1. Transl Clin Pharmacol. 2020 Mar;28(1):55-65. doi: 10.12793/tcp.2020.28.e5.
Epub  2020 Mar 31.

Evaluation of pharmacokinetic interactions between amoxicillin, clarithromycin, 
and the potassium-competitive acid blocker YH4808 in healthy subjects.

Lee WY(1)(2), Oh E(2), Cui M(2), Kim CO(2), Lim Y(3), Kim H(3), Park H(1)(2), 
Yoon S(1)(2), Park MS(2)(4), Hong T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
03722, Korea.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea.
(3)Yuhan Research Institute, Yuhan Corporation, Seoul 06927, Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, 
Korea.

YH4808 is a novel potassium-competitive acid blocker that was developed as a 
therapeutic agent for gastric acid-related diseases; it may replace proton pump 
inhibitors, which are widely used in combination with amoxicillin and 
clarithromycin for Helicobacter pylori eradication. We compared the 
pharmacokinetic (PK) profiles and safety of amoxicillin, clarithromycin, and 
YH4808 used as monotherapies or in combination for evaluating potential drug 
interactions. An open-label, randomized, single-dose, Latin-square (4 × 4) 
crossover study was conducted in 32 healthy Korean volunteers. Subjects were 
randomly assigned to one of the 4 treatment sequences that consisted of 4 
periods separated by 21-day washout intervals. PK parameters of YH4808, 
amoxicillin and clarithromycin administered in combination were compared with 
those of the respective monotherapies. The geometric mean ratios of the maximum 
concentration (Cmax) and the area under the time-concentration curve from time 
zero to time of the last quantifiable concentration (AUClast) of YH4808 
increased during the triple therapy by 48.6% and 29.1%, respectively. Similarly, 
the Cmax and AUClast of M3 (active metabolite of YH4808) increased by 23.3% and 
16.0%, respectively. The Cmax and AUClast of clarithromycin increased by 27.4% 
and 30.5%, and those of 14-hydroxyclarithromycin were increased by 23.1% and 
32.4%, respectively. The corresponding amoxicillin values decreased during the 
triple therapy by 21.5% and 15.6%, respectively. There was no clinically 
significant change in safety assessment related to either monotherapies or 
triple therapy. In conclusion, amoxicillin, clarithromycin and YH4808 
administered as triple therapy did not exhibit significant PK interactions and 
were not associated with safety issues.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01921647.

Copyright © 2020 Translational and Clinical Pharmacology.

DOI: 10.12793/tcp.2020.28.e5
PMCID: PMC7136080
PMID: 32274381

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: - Authors: Yeji Lim and 
Hunam Kim are employees of Yuhan Corp. The authors have no other potential 
conflicts of interest to disclose regarding the content of this article. - 
Reviewers: Nothing to declare - Editors: Nothing to declare