1. J Geriatr Cardiol. 2020 Mar;17(3):133-140. doi: 
10.11909/j.issn.1671-5411.2020.03.009.

Association of serum lipoprotein(a) level with the severity and prognosis of 
calcific aortic valve stenosis: a Chinese cohort study.

Liu SL(1), Rozi R(1), Shi HW(1), Gao Y(1), Guo YL(1), Tang YD(1), Li JJ(1), Wu 
NQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology & Cardiometabolic Center, State Key Laboratory of 
Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular 
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: There was a causal relationship between elevated lipoprotein(a) 
[Lp(a)] levels and increased risk of calcific aortic valve stenosis (CAVS) in 
whites and blacks. The present study aimed to investigate whether Lp(a) levels 
were associated with aortic stenosis (AS) severity and clinical events in 
Chinese patients.
METHODS: Levels of serum Lp(a) were measured in 652 patients with CAVS, whom all 
underwent baseline echocardiographic examination. The clinical endpoint was 
defined as a composite of aortic valve replacement (AVR) and cardiac death.
RESULTS: Patients in the tertile 3 of Lp(a) had a higher percentage of severe AS 
compared with those in the tertile 1 and 2 of Lp(a) (46.2% vs. 33.9%, P = 
0.005). Moreover, the top tertile of Lp(a) was an independent predictor of 
severe AS (OR = 1.78, 95% CI: 1.18-2.66, P = 0.006). However, there was no 
significant association between tertile 3 of Lp(a) and clinical events (hazard 
ratio: 0.73; 95% CI: 0.43-1.24; P = 0.239) in the multivariate Cox regression 
analysis during a mean follow-up time of 3.16 Â± 2.74 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated Lp(a) level was an independent predictor of severe AS by 
echocardiography in the Chinese population, but was not associated with the 
increased risk of AVR and cardiac death, suggesting that Lp(a) levels might be 
helpful in the risk stratification of patients with CAVS.

Institute of Geriatric Cardiology.

DOI: 10.11909/j.issn.1671-5411.2020.03.009
PMCID: PMC7118012
PMID: 32280329