1. Biochimie. 2020 Jun;173:76-90. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.03.016. Epub 2020
Apr  11.

Critical review of nutrition, blood pressure and risk of hypertension through 
the lifecycle: do B vitamins play a role?

Psara E(1), Pentieva K(1), Ward M(1), McNulty H(2).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Innovation Centre for Food and Health (NICHE), School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Ulster University, Coleraine, Northern Ireland, BT52 1SA, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Nutrition Innovation Centre for Food and Health (NICHE), School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Ulster University, Coleraine, Northern Ireland, BT52 1SA, United 
Kingdom. Electronic address: h.mcnulty@ulster.ac.uk.

Hypertension is the leading cause of preventable mortality worldwide, 
contributing to over 9 million deaths per annum, predominantly owing to 
cardiovascular disease. The association of obesity, physical inactivity and 
alcohol with elevated blood pressure (BP) is firmly established. Weight loss or 
other dietary strategies, such as the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension 
(DASH) diet, have been shown to be effective in lowering BP. Additionally, 
specific nutrients are recognised to contribute to BP, with higher sodium intake 
linked with an increased risk of hypertension, while potassium is associated 
with a reduced risk of hypertension. Of note, emerging evidence has identified a 
novel role for one-carbon metabolism and the related B vitamins, particularly 
riboflavin, in BP. Specifically in adults genetically at risk of developing 
hypertension, owing to the common C677T polymorphism in MTHFR, supplemental 
riboflavin (co-factor for MTHFR) was shown in randomised trials to lower 
systolic BP by up to 13 mmHg. A BP response to intervention of this magnitude 
could have important clinical impacts, given that a reduction in systolic BP of 
10 mmHg is estimated to decrease stroke risk by 40%. This review aims to explore 
the factors contributing to hypertension across the lifecycle and to critically 
evaluate the evidence supporting a role for nutrition, particularly 
folate-related B vitamins, in BP and risk of hypertension. In addition, gaps in 
our current knowledge that warrant future research in this area, will be 
identified.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie 
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.03.016
PMID: 32289470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]