1. Ann Hematol. 2020 Jun;99(6):1389-1400. doi: 10.1007/s00277-020-04014-5. Epub 
2020 Apr 14.

Comparison of ATG-thymoglobulin with ATG-Fresenius for Epstein-Barr virus 
infections and graft-versus-host-disease in patients with hematological 
malignances after haploidentical hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a 
single-center experience.

Zhou L(1), Gao ZY(2), Lu DP(3).

Author information:
(1)The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Hematology Department, Fudan 
University, No. 801 Heqing Road, Minhang County, Shanghai, 200240, China.
(2)Hematology Department, Shanghai Dao-Pei Hospital, No. 126 Ruili Road, Minhang 
County, Shanghai, 200240, China.
(3)The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Hematology Department, Fudan 
University, No. 801 Heqing Road, Minhang County, Shanghai, 200240, China. 
beijingludaopei@163.com.

Two anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) forms are used in graft-versus-host disease 
(GVHD) prophylaxis during haploidentical hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantations (haplo-HSCTs): ATG-thymoglobulin (ATG-T) and ATG-fresenious 
(ATG-F). However, comparable dosages for haplo-HSCT remain unclear. We compared 
and evaluated the effects of ATG-T (7.5 mg/kg) or ATG-F (20 mg/kg) dosages in a 
relatively homogenous population in haplotype HSCT settings. Patients 
administered ATG-T 7.5 mg/kg (n = 81) or ATG-F 20 mg/kg (n = 35) as part of GVHD 
prophylaxis during haplo-HSCT were enrolled. Incidence and severity of GVHD, 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection, and immune cell recovery were compared using 
the Mann-Whitney U rank test and chi-square test. Cumulative incidences of GVHD, 
EBV infection and its subgroups, and relapse mortality were computed; overall 
survival (OS) was analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method, with the log-rank test 
used for univariate comparison. Risk factors for OS were analyzed by the Cox 
proportional hazards model. Incidence and cumulative incidence of all grades of 
acute GVHD and subgroups were comparable in both groups (all p > 0.05); however, 
cumulative incidence of any grade and limited chronic GVHD was significantly 
higher in the ATG-T group (p = 0.002, p = 0.007, respectively). Cumulative 
incidences of EBV infections, EBV-DNAemia, and EBV-related diseases were 
similar; relapse mortality and OS rates were comparable between both groups (all 
p > 0.05). ATG-T dosage (7.5 mg/kg) appeared comparable to ATG-F dosage 
(20 mg/kg) for haplo-HSCT. Currently approved ATG-T and ATG-F doses appear 
efficient to balance the risk-benefit ratio of GVHD, OS, relapse mortality, and 
EBV infection in haplo-HSCT.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-020-04014-5
PMCID: PMC7222941
PMID: 32291495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.