1. Front Immunol. 2020 Mar 31;11:483. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00483. eCollection 
2020.

Targeting Chemokine-Glycosaminoglycan Interactions to Inhibit Inflammation.

Crijns H(1), Vanheule V(1), Proost P(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Department of Microbiology, Immunology 
and Transplantation, Rega Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.

Leukocyte migration into tissues depends on the activity of chemokines that form 
concentration gradients to guide leukocytes to a specific site. Interaction of 
chemokines with their specific G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) on leukocytes 
induces leukocyte adhesion to the endothelial cells, followed by extravasation 
of the leukocytes and subsequent directed migration along the chemotactic 
gradient. Interaction of chemokines with glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) is crucial 
for extravasation in vivo. Chemokines need to interact with GAGs on endothelial 
cells and in the extracellular matrix in tissues in order to be presented on the 
endothelium of blood vessels and to create a concentration gradient. Local 
chemokine retention establishes a chemokine gradient and prevents diffusion and 
degradation. During the last two decades, research aiming at reducing chemokine 
activity mainly focused on the identification of inhibitors of the interaction 
between chemokines and their cognate GPCRs. This approach only resulted in 
limited success. However, an alternative strategy, targeting chemokine-GAG 
interactions, may be a promising approach to inhibit chemokine activity and 
inflammation. On this line, proteins derived from viruses and parasites that 
bind chemokines or GAGs may have the potential to interfere with chemokine-GAG 
interactions. Alternatively, chemokine mimetics, including truncated chemokines 
and mutant chemokines, can compete with chemokines for binding to GAGs. Such 
truncated or mutated chemokines are characterized by a strong binding affinity 
for GAGs and abrogated binding to their chemokine receptors. Finally, 
Spiegelmers that mask the GAG-binding site on chemokines, thereby preventing 
chemokine-GAG interactions, were developed. In this review, the importance of 
GAGs for chemokine activity in vivo and strategies that could be employed to 
target chemokine-GAG interactions will be discussed in the context of 
inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2020 Crijns, Vanheule and Proost.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00483
PMCID: PMC7138053
PMID: 32296423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]