1. Arch Razi Inst. 2020 Mar;75(1):101-108. doi: 10.22092/ari.2018.122232.1220.
Epub  2020 Mar 1.

Effect of Point Mutation in the Growth Differentiation Factor 9 Gene of Oocytes 
on the Sterility and Fertility of Awassi Sheep.

Al-Mutar H(1)(1), Younis L(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Baghdad, Bagdad, Iraq.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tikrit, Tikrit, Iraq.

Growth differentiation factor 9 (GDF9) plays a critical role in ovarian 
follicular development and ovulation rate. The present study aimed to 
investigate the correlation between the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of 
the GDF9 gene and reproductive performance variables, such as fertility and 
sterility in Awassi sheep. Forty pairs of ovaries from a total of 40 slaughtered 
Iraqi Awassi ewes were used in this study. Twenty of the ovaries were collected 
from sterile ewes and the other 20 ovaries were taken from fertile ewes for 
genomic DNA extraction, polymerase chain reaction, and sequencing to detect GDF9 
gene polymorphism. Follicles and oocytes of all the 40 ovaries were evaluated 
and compared with the results of genotyping. Furthermore, histopathological and 
microscopic evaluations were performed for 40 ovarian tissues of the two groups. 
The sequence analysis revealed that exon I had three SNPs, including T(114)C, 
G(129)R, and G(199)A. The first two SNPs were silent mutations and the last 
mutation was missense responsible for the substitution of glutamic acid with 
lysine at position 67. The current study showed a significant increase 
(P&amp;le;0.01) in GG, AA, CC, GA, and GG genotypes at G(129)R, G(199)A, 
T(114)C, G(129)R, and G(199)A loci, respectively. Moreover, the TT genotype in 
locus T(114)C was recorded to significantly augment (P&amp;le;0.05) in the 
fertile ewes. Mutant GA genotype of the G(129)R locus led to a significant 
(P&amp;le;0.05) increase in the percentage of follicles (4-8 mm) and oocytes 
number, compared to wild GG. On the other hand, a significant decrease was 
recorded in the mutant AA genotype in G(199)A, compared to wild GG. Differences 
between CC and TT genotypes at T(114)C locus were not significant. 
Histopathological examination revealed hypoplasia in the ovarian tissue of 
sterile ewes accompanied by fibrous connective tissue invasion and follicles 
degeneration. However, in the fertile ewes, the ovarian tissues were normal with 
the presence of numerous corpus albicans and degenerative corpus luteum. 
According to the findings of this study, the homozygote mutation in fertile ewes 
minimized the number of follicles and oocytes leading to sterility, while the 
heterozygote mutation was reported in the fertile Awassi ewes.

Copyright Â© 2020, Archives of Razi Institute. Published by Kowsar.

DOI: 10.22092/ari.2018.122232.1220
PMCID: PMC8410155
PMID: 32292008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.