1. Front Neurol. 2020 Apr 3;11:233. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.00233. eCollection 
2020.

The Predicted Key Molecules, Functions, and Pathways That Bridge Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's Disease (AD).

Tao Y(1), Han Y(2), Yu L(1), Wang Q(1), Leng SX(3), Zhang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Jinqiu Hospital of Liaoning Province, Shenyang, 
China.
(3)Division of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, Department of Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.

To elucidate the key molecules, functions, and pathways that bridge mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD), we investigated open 
gene expression data sets. Differential gene expression profiles were analyzed 
and combined with potential MCI- and AD-related gene expression profiles in 
public databases. Then, weighted gene co-expression network analysis was 
performed to identify the gene co-expression modules. One module was 
significantly negatively associated with MCI samples, in which gene ontology 
function and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis 
showed that these genes were related to cytosolic ribosome, ribosomal structure, 
oxidative phosphorylation, AD, and metabolic pathway. The other two modules 
correlated significantly with AD samples, in which functional and pathway 
enrichment analysis revealed strong relationships of these genes with 
cytoplasmic ribosome, protein binding, AD, cancer, and apoptosis. In addition, 
we regarded the core genes in the module network closely related to MCI and AD 
as bridge genes and submitted them to protein interaction network analysis to 
screen for major pathogenic genes according to the connectivity information. 
Among them, small nuclear ribonucleoprotein D2 polypeptide (SNRPD2), ribosomal 
protein S3a (RPS3A), S100 calcium binding protein A8 (S100A8), small nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein polypeptide G (SNRPG), U6 snRNA-associated Sm-like protein 
LSm3 (LSM3), ribosomal protein S27a (RPS27A), and ATP synthase F1 subunit gamma 
(ATP5C1) were not only major pathogenic genes of MCI, but also bridge genes. In 
addition, SNRPD2, RPS3A, S100A8, SNRPG, LSM3, thioredoxin (TXN), proteasome 20S 
subunit alpha 4 (PSMA4), annexin A1 (ANXA1), DnaJ heat shock protein family 
member A1 (DNAJA1), and prefoldin subunit 5 (PFDN5) were not only major 
pathogenic genes of AD, but also bridge genes. Next, we screened for 
differentially expressed microRNAs (miRNAs) to predict the miRNAs and 
transcription factors related the MCI and AD modules, respectively. The 
significance score of miRNAs in each module was calculated using a 
hypergeometric test to obtain the miRNApivot-Module interaction pair. 
Thirty-four bridge regulators were analyzed, among which hsa-miR-519d-3p was 
recognized as the bridge regulator between MCI and AD. Our study contributed to 
a better understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms of MCI and AD, and might 
lead to the development of a new strategy for clinical diagnosis and treatment.

Copyright Â© 2020 Tao, Han, Yu, Wang, Leng and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2020.00233
PMCID: PMC7145962
PMID: 32308643