1. Contemp Clin Dent. 2019 Jul-Sep;10(3):433-439. doi: 10.4103/ccd.ccd_715_18.

Regenerative Capacity of Leukocyte-rich and Platelet-rich Fibrin in Indirect 
Sinus Elevation Procedure May be Dependent on Model-Specific Modification of the 
Centrifugation Cycle.

Chandra RV(1), Vaishnavi V(1), S Chakravarthy YSH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontics, SVS Institute of Dental Sciences, Mahbubnagar, 
Telangana, India.

CONTEXT: To compare optical density (OD) and fibrinogen content of 
leukocyte-rich and platelet-rich fibrin (L-PRF) generated by standard protocol 
(2700 rotations per minute [RPM] for 12 min) versus relative centrifugal force 
(RCF)-adjusted protocol across two widely used laboratory centrifuges with 
swing-out rotors.
AIMS: Centrifuges for PRF production generate forces in excess of 800 g. The 
study aimed to evaluate OD, fibrinogen content and effectiveness in bone-added 
osteotome sinus floor elevation (BAOSFE) of leukocyte-rich and platelet-rich 
fibrin (L-PRF) generated by the standard protocol (2700 RPM for 12 min) versus a 
RCF-adjusted protocol to generate precisely 400 g of force across two 
centrifuges with swing-out rotors. The outcomes were compared to a standard 
centrifuge configured to generate L-PRF as per the original Choukroun 
guidelines.
SETTINGS AND DESIGN: Sample size for the present study was calculated using 
proportional power calculation. A minimum sample size of 8 per group was needed 
to detect a bone height difference of 2 mm when the power of the test is 0.80 at 
a significance level of 0.05.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Based on the centrifuge and protocol used to generate 
L-PRF, 10 participants were assigned to each of the following groups are as 
follows: D group, fixed angle centrifuge (DUO Quattro®) at default setting. R-O 
group: Swing-out centrifuge (Remi 8C®) + standard protocol. R-A group: Remi 8C® 
centrifuge + RCF-adjusted protocol. C-O group: Swing-out centrifuge (Remi C854®) 
+ standard protocol. and C-A group: Remi C854® + RCF-adjusted protocol. OD, 
fibrinogen content, and gain in bone fill and bone height after BAOSFE were the 
evaluated outcomes.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS USED: Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism® Software 
version 6.0 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, USA) and SAS Software® version 
9.3 versions (SAS, New Delhi, India). Data were summarized by mean ± standard 
deviation for continuous data and median ± inter-quartile range for the score 
data. The comparison between different time points was done by analysis of 
one-way repeated measures test, followed by post hoc test for score data. The 
comparison between two groups for repeated data was made by analysis of two-way 
repeated measures test and followed by post hoc test. Spearman's Rho correlation 
test was used to test the correlation between prognosis and the other variables.
RESULTS: L-PRF from the Remi C854® centrifuge with RCF-adjusted protocol showed 
OD (P = 0.152) and fibrinogen content (P = 0.232) identical to those from the 
DUO Quattro® centrifuge. L-PRF from Remi 8C® centrifuge with the RCF-adjusted 
protocol resulted in maximum postoperative bone height gain (7.01 ± 1.44 mm) and 
bone fill (13.50 ± 4.51 mm2) which was higher than that of the outcomes from the 
DUO Quattro® centrifuge (6.82 ± 2.92 mm and 12.32 ± 5.31 mm2).
CONCLUSIONS: A reduction in RCF resulted in a less dense clot and had a positive 
influence on the regenerative potential of L-PRF in BAOSFE procedure.

Copyright: © 2020 Contemporary Clinical Dentistry.

DOI: 10.4103/ccd.ccd_715_18
PMCID: PMC7150577
PMID: 32308316

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.