1. Mol Med Rep. 2020 Apr;21(4):1799-1808. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2020.10981. Epub 2020 
Feb 7.

SHARPIN regulates cell proliferation of cutaneous basal cell carcinoma via 
inactivation of the transcriptional factors GLI2 and c‑JUN.

Yang Y(#)(1), Liang YH(#)(1), Zheng Y(1), Tang LJ(1), Zhou ST(1), Zhu JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Cosmetology and Venereology, Shenzhen Hospital, 
Southern Medical University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518101, P.R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

SHANK‑associated RH domain‑interacting protein (SHARPIN) is a component of the 
linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex that can enhance the NF‑κB and JNK 
signaling pathways, acting as a tumor‑associated protein in a variety of cancer 
types. The present study investigated the role of SHARPIN in cutaneous basal 
cell carcinoma (BCC). Human BCC (n=26) and normal skin (n=5) tissues, and BCC 
(TE354.T) and normal skin (HaCaT) cell lines were used to evaluate SHARPIN 
expression level using immunohistochemistry and western blotting, respectively. 
A lentivirus carrying SHARPIN‑targeting or negative control short hairpin RNA 
was infected into TE354.T cells, and the infected stable cells were assayed to 
analyze tumor cell proliferation, cell cycle, apoptosis, migration and invasion 
by Cell Counting Kit‑8 and 5‑ethynyl‑2'‑deoxyuridine incorporation assays, flow 
cytometry and Transwell assays. Western blotting was performed to assess the 
protein expression levels of gene signaling in SHARPIN‑silenced BCC cells. 
SHARPIN protein expression levels were downregulated or absent in BCC cancer 
nests and precancerous lesions compared with normal skin samples. In addition, 
SHARPIN expression levels were lower in TE354.T cells compared with HaCaT cells. 
SHARPIN shRNA enhanced tumor cell proliferation and the S phase of the cell 
cycle, whereas BCC cell apoptotic rates, and migratory and invasive abilities 
were not significantly altered. The expression levels of cyclin D1, 
cyclin‑dependent kinase 4, phosphorylated‑c‑JUN and GLI family zinc finger 2 
proteins were increased, whereas Patched 1 (PTCH1) and PTCH2 were decreased in 
the SHARPIN‑shRNA‑infected BCC cells. Therefore, the present results suggested 
that SHARPIN may act as a tumor suppressor during BCC development.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2020.10981
PMCID: PMC7057814
PMID: 32319607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]