1. Materials (Basel). 2020 Apr 17;13(8):1907. doi: 10.3390/ma13081907.

Injection Molding of 3-3 Hydroxyapatite Composites.

Biggemann J(1), Hoffmann P(1), Hristov I(1), Simon S(1), Müller P(1), Fey 
T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials Science (Glass and Ceramics), University of 
Erlangen-Nuernberg, Martensstr. 5, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Frontier Research Institute for Materials Science, Nagoya Institute of 
Technology, Gokiso-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8555, Japan.

The manufacturing of ideal implants requires fabrication processes enabling an 
adjustment of the shape, porosity and pore sizes to the patient-specific defect. 
To meet these criteria novel porous hydroxyapatite (HAp) implants were 
manufactured by combining ceramic injection molding (CIM) with sacrificial 
templating. Varied amounts (Φ = 0-40 Vol%) of spherical pore formers with a size 
of 20 µm were added to a HAp-feedstock to generate well-defined porosities of 
11.2-45.2 Vol% after thermal debinding and sintering. At pore former contents Φ 
≥ 30 Vol% interconnected pore networks were formed. The investigated Young's 
modulus and flexural strength decreased with increasing pore former content from 
97.3 to 29.1 GPa and 69.0 to 13.0 MPa, agreeing well with a fitted power-law 
approach. Additionally, interpenetrating HAp/polymer composites were 
manufactured by infiltrating and afterwards curing of an urethane 
dimethacrylate-based (UDMA) monomer solution into the porous HAp ceramic 
preforms. The obtained stiffness (32-46 GPa) and Vickers hardness (1.2-2.1 GPa) 
of the HAp/UDMA composites were comparable to natural dentin, enamel and other 
polymer infiltrated ceramic network (PICN) materials. The combination of CIM and 
sacrificial templating facilitates a near-net shape manufacturing of complex 
shaped bone and dental implants, whose properties can be directly tailored by 
the amount, shape and size of the pore formers.

DOI: 10.3390/ma13081907
PMCID: PMC7216088
PMID: 32316629

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.