1. Mol Biol Rep. 2020 May;47(5):3779-3787. doi: 10.1007/s11033-020-05425-3. Epub 
2020 Apr 21.

Mutations in aARS genes revealed by targeted next-generation sequencing in 
patients with mitochondrial diseases.

Felhi R(1), Charif M(2)(3), Sfaihi L(4), Mkaouar-Rebai E(5), Desquiret-Dumas 
V(2)(6), Kallel R(7), Bris C(2)(6), GoudenÃ¨ge D(2)(6), Guichet A(2)(6), Bonneau 
D(2)(6), Procaccio V(2)(6), Reynier P(2)(6), Amati-Bonneau P(2)(6), Hachicha 
M(4), Fakhfakh F(8), Lenaers G(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Functional Genetics Laboratory, Faculty of Science of Sfax, 
University of Sfax, Route Soukra, Km 3, Sfax, Tunisia. Rahma.90felhi@gmail.com.
(2)MitoLab Team, Institut MitoVasc, UMR CNRS6015, INSERM U1083, Angers 
University, Angers, France.
(3)Genetics and Immuno-Cell Therapy Team, Mohammed First University, Oujda, 
Morocco.
(4)Departments of Pediatry, University Hospital Hedi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia.
(5)Molecular and Functional Genetics Laboratory, Faculty of Science of Sfax, 
University of Sfax, Route Soukra, Km 3, Sfax, Tunisia.
(6)Departments of Biochemistry and Genetics, University Hospital Angers, Angers, 
France.
(7)Departments of Pathology, University Hospital Habib Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia.
(8)Molecular and Functional Genetics Laboratory, Faculty of Science of Sfax, 
University of Sfax, Route Soukra, Km 3, Sfax, Tunisia. 
faiza.fakhfakh02@gmail.com.

Mitochondrial diseases are a clinically heterogeneous group of multisystemic 
disorders that arise as a result of various mitochondrial dysfunctions. 
Autosomal recessive aARS deficiencies represent a rapidly growing group of 
severe rare inherited mitochondrial diseases, involving multiple organs, and 
currently without curative option. They might be related to defects of 
mitochondrial aminoacyl t-RNA synthetases (mtARS) that are ubiquitous enzymes 
involved in mitochondrial aminoacylation and the translation process. Here, 
using NGS analysis of 281 nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins, we 
identified 4 variants in different mtARS in three patients from unrelated 
Tunisian families, with clinical features of mitochondrial disorders. Two 
homozygous variants were found in KARS (c.683C>T) and AARS2 (c.1150-4C>G), 
respectively in two patients, while two heterozygous variants in EARS2 
(c.486-7C>G) and DARS2 (c.1456C>T) were concomitantly found in the third 
patient. Bio-informatics investigations predicted their pathogenicity and 
deleterious effects on pre-mRNA splicing and on protein stability. Thus, our 
results suggest that mtARS mutations are common in Tunisian patients with 
mitochondrial diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-020-05425-3
PMID: 32319008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]