1. Nutrients. 2020 Apr 17;12(4):1116. doi: 10.3390/nu12041116.

Urinary Metabolic Profiling via LC-MS/MS Reveals Impact of Bovine Lactoferrin on 
Bone Formation in Growing SD Rats.

Xu Y(1)(2), Zhao T(1)(2), Ren H(1)(2), Xie Y(1)(2), An J(1)(2), Shang J(1)(2), 
Tabys D(1)(2), Liu N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Dairy Science, Ministry of Education, Northeast 
Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, China.
(2)College of Food Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, 
China.

Lactoferrin (LF) exerts a promoting bone health function. The effects of LF on 
bone formation at the metabolic level have been less explored. Urinary metabolic 
profiling of growing Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats LF-supplemented (1000 mg/kg bw) 
for four weeks were explored by Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry 
(LC-MS/MS). The serum markers of bone formation and bone resorption, the bone 
mass, and the osteogenesis markers of femur were measured by an enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay, micro-computerized tomography, and immunohistochemistry, 
respectively. Compared with the control, LF supplementation improved bone 
formation (p < 0.05), reduced bone resorption (p < 0.05), enhanced femoral bone 
mineral density and microarchitecture (p < 0.05), and upregulated osteocalcin, 
osterix, and Runx-2 expression (p < 0.05) of femur. LF upregulated 69 urinary 
metabolites. KEGG and pathway enrichment analyses of those urinary metabolites, 
and the Person's correlation analyses among those urinary metabolites and bone 
status revealed that LF impacted on bone formation via regulatory comprehensive 
pathways including taurine and hypotaurine metabolism, arginine and proline 
metabolism, cyanoamino acid metabolism, nitrogen metabolism, nicotinate and 
nicotinamide metabolism, and fatty acid biosynthesis. The present study 
indicated the metabolomics is a useful and practical tool to elucidate the 
mechanisms by which LF augments bone mass formation in growing animals.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12041116
PMCID: PMC7230685
PMID: 32316396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest to declare.