1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Apr 19;21(8):2857. doi: 10.3390/ijms21082857.

A Computational Probe into the Structure and Dynamics of the Full-Length 
Toll-Like Receptor 3 in a Phospholipid Bilayer.

Patra MC(1), Batool M(1), Haseeb M(1), Choi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, 16499 Suwon, 
Korea.

Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) provides the host with antiviral defense by 
initiating an immune signaling cascade for the production of type I interferons. 
The X-ray structures of isolated TLR3 ectodomain (ECD) and transmembrane (TM) 
domains have been reported; however, the structure of a membrane-solvated, 
full-length receptor remains elusive. We investigated an all-residue TLR3 model 
embedded inside a phospholipid bilayer using molecular dynamics simulations. The 
TLR3-ECD exhibited a ~30°-35° tilt on the membrane due to the electrostatic 
interaction between the N-terminal subdomain and phospholipid headgroups. 
Although the movement of dsRNA did not affect the dimer integrity of TLR3, its 
sugar-phosphate backbone was slightly distorted with the orientation of the ECD. 
TM helices exhibited a noticeable tilt and curvature but maintained a consistent 
crossing angle, avoiding the hydrophobic mismatch with the bilayer. Residues 
from the αD helix and the CD and DE loops of the Toll/interleukin-1 receptor 
(TIR) domains were partially absorbed into the lower leaflet of the bilayer. We 
found that the previously unknown TLR3-TIR dimerization interface could be 
stabilized by the reciprocal contact between αC and αD helices of one subunit 
and the αC helix and the BB loop of the other. Overall, the present study can be 
helpful to understand the signaling-competent form of TLR3 in physiological 
environments.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21082857
PMCID: PMC7215789
PMID: 32325904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.