1. J Cell Mol Med. 2020 Jun;24(11):6055-6069. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.15170. Epub 2020 
Apr 23.

Tissue-selective regulation of protein homeostasis and unfolded protein response 
signalling in sporadic ALS.

Montibeller L(1), Tan LY(1), Kim JK(1), Paul P(1), de Belleroche J(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Group, Department of Brain Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
Imperial College London, London, UK.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a disorder that affects motor neurons in 
motor cortex and spinal cord, and the degeneration of both neuronal populations 
is a critical feature of the disease. Abnormalities in protein homeostasis 
(proteostasis) are well established in ALS. However, they have been investigated 
mostly in spinal cord but less so in motor cortex. Herein, we monitored the 
unfolded protein (UPR) and heat shock response (HSR), two major proteostasis 
regulatory pathways, in human post-mortem tissue derived from the motor cortex 
of sporadic ALS (SALS) and compared them to those occurring in spinal cord. 
Although the UPR was activated in both tissues, specific expression of select 
UPR target genes, such as PDIs, was observed in motor cortex of SALS cases 
strongly correlating with oligodendrocyte markers. Moreover, we found that 
endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) and HSR genes, which were 
activated predominately in spinal cord, correlated with the expression of 
neuronal markers. Our results indicate that proteostasis is strongly and 
selectively activated in SALS motor cortex and spinal cord where subsets of 
these genes are associated with specific cell type. This study expands our 
understanding of convergent molecular mechanisms occurring in motor cortex and 
spinal cord and highlights cell type-specific contributions.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by 
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.15170
PMCID: PMC7294118
PMID: 32324341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.