1. Sci Rep. 2020 Apr 24;10(1):7005. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-63961-1.

Analysis of the source of aggressiveness in gamecocks.

Komiyama T(1), Yoshikawa M(2), Yokoyama K(3), Kobayashi H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Tokai University School of Medicine, 143 
Shimokasuya, Isehara, Kanagawa, 259-1193, Japan. komiyama@tokai-u.jp.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Tokai University School of Medicine, 143 
Shimokasuya, Isehara, Kanagawa, 259-1193, Japan.
(3)Support Center for Medical Research and Education, Tokai University, 143 
Shimokasuya, Isehara, Kanagawa, 259-1193, Japan.

Although the fighting behaviour in gamecocks has evolved because of artificial 
selection, it is unknown whether the selection for aggressiveness affects 
neurotransmitter levels in the avian central nervous system. We sought to 
identify the source and origin of this trait. We collected the brain samples 
from 6 female Shamo gamecocks and 5 Shaver Brown chickens (control; bred for egg 
production). The midbrain levels of norepinephrine (NE) were significantly 
higher in Shamo gamecocks (P = 0.0087) than in the controls. Moreover, alleles 
encoding adrenergic receptors differed between the breeds in terms of response 
to NE. Gene mutations specific to Shamo and potentially associated with fighting 
behaviour were in sites T440N of ADRα1D; V296I of ADRα2A; and T44I, Q232R, and 
T277M of ADRβ2. The evolutionary analysis indicated that the ADRβ2 (T44I and 
Q232R) mutations were heritable in all Galliformes, whereas the T440N mutation 
of ADRα1D and V296I mutations of ADRα2A were unique to Shamo and originated by 
artificial selection. A high NE level may confer a selective advantage by 
enabling gamecocks to be aggressive and pain tolerant. Therefore, the strong 
fighting behaviour of Shamo has resulted from a combination of naturally 
inherited and mutant genes derived by artificial selection.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-63961-1
PMCID: PMC7181795
PMID: 32332854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.