1. Balkan Med J. 2020 Aug 11;37(5):236-246. doi: 
10.4274/balkanmedj.galenos.2020.2020.4.82. Epub 2020 Apr 27.

Autoinflammatory Diseases in Childhood.

Yıldız M(1), Haşlak F(1), Adrovic A(1), Barut K(1), Kasapçopur Ö(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, İstanbul University-Cerrahpaşa 
Cerrahpaşa School of Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey

Autoinflammatory diseases are characterized by recurrent fevers and clinical 
findings of impaired natural immunity and can involve various organ systems. The 
concept of autoinflammatory disease emerged after the definition of familial 
Mediterranean fever and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic 
syndrome. This new disease group was considered to differ from the standard 
concept of autoimmune diseases, which is relatively better known in terms of 
basic features, such as defects in innate immunity and the absence of 
antibodies. A better understanding has been achieved regarding the genetic and 
pathogenetic mechanisms of this relatively new disease group over the past 20 
years since they were first diagnosed, which have led to some changes in the 
concept of autoinflammatory diseases. The recent definition classifies 
autoinflammatory disease to be a wide range of diseases with different clinical 
features, mainly accompanied by changes in innate immune and rarely in humoral 
immunity. The spectrum of autoinflammatory diseases is rapidly expanding owing 
to recent developments in molecular sciences and genetics. This review article 
discusses the clinical features, classification criteria, treatment options, and 
long-term prognosis of periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, 
adenitis syndrome, and other common autoinflammatory diseases in the light of 
current literature.

DOI: 10.4274/balkanmedj.galenos.2020.2020.4.82
PMCID: PMC7424192
PMID: 32338845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No conflict of interest 
was declared by the authors.