1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Apr 22;21(8):2955. doi: 10.3390/ijms21082955.

The Sodium Channel B4-Subunits are Dysregulated in Temporal Lobe Epilepsy 
Drug-Resistant Patients.

Sheilabi MA(1), Takeshita LY(2), Sims EJ(1), Falciani F(2), Princivalle AP(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomolecular Sciences Research Centre, Sheffield Hallam University, Howard 
Street, Sheffield S1 1WB, UK.
(2)Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Biosciences 
Building, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK.

Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most common type of partial epilepsy 
referred for surgery due to antiepileptic drug (AED) resistance. A common 
molecular target for many of these drugs is the voltage-gated sodium channel 
(VGSC). The VGSC consists of four domains of pore-forming α-subunits and two 
auxiliary β-subunits, several of which have been well studied in epileptic 
conditions. However, despite the β4-subunits' role having been reported in some 
neurological conditions, there is little research investigating its potential 
significance in epilepsy. Therefore, the purpose of this work was to assess the 
role of SCN4β in epilepsy by using a combination of molecular and bioinformatics 
approaches. We first demonstrated that there was a reduction in the relative 
expression of SCN4B in the drug-resistant TLE patients compared to non-epileptic 
control specimens, both at the mRNA and protein levels. By analyzing a 
co-expression network in the neighborhood of SCN4B we then discovered a linkage 
between the expression of this gene and K+ channels activated by Ca2+, or K+ 
two-pore domain channels. Our approach also inferred several potential effector 
functions linked to variation in the expression of SCN4B. These observations 
support the hypothesis that SCN4B is a key factor in AED-resistant TLE, which 
could help direct both the drug selection of TLE treatments and the development 
of future AEDs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21082955
PMCID: PMC7216270
PMID: 32331418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.