1. Biomolecules. 2020 Apr 23;10(4):655. doi: 10.3390/biom10040655.

Diseases Caused by Mutations in Mitochondrial Carrier Genes SLC25: A Review.

Palmieri F(1), Scarcia P(1), Monn√© M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, Laboratory 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bari Aldo Moro, via E. 
Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Sciences, University of Basilicata, via Ateneo Lucano 10, 85100 
Potenza, Italy.

In the 1980s, after the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) had been sequenced, several 
diseases resulting from mtDNA mutations emerged. Later, numerous disorders 
caused by mutations in the nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins were 
found. A group of these diseases are due to defects of mitochondrial carriers, a 
family of proteins named solute carrier family 25 (SLC25), that transport a 
variety of solutes such as the reagents of ATP synthase (ATP, ADP, and 
phosphate), tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates, cofactors, amino acids, and 
carnitine esters of fatty acids. The disease-causing mutations disclosed in 
mitochondrial carriers range from point mutations, which are often localized in 
the substrate translocation pore of the carrier, to large deletions and 
insertions. The biochemical consequences of deficient transport are the 
compartmentalized accumulation of the substrates and dysfunctional mitochondrial 
and cellular metabolism, which frequently develop into various forms of 
myopathy, encephalopathy, or neuropathy. Examples of diseases, due to 
mitochondrial carrier mutations are: combined D-2- and L-2-hydroxyglutaric 
aciduria, carnitine-acylcarnitine carrier deficiency, 
hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrillinuria (HHH) syndrome, early 
infantile epileptic encephalopathy type 3, Amish microcephaly, 
aspartate/glutamate isoform 1 deficiency, congenital sideroblastic anemia, 
Fontaine progeroid syndrome, and citrullinemia type II. Here, we review all the 
mitochondrial carrier-related diseases known until now, focusing on the 
connections between the molecular basis, altered metabolism, and phenotypes of 
these inherited disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10040655
PMCID: PMC7226361
PMID: 32340404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.