1. Life (Basel). 2020 Apr 24;10(4):49. doi: 10.3390/life10040049.

Rocket Science: The Effect of Spaceflight on Germination Physiology, Ageing, and 
Transcriptome of Eruca sativa Seeds.

Chandler JO(1), Haas FB(2), Khan S(1), Bowden L(3), Ignatz M(1), Enfissi EMA(1), 
Gawthrop F(4), Griffiths A(5), Fraser PD(1), Rensing SA(2), Leubner-Metzger 
G(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham 
TW20 0EX, UK.
(2)Plant Cell Biology, Faculty of Biology, University of Marburg, 35043 Marburg, 
Germany.
(3)Official Seed Testing Station for Scotland, SASA, Edinburgh EH12 9FJ, UK.
(4)Tozer Seeds Ltd, Cobham, Surrey KT11 3EH, UK.
(5)Science Department, Royal Horticultural Society, Woking, Surrey GU23 6QB, UK.
(6)Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Centre of the Region Haná for 
Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Institute of Experimental Botany, 
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Palaćky University, 78371 Olomouc, 
Czech Republic.

In the 'Rocket Science' project, storage of Eruca sativa (salad rocket) seeds 
for six months on board the International Space Station resulted in delayed 
seedling establishment. Here we investigated the physiological and molecular 
mechanisms underpinning the spaceflight effects on dry seeds. We found that 
'Space' seed germination vigor was reduced, and ageing sensitivity increased, 
but the spaceflight did not compromise seed viability and the development of 
normal seedlings. Comparative analysis of the transcriptomes (using RNAseq) in 
dry seeds and upon controlled artificial ageing treatment (CAAT) revealed 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with spaceflight and ageing. 
DEG categories enriched by spaceflight and CAAT included transcription and 
translation with reduced transcript abundances for 40S and 60S ribosomal subunit 
genes. Among the 'spaceflight-up' DEGs were heat shock proteins (HSPs), 
DNAJ-related chaperones, a heat shock factor (HSFA7a-like), and components of 
several DNA repair pathways (e.g., ATM, DNA ligase 1). The 'response to 
radiation' category was especially enriched in 'spaceflight-up' DEGs including 
HSPs, catalases, and the transcription factor HY5. The major finding from the 
physiological and transcriptome analysis is that spaceflight causes vigor loss 
and partial ageing during air-dry seed storage, for which space environmental 
factors and consequences for seed storage during spaceflights are discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/life10040049
PMCID: PMC7235897
PMID: 32344775

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.