1. Head Neck Pathol. 2020 Dec;14(4):1067-1079. doi: 10.1007/s12105-020-01166-8. 
Epub 2020 May 1.

Comparison of Molecular Methods and BRAF Immunohistochemistry (VE1 Clone) for 
the Detection of BRAF V600E Mutation in Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma: A 
Meta-Analysis.

Parker KG(1), White MG(2), Cipriani NA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
USA. Kyle.Parker@uchospitals.edu.
(2)Department of General Surgery, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
USA.

The evaluation of surgically resected papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC) by 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) for BRAF mutation has diagnostic, prognostic and 
therapeutic implications. The goal of this meta-analysis was to perform a 
systematic review of studies using the VE1 clone (specific for detection of the 
BRAF V600E mutation) on formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) thyroid surgical 
resection specimens for primary papillary thyroid carcinoma. The authors' 
molecular techniques, immunohistochemistry protocols, and scoring methods for 
VE1 immunostaining were also evaluated. This study included 4079 PTCs 
representing data from 23 studies. The results extracted from each study were 
split into two different groups, direct sequencing group or PCR group, based on 
the molecular "gold standard" method used to compare VE1 IHC staining. In the 
direct sequencing group, the IHC sensitivity was 100% (95% CI 0.97-1.00) and 
specificity 84% (95% 0.72-0.91). In the PCR group the sensitivity was 98% (95% 
CI 0.96-0.99) and specificity 89% (95% CI 0.82-0.94). Although 
immunohistochemical procedures varied by author, the overall performance of the 
VE1 clone shows that it is highly sensitive and relatively specific for 
detecting the BRAF V600E mutation in surgical resection specimens. However, 
standardization of immunohistochemical procedural method and 
scoring/interpretation criteria may improve the reliability and reproducibility 
for the use of VE1 clone for future practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-020-01166-8
PMCID: PMC7669962
PMID: 32358715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.