1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Apr 28;21(9):3107. doi: 10.3390/ijms21093107.

Changes in Whole-Blood microRNA Profiles during the Onset and Treatment Process 
of Cerebral Infarction: A Human Study.

Abe A(1), Tanaka M(2), Yasuoka A(2), Saito Y(2), Okada S(2), Mishina M(3), Abe 
K(2), Kimura K(1), Asakura T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Science, Graduate School of Medicine, Nippon 
Medical School, Tokyo 113-8603, Japan.
(2)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural 
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.
(3)Department of Neuro-pathophysiological imaging, Medicine, Nippon Medical 
School, Kawasaki 211-8533, Japan.

Circulating miRNA species are promising symptom markers for various diseases, 
including cardiovascular disease. However, studies regarding their role in the 
treatment process are limited, especially concerning cerebral infarction. This 
study aimed to extract miRNA markers to investigate whether they reflect both 
onset and treatment process of cerebral infarction. A total of 22 patients 
(P-group) and 22 control subjects (C-group) were examined for their whole-blood 
miRNA profiles using DNA GeneChipâ„¢ miRNA 4.0 Array, with six patients examined 
after treatment (T-group). A total of 64 miRNAs were found to be differentially 
expressed between the C- and P-groups. Out of 64 miRNAs, the expression levels 
of two miRNAs correlated with hypertension. A total of 155 miRNAs were 
differentially expressed between the P- and T-groups. Five common miRNAs were 
found among the 64 and 155 miRNAs identified. Importantly, these common miRNAs 
were inversely regulated in each comparison (e.g., C < P > T), including 
miR-505-5p, which was previously reported to be upregulated in aortic stenosis 
patients. Our previous study using rat cerebral infarction models detected the 
downregulation of an apoptosis repressor, WDR26, which was repressed by one of 
the five miRNAs. Our results provide novel information regarding the miRNA-based 
diagnosis of cerebral infarction in humans. In particular, the five common 
miRNAs could be useful makers for the onset and the treatment process. Trial 
registration: This study was registered in the UMIN Clinical Trials Registry 
(UMIN000038321).

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21093107
PMCID: PMC7246837
PMID: 32354168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.