1. Int J Mol Cell Med. 2019 Winter;8(Suppl1):63-68. doi: 
10.22088/IJMCM.BUMS.8.2.63. Epub 2019 May 28.

The Association Analysis of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor -2549 Insertion/ 
Deletion Variant and Endometriosis Risk.

Sarhangi N(1)(2), Mohseni S(3), Aminimoghaddam S(4), Hossein Rashidi B(5), 
Haghollahi F(4), Qorbani M(6), Mohammad Amoli M(2), Shahrabi-Farahani M(2).

Author information:
(1)Personalized Medicine Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical 
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Metabolic Disorders Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(3)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Vali-e-Asr Reproductive Health Research Center, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Community Medicine, School of Medicine, Alborz University of 
Medical Sciences, Karaj, Iran.

Endometriosis is a debilitating disorder, defined as the presence of endometrial 
gland and stroma outside of the uterus. It may affect angiogenesis and vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is one of the angiogenic factors that plays an 
important role in both physiological and pathological angiogenesis. The present 
study aimed to evaluate the association of VEGF -2549 insertion/deletion (I/D) 
polymorphism with endometriosis. This case-control study enrolled 244 (100 cases 
and 144 controls) women who were admitted for laparoscopy or laparotomy for 
gynecological procedures. Genomic DNA was separated from peripheral blood 
leukocytes and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification was performed for 
genotyping of the VEGF gene Insertion/Deletion (I/D) polymorphism. The frequency 
of the II, ID, and DD genotype was 14%, 52% and 34% in patients versus 18.8%, 
47.8% and 34% in controls. The results did not provide any evidence supporting 
the endometriosis risk related to the VEGF polymorphism in a group of Iranian 
women population.

DOI: 10.22088/IJMCM.BUMS.8.2.63
PMCID: PMC7175609
PMID: 32351911