1. Biomolecules. 2020 Apr 28;10(5):682. doi: 10.3390/biom10050682.

ADAMTS-15 Has a Tumor Suppressor Role in Prostate Cancer.

Binder MJ(1), McCoombe S(1), Williams ED(2), McCulloch DR(1)(3), Ward AC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, VIC 3216, Australia.
(2)Australian Prostate Cancer Research Centre-Queensland, Institute of Health 
and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), 
Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4102, Australia.
(3)Centre for Molecular and Medical Research, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, 
VIC 3216, Australia.

Extracellular matrix remodeling has emerged as an important factor in many 
cancers. Proteoglycans, including versican (VCAN), are regulated via cleavage by 
the proteolytic actions of A Disintegrin-like And Metalloproteinase domain with 
Thrombospondin-1 motif (ADAMTS) family members. Alterations in the balance 
between Proteoglycans and ADAMTS enzymes have been proposed to contribute to 
cancer progression. Here, we analyzed the expression of ADAMTS-15 in human 
prostate cancer, and investigated the effects of enforced expression in prostate 
cancer cell lines. ADAMTS-15 was found to be expressed in human prostate cancer 
biopsies with evidence of co-localization with VCAN and its bioactive cleavage 
fragment versikine. Enforced expression of ADAMTS-15, but not a 
catalytically-inactive version, decreased cell proliferation and migration of 
the 'castrate-resistant' PC3 prostate cancer cell line in vitro, with survival 
increased. Analysis of 'androgen-responsive' LNCaP prostate cancer cells in vivo 
in NOD/SCID mice revealed that ADAMTS-15 expression caused slower growing 
tumors, which resulted in increased survival. This was not observed in castrated 
mice or with cells expressing catalytically-inactive ADAMTS-15. Collectively, 
this research identifies the enzymatic function of ADAMTS-15 as having a tumor 
suppressor role in prostate cancer, possibly in concert with androgens, and that 
VCAN represents a likely key substrate, highlighting potential new options for 
the clinic.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10050682
PMCID: PMC7277637
PMID: 32354091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.C.W. is the Editor of this Special Issue. All 
other authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the 
design of the study; in the collection, analyses or interpretation of data; in 
the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.