1. Biochimie. 2020 Jul;174:126-135. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.04.021. Epub 2020 
Apr 27.

Physico-chemical properties of two point mutants of small heat shock protein 
HspB6 (Hsp20) with abrogated cardioprotection.

Shatov VM(1), Gusev NB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Biology, Moscow State University, 
Moscow, 119991, Russian Federation.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Biology, Moscow State University, 
Moscow, 119991, Russian Federation. Electronic address: NBGusev@mail.ru.

Physico-chemical properties of HspB6 S10F and P20L mutants with abrogated 
cardioprotective activity and associated with different forms of cardiomyopathy 
were analyzed. Under normal conditions both the wild-type HspB6 and its mutants 
formed small size oligomers (dimers) with apparent molecular weight of 
50-60 kDa. Under crowding conditions (0.5 M trimethylamine N-oxide, TMAO) the 
wild-type HspB6 remained predominantly dimeric or formed small molecular weight 
complexes, whereas both mutants tended to form high molecular weight complexes. 
Catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylated the wild-type 
HspB6 and its S10F mutant with comparable rate. The rate of P20L mutant 
phosphorylation was higher than that of the wild-type HspB6. S10F and P20L 
mutations did not affect interaction of phosphorylated HspB6 with universal 
adapter proteins 14-3-3. The wild-type HspB6 was resistant to heat-induced 
denaturation and aggregation, whereas both its mutants were denatured and 
started to aggregate at temperature much lower than its wild-type counterpart. 
Titration with fluorescent probe bis-ANS was accompanied by larger increase of 
fluorescence in the case of both mutants than in the case of the wild-type 
HspB6. Both mutants possessed higher chaperone-like activity than the wild-type 
protein. It is concluded that both S10F and P20L mutations are accompanied by 
increase of hydrophobicity of the very N-terminal region of HspB6 leading to 
increased aggregation at elevated temperature, formation of large complexes 
under crowding conditions and increased chaperone-like activity measured 
in vitro. Increased hydrophobicity and self-association can affect substrate 
specificity and interaction with certain target proteins thus leading to 
decrease or complete abrogation of cardioprotective activity.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie 
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2020.04.021
PMID: 32353387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.