1. Biomacromolecules. 2020 Jun 8;21(6):2147-2154. doi:
10.1021/acs.biomac.0c00133.  Epub 2020 May 5.

Synthesis of Zwitterionic and Trehalose Polymers with Variable Degradation Rates 
and Stabilization of Insulin.

Pelegri-O'Day EM(1), Bhattacharya A(1), Theopold N(1), Ko JH(1), Maynard HD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and California NanoSystems 
Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, 607 Charles E. Young Drive 
East, Los Angeles, California 90095, United States.

Polymers that stabilize biomolecules are important as excipients in protein 
formulation. Herein, we describe a class of degradable polymers that have 
tunable degradation rates depending on the polymer backbone and can stabilize 
proteins to aggregation. Specifically, zwitterion- and trehalose-substituted 
polycaprolactone, polyvalerolactone, polycarbonate, and polylactide were 
prepared and characterized with regards to their hydrolytic degradation and 
ability to stabilize insulin to mechanical agitation during heat. Ring-opening 
polymerization (ROP) of allyl-substituted monomers was performed by using 
organocatalysis, resulting in well-defined alkene-substituted polymers with good 
control over molecular weight and dispersity. The polymers were then modified by 
using photocatalyzed thiol-ene reactions to install protein-stabilizing 
carboxybetaine and trehalose side chains. The resulting polymers were 
water-soluble and exhibited a wide range of half-lives, from 12 h to more than 3 
months. The polymers maintained the ability to stabilize the therapeutic protein 
insulin from activity loss due to aggregation, demonstrating their potential as 
degradable excipients for protein formulation.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biomac.0c00133
PMCID: PMC8259896
PMID: 32369347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]