1. Viruses. 2020 Apr 30;12(5):500. doi: 10.3390/v12050500.

Phylogenetic, Evolutionary and Structural Analysis of Canine Parvovirus (CPV-2) 
Antigenic Variants Circulating in Colombia.

Giraldo-Ramirez S(1), Rendon-Marin S(1), Ruiz-Saenz J(1).

Author information:
(1)Grupo de Investigaci√≥n en Ciencias Animales-GRICA, Facultad de Medicina 
Veterinaria y Zootecnia, Universidad Cooperativa de Colombia, Sede Bucaramanga 
680005, Colombia.

Canine parvovirus (CPV-2) is the causative agent of haemorrhagic gastroenteritis 
in canids. Three antigenic variants-CPV-2a, CPV-2b and CPV-2c-have been 
described, which are determined by variations at residue 426 of the VP2 capsid 
protein. In Colombia, the CPV-2a and CPV-2b antigenic variants have previously 
been reported through partial VP2 sequencing. Mutations at residues Asn428Asp 
and Ala514Ser of variant CPV-2a were detected, implying the appearance of a 
possible new CPV-2a variant in Colombia. The purpose of the present study was to 
characterise the full VP2 capsid protein in samples from Antioquia, Colombia. We 
conducted a cross-sectional study with 56 stool samples from dogs showing 
clinical symptoms of parvoviral disease. Following DNA extraction from the 
samples, VP2 amplification was performed using PCR and positive samples were 
sequenced. Sequence and phylogenetic analyses were performed by comparison with 
the VP2 gene sequences of the different CPV-2 worldwide. VP2 was amplified in 
51.8% of the analysed samples. Sequencing and sequence alignment showed that 
93.1% of the amplified samples belonged to the new CPV-2a antigenic variant 
previously. Analysing the amino acid sequences revealed that all CPV-2a contain 
Ala297Asn mutations, which are related to the South America I clade, and the 
Ala514Ser mutation, which allows characterization as a new CPV-2a sub-variant. 
The Colombian CPV-2b variant presented Phe267Tyr, Tyr324Ile and Thr440Ala, which 
are related to the Asia-I clade variants. The CPV-2c was not detected in the 
samples. In conclusion, two antigenic CPV-2 variants of two geographically 
distant origins are circulating in Colombia. It is crucial to continue 
characterising CPV-2 to elucidate the molecular dynamics of the virus and to 
detect new CPV-2 variants that could be becoming highly prevalent in the region.

DOI: 10.3390/v12050500
PMCID: PMC7290427
PMID: 32366040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this work do not have any 
personal or financial conflict that may improperly influence the content of this 
document.