1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2020 May;27(5):489-499. doi: 10.1038/s41594-020-0415-7. 
Epub 2020 May 4.

Real-time observation of CRISPR spacer acquisition by Cas1-Cas2 integrase.

Budhathoki JB(1), Xiao Y(#)(1), Schuler G(#)(1), Hu C(1), Cheng A(1), Ding F(1), 
Ke A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 
USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 
USA. ailong.ke@cornell.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Cas1 integrase associates with Cas2 to insert short DNA fragments into a CRISPR 
array, establishing nucleic acid memory in prokaryotes. Here we applied 
single-molecule FRET methods to the Enterococcus faecalis (Efa) Cas1-Cas2 system 
to establish a kinetic framework describing target-searching, integration, and 
post-synapsis events. EfaCas1-Cas2 on its own is not able to find the CRISPR 
repeat in the CRISPR array; it only does so after prespacer loading. The leader 
sequence adjacent to the repeat further stabilizes EfaCas1-Cas2 contacts, 
enabling leader-side integration and subsequent spacer-side integration. The 
resulting post-synaptic complex (PSC) has a surprisingly short mean lifetime. 
Remarkably, transcription effectively resolves the PSC, and we predict that this 
is a conserved mechanism that ensures efficient and directional spacer 
integration in many CRISPR systems. Overall, our study provides a complete model 
of spacer acquisition, which can be harnessed for DNA-based information storage 
and cell lineage tracing technologies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41594-020-0415-7
PMCID: PMC7241818
PMID: 32367067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.