1. Biosci Rep. 2020 May 29;40(5):BSR20200067. doi: 10.1042/BSR20200067.

Whole exome sequencing of a family revealed a novel variant in the CHM gene, 
c.22delG p.(Glu8Serfs*4), which co-segregated with choroideremia.

Dan H(1), Li T(2), Lei X(1), Huang X(1), Xing Y(1), Shen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Eye Center, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, Hubei, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, The Central Hospital of Enshi Tujia and Miao 
Autonomous Prefecture, Enshi Clinical College of Wuhan University, Enshi 445000, 
Hubei, China.

Choroideremia is a complex form of blindness-causing retinal degeneration. The 
aim of the present study was to investigate the pathogenic variant and molecular 
etiology associated with choroideremia in a Chinese family. All available family 
members underwent detailed ophthalmological examinations. Whole exome 
sequencing, bioinformatics analysis, Sanger sequencing, and co-segregation 
analysis of family members were used to validate sequencing data and confirm the 
presence of the disease-causing gene variant. The proband was diagnosed with 
choroideremia on the basis of clinical manifestations. Whole exome sequencing 
showed that the proband had a hemizygous variant in the CHM gene, c.22delG p. 
(Glu8Serfs*4), which was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and found to 
co-segregate with choroideremia. The variant was classified as likely pathogenic 
and has not previously been described. These results expand the spectrum of 
variants in the CHM gene, thus potentially enriching the understanding of the 
molecular basis of choroideremia. Moreover, they may provide insight for future 
choroideremia diagnosis and gene therapy.

Â© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20200067
PMCID: PMC7218218
PMID: 32364220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.