1. Cancer Res. 2020 Jul 1;80(13):2775-2789. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-3278. 
Epub 2020 May 4.

A Premalignant Cell-Based Model for Functionalization and Classification of PTEN 
Variants.

Chao JT(1), Hollman R(1), Meyers WM(1), Meili F(1), Matreyek KA(2)(3), Dean 
P(1), Fowler DM(3)(4), Haas K(1), Roskelley CD(1), Loewen CJR(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, Life Sciences Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(5)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, Life Sciences Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. cloewen@mail.ubc.ca.

As sequencing becomes more economical, we are identifying sequence variations in 
the population faster than ever. For disease-associated genes, it is imperative 
that we differentiate a sequence variant as either benign or pathogenic, such 
that the appropriate therapeutic interventions or surveillance can be 
implemented. PTEN is a frequently mutated tumor suppressor that has been linked 
to the PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome. Although the domain structure of PTEN and 
the functional impact of a number of its most common tumor-linked mutations have 
been characterized, there is a lack of information about many recently 
identified clinical variants. To address this challenge, we developed a 
cell-based assay that utilizes a premalignant phenotype of normal mammary 
epithelial cells lacking PTEN. We measured the ability of PTEN variants to 
rescue the spheroid formation phenotype of PTEN-/- MCF10A cells maintained in 
suspension. As proof of concept, we functionalized 47 missense variants using 
this assay, only 19 of which have clear classifications in ClinVar. We utilized 
a machine learning model trained with annotated genotypic data to classify 
variants as benign or pathogenic based on our functional scores. Our model 
predicted with high accuracy that loss of PTEN function was indicative of 
pathogenicity. We also determined that the pathogenicity of certain variants may 
have arisen from reduced stability of the protein product. Overall, this assay 
outperformed computational predictions, was scalable, and had a short run time, 
serving as an ideal alternative for annotating the clinical significance of 
cancer-associated PTEN variants. SIGNIFICANCE: Combined three-dimensional tumor 
spheroid modeling and machine learning classifies PTEN missense variants, over 
70% of which are currently listed as variants of uncertain significance. 
GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT: 
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/canres/80/13/2775/F1.large.jpg.

Â©2020 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-3278
PMID: 32366478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]