1. J Anim Breed Genet. 2021 Jan;138(1):122-134. doi: 10.1111/jbg.12481. Epub 2020
 May 6.

A gene co-expression network analysis of the candidate genes and molecular 
pathways associated with feather follicle traits of chicken skin.

Ji GG(1), Zhang M(1), Liu YF(1), Shan YJ(1), Tu YJ(1), Ju XJ(1), Zou JM(1), Shu 
JT(1), Wu JF(2), Xie JF(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Poultry Genetics and Breeding of Jiangsu Province, 
Institute of Poultry Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Yangzhou, 
China.
(2)Jiangsu Li-hua Animal Husbandry Company, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Jiangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanchang, China.

Back and thigh skin of chickens showed significant differences in the thickness 
and the feather follicle density and size, which are important traits for 
slaughtered chickens' appearance. In the present study, global gene expression 
profiling was conducted in the back and thigh skin of chickens using Microarray 
technology. The results showed that 676 genes were differentially expressed 
between back and thigh skin. The expression of the differentially expressed 
genes (DEGs), including PPP1R3C, IGF1, PTCHD1, HOXB6, FGF9, CAMK4, SHH, BMP8B, 
FOXN1 and PTGER2, was validated by real-time quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-qPCR), and the results were consistent with microarray results. 
Functional analysis revealed that the DEGs were significantly involved in cell 
proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, adhesion and transport process, and 
the pathways were significantly mapped into the ECM-receptor interaction, 
peroxisome, focal adhesion, Hedgehog and PPAR signalling pathways. 
Protein-protein interaction network analysis suggested that signalling pathways 
related to feathers morphogenesis and development, such as Wnt, FGF, MAPK, SHH 
and BMP signalling pathways, occupied important positions in the network. Genes 
involved in these signalling pathways and adhesion molecules might play a vital 
role in skin and feather follicle development. Further single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) association analysis of Wnt3A showed that the AC genotype of 
SNP g.255361 C>A significantly increased the feather follicle density of thigh 
skin. Our findings may provide new insights on candidate genes and pathways 
related to skin and feather follicle formation of chickens.

Â© 2020 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/jbg.12481
PMID: 32378263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]