1. Front Neurol. 2020 Apr 21;11:290. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.00290. eCollection 
2020.

Making the Case for Research on Disease-Modifying Treatments to Tackle 
Post-lingual Progressive Sensorineural Hearing Loss.

Van Rompaey V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, Antwerp University 
Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
(2)Department of Translational Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

Hearing loss not only has a significant impact on the quality of life of 
patients and society, but its correlation with cognitive decline in an aging 
population will also increase the risk of incident dementia. While current 
management of hearing loss is focused on hearing rehabilitation (and essentially 
symptomatic), patients are suffering from the burden of progressive hearing loss 
before hearing aids or cochlear implants are fitted. Although these devices have 
a significant effect on speech understanding, they do not always lead to normal 
speech understanding, especially in noisy environments. A significant number of 
patients suffer from autosomal dominantly inherited disorders that can produce 
progressive sensorineural hearing loss. This includes DFNA9, a disorder caused 
by pathologic variants in the COCH gene that leads to post-lingual profound 
sensorineural hearing loss and bilateral vestibulopathy. Carriers of a 
pathogenic variant leading to DFNA9 can be diagnosed at the pre-symptomatic or 
early symptomatic stage which creates a window of opportunity for treatment. 
Preventing hearing loss from occurring or stabilizing progression would provide 
the opportunity to avoid hearing aids or cochlear implants and would be able to 
reduce the increased incidence of dementia. While innovative therapies for 
restoration of hearing have been studied for restoration of hearing in case of 
severe-to-profound sensorineural hearing loss and congenital hearing loss, 
further research is needed to study how we can modify disease progression in 
late-onset autosomal dominant hereditary sensorineural hearing loss. Recently, 
gene editing strategies have been explored in autosomal dominant disorders to 
disrupt dominant mutations selectively without affecting wild-type alleles.

Copyright Â© 2020 Van Rompaey.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2020.00290
PMCID: PMC7186466
PMID: 32373054