1. Asian J Pharm Sci. 2020 Mar;15(2):181-191. doi: 10.1016/j.ajps.2019.10.004.
Epub  2019 Nov 13.

Stimulatory effect on the transport mediated by organic anion transporting 
polypeptide 2B1.

Ogura J(1), Yamaguchi H(1), Mano N(1).

Author information:
(1)Tohoku University Hospital, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Miyagi 
980-8574, Japan.

Drug-drug interaction (DDI) is one of causes of adverse drug events and can 
result in life-threatening consequences. Organic anion-transporting polypeptide 
(OATP) 2B1 is a major uptake transporter in the intestine and contributes to 
transport various clinically used therapeutic agents. The intestine has a high 
risk of DDI, because it has a special propensity to be exposed to a high 
concentration of drugs. Thus, understanding drug interaction mediated by OATP2B1 
in the absorption process is important for the prevention of adverse drug 
events, including decrease in the therapeutic effect of co-administered drugs. 
Acute drug interaction occurs through the direct inhibitory effect on 
transporters, including OATP2B1. Moreover, some compounds such as clinically 
used drugs and food components have an acute stimulatory effect on transport of 
co-administered drugs by OATP2B1. This review summarizes the acute stimulatory 
effect on the transport mediated by OATP2B1 and discusses the mechanisms of the 
acute stimulatory effects of compounds. There are two types of acute stimulatory 
effects, substrate-independent and -dependent interactions on OATP2B1 function. 
The facilitating translocation of OATP2B1 to the plasma membrane is one of 
causes for the substrate-independent acute stimulatory effect. On the contrary, 
the substrate-dependent effect is based on the direct binding to the 
substrate-binding site or allosteric progesterone-binding site of OATP2B1.

Â© 2019 Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajps.2019.10.004
PMCID: PMC7193449
PMID: 32373198