1. NPJ Syst Biol Appl. 2020 May 6;6(1):12. doi: 10.1038/s41540-020-0131-2.

Genomic competition for noise reduction shaped evolutionary landscape of 
mir-4673.

Farahani RM(1)(2), Rezaei-Lotfi S(3), Hunter N(4)(3).

Author information:
(1)IDR/Westmead Institute for Medical Research and Westmead Centre for Oral 
Health, Sydney, NSW, Australia. ramin.mostofizadehfarahani@sydney.edu.au.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
2006, Australia. ramin.mostofizadehfarahani@sydney.edu.au.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
2006, Australia.
(4)IDR/Westmead Institute for Medical Research and Westmead Centre for Oral 
Health, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

The genomic platform that informs evolution of microRNA cascades remains 
unknown. Here we capitalised on the recent evolutionary trajectory of 
hominin-specific miRNA-4673, encoded in intron 4 of notch-1, to uncover the 
identity of one such precursor genomic element and the selective forces acting 
upon it. The miRNA targets genes that regulate Wnt/β-catenin signalling cascade. 
Primary sequence of the microRNA and its target region in Wnt modulating genes 
evolved from homologous signatures mapped to homotypic cis-clusters recognised 
by TCF3/4 and TFAP2A/B/C families. Integration of homologous TFAP2A/B/C 
cis-clusters (short range inhibitor of β-catenin) into the transcriptional 
landscape of Wnt cascade genes can reduce noise in gene expression. 
Probabilistic adoption of miRNA secondary structure by one such cis-signature in 
notch-1 reflected selection for superhelical curvature symmetry of precursor DNA 
to localise a nucleosome that overlapped the latter cis-cluster. By replicating 
the cis-cluster signature, non-random interactions of the miRNA with key Wnt 
modulator genes expanded the transcriptional noise buffering capacity via a 
coherent feed-forward loop mechanism. In consequence, an autonomous 
transcriptional noise dampener (the cis-cluster/nucleosome) evolved into a 
post-transcriptional one (the miRNA). The findings suggest a latent potential 
for remodelling of transcriptional landscape by miRNAs that capitalise on 
non-random distribution of genomic cis-signatures.

DOI: 10.1038/s41540-020-0131-2
PMCID: PMC7203229
PMID: 32376854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.