1. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2020 May 8;49(5):441-447. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.cn112151-20190826-00466.

[Ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors: DICER1 hotspot mutations and associated 
clinicopathological features].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Xiao YX(1), Zhu XL(2), Bi R(2), Tu XY(2), Cheng YF(2), Chang B(2), Yu L(2), 
Huang D(2), Lu YM(2), Shan L(2), Yang WT(2).

Author information:
(1)Pathology Residency Training Program, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer 
Center, Shanghai 200032, China(Xiao Yaoxing is working on the Department of 
Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai 200011, China).
(2)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 
200032, China.

Objective: To investigate DICER1 hotspot mutations in ovarian Sertoli-Leydig 
cell tumor (SLCT) and its associated clinicopathological features. Methods: 
Forty-three SLCTs and 40 other sex cord-stromal tumors (SCSTs) diagnosed between 
2010 and 2017 at Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center were examined for 
somatic DICER1 hotspot mutations by Sanger sequencing. The associations between 
mutation status and clinicopathological features, including patient age, tumor 
differentiation and recurrence, were analyzed. Results: Somatic DICER1 mutations 
were found in 51% (22/43) of SLCTs, while none in the other 40 SCSTs. The most 
common mutation of DICER1 was p.D1709N in exon 24 (41%, 9/22) and the second 
most common mutation of DICER1 was p.E1813K in exon 25 (14%, 3/22). A novel 
frameshift mutation (c.5464delG, p.M1837fs*16) was identified in one SLCT with 
microcystic pattern. Mutations were more likely to occur in patients under forty 
years of age (P=0.046), whereas no significant associations were found between 
DICER1 mutations and clinical symptoms, morphology or tumor recurrence. 
Conclusions: Somatic DCIER1 hotspot mutations are specifically found in SLCT and 
may serve as an ancillary marker in differential diagnosis of SLCT from other 
SCST. The mutations occur more often in young patients (<40 years old). 
Additional studies are warranted to examine the associations between DICER1 
mutations and clinicopathological features and prognosis of SLCT.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨DICER1基因在卵巢支持-间质细胞肿瘤（Sertoli-Leydig cell 
tumor，SLCT）的热点区域突变及相关临床病理学特征。 方法： 
收集复旦大学附属肿瘤医院病理科2010—2017年诊断的43例SLCT及40例其他卵巢性索-间质肿瘤（sex cord-stromal 
tumor，SCST）标本，采用Sanger法检测DICER1热点区域突变，根据年龄、组织学分化、复发情况等因素分类，分析与突变相关的临床病理特征。 结果： 
在22例（51%，22/43）SLCT检测到突变，而其他40例SCST未检测到突变。SLCT中最常见突变为第24号外显子p.D1709N突变（41%，9/22），其次为第25号外显子p.E1813K突变（14%，3/22）。在1例微囊型SLCT中检测到移码突变（c.5464delG，p.M1837fs*16）。突变型与野生型患者的年龄存在差异，突变多见于<40岁的患者（P=0.046），与临床症状、组织形态、肿瘤复发之间未显示具有统计学意义的相关性。 
结论： 
DICER1热点区域突变为卵巢SLCT特征性的分子病理改变，其检测有助于鉴别诊断SLCT与其他诊断困难的SCST。DICER1热点区域突变多见于年轻患者（<40岁），但目前缺乏足够证据表明突变与其他临床病理特征及生存预后相关。.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112151-20190826-00466
PMID: 32392927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]