1. J Chem Inf Model. 2020 Jun 22;60(6):3157-3171. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00307. 
Epub 2020 May 29.

Structural Determinants of Phosphopeptide Binding to the N-Terminal Src Homology 
2 Domain of the SHP2 Phosphatase.

Anselmi M(1), Calligari P(1), Hub JS(2), Tartaglia M(3), Bocchinfuso G(1), 
Stella L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Science and Technologies, University of Rome Tor 
Vergata, 00133, Rome, Italy.
(2)Theoretical Physics and Center for Biophysics, Saarland University, Campus E2 
6, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(3)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy.

SH2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2), encoded by PTPN11, plays a 
fundamental role in the modulation of several signaling pathways. Germline and 
somatic mutations in PTPN11 are associated with different rare diseases and 
hematologic malignancies, and recent studies have individuated SHP2 as a central 
node in oncogenesis and cancer drug resistance. The SHP2 structure includes two 
Src homology 2 domains (N-SH2 and C-SH2) followed by a catalytic protein 
tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) domain. Under basal conditions, the N-SH2 domain 
blocks the active site, inhibiting phosphatase activity. Association of the 
N-SH2 domain with binding partners containing short amino acid motifs comprising 
a phosphotyrosine residue (pY) leads to N-SH2/PTP dissociation and SHP2 
activation. Considering the relevance of SHP2 in signaling and disease and the 
central role of the N-SH2 domain in its allosteric regulation mechanism, we 
performed microsecond-long molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of the N-SH2 
domain complexed to 12 different peptides to define the structural and dynamical 
features determining the binding affinity and specificity of the domain. 
Phosphopeptide residues at position -2 to +5, with respect to pY, have 
significant interactions with the SH2 domain. In addition to the strong 
interaction of the pY residue with its conserved binding pocket, the complex is 
stabilized hydrophobically by insertion of residues +1, +3, and +5 in an apolar 
groove of the domain and interaction of residue -2 with both the pY and a 
protein surface residue. Additional interactions are provided by hydrogen bonds 
formed by the backbone of residues -1, +1, +2, and +4. Finally, negatively 
charged residues at positions +2 and +4 are involved in electrostatic 
interactions with two lysines (Lys89 and Lys91) specific for the SHP2 N-SH2 
domain. Interestingly, the MD simulations illustrated a previously undescribed 
conformational flexibility of the domain, involving the core β sheet and the 
loop that closes the pY binding pocket.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00307
PMCID: PMC8007070
PMID: 32395997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.