1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 May 13;16(5):e1008500. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008500. 
eCollection 2020 May.

Multiple weak interactions between BvgA~P and ptx promoter DNA strongly activate 
transcription of pertussis toxin genes in Bordetella pertussis.

Chen Q(1), Boucher PE(1), Stibitz S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products, Center For 
Biologics Evaluation and Research, FDA, Silver Spring, Maryland, United States 
of America.

Pertussis toxin is the preeminent virulence factor and major protective antigen 
produced by Bordetella pertussis, the human respiratory pathogen and etiologic 
agent of whooping cough. Genes for its synthesis and export are encoded by the 
12 kb ptx-ptl operon, which is under the control of the pertussis promoter, 
Pptx. Expression of this operon, like that of all other known protein virulence 
factors, is regulated by the BvgAS two-component global regulatory system. 
Although Pptx has been studied for years, characterization of its promoter 
architecture vis-à-vis BvgA-binding has lagged behind that of other promoters, 
mainly due to its lower affinity for BvgA~P. Here we take advantage of a mutant 
BvgA protein (Δ127-129), which enhances ptx transcription in B. pertussis and 
also demonstrates enhanced binding affinity to Pptx. By using this mutant 
protein labeled with FeBABE, binding of six head-to-head dimers of BvgA~P was 
observed, with a spacing of 22 bp, revealing a binding geometry similar to that 
of other BvgA-activated promoters carrying at least one strong binding site. All 
of these six BvgA-binding sites lack sequence features associated with strong 
binding. A genetic analysis indicated the degree to which each contributes to 
Pptx activity. Thus the weak/medium binding affinity of Pptx revealed in this 
study explains its lower responsiveness to phosphorylated BvgA, relative to 
other promoters containing a high affinity binding site, such as that of the fha 
operon.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008500
PMCID: PMC7250471
PMID: 32401811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.