1. Iran J Basic Med Sci. 2020 Feb;23(2):224-235. doi: 
10.22038/IJBMS.2019.35595.8488.

Pharmacological and computational evaluation of Sapodilla and its constituents 
for therapeutic potential in hyperactive gastrointestinal disorders.

Riaz MB(1), Khan AU(1), Qazi NG(1).

Author information:
(1)Riphah Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Riphah International University, 
Islamabad.

OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to investigate various gastrointestinal 
effects of Manilkara zapota (Sapodilla), exploring its anti-diarrheal, 
anti-secretary, anti-spasmodic, anti-ulcer and anti-motility potential.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Antidiarrheal and anti-secretary activities were 
investigated using castor oil induced diarrhea and castor oil induced fluid 
accumulation. Isolated rabbit jejunum tissues (antispasmodic) were employed for 
in vitro experiments. Antiulcer, antimotility and molecular docking were 
performed using ethanol-HCl induced ulcer assay, charcoal meal transit time and 
Auto Doc Vina.
RESULTS: Mz.Cr exhibited protection against castor oil-induced diarrhea (P<0.05 
vs. saline group) and dose-dependently inhibited intestinal fluid secretions 
(P<0.001 vs. castor oil group). Mz.Cr caused relaxation of spontaneous and K+ 
(80 Mm)-induced contractions with EC50 values of 0.11mg/ml (0.08-0.1, n=4) and 
0.16 mg/ml (0.09-0.2, n=4) respectively (* P<0.05** P<0.01 *** P<0.001). It 
showed protective effect against gastric ulcers induced by ethanol-HCl (P<0.001 
vs. saline group). Mz.Cr reduced distance travelled by charcoal meal (P<0.001 
vs. saline group). Plant constituents: caffeoylquinic acid and methyl 
4-O-galloylchlorogenate showed high binding affinities (E-value≥-6.5 Kcal/mol) 
against histaminergic H2 receptors, H+/K+ ATPase pump and voltage gated L-type 
calcium channels, while possesses moderate affinities (E-value≥8 Kcal/mol) 
against histaminergic H1, muscarinic M1, M3 and mu-opioid, whereas lower 
affinities (E-value≥9.5 Kcal/mol) vs. calmodulin, adrenergic α1, 
phosphodiesterase enzyme and dopaminergic D2 receptors. Lupeol-3-acetate and 
β-amyrin-3-(3'-dimethyl) butyrate observed weak affinities.
CONCLUSION: In present study, M. zapota is reported to exhibits anti-diarrheal, 
anti-secretory, anti-spasmodic, anti-motility, anti-ulcer effects and 
computational binding affinities against gastrointestinal targets.

DOI: 10.22038/IJBMS.2019.35595.8488
PMCID: PMC7211360
PMID: 32405366