1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2020 Jan 25;2020:4912395. doi: 
10.1155/2020/4912395. eCollection 2020.

The Active Compounds of Yixin Ningshen Tablet and Their Potential Action 
Mechanism in Treating Coronary Heart Disease- A Network Pharmacology and 
Proteomics Approach.

Lv X(1), Wang H(1)(2), Wu R(1), Shen X(3), Ye G(1).

Author information:
(1)Central Research Institute, Shanghai Pharmaceuticals Holding Co. Ltd., 
Shanghai, China.
(2)The MOE Key Laboratory for Standardization of Chinese Medicines and the SATCM 
Key Laboratory for New Resources and Quality Evaluation of Chinese Medicines, 
Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

Yixin Ningshen tablet is a CFDA-approved TCM formula for treating coronary heart 
disease (CHD) clinically. However, its active compounds and mechanism of action 
in treating CHD are unknown. In this study, a novel strategy with the 
combination of network pharmacology and proteomics was proposed to identify the 
active components of Yixin Ningshen tablet and the mechanism by which they treat 
CHD. With the application of network pharmacology, 62 active compounds in Yixin 
Ningshen tablet were screened out by text mining, and their 313 potential target 
proteins were identified by a tool in SwissTargetPrediction. These data were 
integrated with known CHD-related proteomics results to predict the most 
possible targets, which reduced the 313 potential target proteins to 218. The 
STRING database was retrieved to find the enriched pathways and related diseases 
of these target proteins, which indicated that the Calcium, MAPK, PI3K-Akt, 
cAMP, Rap1, AGE-RAGE, Relaxin, HIF-1, Prolactin, Sphingolipid, Estrogen, IL-17, 
Jak-STAT signaling pathway, necroptosis, arachidonic acid metabolism, insulin 
resistance, endocrine resistance, and steroid hormone biosynthesis might be the 
main pathways regulated by Yixin Ningshen tablet for the treatment of CHD. 
Through further enrichment analysis and literature study, EGFR, ERBB2, VGFR2, 
FGF1, ESR1, LOX15, PGH2, HMDH, ADRB1, and ADRB2 were selected and then validated 
to be the target proteins of Yixin Ningshen tablet by molecular docking, which 
indicated that Yixin Ningshen tablet might treat CHD mainly through promoting 
heart regeneration, new vessels' formation, and the blood supply of the 
myocardial region and reducing cardiac output, oxygen demand, and inflammation 
as well as arteriosclerosis (promoting vasodilation and intraplaque 
neoangiogenesis, lowering blood lipid). This study is expected to benefit the 
clinical application of Yixin Ningshen tablet for the treatment of CHD.

Copyright Â© 2020 Xing Lv et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/4912395
PMCID: PMC7204378
PMID: 32419806

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared no conflicts of 
interest.