1. Eur J Cancer. 2020 Jul;133:25-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.04.002. Epub 2020
May  15.

Precision oncology: the intention-to-treat analysis fallacy.

Sicklick JK(1), Kato S(2), Okamura R(2), Kurzrock R(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA; Moores Cancer Center, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA; Center for Personalized Cancer 
Therapy, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. Electronic 
address: jsicklick@health.ucsd.edu.
(2)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA; 
Center for Personalized Cancer Therapy, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA; Division of Hematology Oncology, Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA; 
Center for Personalized Cancer Therapy, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA; Division of Hematology Oncology, Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
rkurzrock@health.ucsd.edu.

Comment in
    Eur J Cancer. 2020 Oct;138:229-231. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.06.039.
    Eur J Cancer. 2020 Oct;138:228. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.07.015.

It has recently been suggested that precision oncology studies should be 
reanalysed using the intention-to-treat (ITT) methodology developed for 
randomized controlled clinical trials. This reanalysis dramatically decreases 
response rates in precision medicine studies. We contend that the ITT analysis 
of precision oncology trials is invalid. The ITT methodology was developed three 
decades ago to mitigate the problems of randomized trials, which try to ensure 
that both arms have an unselected patient population free from confounders. In 
contrast, precision oncology trials specifically select patients for confounders 
(that is biomarkers) that predict response. To demonstrate the issues inherent 
in an ITT reanalysis for precision cancer medicine studies, we take as an 
example the drug larotrectinib (TRK inhibitor) approved because of remarkable 
responses in malignancies harbouring NTRK fusions. Based on large-scale studies, 
NTRK fusions are found in ~0.31% of tumours. In a non-randomized pivotal study 
of larotrectinib, 75% of the 55 treated patients responded. Based upon the 
prevalence of NTRK fusions, ~18,000 patients would need to be screened to enrol 
the 55 treated patients. Utilizing the ITT methodology, the revised response 
rate to larotrectinib would be 0.23%. This is, of course, a dramatic 
underestimation of the efficacy of this now Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)-approved drug. Similar issues can be shown for virtually any 
biomarker-based precision clinical trial. Therefore, retrofitting the ITT 
analysis developed for unselected patient populations in randomized trials 
yields misleading conclusions in precision medicine studies.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.04.002
PMCID: PMC7786388
PMID: 32422506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement J.S. receives 
research funds from Foundation Medicine Inc., Novartis Pharmaceuticals, 
Blueprint Medicines, and Amgen, as well as consultant fees from Loxo, 
Biotheranostics, and Grand Rounds. R.K. has research funding from Incyte, 
Genentech, Merck Serono, Pfizer, Sequenom, Grifols, Omniseq, Foundation Medicine 
Inc., Guardant Health, and Konica Minolta, as well as consultant fees from Loxo, 
Actuate Therapeutics, Roche, Xbiotech and NeoMed. She serves as an advisor to 
Soluventis. She receives speaker fees from Roche, and has an equity interest in 
IDbyDNA, Curematch, Inc., and Soluventis. All other authors have no 
relationships to disclose.