1. Vision (Basel). 2020 May 15;4(2):27. doi: 10.3390/vision4020027.

Plasma Levels of Matrix Metalloprotease MMP-9 and Tissue Inhibitor TIMP-1 in 
Caucasian Patients with Polypoidal Choroidal Vasculopathy.

Sørensen JØ(1)(2), Subhi Y(1)(2), Molbech CR(1)(2), Krogh Nielsen M(1)(2), 
Sørensen TL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Eye Research Division, Department of Ophthalmology, Zealand 
University Hospital, Vestermarksvej 23, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Rigshospitalet-Glostrup, DK-2600 Glostrup, 
Denmark.
(3)Faculty of Health and Medical Science, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) and tissue inhibitor of 
metalloproteinases 1 (TIMP-1) are regulating enzymes of the extracellular 
matrix. A systemic imbalance of MMP-9 and TIMP-1, thought to reflect an 
imbalance of the extracellular matrix homeostasis, is previously associated with 
polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) in Asian patients. Previous studies 
suggest inter-ethnical differences in the genetic background and etiology of 
PCV. To further explore this issue, we studied the plasma levels of MMP-9 and 
TIMP-1 in Caucasian patients with PCV and compared to healthy age-matched 
controls.
METHODS: For this prospective case-control study, 60 participants were recruited 
who were either patients with PCV (n = 26) or healthy controls (n = 34). All 
participants underwent detailed clinical examination. We sampled fresh venous 
blood, isolated plasma, and quantified plasma concentrations of the 
extracellular matrix regulators MMP-9 and TIMP-1 using electrochemiluminescence 
immunoassays.
RESULTS: Plasma levels of MMP-9 (p = 0.4), TIMP-1 (p = 0.9), and MMP-9/TIMP-1 
ratio (p = 0.4) did not differ significantly between patients with PCV and 
healthy controls. No differences appeared after adjusting for influencing 
co-variates in multivariate analyses.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that Caucasian patients with PCV do not have altered 
levels of plasma MMP-9 or plasma TIMP-1. These findings suggest no strong 
evidence of a systemic imbalance of the extracellular matrix homeostasis in 
Caucasian patients with PCV. Our findings are in line with studies of other 
aspects of PCV that are also subject to significant inter-ethnical differences.

DOI: 10.3390/vision4020027
PMCID: PMC7356191
PMID: 32429088

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare that no potential conflicts of 
interest exist in relation to this work. Not related to this work, authors Y.S. 
and T.L.S. declare that are co-authors of a patent on the use of regulatory T 
cells in relation to polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy.