1. Cell Stress. 2020 Mar 4;4(5):99-113. doi: 10.15698/cst2020.05.220.

HIF1α-dependent mitophagy facilitates cardiomyoblast differentiation.

Zhao JF(1)(2), Rodger CE(1)(2), Allen GFG(1), Weidlich S(1), Ganley IG(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, 
University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK.
(2)Equal contribution.

Comment in
    Cell Stress. 2020 May 11;4(5):95-98. doi: 10.15698/cst2020.05.219.

Mitophagy is thought to play a key role in eliminating damaged mitochondria, 
with diseases such as cancer and neurodegeneration exhibiting defects in this 
process. Mitophagy is also involved in cell differentiation and maturation, 
potentially through modulating mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming. Here we 
examined mitophagy that is induced upon iron chelation and found that the 
transcriptional activity of HIF1α, in part through upregulation of BNIP3 and 
NIX, is an essential mediator of this pathway in SH-SY5Y cells. In contrast, 
HIF1α is dispensable for mitophagy occurring upon mitochondrial depolarisation. 
To examine the role of this pathway in a metabolic reprogramming and 
differentiation context, we utilised the H9c2 cell line model of cardiomyocyte 
maturation. During differentiation of these cardiomyoblasts, mitophagy increased 
and required HIF1α-dependent upregulation of NIX. Though HIF1α was essential for 
expression of key cardiomyocyte markers, mitophagy was not directly required. 
However, enhancing mitophagy through NIX overexpression, accelerated marker gene 
expression. Taken together, our findings provide a molecular link between 
mitophagy signalling and cardiomyocyte differentiation and suggest that although 
mitophagy may not be essential per se, it plays a critical role in maintaining 
mitochondrial integrity during this energy demanding process.

Copyright: © 2020 Zhao et al.

DOI: 10.15698/cst2020.05.220
PMCID: PMC7212530
PMID: 32420530

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare they 
have no conflict of interest.