1. Cells. 2020 May 14;9(5):1220. doi: 10.3390/cells9051220.

Xylosyl Extension of O-Glucose Glycans on the Extracellular Domain of NOTCH1 and 
NOTCH2 Regulates Notch Cell Surface Trafficking.

Urata Y(1)(2), Saiki W(1), Tsukamoto Y(1), Sago H(1), Hibi H(2), Okajima T(1), 
Takeuchi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biochemistry, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

Biochemical and genetic studies have indicated that O-linked glycosylation such 
as O-glucose (Glc), fucose (Fuc), and N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) is critical 
for Notch signaling; however, it is not fully understood how O-glycans regulate 
the Notch receptor function. Notch receptors are type-I transmembrane proteins 
with large extracellular domains (ECD), containing 29-36 epidermal growth 
factor-like (EGF) repeats. Here, we analyzed O-Glc glycans on NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 
expressed in HEK293T cells using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer and 
successfully revealed the structures and stoichiometries of all 17 EGF repeats 
of NOTCH1 with the O-Glc consensus sequence (C1-X-S-X-(P/A)-C2), and 16 out of 
17 EGF repeats of NOTCH2 with the same consensus sequence. High levels of O-Glc 
attachment and xylosyl elongation were detected on most NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 EGF 
repeats. When both glucoside xylosyltransferases, GXYLT1 and GXYLT2, responsible 
for the xylosyl elongation of O-glucose, were genetically deleted, the 
expression of endogenous NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 on the surface of HEK293T cells did 
not change, but the cell surface expression of overexpressed NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 
decreased compared with that in the wild type cells. In vitro secretion assays 
consistently showed a reduced secretion of both the NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 ECDs in 
GXYLT1 and GXYLT2 double knockout cells compared with the wild type cells, 
suggesting a significant role of the elongation of O-Glc glycans on the Notch 
ECDs in the quality control of Notch receptors.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9051220
PMCID: PMC7291291
PMID: 32423029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.