1. J Mol Biol. 2020 Jun 26;432(14):4092-4107. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.05.007.
Epub  2020 May 19.

Yeast Spt6 Reads Multiple Phosphorylation Patterns of RNA Polymerase II 
C-Terminal Domain In Vitro.

Brázda P(1), Krejčíková M(1), Kasiliauskaite A(1), Šmiřáková E(1), Klumpler 
T(1), Vácha R(1), Kubíček K(1), Štefl R(2).

Author information:
(1)CEITEC-Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, CZ-62500 
Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)CEITEC-Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, CZ-62500 
Brno, Czech Republic. Electronic address: richard.stefl@ceitec.muni.cz.

Transcription elongation factor Spt6 associates with RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) 
via a tandem SH2 (tSH2) domain. The mechanism and significance of the RNAP 
II-Spt6 interaction is still unclear. Recently, it was proposed that Spt6-tSH2 
is recruited via a newly described phosphorylated linker between the Rpb1 core 
and its C-terminal domain (CTD). Here, we report binding studies with isolated 
tSH2 of Spt6 (Spt6-tSH2) and Spt6 lacking the first unstructured 297 residues 
(Spt6ΔN) with a minimal CTD substrate of two repetitive heptads phosphorylated 
at different sites. The data demonstrate that Spt6 also binds the phosphorylated 
CTD, a site that was originally proposed as a recognition epitope. We also show 
that an extended CTD substrate harboring 13 repetitive heptads of the 
tyrosine-phosphorylated CTD binds Spt6-tSH2 and Spt6ΔN with tighter affinity 
than the minimal CTD substrate. The enhanced binding is achieved by avidity 
originating from multiple phosphorylation marks present in the CTD. 
Interestingly, we found that the steric effects of additional domains in the 
Spt6ΔN construct partially obscure the binding of the tSH2 domain to the 
multivalent ligand. We show that Spt6-tSH2 binds various phosphorylation 
patterns in the CTD and found that the studied combinations of phospho-CTD marks 
(1,2; 1,5; 2,4; and 2,7) all facilitate the interaction of CTD with Spt6. Our 
structural studies reveal a plasticity of the tSH2 binding pockets that enables 
the accommodation of CTDs with phosphorylation marks in different registers.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.05.007
PMCID: PMC7327521
PMID: 32439331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]