1. Gene. 2020 Aug 30;753:144793. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.144793. Epub 2020 May
21.

Loss of the KH1 domain of FMR1 in humans due to a synonymous variant causes 
global developmental retardation.

Carion N(1), Briand A(1), Cuisset L(1), Pacot L(1), Afenjar A(2), Bienvenu T(3).

Author information:
(1)Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, APHP. Centre Universitaire Paris, 
Hôpital Cochin, Laboratoire de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaires, Paris, 
France.
(2)Sorbonne Universités, Centre de Référence déficiences intellectuelles de 
causes rares, département de génétique et embryologie médicale, Hôpital 
Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(3)Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, APHP. Centre Universitaire Paris, 
Hôpital Cochin, Laboratoire de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaires, Paris, 
France; Institut de Psychiatrie et de Neurosciences de Paris (IPNP), INSERM 
U1266, Team « Vulnérabilité aux troubles psychiatriques et addictifs », 
Université de Paris, Paris, France. Electronic address: 
thierry.bienvenu@inserm.fr.

BACKGROUND: Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a monogenic disorder and a common cause 
of intellectual disability (ID). Up to now, very few pathological variants other 
than the typical CGG-repeat expansion have been reported in the FMR1 gene.
METHODS: A panel of 56 intellectual disability (ID) genes including the FMR1 
gene was sequenced in a cohort of 300 patients with unexplained ID. To determine 
the effect of a new FMR1 variant, total RNA from peripheral blood cells was 
reverse transcribed, amplified by polymerase chain reaction and sequenced.
RESULTS: We report a novel G to A point variant (c.801G > A) located at the last 
nucleotide of exon 8 in the FMR1 gene in one patient with ID. Direct sequencing 
of the RT-PCR products revealed that the transcript from the allele with G to A 
variant skips exon 8 entirely, resulting in a joining of exons 7 and 9. Skipping 
of exon 8 may result in an abnormal FMR1 protein (FMRP), which removes the 
highly conserved region that encoding the KH1 domain of FMRP.
CONCLUSIONS: This report describes for the first time that a synonymous variant 
in the FMR1 gene is associated with an error in mRNA processing, leading 
preferentially to the production of an aberrant transcript without exon 8. This 
splice variant was associated with an unspecific clinical presentation, 
suggesting the need for more detailed investigation of silent variants in ID 
patients with a large spectrum of phenotypes.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.144793
PMID: 32446918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.