1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2020 Sep;98(8):693-699. doi: 10.1111/imcb.12362. Epub 2020 
Jul 12.

Novel homozygous variants in the SERPING1 gene in two Turkish families with 
hereditary angioedema of recessive inheritance.

Mete Gökmen N(1), Rodríguez-Alcalde C(2), Gülbahar O(1), Lopez-Trascasa M(3), 
Onay H(4), López-Lera A(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Allergy and Immunology, Ege 
University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Hospital La Paz Institute for Health Research (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Hospital La Paz 
Institute for Health Research (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, 
Turkey.
(5)Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, 
Spain.

Hereditary angioedema as a result of deficiency of the C1 inhibitor (HAE-C1INH; 
MIM# 106100) is a rare autosomal disorder and affected individuals are generally 
heterozygous for dominant negative variants in the SERPING1 gene. Homozygosity 
for SERPING1 pathogenic variants was long considered to be embryonically lethal; 
however, five nonrelated families with a recessive HAE pattern have been 
described in the last decade. In this report, we functionally characterized two 
newly reported nonrelated, consanguineous families with a recessive presentation 
of HAE attributed to SERPING1 variants in the reactive center loop (family D; 
S438F) and gate (family A; I379T) regions. S438F heterozygotes (family D) showed 
variable levels of intact 105-kDa and cleaved/inactive 96-kDa isoforms of C1INH, 
whereas their homozygous relative presented only the 96-kDa band. Functional 
studies showed that S438F reduced C1INH interaction with target proteases in 
heterozygous (C1s, 32-38% of controls and FXIIa, 28-35% of controls) and 
homozygous (C1s, 18-24% of controls and FXIIa, 4-8% of controls) carriers, which 
is consistent with the more severe presentation of HAE in the family and 
decreased C1q levels in homozygous patients. By contrast, plasma C1INH from 
I379T heterozygotes (family A) showed normal C1INH/C1s binding (84-94% of 
controls) and no significant reduction in C1INH/FXIIa complexes (50-70% of 
controls). However, the homozygote failed to inhibit both C1s (25-42% of 
controls) and FXIIa (14-18% of controls). This profile is concordant with the 
less severe presentation of HAE in the family and the conserved C4 and C1q 
levels in heterozygous and homozygous patients.

© 2020 Australian and New Zealand Society for Immunology Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/imcb.12362
PMID: 32445210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]