1. Ther Hypothermia Temp Manag. 2020 Sep;10(3):171-178. doi: 
10.1089/ther.2020.0010. Epub 2020 May 22.

Infusion of Cold Saline into the Carotid Artery Does Not Affect Outcome After 
Intrastriatal Hemorrhage.

Liddle LJ(1), Prokop BJ(1), Dirks CA(1), Demchuk A(2), Almekhlafi M(2), 
Colbourne F(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(2)Calgary Stroke Program, Calgary, Canada.
(3)Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
Canada.

Localized brain hypothermia (HYPO) can be achieved by infusing cold saline into 
the carotid artery of animals and patients. Studies suggest that HYPO improves 
behavioral and histological outcomes in focal ischemia models. Given that 
ischemic stroke and intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) share pathophysiological 
overlap, we tested whether cold saline infusion is safe and neuroprotective when 
given during collagenase-induced ICH. Eighty-five adult male Sprague-Dawley rats 
were used. Experiment 1 investigated brain and body temperature changes 
associated with a cold saline infusion paradigm that was scaled from patients 
according to brain weight and blood volume (3 mL/20-minute infusion). Experiment 
2 determined whether HYPO aggravated bleeding volume. Experiment 3 investigated 
if cerebral edema or elemental concentrations were altered by HYPO. We also 
collected core body temperature and activity data through telemetry. Experiment 
4 investigated whether behavioral outcomes (e.g., skilled reaching) and tissue 
loss were influenced by HYPO. Our HYPO protocol decreased the ipsilateral 
striatal temperature by ∼0.20°C (p < 0.001), with no other effects. HYPO did not 
affect hematoma volume (p = 0.64), cerebral edema (p = 0.34), or elemental 
concentrations (p = 0.49) at 24 hours post-ICH. Although ICH caused persistent 
behavioral impairments, HYPO did not improve behavioral outcomes (measured by a 
neurological deficit scale, cylinder, and the staircase test; p > 0.05 for all). 
Brain tissue loss was not different between groups on day 28 post-ICH 
(p = 0.90). Although cold saline infusion appears to be safe in the acute 
post-ICH period, there was no evidence that this therapy improved outcome. 
However, our treatment protocol was relatively mild and additional interventions 
might help improve efficacy. Finally, our findings may also speak to the safety 
of this cooling approach in focal ischemia where hemorrhagic transformation is a 
risk; future studies on this issue are needed.

DOI: 10.1089/ther.2020.0010
PMCID: PMC7482714
PMID: 32456561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing financial interests exist.