1. Viruses. 2020 May 24;12(5):577. doi: 10.3390/v12050577.

Comparative Genomics Unveils Regionalized Evolution of the Faustovirus Genomes.

Geballa-Koukoulas K(1)(2), Boudjemaa H(1)(3), Andreani J(1), La Scola B(1), 
Blanc G(2).

Author information:
(1)MEPHI, APHM, IRD 198, Aix Marseille Univ, IHU-Méditerranée Infection, 13005 
Marseille, France.
(2)Aix Marseille Univ., Universite de Toulon, CNRS, IRD, MIO UM 110, 13288 
Marseille, France.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of science of nature and life, Hassiba Ben 
Bouali University Chlef, 02000 Chlef, Algeria.

Faustovirus is a recently discovered genus of large DNA virus infecting the 
amoeba Vermamoeba vermiformis, which is phylogenetically related to 
Asfarviridae. To better understand the diversity and evolution of this viral 
group, we sequenced six novel Faustovirus strains, mined published metagenomic 
datasets and performed a comparative genomic analysis. Genomic sequences 
revealed three consistent phylogenetic groups, within which genetic diversity 
was moderate. The comparison of the major capsid protein (MCP) genes unveiled 
between 13 and 18 type-I introns that likely evolved through a still-active 
birth and death process mediated by intron-encoded homing endonucleases that 
began before the Faustovirus radiation. Genome-wide alignments indicated that 
despite genomes retaining high levels of gene collinearity, the central region 
containing the MCP gene together with the extremities of the chromosomes evolved 
at a faster rate due to increased indel accumulation and local rearrangements. 
The fluctuation of the nucleotide composition along the Faustovirus (FV) genomes 
is mostly imprinted by the consistent nucleotide bias of coding sequences and 
provided no evidence for a single DNA replication origin like in circular 
bacterial genomes.

DOI: 10.3390/v12050577
PMCID: PMC7290515
PMID: 32456325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.