1. J Med Food. 2021 Jan;24(1):28-32. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2020.0024. Epub 2020 May
27.

Effect of Gymnema sylvestre Administration on Glycemic Control, Insulin 
Secretion, and Insulin Sensitivity in Patients with Impaired Glucose Tolerance.

Gaytán Martínez LA(1), Sánchez-Ruiz LA(1), Zuñiga LY(1), González-Ortiz M(1), 
Martínez-Abundis E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Experimental and Clinical 
Therapeutics, Health Science University Center, University of Guadalajara, 
Guadalajara, Mexico.

Gymnema sylvestre, a plant typical of India, has long been known for its 
hypoglycemic effects. The objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of 
G. sylvestre administration on glycemic control, insulin secretion, and insulin 
sensitivity in patients with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT). A randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial was conducted in 30 patients 
with IGT. Fifteen patients randomly received G. sylvestre in doses of 300 mg 
b.i.d. and the other 15 received placebo in the same way. Before and after the 
intervention, anthropometric and metabolic measurements were taken, including 
2-h oral glucose tolerance test (2-h OGTT), fasting plasma glucose, glycated 
hemoglobin A1c (A1C), and the lipid profile panel. Areas under the curve of 
glucose and insulin were calculated, as well as the insulinogenic, Stumvoll, and 
Matsuda indices. Wilcoxon, Mann-Whitney U, and chi-square or Fisher's exact 
tests were performed, and a P-value ≤.05 was considered statistically 
significant. There was a significant reduction in 2-h OGTT (9.1 ± 1.2 vs. 
7.8 ± 1.7 mmol/L, P = .003), A1C (5.8 ± 0.3% vs. 5.4 ± 0.4%, P = .025), body 
weight, body mass index, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in the 
G. sylvestre group, with an increment in the Matsuda index (1.8 ± 0.8 vs. 
2.4 ± 1.2, P = .008). At the end of the intervention, 46.7% of the patients 
obtained normal values in A1C. In conclusion, G. sylvestre administration in 
patients with IGT decreased 2-h OGTT and A1C, increasing insulin sensitivity. 
There were also improvements in anthropometric measures and the lipid profile.

DOI: 10.1089/jmf.2020.0024
PMID: 32460589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]