1. Viruses. 2020 May 25;12(5):578. doi: 10.3390/v12050578.

Isolation of a Chinook Salmon Bafinivirus (CSBV) in Imported Goldfish Carassius 
auratus L. in the United Kingdom and Evaluation of Its Virulence in Resident 
Fish Species.

Cano I(1), Stone D(1), Savage J(1), Wood G(1), Mulhearn B(1), Gray J(1), Stinton 
N(1), Ross S(1), Bonar M(1), Taylor NGH(1), Bateman KS(1), Feist SW(1).

Author information:
(1)International Centre of Excellence for Aquatic Animal Health, Cefas Weymouth 
Laboratory, Weymouth, Dorset DT4 8UB, UK.

This is the first record of a fish nidovirus isolated from a consignment of 
goldfish at the United Kingdom (UK) border. The full-length viral genome was 
25,985 nt, sharing a 97.9% nucleotide identity with the Chinook salmon 
bafinivirus (CSBV) NIDO with two deletions of 537 and 480 nt on the ORF Ia 
protein. To assess the potential impact on UK fish species, Atlantic salmon, 
common carp and goldfish were exposed to the virus via an intraperitoneal (IP) 
injection and bath challenge. Moribundity was recorded in only 8% of IP-injected 
goldfish. A high viral load, ≈107 of the CSBV PpIa gene, was measured in the 
kidney of moribund goldfish. Mild histopathological changes were observed in the 
kidneys of challenged carps. Ultrastructural observations in renal tubule 
epithelial cells of goldfish showed cylindrical tubes (≈15 nm in diameter) and 
tubular structures budding spherical virions (≈200 nm in diameter) with external 
spike-like structures. Negative staining showed both circular and bacilliform 
virions. Seroconversion was measured in common carp and goldfish but not in 
Atlantic salmon. This study reinforces the potential risk of novel and emerging 
pathogens being introduced to recipient countries via the international 
ornamental fish trade and the importance of regular full health screens at the 
border inspection posts to reduce this risk.

DOI: 10.3390/v12050578
PMCID: PMC7290303
PMID: 32466150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.