1. Biomol Ther (Seoul). 2020 Nov 1;28(6):519-526. doi:
10.4062/biomolther.2020.041.

MeBib Suppressed Methamphetamine Self-Administration Response via Inhibition of 
BDNF/ERK/CREB Signal Pathway in the Hippocampus.

Kim B(1), Jha S(1), Seo JH(2), Jeong CH(1), Lee S(1), Lee S(1), Seo YH(1), Park 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, Daegu 42601, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, Daegu 
42601, Republic of Korea.

Methamphetamine (MA) is one of the most commonly abused drugs in the world by 
illegal drug users. Addiction to MA is a serious public health problem and 
effective therapies do not exist to date. It has also been reported that 
behavior induced by psychostimulants such as MA is related to histone 
deacetylase (HDAC). MeBib is an HDAC6 inhibitor derived from a benzimidazole 
scaffold. Many benzimidazole-containing compounds exhibit a wide range of 
pharmacological activity. In this study, we investigated whether HDAC6 inhibitor 
MeBib modulates the behavioral response in MA self-administered rats. Our 
results demonstrated that the number of active lever presses in MA 
self-administered rats was reduced by pretreatment with MeBib. In the 
hippocampus of rats, we also found MA administration promotes GluN2B, an NMDA 
receptor subunit, expression, which results in sequential activation of 
ERK/CREB/BDNF pathway, however, MeBib abrogated it. Collectively, we suggest 
that MeBib prevents the MA seeking response induced by MA administration and 
therefore, represents a potent candidate as an MA addiction inhibitor.

DOI: 10.4062/biomolther.2020.041
PMCID: PMC7585641
PMID: 32466633