1. Neurosci Lett. 2020 Jun 21;730:135046. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135046. Epub
 2020 May 26.

Genetic underpinnings of cerebral edema in acute brain injury: an opportunity 
for pathway discovery.

Kirsch E(1), Szejko N(2), Falcone GJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA; Division of 
Neurocritical Care & Emergency Neurology, Department of Neurology, Yale School 
of Medicine, 15 York Street, LLCI Room 1004D, P.O. Box 20801, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA.
(2)Division of Neurocritical Care & Emergency Neurology, Department of 
Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, 15 York Street, LLCI Room 1004D, P.O. Box 
20801, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Department of Neurology, Medical University of 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland; Department of Bioethics, Medical University of Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Division of Neurocritical Care & Emergency Neurology, Department of 
Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, 15 York Street, LLCI Room 1004D, P.O. Box 
20801, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. Electronic address: guido.falcone@yale.edu.

Cerebral edema constitutes an important contributor to secondary injury in acute 
brain injury. The quantification of cerebral edema in neuroimaging, a 
well-established biomarker of secondary brain injury, represents a useful 
intermediate phenotype to study edema formation. Population genetics provides 
powerful tools to identify novel susceptibility genes, biological pathways and 
therapeutic targets related to brain edema formation. Here, we provide an 
overview of the pathogenesis of cerebral edema, introduce relevant genetic 
methods to study this process, and discuss the ongoing research on the genetic 
underpinnings of edema formation in acute brain injury. The epsilon 2 and 4 
variants within the Apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene are associated with worse 
outcome after traumatic brain injury and intracerebral hemorrhage, and recent 
studies link these polymorphisms to inflammatory processes that lead to 
blood-brain barrier disruption and vasogenic edema. For the Haptoglobin gene 
(HP), the Hp 2-2 genotype associates with worse outcome after acute brain 
injury, whereas the haptoglobin Hp 1-1 genotype correlates with increased edema 
in the early phases of intracerebral hemorrhage. Another important protein in 
cerebral edema is aquaporin 4, coded by the AQP4 gene. AQP4 mutations contribute 
to the formation of cytotoxic edema, and further genetic research is necessary 
to help elucidate the mediating mechanism. Findings supporting the target genes 
outlined above require replication in larger samples and evaluation in non-white 
populations. These next steps will be significantly facilitated by the rapid 
changes observed in the field of population genetics, including large 
international collaborations, open access to genetic data, and significant 
reductions in the cost of genotyping technologies.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135046
PMCID: PMC7372633
PMID: 32464484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]