1. Neurosci Lett. 2020 Aug 10;733:135082. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135082. Epub
 2020 May 24.

Characterization of 5-HT(1A) receptor and transport protein KIF13A expression in 
the hippocampus of stress-adaptive and -maladaptive mice.

Miyagishi H(1), Tsuji M(2), Miyagawa K(3), Kurokawa K(3), Mochida-Saito A(3), 
Takahashi K(3), Ishige K(4), Takeda H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, International University of 
Health and Welfare, 2600-1 Kitakanemaru, Ohtawara, Tochigi 324-8501, Japan; 
Laboratory of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 7-7-1 
Narashinodai, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8555, Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, International University of 
Health and Welfare, 2600-1 Kitakanemaru, Ohtawara, Tochigi 324-8501, Japan. 
Electronic address: mtsuji@iuhw.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, International University of 
Health and Welfare, 2600-1 Kitakanemaru, Ohtawara, Tochigi 324-8501, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 7-7-1 
Narashinodai, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8555, Japan.

The ability to adapt to stress is an essential defensive function of a living 
body, and disturbance of this ability in the brain may contribute to the 
development of affective illness including major depression and anxiety 
disorders. A growing body of evidence suggests that brain serotonin (5-HT)1A 
receptors may be involved, at least in part, in the development of adaptation to 
stress. 5-HT1A receptor was reported to be transported by KIF13A, a motor 
protein and a member of the kinesin superfamily, from the golgi apparatus to the 
plasma membrane. The aim of the present study was to characterize the expression 
pattern of 5-HT1A receptor and KIF13A in the hippocampus of stress-adaptive and 
-maladaptive mice. Mice were either exposed to repeated adaptable (1 h/day) or 
unadaptable (4 h/day) restraint stress, or left in their home cage for 14 days. 
The levels of 5-HT1A receptor and KIF13A expression were assessed by western 
blot analysis. To confirm the formation of a 5-HT1A receptor and KIF13A complex, 
we performed blue native-sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (BN-SDS-PAGE). Western blotting showed that neither 5-HT1A 
receptor nor KIF13A expression changed significantly in the hippocampal total 
extract of stress-adaptive and -maladaptive mice. In contrast, expression of 
5 H T1A receptor and KIF13A in the hippocampal membrane fraction was increased 
in stress-adaptive mice, but not in stress-maladaptive mice. BN-SDS-PAGE 
analysis revealed that the bands of 5-HT1A receptor and KIF13A were both 
observed at a molecular weight of approximately 70 kDa, which indicated that 
5-HT1A receptor and KIF13A form a complex. The present findings suggest that 
translocation of 5-HT1A receptor in complex with KIF13A to the plasma membrane 
of the hippocampus may play an important role in the formation of stress 
adaptation.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135082
PMID: 32461107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]