1. Front Oncol. 2020 May 12;10:737. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2020.00737. eCollection
2020.

Diacylglycerol Kinase Alpha in Radiation-Induced Fibrosis: Potential as a 
Predictive Marker or Therapeutic Target.

Liu CS(1), Schmezer P(1), Popanda O(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Epigenomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, Germany.

Radiotherapy is an efficient tool in cancer treatment, but it brings along the 
risk of side effects such as fibrosis in the irradiated healthy tissue thus 
limiting tumor control and impairing quality of life of cancer survivors. 
Knowledge on radiation-related fibrosis risk and therapeutic options is still 
limited and requires further research. Recent studies demonstrated that 
epigenetic regulation of diacylglycerol kinase alpha (DGKA) is associated with 
radiation-induced fibrosis. However, the specific mechanisms are still unknown. 
In this review, we scrutinized the role of DGKA in the radiation response and in 
further cellular functions to show the potential of DGKA as a predictive marker 
or a novel target in fibrosis treatment. DGKA was reported to participate in 
immune response, lipid signaling, exosome production, and migration as well as 
cell proliferation, all processes which are suggested to be critical steps in 
fibrogenesis. Most of these functions are based on the conversion of 
diacylglycerol (DAG) to phosphatidic acid (PA) at plasma membranes, but DGKA 
might have also other, yet not well-known functions in the nucleus. Current 
evidence summarized here underlines that DGKA activation may play a central role 
in fibrosis formation post-irradiation and shows a potential of direct DGKA 
inhibitors or epigenetic modulators to attenuate pro-fibrotic reactions, thus 
providing novel therapeutic choices.

Copyright Â© 2020 Liu, Schmezer and Popanda.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2020.00737
PMCID: PMC7235333
PMID: 32477950