1. Aging Cell. 2020 Jun;19(6):e13163. doi: 10.1111/acel.13163. Epub 2020 May 31.

Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 inhibition prevents neurodegeneration and 
promotes α-synuclein degradation via transcription factor EB-dependent autophagy 
in mutant α-synucleinA53T model of Parkinson's disease.

Mao K(1), Chen J(1), Yu H(1), Li H(1), Ren Y(1), Wu X(1), Wen Y(1), Zou F(1), Li 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational Health and Occupational Medicine, Guangdong 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, School of Public Health, 
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) is a master regulator of diverse 
biological processes such as DNA repair, oxidative stress, and apoptosis. PARP1 
can be activated by aggregated α-synuclein, and this process in turn exacerbates 
toxicity of α-synuclein. This circle is closely linked to the evolution of 
Parkinson's disease (PD) that characterized by progressive neurodegeneration and 
motor deficits. Here, we reported the PARP1, as a novel upstream molecular of 
transcription factor EB (TFEB), participates in regulation of autophagy in 
α-synuclein aggregated cells and mice. PARP1 inhibition not only enhances the 
nuclear transcription of TFEB via SIRT1 mediated down-regulation of mTOR 
signaling but also reduces nuclear export of TFEB by attenuating the TFEB-CRM1 
interaction. Our results revealed that PARP1 inhibition lessened the 
accumulation of α-synuclein in PD models. Also, oral administration of PARP1 
inhibitor Veliparib prevented neurodegeneration and improved motor ability in 
α-synucleinA53T transgenic mice. These findings identify that PARP1 signaling 
pathway regulates TFEB-mediated autophagy, pointing to potential therapeutic 
strategy of PD via enhancing protein degradation systems.

© 2020 The Authors. Aging Cell published by Anatomical Society and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13163
PMCID: PMC7294777
PMID: 32475059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicting financial 
interest.