1. J Pathol Inform. 2020 May 20;11:14. doi: 10.4103/jpi.jpi_15_20. eCollection 
2020.

Bridging the Collaboration Gap: Real-time Identification of Clinical Specimens 
for Biomedical Research.

Durant TJS(1)(2), Gong G(2)(3), Price N(4), Schulz WL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Yale New Haven Hospital, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Department of Information Technology, Yale New Haven Health, New Haven, CT, 
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Biomedical and translational research often relies on the 
evaluation of patients or specimens that meet specific clinical or laboratory 
criteria. The typical approach used to identify biospecimens is a manual, 
retrospective process that exists outside the clinical workflow. This often 
makes biospecimen collection cost prohibitive and prevents the collection of 
analytes with short stability times. Emerging data architectures offer novel 
approaches to enhance specimen-identification practices. To this end, we present 
a new tool that can be deployed in a real-time environment to automate the 
identification and notification of available biospecimens for biomedical 
research.
METHODS: Real-time clinical and laboratory data from Cloverleaf (Infor, NY, NY) 
were acquired within our computational health platform, which is built on 
open-source applications. Study-specific filters were developed in NiFi (Apache 
Software Foundation, Wakefield, MA, USA) to identify the study-appropriate 
specimens in real time. Specimen metadata were stored in Elasticsearch (Elastic 
N. V., Mountain View, CA, USA) for visualization and automated alerting.
RESULTS: Between June 2018 and December 2018, we identified 2992 unique 
specimens belonging to 2815 unique patients, split between two different use 
cases. Based on laboratory policy for specimen retention and study-specific 
stability requirements, secure E-mail notifications were sent to investigators 
to automatically notify of availability. The assessment of throughput on 
commodity hardware demonstrates the ability to scale to approximately 2000 
results per second.
CONCLUSION: This work demonstrates that real-world clinical data can be analyzed 
in real time to increase the efficiency of biospecimen identification with 
minimal overhead for the clinical laboratory. Future work will integrate 
additional data types, including the analysis of unstructured data, to enable 
more complex cases and biospecimen identification.

Copyright: Â© 2020 Journal of Pathology Informatics.

DOI: 10.4103/jpi.jpi_15_20
PMCID: PMC7245342
PMID: 32477620

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.