1. Poult Sci. 2020 Jun;99(6):2895-2901. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2019.12.070. Epub 2020
 Mar 19.

POMC gene expression, polymorphism, and the association with reproduction traits 
in chickens.

Liu K(1), Wen YY(1), Liu HH(1), Cao HY(1), Dong XY(1), Mao HG(1), Yin ZZ(2).

Author information:
(1)Animal Science College, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus, Hangzhou, 
China 310058.
(2)Animal Science College, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus, Hangzhou, 
China 310058. Electronic address: yzhzh@zju.edu.cn.

Reproduction trait is one of the most important economic traits in poultry 
industry. This study was aimed to investigate the mRNA expression levels, single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of POMC gene, and the association with 
reproduction traits in chickens. Five SNP (g.958 G > A, g.1374 G > C, 
g.1393 G > A, g.1817 C > T, and g.1918G > A) were detected in introns of POMC 
gene in 317 Zhenning yellow chickens. Association analysis revealed that 
g.958 G > A and g.1817 C > T showed significantly associations with 
fertilization rate, hatching rate of hatching eggs, and hatching rate of 
fertilized eggs in chickens. Simultaneously, g.1374 G > C and g.1918G > A were 
both associated with egg weight at 300 D of age (P < 0.05). The SNP of 
g.958 G > A, g.1393 G > A, and g.1817 C > T were all associated with E2 hormone 
levels (P < 0.05). The result of mRNA expression levels in different tissues 
showed that POMC mRNA expression level in the pituitary was higher than those in 
the other tissues and varied in different genotypes. In conclusion, the results 
in this study provided new evidences that polymorphisms of the POMC gene have 
potential effects on reproduction traits in chickens. The 5 SNP detected in this 
study could be potential markers for improving reproduction traits in chickens.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2019.12.070
PMCID: PMC7597669
PMID: 32475422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]