1. Cells. 2020 May 29;9(6):1354. doi: 10.3390/cells9061354.

The Vasopressin Receptor 2 Mutant R137L Linked to the Nephrogenic Syndrome of 
Inappropriate Antidiuresis (NSIAD) Signals through an Alternative Pathway that 
Increases AQP2 Membrane Targeting Independently of S256 Phosphorylation.

Ranieri M(1), Venneri M(1), Pellegrino T(1), Centrone M(1), Di Mise A(1), 
Cotecchia S(1), Tamma G(1)(2), Valenti G(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, University 
of Bari, 70125 Bari, Italy.
(2)Istituto Nazionale di Biostrutture e Biosistemi, 00136 Roma, Italy.
(3)Center of Excellence in Comparative Genomics (CEGBA), University of Bari, 
70125 Bari, Italy.

NSIAD is a rare X-linked condition, caused by activating mutations in the AVPR2 
gene coding for the vasopressin V2 receptor (V2R) associated with hyponatremia, 
despite undetectable plasma vasopressin levels. We have recently provided in 
vitro evidence that, compared to V2R-wt, expression of activating V2R mutations 
R137L, R137C and F229V cause a constitutive redistribution of the AQP2 water 
channel to the plasma membrane, higher basal water permeability and 
significantly higher basal levels of p256-AQP2 in the F229V mutant but not in 
R137L or R137C. In this study, V2R mutations were expressed in collecting duct 
principal cells and the associated signalling was dissected. V2R-R137L and R137C 
mutants had significantly higher basal pT269-AQP2 levels -independently of S256 
and PKA-which were reduced to control by treatment with Rho kinase (ROCK) 
inhibitor. Interestingly, ROCK activity was found significantly higher in 
V2R-R137L along with activation of the GÎ±12/13-Rho-ROCK pathway. Of note, 
inhibition of ROCK reduced the basal elevated osmotic water permeability to 
control. To conclude, our data demonstrate for the first time that the 
gain-of-function mutation of the V2R, R137L causing NSIAD, signals through an 
alternative PKA-independent pathway that increases AQP2 membrane targeting 
through ROCK-induced phosphorylation at S/T269 independently of S256 of AQP2.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9061354
PMCID: PMC7349359
PMID: 32486031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.