1. J Lipid Res. 2020 Aug;61(8):1150-1160. doi: 10.1194/jlr.R120000800. Epub 2020 
Jun 2.

Roles of polyunsaturated fatty acids, from mediators to membranes.

Harayama T(1), Shimizu T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and National Centre of Competence in Research in 
Chemical Biology, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland 
harayama-t@umin.net tshimizu@ri.ncgm.go.jp.
(2)Department of Lipid Signaling, National Center for Global Health and 
Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan and Department of Lipidomics, 
Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, 
Japan harayama-t@umin.net tshimizu@ri.ncgm.go.jp.

PUFAs, such as AA and DHA, are recognized as important biomolecules, but 
understanding their precise roles and modes of action remains challenging. PUFAs 
are precursors for a plethora of signaling lipids, for which knowledge about 
synthetic pathways and receptors has accumulated. However, due to their extreme 
diversity and the ambiguity concerning the identity of their cognate receptors, 
the roles of PUFA-derived signaling lipids require more investigation. In 
addition, PUFA functions cannot be explained just as lipid mediator precursors 
because they are also critical for the regulation of membrane biophysical 
properties. The presence of PUFAs in membrane lipids also affects the functions 
of transmembrane proteins and peripheral membrane proteins. Although the roles 
of PUFAs as membrane lipid building blocks were difficult to analyze, the 
discovery of lysophospholipid acyltransferases (LPLATs), which are critical for 
their incorporation, advanced our understanding. Recent studies unveiled how 
LPLATs affect PUFA levels in membrane lipids, and their genetic manipulation 
became an excellent strategy to study the roles of PUFA-containing lipids. In 
this review, we will provide an overview of metabolic pathways regulating PUFAs 
as lipid mediator precursors and membrane components and update recent progress 
about their functions. Some issues to be solved for future research will also be 
discussed.

Copyright Â© 2020 Harayama and Shimizu. Published by The American Society for 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.R120000800
PMCID: PMC7397749
PMID: 32487545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article.