1. Front Plant Sci. 2020 May 15;11:518. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2020.00518. eCollection
 2020.

OsMFS1/OsHOP2 Complex Participates in Rice Male and Female Development.

Lu J(1), Wang C(1), Wang H(1), Zheng H(1), Bai W(1), Lei D(1), Tian Y(1), Xiao 
Y(1), You S(1), Wang Q(1), Yu X(1), Liu S(1), Liu X(1), Chen L(1), Jang L(1), 
Wang C(1), Zhao Z(1), Wan J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Jiangsu 
Plant Gene Engineering Research Center, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, 
Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 
China.

Meiosis plays an essential role in the production of gametes and genetic 
diversity of posterities. The normal double-strand break (DSB) repair is vital 
to homologous recombination (HR) and occurrence of DNA fragment exchange, but 
the underlying molecular mechanism remain elusive. Here, we characterized a 
completely sterile Osmfs1 (male and female sterility 1) mutant which has its 
pollen and embryo sacs both aborted at the reproductive stage due to severe 
chromosome defection. Map-based cloning revealed that the OsMFS1 encodes a 
meiotic coiled-coil protein, and it is responsible for DSB repairing that acts 
as an important cofactor to stimulate the single strand invasion. Expression 
pattern analyses showed the OsMFS1 was preferentially expressed in meiosis 
stage. Subcellular localization analysis of OsMFS1 revealed its association with 
the nucleus exclusively. In addition, a yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) and pull-down 
assay showed that OsMFS1 could physically interact with OsHOP2 protein to form a 
stable complex to ensure faithful homologous recombination. Taken together, our 
results indicated that OsMFS1 is indispensable to the normal development of 
anther and embryo sacs in rice.

Copyright Â© 2020 Lu, Wang, Wang, Zheng, Bai, Lei, Tian, Xiao, You, Wang, Yu, 
Liu, Liu, Chen, Jang, Wang, Zhao and Wan.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2020.00518
PMCID: PMC7243175
PMID: 32499797