1. Biomed Res Int. 2020 May 15;2020:3872314. doi: 10.1155/2020/3872314.
eCollection  2020.

Noninvasive Prediction of TERT Promoter Mutations in High-Grade Glioma by 
Radiomics Analysis Based on Multiparameter MRI.

Tian H(1), Wu H(1), Wu G(1), Xu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, 
China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the predictors of telomerase reverse transcriptase 
(TERT) promoter mutations in adults suffered from high-grade glioma (HGG) 
through radiomics analysis, develop a noninvasive approach to evaluate TERT 
promoter mutations.
METHODS: 126 adult patients with HGG (88 in the training cohort and 38 in the 
validation cohort) were retrospectively enrolled. Totally 5064 radiomics 
features were, respectively, extracted from three VOIs (necrosis, enhanced, and 
edema) in MRI. Firstly, an optimal radiomics signature (Radscore) was 
established based on LASSO regression. Secondly, univariate and multivariate 
logistic regression analyses were performed to investigate important potential 
variables as predictors of TERT promoter mutations. Besides, multiparameter 
models were established and evaluated. Eventually, an optimal model was 
visualized as radiomics nomogram for clinical evaluations.
RESULTS: 6 radiomics features were selected to build Radscore signature through 
LASSO regression. Among them, 5 were from necrotic VOIs and 1 was from enhanced 
ones. With univariate and multivariate analysis, necrotic volume percentages of 
core (CNV), Age, Cho/Cr, Lac, and Radscore were significantly higher in TERTm 
than in TERTw (p < 0.05). 4 models were built in our study. Compared with Model 
B (Age, Cho/Cr, Lac, and Radscore), Model A (Age, Cho/Cr, Lac, Radscore, and 
CNV) has a larger AUC in both training (0.955 vs. 0.917, p = 0.049) and 
validation (0.889 vs. 0.868, p = 0.039) cohorts. It also has higher performances 
in net reclassification improvement (NRI), integrated discrimination improvement 
(IDI), and decision curve analysis (DCA) evaluation. Conclusively, Model A was 
visualized as a radiomics nomogram. Calibration curve shows a good agreement 
between estimated and actual probabilities.
CONCLUSIONS: Age, Cho/Cr, Lac, CNV, and Radscore are important indicators for 
TERT promoter mutation predictions in HGG. Tumor necrosis seems to be closely 
related to TERT promoter mutations. Radiomics nomogram based on multiparameter 
MRI and CNV has higher prediction accuracies.

Copyright Â© 2020 Hongan Tian et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/3872314
PMCID: PMC7245686
PMID: 32509858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors declare no conflict of interest.