1. ChemRxiv [Preprint]. 2020 Feb 19. doi: 10.26434/chemrxiv.11860137.v1.

A Single and Two-Stage, Closed-Tube, Molecular Test for the 2019 Novel 
Coronavirus (COVID-19) at Home, Clinic, and Points of Entry.

El-Tholoth M(1)(2), Bau HH(1), Song J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA, USA.
(2)Department of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mansoura University, 
Mansoura 35516, Egypt.

Update in
    Anal Chem. 2021 Sep 28;93(38):13063-13071. doi: 
10.1021/acs.analchem.1c03016.

The 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) is a newly emerged strain that has never 
been found in humans before. At present, the laboratory-based reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is the main method to confirm 
COVID-19 infection. The intensification of the COVID-19 epidemic overwhelms 
limited clinical resources in particular, but not only, in developing countries, 
resulting in many patients not being tested for the infection and in large 
queues of potentially infected individuals waiting to be tested while providing 
a breeding ground for the disease. We describe here a rapid, highly sensitive, 
point-of-care, molecular test amenable for use at home, in the clinic, and at 
points of entry by minimally trained individuals and with minimal 
instrumentation. Our test is based on loop mediated isothermal amplification 
(COVID-19 LAMP) and for higher sensitivity on nested nucleic acid, two stage 
isothermal amplification (COVID-19 Penn-RAMP). Both tests can be carried out in 
closed tubes with either fluorescence or colorimetric (e.g., leuco crystal 
violet LCV) detection. COVID-19 LAMP performs on par with COVID-19 RT-PCR. 
COVID-19 RAMP has 10 fold better sensitivity than COVID-19 LAMP and COVID-19 
RT-PCR when testing purified targets and 100 times better sensitivity than 
COVID-19 LAMP and COVID-19 RT-PCR when testing rapidly prepared sample mimics. 
Due to fortunate scarcity of COVID-19 infections in the USA, we were not able to 
test our assays and methods with patient samples. We hope that such tests will 
be carried out by colleagues in impacted countries. Our Closed-Tube Penn-RAMP 
has the potential to significantly reduce false negatives while being amenable 
to use with minimal instrumentation and training.

DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv.11860137.v1
PMCID: PMC7251958
PMID: 32511284

Conflict of interest statement: University of Pennsylvania has applied for a 
patent on Penn-RAMP with J.S. and H.H.B. listed as co-inventors.