1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jun 4;21(11):4014. doi: 10.3390/ijms21114014.

Ionising Radiation Induces Promoter DNA Hypomethylation and Perturbs 
Transcriptional Activity of Genes Involved in Morphogenesis during Gastrulation 
in Zebrafish.

Murat El Houdigui S(1), Adam-Guillermin C(2), Armant O(1).

Author information:
(1)PSE-ENV/SRTE/LECO, Institut de Radioprotection et de Sûreté Nucléaire (IRSN), 
Cadarache, 13115 Saint-Paul-Lez-Durance, France.
(2)PSE-SANTE/SDOS/LMDN, Institut de Radioprotection et de Sûreté Nucléaire 
(IRSN), Cadarache, 13115 Saint-Paul-Lez-Durance, France.

Embryonic development is particularly vulnerable to stress and DNA damage, as 
mutations can accumulate through cell proliferation in a wide number of cells 
and organs. However, the biological effects of chronic exposure to ionising 
radiation (IR) at low and moderate dose rates (< 6 mGy/h) remain largely 
controversial, raising concerns for environmental protection. The present study 
focuses on the molecular effects of IR (0.005 to 50 mGy/h) on zebrafish embryos 
at the gastrula stage (6 hpf), at both the transcriptomics and epigenetics 
levels. Our results show that exposure to IR modifies the expression of genes 
involved in mitochondrial activity from 0.5 to 50 mGy/h. In addition, important 
developmental pathways, namely, the Notch, retinoic acid, BMP and Wnt signalling 
pathways, were altered at 5 and 50 mGy/h. Transcriptional changes of genes 
involved in the morphogenesis of the ectoderm and mesoderm were detected at all 
dose rates, but were prominent from 0.5 to 50 mGy/h. At the epigenetic level, 
exposure to IR induced a hypomethylation of DNA in the promoter of genes that 
colocalised with both H3K27me3 and H3Kme4 histone marks and correlated with 
changes in transcriptional activity. Finally, pathway enrichment analysis 
demonstrated that the DNA methylation changes occurred in the promoter of 
important developmental genes, including morphogenesis of the ectoderm and 
mesoderm. Together, these results show that the transcriptional program 
regulating morphogenesis in gastrulating embryos was modified at dose rates 
greater than or equal to 0.5 mGy/h, which might predict potential neurogenesis 
and somitogenesis defects observed at similar dose rates later in development.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21114014
PMCID: PMC7312202
PMID: 32512748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.