1. Cell. 2020 Jul 9;182(1):50-58.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.027. Epub 2020
May  21.

Pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 in Transgenic Mice Expressing Human 
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2.

Jiang RD(1), Liu MQ(1), Chen Y(1), Shan C(2), Zhou YW(3), Shen XR(1), Li Q(1), 
Zhang L(2), Zhu Y(2), Si HR(1), Wang Q(2), Min J(2), Wang X(1), Zhang W(2), Li 
B(2), Zhang HJ(2), Baric RS(4), Zhou P(2), Yang XL(5), Shi ZL(6).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center 
for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei, People's 
Republic of China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center 
for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Department of Forensic Medicine, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of China.
(4)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(5)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center 
for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei, People's 
Republic of China. Electronic address: yangxl@wh.iov.cn.
(6)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center 
for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei, People's 
Republic of China. Electronic address: zlshi@wh.iov.cn.

COVID-19 has spread worldwide since 2019 and is now a severe threat to public 
health. We previously identified the causative agent as a novel SARS-related 
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that uses human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2) 
as the entry receptor. Here, we successfully developed a SARS-CoV-2 hACE2 
transgenic mouse (HFH4-hACE2 in C3B6 mice) infection model. The infected mice 
generated typical interstitial pneumonia and pathology that were similar to 
those of COVID-19 patients. Viral quantification revealed the lungs as the major 
site of infection, although viral RNA could also be found in the eye, heart, and 
brain in some mice. Virus identical to SARS-CoV-2 in full-genome sequences was 
isolated from the infected lung and brain tissues. Last, we showed that 
pre-exposure to SARS-CoV-2 could protect mice from severe pneumonia. Our results 
show that the hACE2 mouse would be a valuable tool for testing potential 
vaccines and therapeutics.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.027
PMCID: PMC7241398
PMID: 32516571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.