1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2020 May 15:2020.05.15.098616. doi: 
10.1101/2020.05.15.098616.

SARS-CoV2 (COVID-19) Structural/Evolution Dynamicome: Insights into functional 
evolution and human genomics.

Gupta R, Charron J, Stenger CL, Painter J, Steward H, Cook TW, Faber W, Frisch 
A, Lind E, Bauss J, Li X, Sirpilla O, Soehnlen X, Underwood A, Hinds D, Morris 
M, Lamb N, Carcillo JA, Bupp C, Uhal BD, Rajasekaran S, Prokop JW.

Update in
    J Biol Chem. 2020 Aug 14;295(33):11742-11753. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.014873.

The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, starting in 2019, has challenged the speed at which 
labs perform science, ranging from discoveries of the viral composition to 
handling health outcomes in humans. The small ~30kb single-stranded RNA genome 
of Coronaviruses makes them adept at cross species spread and drift, increasing 
their probability to cause pandemics. However, this small genome also allows for 
a robust understanding of all proteins coded by the virus. We employed protein 
modeling, molecular dynamic simulations, evolutionary mapping, and 3D printing 
to gain a full proteome and dynamicome understanding of SARS-CoV-2. The Viral 
Integrated Structural Evolution Dynamic Database (VIStEDD) has been established 
(prokoplab.com/vistedd), opening future discoveries and educational usage. In 
this paper, we highlight VIStEDD usage for nsp6, Nucleocapsid (N), and Spike (S) 
surface glycoprotein. For both nsp6 and N we reveal highly conserved surface 
amino acids that likely drive protein-protein interactions. In characterizing 
viral S protein, we have developed a quantitative dynamics cross correlation 
matrix insight into interaction with the ACE2/SLC6A19 dimer complex. From this 
quantitative matrix, we elucidated 47 potential functional missense variants 
from population genomic databases within ACE2/SLC6A19/TMPRSS2, warranting 
genomic enrichment analyses in SARS-CoV-2 patients. Moreover, these variants 
have ultralow frequency, but can exist as hemizygous in males for ACE2, which 
falls on the X-chromosome. Two noncoding variants (rs4646118 and rs143185769) 
found in ~9% of African descent individuals for ACE2 may regulate expression and 
be related to increased susceptibility of African Americans to SARS-CoV-2. This 
powerful database of SARS-CoV-2 can aid in research progress in the ongoing 
pandemic.

DOI: 10.1101/2020.05.15.098616
PMCID: PMC7263544
PMID: 32511397