1. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2020 May;10(5):878-894. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2019.08.013.
Epub  2019 Sep 14.

Exploring the hydrophobic channel of NNIBP leads to the discovery of novel 
piperidine-substituted thiophene[3,2-d]pyrimidine derivatives as potent HIV-1 
NNRTIs.

Kang D(1), Feng D(1), Ginex T(2), Zou J(1), Wei F(1), Zhao T(1), Huang B(1), Sun 
Y(1), Desta S(1), De Clercq E(3), Pannecouque C(3), Zhan P(1), Liu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology, 
Ministry of Education, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University, 
Jinan 250012, China.
(2)Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Gastronomy, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Campus Torribera, Institute of Biomedicine and Institute of Theoretical and 
Computational Chemistry, University of Barcelona, Santa Coloma de Gramenet 
08921, Spain.
(3)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, 
K.U. Leuven, Leuven B-3000, Belgium.

In this report, a series of novel piperidine-substituted 
thiophene[3,2-d]pyrimidine derivatives were designed to explore the hydrophobic 
channel of the non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors binding pocket 
(NNIBP) by incorporating an aromatic moiety to the left wing of the lead K-5a2. 
The newly synthesized compounds were evaluated for anti-HIV potency in 
MT-4 cells and inhibitory activity to HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT). Most of 
the synthesized compounds exhibited broad-spectrum activity toward wild-type and 
a wide range of HIV-1 strains carrying single non-nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI)-resistant mutations. Especially, compound 26 
exhibited the most potent activity against wild-type and a panel of single 
mutations (L100I, K103N, Y181C, Y188L and E138K) with an EC50 ranging from 6.02 
to 23.9 nmol/L, which were comparable to those of etravirine (ETR). Moreover, 
the RT inhibition activity, preliminary structure-activity relationship and 
molecular docking were also investigated. Furthermore, 26 exhibited favorable 
pharmacokinetics (PK) profiles and with a bioavailability of 33.8%. Taken 
together, the results could provide valuable insights for further optimization 
and compound 26 holds great promise as a potential drug candidate for the 
treatment of HIV-1 infection.

© 2020 Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2019.08.013
PMCID: PMC7280082
PMID: 32528834