1. IUBMB Life. 2020 Aug;72(8):1757-1764. doi: 10.1002/iub.2302. Epub 2020 Jun 11.

APOC3rs2854116, PNPLA3rs738409, and TM6SF2rs58542926 polymorphisms might 
influence predisposition of NAFLD: A meta-analysis.

Tong M(1), Wang F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infection and Hepatology, Affiliated Hospital of Shaoxing 
University, Shaoxing, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province, 
Hangzhou, China.

It is plausible that apolipoprotein C3 (APOC3), patatin-like phospholipase 
domain containing 3 (PNPLA3), and transmembrane 6 superfamily member 2 (TM6SF2) 
polymorphisms may affect predisposition of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD), but the results of so far published studies remain controversial. The 
authors conducted this meta-analysis to clarify relationships between 
APOC3/PNPLA3/TM6SF2 polymorphisms and predisposition of NAFLD by pooling the 
findings of eligible studies. A comprehensive search of PubMed, Embase, Web of 
Science, and CNKI was endorsed by the authors to identify already published 
studies. Forty-nine studies were found to be eligible for meta-analyses. The 
pooled meta-analyses results showed that genotypic frequencies of APOC3 
rs2854116, PNPLA3 rs738409, and TM6SF2 rs58542926 polymorphisms among patients 
and controls differed significantly. Moreover, genotypic frequencies of PNPLA3 
rs738409 and TM6SF2 rs58542926 polymorphisms among patients and controls from 
both Caucasians and Asians also differed significantly. But However, no such 
differences in genotypic frequencies were observed for the APOC3 rs2854117 
polymorphism. This meta-analysis suggested that APOC3 rs2854116, PNPLA3 
rs738409, and TM6SF2 rs58542926 polymorphisms might affect predisposition of 
NAFLD.

Â© 2020 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/iub.2302
PMID: 32525256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]