1. ACS Catal. 2018 May 4;8(5):4600-4611. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.8b00843. Epub 2018
 Apr 10.

An Initiation Kinetics Prediction Model Enables Rational Design of Ruthenium 
Olefin Metathesis Catalysts Bearing Modified Chelating Benzylidenes.

Luo SX(1), Engle KM(1), Dong X(2), Hejl A(1), Takase MK(1), Henling LM(1), Liu 
P(3), Houk KN(2), Grubbs RH(1).

Author information:
(1)Arnold and Mabel Beckman Laboratories of Chemical Synthesis, California 
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los 
Angeles, California 90095, United States.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 
15260, United States.

Rational design of second-generation ruthenium olefin metathesis catalysts with 
desired initiation rates can be enabled by a computational model that depends on 
a single thermodynamic parameter. Using a computational model with no assumption 
about the specific initiation mechanism, the initiation kinetics of a spectrum 
of second-generation ruthenium olefin metathesis catalysts bearing modified 
chelating ortho-alkoxy benzylidenes were predicted in this work. Experimental 
tests of the validity of the computational model were achieved by the synthesis 
of a series of ruthenium olefin metathesis catalysts and investigation of 
initiation rates by UV/Vis kinetics, NMR spectroscopy, and structural 
characterization by X-ray crystallography. Included in this series of catalysts 
were thirteen catalysts bearing alkoxy groups with varied steric bulk on the 
chelating benzylidene, ranging from ethoxy to dicyclohexylmethoxy groups. The 
experimentally observed initiation kinetics of the synthesized catalysts were in 
good accordance with computational predictions. Notably, the fast initiation 
rate of the dicyclohexylmethoxy catalyst was successfully predicted by the 
model, and this complex is believed to be among the fastest initiating 
Hoveyda-Grubbs-type catalysts reported to date. The compatibility of the 
predictive model with other catalyst families, including those bearing 
alternative NHC ligands or disubstituted alkoxy benzylidenes, was also examined.

DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.8b00843
PMCID: PMC7289044
PMID: 32528741

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.