1. Hortic Res. 2020 Jun 1;7(1):93. doi: 10.1038/s41438-020-0318-0. eCollection 
2020.

Genome-wide analysis of NDR1/HIN1-like genes in pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) and 
functional characterization of CaNHL4 under biotic and abiotic stresses.

Liu C(1), Peang H(2), Li X(1), Liu C(1), Lv X(1), Wei X(1), Zou A(1), Zhang 
J(1), Fan G(1), Ma G(1), Ma L(3), Sun X(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of plant immunity and ecological control of plant disease, College 
of Plant Protection, Southwest University, 400716 Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Botany and Plant Biology, Section of Biology, Faculty of 
Science, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.
(3)State Key Laboratory of North China Crop Improvement and Regulation, College 
of Plant Protection, Hebei Agricultural University, 071001 Baoding, China.

Plant NDR1/HIN1-like (NHL) genes play an important role in triggering plant 
defenses in response to biotic stresses. In this study, we performed a 
genome-wide identification of the NHL genes in pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) and 
characterized the functional roles of these CaNHL genes in response to abiotic 
stresses and infection by different pathogens. Phylogenetic analysis revealed 
that CaNHLs can be classified into five distinct subgroups, with each group 
containing generic and specific motifs. Regulatory element analysis showed that 
the majority of the promoter regions of the identified CaNHLs contain jasmonic 
acid (JA)-responsive and salicylic acid (SA)-responsive elements, and 
transcriptomic analysis revealed that CaNHL genes are expressed in all the 
examined tissues of pepper. The CaNHL1, CaNHL4, CaNHL6, CaNHL10, CaNHL11, and 
CaNHL12 genes were significantly upregulated under abiotic stress as well as in 
response to different pathogens, such as TMV, Phytophthora capsici and 
Pseudomonas syringae. In addition, we found that CaNHL4 localizes to the plasma 
membrane. CaNHL4-silenced pepper plants display significantly increased 
susceptibility to TMV, Phytophthora capsici and Pseudomonas syringae, exhibiting 
reduced expression of JA-related and SA-related genes and reduced ROS 
production. However, transient overexpression of CaNHL4 in pepper increases the 
expression of JA-related and SA-related genes, enhances the accumulation of ROS, 
and inhibits the infection of these three pathogens. Collectively, for the first 
time, we identified the NHL genes in pepper and demonstrated that CaNHL4 is 
involved in the production of ROS and that it also regulates the expression of 
JA-related and SA-related genes in response to different pathogens, suggesting 
that members of the CaNHL family play an essential role in the disease 
resistance of pepper.

Â© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1038/s41438-020-0318-0
PMCID: PMC7261774
PMID: 32528705

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.