1. Acta Crystallogr E Crystallogr Commun. 2020 May 5;76(Pt 6):803-806. doi: 
10.1107/S2056989020005861. eCollection 2020 Jun 1.

Synthesis and crystal structure of (1,10-phenanthroline-κ(2) 
N,N')[2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)phenyl-κ(2) N (2),C (1)]iridium(III) 
hexa-fluorido-phosphate with an unknown number of solvent mol-ecules.

Zeng J(1), Tang G(2), Qian J(3).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Nursing Vocational College, Huaian 223300, Jiangsu Province, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Chemistry of Low-Dimensional Materials, Huaiyin 
Normal University, Huaian 223300, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China.
(3)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 
212013, People's Republic of China.

The cationic complex in the title compound, [Ir(C9H7N2)2(C12H8N2)]PF6, comprises 
two phenyl-pyrazole (ppz) cyclo-metallating ligands and one 1,10-phenanthroline 
(phen) ancillary ligand. The asymmetric unit consists of one [Ir(ppz)2(phen)]+ 
cation and one [PF6]- counter-ion. The central IrIII ion is six-coordinated by 
two N atoms and two C atoms from the two ppz ligands as well as by two N atoms 
from the phen ligand within a distorted octa-hedral C2N4 coordination set. In 
the crystal structure, the [Ir(ppz)2(phen)]+ cations and PF6 - counter-ions are 
connected with each other through weak inter-molecular C-H⋯F hydrogen bonds. 
Additional C-H⋯π inter-actions between the rings of neighbouring cations 
consolidate the three-dimensional network. Electron density associated with 
additional disordered solvent mol-ecules inside cavities of the structure was 
removed with the SQUEEZE procedure in PLATON [Spek (2015 ▸). Acta Cryst. C71, 
9-18]. The given chemical formula and other crystal data do not take into 
account the unknown solvent mol-ecule(s). The title compound has a different 
space-group symmetry (C2/c) from its solvatomorph (P21/c) comprising 1.5CH2Cl2 
solvent mol-ecules per ion pair.

© Zeng et al. 2020.

DOI: 10.1107/S2056989020005861
PMCID: PMC7274009
PMID: 32523743