1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 Aug;104(15):6565-6585. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-020-10671-3. Epub 2020 Jun 11.

Towards control of cellulose biosynthesis by Komagataeibacter using 
systems-level and strain engineering strategies: current progress and 
perspectives.

Ryngajłło M(1), Jędrzejczak-Krzepkowska M(2), Kubiak K(2), Ludwicka K(2), 
Bielecki S(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Industrial Biotechnology, Lodz University of 
Technology, B. Stefanowskiego 4/10, 90-924, Lodz, Poland. 
malgorzata.ryngajllo@p.lodz.pl.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Industrial Biotechnology, Lodz University of 
Technology, B. Stefanowskiego 4/10, 90-924, Lodz, Poland.

The strains of the Komagataeibacter genus have been shown to be the most 
efficient bacterial nanocellulose producers. Although exploited for many 
decades, the studies of these species focused mainly on the optimisation of 
cellulose synthesis process through modification of culturing conditions in the 
industrially relevant settings. Molecular physiology of Komagataeibacter was 
poorly understood and only a few studies explored genetic engineering as a 
strategy for strain improvement. Only since recently the systemic information of 
the Komagataeibacter species has been accumulating in the form of omics datasets 
representing sequenced genomes, transcriptomes, proteomes and metabolomes. 
Genetic analyses of the mutants generated in the untargeted strain modification 
studies have drawn attention to other important proteins, beyond those of the 
core catalytic machinery of the cellulose synthase complex. Recently, modern 
molecular and synthetic biology tools have been developed which showed the 
potential for improving targeted strain engineering. Taking the advantage of the 
gathered knowledge should allow for better understanding of the 
genotype-phenotype relationship which is necessary for robust modelling of 
metabolism as well as selection and testing of new molecular engineering 
targets. In this review, we discuss the current progress in the area of 
Komagataeibacter systems biology and its impact on the research aimed at 
scaled-up cellulose synthesis as well as BNC functionalisation. Key points • The 
accumulated omics datasets advanced the systemic understanding of 
Komagataeibacter physiology at the molecular level. • Untargeted and targeted 
strain modification approaches have been applied to improve nanocellulose yield 
and properties. • The development of modern molecular and synthetic biology 
tools presents a potential for enhancing targeted strain engineering. • The 
accumulating omic information should improve modelling of Komagataeibacter's 
metabolism as well as selection and testing of new molecular engineering 
targets.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-10671-3
PMCID: PMC7347698
PMID: 32529377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.