1. J Math Neurosci. 2020 Jun 15;10(1):10. doi: 10.1186/s13408-020-00087-8.

Methods to assess binocular rivalry with periodic stimuli.

Darki F(1), Rankin J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, College of Engineering, Mathematics & Physical 
Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. fd303@exeter.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Mathematics, College of Engineering, Mathematics & Physical 
Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

Binocular rivalry occurs when the two eyes are presented with incompatible 
stimuli and perception alternates between these two stimuli. This phenomenon has 
been investigated in two types of experiments: (1) Traditional experiments where 
the stimulus is fixed, (2) eye-swap experiments in which the stimulus 
periodically swaps between eyes many times per second (Logothetis et al. in 
Nature 380(6575):621-624, 1996). In spite of the rapid swapping between eyes, 
perception can be stable for many seconds with specific stimulus parameter 
configurations. Wilson introduced a two-stage, hierarchical model to explain 
both types of experiments (Wilson in Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 100(24):14499-14503, 
2003). Wilson's model and other rivalry models have been only studied with 
bifurcation analysis for fixed inputs and different types of dynamical behavior 
that can occur with periodically forcing inputs have not been investigated. Here 
we report (1) a more complete description of the complex dynamics in the 
unforced Wilson model, (2) a bifurcation analysis with periodic forcing. 
Previously, bifurcation analysis of the Wilson model with fixed inputs has 
revealed three main types of dynamical behaviors: Winner-takes-all (WTA), 
Rivalry oscillations (RIV), Simultaneous activity (SIM). Our results have 
revealed richer dynamics including mixed-mode oscillations (MMOs) and a 
period-doubling cascade, which corresponds to low-amplitude WTA (LAWTA) 
oscillations. On the other hand, studying rivalry models with numerical 
continuation shows that periodic forcing with high frequency (e.g. 18 Hz, known 
as flicker) modulates the three main types of behaviors that occur with fixed 
inputs with forcing frequency (WTA-Mod, RIV-Mod, SIM-Mod). However, dynamical 
behavior will be different with low frequency periodic forcing (around 1.5 Hz, 
so-called swap). In addition to WTA-Mod and SIM-Mod, cycle skipping, multi-cycle 
skipping and chaotic dynamics are found. This research provides a framework for 
either assessing binocular rivalry models to check consistency with empirical 
results, or for better understanding neural dynamics and mechanisms necessary to 
implement a minimal binocular rivalry model.

DOI: 10.1186/s13408-020-00087-8
PMCID: PMC7295892
PMID: 32542516

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.