1. Pain. 2021 Jan;162(1):71-83. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001949.

Aberrant reactive aldehyde detoxification by aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 influences 
endometriosis development and pain-associated behaviors.

McAllister SL(1)(2), Sinharoy P(2), Vasu M(2), Gross ER(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, United States.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative, and Pain Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States.

Endometriosis affects ∼176 million women worldwide, yet on average, women 
experience pain ∼10 years from symptom onset before being properly diagnosed. 
Standard treatments (drugs or surgery) often fail to provide long-term pain 
relief. Elevated levels of reactive aldehydes such as 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) 
have been implicated in the peritoneal fluid of women with endometriosis and 
upon accumulation, reactive aldehydes can form protein-adducts and/or generate 
pain. A key enzyme in detoxifying reactive aldehydes to less reactive forms is 
the mitochondrial enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (ALDH2). Here, we tested the 
hypothesis that aberrant reactive aldehyde detoxification by ALDH2 underlies 
endometriosis and its associated pain. We determined, in the eutopic and ectopic 
endometrium of women with severe (stage IV) peritoneal endometriosis, that ALDH2 
enzyme activity was decreased, which was associated with decreased ALDH2 
expression and increased 4-HNE adduct formation compared to the eutopic 
endometrium of controls in the proliferative phase. Using a rodent model of 
endometriosis and an ALDH2*2 knock-in mouse with decreased ALDH2 activity, we 
determined that increasing ALDH2 activity with the enzyme activator Alda-1 could 
prevent endometriosis lesion development as well as alleviate pain-associated 
behaviors in proestrus. Overall, our findings suggest that targeting the ALDH2 
enzyme in endometriosis may lead to better treatment strategies and in the 
proliferative phase, that increased 4-HNE adduct formation within the 
endometrium may serve as a less invasive diagnostic biomarker to reduce years of 
suffering in women.

DOI: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001949
PMCID: PMC7718385
PMID: 32541390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.L. McAllister and E.R. Gross are listed as 
co-inventors on the patent WO 2018/204673 “Methods and Compositions for Treating 
Endometriosis and Endometriosis-Associated Symptoms” filed by Stanford 
University. P. Sinharoy is currently an employee of AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals. 
No other potential conflicts of interest are declared. Sponsorships or competing 
interests that may be relevant to content are disclosed at the end of this 
article.