1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2020 Jun 20;133(12):1415-1421. doi: 
10.1097/CM9.0000000000000843.

Assessment of circulating tumor DNA in cerebrospinal fluid by whole exome 
sequencing to detect genomic alterations of glioblastoma.

Duan H(1), Hu JL(2), Chen ZH(1), Li JH(1), He ZQ(1), Wang ZN(1), Zhang GH(1), 
Guo XY(1), Liang L(1), Mou YG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery/Neuro-Oncology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology 
in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen 
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, China.
(2)Department of Abdominal Surgery Oncology, Jiangxi Cancer Hospital, Nanchang, 
Jiangxi 330029, China.

BACKGROUND: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) has been demonstrated as a better source 
of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) than plasma for brain tumors. However, it is 
unclear whether whole exome sequencing (WES) is qualified for detection of ctDNA 
in CSF. The aim of this study was to determine if assessment of ctDNA in CSF by 
WES is a feasible approach to detect genomic alterations of glioblastoma.
METHODS: CSFs of ten glioblastoma patients were collected pre-operatively at the 
Department of Neurosurgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center. ctDNA in CSF 
and genome DNA in the resected tumor were extracted and subjected to WES. The 
identified glioblastoma-associated mutations from ctDNA in CSF and genome DNA in 
the resected tumor were compared.
RESULTS: Due to the ctDNA in CSF was unqualified for exome sequencing for one 
patient, nine patients were included into the final analysis. More 
glioblastoma-associated mutations tended to be detected in CSF compared with the 
corresponding tumor tissue samples (3.56 ± 0.75 vs. 2.22 ± 0.32, P = 0.097), 
while the statistical significance was limited by the small sample size. The 
average mutation frequencies were similar in CSF and tumor tissue samples 
(74.1% ± 6.0% vs. 73.8% ± 6.0%, P = 0.924). The R132H mutation of isocitrate 
dehydrogenase 1 and the G34V mutation of H3 histone, family 3A (H3F3A) which had 
been reported in the pathological diagnoses were also detected from ctDNA in CSF 
by WES. Patients who received temozolomide chemotherapy previously or those 
whose tumor involved subventricular zone tended to harbor more mutations in 
their CSF.
CONCLUSION: Assessment of ctDNA in CSF by WES is a feasible approach to detect 
genomic alterations of glioblastoma, which may provide useful information for 
the decision of treatment strategy.

DOI: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000000843
PMCID: PMC7339330
PMID: 32558704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.