1. mSphere. 2020 Jun 17;5(3):e00313-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00313-20.

The Functional Characterization of TcMyoF Implicates a Family of 
Cytostome-Cytopharynx Targeted Myosins as Integral to the Endocytic Machinery of 
Trypanosoma cruzi.

Chasen NM(1), Etheridge MG(1), Etheridge RD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, Center for Tropical and Emerging Global 
Diseases (CTEGD), University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular Biology, Center for Tropical and Emerging Global 
Diseases (CTEGD), University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA 
ronald.etheridge@uga.edu.

Of the pathogenic trypanosomatids, Trypanosoma cruzi alone retains an ancient 
feeding apparatus known as the cytostome-cytopharynx complex (SPC) that it uses 
as its primary mode of endocytosis in a manner akin to its free-living 
kinetoplastid relatives who capture and eat bacterial prey via this endocytic 
organelle. In a recent report, we began the process of dissecting how this 
organelle functions by identifying the first SPC-specific proteins in T. cruzi 
Here, we continued these studies and report on the identification of the first 
enzymatic component of the SPC, a previously identified orphan myosin motor 
(MyoF) specifically targeted to the SPC. We overexpressed MyoF as a 
dominant-negative mutant, resulting in parasites that, although viable, were 
completely deficient in measurable endocytosis in vitro To our surprise, 
however, a full deletion of MyoF demonstrated only a decrease in the overall 
rate of endocytosis, potentially indicative of redundant myosin motors at work. 
Thereupon, we identified three additional orphan myosin motors, two of which 
(MyoB and MyoE) were targeted to the preoral ridge region adjacent to the 
cytostome entrance and another (MyoC) which was targeted to the cytopharynx 
tubular structure similar to that of MyoF. Additionally, we show that the 
C-terminal tails of each myosin are sufficient for targeting a fluorescent 
reporter to SPC subregions. This work highlights a potential mechanism used by 
the SPC to drive the inward flow of material for digestion and unveils a new 
level of overlapping complexity in this system with four distinct myosin 
isoforms targeted to this feeding structure.IMPORTANCE The parasite Trypanosoma 
cruzi is the etiological agent of Chagas disease and chronically infects upwards 
of 7 million people in the Americas. Current diagnostics and treatments remain 
grossly inadequate due, in part, to our general lack of understanding of this 
parasite's basic biology. One aspect that has resisted detailed scrutiny is the 
mechanism employed by this parasite to extract nutrient resources from the 
radically different environments that it encounters as it transitions between 
its invertebrate and mammalian hosts. These parasites engulf food via a tubular 
invagination of its membrane, a strategy used by many protozoan species, but how 
this structure is formed or functions mechanistically remains a complete 
mystery. The significance of our research is in the identification of the 
mechanistic underpinnings of this feeding organelle that may bring to light new 
potential therapeutic targets to impede parasite feeding and thus halt the 
spread of this deadly human pathogen.

Copyright Â© 2020 Chasen et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00313-20
PMCID: PMC7300353
PMID: 32554712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]