1. Cell Discov. 2020 Jun 16;6:39. doi: 10.1038/s41421-020-0180-0. eCollection
2020.

The pericyte connectome: spatial precision of neurovascular coupling is driven 
by selective connectivity maps of pericytes and endothelial cells and is 
disrupted in diabetes.

Kovacs-Oller T(#)(1)(2), Ivanova E(#)(1), Bianchimano P(1), Sagdullaev BT(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Burke Neurological Institute, White Plains, NY 10605 USA.
(2)Szentagothai Research Centre, University of Pécs, Pécs, H-7624 Hungary.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065 USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Functional hyperemia, or the matching of blood flow with activity, directs 
oxygen and nutrients to regionally firing neurons. The mechanisms responsible 
for this spatial accuracy remain unclear but are critical for brain function and 
establish the diagnostic resolution of BOLD-fMRI. Here, we described a mosaic of 
pericytes, the vasomotor capillary cells in the living retina. We then tested 
whether this net of pericytes and surrounding neuroglia predicted a connectivity 
map in response to sensory stimuli. Surprisingly, we found that these 
connections were not only selective across cell types, but also highly 
asymmetric spatially. First, pericytes connected predominantly to other 
neighboring pericytes and endothelial cells, and less to arteriolar smooth 
muscle cells, and not to surrounding neurons or glia. Second, focal, but not 
global stimulation evoked a directional vasomotor response by strengthening 
connections along the feeding vascular branch. This activity required local NO 
signaling and occurred by means of direct coupling via gap junctions. By 
contrast, bath application of NO or diabetes, a common microvascular pathology, 
not only weakened the vascular signaling but also abolished its directionality. 
We conclude that the exclusivity of neurovascular interactions may thus 
establish spatial accuracy of blood delivery with the precision of the neuronal 
receptive field size, and is disrupted early in diabetes.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1038/s41421-020-0180-0
PMCID: PMC7296038
PMID: 32566247

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.