1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2020 Nov;33(6):878-888. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12909.
Epub  2020 Jul 7.

Primary tumor characteristics and next-generation sequencing mutations as 
biomarkers for melanoma immunotherapy response.

Loo K(1)(2), Gauvin G(1), Soliman I(1), Renzetti M(1)(2), Deng M(3), Ross E(3), 
Luo B(4), Wu H(4), Reddy S(1), Olszanski AJ(5), Farma JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(2)Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Statistics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Considerable advances in melanoma have been realized through 
immunotherapy. The principal aim was to determine whether primary tumor 
characteristics or next-generation sequencing (NGS) could serve as markers of 
immunotherapy response.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The study cohort consisted of 67 patients who received 
immunotherapy for recurrent or metastatic melanoma and for whom primary tumor 
biopsies and pathology reports were available. A subset of 59 patient tumors 
were profiled using an NGS panel of 50 cancer-related genes. Objective response 
rate to immunotherapy was assessed using RECIST v1.1 criteria. Progression-free 
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were used as endpoints. Lymphovascular 
invasion (LVI) strongly correlated with an increased proportion of immunotherapy 
responders (p = .002). PFS interval (p = .003) and OS (p = .036) were 
significantly higher in patients with LVI. NRAS mutation was more strongly 
correlated with an increased proportion of immunotherapy responders (p =.050). 
PFS was significantly higher in patients with NRAS mutation (p = .042); no 
difference in OS (p = .111).
DISCUSSION: This analysis demonstrates an association between lymphovascular 
invasion and immunotherapy response. Additionally, NGS mutation analysis 
demonstrated a potential association between NRAS mutations and immunotherapy 
response.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pcmr.12909
PMCID: PMC7713701
PMID: 32564504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest AJO has received honoraria 
on advisory boards or providing other scientific content to BMS, Pfizer, 
Novartis, Merck, Array, Alkermes, EMD Serono, and Iovance and FCCC receives 
research funding from Alkermes, Amgen, Astellas, BMS, Boston Biomedical, 
Checkmate Pharmaceuticals, Eli Lilly, EMD Serono, GSK, Immunocore, Incyte, 
Intensity Therapeutics, Kartos, Nektar, Oncoceutics, Sound Biologics, Takeda, 
Targovax. All other authors report no commercial or proprietary interest in any 
product mentioned or concept discussed in this manuscript.