1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Jun 19;99(25):e20279. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000020279.

Congenital heart disease combined with Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular 
Cardiomyopathy: A CARE compliant case report and literature review.

Ren C(1), Fang Z(2), Zhao Y(2), Luo J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Minimal Invasive Surgery.
(2)Department of Cardiology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China.

RATIONALE: Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a 
hereditary cardiomyopathy disease discovered in 1994. Though there are advances 
in diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, early diagnosis 
is still difficult especially when it is combined with other diseases with 
similar pathophysiologic changes, such as left to right shunt congenital heart 
disease (CHD). In this paper, we reported a case of CHD combined with ARVC.
PATIENT CONCERNS: The patient was referred to us for chest tightness and 
shortness of breath after physical activities. His cardiac MRI indicated the 
possibility of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. He was diagnosed 
with a large atrial septal defect (ASD) through ultrasound examination.
DIAGNOSIS: CHD ASD combined with arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
cardiomyopathy.
INTERVENTIONS: The patient underwent occlusion of the ASD and he was followed-up 
closely. His symptoms were relieved a lot and the activity tolerance was 
elevated.
LESSONS: CHD may accompany with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. 
Careful history collection and comprehensive examinations should be emphasized. 
We firmly believe that our work will be helpful for the medical practice of 
similar complicated cardiovascular diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000020279
PMCID: PMC7310865
PMID: 32569162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.