1. Oncol Lett. 2020 Jul;20(1):655-666. doi: 10.3892/ol.2020.11606. Epub 2020 May 
13.

Histology and its prognostic effect on KRAS-mutated colorectal carcinomas in 
Korea.

Lee HS(1), Hwang DY(2), Han HS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Korea Clinical Laboratory, Seoul 05396, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Surgery, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul 05030, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul 05030, 
Republic of Korea.

KRAS mutation is frequently identified in advanced colorectal carcinoma (CRC); 
however, its prognostic significance and the associated histological features 
have remained to be clarified. In the present study, the precise histological 
results and prognostic value of KRAS-mutated CRCs were investigated in patients 
from South Korea. A retrospective review of the results from KRAS mutation 
testing, as well as evaluation of the histology of 310 cases of CRC at various 
stages, were performed. Cross-tabulation and survival analysis were performed 
according to the KRAS status. Patients with KRAS mutation more frequently 
exhibited serrated and papillary architectures (P=0.009 and P=0.014, 
respectively). KRAS mutation was an independent unfavorable prognostic factor 
for overall survival (OS) according to multivariate analysis (P=0.001), whereas 
no association was observed with disease-free survival (DFS) (P=0.611). Of note, 
in the subgroup of KRAS-mutated carcinomas, the presence of a solid component on 
histology was associated with less favorable OS (P=0.032). Furthermore, among 
the wild type cases, patients with a micropapillary component had a worse OS 
than those who did not (P=0.018). However, no subgroup or specific histological 
features were associated with DFS. In summary, KRAS-mutated CRCs had a moderate 
association with particular histological features, and according to the KRAS 
mutational status, there was a certain degree of association between histology 
and prognosis.

Copyright: Â© Lee et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2020.11606
PMCID: PMC7285809
PMID: 32565990