1. PLoS One. 2020 Jun 24;15(6):e0234869. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0234869. 
eCollection 2020.

Whole-genome sequencing reveals origin and evolution of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 
viruses in Lincang, China, from 2014 to 2018.

Zhao XN(1), Zhang HJ(2), Li D(1), Zhou JN(1), Chen YY(1), Sun YH(1), Adeola 
AC(3), Fu XQ(1), Shao Y(3), Zhang ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Acute Infectious Diseases Control and Prevention, Yunnan 
Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)Lincang Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Lincang, Yunnan, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming, Yunnan, China.

The continuous variation of the seasonal influenza viruses, particularly 
A(H1N1)pdm09, persistently threatens human life and health around the world. In 
local areas of southwest china, the large time-scale genomic research on 
A(H1N1)pdm09 is still insufficient. Here, we sequenced 45 whole-genome sequences 
of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses in Lincang, China, from 2014 to 2018, by 
next-generation sequencing technology to characterize molecular mechanisms of 
their origin and evolution. Our phylogenetic analyses suggest that the 
A(H1N1)pdm09 strains circulating in Lincang belong to clade 6B and the subclade 
6B.1A predominates in 2018. Further, the strains in 2018 possess elevated 
evolutionary rate as compared to strains in other years. Several newly emerged 
mutations for HA (hemagglutinin) in 2018 are revealed (i.e., S183P and R221K). 
Intriguingly, the substitution R221K falls into the RBS (receptor binding site) 
of HA protein, which could affect antigenic properties of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 
viruses, and another substitution S183P near to RBS with a high covering 
frequency (11/14 strains) in 2018 is exactly located at the epitope B. Notably, 
the NA (neuraminidase) protein harbors a new mutation I23T, potentially involved 
in N-glycosylation. Based on the background with a higher evolutionary rate in 
2018 strains, we deeply evaluate the potential vaccine efficacy against Lincang 
strains and discover a substantive decline of the vaccine efficacy in 2018. Our 
analyses reaffirm that the real-time molecular surveillance and timely updated 
vaccine strains for prevention and control of influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 are crucial 
in the future.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0234869
PMCID: PMC7314029
PMID: 32579578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.