1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jun 18;21(12):4340. doi: 10.3390/ijms21124340.

Regulation of Three Key Kinases of Brassinosteroid Signaling Pathway.

Mao J(1)(2), Li J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-Bioresources, South China Agriculture University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
(2)Guangdong Key Laboratory for Innovative Development and Utilization of Forest 
Plant Germplasm, College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China 
Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Brassinosteroids (BRs) are important plant growth hormones that regulate a wide 
range of plant growth and developmental processes. The BR signals are perceived 
by two cell surface-localized receptor kinases, Brassinosteroid-Insensitive1 
(BRI1) and BRI1-Associated receptor Kinase (BAK1), and reach the nucleus through 
two master transcription factors, bri1-EMS suppressor1 (BES1) and 
Brassinazole-resistant1 (BZR1). The intracellular transmission of the BR signals 
from BRI1/BAK1 to BES1/BZR1 is inhibited by a constitutively active kinase 
Brassinosteroid-Insensitive2 (BIN2) that phosphorylates and negatively regulates 
BES1/BZR1. Since their initial discoveries, further studies have revealed a 
plethora of biochemical and cellular mechanisms that regulate their protein 
abundance, subcellular localizations, and signaling activities. In this review, 
we provide a critical analysis of the current literature concerning activation, 
inactivation, and other regulatory mechanisms of three key kinases of the BR 
signaling cascade, BRI1, BAK1, and BIN2, and discuss some unresolved 
controversies and outstanding questions that require further investigation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21124340
PMCID: PMC7352359
PMID: 32570783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.