1. J Clin Med. 2020 Jun 21;9(6):1941. doi: 10.3390/jcm9061941.

Glia-Derived Extracellular Vesicles in Parkinson's Disease.

Marchetti B(1)(2), Leggio L(1), L'Episcopo F(2), Vivarelli S(1), Tirolo C(2), 
Patern√≤ G(1), Giachino C(2), Caniglia S(2), Serapide MF(1), Iraci N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences (BIOMETEC), University 
of Catania, Torre Biologica, Via S. Sofia 97, 95125 Catania, Italy.
(2)Neuropharmacology Section, OASI Research Institute-IRCCS, 94018 Troina, 
Italy.

Glial cells are fundamental players in the central nervous system (CNS) 
development and homeostasis, both in health and disease states. In Parkinson's 
disease (PD), a dysfunctional glia-neuron crosstalk represents a common final 
pathway contributing to the chronic and progressive death of dopaminergic 
(DAergic) neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). Notably, glial 
cells communicating with each other by an array of molecules, can acquire a 
"beneficial" or "destructive" phenotype, thereby enhancing neuronal 
death/vulnerability and/or exerting critical neuroprotective and neuroreparative 
functions, with mechanisms that are actively investigated. An important way of 
delivering messenger molecules within this glia-neuron cross-talk consists in 
the secretion of extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs are nano-sized membranous 
particles able to convey a wide range of molecular cargoes in a controlled way, 
depending on the specific donor cell and the microenvironmental milieu. Given 
the dual role of glia in PD, glia-derived EVs may deliver molecules carrying 
various messages for the vulnerable/dysfunctional DAergic neurons. Here, we 
summarize the state-of-the-art of glial-neuron interactions and glia-derived EVs 
in PD. Also, EVs have the ability to cross the blood brain barrier (BBB), thus 
acting both within the CNS and outside, in the periphery. In these regards, this 
review discloses the emerging applications of EVs, with a special focus on 
glia-derived EVs as potential carriers of new biomarkers and nanotherapeutics 
for PD.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9061941
PMCID: PMC7356371
PMID: 32575923

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.