1. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2020;157:96-117. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2020.06.013. Epub
2020  Jun 21.

Targeting drug delivery in the vascular system: Focus on endothelium.

Glassman PM(1), Myerson JW(2), Ferguson LT(3), Kiseleva RY(2), Shuvaev VV(2), 
Brenner JS(3), Muzykantov VR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Center for 
Targeted Therapeutics and Translational Nanomedicine of the Institute for 
Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States of America. Electronic 
address: pglas@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(2)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Center for 
Targeted Therapeutics and Translational Nanomedicine of the Institute for 
Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States of America.
(3)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Center for 
Targeted Therapeutics and Translational Nanomedicine of the Institute for 
Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States of America; Department of 
Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United 
States of America.
(4)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Center for 
Targeted Therapeutics and Translational Nanomedicine of the Institute for 
Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States of America. Electronic 
address: muzykant@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

The bloodstream is the main transporting pathway for drug delivery systems (DDS) 
from the site of administration to the intended site of action. In many cases, 
components of the vascular system represent therapeutic targets. Endothelial 
cells, which line the luminal surface of the vasculature, play a tripartite role 
of the key target, barrier, or victim of nanomedicines in the bloodstream. 
Circulating DDS may accumulate in the vascular areas of interest and in 
off-target areas via mechanisms bypassing specific molecular recognition, but 
using ligands of specific vascular determinant molecules enables a degree of 
precision, efficacy, and specificity of delivery unattainable by non-affinity 
DDS. Three decades of research efforts have focused on specific vascular 
targeting, which have yielded a multitude of DDS, many of which are currently 
undergoing a translational phase of development for biomedical applications, 
including interventions in the cardiovascular, pulmonary, and central nervous 
systems, regulation of endothelial functions, host defense, and permeation of 
vascular barriers. We discuss the design of endothelial-targeted nanocarriers, 
factors underlying their interactions with cells and tissues, and describe 
examples of their investigational use in models of acute vascular inflammation 
with an eye on translational challenges.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2020.06.013
PMCID: PMC7306214
PMID: 32579890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]