1. Mech Ageing Dev. 2020 Sep;190:111284. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2020.111284. Epub
2020  Jun 20.

Regulation of cellular senescence by eukaryotic members of the FAH superfamily - 
A role in calcium homeostasis?

Weiss AKH(1), Albertini E(2), Holzknecht M(2), Cappuccio E(2), Dorigatti I(2), 
Krahbichler A(2), Damisch E(2), Gstach H(3), Jansen-Dürr P(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Innsbruck, Research Institute for Biomedical Aging Research, 
Rennweg 10, A-6020, Innsbruck, Austria; University of Innsbruck, Center for 
Molecular Biosciences Innsbruck (CMBI), Austria. Electronic address: 
alexander.weiss@uibk.ac.at.
(2)University of Innsbruck, Research Institute for Biomedical Aging Research, 
Rennweg 10, A-6020, Innsbruck, Austria; University of Innsbruck, Center for 
Molecular Biosciences Innsbruck (CMBI), Austria.
(3)University of Vienna, UZ2 E349, Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, 
Faculty of Life Sciences, Althanstrasse 14, 1090, Vienna, Austria.

Fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH) superfamily members are commonly expressed 
in the prokaryotic kingdom, where they take part in the committing steps of 
degradation pathways of complex carbon sources. Besides FAH itself, the only 
described FAH superfamily members in the eukaryotic kingdom are 
fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase domain containing proteins (FAHD) 1 and 2, that 
have been a focus of recent work in aging research. Here, we provide a review of 
current knowledge on FAHD proteins. Of those, FAHD1 has recently been described 
as a regulator of mitochondrial function and senescence, in the context of 
mitochondrial dysfunction associated senescence (MiDAS). This work further 
describes data based on bioinformatics analysis, 3D structure comparison and 
sequence alignment, that suggests a putative role of FAHD proteins as calcium 
binding proteins.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mad.2020.111284
PMCID: PMC7116474
PMID: 32574647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that there are no competing interests associated with this manuscript.