1. Cells. 2020 Jun 23;9(6):1531. doi: 10.3390/cells9061531.

Multilineage Differentiation for Formation of Innervated Skeletal Muscle Fibers 
from Healthy and Diseased Human Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Mazaleyrat K(1), Badja C(1), Broucqsault N(1), Chevalier R(1), Laberthonnière 
C(1), Dion C(1), Baldasseroni L(1), El-Yazidi C(1), Thomas M(1), Bachelier R(2), 
Altié A(2), Nguyen K(1)(3), Lévy N(1)(3), Robin JD(1), Magdinier F(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix-Marseille University, INSERM, MMG, Marseille Medical Genetics, 13385 
Marseille, France.
(2)Aix-Marseille University, INSERM, INRA, C2VN, 13385 Marseille, France.
(3)APHM, Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de la Timone Enfants, 13385 
Marseille, France.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) obtained by reprogramming primary somatic 
cells have revolutionized the fields of cell biology and disease modeling. 
However, the number protocols for generating mature muscle fibers with 
sarcolemmal organization using iPSCs remain limited, and partly mimic the 
complexity of mature skeletal muscle. Methods: We used a novel combination of 
small molecules added in a precise sequence for the simultaneous 
codifferentiation of human iPSCs into skeletal muscle cells and motor neurons. 
Results: We show that the presence of both cell types reduces the production 
time for millimeter-long multinucleated muscle fibers with sarcolemmal 
organization. Muscle fiber contractions are visible in 19-21 days, and can be 
maintained over long period thanks to the production of innervated 
multinucleated mature skeletal muscle fibers with autonomous cell regeneration 
of PAX7-positive cells and extracellular matrix synthesis. The sequential 
addition of specific molecules recapitulates key steps of human peripheral 
neurogenesis and myogenesis. Furthermore, this organoid-like culture can be used 
for functional evaluation and drug screening. Conclusion: Our protocol, which is 
applicable to hiPSCs from healthy individuals, was validated in Duchenne 
Muscular Dystrophy, Myotonic Dystrophy, Facio-Scapulo-Humeral Dystrophy and type 
2A Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy, opening new paths for the exploration of 
muscle differentiation, disease modeling and drug discovery.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9061531
PMCID: PMC7349825
PMID: 32585982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.