1. Hemoglobin. 2020 May;44(3):162-167. doi: 10.1080/03630269.2020.1780252. Epub 
2020 Jun 26.

Micromapping of Thalassemia and Hemoglobinopathies Among Laos, Khmer, Suay and 
Yer Ethnic Groups Residing in Lower Northeastern Thailand.

Bunthupanich R(1), Karnpean R(2), Pinyachat A(2), Jiambunsri N(2), Prakobkaew 
N(3), Pakdee N(4), Fucharoen S(5), Fucharoen S(6).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Sciences Program, College of Medicine and Public Health, Ubon 
Ratchathani University, Ubon Ratchathani, Thailand.
(2)College of Medicine and Public Health, Ubon Ratchathani University, Ubon 
Ratchathani, Thailand.
(3)Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Burapha University, Chonburi, Thailand.
(4)Department of Thai Traditional Medicine, Faculty of Natural Resources, 
Rajamangala University of Technology Isan, Sakon Nakhon Campus, Sakon Nakhon, 
Thailand.
(5)Centre for Research and Development of Medical Diagnostic Laboratories, 
Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, 
Thailand.
(6)Thalassaemia Research Center, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol 
University, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.

Northeastern (NE) Thailand is one of the areas with a prevalence of thalassemias 
and hemoglobinopathies. Data on the prevalence of the diseases in minorities in 
the region has been limited. This study aimed to survey the thalassemias and 
hemoglobinopathies that take into account ethnicity. Four ethnic groups, 
including Laos (n = 162), Khmer (n = 145), Suay (n = 134), and Yer (n = 101) 
inhabiting the lower region of NE Thailand, were selected to represent the study 
populations. The results demonstrated that an extremely high prevalence of Hb E 
(HBB: c.79G>A) (>50.0%) was observed in the Khmer, Suay and Yer ethnic groups. 
The highest prevalence of α+-thalassemia (α+-thal) [-α3.7 (rightward)] deletion 
was found in the Khmer ethnic group (48.28%). The -α4.2 (leftward) deletion 
(α+-thal) was restricted to the Yer ethnic group. Yer and Suay had a high 
incidence of Hb Constant Spring (Hb CS; HBA2: c.427T>C) as well as Hb Paksé 
(HBA2: c.429A>T). As the prevalence of α0-thalassemia (α0-thal) is relatively 
high in Suay (7.46%), couples who are members of Suay ethnic population should 
be urged to undergo hematological screening before planning a pregnancy to 
control the Hb Bart's hydrops fetalis. Micromapping of thalassemias and 
hemoglobinopathies herein described will be helpful in genetic counseling and 
public education campaigns, which should be carried out in appropriate 
languages, with exhibitions at the village levels. This information will be of 
benefit for the long-term effort to reduce the burden of severe thalassemia 
disease in the region.

DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2020.1780252
PMID: 32586159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]