1. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2020 Oct;34(10):e22547. doi: 10.1002/jbt.22547. Epub
2020  Jun 26.

Effects of metformin and pioglitazone combination on apoptosis and AMPK/mTOR 
signaling pathway in human anaplastic thyroid cancer cells.

Ozdemir Kutbay N(1), Biray Avci C(2), Sarer Yurekli B(3), Caliskan Kurt C(2), 
Shademan B(2), Gunduz C(2), Erdogan M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine, Celal Bayar University, 
Manisa, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, Ege University Medical School, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Ege University Medical School, Izmir, Turkey.

Anaplastic cancer constitutes 1% of thyroid cancers, and it is one of the most 
aggressive cancers. Treatment options are external radiation therapy and/or 
chemotherapy. The success rate with these treatment modalities is not 
satisfactory. We aimed to evaluate the effects of metformin (MET) and 
pioglitazone (PIO) combination on apoptosis and AMP-activated protein 
kinase/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway in human 
anaplastic thyroid cancer cells. In this study, we evaluated the effects of MET 
and PIO individually and the combination of the two drugs on the cellular lines 
SW1736 and C643 ATC. Genes contained in the mTOR signaling pathway were examined 
using human mTOR Signalization RT2 Profiler PCR Array. In C643 and SW1736 cell 
lines, IC50 doses of MET and PIO were found out as 17.69 mM, 11.64 mM, 27.12 µM, 
and 23.17 µM. Also, the combination of MET and PIO was determined as an additive 
according to isobologram analyses. We have found the downregulation of the 
expression levels of oncogenic genes: AKT3, CHUK, CDC42, EIF4E, HIF1A, IKBKB, 
ILK, MTOR, PIK3CA, PIK3CG, PLD1, PRKCA, and RICTOR genes, in the MET and PIO 
combination-treated cells. In addition, expression levels of tumor suppressor 
genes, DDIT4, DDIT4L, EIF4EBP1, EIF4EBP2, FKBP1A, FKBP8, GSK3B, MYO1C, PTEN, 
ULK1, and ULK2, were found to have increased significantly. The MET + PIO 
combination was first applied to thyroid cancer cells, and significant 
reductions in the level of oncogenic genes were detected. The decreases, 
particularly, in AKT3, DEPTOR, EIF4E, ILK, MTOR, PIK3C, and PRKCA expressions 
indicate that progression can be prevented in thyroid cancer cells and these 
genes could be selected as therapeutic targets.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jbt.22547
PMID: 32589349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]