1. PLoS One. 2020 Jun 26;15(6):e0235095. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0235095. 
eCollection 2020.

Activated whole-body arginine pathway in high-active mice.

Granados JZ(1)(2), Ten Have GAM(2), Letsinger AC(1), Thaden JJ(2), Engelen 
MPKJ(2), Lightfoot JT(1), Deutz NEP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Kinesiology, Biology of Physical Activity 
Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United States of America.
(2)Department of Health and Kinesiology, Center for Translational Research in 
Aging & Longevity, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, United States of 
America.

Our previous studies suggest that physical activity (PA) levels are potentially 
regulated by endogenous metabolic mechanisms such as the vasodilatory roles of 
nitric oxide (NO) production via the precursor arginine (ARG) and ARG-related 
pathways. We assessed ARG metabolism and its precursors [citrulline (CIT), 
glutamine (GLN), glutamate (GLU), ornithine (ORN), and phenylalanine (PHE)] by 
measuring plasma concentration, whole-body production (WBP), de novo ARG and NO 
production, and clearance rates in previously classified low-active (LA) or 
high-active (HA) mice. We assessed LA (n = 23) and HA (n = 20) male mice by 
administering a stable isotope tracer pulse via jugular catheterization. We 
measured plasma enrichments via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry 
(LC-MS/MS) and body compostion by echo-MRI. WBP, clearance rates, and de novo 
ARG and NO were calculated. Compared to LA mice, HA mice had lower plasma 
concentrations of GLU (71.1%; 36.8 ± 2.9 vs. 17.5 ± 1.7μM; p<0.0001), CIT (21%; 
57.3 ± 2.3 vs. 46.4 ± 1.5μM; p = 0.0003), and ORN (40.1%; 55.4 ± 7.3 vs. 36.9 ± 
2.6μM; p = 0.0241), but no differences for GLN, PHE, and ARG. However, HA mice 
had higher estimated NO production ratio (0.64 ± 0.08; p = 0.0197), higher WBP 
for CIT (21.8%, 8.6 ± 0.2 vs. 10.7 ± 0.3 nmol/g-lbm/min; p<0.0001), ARG (21.4%, 
35.0 ± 0.6 vs. 43.4 ± 0.7 nmol/g-lbm/min; p<0.0001), PHE (7.6%, 23.8 ± 0.5 vs. 
25.6 ± 0.5 nmol/g-lbm/min; p<0.0100), and lower GLU (78.5%; 9.4 ± 1.1 vs. 4.1 ± 
1.6 nmol/g lbm/min; p = 0.0161). We observed no significant differences in WBP 
for GLN, ORN, PHE, or de novo ARG. We concluded that HA mice have an activated 
whole-body ARG pathway, which may be associated with regulating PA levels via 
increased NO production.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0235095
PMCID: PMC7319332
PMID: 32589680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.