1. Front Pediatr. 2020 Jun 3;8:284. doi: 10.3389/fped.2020.00284. eCollection
2020.

Minor Histocompatibility Antigen-Specific T Cells.

Summers C(1)(2), Sheth VS(1), Bleakley M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA, United States.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United 
States.

Minor Histocompatibility (H) antigens are major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC)/Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA)-bound peptides that differ between 
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HCT) recipients and their 
donors as a result of genetic polymorphisms. Some minor H antigens can be used 
as therapeutic T cell targets to augment the graft-vs.-leukemia (GVL) effect in 
order to prevent or manage leukemia relapse after HCT. Graft engineering and 
post-HCT immunotherapies are being developed to optimize delivery of T cells 
specific for selected minor H antigens. These strategies have the potential to 
reduce relapse risk and thereby permit implementation of HCT approaches that are 
associated with less toxicity and fewer late effects, which is particularly 
important in the growing and developing pediatric patient. Most minor H antigens 
are expressed ubiquitously, including on epithelial tissues, and can be 
recognized by donor T cells following HCT, leading to graft-vs.-host disease 
(GVHD) as well as GVL. However, those minor H antigens that are expressed 
predominantly on hematopoietic cells can be targeted for selective GVL. Once 
full donor hematopoietic chimerism is achieved after HCT, 
hematopoietic-restricted minor H antigens are present only on residual recipient 
malignant hematopoietic cells, and these minor H antigens serve as 
tumor-specific antigens for donor T cells. Minor H antigen-specific T cells that 
are delivered as part of the donor hematopoietic stem cell graft at the time of 
HCT contribute to relapse prevention. However, in some cases the minor H 
antigen-specific T cells delivered with the graft may be quantitatively 
insufficient or become functionally impaired over time, leading to leukemia 
relapse. Following HCT, adoptive T cell immunotherapy can be used to treat or 
prevent relapse by delivering large numbers of donor T cells targeting 
hematopoietic-restricted minor H antigens. In this review, we discuss minor H 
antigens as T cell targets for augmenting the GVL effect in engineered HCT 
grafts and for post-HCT immunotherapy. We will highlight the importance of these 
developments for pediatric HCT.

Copyright Â© 2020 Summers, Sheth and Bleakley.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2020.00284
PMCID: PMC7283489
PMID: 32582592