1. J Pain Res. 2020 Jun 12;13:1385-1400. doi: 10.2147/JPR.S231778. eCollection 
2020.

Electromagnetic Field Therapy: A Rehabilitative Perspective in the Management of 
Musculoskeletal Pain - A Systematic Review.

Paolucci T(1), Pezzi L(1), Centra AM(1), Giannandrea N(1), Bellomo RG(2), 
Saggini R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oral Sciences and Biotechnology (DiSmob), Physical 
Medicine and Rehabilitation Unit, G. D'Annunzio University of Chieti-Pescara, 
Chieti, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Study of Urbino Carlo Bo, 
Urbino, Italy.

Electromagnetic fields (EMFs) provide a non-invasive, safe, and easy method to 
treat pain with respect to musculoskeletal diseases. The purpose of this 
systematic review was to describe the use of electromagnetic therapy in the 
rehabilitation field by investigating the efficacy in acute and chronic pain in 
the musculoskeletal disorders. A database search was conducted using the 
following resources: PubMed, Cochrane, PEDro, SCOPUS, and WoS. The following 
MESH terms were used: [Electromagnetic field AND/OR Rehabilitation], 
[Electromagnetic field AND/OR Pain], [Pulsed Magnetic field AND/OR 
Rehabilitation] and [Pulsed Magnetic field AND/OR Pain], [Pulsed Electromagnetic 
field AND/OR Rehabilitation] and [Pulsed Electromagnetic field AND/OR Pain], per 
the guidelines of the PRISMA statement. Articles published between January 1, 
2009 and December 31, 2018 were included as assessment of musculoskeletal pain 
conditions, randomized clinical trial including crossover and prospective design 
studies, full English text available, population age > 18 years; instead were 
excluded neurological randomized clinical trials, transcranial magnetic 
stimulation application, neuropathic pain, animal/in vitro studies, and articles 
without English abstract or English full text. Three independent investigators 
(AMC, NG, and LP) retrieved all the information. Twenty-one RTC (N=21) were 
considered for the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The results showed as 
pulsed magnetic fields at low intensity and frequency (from 1 Hz up to 100 Hz) 
are commonly used with efficacy in resolving musculoskeletal pain. EMFs therapy 
is a well tolerated, effective with no negative side effects, which can be 
integrated with rehabilitation for the treatment of chronic and acute pain in 
musculoskeletal diseases, but further studies are needed to examine the use of 
more standardized protocols.

Â© 2020 Paolucci et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JPR.S231778
PMCID: PMC7297361
PMID: 32606905

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.