1. BMC Microbiol. 2020 Jun 29;20(1):183. doi: 10.1186/s12866-020-01862-z.

Prevalence and molecular characterization of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus with mupirocin, fusidic acid and/or retapamulin 
resistance.

Chen W(1), He C(1), Yang H(1), Shu W(1), Cui Z(1), Tang R(1), Zhang C(2), Liu 
Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 100 Haining Rd, Shanghai, 200080, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Xiaoshan Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
Province, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 100 Haining Rd, Shanghai, 200080, 
People's Republic of China. jiaodamedicine@foxmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The data on the prevalence of resistance to mupirocin (MUP), fusidic 
acid (FA) and retapamulin (RET) in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(MRSA) from China are still limited. This study aimed to examine these three 
antibiotics resistance in 1206 MRSA clinical isolates from Eastern China. 
Phenotypic MUP, FA and RET resistance was determined by minimum inhibitory 
concentrations (MICs), and genotypic by PCR and DNA sequencing of the mupA/B, 
fusB-D, cfr, vgaA/Av/ALC/B/C/E, lsaA-C/E and salA and mutations in ileS, fusA/E, 
rplC, and 23S RNA V domain. The genetic characteristics of resistance isolates 
were conducted by pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and multilocus 
sequence typing (MLST).
RESULTS: Overall MRSA MUP, FA and RET resistance was low (5.1, 1.0 and 0.3%, 
respectively). MupA was the mechanism of high-level MUP resistance. All 
low-level MUP resistance isolates possessed an equivocal mutation N213D in IleS; 
of these, 2 reported an additional V588F mutation with an impact on the Rossman 
fold. FusA mutations, such as L461K, H457Q, H457Y and V90I were the primary FA 
mechanisms among high-level resistance isolates, most of which also contained 
fusC; however, all low-level resistance strains carried fusB. Except lsaE gene 
detected in one isolate, no other resistance mechanisms tested were found among 
RET-resistant isolates. Additionally, sixteen PFGE types (A-P) were observed, 
among which type B was the most common (49/76, 64.5%), followed by types E and G 
(4/76, 5.3% each) and types C and M (3/76, 3.9% each). All resistant strains 
were divided into 15 ST types by MLST. ST764 (24/76, 31.6%), ST630 (11/76, 
14.5%), ST239 (9/76, 11.8%) and ST5 (7/76, 9.2%) were the major types. PFGE type 
B isolates with the aforementioned STs were mainly found in mupirocin resistant 
isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: MUP, FA and RET exhibited highly activity against the MRSA 
isolates. Acquired genes and chromosome-borne genes mutations were responsible 
for MUP and FA resistance; however, the mechanism for some RET-resistant 
isolates remains to be further elucidated. Also, the surveillance to MUP in MRSA 
should be strengthened to prevent elevated resistance due to the expansion of 
clones.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-020-01862-z
PMCID: PMC7325228
PMID: 32600253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.