1. Mob DNA. 2020 Jun 29;11:21. doi: 10.1186/s13100-020-00212-0. eCollection 2020.

Phylogenetic analysis of the Tc1/mariner superfamily reveals the unexplored 
diversity of pogo-like elements.

Dupeyron M(1), Baril T(1), Bass C(1), Hayward A(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, 
Penryn, Cornwall, TR10 9FE UK.

BACKGROUND: Tc1/mariner transposons are widespread DNA transposable elements 
(TEs) that have made important contributions to the evolution of host genomic 
complexity in metazoans. However, the evolution and diversity of the Tc1/mariner 
superfamily remains poorly understood. Following recent developments in genome 
sequencing and the availability of a wealth of new genomes, Tc1/mariner TEs have 
been identified in many new taxa across the eukaryotic tree of life. To date, 
the majority of studies focussing on Tc1/mariner elements have considered only a 
single host lineage or just a small number of host lineages. Thus, much remains 
to be learnt about the evolution of Tc1/mariner TEs by performing analyses that 
consider elements that originate from across host diversity.
RESULTS: We mined the non-redundant database of NCBI using BLASTp searches, with 
transposase sequences from a diverse set of reference Tc1/mariner elements as 
queries. A total of 5158 Tc1/mariner elements were retrieved and used to 
reconstruct evolutionary relationships within the superfamily. The resulting 
phylogeny is well resolved and includes several new groups of Tc1/mariner 
elements. In particular, we identify a new family of plant-genome restricted 
Tc1/mariner elements, which we call PlantMar. We also show that the pogo family 
is much larger and more diverse than previously appreciated, and we review 
evidence for a potential revision of its status to become a separate 
superfamily.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides an overview of Tc1-mariner phylogeny and 
summarises the impressive diversity of Tc1-mariner TEs among sequenced 
eukaryotes. Tc1/mariner TEs are successful in a wide range of eukaryotes, 
especially unikonts (the taxonomic supergroup containing Amoebozoa, 
Opisthokonta, Breviatea, and Apusomonadida). In particular, ecdysozoa, and 
especially arthropods, emerge as important hosts for Tc1/mariner elements 
(except the PlantMar family). Meanwhile, the pogo family, which is by far the 
largest Tc1/mariner family, also includes many elements from fungal and chordate 
genomes. Moreover, there is evidence of the repeated exaptation of pogo elements 
in vertebrates, including humans, in addition to the well-known example of 
CENP-B. Collectively, our findings provide a considerable advancement in 
understanding of Tc1/mariner elements, and more generally they suggest that much 
work remains to improve understanding of the diversity and evolution of DNA TEs.

Â© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1186/s13100-020-00212-0
PMCID: PMC7325037
PMID: 32612713

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interest.