1. Oncol Rep. 2020 Jul;44(1):325-338. doi: 10.3892/or.2020.7609. Epub 2020 May
11.

Fluctuating role of antimicrobial peptide hCAP18/LL‑37 in oral tongue dysplasia 
and carcinoma.

Vierthaler M(#)(1), Rodrigues PC(#)(1), Sundquist E(1), Siponen M(2), Salo T(1), 
Risteli M(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research and Translational Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Oulu, FI‑90014 Oulu, Finland.
(2)Institute of Dentistry, University of Eastern Finland, FI‑70211 Kuopio, 
Finland.
(#)Contributed equally

Oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma (OTSCC), the most common cancer in the oral 
cavity, is aggressive and its incidence is increasing globally. Human host 
defense cationic antimicrobial peptide‑18/antimicrobial peptide 
leucine‑leucine‑37 (hCAP18/LL‑37) plays a complex role in various types of 
cancers. In the present study, we characterized the effects of exogenous LL‑37 
on three OTSCC cell lines and determined the expression of hCAP18/LL‑37 in oral 
dysplastic and OTSCC patient samples. Our data revealed that LL‑37, especially 
in high doses, mostly reduced the proliferation of OTSCC cells, but the effect 
was fluctuating. However, LL‑37 stimulated the migration and invasion of OTSCC 
cells. The high dose of LL‑37 also increased the amount of total epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) probably due to stabilization of the receptor to 
the plasma membrane. However, activation of EGFR downstream pathways was mostly 
decreased. Our immunohistochemical analysis showed that the hCAP18/LL‑37 
expression was higher in normal/mild dysplasia than in moderate/severe dysplasia 
and OTSCC. The hCAP18/LL‑37 expression did not correlate with 
clinicopathological features or outcome of OTSCC patients. Our data suggest that 
LL‑37 has a fluctuating effect on proliferation, migration and invasion of OTSCC 
cells, but it does not seem to play a role in the progression of OTSCC.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2020.7609
PMID: 32627035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]