1. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2020 Jul 1;11:68. doi: 10.1186/s40104-020-00473-y. 
eCollection 2020.

Postpartum meloxicam administration alters plasma haptoglobin, polyunsaturated 
fatty acid, and oxylipid concentrations in postpartum ewes.

Olagaray KE(1), Bradford BJ(1), Sordillo LM(2), Gandy JC(2), Mamedova LK(1), 
Swartz TH(1), Jackson TD(3), Persoon EK(3), Shugart CS(3), Youngs CR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Sciences and Industry, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, 66506 USA.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State University, 2265K Anthony 
Hall, East Lansing, MI 48824-1225 USA.
(3)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA USA.

BACKGROUND: Postpartum inflammation is a natural and necessary response; 
however, a dysfunctional inflammatory response can be detrimental to animal 
productivity. The objective of this study was to determine the effects of a 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (meloxicam) on ewe postpartum inflammatory 
response, ewe plasma polyunsaturated fatty acid and oxylipid concentrations, and 
lamb growth.
RESULTS: After lambing, 36 Hampshire and Hampshire × Suffolk ewes were 
sequentially assigned within type of birth to control (n = 17) or meloxicam 
orally administered on d 1 and 4 of lactation (MEL; 90 mg, n = 19). Milk and 
blood samples were collected on d 1 (prior to treatment) and d 4. Milk 
glucose-6-phosphate was not affected by MEL. Plasma haptoglobin (Hp) 
concentrations were less for MEL ewes; control ewes with greater d 1 Hp 
concentrations had elevated Hp on d 4, but this was not the case for MEL-treated 
ewes. Treatment with MEL increased plasma arachidonic acid concentration by more 
than 4-fold in ewes rearing singles but decreased concentrations of 
9,10-dihydroxyoctadecenoic acid, prostaglandin F2α, 8-iso-prostaglandin E2, and 
8,9-dihydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid. Nine oxylipids in plasma had interactions of 
treatment with d 1 Hp concentration, all of which revealed positive associations 
between d 1 Hp and d 4 oxylipid concentrations for CON, but neutral or negative 
relationships for MEL. MEL decreased 13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic 
acid:13-oxooctadecadienoic acid ratio and tended to increase 
9-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid:9-oxooctadecadienoic acid ratio (both dependent on 
d 1 values), indicating progressive metabolism of linoleic acid-derived 
oxylipids occurred by enzymatic oxidation after MEL treatment. Meloxicam reduced 
oxylipids generated across oxygenation pathways, potentially due to an improved 
redox state.
CONCLUSIONS: Postpartum MEL treatment of ewes decreased plasma concentrations of 
Hp and several oxylipids, with the greatest impact in ewes with biomarkers 
reflecting a greater inflammatory state before treatment. Anti-inflammatory 
strategies may help resolve excessive postpartum inflammation in some dams.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1186/s40104-020-00473-y
PMCID: PMC7329520
PMID: 32626575

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.