1. J Biomol NMR. 2020 Nov;74(10-11):565-577. doi: 10.1007/s10858-020-00321-1.
Epub  2020 Jul 7.

CcpNmr AnalysisScreen, a new software programme with dedicated automated 
analysis tools for fragment-based drug discovery by NMR.

Mureddu LG(1), Ragan TJ(1), Brooksbank EJ(1), Vuister GW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Leicester Institute of Structural 
and Chemical Biology, University of Leicester, Henry Wellcome Building, 
Lancaster Road, Leicester, LE1 7HN, UK.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Leicester Institute of Structural 
and Chemical Biology, University of Leicester, Henry Wellcome Building, 
Lancaster Road, Leicester, LE1 7HN, UK. gv29@leicester.ac.uk.

Fragment-based drug discovery or FBDD is one of the main methods used by 
industry and academia for identifying drug-like candidates in early stages of 
drug discovery. NMR has a significant impact at any stage of the drug discovery 
process, from primary identification of small molecules to the elucidation of 
binding modes for guiding optimisations. The essence of NMR as an analytical 
tool, however, requires the processing and analysis of relatively large amounts 
of single data items, e.g. spectra, which can be daunting when managed manually. 
One bottleneck in FBDD by NMR is a lack of adequate and well-integrated 
resources for NMR data analysis that are freely available to the community. 
Thus, scientists typically resort to manually inspecting large datasets and 
relying predominantly on subjective interpretations. In this manuscript, we 
present CcpNmr AnalysisScreen, a software package that provides computational 
tools for automated analysis of FBDD data by NMR. We outline how the quality of 
collected spectra can be evaluated quickly, and how robust workflows can be 
optimised for reliable and rapid hit identification. With an intuitive graphical 
user interface and powerful algorithms, AnalysisScreen enables easy analysis of 
the large datasets needed in the early process of drug discovery by NMR.

DOI: 10.1007/s10858-020-00321-1
PMCID: PMC7683461
PMID: 32638146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.