1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2020 Jul 2;9(7):374. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics9070374.

Identification of Genetic Alterations Associated with Acquired Colistin 
Resistance in Klebsiella pneumoniae Isogenic Strains by Whole-Genome Sequencing.

Choi M(1), Ko KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon 
16419, Korea.

The present study was undertaken to find novel genes associated with colistin 
resistance in Klebsiella pneumoniae. Five colistin-resistant mutants were 
derived from four colistin-susceptible parental K. pneumoniae strains belonging 
to different clones. Whole-genome sequencing was performed for the nine K. 
pneumoniae strains to screen altered candidate genes. Expression levels of genes 
with amino acid alterations in derivative strains were determined using 
quantitative real-time Polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Colistin susceptibility 
was examined in a parental strain complemented with altered candidate genes. 
Overall, 13 genetic alterations were identified in five pairs of isogenic K. 
pneumoniae strains. Genetic alterations related to KP1_3468, including the 
insertion of an IS5-like element in an intergenic or coding region and amino 
acid substitutions, were identified in three separate derivative strains. Amino 
acid substitutions and deletion of PhoQ were determined in one derivative 
strain. With inactivation of CrrA and substituted CrrB, amino acid substitutions 
and deletion were identified in a repressor of galETK operon (KP1_0061) and 
hypothetical protein (KP1_3620), respectively. Decreased colistin susceptibility 
was observed in a parental strain complemented with KP1-0061, but not a KP1-3620 
gene. This study demonstrated diverse genetic paths to colistin resistance in K. 
pneumoniae. Our results suggest that a repressor of galETK operon may play an 
important role in colistin resistance in K. pneumoniae.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics9070374
PMCID: PMC7400116
PMID: 32630683

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.