1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jul 7;10(1):11157. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-67853-2.

The proofreading activity of Pfprex from Plasmodium falciparum can prevent 
mutagenesis of the apicoplast genome by oxidized nucleotides.

Sharma M(1)(2), Narayanan N(1)(3), Nair DT(4).

Author information:
(1)Regional Centre for Biotechnology, 3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon 
Expressway, Faridabad, Haryana, 121001, India.
(2)Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Patia, Bhubaneshwar, Odisha, 
751024, India.
(3)Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Madhav Nagar, Manipal, 576104, India.
(4)Regional Centre for Biotechnology, 3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon 
Expressway, Faridabad, Haryana, 121001, India. deepak@rcb.res.in.

The DNA polymerase module of the Pfprex enzyme (PfpPol) is responsible for 
duplication of the genome of the apicoplast organelle in the malaria parasite. 
We show that PfpPol can misincorporate oxidized nucleotides such as 8oxodGTP 
opposite dA. This event gives rise to transversion mutations that are known to 
lead to adverse physiological outcomes. The apicoplast genome is particularly 
vulnerable to the harmful effects of 8oxodGTP due to very high AT content 
(~â€‰87%). We show that the proofreading activity of PfpPol has the unique ability 
to remove the oxidized nucleotide from the primer terminus. Due to this 
property, the proofreading domain of PfpPol is able to prevent mutagenesis of 
the AT-rich apicoplast genome and neutralize the deleterious genotoxic effects 
of ROS generated in the apicoplast due to normal metabolic processes. The 
proofreading activity of the Pfprex enzyme may, therefore, represent an 
attractive target for therapeutic intervention. Also, a survey of DNA repair 
pathways shows that the observed property of Pfprex constitutes a novel form of 
dynamic error correction wherein the repair of promutagenic damaged nucleotides 
is concomitant with DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-67853-2
PMCID: PMC7341739
PMID: 32636411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.