1. Cell Struct Funct. 2020;45(2):93-105. doi: 10.1247/csf.20018.

p18/Lamtor1-mTORC1 Signaling Controls Development of Mucin-producing Goblet 
Cells in the Intestine.

Ito S(1), Nada S(1), Yamazaki D(2), Kimura T(1), Kajiwara K(1), Miki H(2), Okada 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncogene Research, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University.
(2)Department of Cellular Regulation, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University.

Mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) plays a pivotal role in 
controlling cell growth and metabolism in response to nutrients and growth 
factors. The activity of mTORC1 is dually regulated by amino acids and growth 
factor signaling, and amino acid-dependent mTORC1 activity is regulated by 
mTORC1 interaction with the Ragulator-Rag GTPase complex, which is localized to 
the surface of lysosomes via a membrane-anchored protein, p18/Lamtor1. However, 
the physiological function of p18-Ragulator-dependent mTORC1 signaling remains 
elusive. The present study evaluated the function of p18-mediated mTORC1 
signaling in the intestinal epithelia using p18 conditional knockout mice. In 
p18 knockout colonic crypts, mTORC1 was delocalized from lysosomes, and in vivo 
mTORC1 activity was markedly decreased. Histologically, p18 knockout crypts 
exhibited significantly increased proliferating cells and dramatically decreased 
mucin-producing goblet cells, while overall crypt architecture and 
enteroendocrine cell differentiation were unaffected. Furthermore, p18 knockout 
crypts normally expressed transcription factors implicated in crypt 
differentiation, such as Cdx2 and Klf4, indicating that p18 ablation did not 
affect the genetic program of cell differentiation. Analysis of colon crypt 
organoid cultures revealed that both p18 ablation and rapamycin treatment 
robustly suppressed development of mucin-producing goblet cells. Hence, 
p18-mediated mTORC1 signaling could promote the anabolic metabolism required for 
robust mucin production in goblet cells to protect the intestinal epithelia from 
various external stressors.Key words: mTORC1, p18/lamtor1, intestinal 
epithelium, goblet cells, mucin.

DOI: 10.1247/csf.20018
PMCID: PMC10511045
PMID: 32641600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]