1. Protein Sci. 2020 Sep;29(9):1902-1910. doi: 10.1002/pro.3910. Epub 2020 Aug 5.

Structural investigation of 2-naphthyl phenyl ether inhibitors bound to WT and 
Y181C reverse transcriptase highlights key features of the NNRTI binding site.

Duong VN(1), Ippolito JA(1), Chan AH(1), Lee WG(2), Spasov KA(1), Jorgensen 
WL(2), Anderson KS(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 remains as a global health issue that is 
primarily treated with highly active antiretroviral therapy, a combination of 
drugs that target the viral life cycle. One class of these drugs are 
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) that target the viral 
reverse transcriptase (RT). First generation NNRTIs were troubled with poor 
pharmacological properties and drug resistance, incentivizing the development of 
improved compounds. One class of developed compounds are the 2-naphthyl phenyl 
ethers, showing promising efficacy against the Y181C RT mutation. Further 
biochemical and structural work demonstrated differences in potency against the 
Y181C mutation and binding mode of the compounds. This work aims to understand 
the relationship between the binding mode and ability to overcome drug 
resistance using macromolecular x-ray crystallography. Comparison of 2-naphthyl 
phenyl ethers bound to Y181C RT reveal that compounds that interact with the 
invariant W229 are more capable of retaining efficacy against the resistance 
mutation. Additional modifications to these compounds at the 4-position, 
computationally designed to compensate for the Y181C mutation, do not 
demonstrate improved potency. Ultimately, we highlight important considerations 
for the development of future HIV-1 drugs that are able to combat drug 
resistance.

Â© 2020 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.3910
PMCID: PMC7454559
PMID: 32643196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]