1. Neurooncol Adv. 2019 Jul 8;1(1):vdz013. doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdz013.
eCollection  2019 May-Dec.

Biomarkers and smart intracranial devices for the diagnosis, treatment, and 
monitoring of high-grade gliomas: a review of the literature and future 
prospects.

Hafeez U(1)(2)(3), Cher LM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute, Austin Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(2)Latrobe University School of Cancer Medicine, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Austin Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary brain neoplasm with median overall 
survival (OS) around 15 months. There is a dearth of effective monitoring 
strategies for patients with high-grade gliomas. Relying on magnetic resonance 
images of brain has its challenges, and repeated brain biopsies add significant 
morbidity. Hence, it is imperative to establish a less invasive way to diagnose, 
monitor, and guide management of patients with high-grade gliomas. Currently, 
multiple biomarkers are in various phases of development and include tissue, 
serum, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and imaging biomarkers. Here we review and 
summarize the potential biomarkers found in blood and CSF, including 
extracellular macromolecules, extracellular vesicles, circulating tumor cells, 
immune cells, endothelial cells, and endothelial progenitor cells. The ability 
to detect tumor-specific biomarkers in blood and CSF will potentially not only 
reduce the need for repeated brain biopsies but also provide valuable 
information about the heterogeneity of tumor, response to current treatment, and 
identify disease resistance. This review also details the status and potential 
scope of brain tumor-related cranial devices and implants including Ommaya 
reservoir, microelectromechanical systems-based depot device, Alzet mini-osmotic 
pump, Metronomic Biofeedback Pump (MBP), ipsum G1 implant, ultra-thin needle 
implant, and putative devices. An ideal smart cranial implant will overcome the 
blood-brain barrier, deliver various drugs, provide access to brain tissue, and 
potentially measure and monitor levels of various biomarkers.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press, the Society for 
Neuro-Oncology and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/noajnl/vdz013
PMCID: PMC7212884
PMID: 32642651