1. Mob DNA. 2020 Jul 4;11:24. doi: 10.1186/s13100-020-00221-z. eCollection 2020.

IS982 and kin: new insights into an old IS family.

Fayad N(1)(2), Kallassy Awad M(2), Mahillon J(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Food and Environmental Microbiology, Earth and Life Institute, 
Université Catholique de Louvain, Croix du Sud, 2 - L7.05.12, B-1348 
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Biodiversity and functional genomics, UR-EGP, Faculty of 
Science, Université Saint-Joseph de Beyrouth, Beirut, Lebanon.

Insertion sequences (IS) are ubiquitous transposable elements with a very simple 
organization: two inverted repeats flanking a transposase coding gene. IS982 is 
one of 26 insertion sequence families known so far. With 70 registered members 
in the ISFinder database, this family remains somewhat unexplored, despite the 
association of many of its members with important features such as antibiotic 
resistance. IS982 has a fairly simple organization with a mean length of ca. 1 
Kb, two inverted repeats with conserved 5' AC 3' ends flanking a transposase 
coding gene and direct repeats of variable lengths. Its transposase has a 
RNAse-H like chemistry with an atypical DDE motif. In this study, we first 
highlight the current knowledge on the IS982 family by dissecting its registered 
members and their characteristics. Secondly, we bring new insights into this 
old, yet uncharted IS family, by exploring its registered elements, as well as 
the genomic and proteomic databases of bacterial and archaeal strains. This 
probing showed that the presence and distribution of this family goes far beyond 
the clear-cut registry of ISFinder database.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1186/s13100-020-00221-z
PMCID: PMC7335449
PMID: 32641975

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that 
there are no conflicts of interest.