1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jul 7;17(13):4900. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph17134900.

Myostatin A55T Genotype is Associated with Strength Recovery Following 
Exercise-Induced Muscle Damage.

Kim J(1), Park K(2), Lee J(2).

Author information:
(1)Office of Academic Affairs, Konkuk University, Chungju-si 27478, Korea.
(2)Department of Sport, Health and Rehabilitation, College of Physical 
Education, Kookmin University, Seoul 02707, Korea.

Myostatin A55T genotype is one of the candidates showing inter-individual 
variation in skeletal muscle phenotypes. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the effect of the myostatin A55T genotype on markers of muscle 
damage after eccentric exercise. Forty-eight young, healthy male college 
students (age = 24.8 ± 2.2 years, height = 176.7 ± 5.3 cm, weight = 73.7 ± 8.3 
kg) were enrolled in this study, and muscle damage was induced through 50 reps 
of maximal eccentric muscle contraction. As markers of muscle damage, maximal 
isometric strength (MIS), muscle soreness, creatine kinase (CK), and aspartate 
transaminase (AST) were measured. Myostatin A55T genotypes were classified into 
homozygous myostatin A55T allele (AA, n = 34, 72%), heterozygous myostatin A55T 
allele (AT, n = 13, 26%), and homozygous mutant carriers (TT, n = 1, 2%). After 
eccentric exercise, the subjects with heterozygous for AT showed markedly 
quicker MIS recovery compared to the AA group (p = 0.042). However, there were 
no significant variations in muscle soreness (p = 0.379), CK (p = 0.955), and 
AST (p = 0.706) among the groups. These results suggest that AT in myostatin 
A55T genotype may be associated with quicker strength recovery following 
exercise-induced muscle damage.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17134900
PMCID: PMC7369921
PMID: 32645967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.