1. Am J Case Rep. 2020 Jul 9;21:e923130. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.923130.

Metastatic Plasmacytoid Bladder Cancer Harboring a CDH-1 Mutation and Producing 
High Levels of CA 19-9. A Case Report and Literature Review.

Telfah M(1), Parikh RA(1), Zhang D(2), Kasi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, The University of Kansas Cancer Center, 
Westwood, KS, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.

BACKGROUND Plasmacytoid urothelial carcinoma (PUC) is a rare and aggressive 
variant of urothelial cancers. Herein, we report a patient with CDH-1 mutated 
PUC who presented with disseminated peritoneal metastasis and high levels of CA 
19-9. CASE REPORT A 65-year-old female presented to the hospital with vomiting, 
obstructive jaundice, and acute renal failure. Imaging studies showed bilateral 
hydronephrosis, bladder wall thickening without masses, and dilation of both 
common bile and pancreatic ducts without pancreatic masses. Carbohydrate antigen 
(CA) 19-9 was elevated at >17 000 U/mL. Repeated cystoscopies demonstrated no 
masses within the bladder, but with nodularity and inflamed mucosa, and random 
biopsies were obtained and showed PUC. Ascitic fluid cytology revealed 
metastatic PUC. A targeted exome next-generation sequencing (NGS) revealed 
pathogenic mutations in TP53, CDH-1, RB1, and ARIDA1A. The patient was 
debilitated, and hospice care was recommended. She passed away after 2 months of 
her initial presentation. CONCLUSIONS PUC is a rare and aggressive histological 
variant of bladder cancer. Advanced stage at diagnosis and high relapse rates 
after treatment with cytotoxic regimens are common. At the molecular level, 
somatic alterations in cadherin-1 (CDH-1) gene seem to be characteristic. 
Exploring the molecular sphere of this disease is prudent to identify possible 
new therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.923130
PMCID: PMC7370577
PMID: 32644978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared