1. Nutrients. 2020 Jul 9;12(7):2038. doi: 10.3390/nu12072038.

Breakfast Consumption in Low-Income Hispanic Elementary School-Aged Children: 
Associations with Anthropometric, Metabolic, and Dietary Parameters.

Jeans MR(1), Asigbee FM(1), Landry MJ(1), Vandyousefi S(1), Ghaddar R(1), Leidy 
HJ(1)(2), Davis JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, 200 W 
24th Street, Stop A2700, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Dell Medical Center, The University of Texas at 
Austin, 1400 Barbara Jordan Blvd, Austin, TX 78723, USA.

Breakfast consumption is associated with lower obesity prevalence and 
cardiometabolic risk and higher dietary quality (DQ) in children. Low-income, 
Hispanic populations are disproportionately affected by obesity and 
cardiometabolic risks. This study examined the relationship between breakfast 
consumption groups (BCG) on anthropometric, metabolic, and dietary parameters in 
predominately low-income, Hispanic children from 16 Texas schools. 
Cross-sectional data were from TX Sprouts, a school-based gardening, nutrition, 
and cooking randomized controlled trial. Anthropometric measurements included 
height, weight, body mass index, body fat percent via bioelectrical impedance, 
waist circumference, and blood pressure. Metabolic parameters included fasting 
plasma glucose, insulin, glycated hemoglobin, cholesterol, and triglycerides. DQ 
and BCG were assessed via two 24-h dietary recalls. Multivariate multiple 
regression examined relationships between BCG and anthropometric, metabolic, and 
dietary parameters. This study included 671 students (mean age 9 years, 58% 
Hispanic, 54% female, 66% free/reduced lunch, 17% breakfast skippers). No 
relationships were observed between BCG and anthropometric or metabolic 
parameters. BCG had higher DQ; higher daily protein, total sugar, and added 
sugar intake; and lower daily fat intake. Skipping breakfast was associated with 
lower DQ; higher daily fat intake; and lower daily protein intake. Longitudinal 
research examining breakfast quality on cardiometabolic outcomes in low-income, 
Hispanic children is warranted.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12072038
PMCID: PMC7400815
PMID: 32659982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.