1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Jul 8;12(7):1831. doi: 10.3390/cancers12071831.

The Role of Liquid Biopsies in Detecting Molecular Tumor Biomarkers in Brain 
Cancer Patients.

Sareen H(1)(2), Garrett C(1)(3), Lynch D(1)(3), Powter B(1), Brungs D(4), Cooper 
A(1)(3)(5), Po J(1), Koh ES(1)(5), Vessey JY(1)(5), McKechnie S(5), Bazina R(5), 
Sheridan M(5), Gelder JV(5), Darwish B(5), Jaeger M(2)(6), Roberts TL(1)(2)(3), 
De Souza P(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Becker TM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Circulating Tumour Cell Diagnostics and Research, Ingham Institute 
for Applied Medical Research, 1 Campbell St, Liverpool, NSW 2170, Australia.
(2)South Western Sydney Clinical School, University of New South Wales South 
Western Clinical School, Goulburn St, Liverpool, NSW 2170, Australia.
(3)Western Sydney Clinical School, Western Sydney University, School of 
Medicine, Campbelltown 2560, NSW, Australia.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2522, 
Australia.
(5)Liverpool Hospital, Elizabeth St & Goulburn St, Liverpool, NSW 2170, 
Australia.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Wollongong Hospital, Wollongong, NSW 2500, 
Australia.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most lethal primary central nervous 
system cancers with a median overall survival of only 12-15 months. The best 
documented treatment is surgical tumor debulking followed by chemoradiation and 
adjuvant chemotherapy with temozolomide, but treatment resistance and therefore 
tumor recurrence, is the usual outcome. Although advances in molecular subtyping 
suggests GBM can be classified into four subtypes, one concern about using the 
original histology for subsequent treatment decisions is that it only provides a 
static snapshot of heterogeneous tumors that may undergo longitudinal changes 
over time, especially under selective pressure of ongoing therapy. Liquid 
biopsies obtained from bodily fluids like blood and cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF) 
are less invasive, and more easily repeated than surgery. However, their 
deployment for patients with brain cancer is only emerging, and possibly 
suppressed clinically due to the ongoing belief that the blood brain barrier 
prevents the egress of circulating tumor cells, exosomes, and circulating tumor 
nucleic acids into the bloodstream. Although brain cancer liquid biopsy analyses 
appear indeed challenging, advances have been made and here we evaluate the 
current literature on the use of liquid biopsies for detection of clinically 
relevant biomarkers in GBM to aid diagnosis and prognostication.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12071831
PMCID: PMC7408771
PMID: 32650387

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.