1. Int J Genomics. 2020 Jun 19;2020:3126592. doi: 10.1155/2020/3126592.
eCollection  2020.

Identification of Heat-Responsive Genes in Guar [Cyamopsis tetragonoloba (L.) 
Taub].

Alshameri A(1), Al-Qurainy F(1), Gaafar AR(1), Khan S(1), Nadeem M(1), Alansi 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, College of Science, King Saud 
University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.

The threat of heat stress on crop production increased dramatically due to 
global warming leading to the rise on the demand of heat-tolerant crops and 
understanding their tolerance. The leguminous forage crop Guar [Cyamopsis 
tetragonoloba (L.) Taub] is a high-temperature tolerant plant with numerous 
works on its tolerance at morph-physiological levels but lack on molecular 
thermotolerance level. In the current study, the differential gene expression 
and the underlying metabolic pathways induced by heat treatment were 
investigated. An RNA-Seq study on Guar leaves was carried out to estimate gene 
abundance and identify genes involved in heat tolerance to better understand the 
response mechanisms to heat stress. The results uncovered 1551 up- and 1466 
downregulated genes, from which 200 and 72 genes with unknown function could be 
considered as new genes specific to guar. The upregulated unigenes were 
associated with 158 enzymes and 102 KEGG pathways. Blast2GO, InterProScan, and 
Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes packages were utilized to search the 
functional annotation, protein analysis, enzymes, and metabolic pathways and 
revealed hormone signal transduction were enriched during heat stress tolerance. 
A total of 301 protein families, 551 domains, 15 repeats, and 3 sites were 
upregulated and matched to those unigenes. A batch of heat-regulated 
transcription factor transcripts were identified using the PlantTFDB database, 
which may play roles in heat response in Guar. Interestingly, several heat shock 
protein families were expressed in response to exposure to stressful conditions 
for instance small HSP20, heat shock transcription factor family, heat shock 
protein Hsp90 family, and heat shock protein 70 family. Our results revealed the 
expressional changes associated with heat tolerance and identified potential key 
genes in the regulation of this process. These results will provide a good start 
to dissect the molecular behaviour of plants induced by heat stress and could 
identify the key genes in stress response for marker-assisted selection in Guar 
and reveal their roles in stress adaptation in plants.

Copyright Â© 2020 Aref Alshameri et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/3126592
PMCID: PMC7322617
PMID: 32656260

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.