1. J Vet Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Nov;43(6):602-607. doi: 10.1111/jvp.12890. Epub
2020  Jul 12.

Analysis of polymorphisms of canine Cytochrome P 450-CYP2D15.

van Hagen MAE(1), Schipper L(2), Oosterveer-van der Doelen MAM(2), Vos-Loohuis 
M(3), Gehring R(2), Leegwater PA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health Sciences, Unit Animals in Science and 
Society, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) proteins constitute a large ancient family of oxidative 
enzymes essential for the efficient elimination of a wide variety of clinically 
used drugs. Polymorphic variants of human CYP2D6 are associated with the 
conversion rate and efficacy of several drugs such as antidepressants. 
Polymorphisms of the canine orthologue CYP2D15 are of interest because these 
antidepressants are also used in dogs with behavioral problems and the outcome 
of the treatment is variable. However, the annotated CYP2D15 gene is incomplete 
and inaccurately assembled in CanFam3.1, hampering DNA sequence analysis of the 
gene in individual dogs. We elucidated the complete exon-intron structure of 
CYP2D15 to enable comprehensive genotyping of the gene using genomic DNA. We 
surveyed variations of the gene in four diverse dog breeds and identified novel 
polymorphisms in exon 2 in border collies. Further investigation to establish 
the impact of these canine CYP2D15 polymorphisms on interindividual variability 
in expression and function of this metabolizing enzyme is now feasible. Further 
knowledge of CYP pharmacogenetics will help individualize therapy and thereby 
increase therapeutic efficacy, especially in the use of antidepressants in 
veterinary behavioral medicine.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 
published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvp.12890
PMCID: PMC7689907
PMID: 32656886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.