1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jul 13;17(14):5019. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph17145019.

How Does a Public Health Emergency Motivate People's Impulsive Consumption? An 
Empirical Study during the COVID-19 Outbreak in China.

Li M(1), Zhao T(2), Huang E(3), Li J(3).

Author information:
(1)School of International, Jilin University of Finance and Economics, Changchun 
130012, China.
(2)School of Philosophy and Sociology, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, 
China.
(3)Business School, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China.

Impulsive consumption is a typical behavior that people often present during 
public health emergencies, which usually leads to negative outcomes. This study 
investigates how public health emergencies, such as COVID-19, affect people's 
impulsive consumption behavior. Data from 1548 individuals in China during the 
COVID-19 outbreak was collected. The sample covered 297 prefecture-level cities 
in 31 provincial administrative regions. The research method included the use of 
a structural equation model to test multiple research hypotheses. The study 
finds that the severity of a pandemic positively affects people's impulsive 
consumption. Specifically, the more severe the pandemic, the more likely people 
are to make impulsive consumption choices. The results indicate that both 
perceived control and materialism play mediating roles between the severity of a 
pandemic and impulsive consumption. As conclusions, people's impulsive 
consumption during public health emergencies can be weakened either by enhancing 
their perceived control or by reducing their materialistic tendency. These 
conclusions are valuable and useful for a government's crisis response and 
disaster risk management.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17145019
PMCID: PMC7400470
PMID: 32668635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.