1. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2020 Jul 15;12(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s13195-020-00651-0.

Longitudinal changes in EEG power, sleep cycles and behaviour in a tau model of 
neurodegeneration.

Holton CM(1), Hanley N(1), Shanks E(1), Oxley P(1), McCarthy A(1), Eastwood 
BJ(1), Murray TK(1), Nickerson A(1), Wafford KA(2).

Author information:
(1)Eli Lilly and Company, Erl Wood Manor, Windlesham, Surrey, GU20 6PH, UK.
(2)Eli Lilly and Company, Erl Wood Manor, Windlesham, Surrey, GU20 6PH, UK. 
kwafford@slowavetx.co.uk.

BACKGROUND: Disturbed sleep is associated with cognitive decline in 
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD). The progressive sequence of how neurodegeneration affects 
aspects of sleep architecture in conjunction with behavioural changes is not 
well understood.
METHODS: We investigated changes in sleep architecture, spectral power and 
circadian rhythmicity in the tet-off rTg4510 mouse overexpressing human P301L 
tau within the same subjects over time. Doxycycline-induced transgene-suppressed 
rTg4510 mice, tTa carriers and wild-type mice were used as comparators. Spectral 
power and sleep stages were measured from within the home cage environment using 
EEG electrodes. In addition, locomotor activity and performance during a T-maze 
task were measured.
RESULTS: Spectral power in the delta and theta bands showed a time-dependent 
decrease in rTg4510 mice compared to all other groups. After the initial changes 
in spectral power, wake during the dark period increased whereas NREM and number 
of REM sleep bouts decreased in rTg4510 compared to wild-type mice. Home cage 
locomotor activity in the dark phase significantly increased in rTg4510 compared 
to wild-type mice by 40 weeks of age. Peak-to-peak circadian rhythm amplitude 
and performance in the T-maze was impaired throughout the experiment independent 
of time. At 46 weeks, rTG4510 mice had significant degeneration in the 
hippocampus and cortex whereas doxycycline-treated rTG4510 mice were protected. 
Pathology significantly correlated with sleep and EEG outcomes, in addition to 
locomotor and cognitive measures.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that reduced EEG spectral power precedes reductions in 
sleep and home cage locomotor activity in a mouse model of tauopathy. The data 
shows increasing mutant tau changes sleep architecture, EEG properties, 
behaviour and cognition, which suggest tau-related effects on sleep architecture 
in patients with neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-020-00651-0
PMCID: PMC7364634
PMID: 32669112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors were either employees or contractors 
of Eli Lilly & Co. No other conflicts of interest declared.