1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jul 13;21(14):4951. doi: 10.3390/ijms21144951.

Current and Future Role of Tyrosine Kinases Inhibition in Thyroid Cancer: From 
Biology to Therapy.

San Román Gil M(1), Pozas J(1), Molina-Cerrillo J(1)(2)(3), Gómez J(3)(4), Pian 
H(3)(5), Pozas M(1), Carrato A(1)(2)(3), Grande E(6), Alonso-Gordoa T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, 28034 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)The Ramon y Cajal Health Research Institute (IRYCIS), CIBERONC, 28034 Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)Medicine School, Alcalá University, 28805 Madrid, Spain.
(4)General Surgery Department, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, 28034 
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Pathology Department, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, 28034 Madrid, 
Spain.
(6)Medical Oncology Department, MD Anderson Cancer Center, 28033 Madrid, Spain.

Thyroid cancer represents a heterogenous disease whose incidence has increased 
in the last decades. Although three main different subtypes have been described, 
molecular characterization is progressively being included in the diagnostic and 
therapeutic algorithm of these patients. In fact, thyroid cancer is a landmark 
in the oncological approach to solid tumors as it harbors key genetic 
alterations driving tumor progression that have been demonstrated to be 
potential actionable targets. Within this promising and rapid changing scenario, 
current efforts are directed to improve tumor characterization for an accurate 
guidance in the therapeutic management. In this sense, it is strongly 
recommended to perform tissue genotyping to patients that are going to be 
considered for systemic therapy in order to select the adequate treatment, 
according to recent clinical trials data. Overall, the aim of this article is to 
provide a comprehensive review on the molecular biology of thyroid cancer 
focusing on the key role of tyrosine kinases. Additionally, from a clinical 
point of view, we provide a thorough perspective, current and future, in the 
treatment landscape of this tumor.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21144951
PMCID: PMC7403957
PMID: 32668761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Teresa Alonso-Gordoa: Pfizer, Ipsen, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche, Eusa Pharma, MerckSharp&Dohme (C/A, SAB), Roche 
(RF). Enrique Grande: Pfizer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Ipsen, Roche, Eisai, Eusa 
Pharma, MerckSharp&Dohme, Sanofi-Genzyme, Adacap, Novartis, PierreFabre, 
Lexicon, Celgene (C/A, SAB), Pfizer, AstraZeneca, MTEM/Threshold, Roche, Ipsen, 
Lexicon (RF). The rest of authors declares no conflict of interest. (C/A): 
Consulting/Advisory relationship; (RF) Research Funding; (SAB) Scientific 
Advisory Board.