1. Scientifica (Cairo). 2020 Jun 17;2020:5843958. doi: 10.1155/2020/5843958. 
eCollection 2020.

Interleukin-8 in Hyperlipidemia and Coronary Heart Disease in Thai Patients 
Taking Statin Cholesterol-Lowering Medication While Undergoing Coronary Artery 
Bypass Grafting Treatment.

Dechkhajorn W(1), Maneerat Y(1), Prasongsukarn K(2), Kanchanaphum P(3), Kumsiri 
R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tropical Pathology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(2)Phramongkutklao Hospital, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(3)Department of Medical Science, Faculty of Science, Rangsit University, 
Pathumthani 12000, Thailand.

The role of interleukin-8 (IL-8), a pivotal chemokine in atherogenesis and 
coronary heart disease (CHD) development, is diverse and remains unclear. This 
cross-sectional study investigates the association of the IL-8 expression in 
hyperlipidemia (H) and CHD patients who have been treated with statin 
cholesterol-lowering drugs while undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting 
treatment. Fifty-five Thai volunteers including 13 normal (N), 24 H, and 18 CHD 
patients were enrolled for the investigation. All the CHD patients had been 
treated continuously with statin cholesterol-lowering medications since the 
disease was diagnosed and were undergoing coronary bypass grafting approximately 
one month later. Therefore, the CHD group was representative of a pathogenesis 
improvement in CHD. The IL8 mRNA expression was determined by real-time 
quantitative PCR in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells from heparinized 
blood. The plasma IL-8 levels were assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay. The result shows that the IL8 mRNA expression in the H group tended to 
increase; however, in the CHD group, there was a significant decrease (p=0.0111) 
compared to the N group. The IL8 mRNA expression and the plasma levels in the 
CHD group were significantly lower than those in the H group (p < 0.05). A 
significant negative correlation between the IL8 mRNA (r = -0.499) or plasma 
IL-8 (r = -0.3875) expression and CHD progression was observed (p < 0.05). In 
conclusion, the transcriptomic and the phenotypic IL-8 expression decreased 
significantly in the Thai CHD patients who had continuously received 
statin-group medications compared to the H and N group participants. Therefore, 
IL-8 should serve as a feasible marker and could be used to evaluate the 
therapeutic effects of statins and illustrate the pathology of CHD treatment.

Copyright © 2020 Wilanee Dechkhajorn et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/5843958
PMCID: PMC7334778
PMID: 32676215

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.