1. J Clin Pharmacol. 2021 Jan;61(1):41-51. doi: 10.1002/jcph.1699. Epub 2020 Jul 
16.

Computer Algorithm-Based Hydroxyurea Dosing Facilitates Titration to Maximum 
Tolerated Dose in Sickle Cell Anemia.

Oldham M(1), Conrey A(1), Pittman C(1), Fisher C(1), Hargrett S(1), West K(2), 
Jackson M(1), Martin S(3), Hsieh MM(1), Jeffries N(4), Kaplarevic M(5), Johnson 
D(6), Olkhanud P(1), Fitzhugh CD(1).

Author information:
(1)Sickle Cell Branch, NHLBI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Transfusion Medicine, Clinical Center, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(3)Pediatric Oncology Branch, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Office of Biostatistics Research, NHLBI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Office of the Scientific Director, NHLBI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(6)Pharmacy Department, Clinical Center, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Adults with sickle cell disease (SCD) experience acute and chronic complications 
and die prematurely. When taken at maximum tolerated dose (MTD), hydroxyurea 
prolongs survival; however, it has not consistently reversed organ dysfunction. 
Patients also frequently do not take hydroxyurea, at least in part because of 
physician discomfort with prescribing hydroxyurea. We sought to develop a 
computer program that could easily titrate hydroxyurea to MTD. This was a 
single-arm, open-label pilot study. Fifteen patients with homozygous SCD were 
enrolled in the protocol, and 10 patients were followed at baseline and then for 
1 year after hydroxyurea initiation or dose titration. Fetal hemoglobin 
significantly increased in all 10 patients from 8.3% to 25.1% (P < .001). Nine 
patients were titrated to MTD in an average of 7.9 months, and the tenth 
patient's hydroxyurea dose was increased to 33 mg/kg/day. Computer program 
dosing recommendations were the same as manual dosing decisions made using the 
same algorithm for all patients and at all times. We also evaluated markers of 
cardiopulmonary, liver and renal damage. Although cardiopulmonary function did 
not significantly improve, direct bilirubin and alanine aminotransferase levels 
significantly decreased (P < .001 and P < .01, respectively). Last, although 
kidney function did not improve, degree of proteinuria was significantly reduced 
(P < .05). We have developed a computer program that reliably titrates 
hydroxyurea to MTD. A larger study is indicated to test the program either as a 
computer program or a downloadable application.

Published 2020. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/jcph.1699
PMCID: PMC8558836
PMID: 32673439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no 
competing financial interests and no conflicts of interest.