1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Jul 14;12(7):1903. doi: 10.3390/cancers12071903.

Inconsistent Intersample ALK FISH Results in Patients with Lung Cancer: Analysis 
of Potential Causes.

Tang Z(1), Chen H(1), Hong L(1), Tang G(1), Toruner GA(1), Wang W(1), Roy 
Chowdhuri S(1), Yin W(1), Jung HS(1), Gu J(1), Routbort MJ(1), Zhang J(1), 
Khoury JD(1), Medeiros LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Hematopathology, Pathology and Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical 
Oncology, School of Health Professions, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

ALK FISH analyses of multiple specimens occasionally yield inconsistent 
intersample results in lung cancer patients, posing clinical challenges 
requiring intensive analysis of all potential causative pre- and post- analytic 
factors. In this study, 19 patients (8M/11F) with inconsistent intersample ALK 
FISH results were analyzed, representing 4.9% of patients assessed â‰¥ twice in 
our institution. Fifteen patients received ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitor(s) 
(TKIs). Nine patients died, and ten were alive for 8 to 74-month follow-ups 
(median, 40 months). Through strict and stringent laboratory and case-review 
policies, all postanalytic factors were excluded. Correlating clinical 
information, ALK results obtained by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and other 
concurrent tests, several pre-analytic factors were determined. A suboptimal 
specimen was likely the cause in three patients, supported by the failure of one 
or more concurrent tests or discrepant results between FISH and RNA-seq. ALK 
inhibition by TKIs might have been responsible for the change of ALK status from 
positive to negative in eight patients. Other potential explanations include the 
existence of multiple primary lung cancer lesions, tumor heterogeneity, and the 
clonal evolution of tumor cells, related or not to ALK TKI therapy. This study 
is helpful for both pathologists and clinicians encountering inconsistent and/or 
discrepant intersample results.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12071903
PMCID: PMC7409019
PMID: 32674491

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.