1. Stem Cell Res. 2020 Jul 2;47:101901. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2020.101901. Online 
ahead of print.

Generation of pluripotent stem cell lines and CRISPR/Cas9 modified isogenic 
controls from a patient with dilated cardiomyopathy harboring a RBM20 p.R634W 
mutation.

Rebs S(1), Sedaghat-Hamedani F(2), Kayvanpour E(2), Meder B(3), 
Streckfuss-Bömeke K(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Cardiology and Pneumology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany; German Center of Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Germany.
(2)German Center of Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Germany; Department of 
Cardiology, Angiology and Pneumology, University Medical Center Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(3)German Center of Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Germany; Department of 
Cardiology, Angiology and Pneumology, University Medical Center Heidelberg, 
Germany; Stanford Genome Technology Center, Department of Genetics, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(4)Clinic for Cardiology and Pneumology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany; German Center of Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Germany. 
Electronic address: katrin.streckfuss@med.uni-goettingen.de.

RNA binding motif protein 20 (RBM20) is an alternative splicing factor and 
highly expressed in cardiac tissue. Mutations in the RS domain of RBM20 have 
been shown to cause different cardiomyopathies. Here, we generated induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from a dilated cardiomyopathy patient harboring 
the heterozygous RBM20 mutation p.R634W and consecutively produced isogenic 
control line using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. Patient-specific RBM20 iPSCs and 
isogenic control line maintained full pluripotency, genomic integrity, and in 
vitro differentiation capacity. All iPSC-lines were able to differentiate into 
pure cardiomyocytes, thus providing a valuable tool for studying the 
pathogenesis of human RBM20-mediated cardiac disease.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2020.101901
PMID: 32674065

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.