1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jul 15;21(14):4993. doi: 10.3390/ijms21144993.

In Vivo Models for Cholangiocarcinoma-What Can We Learn for Human Disease?

Mohr R(1), Özdirik B(1), Knorr J(1), Wree A(1), Demir M(1), Tacke F(1), 
Roderburg C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology & Gastroenterology, Campus Virchow Klinikum and 
Campus Charité Mitte, Charité University Medicine Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) comprises a heterogeneous group of primary liver 
tumors. They emerge from different hepatic (progenitor) cell populations, 
typically via sporadic mutations. Chronic biliary inflammation, as seen in 
primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), may trigger CCA development. Although 
several efforts were made in the last decade to better understand the complex 
processes of biliary carcinogenesis, it was only recently that new therapeutic 
advances have been achieved. Animal models are a crucial bridge between in vitro 
findings on molecular or genetic alterations, pathophysiological understanding, 
and new therapeutic strategies for the clinic. Nevertheless, it is inherently 
difficult to recapitulate simultaneously the stromal microenvironment (e.g., 
immune-competent cells, cholestasis, inflammation, PSC-like changes, fibrosis) 
and the tumor biology (e.g., mutational burden, local growth, and metastatic 
spread) in an animal model, so that it would reflect the full clinical reality 
of CCA. In this review, we highlight available data on animal models for CCA. We 
discuss if and how these models reflect human disease and whether they can serve 
as a tool for understanding the pathogenesis, or for predicting a treatment 
response in patients. In addition, open issues for future developments will be 
discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21144993
PMCID: PMC7404171
PMID: 32679791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.