1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2020 Jul 10:2020.07.10.197079. doi: 
10.1101/2020.07.10.197079.

Comprehensive in-vivo secondary structure of the SARS-CoV-2 genome reveals novel 
regulatory motifs and mechanisms.

Huston NC(1), Wan H(2), de Cesaris Araujo Tavares R(3), Wilen C(4)(5), Pyle 
AM(2)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale 
University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(5)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA.

Update in
    Mol Cell. 2021 Feb 4;81(3):584-598.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.12.041.

SARS-CoV-2 is the positive-sense RNA virus that causes COVID-19, a disease that 
has triggered a major human health and economic crisis. The genome of SARS-CoV-2 
is unique among viral RNAs in its vast potential to form stable RNA structures 
and yet, as much as 97% of its 30 kilobases have not been structurally explored 
in the context of a viral infection. Our limited knowledge of SARS-CoV-2 genomic 
architecture is a fundamental limitation to both our mechanistic understanding 
of coronavirus life cycle and the development of COVID-19 RNA-based 
therapeutics. Here, we apply a novel long amplicon strategy to determine for the 
first time the secondary structure of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA genome probed in 
infected cells. In addition to the conserved structural motifs at the viral 
termini, we report new structural features like a conformationally flexible 
programmed ribosomal frameshifting pseudoknot, and a host of novel RNA 
structures, each of which highlights the importance of studying viral structures 
in their native genomic context. Our in-depth structural analysis reveals 
extensive networks of well-folded RNA structures throughout Orf1ab and reveals 
new aspects of SARS-CoV-2 genome architecture that distinguish it from other 
single-stranded, positive-sense RNA viruses. Evolutionary analysis of RNA 
structures in SARS-CoV-2 shows that several features of its genomic structure 
are conserved across beta coronaviruses and we pinpoint individual regions of 
well-folded RNA structure that merit downstream functional analysis. The native, 
complete secondary structure of SAR-CoV-2 presented here is a roadmap that will 
facilitate focused studies on mechanisms of replication, translation and 
packaging, and guide the identification of new RNA drug targets against 
COVID-19.

DOI: 10.1101/2020.07.10.197079
PMCID: PMC7359520
PMID: 32676598

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests A patent application on 
MarathonRT has been filed by Yale University.