1. PPAR Res. 2020 Jul 1;2020:9657380. doi: 10.1155/2020/9657380. eCollection
2020.

The PPAR Ω Pocket: Renewed Opportunities for Drug Development.

Kaupang Å(1), Hansen TV(1).

Author information:
(1)Section for Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Department of Pharmacy, University of 
Oslo, 0316 Oslo, Norway.

The past decade of PPARγ research has dramatically improved our understanding of 
the structural and mechanistic bases for the diverging physiological effects of 
different classes of PPARγ ligands. The discoveries that lie at the heart of 
these developments have enabled the design of a new class of PPARγ ligands, 
capable of isolating central therapeutic effects of PPARγ modulation, while 
displaying markedly lower toxicities than previous generations of PPARγ ligands. 
This review examines the emerging framework around the design of these ligands 
and seeks to unite its principles with the development of new classes of ligands 
for PPARα and PPARβ/δ. The focus is on the relationships between the binding 
modes of ligands, their influence on PPAR posttranslational modifications, and 
gene expression patterns. Specifically, we encourage the design and study of 
ligands that primarily bind to the Ω pockets of PPARα and PPARβ/δ. In support of 
this development, we highlight already reported ligands that if studied in the 
context of this new framework may further our understanding of the gene programs 
regulated by PPARα and PPARβ/δ. Moreover, recently developed pharmacological 
tools that can be utilized in the search for ligands with new binding modes are 
also presented.

Copyright © 2020 Åsmund Kaupang and Trond Vidar Hansen.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/9657380
PMCID: PMC7351019
PMID: 32695150

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.