1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Aug 4;117(31):18680-18691. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2006165117. Epub 2020 Jul 20.

Subdomain cryo-EM structure of nodaviral replication protein A crown complex 
provides mechanistic insights into RNA genome replication.

Unchwaniwala N(1)(2)(3), Zhan H(1)(2)(3), Pennington J(2)(3), Horswill 
M(1)(2)(3), den Boon JA(1)(2)(3), Ahlquist P(4)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)John and Jeanne Rowe Center for Research in Virology, Morgridge Institute for 
Research, Madison, WI 53715.
(2)Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI 53706.
(3)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI 53706.
(4)John and Jeanne Rowe Center for Research in Virology, Morgridge Institute for 
Research, Madison, WI 53715; ahlquist@wisc.edu.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 
53706.

For positive-strand RNA [(+)RNA] viruses, the major target for antiviral 
therapies is genomic RNA replication, which occurs at poorly understood 
membrane-bound viral RNA replication complexes. Recent cryoelectron microscopy 
(cryo-EM) of nodavirus RNA replication complexes revealed that the viral 
double-stranded RNA replication template is coiled inside a 30- to 90-nm 
invagination of the outer mitochondrial membrane, whose necked aperture to the 
cytoplasm is gated by a 12-fold symmetric, 35-nm diameter "crown" complex that 
contains multifunctional viral RNA replication protein A. Here we report 
optimizing cryo-EM tomography and image processing to improve crown resolution 
from 33 to 8.5 Å. This resolves the crown into 12 distinct vertical segments, 
each with 3 major subdomains: A membrane-connected basal lobe and an apical lobe 
that together comprise the ∼19-nm-diameter central turret, and a leg emerging 
from the basal lobe that connects to the membrane at ∼35-nm diameter. Despite 
widely varying replication vesicle diameters, the resulting two rings of 
membrane interaction sites constrain the vesicle neck to a highly uniform shape. 
Labeling protein A with a His-tag that binds 5-nm Ni-nanogold allowed cryo-EM 
tomography mapping of the C terminus of protein A to the apical lobe, which 
correlates well with the predicted structure of the C-proximal polymerase domain 
of protein A. These and other results indicate that the crown contains 12 copies 
of protein A arranged basally to apically in an N-to-C orientation. Moreover, 
the apical polymerase localization has significant mechanistic implications for 
template RNA recruitment and (-) and (+)RNA synthesis.

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2006165117
PMCID: PMC7414174
PMID: 32690711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.