1. Elife. 2020 Jul 23;9:e59610. doi: 10.7554/eLife.59610.

Odd-paired is a pioneer-like factor that coordinates with Zelda to control gene 
expression in embryos.

Koromila T(1), Gao F(1), Iwasaki Y(2), He P(1), Pachter L(1), Gergen JP(2), 
Stathopoulos A(1).

Author information:
(1)California Institute of Technology, Division of Biology and Biological 
Engineering, Pasadena, United States.
(2)Stony Brook University, Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology and 
Center for Developmental Genetics, Stony Brook, United States.

Comment on
    Elife. 2020 Apr 29;9:e53916. doi: 10.7554/eLife.53916.

Pioneer factors such as Zelda (Zld) help initiate zygotic transcription in 
Drosophila early embryos, but whether other factors support this dynamic process 
is unclear. Odd-paired (Opa), a zinc-finger transcription factor expressed at 
cellularization, controls the transition of genes from pair-rule to segmental 
patterns along the anterior-posterior axis. Finding that Opa also regulates 
expression through enhancer sog_Distal along the dorso-ventral axis, we 
hypothesized Opa's role is more general. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP-seq) confirmed its in vivo binding to sog_Distal but also identified 
widespread binding throughout the genome, comparable to Zld. Furthermore, 
chromatin assays (ATAC-seq) demonstrate that Opa, like Zld, influences chromatin 
accessibility genome-wide at cellularization, suggesting both are pioneer 
factors with common as well as distinct targets. Lastly, embryos lacking opa 
exhibit widespread, late patterning defects spanning both axes. Collectively, 
these data suggest Opa is a general timing factor and likely late-acting pioneer 
factor that drives a secondary wave of zygotic gene expression.

Â© 2020, Koromila et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.59610
PMCID: PMC7417190
PMID: 32701060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TK, FG, YI, PH, LP, JG, AS No competing 
interests declared