1. Genet Mol Biol. 2020 Jul 24;43(3):20200080. doi: 
10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2020-0080.

Molecular evolution and diversification of the GRF transcription factor family.

Fonini LS(1), Lazzarotto F(1), Barros PM(2), Cabreira-Cagliari C(3), Martins 
MAB(3), Saibo NJM(2), Turchetto-Zolet AC(3), Margis-Pinheiro M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Centro de Biotecnologia, Programa 
de Pós-graduação em Biologia Celular e Molecular, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica 
António Xavier (ITQB NOVA), Oeiras, Portugal.
(3)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Departamento de Genética, Programa 
de Pós-Graduação em Genética e Biologia Molecular, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

- Growth Regulating Factors (GRFs) comprise a transcription factor family with 
important functions in plant growth and development. They are characterized by 
the presence of QLQ and WRC domains, responsible for interaction with proteins 
and DNA, respectively. The QLQ domain is named due to the similarity to a 
protein interaction domain found in the SWI2/SNF2 chromatin remodeling complex. 
Despite the occurrence of the QLQ domain in both families, the divergence 
between them had not been further explored. Here, we show evidence for GRF 
origin and determined its diversification in angiosperm species. Phylogenetic 
analysis revealed 11 well-supported groups of GRFs in flowering plants. These 
groups were supported by gene structure, synteny, and protein domain 
composition. Synteny and phylogenetic analyses allowed us to propose different 
sets of probable orthologs in the groups. Besides, our results, together with 
functional data previously published, allowed us to suggest candidate genes for 
engineering agronomic traits. In addition, we propose that the QLQ domain of GRF 
genes evolved from the eukaryotic SNF2 QLQ domain, most likely by a duplication 
event in the common ancestor of the Charophytes and land plants. Altogether, our 
results are important for advancing the origin and evolution of the GRF family 
in Streptophyta.

DOI: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2020-0080
PMCID: PMC7380329
PMID: 32706846

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest declared.