1. Microorganisms. 2020 Jul 16;8(7):1055. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8071055.

Multidrug-Resistant Streptococcus agalactiae Strains Found in Human and Fish 
with High Penicillin and Cefotaxime Non-Susceptibilities.

Li C(1), Sapugahawatte DN(1), Yang Y(1), Wong KT(1), Lo NWS(1), Ip M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR), Hong Kong, China.

Erratum in
    Microorganisms. 2021 Jun 01;9(6):1198. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9061198.

Penicillin non-susceptible Streptococcus agalactiae (PEN-NS GBS) has been 
increasingly reported, with multidrug-resistant (MDR) GBS documented in Japan. 
Here we identified two PEN-NS GBS strains during our surveillance studies: one 
from a patient's wound and the other from a tilapia. The patient's GBS (H21) and 
fish GBS (F49) were serotyped and tested for antibiotic susceptibility. 
Whole-genome sequencing was performed to find the sequence type, antimicrobial 
resistance genes, and mutations in penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) and 
fluoroquinolone (FQ) resistance genes. H21 and F49 belonged to ST651, serotype 
Ib, and ST7, serotype Ia, respectively. H21 showed PEN and cefotaxime minimum 
inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 2.0 mg/L. F49 showed PEN MIC 0.5 mg/L. H21 
was MDR with ermB, lnuB, tetS, ant6-Ia, sat4a, and aph3-III antimicrobial 
resistance genes observed. Alignment of PBPs showed the combination of PBP1B 
(A95D) and 2B mutations (V80A, S147A, S160A) in H21 and a novel mutation in F49 
at N192S in PBP2B. Alignment of FQ-resistant determinants revealed mutation 
sites on gyrA, gyrB, and parC and E in H21. To our knowledge, this is the first 
report of GBS isolates with such high penicillin and cefotaxime MICs. This 
raises the concern of emergence of MDR and PEN-NS GBS in and beyond healthcare 
facilities.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8071055
PMCID: PMC7409034
PMID: 32708529

Conflict of interest statement: M.I. has received travel funds from the WHO to 
join the Scientific Advisory Group (SAG) in relation to the development of a GBS 
vaccine. All other authors have none to declare.