1. J Mol Biol. 2020 Sep 4;432(19):5287-5303. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.07.014. Epub
 2020 Jul 22.

Highly Conserved Molecular Features in IgLONs Contrast Their Distinct Structural 
and Biological Outcomes.

Venkannagari H(1), Kasper JM(2), Misra A(1), Rush SA(1), Fan S(1), Lee H(1), Sun 
H(2), Seshadrinathan S(1), Machius M(1), Hommel JD(2), Rudenko G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA; Sealy Center for Structural Biology and 
Molecular Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA; Center for Addiction Research, University of 
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA; Sealy Center for Structural Biology and 
Molecular Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, 
USA; Center for Addiction Research, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, TX 77555, USA. Electronic address: garudenk@utmb.edu.

Neuronal growth regulator 1 (NEGR1) and neurotrimin (NTM) are abundant 
cell-surface proteins found in the brain and form part of the IgLON 
(Immunoglobulin LSAMP, OBCAM, Neurotrimin) family. In humans, NEGR1 is 
implicated in obesity and mental disorders, while NTM is linked to intelligence 
and cognitive function. IgLONs dimerize homophilically and heterophilically, and 
they are thought to shape synaptic connections and neural circuits by acting in 
trans (spanning cellular junctions) and/or in cis (at the same side of a 
junction). Here, we reveal homodimeric structures of NEGR1 and NTM. They 
assemble into V-shaped complexes via their Ig1 domains, and disruption of the 
Ig1-Ig1 interface abolishes dimerization in solution. A hydrophobic ridge from 
one Ig1 domain inserts into a hydrophobic pocket from the opposing Ig1 domain 
producing an interaction interface that is highly conserved among IgLONs but 
remarkably plastic structurally. Given the high degree of sequence conservation 
at the interaction interface, we tested whether different IgLONs could elicit 
the same biological effect in vivo. In a small-scale study administering 
different soluble IgLONs directly into the brain and monitoring feeding, only 
NEGR1 altered food intake significantly. Taking NEGR1 as a prototype, our 
studies thus indicate that while IgLONs share a conserved mode of interaction 
and are able to bind each other as homomers and heteromers, they are 
structurally plastic and can exert unique biological action.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.07.014
PMCID: PMC7502549
PMID: 32710982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]