1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jul 27;10(1):12500. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-68860-z.

The molecular basis of thioalcohol production in human body odour.

Rudden M(#)(1), Herman R(#)(1), Rose M(1), Bawdon D(1), Cox DS(2), Dodson E(3), 
Holden MTG(4), Wilkinson AJ(5), James AG(2), Thomas GH(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of York, Wentworth Way, York, YO10 5DD, UK.
(2)Unilever R&D, Colworth Science Park, Sharnbrook, Bedford, MK44 1LQ, UK.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of York, Wentworth Way, York, YO10 5DD, 
UK.
(4)School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY11 9TF, UK.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of York, Wentworth Way, York, YO10 5DD, 
UK. tony.wilkinson@york.ac.uk.
(6)Department of Biology, University of York, Wentworth Way, York, YO10 5DD, UK. 
gavin.thomas@york.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Body odour is a characteristic trait of Homo sapiens, however its role in human 
behaviour and evolution is poorly understood. Remarkably, body odour is linked 
to the presence of a few species of commensal microbes. Herein we discover a 
bacterial enzyme, limited to odour-forming staphylococci that are able to cleave 
odourless precursors of thioalcohols, the most pungent components of body odour. 
We demonstrated using phylogenetics, biochemistry and structural biology that 
this cysteine-thiol lyase (C-T lyase) is a PLP-dependent enzyme that moved 
horizontally into a unique monophyletic group of odour-forming staphylococci 
about 60 million years ago, and has subsequently tailored its enzymatic function 
to human-derived thioalcohol precursors. Significantly, transfer of this enzyme 
alone to non-odour producing staphylococci confers odour production, 
demonstrating that this C-T lyase is both necessary and sufficient for 
thioalcohol formation. The structure of the C-T lyase compared to that of other 
related enzymes reveals how the adaptation to thioalcohol precursors has evolved 
through changes in the binding site to create a constrained hydrophobic pocket 
that is selective for branched aliphatic thioalcohol ligands. The ancestral 
acquisition of this enzyme, and the subsequent evolution of the specificity for 
thioalcohol precursors implies that body odour production in humans is an 
ancient process.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-68860-z
PMCID: PMC7385124
PMID: 32719469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
interests: D.S.C and A.G.J are employees for Unilever.