1. J Mol Graph Model. 2020 Nov;100:107657. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2020.107657. Epub 
2020 Jun 24.

Computational reverse engineering of the lipase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
PAO1: α-helices.

Elatico AJJ(1), Nellas RB(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chemistry, College of Science, University of the Philippines 
Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines.
(2)Institute of Chemistry, College of Science, University of the Philippines 
Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines. Electronic address: rbnellas@up.edu.ph.

Lipases are important enzymes in many biochemical industries, thus making them 
attractive targets for protein engineering to improve enzymatic properties. In 
this work, a ''reverse engineering'' approach was explored: disrupt secondary 
structures to determine their contribution to enzyme stability and activity. All 
the α-helices of the lipase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 (PAL) were 
systematically disrupted using computational proline mutagenesis and molecular 
dynamics (MD) simulations. This method identified the α3 mutant (R89P), located 
within the vicinity of the active site, to be significantly important for 
stability and activity. In addition, the α6 system (L159P), part of the ''cap'' 
domain that regulates substrate entry into the active site, was found to be 
critical for activity as it pushed the lipase to adopt a completely closed 
conformation. The perturbation introduced by the proline mutations resulted in 
increased backbone flexibility that significantly decreased protein stability. 
Moreover, mutations within the cap domain helices - α4 (A115P), α5 (S132P, 
G139P), α6 (L159P), and α7 (R169P) - resulted in increased flexibility of the 
N-terminal region of the α5 helix, the mobile ''lid'' helix, that pushes the 
gorge into a partially closed conformation. The α6 mutation (L159P) further 
increased the flexibility of the helix-loop region at the C-terminal end of the 
α5 helix to push the lid into the fully closed state. Therefore, the α3 and α6 
helices could be ''hot spots'' for stabilizing mutations that could improve the 
overall enzyme stability and activity this lipase. The insights obtained in this 
work may be validated experimentally in future works.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2020.107657
PMID: 32712552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.