1. Br J Nutr. 2021 Feb 28;125(4):369-376. doi: 10.1017/S0007114520002822. Epub
2020  Jul 27.

Does polymorphisms in PPAR and APOE genes modify associations between fatty acid 
desaturase (FADS), n-3 long-chain PUFA and cardiometabolic markers in 
8-11-year-old Danish children?

Damsgaard CT(1), Vuholm S(1), Teisen MN(1), Stark KD(2), Lauritzen L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, Faculty of Science, University 
of Copenhagen, 1958Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(2)Department of Kinesiology, Faculty of Applied Health Sciences, University of 
Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3G1, Canada.

n-3 Long-chain PUFA (LCPUFA) can improve cardiometabolic blood markers, but 
studies in children are limited. SNP in the FADS genes, which encode fatty acid 
desaturases, influence endogenous LCPUFA production. Moreover, SNP in genes that 
encode PPAR and apoE may modulate the effects of n-3 LCPUFA. We explored whether 
FADS polymorphisms were associated with blood cholesterol and TAG, insulin and 
glucose and whether polymorphisms in PPAR and APOE modified associations between 
FADS or n-3 LCPUFA status and the cardiometabolic blood markers. We measured 
fasting cholesterol and TAG, insulin, glucose and n-3 LCPUFA in 757 Danish 
8-11-year-old children and genotyped SNP in FADS (rs1535 and rs174448), PPARG2 
(rs1801282), PPARA (rs1800206) and APOE (rs7412+rs429358). Carriage of two FADS 
rs174448 major alleles was associated with lower TAG (P = 0·027) and higher 
HDL-cholesterol (P = 0·047). Blood n-3 LCPUFA was inversely associated with TAG 
and insulin in PPARG2 minor allele carriers and positively with LDL-cholesterol 
in major allele homozygotes (Pn-3 LCPUFA × rs180182 < 0·01). Associations 
between n-3 LCPUFA and cardiometabolic markers were not modified by APOE 
genotype (Pn-3 LCPUFA × APOE > 0·11), but interaction between FADS rs1535 and 
APOE showed that rs1535 major allele homozygotes who also carried APOE2 had 
higher HDL-cholesterol than all other genotype combinations (Prs1535 × APOE = 
0·019, pairwise-P < 0·05). This indicates that FADS genotypes, which increase 
endogenous LCPUFA production, may beneficially affect children's cardiometabolic 
profile in a partly APOE-dependent manner. Also, the degree to which children 
benefit from higher n-3 LCPUFA intake may depend on their PPARG2 genotype.

DOI: 10.1017/S0007114520002822
PMID: 32713352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]