1. Mol Plant. 2020 Oct 5;13(10):1455-1469. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2020.07.010. Epub 
2020 Jul 25.

The IBI1 Receptor of β-Aminobutyric Acid Interacts with VOZ Transcription 
Factors to Regulate Abscisic Acid Signaling and Callose-Associated Defense.

Schwarzenbacher RE(1), Wardell G(1), Stassen J(1), Guest E(1), Zhang P(1), Luna 
E(1), Ton J(2).

Author information:
(1)P3 Institute for Plant and Soil Biology, Department of Animal and Plant 
Sciences, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.
(2)P3 Institute for Plant and Soil Biology, Department of Animal and Plant 
Sciences, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK. Electronic 
address: j.ton@sheffield.ac.uk.

External and internal signals can prime the plant immune system for a faster 
and/or stronger response to pathogen attack. β-aminobutyric acid (BABA) is an 
endogenous stress metabolite that induces broad-spectrum disease resistance in 
plants. BABA perception in Arabidopsis is mediated by the aspartyl tRNA 
synthetase IBI1, which activates priming of multiple immune responses, including 
callose-associated cell wall defenses that are under control by abscisic acid 
(ABA). However, the immediate signaling components after BABA perception by 
IBI1, as well as the regulatory role of ABA therein, remain unknown. Here, we 
have studied the early signaling events controlling IBI1-dependent BABA-induced 
resistance (BABA-IR), using untargeted transcriptome and protein interaction 
analyses. Transcriptome analysis revealed that IBI1-dependent expression of 
BABA-IR against the biotrophic oomycete Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis is 
associated with suppression of ABA-inducible abiotic stress genes. Protein 
interaction studies identified the VOZ1 and VOZ2 transcription factors (TFs) as 
IBI1-interacting partners, which are transcriptionally induced by ABA but 
suppress pathogen-induced expression of ABA-dependent genes. Furthermore, we 
show that VOZ TFs require nuclear localization for their contribution to BABA-IR 
by mediating augmented expression of callose-associated defense. Collectively, 
our study indicates that the IBI1-VOZ signaling module channels pathogen-induced 
ABA signaling toward cell wall defense while simultaneously suppressing abiotic 
stress-responsive genes.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molp.2020.07.010
PMCID: PMC7550849
PMID: 32717347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]