1. Food Sci Nutr. 2020 May 16;8(7):3380-3388. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.1617. eCollection
 2020 Jul.

Effect of ethanol fumigation on pericarp browning associated with phenol 
metabolism, storage quality, and antioxidant systems of wampee fruit during cold 
storage.

Shao Y(1), Jiang Z(2), Zeng J(2), Li W(2), Dong Y(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Science and Medicine Hainan University Haikou China.
(2)College of Horticulture Hainan University Haikou China.
(3)Department of Horticulture Mid-Columbia Agricultural Research and Extension 
Center Oregon State University Hood River OR USA.

Wampee fruit is a popular fruit cultivar in South-East Asia due to its high 
levels of nutrients and antioxidants; however, pericarp browning leads to a 
short storage life with great economic loss during years. The purpose of this 
work was to determine whether postharvest ethanol fumigation affected pericarp 
browning development of wampee fruit during 12 days of storage at 8 ± 0.5°C, and 
if so, how it is related to phenol metabolism and how it affects quality 
attributes and antioxidant systems during storage. After fruits were fumigated 
with 100, 300, 500, and 800 μl/L for 5 hr at 22 ± 0.5°C, ethanol significantly 
reduced the development of pericarp browning by increasing total phenolics (TP) 
content and decreasing the activity of polyphenol oxidase (PPO), especially in 
500 μl/L ethanol treatment. Additionally, ethanol delayed the losses in fruit 
firmness (FF), soluble solid content (SSC), and titratable acidity (TA), 
retarded weight loss and accumulation of malondialdehyde (MDA) content and 
maintained relatively high contents of ascorbic acid (AsA), total flavonoids 
(TF), and total antioxidant capacity (TAC) and activities of superoxide 
dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), and peroxidase (POD). In conclusion, results 
demonstrated that postharvest ethanol fumigation in wampee fruit has ability to 
reduce pericarp browning development by regulating phenol metabolism and 
enhancing antioxidant systems.

© 2020 The Authors. Food Science & Nutrition published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.1617
PMCID: PMC7382126
PMID: 32724602

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.