1. Theranostics. 2020 Jul 9;10(18):8343-8364. doi: 10.7150/thno.45848.
eCollection  2020.

Tumor progression locus 2 (TPL2) in tumor-promoting Inflammation, Tumorigenesis 
and Tumor Immunity.

Njunge LW(1)(2), Estania AP(1)(2), Guo Y(1)(2), Liu W(1)(2), Yang L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Key Laboratory of Biorheological Science and Technology, Ministry of 
Education, College of Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, 
China.
(2)The 111 Project Laboratory of Biomechanics and Tissue Repair, College of 
Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China.

Over the years, tumor progression locus 2 (TPL2) has been identified as an 
essential modulator of immune responses that conveys inflammatory signals to 
downstream effectors, subsequently modulating the generation and function of 
inflammatory cells. TPL2 is also differentially expressed and activated in 
several cancers, where it is associated with increased inflammation, malignant 
transformation, angiogenesis, metastasis, poor prognosis and therapy resistance. 
However, the relationship between TPL2-driven inflammation, tumorigenesis and 
tumor immunity has not been addressed. Here, we reconcile the function of 
TPL2-driven inflammation to oncogenic functions such as inflammation, 
proliferation, apoptosis resistance, angiogenesis, metastasis, immunosuppression 
and immune evasion. We also address the controversies reported on TPL2 function 
in tumor-promoting inflammation and tumorigenesis, and highlight the potential 
role of the TPL2 adaptor function in regulating the mechanisms leading to 
pro-tumorigenic inflammation and tumor progression. We discuss the therapeutic 
implications and limitations of targeting TPL2 for cancer treatment. The ideas 
presented here provide some new insight into cancer pathophysiology that might 
contribute to the development of more integrative and specific anti-inflammatory 
and anti-cancer therapeutics.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.45848
PMCID: PMC7381748
PMID: 32724474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.