1. Cancer Sci. 2020 Oct;111(10):3953-3961. doi: 10.1111/cas.14592. Epub 2020 Aug 
17.

HTR3A is correlated with unfavorable histology and promotes proliferation 
through ERK phosphorylation in lung adenocarcinoma.

Tone M(1), Tahara S(1), Nojima S(1), Motooka D(2)(3), Okuzaki D(2)(3)(4), Morii 
E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan.
(2)Single Cell Genomics, Human Immunology, WPI Immunology Frontier Research 
Center, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Genome Information Research Center, Research Institute for Microbial 
Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Institute for Open and Transdisciplinary Research Initiatives, Osaka 
University, Osaka, Japan.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death around the world. 
Adenocarcinoma is the most common histological type and has various histologic 
subtypes: lepidic, acinar, papillary, solid, and invasive mucinous 
adenocarcinoma. Histologic subtypes are related to invasiveness of tumors; eg, 
lepidic subtype is less invasive than acinar/papillary subtype. HTR3A is the 
main subunit of 5-hydroxytryptamine 3 (5-HT3) receptors, which are the only 
ligand-gated ion channels in seven families of 5-HT receptors. Although 5-HT3 
receptor is expressed mainly throughout the central and peripheral nervous 
systems, some papers report the effect of 5-HT3 receptors on tumor cells, 
including lung cancer. However, whether HTR3A correlates with histopathological 
findings such as the histologic subtypes or the distribution in an individual 
sample remains unclear. Immunohistochemically, we revealed that the higher 
expression level of HTR3A was detected in acinar, papillary, and solid 
adenocarcinoma than in adenocarcinoma in situ and lepidic adenocarcinoma; the 
former was a more aggressive subtype than the latter. We also showed the 
relationship between HTR3A expression and Ki-67 positivity, widely used as a 
proliferation marker. Moreover, we generated HTR3A-knockdown lung adenocarcinoma 
cells and showed that the HTR3A knockdown attenuated proliferation by ERK 
phosphorylation. Our results indicated that HTR3A expression was related to 
proliferation in lung adenocarcinoma, by means of both in vitro and 
immunohistochemical assays on clinical samples. We showed the therapeutic 
potential of a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, tropisetron, for the treatment of lung 
adenocarcinoma.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.14592
PMCID: PMC7540989
PMID: 32736413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest.