1. Front Physiol. 2020 Jul 9;11:763. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00763. eCollection 
2020.

Suppressed Vascular Leakage and Myocardial Edema Improve Outcome From Myocardial 
Infarction.

Li X(1)(2), Redfors B(3), Sáinz-Jaspeado M(2), Shi S(2), Martinsson P(2), Padhan 
N(2), Scharin Täng M(3), Borén J(3), Levin M(3), Claesson-Welsh L(2).

Author information:
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, 
State Key Laboratory of Radiation Medicine and Protection, Soochow University, 
Suzhou, China.
(2)Beijer and Science for Life Laboratories, Department of Immunology, Genetics 
and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine / Wallenberg Laboratory, 
Institute of Medicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg and 
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

AIM: The acute phase of myocardial infarction (MI) is accompanied by edema 
contributing to tissue damage and disease outcome. Here, we aimed to identify 
the mechanism whereby vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A induces 
myocardial edema in the acute phase of MI to eventually promote development of 
therapeutics to specifically suppress VEGFA-regulated vascular permeability 
while preserving collateral vessel formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: VEGFA regulates vascular permeability and edema by 
activation of VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR2), leading to induction of several 
signaling pathways including the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase c-Src. The 
activated c-Src in turn phosphorylates vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin, 
leading to dissociation of endothelial adherens junctions. A particular tyrosine 
at position 949 in mouse VEGFR2 has been shown to be required for activation of 
c-Src. Wild-type mice and mice with phenylalanine replacing tyrosine (Y) 949 in 
VEGFR2 (Vegfr2 Y949F/Y949F ) were challenged with MI through permanent ligation 
of the left anterior descending coronary artery. The infarct size was similar in 
wild-type and mutant mice, but left ventricular wall edema and fibrinogen 
deposition, indicative of vascular leakage, were reduced in the Vegfr2 
Y949F/Y949F strain. When challenged with large infarcts, the Vegfr2 Y949F/Y949F 
mice survived significantly better than the wild-type strain. Moreover, 
neutrophil infiltration and levels of myeloperoxidase were low in the infarcted 
Vegfr2 Y949F/Y949F hearts, correlating with improved survival. In vivo tyrosine 
phosphorylation of VE-cadherin at Y685, implicated in regulation of vascular 
permeability, was induced by circulating VEGFA in the wild-type but remained at 
baseline levels in the Vegfr2 Y949F/Y949F hearts.
CONCLUSION: Suppression of VEGFA/VEGFR2-regulated vascular permeability leads to 
diminished edema without affecting vascular density correlating with improved 
myocardial parameters and survival after MI.

Copyright © 2020 Li, Redfors, Sáinz-Jaspeado, Shi, Martinsson, Padhan, Scharin 
Täng, Borén, Levin and Claesson-Welsh.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00763
PMCID: PMC7363985
PMID: 32733273