1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jul 28;21(15):5369. doi: 10.3390/ijms21155369.

Ubiquitination in the ERAD Process.

Lopata A(1), Kniss A(1), Löhr F(1), Rogov VV(1), Dötsch V(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biophysical Chemistry and Center for Biomolecular Magnetic 
Resonance, Goethe University, Max-von-Laue Str. 9, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany.

In this review, we focus on the ubiquitination process within the endoplasmic 
reticulum associated protein degradation (ERAD) pathway. Approximately one third 
of all synthesized proteins in a cell are channeled into the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) lumen or are incorporated into the ER membrane. Since all newly 
synthesized proteins enter the ER in an unfolded manner, folding must occur 
within the ER lumen or co-translationally, rendering misfolding events a serious 
threat. To prevent the accumulation of misfolded protein in the ER, proteins 
that fail the quality control undergo retrotranslocation into the cytosol where 
they proceed with ubiquitination and degradation. The wide variety of misfolded 
targets requires on the one hand a promiscuity of the ubiquitination process and 
on the other hand a fast and highly processive mechanism. We present the various 
ERAD components involved in the ubiquitination process including the different 
E2 conjugating enzymes, E3 ligases, and E4 factors. The resulting K48-linked and 
K11-linked ubiquitin chains do not only represent a signal for degradation by 
the proteasome but are also recognized by the AAA+ ATPase Cdc48 and get in the 
process of retrotranslocation modified by enzymes bound to Cdc48. Lastly we 
discuss the conformations adopted in particular by K48-linked ubiquitin chains 
and their importance for degradation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21155369
PMCID: PMC7432864
PMID: 32731622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.