1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jul 7;11:1144. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01144. eCollection 
2020.

TMEM16F Aggravates Neuronal Loss by Mediating Microglial Phagocytosis of Neurons 
in a Rat Experimental Cerebral Ischemia and Reperfusion Model.

Zhang Y(1), Li H(1), Li X(1), Wu J(1), Xue T(1), Wu J(1), Shen H(1), Li X(1), 
Shen M(1), Chen G(1).

Author information:
(1)Brain and Nerve Research Laboratory, Department of Neurosurgery, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.

Cerebral ischemia is a severe, acute condition, normally caused by 
cerebrovascular disease, and results in high rates of disability, and death. 
Phagoptosis is a newly recognized form of cell death caused by phagocytosis of 
viable cells, and has been reported to contribute to neuronal loss in brain 
tissue after ischemic stroke. Previous data indicated that exposure of 
phosphatidylserine to viable neurons could induce microglial phagocytosis of 
such neurons. Phosphatidylserine can be reversibly exposed to viable cells as a 
result of a calcium-activated phospholipid scramblase named TMEM16F. 
TMEM16F-mediated phospholipid scrambling on platelet membranes is critical for 
hemostasis and thrombosis, which plays an important role in Scott syndrome and 
has been confirmed by much research. However, few studies have investigated the 
association between TMEM16F and phagocytosis in ischemic stroke. In this study, 
a middle-cerebral-artery occlusion/reperfusion (MCAO/R) model was used in adult 
male Sprague-Dawley rats in vivo, and cultured neurons were exposed to 
oxygen-glucose deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/R) to simulate cerebral 
ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury in vitro. We found that the protein level of 
TMEM16F was significantly increased at 12 h after I-R injury both in vivo and in 
vitro, and reversible phosphatidylserine exposure was confirmed in neurons 
undergoing I/R injury in vitro. Additionally, we constructed a LV-TMEM16F-RNAi 
transfection system to suppress the expression of TMEM16F during and after 
cerebral ischemia. As a result, TMEM16F knockdown alleviated motor function 
injury and decreased the microglial phagocytosis of viable neurons in the 
penumbra through inhibiting the "eat-me" signal phosphatidylserine. Our data 
indicate that reducing neuronal phosphatidylserine-exposure via deficiency of 
TMEM16F blocks phagocytosis of neurons and rescues stressed-but-still-viable 
neurons in the penumbra, which may contribute to reducing infarct volume and 
improving functional recovering.

Copyright Â© 2020 Zhang, Li, Li, Wu, Xue, Wu, Shen, Li, Shen and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01144
PMCID: PMC7359929
PMID: 32733436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]