1. Rheumatol Ther. 2020 Sep;7(3):473-516. doi: 10.1007/s40744-020-00219-2. Epub 
2020 Jul 30.

Understanding the Role of Interleukin-6 (IL-6) in the Joint and Beyond: A 
Comprehensive Review of IL-6 Inhibition for the Management of Rheumatoid 
Arthritis.

Favalli EG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, ASST Gaetano Pini-CTO Institute, University of 
Milan, Milan, Italy. enniofavalli@me.com.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, debilitating autoimmune disorder 
involving inflammation and progressive destruction of the joints, affecting up 
to 1% of the population. The majority of patients with RA have one or more 
comorbid conditions, the most common being cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, 
and depression, the presence of which are associated with poorer clinical 
outcomes and lower health-related quality of life. RA pathogenesis is driven by 
a complex network of proinflammatory cells and cytokines, and of these, 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) plays a key role in the chronic inflammation associated 
with RA. Through cell signaling that can be initiated by both membrane-bound and 
soluble forms of its receptor, IL-6 acts both locally to promote joint 
inflammation and destruction, and in the circulation to mediate extra-articular 
manifestations of RA, including pain, fatigue, morning stiffness, anemia, and 
weight loss. This narrative review describes the role of IL-6 in the 
pathogenesis of RA, its comorbidities, and extra-articular systemic 
manifestations, and examines the effects of the IL-6 receptor inhibitors 
sarilumab and tocilizumab on clinical endpoints of RA, patient-reported 
outcomes, and common comorbidities and extra-articular manifestations.

DOI: 10.1007/s40744-020-00219-2
PMCID: PMC7410942
PMID: 32734482

Conflict of interest statement: Ennio G. Favalli has received consulting fees 
and/or speaking engagements from AbbVie, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Lilly, Merck 
Sharp & Dohme, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, and Union Chimique Belge.