1. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2020 Nov;39(11):3416-3428. doi: 
10.1109/TMI.2020.2995510. Epub 2020 Oct 28.

Associating Multi-Modal Brain Imaging Phenotypes and Genetic Risk Factors via a 
Dirty Multi-Task Learning Method.

Du L, Liu F, Liu K, Yao X, Risacher SL, Han J, Saykin AJ, Shen L.

Brain imaging genetics becomes more and more important in brain science, which 
integrates genetic variations and brain structures or functions to study the 
genetic basis of brain disorders. The multi-modal imaging data collected by 
different technologies, measuring the same brain distinctly, might carry 
complementary information. Unfortunately, we do not know the extent to which the 
phenotypic variance is shared among multiple imaging modalities, which further 
might trace back to the complex genetic mechanism. In this paper, we propose a 
novel dirty multi-task sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA) to study 
imaging genetic problems with multi-modal brain imaging quantitative traits 
(QTs) involved. The proposed method takes advantages of the multi-task learning 
and parameter decomposition. It can not only identify the shared imaging QTs and 
genetic loci across multiple modalities, but also identify the modality-specific 
imaging QTs and genetic loci, exhibiting a flexible capability of identifying 
complex multi-SNP-multi-QT associations. Using the state-of-the-art multi-view 
SCCA and multi-task SCCA, the proposed method shows better or comparable 
canonical correlation coefficients and canonical weights on both synthetic and 
real neuroimaging genetic data. In addition, the identified modality-consistent 
biomarkers, as well as the modality-specific biomarkers, provide meaningful and 
interesting information, demonstrating the dirty multi-task SCCA could be a 
powerful alternative method in multi-modal brain imaging genetics.

DOI: 10.1109/TMI.2020.2995510
PMCID: PMC7705646
PMID: 32746095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]