1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2021 Feb;78(4):1615-1636. doi: 10.1007/s00018-020-03598-5. 
Epub 2020 Aug 4.

Defects of full-length dystrophin trigger retinal neuron damage and synapse 
alterations by disrupting functional autophagy.

Catalani E(1), Bongiorni S(2), Taddei AR(3), Mezzetti M(1), Silvestri F(1), 
Coazzoli M(4), Zecchini S(4), Giovarelli M(4), Perrotta C(4), De Palma C(5), 
Clementi E(4)(6)(7), Ceci M(2), Prantera G(2), Cervia D(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department for Innovation in Biological, Agro-Food and Forest Systems 
(DIBAF), Università degli Studi della Tuscia, largo dell'Università snc, 01100, 
Viterbo, Italy.
(2)Department of Ecological and Biological Sciences (DEB), Università degli 
Studi della Tuscia, largo dell'Università snc, 01100, Viterbo, Italy.
(3)Section of Electron Microscopy, Great Equipment Center, Università degli 
Studi della Tuscia, largo dell'Università snc, 01100, Viterbo, Italy.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences "Luigi Sacco" (DIBIC), 
Università degli Studi di Milano, via G.B. Grassi 74, 20157, Milano, Italy.
(5)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine (BioMeTra), 
Università degli Studi di Milano, via Luigi Vanvitelli 32, 20129 , Milano, 
Italy.
(6)Unit of Clinical Pharmacology, University Hospital "Luigi Sacco"-ASST 
Fatebenefratelli Sacco, via G.B. Grassi 74, 20157, Milano, Italy.
(7)Scientific Institute IRCCS "Eugenio Medea", via Don Luigi Monza 20, 23842, 
Bosisio Parini (LC), Italy.
(8)Department for Innovation in Biological, Agro-Food and Forest Systems 
(DIBAF), Università degli Studi della Tuscia, largo dell'Università snc, 01100, 
Viterbo, Italy. d.cervia@unitus.it.
(9)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences "Luigi Sacco" (DIBIC), 
Università degli Studi di Milano, via G.B. Grassi 74, 20157, Milano, Italy. 
d.cervia@unitus.it.

Dystrophin (dys) mutations predispose Duchenne muscular disease (DMD) patients 
to brain and retinal complications. Although different dys variants, including 
long dys products, are expressed in the retina, their function is largely 
unknown. We investigated the putative role of full-length dystrophin in the 
homeostasis of neuro-retina and its impact on synapsis stabilization and cell 
fate. Retinas of mdx mice, the most used DMD model which does not express the 
427-KDa dys protein (Dp427), showed overlapped cell death and impaired 
autophagy. Apoptotic neurons in the outer plexiform/inner nuclear layer and the 
ganglion cell layer had an impaired autophagy with accumulated autophagosomes. 
The autophagy dysfunction localized at photoreceptor axonal terminals and 
bipolar, amacrine, and ganglion cells. The absence of Dp427 does not cause a 
severe phenotype but alters the neuronal architecture, compromising mainly the 
pre-synaptic photoreceptor terminals and their post-synaptic sites. The analysis 
of two dystrophic mutants of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, the 
homozygous DysE17 and DysEP3397, lacking functional large-isoforms of 
dystrophin-like protein, revealed rhabdomere degeneration. Structural damages 
were evident in the internal network of retina/lamina where photoreceptors make 
the first synapse. Both accumulated autophagosomes and apoptotic features were 
detected and the visual system was functionally impaired. The reactivation of 
the autophagosome turnover by rapamycin prevented neuronal cell death and 
structural changes of mutant flies and, of interest, sustained autophagy 
ameliorated their response to light. Overall, these findings indicate that 
functional full-length dystrophin is required for synapsis stabilization and 
neuronal survival of the retina, allowing also proper autophagy as a 
prerequisite for physiological cell fate and visual properties.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-020-03598-5
PMCID: PMC7904721
PMID: 32749504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.