1. Plants (Basel). 2020 Jul 29;9(8):958. doi: 10.3390/plants9080958.

So Uncommon and so Singular, but Underexplored: An Updated Overview on 
Ethnobotanical Uses, Biological Properties and Phytoconstituents of Sardinian 
Endemic Plants.

Sanna C(1)(2), Maxia A(1)(2), Fenu G(1), Loi MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Cagliari, Via 
Sant'Ignazio da Laconi 13, 09123 Cagliari, Italy.
(2)Co.S.Me.Se-Consorzio per lo Studio dei Metaboliti Secondari, Via Sant'Ignazio 
da Laconi 13, 09123 Cagliari, Italy.

The last decades have recorded an increase of plant-based drug discovery 
processes. Indeed, natural products possess a superior chemical diversity as 
compared to synthetic ones, leading to a renewal in searching for new 
therapeutic agents from the plant kingdom. In particular, since the structural 
variety of natural compounds reflects the biodiversity of their source 
organisms, regions of the world with high biodiversity and endemism deserve 
particular interest. In this context, Sardinia Island (Italy), with 290 endemic 
taxa (12% of the total flora), is expected to provide unique and structurally 
diverse phytochemicals for drug development. Several research groups built up a 
large program dedicated to the analysis of Sardinian endemic species, 
highlighting their peculiar features, both in respect of phytochemical and 
biological profiles. On this basis, the aim of this review is to provide an 
up-to-date and comprehensive overview on ethnobotanical uses, biological 
properties and phytoconstituents of Sardinian endemic plants in order to support 
their beneficial potential and to provide input for future investigations. We 
documented 152 articles published from 1965 to June 2020 in which a broad range 
of biological activities and the identification of previously undescribed 
compounds have been reported, supporting their great value as sources of 
therapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.3390/plants9080958
PMCID: PMC7465485
PMID: 32751394

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.