1. Viruses. 2020 Aug 4;12(8):851. doi: 10.3390/v12080851.

Advances with RNAi-Based Therapy for Hepatitis B Virus Infection.

van den Berg F(1), Limani SW(1), Mnyandu N(1), Maepa MB(1), Ely A(1), Arbuthnot 
P(1).

Author information:
(1)Wits/SAMRC Antiviral Gene Therapy Research Unit, School of Pathology, Faculty 
of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2050, South 
Africa.

Infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) remains a global health challenge. 
Approximately 292 million people worldwide are chronically infected with HBV and 
the annual mortality from the infection is approaching 900,000. Despite the 
availability of an effective prophylactic vaccine, millions of individuals are 
at risk of potentially fatal complicating cirrhosis and hepatocellular 
carcinoma. Current drug treatments can suppress viral replication, slow the 
progression of liver fibrosis, and reduce infectivity, but can rarely clear the 
viral covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) that is responsible for HBV 
persistence. Alternative therapeutic strategies, including those based on viral 
gene silencing by harnessing the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway, effectively 
suppress HBV replication and thus hold promise. RNAi-based silencing of certain 
viral genes may even lead to disabling of cccDNA during chronic infection. This 
review summarizes different RNAi activators that have been tested against HBV, 
the advances with vectors used to deliver artificial potentially therapeutic 
RNAi sequences to the liver, and the current status of preclinical and clinical 
investigation.

DOI: 10.3390/v12080851
PMCID: PMC7472220
PMID: 32759756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the writing of the manuscript.