1. Front Genet. 2020 Jul 14;11:581. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00581. eCollection 
2020.

Stroke and Alzheimer's Disease: A Mendelian Randomization Study.

Wang T(1), Ni QB(2), Wang K(2), Han Z(3), Sun BL(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Postdoctoral Workstation, Taian City Central Hospital, Taian, China.
(3)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Shandong First 
Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Taian, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Cerebral Microcirculation in Universities of Shandong, 
Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Taian, 
China.

Stroke and Alzheimer's disease (AD) are common neurological diseases. Several 
exiting studies indicated that late onset-AD and ischemic stroke have shared 
genetic links. Different kinds of stroke have different mechanisms. However, it 
remains unclear whether there is a causal relationship between different types 
of strokes, including any stroke (AS), any ischemic stroke (AIS), large-artery 
atherosclerotic stroke (LAS), and cardio-embolic stroke (CES), and AD. Herein, 
we conducted several Mendelian randomization (MR) studies to explore genetically 
causal link of different kinds of strokes and AD. The results for 
inverse-variance weighted (IVW) meta-analysis (β = -0.039, OR = 0.9618, and 
P-value = 0.750) and weighted median regression (WMR) (β = -0.156, OR = 0.8556, 
and P-value = 0.274) demonstrated that AS is not causally associated with AD 
risk. The result of MR-Egger regression (β = -1.312, P-value = 0.098) and 
intercept term (P-value = 0.105) illustrated no pleiotropy in this MR study. 
According to the results for IVW (P-value = 0.305, β = -0.103, and OR = 0.9021) 
and WMR (P-value = 0.487, β = -0.092, and OR = 0.9121) in the MR study between 
AIS and AD, there is no causal association between AIS and AD risk. In addition, 
the MR-Egger regression (P-value = 0.290 and β = -0.512) and intercept term 
(P-value = 0.387) showed no potential pleiotropy. LAS is not causally associated 
with AD risk according to the MR results (IVW: P-value = 0.568, β = 0.037, and 
OR = 1.0377; WMR: P-value = 0.793, β = -0.022, and OR = 0.9782). Additionally, 
the results of MR-Egger regression (P-value = 0.122 and β = -1.220) and 
intercept term (P-value = 0.110) showed no potential pleiotropy. Our results 
[IVW: P-value = 0.245, β = -0.064, and OR = 0.938; WMR: P-value = 0.331, β = 
-0.057, and OR = 0.9446; MR-Egger: P-value = 0.673 and β = -0.062, and intercept 
term (P-value = 0.985)] further demonstrated there is no causal link between CES 
and AD and no pleiotropy in this MR study. In conclusion, different types of 
stroke, including AS, AIS, LAS, and CES, would not be causally associated with 
AD risk.

Copyright © 2020 Wang, Ni, Wang, Han and Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00581
PMCID: PMC7371994
PMID: 32760421