1. Fungal Genet Biol. 2020 Nov;144:103439. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2020.103439. Epub 
2020 Aug 6.

The Aspergillus nidulans IQGAP orthologue SepG is required for constriction of 
the contractile actomyosin ring.

Hill TW(1), Wendt KE(2), Jones DA(3), Williamson MH(2), Ugwu UJ(4), Rowland 
LB(2), Jackson-Hayes L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Rhodes College, Memphis, TN 38112, USA; Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology Program, Rhodes College, Memphis, TN 38112, USA. 
Electronic address: hill@rhodes.edu.
(2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program, Rhodes College, Memphis, TN 
38112, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Rhodes College, Memphis, TN 38112, USA.
(4)Division of Natural & Mathematic Sciences, LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, TN 
38126, USA.
(5)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program, Rhodes College, Memphis, TN 
38112, USA; Department of Chemistry, Rhodes College, Memphis, TN 38112, USA.

In this research we report that the sepG1 mutation in Aspergillus nidulans 
resides in gene AN9463, which is predicted to encode an IQGAP orthologue. The 
genetic lesion is predicted to result in a G-to-R substitution at residue 1637 
of the 1737-residue protein in a highly conserved region of the 
RasGAP-C-terminal (RGCT) domain. When grown at restrictive temperature, strains 
expressing the sepGG1637R (sepG1) allele are aseptate, with reduced colony 
growth and aberrantly formed conidiophores. The aseptate condition can be 
replicated by deletion of AN9463 or by downregulating its expression via 
introduced promoters. The mutation does not prevent assembly of a cortical 
contractile actomyosin ring (CAR) at putative septation sites, but tight 
compaction of the rings is impaired and the rings fail to constrict. Both 
GFP::SepG wild type and the GFP-tagged product of the sepG1 allele localize to 
the CAR at both permissive and restrictive temperatures. Downregulation of myoB 
(encoding the A. nidulans type-II myosin heavy chain) does not prevent formation 
of SepG rings at septation sites, but filamentous actin is required for CAR 
localization of SepG and MyoB. We identify fourteen probable IQ-motifs (EF-hand 
protein binding sites) in the predicted SepG sequence. Two of the A. nidulans 
EF-hand proteins, myosin essential light chain (AnCdc4) and myosin regulatory 
light chain (MrlC), colocalize with SepG and MyoB at all stages of CAR formation 
and constriction. However, calmodulin (CamA) appears at septation sites only 
after the CAR has become fully compacted. When expression of sepG is 
downregulated, leaving MyoB as the sole IQ-motif protein in the pre-compaction 
CAR, both MrlC and AnCdc4 continue to associate with the forming CAR. When myoB 
expression is downregulated, leaving SepG as the sole IQ-motif protein in the 
CAR, AnCdc4 association with the forming CAR continues but MrlC fails to 
associate. This supports a model in which the IQ motifs of MyoB bind both MrlC 
and AnCdc4, while the IQ motifs of SepG bind only AnCdc4. Downregulation of 
either mrlC or Ancdc4 results in an aseptate phenotype, but has no effect on 
association of either SepG or MyoB with the CAR.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fgb.2020.103439
PMID: 32768603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]