1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jul 16;11:1516. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01516. eCollection
 2020.

IgG Subclass Determines Suppression Versus Enhancement of Humoral Alloimmunity 
to Kell RBC Antigens in Mice.

Shinde P(1), Howie HL(2), Stegmann TC(3), Hay AM(2), Waterman HR(1), Szittner 
Z(3), Bentlage AEH(3), Kapp L(1), Lissenberg-Thunnissen SN(3), Dekkers G(3), 
Schasfoort RBM(4), Ratcliffe SJ(2), Smolkin ME(2), Vidarsson G(3), van der 
Schoot CE(3), Hudson KE(5), Zimring JC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Bloodworks Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology, Carter Immunology Center, University of Virginia 
School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA, United States.
(3)Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Department of Experimental 
Immunohematology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(4)Medical Cell Biophysics Group, MIRA Institute, University of Twente, 
Enschede, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, United States.

It has long been appreciated that immunoglobulins are not just the effector 
endpoint of humoral immunity, but rather have a complex role in regulating 
antibody responses themselves. Donor derived anti-RhD IgG has been used for over 
50 years as an immunoprophylactic to prevent maternal alloimmunization to RhD. 
Although anti-RhD has dramatically decreased rates of hemolytic disease of the 
fetus and newborn (for the RhD alloantigen), anti-RhD also fails in some cases, 
and can even paradoxically enhance immune responses in some circumstances. 
Attempts to generate a monoclonal anti-RhD have largely failed, with some 
monoclonals suppressing less than donor derived anti-RhD and others enhancing 
immunity. These difficulties likely result, in part, because the mechanism of 
anti-RhD remains unclear. However, substantial evidence exists to reject the 
common explanations of simple clearance of RhD + RBCs or masking of antigen. 
Donor derived anti-RhD is a mixture of 4 different IgG subtypes. To the best of 
our knowledge an analysis of the role different IgG subtypes play in 
immunoregulation has not been carried out; and, only IgG1 and IgG3 have been 
tested as monoclonals. Multiple attempts to elicit alloimmune responses to human 
RhD epitopes in mice have failed. To circumvent this limitation, we utilize a 
tractable animal model of RBC alloimmunization using the human Kell glycoprotein 
as an antigen to test the effect of IgG subtype on immunoregulation by 
antibodies to RBC alloantigens. We report that the ability of an anti-RBC IgG to 
enhance, suppress (at the level of IgM responses), or have no effect is a 
function of the IgG subclass in this model system.

Copyright Â© 2020 Shinde, Howie, Stegmann, Hay, Waterman, Szittner, Bentlage, 
Kapp, Lissenberg-Thunnissen, Dekkers, Schasfoort, Ratcliffe, Smolkin, Vidarsson, 
Schoot, Hudson and Zimring.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01516
PMCID: PMC7378678
PMID: 32765523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]