1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 Oct 10;29(17):2872-2881. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa174.

Medical and neurobehavioural phenotypes in male and female carriers of Xp22.31 
duplications in the UK Biobank.

Gubb SJA(1), Brcic L(2), Underwood JFG(1)(3), Kendall KM(1), Caseras X(1), Kirov 
G(1), Davies W(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences and Centre for 
Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff CF24 4HQ, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AT, United Kingdom.
(3)Neuroscience and Mental Health Research Institute, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff CF24 4HQ, United Kingdom.

Deletions spanning the STS (steroid sulfatase) gene at Xp22.31 are associated 
with X-linked ichthyosis, corneal opacities, testicular maldescent, cardiac 
arrhythmia, and higher rates of developmental and mood disorders/traits, 
possibly related to the smaller volume of some basal ganglia structures. The 
consequences of duplication of the same genomic region have not been 
systematically assessed in large or adult samples, although evidence from case 
reports/series has indicated high rates of developmental phenotypes. We compared 
multiple measures of physical and mental health, cognition and neuroanatomy in 
male (n = 414) and female (n = 938) carriers of 0.8-2.5 Mb duplications spanning 
STS, and non-carrier male (n = 192, 826) and female (n = 227, 235) controls from 
the UK Biobank (recruited aged 40-69 from the UK general population). Clinical 
and self-reported diagnoses indicated a higher prevalence of inguinal hernia and 
mania/bipolar disorder respectively in male duplication carriers, and a higher 
prevalence of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and blistering/desquamating skin 
disorder respectively in female duplication carriers; duplication carriers also 
exhibited reductions in several depression-related measures, and greater 
happiness. Cognitive function and academic achievement did not differ between 
comparison groups. Neuroanatomical analysis suggested greater lateral ventricle 
and putamen volume in duplication carriers. In conclusion, Xp22.31 duplications 
appear largely benign, but could slightly increase the likelihood of specific 
phenotypes (although results were only nominally-significant). In contrast to 
deletions, duplications might protect against depressive symptoms, possibly via 
higher STS expression/activity (resulting in elevated endogenous free steroid 
levels), and through contributing towards an enlarged putamen volume. These 
results should enable better genetic counselling of individuals with Xp22.31 
microduplications.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa174
PMCID: PMC7566349
PMID: 32766777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]