1. J Med Virol. 2021 Mar;93(3):1428-1435. doi: 10.1002/jmv.26417. Epub 2020 Aug
25.

Mutational spectra of SARS-CoV-2 orf1ab polyprotein and signature mutations in 
the United States of America.

Banerjee S(1)(2), Seal S(1)(3), Dey R(1)(3), Mondal KK(1), Bhattacharjee P(1).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Epigenomics Lab, Department of Environmental Science, 
University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India.
(2)UGC-DAE Consortium for Scientific Research Kolkata Centre, Kolkata, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, Ramakrishna Mission Vidyamandira, Howrah, India.

The pandemic COVID-19 outbreak has been caused due to SARS-CoV-2 pathogen, 
resulting in millions of infections and deaths worldwide, the United States 
being on top at the present moment. The long, complex orf1ab polyproteins of 
SARS-CoV-2 play an important role in viral RNA synthesis. To assess the impact 
of mutations in this important domain, we analyzed 1134 complete protein 
sequences of the orf1ab polyprotein from the NCBI virus database from affected 
patients across various states of the United States from December 2019 to 25 
April 2020. Multiple sequence alignment using Clustal Omega followed by 
statistical significance was calculated. Four significant mutations T265I (nsp 
2), P4715L (nsp 12), and P5828L and Y5865C (both at nsp 13) were identified in 
important nonstructural proteins, which function either as replicase or 
helicase. A comparative analysis shows 265 T→I, 5828 P→L, and 5865Y→C are unique 
to the United States and not reported from Europe or Asia; while one, 4715 P→L 
is predominant in both Europe and the United States. Mutational changes in amino 
acids are predicted to alter the structure and function of the corresponding 
proteins, thereby, it is imperative to consider the mutational spectra while 
designing new antiviral therapeutics targeting viral orf1ab.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.26417
PMCID: PMC7436414
PMID: 32779784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflict 
of interests.