1. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2020 Oct 14;22(38):21583-21629. doi: 10.1039/d0cp01556c. 
Epub 2020 Aug 12.

Multifaceted aspects of charge transfer.

Derr JB (1), Tamayo J , Clark JA , Morales M , Mayther MF , Espinoza EM , 
Rybicka-Jasi≈Ñska K , Vullev VI .

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, 
USA. vullev@ucr.edu.

Charge transfer and charge transport are by far among the most important 
processes for sustaining life on Earth and for making our modern ways of living 
possible. Involving multiple electron-transfer steps, photosynthesis and 
cellular respiration have been principally responsible for managing the energy 
flow in the biosphere of our planet since the Great Oxygen Event. It is 
impossible to imagine living organisms without charge transport mediated by ion 
channels, or electron and proton transfer mediated by redox enzymes. 
Concurrently, transfer and transport of electrons and holes drive the 
functionalities of electronic and photonic devices that are intricate for our 
lives. While fueling advances in engineering, charge-transfer science has 
established itself as an important independent field, originating from physical 
chemistry and chemical physics, focusing on paradigms from biology, and gaining 
momentum from solar-energy research. Here, we review the fundamental concepts of 
charge transfer, and outline its core role in a broad range of unrelated fields, 
such as medicine, environmental science, catalysis, electronics and photonics. 
The ubiquitous nature of dipoles, for example, sets demands on deepening the 
understanding of how localized electric fields affect charge transfer. 
Charge-transfer electrets, thus, prove important for advancing the field and for 
interfacing fundamental science with engineering. Synergy between the vastly 
different aspects of charge-transfer science sets the stage for the broad global 
impacts that the advances in this field have.

DOI: 10.1039/d0cp01556c
PMCID: PMC7544685
PMID: 32785306

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to 
declare