1. Ecol Evol. 2020 Jul 12;10(15):8449-8464. doi: 10.1002/ece3.6551. eCollection 
2020 Aug.

Italian weedy rice-A case of de-domestication?

Grimm A(1), Sahi VP(1), Amann M(1), Vidotto F(2), Fogliatto S(2), Devos KM(3), 
Ferrero A(2), Nick P(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cell Biology Botanical Institute Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
Karlsruhe Germany.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie Forestali e Alimentari Universita degli Studi 
di Torino Torino Italy.
(3)Institute of Plant Breeding, Genetics and Genomics (Department of Crop and 
Soil Sciences), and Department of Plant Biology The University of Georgia Athens 
GA USA.

Weedy rice is a representative of the extensive group of feral weeds that derive 
from crops, but has returned to the lifestyle of a wild species. These weeds 
develop either from a hybridization of crops with wild relatives (exoferality), 
or by mutation of crops to weedy forms (endoferality). Due to the close relation 
of weed and crop, the methods for weed-targeted containment are limited to date. 
A deeper understanding of the development of such weeds might help to design 
more efficient and sustainable approaches for weed management. Weedy rice poses 
a serious threat to rice yields worldwide. It is widely accepted that weedy rice 
has originated independently in different regions all over the world. However, 
details of its evolution have remained elusive. In the current study, we 
investigated the history of weedy rice in northern Italy, the most important 
rice-growing area in Europe. Our approach was to analyze genes related to weedy 
traits (SD1, sh4, Rc) in weedy rice accessions compared to cultivars, and to 
integrate these results with phenotypic and physiological data, as well as 
historical information about rice farming in Italy. We arrive at a working model 
for the timeline of evolution of weedy rice in Italy indicating that both 
exoferality and endoferality acted as forces driving the development of the 
diverse weedy rice populations found in the region today. Models of weed 
evolution can help to predict the direction which weed development might take 
and to develop new, sustainable methods to control feral weeds.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Ecology and Evolution published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.6551
PMCID: PMC7417233
PMID: 32788993

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.