1. Oncol Lett. 2020 Sep;20(3):2757-2762. doi: 10.3892/ol.2020.11808. Epub 2020
Jul  3.

miR-502-5p inhibits the proliferation, migration and invasion of gastric cancer 
cells by targeting SP1.

Peng X(1), Wu M(1), Liu W(2), Guo C(1), Zhan L(3), Zhan X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Changhai Hospital, Naval Military Medical University, 
Shanghai 200433, P.R. China.
(2)VIP Clinic, Changhai Hospital, Naval Military Medical University, Shanghai 
200433, P.R. China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Food Safety Research, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, 
Shanghai Institute of Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 
200031, P.R. China.

Gastric cancer (GC) is the third most common cause of cancer-associated 
mortality in China. Aberrant microRNA (miR) expression can occur through 
multiple biological processes and has been implicated in cancer development. 
However, to the best of our knowledge, the function of miR-502-5p in GC is 
currently unclear. In the present study, the expression and function of 
miR-502-5p in GC was evaluated. Reverse transcription-quantitative (RT-q) PCR 
was used to measure the expression levels of miR-502-5p in GC tissues, normal 
adjacent tissues, a normal human gastric epithelial cell line (GES-1) and two GC 
cell lines. miR-502-5p expression levels were significantly lower in GC tissues 
and GC cell lines compared with those in adjacent normal tissues and GES-1 
cells, respectively. Subsequently, the target genes of miR-502-5p were 
predicted, and it was demonstrated that the transcription factor SP1 was a 
direct target. SP1 expression, cell viability, migration and invasion, and SP1 
protein levels were examined using RT-qPCR, an MTT assay, Transwell assay and 
western blotting, respectively. Human GC cells were then transfected with an 
miR-502-5p mimic to emulate miR-502-5p overexpression, resulting in inhibition 
of the proliferation, migration and invasion capacities of human GC cells. 
Compared with the negative control, cells overexpressing miR-502-5p had 
decreased levels of SP1 mRNA and protein. These data suggest that miR-502-5p 
serves as a tumor suppressor gene by targeting SP1 to regulate the 
proliferation, migration and invasion of GC cells.

Copyright: Â© Peng et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2020.11808
PMCID: PMC7399809
PMID: 32782592