1. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):201-214. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa202.

Substitutions at Nonconserved Rheostat Positions Modulate Function by Rewiring 
Long-Range, Dynamic Interactions.

Campitelli P(1), Swint-Kruse L(2), Ozkan SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Center for Biological Physics, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS.

Amino acid substitutions at nonconserved protein positions can have noncanonical 
and "long-distance" outcomes on protein function. Such outcomes might arise from 
changes in the internal protein communication network, which is often 
accompanied by changes in structural flexibility. To test this, we calculated 
flexibilities and dynamic coupling for positions in the linker region of the 
lactose repressor protein. This region contains nonconserved positions for which 
substitutions alter DNA-binding affinity. We first chose to study 11 
substitutions at position 52. In computations, substitutions showed long-range 
effects on flexibilities of DNA-binding positions, and the degree of flexibility 
change correlated with experimentally measured changes in DNA binding. 
Substitutions also altered dynamic coupling to DNA-binding positions in a manner 
that captured other experimentally determined functional changes. Next, we 
broadened calculations to consider the dynamic coupling between 17 linker 
positions and the DNA-binding domain. Experimentally, these linker positions 
exhibited a wide range of substitution outcomes: Four conserved positions 
tolerated hardly any substitutions ("toggle"), ten nonconserved positions showed 
progressive changes from a range of substitutions ("rheostat"), and three 
nonconserved positions tolerated almost all substitutions ("neutral"). In 
computations with wild-type lactose repressor protein, the dynamic couplings 
between the DNA-binding domain and these linker positions showed varied degrees 
of asymmetry that correlated with the observed toggle/rheostat/neutral 
substitution outcomes. Thus, we propose that long-range and noncanonical 
substitutions outcomes at nonconserved positions arise from rewiring long-range 
communication among functionally important positions. Such calculations might 
enable predictions for substitution outcomes at a range of nonconserved 
positions.

Â© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa202
PMCID: PMC7783170
PMID: 32780837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]