1. Materials (Basel). 2020 Aug 11;13(16):3545. doi: 10.3390/ma13163545.

Additive Re-Manufacturing of Mechanically Recycled End-of-Life Glass 
Fiber-Reinforced Polymers for Value-Added Circular Design.

Romani A(1), Mantelli A(1), Suriano R(1), Levi M(1), Turri S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Materials and Chemical Engineering "Giulio Natta", 
Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy.

Despite the large use of composites for industrial applications, their 
end-of-life management is still an open issue for manufacturing, especially in 
the wind energy sector. Additive manufacturing technology has been emerging as a 
solution, enhancing circular economy models, and using recycled composites for 
glass fiber-reinforced polymers is spreading as a new additive manufacturing 
trend. Nevertheless, their mechanical properties are still not comparable to 
pristine materials. The purpose of this paper is to examine the additive 
re-manufacturing of end-of-life glass fiber composites with mechanical 
performances that are comparable to virgin glass fiber-reinforced materials. 
Through a systematic characterization of the recyclate, requirements of the 
filler for the liquid deposition modeling process were identified. Printability 
and material surface quality of different formulations were analyzed using a 
low-cost modified 3D printer. Two hypothetical design concepts were also 
manufactured to validate the field of application. Furthermore, an understanding 
of the mechanical behavior was accomplished by means of tensile tests, and the 
results were compared with a benchmark formulation with virgin glass fibers. 
Mechanically recycled glass fibers show the capability to substitute pristine 
fillers, unlocking their use for new fields of application.

DOI: 10.3390/ma13163545
PMCID: PMC7476045
PMID: 32796697

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.