1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Sep 25;48(17):e101. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa673.

SPRINT: a Cas13a-based platform for detection of small molecules.

Iwasaki RS(1), Batey RT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0596, 
USA.

Recent efforts in biological engineering have made detection of nucleic acids in 
samples more rapid, inexpensive and sensitive using CRISPR-based approaches. We 
expand one of these Cas13a-based methods to detect small molecules in a 
one-batch assay. Using SHERLOCK-based profiling of in vitrotranscription 
(SPRINT), in vitro transcribed RNA sequence-specifically triggers the RNase 
activity of Cas13a. This event activates its non-specific RNase activity, which 
enables cleavage of an RNA oligonucleotide labeled with a quencher/fluorophore 
pair and thereby de-quenches the fluorophore. This fluorogenic output can be 
measured to assess transcriptional output. The use of riboswitches or proteins 
to regulate transcription via specific effector molecules is leveraged as a 
coupled assay that transforms effector concentration into fluorescence 
intensity. In this way, we quantified eight different compounds, including 
cofactors, nucleotides, metabolites of amino acids, tetracycline and monatomic 
ions in samples. In this manner, hundreds of reactions can be easily quantified 
in a few hours. This increased throughput also enables detailed characterization 
of transcriptional regulators, synthetic compounds that inhibit transcription, 
or other coupled enzymatic reactions. These SPRINT reactions are easily 
adaptable to portable formats and could therefore be used for the detection of 
analytes in the field or at point-of-care situations.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa673
PMCID: PMC7515716
PMID: 32797156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]