1. Int J Biol Sci. 2020 Jul 19;16(14):2490-2505. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.45640. 
eCollection 2020.

S-Palmitoylation as a Functional Regulator of Proteins Associated with Cisplatin 
Resistance in Bladder Cancer.

Shahid M(1), Kim M(1), Jin P(1), Zhou B(1), Wang Y(1), Yang W(1)(2), You S(1), 
Kim J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Protein S-palmitoylation is a powerful post-translational modification that 
regulates protein trafficking, localization, turnover, and signal transduction. 
Palmitoylation controls several important cellular processes, and, if 
dysregulated, can lead to cancer, cardiovascular disease, and neurological 
disorders. The role of protein palmitoylation in mediating resistance to 
systemic cisplatin-based chemotherapies in cancer is currently unknown. This is 
of particular interest because cisplatin is currently the gold standard of 
treatment for bladder cancer (BC), and there are no feasible options after 
resistance is acquired. Using unbiased global proteomic profiling of purified 
S-palmitoylated peptides combined with intensive bioinformatics analyses, we 
identified 506 candidate palmitoylated proteins significantly enriched in 
cisplatin-resistant BC cells. One of these proteins included PD-L1, which is 
highly palmitoylated in resistant cells. Pharmacological inhibition of fatty 
acid synthase (FASN) suppressed PD-L1 palmitoylation and expression, which 
suggests the potential use of FASN-PD-L1-targeted therapeutic strategies in BC 
patients. Taken together, these results highlight the role of protein 
palmitoylation in mediating BC chemoresistance.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.45640
PMCID: PMC7415425
PMID: 32792852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.