1. Arthroplast Today. 2020 Aug 10;6(3):571-577. doi: 10.1016/j.artd.2020.06.010. 
eCollection 2020 Sep.

Metabolic Syndrome Is Associated With Higher Risk of Wound Complications After 
Total Hip Arthroplasty.

Cheng KY(1), Ball ST(2), Gonzales FB(2), Schenk S(2), Hughes-Austin JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Diego, San 
Diego, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Obesity is prevalent among patients undergoing total hip 
arthroplasty and has been associated with the risk of wound complications, 
particularly when an anterior approach is used. However, most studies have 
focused on obesity defined by the body mass index (BMI), without considering the 
metabolic effects of adiposity. Thus, in this study, we investigated the 
independent effects of the BMI and metabolic syndrome on wound complications 
after total hip arthroplasty.
METHODS: Among 804 consecutive patients undergoing total hip arthroplasty 
between October 2013 and July 2016, we evaluated the associations between 
obesity (BMI ≥30 mg/kg2), metabolic syndrome (defined by the National 
Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III guidelines), and wound 
complication (defined as documented wound dehiscence, drainage, erythema, 
hematoma, infection, or seroma) over a 1-year follow-up period. We used Cox 
proportional hazards models adjusting for demographics, smoking status, and 
hospital length of stay.
RESULTS: Patients' mean age at time of surgery was 62.0 ± 11.9 years. 
Forty-seven percent were male, 27.9% were obese, and 11.6% met the definition 
for metabolic syndrome. Metabolic syndrome was associated with a 4-fold higher 
risk of wound complication (95% confidence interval: 1.4-11.1) after adjusting 
for all covariates including the BMI. In unadjusted analysis, obesity was 
associated with a higher risk of wound complication (hazard ratio: 2.8, 95% 
confidence interval: 1.3-6.2). However, obesity was not associated with the risk 
of wound complication after adjusting for the metabolic syndrome (P = .16).
CONCLUSIONS: Metabolic syndrome, but not obesity, defined by a BMI ≥30, was 
associated with wound complications, suggesting that metabolic effects of 
adiposity may represent a distinct risk factor in the development of wound 
complications from a higher BMI alone.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artd.2020.06.010
PMCID: PMC7419251
PMID: 32802927