1. Oncol Lett. 2020 Oct;20(4):50. doi: 10.3892/ol.2020.11904. Epub 2020 Jul 27.

Mutations of the TERT promoter are associated with aggressiveness and 
recurrence/distant metastasis of papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Liu R(1), Li Y(1), Chen W(2), Cong J(3), Zhang Z(1), Ma L(1), Chu L(1), Xiao 
H(1), Zhang Y(1), Liu Y(1), Xu Y(1), Yu Q(1), Yang X(1), Sun C(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Laboratory Diagnosis, The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital 
of Qingdao University, Yantai, Shandong 370600, P.R. China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital of Fudan University, 
Qingpu, Shanghai 201700, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Gynaecology, The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Yantai, Shandong 370600, P.R. China.

Several previous studies have shown that mutations in B-Raf proto-oncogene 
(BRAF) and telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) can be used for the diagnosis 
and prognosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). However, whether mutations 
in BRAF and the TERT promoter may improve the accurate identification and risk 
stratification of high-risk patients in the early stage of PTC remains unclear 
and requires further investigation. In the present study, mutations in BRAF and 
the TERT promoter were examined in 205 patients using PCR and Sanger DNA 
sequencing. The potential association between mutations in these two genes and 
the clinicopathological characteristics of patients with PTC was then analyzed. 
BRAF mutations were identified in 169/205 (82.4%) patients, whereas only 8/205 
(3.9%) patients presented mutations in the TERT promoter, seven patients 
exhibited a C228T mutation, and the remaining one had a C250T mutation. There 
were 6/205 (2.9%) patients with mutations in both BRAF and the TERT promoter. 
Importantly, compared with patients with no mutations, patients with mutations 
in BRAF were more likely to exhibit mutations in the TERT promoter. A 
significant difference in lymph node metastasis was found between the BRAF V600E 
mutation group and the group without mutations in BRAF. Mutations in the TERT 
promoter were significantly correlated with older age, extrathyroidal invasion, 
tumor multifocality and advanced tumor/node/metastasis stage, which are 
associated with the aggressiveness of PTC. Moreover, compared with patients 
exhibiting mutations in BRAF, mutations in the TERT promoter were found to be 
significantly associated with aggressive clinicopathological features and higher 
risk of recurrence or distant metastasis. Collectively, mutations in the TERT 
promoter were not frequent, but were significantly correlated with more 
aggressive clinicopathological features of PTC. Therefore, mutations in the TERT 
promoter may be an important factor in the genetic background of PTC, and 
detection of such mutations may help the accurate identification and management 
of high-risk patients with recurrent or distant metastasis.

Copyright Â© 2020, Spandidos Publications.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2020.11904
PMCID: PMC7412748
PMID: 32802170