1. Neurol Genet. 2020 Jul 15;6(4):e480. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000480. 
eCollection 2020 Aug.

Homoplasmic mitochondrial tRNA(Pro) mutation causing exercise-induced muscle 
swelling and fatigue.

Auré K(1), Fayet G(1), Chicherin I(1), Rucheton B(1), Filaut S(1), Heckel AM(1), 
Eichler J(1), Caillon F(1), Péréon Y(1), Entelis N(1), Tarassov I(1), Lombès 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Inserm U1016 Institut Cochin (K.A., B.R., A.L.), INSERM, Paris; Department of 
Neurophysiology (K.A.), Foch Hospital, Suresnes; Centre de Référence Maladies 
Neuromusculaires Hôtel-Dieu AOC (G.F., Y.P.), CHU Nantes; CNRS UMR 7156 GMGM 
(I.C., A.-M.H., J.E., N.E., I.T.), University of Strasbourg; Service de 
Biochimie Métabolique CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière (B.R., S.F.), AP-HP, Paris; Service 
de Radiologie et Imagerie Médicale Hôtel-Dieu (F.C.), CHU Nantes; CNRS UMR 8104 
(A.L.); Université Paris-Descartes-Paris5 (A.L.), Paris, France; and Present 
Address: M.V. Lomonossov State University (I.C.), Moscow, Russia.

OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate the causal role in disease of the MT-TP m.15992A>T 
mutation observed in patients from 5 independent families.
METHODS: Lactate measurement, muscle histology, and mitochondrial activities in 
patients; PCR-based analyses of the size, amount, and sequence of muscle 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and proportion of the mutation; respiration, 
mitochondrial activities, proteins, translation, transfer RNA (tRNA) levels, and 
base modification state in skin fibroblasts and cybrids; and reactive oxygen 
species production, proliferation in the absence of glucose, and plasma membrane 
potential in cybrids.
RESULTS: All patients presented with severe exercise intolerance and 
hyperlactatemia. They were associated with prominent exercise-induced muscle 
swelling, conspicuous in masseter muscles (2 families), and/or with congenital 
cataract (2 families). MRI confirmed exercise-induced muscle edema. Muscle 
disclosed severe combined respiratory defect. Muscle mtDNA had normal size and 
amount. Its sequence was almost identical in all patients, defining the 
haplotype as J1c10, and sharing 31 variants, only 1 of which, MT-TP m.15992A>T, 
was likely pathogenic. The mutation was homoplasmic in all tissues and family 
members. Fibroblasts and cybrids with homoplasmic mutation had defective 
respiration, low complex III activity, and decreased tRNAPro amount. Their 
respiratory complexes amount and tRNAPro aminoacylation appeared normal. Low 
proliferation in the absence of glucose demonstrated the relevance of the 
defects on cybrid biology while abnormal loss of cell volume when faced to 
plasma membrane depolarization provided a link to the muscle edema observed in 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The homoplasmic MT-TP m.15992A>T mutation in the J1c10 haplotype 
causes exercise-induced muscle swelling and fatigue.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000480
PMCID: PMC7371370
PMID: 32802947