1. Exp Mol Med. 2020 Aug;52(8):1239-1254. doi: 10.1038/s12276-020-0484-z. Epub
2020  Aug 17.

The M-CSF receptor in osteoclasts and beyond.

Mun SH(1), Park PSU(1), Park-Min KH(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program, David Z. Rosensweig Genomics 
Research Center, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY, 10021, USA.
(2)Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program, David Z. Rosensweig Genomics 
Research Center, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY, 10021, USA. 
ParkminK@hss.edu.
(3)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, 10065, 
USA. ParkminK@hss.edu.
(4)BCMB Allied Program, Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences, New 
York, NY, 10021, USA. ParkminK@hss.edu.

Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R, also known as c-FMS) is a receptor 
tyrosine kinase. Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and IL-34 are 
ligands of CSF1R. CSF1R-mediated signaling is crucial for the survival, 
function, proliferation, and differentiation of myeloid lineage cells, including 
osteoclasts, monocytes/macrophages, microglia, Langerhans cells in the skin, and 
Paneth cells in the intestine. CSF1R also plays an important role in oocytes and 
trophoblastic cells in the female reproductive tract and in the maintenance and 
maturation of neural progenitor cells. Given that CSF1R is expressed in a wide 
range of myeloid cells, altered CSF1R signaling is implicated in inflammatory, 
neoplastic, and neurodegenerative diseases. Inhibiting CSF1R signaling through 
an inhibitory anti-CSF1R antibody or small molecule inhibitors that target the 
kinase activity of CSF1R has thus been a promising therapeutic strategy for 
those diseases. In this review, we cover the recent progress in our 
understanding of the various roles of CSF1R in osteoclasts and other myeloid 
cells, highlighting the therapeutic applications of CSF1R inhibitors in disease 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/s12276-020-0484-z
PMCID: PMC8080670
PMID: 32801364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.