1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2020 Aug 11:rs.3.rs-49671. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-49671/v1.

Characterizing SARS-CoV-2 mutations in the United States.

Wang R(1), Chen J(1), Gao K(1), Hozumi Y(1), Yin C(2), Wei GW(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Michigan State University, MI 48824, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.
(3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, 
MI 48824, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
MI 48824, USA.

Update in
    Commun Biol. 2021 Feb 15;4(1):228. doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-01754-6.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been 
mutating since it was first sequenced in early January 2020. The genetic 
variants have developed into a few distinct clusters with different properties. 
Since the United States (US) has the highest number of viral infected patients 
globally, it is essential to understand the US SARS-CoV-2. Using genotyping, 
sequence-alignment, time-evolution, k-means clustering, protein-folding 
stability, algebraic topology, and network theory, we reveal that the US 
SARS-CoV-2 has four substrains and five top US SARS-CoV-2 mutations were first 
detected in China (2 cases), Singapore (2 cases), and the United Kingdom (1 
case). The next three top US SARS-CoV-2 mutations were first detected in the US. 
These eight top mutations belong to two disconnected groups. The first group 
consisting of 5 concurrent mutations is prevailing, while the other group with 
three concurrent mutations gradually fades out. We identify that one of the top 
mutations, 27964C>T-(S24L) on ORF8, has an unusually strong gender dependence. 
Based on the analysis of all mutations on the spike protein, we further uncover 
that three of four US SASR-CoV-2 substrains become more infectious. Our study 
calls for effective viral control and containing strategies in the US.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-49671/v1
PMCID: PMC7430589
PMID: 32818213