1. J Inorg Biochem. 2020 Oct;211:111209. doi: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2020.111209.
Epub  2020 Aug 10.

Unfolding cytochromes c-b(562) and Rd apo b(562).

Kozak JJ(1), Gray HB(2), Garza-López RA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, DePaul University, Chicago, IL 60604-6116, United 
States of America.
(2)Beckman Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, 
United States of America.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Seaver Chemistry Laboratory, Pomona College, 
Claremont, CA 91711, United States of America. Electronic address: 
rgarza@pomona.edu.

We have analyzed the early stages of unfolding of cytochromes c-b562 (PDB ID: 
2BC5) and Rd apo b562 (PDB ID: 1YYJ). Our geometrical approach proceeds from an 
analysis of the crystal structure reported for each protein. We quantify, 
residue-by-residue and region-by-region, the spatial and angular changes in the 
structure as the protein denatures, and quantify differences that result from 
the seven residues that differ in the two proteins. Using two independent 
analyses, one based on spatial metrics and the second on angular metrics, we 
establish the order of unfolding of the five helices in cyt c-b562 and the four 
helices in the apo protein. For the two helices nearest the N-terminal end of 
both proteins, the ones in the apo protein unfold first. For the two helices 
nearest the C-terminal end, the interior helix of the apo protein unfolds first, 
whereas the terminal helix of the holo protein unfolds first. Excluded-volume 
effects (repulsive interactions) are minimized in turning regions; the overall 
range in Δ values is Δ = 36.3 Å3 for cyt c-b562 and Δ = 36.6 Å3 for the apo 
protein, whereas the span for all 20 amino acids is Δ = 167.7 Å3. As our work 
indicates that the interior helix of cytochrome c-b562 is the first to fold, we 
suggest that this helix protects the heme from misligation, consistent with 
ultrafast folding over a minimally frustrated funneled landscape.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2020.111209
PMCID: PMC8111852
PMID: 32818710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.