1. Biochemistry. 2020 Sep 29;59(38):3570-3581. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00549. 
Epub 2020 Sep 11.

Structural Basis for GTP versus ATP Selectivity in the NMP Kinase AK3.

Rogne P(1), Dulko-Smith B(2), Goodman J(1), Rosselin M(1), Grundström C(1), 
Hedberg C(1), Nam K(2), Sauer-Eriksson AE(1), Wolf-Watz M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Alington, 
Arlington, Texas 76019-0065, United States.

ATP and GTP are exceptionally important molecules in biology with multiple, and 
often discrete, functions. Therefore, enzymes that bind to either of them must 
develop robust mechanisms to selectively utilize one or the other. Here, this 
specific problem is addressed by molecular studies of the human NMP kinase AK3, 
which uses GTP to phosphorylate AMP. AK3 plays an important role in the citric 
acid cycle, where it is responsible for GTP/GDP recycling. By combining a 
structural biology approach with functional experiments, we present a 
comprehensive structural and mechanistic understanding of the enzyme. We 
discovered that AK3 functions by recruitment of GTP to the active site, while 
ATP is rejected and nonproductively bound to the AMP binding site. Consequently, 
ATP acts as an inhibitor with respect to GTP and AMP. The overall features with 
specific recognition of the correct substrate and nonproductive binding by the 
incorrect substrate bear a strong similarity to previous findings for the ATP 
specific NMP kinase adenylate kinase. Taken together, we are now able to provide 
the fundamental principles for GTP and ATP selectivity in the large NMP kinase 
family. As a side-result originating from nonlinearity of chemical shifts in GTP 
and ATP titrations, we find that protein surfaces offer a general and weak 
binding affinity for both GTP and ATP. These nonspecific interactions likely act 
to lower the available intracellular GTP and ATP concentrations and may have 
driven evolution of the Michaelis constants of NMP kinases accordingly.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00549
PMCID: PMC8325564
PMID: 32822537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.