1. J Immunol. 2020 Oct 1;205(7):1886-1896. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2000026. Epub
2020  Aug 21.

The Structural Basis of IRF-3 Activation upon Phosphorylation.

Jing T(1), Zhao B(1), Xu P(1), Gao X(1), Chi L(1)(2), Han H(1), Sankaran B(3), 
Li P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, TX 77843.
(2)School of Food and Bioengineering, Zhengzhou University of Light Industry, 
Zhengzhou, Henan 450002, China; and.
(3)Molecular Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging, Berkeley Center for 
Structural Biology, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, TX 77843; pingwei@tamu.edu.

The innate immune system is the first line of defense against bacterial and 
viral infections. The recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns by 
the RIG-I-like receptors, TLRs, and cGAS leads to the induction of IFN-I by 
activating the transcription factor IRF-3. Although the mechanism of IRF-3 
activation has been extensively studied, the structural basis of IRF-3 
activation upon phosphorylation is not fully understood. In this study, we 
determined the crystal structures of phosphorylated human and mouse IRF-3 bound 
to CREB-binding protein (CBP), which reveal that phosphorylated IRF-3 forms a 
dimer via pSer386 (pSer379 in mouse IRF-3) and a downstream pLxIS motif. 
Size-exclusion chromatography and cell-based studies show that mutations of key 
residues interacting with pSer386 severely impair IRF-3 activation and IFN-β 
induction. By contrast, phosphorylation of Ser396 within the pLxIS motif of 
human IRF-3 only plays a moderate role in IRF-3 activation. The mouse IRF-3/CBP 
complex structure reveals that the mechanism of mouse IRF-3 activation is 
similar but distinct from human IRF-3. These structural and functional studies 
reveal the detailed mechanism of IRF-3 activation upon phosphorylation.

Copyright © 2020 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.2000026
PMCID: PMC7511445
PMID: 32826280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]