1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2020 Sep 15;28(18):115644. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2020.115644.
Epub  2020 Jul 17.

Identification of the first noncompetitive SARM1 inhibitors.

Loring HS(1), Parelkar SS(1), Mondal S(1), Thompson PR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, UMass Medical School, 
364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA; Program in Chemical Biology, 
UMass Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, UMass Medical School, 
364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA; Program in Chemical Biology, 
UMass Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. 
Electronic address: paul.thompson@umassmed.edu.

Sterile Alpha and Toll Interleukin Receptor Motif-containing protein 1 (SARM1) 
is a key therapeutic target for diseases that exhibit Wallerian-like 
degeneration; Wallerian degeneration is characterized by degeneration of the 
axon distal to the site of injury. These diseases include traumatic brain 
injury, peripheral neuropathy, and neurodegenerative diseases. SARM1 promotes 
neurodegeneration by catalyzing the hydrolysis of NAD+ to form a mixture of ADPR 
and cADPR. Notably, SARM1 knockdown prevents degeneration, indicating that SARM1 
inhibitors will likely be efficacious in treating these diseases. Consistent 
with this hypothesis is the observation that NAD+ supplementation is 
axoprotective. To identify compounds that block the NAD+ hydrolase activity of 
SARM1, we developed and performed a high-throughput screen (HTS). This HTS assay 
exploits an NAD+ analog, etheno-NAD+ (ENAD) that fluoresces upon cleavage of the 
nicotinamide moiety. From this screen, we identified berberine chloride and zinc 
chloride as the first noncompetitive inhibitors of SARM1. Though modest in 
potency, the noncompetitive mode of inhibition, suggests the presence of an 
allosteric binding pocket on SARM1 that can be targeted for future therapeutic 
development. Additionally, zinc inhibition and site-directed mutagenesis reveals 
that cysteines 629 and 635 are critical for SARM1 catalysis, highlighting these 
sites for the design of inhibitors targeting SARM1.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2020.115644
PMCID: PMC7443514
PMID: 32828421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.