1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Sep 25;48(17):9787-9803. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa685.

Spacer acquisition by Type III CRISPR-Cas system during bacteriophage infection 
of Thermus thermophilus.

Artamonova D(1), Karneyeva K(1), Medvedeva S(1), Klimuk E(1)(2), Kolesnik M(1), 
Yasinskaya A(1), Samolygo A(1), Severinov K(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center of Life Science, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 
Moscow 121205, Russia.
(2)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 123182, 
Russia.
(3)Waksman Institute, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, NJ 08854 USA.

Type III CRISPR-Cas systems provide immunity to foreign DNA by targeting its 
transcripts. Target recognition activates RNases and DNases that may either 
destroy foreign DNA directly or elicit collateral damage inducing death of 
infected cells. While some Type III systems encode a reverse transcriptase to 
acquire spacers from foreign transcripts, most contain conventional spacer 
acquisition machinery found in DNA-targeting systems. We studied Type III spacer 
acquisition in phage-infected Thermus thermophilus, a bacterium that lacks 
either a standalone reverse transcriptase or its fusion to spacer integrase 
Cas1. Cells with spacers targeting a subset of phage transcripts survived the 
infection, indicating that Type III immunity does not operate through altruistic 
suicide. In the absence of selection spacers were acquired from both strands of 
phage DNA, indicating that no mechanism ensuring acquisition of RNA-targeting 
spacers exists. Spacers that protect the host from the phage demonstrate a very 
strong strand bias due to positive selection during infection. Phages that 
escaped Type III interference accumulated deletions of integral number of codons 
in an essential gene and much longer deletions in a non-essential gene. This and 
the fact that Type III immunity can be provided by plasmid-borne mini-arrays 
open ways for genomic manipulation of Thermus phages.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa685
PMCID: PMC7515739
PMID: 32821943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]