1. Transl Vis Sci Technol. 2020 May 23;9(6):25. doi: 10.1167/tvst.9.6.25. 
eCollection 2020 May.

A Mitochondrial Genome-Wide Association Study of Cataract in a Latino 
Population.

Miller B(1), Torres M(2), Jiang X(3), McKean-Cowdin R(3), Nousome D(3), Kim 
SJ(1), Mehta HH(1), Yen K(1), Cohen P(1), Varma R(2).

Author information:
(1)Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Southern California Eye Institute, CHA Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Departments of Ophthalmology and Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine 
of the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

PURPOSE: Over 9.5 million Latinos could be affected by cataracts by 2050. 
However, no known cataract genetic risk alleles have been identified in Latinos. 
Moreover, no mitochondrial genome-wide association studies (MiWAS) have been 
conducted on cataracts in a Latino cohort despite the association between 
mitochondrial dysfunction and cataracts. Our purpose was to identify a 
mitochondrial DNA variant that associated with cataracts in a large-scale Latino 
population.
METHODS: We conducted an MiWAS to identify mitochondrial single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms that modify cataract risk in nearly 3500 individuals enrolled in 
the Los Angles Latino Eye Study cohort, the largest Latino-specific cohort with 
comprehensive cataract data. Our analytic strategy for MiWAS included logistic 
regression on cataract occurrence while controlling for mitochondrial genetic 
ancestry, age, and biological sex.
RESULTS: We found that MitoG228A (rs41323649) alternative allele carriers 
experienced a five times greater risk for cataracts compared with reference 
allele carriers. Alternative allele carriers also developed cataracts earlier in 
life compared with reference allele carriers. Intracohort cross-validation with 
10-fold resampling and five repeats showed that the effect of MitoG228A remained 
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: MitoG228A increased risk for cataracts five-fold in approximately 
3500 Latinos. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first cataract MiWAS on 
a large-scale Latino population. This association needs to be validated in an 
independent cohort.
TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE: Our discovery hypothesis-generating study suggest 
MitoG228A has potential to be used as a risk factor in the clinic and as a 
target for therapeutics. With validation via an independent cohort, MitoG228A 
could be used to estimate cataract risk for a Latino to reduce complications 
later in life.

Copyright 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1167/tvst.9.6.25
PMCID: PMC7408807
PMID: 32821522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: B. Miller, None; M. Torres, None; X. 
Jiang, None; R. McKean-Cowdin, None; D. Nousome, None; S.-J. Kim, None; H.H. 
Mehta, None; K. Yen, None; P. Cohen, CohBar Inc. (C, I); R. Varma, None