1. Animals (Basel). 2020 Aug 18;10(8):1444. doi: 10.3390/ani10081444.

B-Mode and Contrast Enhanced Ultrasonography Features of Gastric Inflammatory 
and Neoplastic Diseases in Cats.

Simeoni F(1), Terragni R(2), Rubini G(3), Tamburro R(1), Del Signore F(1), 
Falerno I(1), Aste G(1), Russo M(4), Mastromatteo G(1), Vignoli M(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Teramo, SP 18, 64100 Teramo, 
Italy.
(2)Pet Care Veterinary Clinic, via Marzabotto Â½ M-N, 40133 Bologna, Italy.
(3)UltraVet Diagnostic, via Enrico Fermi 59, San Giovanni, 40017 Persiceto, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Production, University of Naple, 
via Federico Delpino 1, 80137 Napoli, Italy.

Alimentary lymphoma (AL) is the most common malignancy of the feline 
gastrointestinal tract and may cause variable mild to severe alteration of the 
gastric wall on ultrasonography (US) that can be very similar to those caused by 
inflammation (INF). The aim of this prospective study is to establish the value 
of B-mode and contrast-enhanced US (CEUS) in describing specific features of 
normal, inflammatory, and neoplastic gastric diseases in feline species. B-mode 
US and CEUS of the stomach were performed in anesthetized cats with or without 
gastric disorders. Gastric wall qualitative and quantitative parameters were 
evaluated on B-mode US and CEUS examination. A total of 29 cats were included: 
six healthy (HEA) cats as the control group; nine INF; three low-grade lymphoma 
(LGAL); 10 high-grade lymphoma (HGAL). On B-mode US, there were significant 
differences in thickness, the wall's layer definition and echogenicity between 
HGAL and all the other groups (<0.001). For CEUS, statistical differences 
between groups were found in the following: HGAL vs. HEA, HGAL vs. INF; HGAL vs. 
LGAL; INF vs. HEA. Diagnostic accuracy (AUC) and cut-off value were calculated 
and found to be significant for thickness (3.8 mm) for INF vs. LGAL (AUC > 0.70) 
and "benign" vs. "malignant" (AUC > 0.90) as well as peak enhancement (34.87 dB) 
for "benign" vs. "malignant" (AUC > 0.70). INF and LGAL showed an overlap of 
qualitative and quantitative parameters both on B-mode and CEUS, while HGAL 
usually appears as a severe wall thickening with absent layer definition, 
high-contrast uptake, a specific enhancement pattern, regional lymphadenopathy 
and local steatitis. Thickness and peak enhancement can be useful parameters in 
the characterization of gastric infiltrates in cats.

DOI: 10.3390/ani10081444
PMCID: PMC7460435
PMID: 32824834

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.