1. Chem Sci. 2020 May 18;11(24):6149-6159. doi: 10.1039/d0sc01414a. eCollection 
2020 Jun 28.

Comparison of tetravalent cerium and terbium ions in a conserved, homoleptic 
imidophosphorane ligand field.

Rice NT(1), Popov IA(2), Russo DR(1), Gompa TP(1), Ramanathan A(1), Bacsa J(1), 
Batista ER(2), Yang P(2), La Pierre HS(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry , Georgia Institute of Technology , 
Atlanta , Georgia 30332-0400 , USA . Email: hsl@gatech.edu.
(2)Theoretical Division , Los Alamos National Laboratory , Los Alamos , New 
Mexico 87545 , USA . Email: pyang@lanl.gov ; Email: erb@lanl.gov.
(3)Nuclear and Radiological Engineering and Medical Physics Program , School of 
Mechanical Engineering , Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , Georgia 
30332-0400 , USA.

A redox pair of Ce4+ and Ce3+ complexes has been prepared that is stabilized by 
the [(NP(1,2-bis- t Bu-diamidoethane)(NEt2))]1- ligand. Since these complexes 
are isostructural to the recently reported isovalent terbium analogs, a detailed 
structural and spectroscopic comparative analysis was pursued via 
Voronoi-Dirichlet polyhedra analysis, UV-vis-NIR, L3-edge X-ray absorption near 
edge spectroscopy (XANES), cyclic voltammetry, and natural transitions orbital 
(NTO) analysis and natural bond orbital (NBO) analysis. The electrochemical 
studies confirm previous theoretical studies of the redox properties of the 
related complex [K][Ce3+(NP(pip)3)4] (pip = piperidinyl), 1-Ce(PN). Complex 
1-Ce(PN*) presents the most negative E pc of -2.88 V vs. Fc/Fc+ in THF of any 
cerium complex studied electrochemically. Likewise 1-Tb(PN*) has the most 
negative E pc for electrochemically interrogated terbium complexes at -1.79 V 
vs. Fc/Fc+ in THF. Complexes 1-Ce(PN*) and 2-Ce(PN*) were also studied by 
L3-edge X-ray absorption near edges spectroscopy (XANES) and a comparison to 
previously reported spectra for 1-Tb(PN*), 2-Tb(PN*), 1-Ce(PN), and, 
[Ce4+(NP(pip)3)4], 2-Ce(PN), demonstrates similar n f values for all the 
tetravalent lanthanide complexes. According to the natural bond orbital 
analysis, a greater covalent character of the M-L bonds is found in 2-Ce(PN*) 
than in 1-Ce(PN*), in agreement with the shorter Ce-N bonds in the tetravalent 
counterpart. The greater contribution of Ce orbitals in the Ce-N bonding and, 
specifically, the higher participation of 4f electrons accounts for the stronger 
covalent interactions in 2-Ce(PN*) as compared to 2-Tb(PN*).

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020.

DOI: 10.1039/d0sc01414a
PMCID: PMC7422963
PMID: 32832060