1. J Immunol Res. 2020 Aug 3;2020:1421795. doi: 10.1155/2020/1421795. eCollection
 2020.

Adenosine-Induced NLRP11 in B Lymphoblasts Suppresses Human CD4(+) T Helper Cell 
Responses.

Ozel I(1), Akkaya I(1), Oylumlu E(1), Uzel G(1), Ciraci C(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Science and Letters, Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, 
Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul 34469, Turkey.

NLRP11 is a member of the PYD domain-containing, nucleotide-binding 
oligomerization-domain (NOD-) like receptor (NLR) family. The true stimulus of 
NLRP11 is still unclear to date, so the current study is built upon NLRP11 
induction via adenosine stimulation and that activation can shape adaptive 
immune responses in a caspase-1-independent manner. We examined the regulation 
and mechanism of adenosine responsiveness via NLRP11 in human Daudi Burkitt's B 
lymphoma cells and their effects on human peripheral CD4+ T lymphocytes from 
healthy individuals. NLRP11 was significantly upregulated after induction with 
adenosine at both the mRNA and protein levels, which led to the interaction of 
endogenous NLRP11 with the ASC adaptor protein; however, this interaction did 
not result in the activation of the caspase-1 enzyme. Furthermore, cocultures of 
NLRP11-expressing Burkitt's lymphoma cells and naïve human peripheral CD4+ T 
lymphocytes had reduced IFN-γ and IL-17A production, whereas IL-13 and IL-10 
cytokines did not change. Interestingly, IFN-γ and IL-17A were recovered after 
transfection of Burkitt's lymphoma cells with siRNAs targeting NLRP11. 
Concomitant with NLRP11 upregulation, we also exhibited that adenosine A2B 
receptor signaling induced two phosphorylated downstream effectors, pErk1/2 and 
pAkt (Ser473), but not pAkt (Thr308). Taken together, our data indicate that 
adenosine is a negative regulator of Th1 and Th17 responses via NLRP11 in an 
inflammasome-independent manner.

Copyright © 2020 Irem Ozel et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/1421795
PMCID: PMC7421714
PMID: 32832566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.