1. Virulence. 2020 Dec;11(1):1041-1058. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2020.1806675.

A DUF4148 family protein produced inside RAW264.7 cells is a critical 
Burkholderia pseudomallei virulence factor.

Welkos S(1), Blanco I(1), Okaro U(1), Chua J(1), DeShazer D(1).

Author information:
(1)Bacteriology Division, United States Army Medical Research Institute of 
Infectious Diseases , Frederick, Maryland, USA.

Burkholderia pseudomallei: is the etiological agent of the disease melioidosis 
and is a Tier 1 select agent. It survives and replicates inside phagocytic cells 
by escaping from the endocytic vacuole, replicating in the cytosol, spreading to 
other cells via actin polymerization and promoting the fusion of infected and 
uninfected host cells to form multinucleated giant cells. In this study, we 
utilized a proteomics approach to identify bacterial proteins produced inside 
RAW264.7 murine macrophages and host proteins produced in response to B. 
pseudomallei infection. Cells infected with B. pseudomallei strain K96243 were 
lysed and the lysate proteins digested and analyzed using nanoflow 
reversed-phase liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. Approximately 
160 bacterial proteins were identified in the infected macrophages, including 
BimA, TssA, TssB, Hcp1 and TssM. Several previously uncharacterized B. 
pseudomallei proteins were also identified, including BPSS1996 and BPSL2748. 
Mutations were constructed in the genes encoding these novel proteins and their 
relative virulence was assessed in BALB/c mice. The 50% lethal dose for the 
BPSS1996 mutant was approximately 55-fold higher than that of the wild type, 
suggesting that BPSS1996 is required for full virulence. Sera from B. 
pseudomallei-infected animals reacted with BPSS1996 and it was found to localize 
to the bacterial surface using indirect immunofluorescence. Finally, we 
identified 274 host proteins that were exclusively present or absent in infected 
RAW264.7 cells, including chemokines and cytokines involved in controlling the 
initial stages of infection.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2020.1806675
PMCID: PMC7549894
PMID: 32835600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest were reported 
by the authors.