1. Sci Adv. 2020 Jul 29;6(31):eabb2964. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abb2964. eCollection 
2020 Jul.

Structural mechanism of two gain-of-function cardiac and skeletal RyR mutations 
at an equivalent site by cryo-EM.

Iyer KA(1), Hu Y(1), Nayak AR(1), Kurebayashi N(2), Murayama T(2), Samsó M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Juntendo University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Mutations in ryanodine receptors (RyRs), intracellular Ca2+ channels, are 
associated with deadly disorders. Despite abundant functional studies, the 
molecular mechanism of RyR malfunction remains elusive. We studied two 
single-point mutations at an equivalent site in the skeletal (RyR1 R164C) and 
cardiac (RyR2 R176Q) isoforms using ryanodine binding, Ca2+ imaging, and 
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) of the full-length protein. Loss of the 
positive charge had greater effect on the skeletal isoform, mediated via 
distortion of a salt bridge network, a molecular latch inducing rotation of a 
cytoplasmic domain, and partial progression to open-state traits of the large 
cytoplasmic assembly accompanied by alteration of the Ca2+ binding site, which 
concur with the major "hyperactive" feature of the mutated channel. Our cryo-EM 
studies demonstrated the allosteric effect of a mutation situated ~85 Å away 
from the pore and identified an isoform-specific structural effect.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 
4.0 (CC BY-NC).

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abb2964
PMCID: PMC7439390
PMID: 32832689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]