1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Aug 26;33(10):1293-1297. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2019-0441.

Identification of nucleotide polymorphism within the NeuroD1 candidate gene and 
its association with type 1 diabetes susceptibility in Iranian people by 
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism.

Soltani Asl M(1), Azimnasab-Sorkhabi P(1), Abolfathi AA(2), Hashemi Aghdam Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Ahar Branch, Azad University, 
Ahar, Iran.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(3)Department of Traumatology, Spine and Orthopedic Surgery, Asklepios Hospital 
Altona, Faculty of Medicine, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.

Objectives Diabetes is a serious disease, and the number of affected individuals 
with diabetes is considerably high. The aim of this study is the identification 
of NeuroD1 Ala45Thr polymorphism and its association with type 1 diabetes 
susceptibility in Iranian people. Methods Clinical and biochemical 
characteristics for 146 people (76 diabetics and 70 nondiabetics) were measured, 
such as fasting blood sugar, triacylglycerol, total cholesterol, age, and weight 
in each individual. Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism technique (MwoI restriction-enzyme) was used for genotyping of the 
NeuroD1 Ala45Thr polymorphism. Results In this study, the frequency of the A 
allele in diabetic patients in comparison with the healthy control group had a 
significantly higher percentage (p < 0.01), whereas diabetic patients had the AA 
genotype, approximately four times more than the healthy control group (p < 
0.01). In addition, we observed that fasting blood sugar had a higher 
concentration in the AA genotype than in AG + GG genotypes (p < 0.01). 
Conclusions The A allele may be a risk factor for the expansion of type 1 
diabetes in the Iranian population. However, the NeuroD1 Ala45Thr polymorphism 
and its role in type 1 diabetes in different populations are controversial.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2019-0441
PMID: 32845865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]