1. J Oncol. 2020 Aug 12;2020:3818051. doi: 10.1155/2020/3818051. eCollection
2020.

Morphological Characteristics and Clinical Significance of Different Types of 
Tumor Vessels in Patients with Stages I-IIA of Squamous Cervical Cancer.

Senchukova MA(1), Makarova EV(1), Shurygina EI(2), Volchenko NN(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Orenburg State Medical University, 460000 Orenburg, 
Russia.
(2)Department of Pathology, Orenburg State Medical University, 460000 Orenburg, 
Russia.
(3)Department of Pathology, P. A. Hertzen Moscow Oncology Research Center, 
National Medical Research Center of Radiology, 125284 Moscow, Russia.

The determination of factors associated with progression of cervical cancer is 
important, both for a recurrence risk assessment and for determining optimal 
treatment tactics. Previously, we showed the prognostic value of different types 
of tumor microvessels (MVs) in gastric and breast cancer. The object of this 
research was to study the morphology and clinical significance of different 
tumor microvessels in early cervical cancer. A total of 65 archived paraffin 
blocks of patients with I-IIA stages of squamous cervical cancer were 
investigated. Samples were stained with Mayer hematoxylin and 
immunohistochemically using antibodies to CD34, podoplanin, HIF-1a, and Snail. 
The eight types of tumor MVs differed in morphology were identified. It was 
established that only the dilated capillaries (DСs) with weak expression of 
CD34, the contact type DCs, the capillaries in tumor solid component, and the 
lymphatic vessels in the lymphoid and polymorphic cell infiltrates of tumor 
stroma are associated with clinical and pathological characteristics of early 
cervical cancer. Preliminary results also suggest that a combination of 
fragmentation in tumor solid component and the contact type DCs may predict a 
recurrence of early cervical cancer. Given the small number of cervical cancer 
recurrences, the predictive significance of the described markers requires a 
more thorough examination.

Copyright © 2020 Marina A. Senchukova et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/3818051
PMCID: PMC7441445
PMID: 32849870

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest regarding the publication of this paper.