1. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr. 2021 Jan 1;1863(1):183445. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2020.183445. Epub 2020 Aug 22.

Structure and function of proteins in membranes and nanodiscs.

Lemieux MJ(1), Overduin M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Membrane Protein Disease Research Group, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Membrane Protein Disease Research Group, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7, Canada. Electronic address: 
overduin@ualberta.ca.

The field of membrane structural biology represents a fast-moving field with 
exciting developments including native nanodiscs that allow preparation of 
complexes of post-translationally modified proteins bound to biological lipids. 
This has led to conceptual advances including biological membrane:protein 
assemblies or "memteins" as the fundamental functional units of biological 
membranes. Tools including cryo-electron microscopy and X-ray crystallography 
are maturing such that it is becoming increasingly feasible to solve structures 
of large, multicomponent complexes, while complementary methods including 
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy yield unique insights into interactions 
and dynamics. Challenges remain, including elucidating exactly how lipids and 
ligands are recognized at atomic resolution and transduce signals across 
asymmetric bilayers. In this special volume some of the latest thinking and 
methods are gathered through the analysis of a range of transmembrane targets. 
Ongoing work on areas including polymer design, protein labelling and 
microfluidic technologies will ensure continued progress on improving resolution 
and throughput, providing deeper understanding of this most important group of 
targets.

Copyright Â© 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2020.183445
PMCID: PMC7443088
PMID: 32841614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.