1. Front Plant Sci. 2020 Aug 5;11:1185. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2020.01185. eCollection
 2020.

Transcriptome Analysis of ppdnmt2 and Identification of Superoxide Dismutase as 
a Novel Interactor of DNMT2 in the Moss Physcomitrella patens.

Singh D(1), Yadav R(1), Kaushik S(2), Wadhwa N(1), Kapoor S(3), Kapoor M(1).

Author information:
(1)University School of Biotechnology, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha 
University, New Delhi, India.
(2)Vproteomics, Valerian Chem Private Limited Green Park Mains, New Delhi, 
India.
(3)Interdisciplinary Centre for Plant Genomics and Department of Plant Molecular 
Biology, University of Delhi South Campus, New Delhi, India.

DNMT2 is a DNA/tRNA cytosine methyltransferase that is highly conserved in 
structure and function in eukaryotes. In plants however, limited information is 
available on the function of this methyltransferase. We have previously reported 
that in the moss Physcomitrella patens, DNMT2 plays a crucial role in stress 
recovery and tRNAAsp transcription/stability under salt stress. To further 
investigate the role of PpDNMT2 at genome level, in this study we have performed 
RNA sequencing of ppdnmt2. Transcriptome analysis reveals a number of genes and 
pathways to function differentially and suggests a close link between PpDNMT2 
function and osmotic and ionic stress tolerance. We propose PpDNMT2 to play a 
pivotal role in regulating salt tolerance by affecting molecular networks 
involved in stress perception and signal transduction that underlie maintenance 
of ion homeostasis in cells. We also examined interactome of PpDNMT2 using 
affinity purification (AP) coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS). Quantitative 
proteomic analysis reveals several chloroplast proteins involved in light 
reactions and carbon assimilation and proteins involved in stress response and 
some not implicated in stress to co-immunoprecipitate with PpDNMT2. Comparison 
between transcriptome and interactome datasets has revealed novel association 
between PpDNMT2 activity and the antioxidant enzyme Superoxide dismutase (SOD), 
protein turnover mediated by the Ubiquitin-proteasome system and epigenetic gene 
regulation. PpDNMT2 possibly exists in complex with CuZn-SODs in vivo and the 
two proteins also directly interact in the yeast nucleus as observed by yeast 
two-hybrid assay. Taken together, the work presented in this study sheds light 
on diverse roles of PpDNMT2 in maintaining molecular and physiological 
homeostasis in P. patens. This is a first report describing transcriptome and 
interactome of DNMT2 in any land plant.

Copyright Â© 2020 Singh, Yadav, Kaushik, Wadhwa, Kapoor and Kapoor.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2020.01185
PMCID: PMC7419982
PMID: 32849734