1. Cold Spring Harb Mol Case Stud. 2020 Aug 25;6(4):a005058. doi: 
10.1101/mcs.a005058. Print 2020 Aug.

Reciprocal skeletal phenotypes of PRC2-related overgrowth and Rubinstein-Taybi 
syndromes: potential role of H3K27 modifications.

Gamu D(1)(2), Gibson WT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 
4H4, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia V6H 3N1, Canada.

Within histone H3, lysine 27 (H3K27) is one of the residues that functions as a 
molecular switch, by virtue of being subject to mutually exclusive 
post-translational modifications that have reciprocal effects on gene 
expression. Whereas acetylation of H3K27 is associated with transcriptional 
activation, methylation at this residue causes transcriptional silencing; these 
two modifications are mutually exclusive. Establishment of these epigenetic 
marks is important in defining cellular identity and for maintaining normal cell 
function, as evidenced by rare genetic disorders of epigenetic writers involved 
in H3K27 post-translational modification. Polycomb repressive complex 
(PRC2)-related overgrowth and Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) are respectively 
associated with impaired H3K27 methylation and acetylation. Whereas these 
syndromes share commonalities like intellectual disability and susceptibility to 
cancers, they are generally divergent in their skeletal growth phenotypes, 
potentially through dysregulation of their opposing H3K27 writer functions. In 
this review, we discuss the requirement of H3K27 modifications for successful 
embryogenesis, highlighting data from relevant mouse knockout studies. Although 
such gene ablation studies are integral for defining fundamental biological 
roles of methyl- and acetyltransferase function in vivo, studies of partial 
loss-of-function models are likely to yield more meaningful translational 
insight into progression of PRC2-related overgrowth or RSTS. Thus, modeling of 
rare human PRC2-related overgrowth and RSTS variants in mice is needed to fully 
understand the causative role of aberrant H3K27 modification in the 
pathophysiology of these syndromes.

Â© 2020 Gamu and Gibson; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/mcs.a005058
PMCID: PMC7476411
PMID: 32843427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]