1. World J Gastroenterol. 2020 Aug 7;26(29):4272-4287. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v26.i29.4272.

Rno_circ_0005139 regulates apoptosis by targeting Wnt5a in rat anorectal 
malformations.

Liu D(1), Qu Y(1), Cao ZN(1), Jia HM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang 110004, Liaoning Province, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang 110004, Liaoning Province, China. jiahm@sj-hospital.org.

BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms underlying anorectal malformations (ARM) 
are not fully established. Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are new born non-coding 
RNAs, and their role in ARM is unclear. We assumed that rno_circ_0005139 
influences apoptosis and proliferation by acting as a miR-324-3p sponge, and 
downregulating Wnt5a in ARM.
AIM: To identify the differential expression of circRNAs and mRNAs in a rat ARM 
model.
METHODS: Sixty-six pregnant Wistar rats were randomly divided into two groups: 
ARM group (2-imidazolidinethione-induced) and control groups. Embryos were 
harvested by cesarean delivery, and anorectal tissue was taken on embryonic days 
16 (E16), 17 (E17), 19 (E19), and 21 (E21). RNA sequencing and gene microarray 
analysis was used to identify differentially expressed circRNAs and mRNAs in the 
ARM in a rat model. We selected 6 circRNAs and 3 mRNAs in the Wnt signal pathway 
from the result of the RNA sequencing and gene microarray analysis, and 
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was performed to 
evaluate their tissue expression. According to bioinformatics prediction, 
rno_circ_0005139 acted as a miR-324-3p sponge to regulate the expression of 
Wnt5a. We chose rno_circ_0005139 and Wnt5a as the final candidates. We tested 
the function of rno_circ_0005139 and the binding sites between rno_circ_0005139 
and miR-324-3p, miR-324-3p and Wnt5a by luciferase assays. Co-transfection of 
rno_circ_0005139 and miR-324-3p was to verify their functional consistency.
RESULTS: We identified 38 upregulated and 42 downregulated circRNAs on E17 (P < 
0.05), and 301 mRNAs were upregulated and 256 downregulated in the ARM on E17 (P 
< 0.05, fold-change > 2.0). We found that rno_circ_0006880 and rno_circ_0011386 
were upregulated, whereas rno_circ_0000436, rno_circ_0005139, rno_circ_0009285, 
rno_circ_0014367, Wnt5a, Wnt10b, and Wnt2b were downregulated in ARM tissues. 
According to bioinformatics prediction, rno_circ_0005139 acted as a miR-324-3p 
sponge to regulate the expression of Wnt5a. We chose rno_circ_0005139 and Wnt5a 
as the final candidates. Because the role and molecular mechanism of 
rno_circ_0005139 are poorly understood, its effect on apoptosis and 
proliferation was investigated by in vitro plasmid transfection. A luciferase 
experiment showed that rno_circ_0005139 could bind with miR-324-3p, which 
negatively regulated Wnt5a expression. The expression of miR-324-3p was 
significantly higher in ARM anorectal tissues than that in control group on E17 
and E19; Wnt5a expression showed the opposite trend. In addition, a miR-324-3p 
inhibitor attenuated the effects of rno_circ_0005139 knockdown on ARM 
development.
CONCLUSION: Rno_circ_0005139 influences cell proliferation and apoptosis by 
acting as a miR-324-3p sponge, thereby downregulating Wnt5a in ARM. Accordingly, 
rno_circ_0005139, miR-324-3p, and Wnt5a could be targeted therapeutic factors 
for ARM.

Â©The Author(s) 2020. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v26.i29.4272
PMCID: PMC7422537
PMID: 32848333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All other 
authors have nothing to disclose.