1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Aug 25;16(8):e1008745. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008745. 
eCollection 2020 Aug.

A tyrosine phosphoregulatory system controls exopolysaccharide biosynthesis and 
biofilm formation in Vibrio cholerae.

Schwechheimer C(1), Hebert K(1), Tripathi S(2), Singh PK(3), Floyd KA(1), Brown 
ER(2), Porcella ME(2), Osorio J(2), Kiblen JTM(1), Pagliai FA(1), Drescher 
K(3)(4), Rubin SM(2), Yildiz FH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Environmental Toxicology, University of 
California-Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California-Santa 
Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, United States of America.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology, Marburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Physics, Philipps-Universit√§t Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

Production of an extracellular matrix is essential for biofilm formation, as 
this matrix both secures and protects the cells it encases. Mechanisms 
underlying production and assembly of matrices are poorly understood. Vibrio 
cholerae, relies heavily on biofilm formation for survival, infectivity, and 
transmission. Biofilm formation requires Vibrio polysaccharide (VPS), which is 
produced by vps gene-products, yet the function of these products remains 
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that the vps gene-products vpsO and vpsU encode 
respectively for a tyrosine kinase and a cognate tyrosine phosphatase. 
Collectively, VpsO and VpsU act as a tyrosine phosphoregulatory system to 
modulate VPS production. We present structures of VpsU and the kinase domain of 
VpsO, and we report observed autocatalytic tyrosine phosphorylation of the VpsO 
C-terminal tail. The position and amount of tyrosine phosphorylation in the VpsO 
C-terminal tail represses VPS production and biofilm formation through a 
mechanism involving the modulation of VpsO oligomerization. We found that 
tyrosine phosphorylation enhances stability of VpsO. Regulation of VpsO 
phosphorylation by the phosphatase VpsU is vital for maintaining native VPS 
levels. This study provides new insights into the mechanism and regulation of 
VPS production and establishes general principles of biofilm matrix production 
and its inhibition.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008745
PMCID: PMC7485978
PMID: 32841296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.