1. Cytometry B Clin Cytom. 2021 May;100(3):322-330. doi: 10.1002/cyto.b.21946.
Epub  2020 Aug 28.

Proliferative activity is disturbed in myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), 
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and MDS/MPN diseases. Differences between MDS 
and MDS/MPN.

Mestrum SGC(1)(2), de Wit NCJ(3), Drent RJM(2), Hopman AHN(1), Ramaekers 
FCS(1)(4), Leers MPG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, GROW-School for Oncology and 
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Hematology, Zuyderland Medical Center, 
Sittard-Geleen, The Netherlands.
(3)Central Diagnostic Laboratory (CDL), Maastricht University Medical Center, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Nordic-MUbio, Susteren, The Netherlands.

The proliferation marker Ki-67 is widely used within the field of diagnostic 
histopathology as a prognostic marker for solid cancers. However, Ki-67 is 
hardly used for prognostic and diagnostic purposes in flow cytometric analyses 
of hematologic neoplasms. In the present study, we investigated to what extent 
the proliferative activity, as determined by Ki-67 expression, is disturbed in 
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and MDS/MPN 
diseases. Bone marrow aspirates from 74 patients suffering from MPN, MDS, or 
MDS/MPN, and aspirates from 50 non-malignant cases were analyzed by flow 
cytometry for Ki-67 expression in the erythro-, myelo-, and monopoiesis. Ki-67 
expression was used to investigate the proliferative activity during the various 
maturation steps within these hematopoietic cell lineages. In the MPN patient 
cohort, the proliferative activity of all cell lineages is significantly higher 
during almost all maturation stages compared to those of the benign control 
cohort. In the MDS and MDS/MPN cohort, a significantly lower proliferative 
activity is observed in the early maturation stages. In the MDS/MPN patient 
cohort, increased proliferative activity is seen in the later stages of the 
maturation. MDS and MDS/MPN display a distinct pattern in the proliferating 
fraction of maturing hematopoietic cells. This could become of added value in 
order to classify these malignancies based on their biological background and 
behavior, as well as in gaining a better understanding into the pathobiology of 
these malignancies.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Cytometry Part B: Clinical Cytometry published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Clinical Cytometry Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cyto.b.21946
PMCID: PMC8247351
PMID: 32857909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]