1. Exp Ther Med. 2020 Oct;20(4):2923-2940. doi: 10.3892/etm.2020.9073. Epub 2020 
Jul 29.

Protein acetylation and deacetylation: An important regulatory modification in 
gene transcription (Review).

Xia C(1), Tao Y(1), Li M(1), Che T(2), Qu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou, 
Jiangsu 215123, P.R. China.
(2)Laboratory of Precision Medicine and Translational Medicine, Suzhou Hospital 
Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou Science and Technology Town 
Hospital, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215153, P.R. China.

Cells primarily rely on proteins to perform the majority of their physiological 
functions, and the function of proteins is regulated by post-translational 
modifications (PTMs). The acetylation of proteins is a dynamic and highly 
specific PTM, which has an important influence on the functions of proteins, 
such as gene transcription and signal transduction. The acetylation of proteins 
is primarily dependent on lysine acetyltransferases and lysine deacetylases. In 
recent years, due to the widespread use of mass spectrometry and the emergence 
of new technologies, such as protein chips, studies on protein acetylation have 
been further developed. Compared with histone acetylation, acetylation of 
non-histone proteins has gradually become the focus of research due to its 
important regulatory mechanisms and wide range of applications. The discovery of 
specific protein acetylation sites using bioinformatic tools can greatly aid the 
understanding of the underlying mechanisms of protein acetylation involved in 
related physiological and pathological processes.

Copyright: Â© Xia et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2020.9073
PMCID: PMC7444376
PMID: 32855658