1. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2020 Oct;20(5):463-473. doi: 10.1007/s12012-020-09603-4. 
Epub 2020 Aug 27.

Roles of MicroRNA-122 in Cardiovascular Fibrosis and Related Diseases.

Liu Y(1)(2), Song JW(1), Lin JY(3), Miao R(4)(5), Zhong JC(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Heart Center and Beijing Key Laboratory of Hypertension, Beijing Chaoyang 
Hospital Affiliated to Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100020, China.
(2)Medical Research Center, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100020, China.
(3)Department of Comprehensive Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital 
Medical University, Beijing, 100020, China.
(4)Heart Center and Beijing Key Laboratory of Hypertension, Beijing Chaoyang 
Hospital Affiliated to Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100020, China. 
mr1019@163.com.
(5)Medical Research Center, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100020, China. mr1019@163.com.
(6)Heart Center and Beijing Key Laboratory of Hypertension, Beijing Chaoyang 
Hospital Affiliated to Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100020, China. 
jczhong@sina.com.
(7)Medical Research Center, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100020, China. jczhong@sina.com.

Fibrotic diseases cause annually more than 800,000 deaths worldwide, where of 
the majority accounts for cardiovascular fibrosis, which is characterized by 
endothelial dysfunction, myocardial stiffening and reduced dispensability. 
MicroRNAs (miRs), small noncoding RNAs, play critical roles in cardiovascular 
dysfunction and related disorders. Intriguingly, there is a critical link among 
miR-122, cardiovascular fibrosis, sirtuin 6 (SIRT6) and angiotensin-converting 
enzyme 2 (ACE2), which was recently identified as a coreceptor for SARS-CoV2 and 
a negative regulator of the rennin-angiotensin system. MiR-122 overexpression 
appears to exacerbate the angiotensin II-mediated loss of autophagy and 
increased inflammation, apoptosis, extracellular matrix deposition, 
cardiovascular fibrosis and dysfunction by modulating the SIRT6-Elabela-ACE2, 
LGR4-β-catenin, TGFβ-CTGF and PTEN-PI3K-Akt signaling pathways. More 
importantly, the inhibition of miR-122 has proautophagic, antioxidant, 
anti-inflammatory, anti-apoptotic and antifibrotic effects. Clinical and 
experimental studies clearly demonstrate that miR-122 functions as a crucial 
hallmark of fibrogenesis, cardiovascular injury and dysfunction. Additionally, 
the miR-122 level is related to the severity of hypertension, atherosclerosis, 
atrial fibrillation, acute myocardial infarction and heart failure, and miR-122 
expression is a risk factor for these diseases. The miR-122 level has emerged as 
an early-warning biomarker cardiovascular fibrosis, and targeting miR-122 is a 
novel therapeutic approach against progression of cardiovascular dysfunction. 
Therefore, an increased understanding of the cardiovascular roles of miR-122 
will help the development of effective interventions. This review summarizes the 
biogenesis of miR-122; regulatory effects and underlying mechanisms of miR-122 
on cardiovascular fibrosis and related diseases; and its function as a potential 
specific biomarker for cardiovascular dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1007/s12012-020-09603-4
PMCID: PMC7451782
PMID: 32856216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors declare that they have no 
conflict of interest.