1. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2020;355:155-204. doi: 10.1016/bs.ircmb.2020.05.005.
Epub  2020 Jul 16.

Profilin choreographs actin and microtubules in cells and cancer.

Pimm ML(1), Hotaling J(1), Henty-Ridilla JL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, State University of New York 
(SUNY) Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, State University of New York 
(SUNY) Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, United States; Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, State University of New York (SUNY) Upstate 
Medical University, Syracuse, NY, United States. Electronic address: 
ridillaj@upstate.edu.

Actin and microtubules play essential roles in aberrant cell processes that 
define and converge in cancer including: signaling, morphology, motility, and 
division. Actin and microtubules do not directly interact, however shared 
regulators coordinate these polymers. While many of the individual proteins 
important for regulating and choreographing actin and microtubule behaviors have 
been identified, the way these molecules collaborate or fail in normal or 
disease contexts is not fully understood. Decades of research focus on Profilin 
as a signaling molecule, lipid-binding protein, and canonical regulator of actin 
assembly. Recent reports demonstrate that Profilin also regulates microtubule 
dynamics and polymerization. Thus, Profilin can coordinate both actin and 
microtubule polymer systems. Here we reconsider the biochemical and cellular 
roles for Profilin with a focus on the essential cytoskeletal-based cell 
processes that go awry in cancer. We also explore how the use of model organisms 
has helped to elucidate mechanisms that underlie the regulatory essence of 
Profilin in vivo and in the context of disease.

Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.ircmb.2020.05.005
PMCID: PMC7461721
PMID: 32859370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.