1. Cells. 2020 Aug 26;9(9):1973. doi: 10.3390/cells9091973.

Fine-Tuning of GLI Activity through Arginine Methylation: Its Mechanisms and 
Function.

Abe Y(1), Tanaka N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Advanced Medical Sciences, 
Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5 Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8602, Japan.

The glioma-associated oncogene (GLI) family consists of GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 in 
mammals. This family has important roles in development and homeostasis. To 
achieve these roles, the GLI family has widespread outputs. GLI activity is 
therefore strictly regulated at multiple levels, including via 
post-translational modifications for context-dependent GLI target gene 
expression. The protein arginine methyl transferase (PRMT) family is also 
associated with embryogenesis, homeostasis, and cancer mainly via epigenetic 
modifications. In the PRMT family, PRMT1, PRMT5, and PRMT7 reportedly regulate 
GLI1 and GLI2 activity. PRMT1 methylates GLI1 to upregulate its activity and 
target gene expression. Cytoplasmic PRMT5 methylates GLI1 and promotes GLI1 
protein stabilization. Conversely, nucleic PRMT5 interacts with MENIN to 
suppress growth arrest-specific protein 1 expression, which assists Hedgehog 
ligand binding to Patched, indirectly resulting in downregulated GLI1 activity. 
PRMT7-mediated GLI2 methylation upregulates its activity through the 
dissociation of GLI2 and Suppressor of Fused. Together, PRMT1, PRMT5, and PRMT7 
regulate GLI activity at multiple revels. Furthermore, the GLI and PRMT families 
have strong links with various cancers through cancer stem cell maintenance. 
Therefore, PRMT-mediated regulation of GLI activity would have important roles 
in cancer stem cell maintenance.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9091973
PMCID: PMC7565022
PMID: 32859041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interests to 
declare.