1. Curr Med Sci. 2020 Aug;40(4):795-800. doi: 10.1007/s11596-020-2234-9. Epub
2020  Aug 29.

Identification of a Novel COL17A1 Compound Heterozygous Mutation in a Chinese 
Girl with Non-Herlitz Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa.

Yao YY(1), Zhang Y(2), Xie XH(3), Chen L(3), Zhu F(4)(5), Zhou M(6).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Center, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Hubei 
Province, Wuhan, 430070, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430015, China.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.
(5)Clinic Center of Human Gene Research, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.
(6)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, 
China. mzhoutj@163.com.

Non-Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB-nH), an autosomal recessive 
bullous genodermatosis, is characterized by generalized skin blistering from 
birth onward, dental anomalies, universal alopecia and nail dystrophy. The 
underlying defect is mutation of the COL17A1 gene encoding the type XVII 
collagen, resulting in losing structure for attachment of basal epithelial cells 
to the matrix. In present study, we described one case of congenitally affected 
female child aged 10 years, with skin blistering. Dermatologic examination 
revealed sparse, mild blisters on the face and hand, with profound enamel 
pitting of the teeth. Skin biopsy from proband's bullous skin displayed 
subepidermal bulla formation without acantholysis. The immunofluorescence of 
anti-type XVII collagen antibody staining showed loss of type XVII collagen 
staining at the basement membrane zone. A combination of whole exome sequencing 
(WES) and Sanger sequencing revealed the novel heterozygous mutations 
(c.4324C>T;p.Q1442* and c.1834G>C;p.G612R) in COL17A1 gene, which could be 
associated with the observed JEB-nH. One allele had a novel nonsense mutation 
(c.4324C>T;p.Q1442*), resulting in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and truncated 
collagen XVII; the other allele had a novel missense mutation of 
c.1834G>C;p.G612R in exon 22, causing a glycine-to-arginine substitution in the 
Gly-X-Y triple helical repeating motifs and decreasing the thermal stability of 
collagen XVII. Our findings indicate that the genetic test based on WES can be 
useful in diagnosing JEB-nH patients. The novel pathogenic mutations identified 
would further expand our understanding of the mutation spectrum of COL17A1 gene 
in association with the inherited blistering diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s11596-020-2234-9
PMID: 32862392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]