1. Anal Chem. 2020 Sep 1;92(17):11627-11634. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.0c01253. 
Epub 2020 Aug 12.

Radiofluorinated Smart Probes for Noninvasive PET Imaging of Legumain Activity 
in Living Subjects.

Qiu L(1)(2), Li X(1), Lv G(1), Seimbille Y(3)(4), Li K(1), Peng Y(1), Liu Q(1), 
Xie M(1)(2), Lin J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of Nuclear Medicine, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Nuclear Medicine, Jiangsu Institute of Nuclear Medicine, Wuxi 214063, China.
(2)Department of Radiopharmaceuticals, School of Pharmacy, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing 211166, China.
(3)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Erasmus MC, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Life Sciences Division, TRIUMF, 4004 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T2A3, 
Canada.

Overexpression of legumain is closely associated with tumor proliferation, 
invasion, and metastasis. Because of its intrinsic properties, such as high 
sensitivity and resolution, positron emission tomography (PET) has become an 
effective imaging technique for early diagnosis, treatment response prediction, 
and monitoring. Herein, two legumain-targeting radiofluorinated smart probes 
(18F-2 and 18F-3) as well as a control probe (18F-1) were specifically designed 
for PET imaging of legumain activity in tumors. 18F-1, 18F-2, and 18F-3 were 
obtained with high radiochemical yield (RCY > 60%) and radiochemical purity (RCP 
> 99%) using a convenient "one-step" 18F-labeling method. The probes 18F-2 and 
18F-3 exhibited high response to legumain activity and reductive environment and 
revealed comparable uptake in HCT116 cells (4.22% ± 0.14% and 4.64% ± 0.32% for 
18F-2 and 18F-3, respectively; 8.46% ± 0.33% and 9.05% ± 0.24% for co-treatment 
of 18F-2 + 2 and 18F-3 + 3 at 1 h), while the control probe 18F-1 showed no 
response. PET imaging of tumor-bearing mice showed that the co-injection 
strategy (18F-2 + 2 and 18F-3 + 3) resulted in higher tumor uptake (3.57% ± 
0.37% and 3.72% ± 0.19% ID/g at 10 min, respectively) than the single injection 
strategy (2.59% ± 0.19% and 2.60% ± 0.46% ID/g for 18F-2 and 18F-3, 
respectively). In addition, introduction of the trimeric histidine-glutamate 
(HEHEHE) tag to 18F-3 reduced the liver uptake by almost two-fold without any 
noticeable effect on the tumor uptake. All the results indicate that 18F-3 holds 
great potential applications in clinics for sensitive and specific PET imaging 
of legumain activity in tumors.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.0c01253
PMID: 32867490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]