1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Aug 31;14(8):e0008669. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008669. eCollection 2020 Aug.

Molecular action of pyriproxyfen: Role of the Methoprene-tolerant protein in the 
pyriproxyfen-induced sterilization of adult female mosquitoes.

Ahmed TH(1), Saunders TR(1), Mullins D(2), Rahman MZ(3), Zhu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United 
States of America.
(2)Department of Entomology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United States 
of America.
(3)Quantitative Science Core, Cancer Biology Division, Ponce Research Institute, 
Ponce Health Sciences University, Ponce, Puerto Rico.

Exposure of adult mosquitoes to pyriproxyfen (PPF), an analog of insect juvenile 
hormone (JH), has shown promise to effectively sterilize female mosquitoes. 
However, the underlying mechanisms of the PPF-induced decrease in mosquito 
fecundity are largely unknown. We performed a comprehensive study to dissect the 
mode of PPF action in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. Exposure to PPF prompted the 
overgrowth of primary follicles in sugar-fed Ae. aegypti females but blocked the 
development of primary follicles at Christopher's Stage III after blood feeding. 
Secondary follicles were precociously activated in PPF-treated mosquitoes. 
Moreover, PPF substantially altered the expression of many genes that are 
essential for mosquito physiology and oocyte development in the fat body and 
ovary. In particular, many metabolic genes were differentially expressed in 
response to PPF treatment, thereby affecting the mobilization and utilization of 
energy reserves. Furthermore, PPF treatment on the previtellogenic female adults 
considerably modified mosquito responses to JH and 20-hydroxyecdysone (20E), two 
major hormones that govern mosquito reproduction. Kr√ºppel homolog 1, a 
JH-inducible transcriptional regulator, showed consistently elevated expression 
after PPF exposure. Conversely, PPF upregulated the expression of several key 
players of the 20E regulatory cascades, including HR3 and E75A, in the 
previtellogenic stage. After blood-feeding, the expression of these 20E response 
genes was significantly weaker in PPF-treated mosquitoes than the 
solvent-treated control groups. RNAi-mediated knockdown of the 
Methoprene-tolerant (Met) protein, the JH receptor, partially rescued the 
impaired follicular development after PPF exposure and substantially increased 
the hatching of the eggs produced by PPF-treated female mosquitoes. Thus, the 
results suggested that PPF relied on Met to exert its sterilizing effects on 
female mosquitoes. In summary, this study finds that PPF exposure disturbs 
normal hormonal responses and metabolism in Ae. aegypti, shedding light on the 
molecular targets and the downstream signaling pathways activated by PPF.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008669
PMCID: PMC7485974
PMID: 32866146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.