1. Virulence. 2020 Dec;11(1):1108-1121. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2020.1809324.

Cu transporter protein CrpF protects against Cu-induced toxicity in Fusarium 
oxysporum.

Lorenzo-Gutiérrez D(1), Gómez-Gil L(2), Guarro J(1), Roncero MIG(2), Capilla 
J(1), López-Fernández L(1).

Author information:
(1)Unitat de Microbiologia, Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut and 
Institut d'Investigació Sanitària Pere Virgili (IISPV), Universitat Rovira i 
Virgili , Reus, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Genetica, Facultad de Ciencias and Campus De Excelencia 
Internacional Agroalimentario ceiA3, Universidad de Cordoba , Cordoba, Spain.

Cu is an essential trace element for cell growth and proliferation. However, 
excess of Cu accumulation leads to cellular toxicity. Thus, precise and tight 
regulation of Cu homeostasis processes, including transport, delivery, storage, 
detoxification, and efflux machineries, is required. Moreover, the maintenance 
of Cu homeostasis is critical for the survival and virulence of fungal 
pathogens. Cu homeostasis has been extensively studied in mammals, bacteria, and 
yeast, but it has not yet been well documented in filamentous fungi. In the 
present work, we investigated Cu tolerance in the filamentous fungus Fusarium 
oxysporum by analysing the Cu transporter coding gene crpF, previously studied 
in Aspergillus fumigatus. The expression studies demonstrated that crpF is 
upregulated in the presence of Cu and its deletion leads to severe sensitivity 
to low levels of CuSO4 in F. oxysporum. Targeted deletion of crpF did not 
significantly alter the resistance of the fungus to macrophage killing, nor its 
pathogenic behaviour on the tomato plants. However, the targeted deletion mutant 
ΔcrpF showed increased virulence in a murine model of systemic infection 
compared to wild-type strain (wt).

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2020.1809324
PMCID: PMC7549990
PMID: 32862758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest to declare.