1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Aug 27;21(17):6208. doi: 10.3390/ijms21176208.

Relevance of Electrostatic Charges in Compactness, Aggregation, and Phase 
Separation of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins.

Bianchi G(1), Longhi S(2), Grandori R(1), Brocca S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, 
20126 Milano, Italy.
(2)Laboratoire Architecture et Fonction des Macromol√©cules Biologiques (AFMB), 
Aix-Marseille University and CNRS, UMR 7257, 13288 Marseille, France.

The abundance of intrinsic disorder in the protein realm and its role in a 
variety of physiological and pathological cellular events have strengthened the 
interest of the scientific community in understanding the structural and 
dynamical properties of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and regions 
(IDRs). Attempts at rationalizing the general principles underlying both 
conformational properties and transitions of IDPs/IDRs must consider the 
abundance of charged residues (Asp, Glu, Lys, and Arg) that typifies these 
proteins, rendering them assimilable to polyampholytes or polyelectrolytes. 
Their conformation strongly depends on both the charge density and distribution 
along the sequence (i.e., charge decoration) as highlighted by recent 
experimental and theoretical studies that have introduced novel descriptors. 
Published experimental data are revisited herein in the frame of this formalism, 
in a new and possibly unitary perspective. The physicochemical properties most 
directly affected by charge density and distribution are compaction and 
solubility, which can be described in a relatively simplified way by tools of 
polymer physics. Dissecting factors controlling such properties could contribute 
to better understanding complex biological phenomena, such as fibrillation and 
phase separation. Furthermore, this knowledge is expected to have enormous 
practical implications for the design, synthesis, and exploitation of 
bio-derived materials and the control of natural biological processes.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21176208
PMCID: PMC7503639
PMID: 32867340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.