1. Food Sci Nutr. 2020 Jul 1;8(8):4370-4378. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.1734. eCollection 
2020 Aug.

Safety assessment of fermented jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus) pulp and 
leaves in Sprague-Dawley rats.

Sabidi S(1), Koh SP(1), Abd Shukor S(2), Adzni Sharifudin S(1), Sew YS(2).

Author information:
(1)Food Science and Technology Research Centre MARDI Headquarters Persiaran 
MARDI-UPM Serdang Malaysia.
(2)Biotechnology & Nanotechnology Research Centre MARDI Headquarters Persiaran 
MARDI-UPM Serdang Malaysia.

Fermented jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus) extracts were produced using pure 
symbiotic culture of bacteria and yeast (SCOBY) under controlled fermentation 
process. Both female and male Sprague-Dawley rats were orally administrated with 
4,000 mg/kg of fermented jackfruit pulp and leaves extracts for 28 consecutive 
days. Body weight of rats was recorded at 1-week interval until necropsy day. 
There was no mortality reported along the experiment with no significant 
differences (p > .05) record among organ histopathology and blood biochemical 
parameters in treated groups when compared to control group. Interestingly, 
there were significant differences (p < .05) in the lower body weight gained of 
treated rats groups as opposed to control group, indicating the potential 
anti-obesity effect of fermented jackfruit extracts. In conclusion, no toxicity 
symptoms were observed in 28 days oral administration toxicity study of 
fermented jackfruit pulp and leaves extracts in Sprague-Dawley rats for both 
sexes.

© 2020 The Authors. Food Science & Nutrition published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.1734
PMCID: PMC7455967
PMID: 32884717

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.