1. Biomolecules. 2020 Sep 2;10(9):1264. doi: 10.3390/biom10091264.

Histidine Residues Are Responsible for Bidirectional Effects of Zinc on 
Acid-Sensing Ion Channel 1a/3 Heteromeric Channels.

Jiang Q(1), Peterson AM(1), Chu Y(2), Yao X(3), Zha XM(4), Chu XP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of 
Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.
(2)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(3)Division of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, School of Biological and 
Chemical Sciences, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64110, 
USA.
(4)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of 
South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36688, USA.

Acid-sensing ion channel (ASIC) subunits 1a and 3 are highly expressed in 
central and peripheral sensory neurons, respectively. Endogenous biomolecule 
zinc plays a critical role in physiological and pathophysiological conditions. 
Here, we found that currents recorded from heterologously expressed ASIC1a/3 
channels using the whole-cell patch-clamp technique were regulated by zinc with 
dual effects. Co-application of zinc dose-dependently potentiated both peak 
amplitude and the sustained component of heteromeric ASIC1a/3 currents; 
pretreatment with zinc between 3 to 100 µM exerted the same potentiation as 
co-application. However, pretreatment with zinc induced a significant inhibition 
of heteromeric ASIC1a/3 channels when zinc concentrations were over 250 µM. The 
potentiation of heteromeric ASIC1a/3 channels by zinc was pH dependent, as zinc 
shifted the pH dependence of ASIC1a/3 currents from a pH50 of 6.54 to 6.77; 
whereas the inhibition of ASIC1a/3 currents by zinc was also pH dependent. 
Furthermore, we systematically mutated histidine residues in the extracellular 
domain of ASIC1a or ASIC3 and found that histidine residues 72 and 73 in both 
ASIC1a and ASIC3, and histidine residue 83 in the ASIC3 were responsible for 
bidirectional effects on heteromeric ASIC1a/3 channels by zinc. These findings 
suggest that histidine residues in the extracellular domain of heteromeric 
ASIC1a/3 channels are critical for zinc-mediated effects.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10091264
PMCID: PMC7565092
PMID: 32887365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.