1. J Mol Neurosci. 2021 Apr;71(4):675-690. doi: 10.1007/s12031-020-01696-4. Epub 
2020 Sep 5.

Association Between REELIN Gene Polymorphisms (rs7341475 and rs262355) and Risk 
of Schizophrenia: an Updated Meta-analysis.

Marzan S(#)(1), Aziz MA(#)(2), Islam MS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Asia Pacific, Dhaka, 1205, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Noakhali Science and Technology University, Noakhali, 
3814, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Noakhali Science and Technology University, Noakhali, 
3814, Bangladesh. research_safiq@yahoo.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a destructive neuropsychiatric illness affecting millions 
of people worldwide. The correlation between RELN gene polymorphisms and SCZ was 
investigated by previous researches, though the results remained conflicting. 
Based on the available studies, we conducted this meta-analysis to provide a 
more comprehensive outcome on whether the RELN gene polymorphisms (rs7341475 and 
rs262355) are associated with SCZ. A total of 15 studies with 25,403 subjects 
(9047 cases and 16,356 controls) retrieved from PubMed, ScienceDirect, EMBASE, 
Wiley, BMC, Cochrane, Springer, MDPI, SAGE, and Google Scholar up to June 2020 
were included. Meta-analysis was performed using Review Manager 5.3. The 
heterogeneity was checked using I2 statistics and Q-test, whereas publication 
bias was also measured. The rs7341475 polymorphism showed a significantly lower 
risk for SCZ for the allele (A vs. G: OR = 0.93, 95%CI = 0.87-0.99), codominant 
1 (AG vs. GG: OR = 0.92, 95%CI = 0.85-0.99), dominant model (AA+AG vs. GG: 
OR = 0.92, 95%CI = 0.86-0.98), and over dominant model (AG vs. AA+GG: OR = 0.92, 
95%Cl = 0.86-0.99). The allele, codominant model 1, and dominant models remained 
statistically significant after the correction of the Bonferroni (p < 0.025). 
Subgroup analysis confirmed the association of allele and dominant models in the 
Caucasian after Bonferroni correction. For rs262355 polymorphism, a 
significantly increased risk of SCZ was found only in Caucasians for codominant 
2, dominant, and allele models, but significance exists only for the allele 
model after Bonferroni correction. Publication bias was found in the case of 
codominant 2 and recessive models for rs7341475 in the overall population, but 
this publication was not found after performing the Bonferroni correction or 
after performing the subgroup analysis. No such publication was found for 
rs262355. The results suggest that RELN rs7341475 is associated with a lower 
risk of SCZ in the overall population and Caucasian population, but rs262355 is 
associated with an increased risk of SCZ only in the Caucasian population.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-020-01696-4
PMID: 32889693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]