1. J Immunol. 2020 Oct 15;205(8):2222-2230. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2000654. Epub 
2020 Sep 4.

p53 Hinders CRISPR/Cas9-Mediated Targeted Gene Disruption in Memory CD8 T Cells 
In Vivo.

Kurup SP(1)(2), Moioffer SJ(3), Pewe LL(3), Harty JT(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602.
(2)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, 
Athens, GA 30602.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242; and.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242; and 
john-harty@uiowa.edu.
(5)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA 52242.

CRISPR/Cas9 technology has revolutionized rapid and reliable gene editing in 
cells. Although many cell types have been subjected to CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene 
editing, there is no evidence of success in genetic alteration of Ag-experienced 
memory CD8 T cells. In this study, we show that CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene 
editing in memory CD8 T cells precludes their proliferation after Ag 
re-encounter in vivo. This defect is mediated by the proapoptotic transcription 
factor p53, a sensor of DNA damage. Temporarily inhibiting p53 function offers a 
window of opportunity for the memory CD8 T cells to repair the DNA damage, 
facilitating robust recall responses on Ag re-encounter. We demonstrate this by 
functionally altering memory CD8 T cells using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated targeted 
gene disruption under the aegis of p53siRNA in the mouse model. Our approach 
thus adapts the CRISPR/Cas9 technology for memory CD8 T cells to undertake gene 
editing in vivo, for the first time, to our knowledge.

Copyright Â© 2020 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.2000654
PMCID: PMC7541733
PMID: 32887747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]