1. J Thromb Haemost. 2021 Jan;19(1):75-84. doi: 10.1111/jth.15087. Epub 2020 Oct
1.

A serine loop in tissue factor mediates substrate selectivity by the tissue 
factor-factor VIIa complex.

Birkle F(1), Morrissey JH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.

Comment in
    J Thromb Haemost. 2021 Jan;19(1):52-54. doi: 10.1111/jth.15148.

Essentials How the tissue factor-factor VIIa complex selects between different 
substrates is not well understood. We investigated a serine loop in tissue 
factor and its role in substrate selectivity. The tissue factor serine loop is 
selective for factor X over factor IX. Substrate selectivity is facilitated by 
differential regulation of the nearby tissue factor exosite. ABSTRACT: 
Background The tissue factor-factor VIIa (TF-FVIIa) complex is the physiologic 
activator of blood clotting and plays a major role in many thrombotic diseases. 
TF-FVIIa drives clotting through proteolytic cleavage of its major protein 
substrates, factor IX (FIX) and factor X (FX). However, it remains unclear how 
TF-FVIIa exhibits selectivity between these substrates. We previously showed 
that TF residues adjacent to the putative substrate binding site of TF 
("exosite") facilitate FX activation, but the role of these residues in 
substrate selectivity had not been tested. Objectives We hypothesized that a TF 
serine loop (residues S160-S163) mediates substrate selectivity by the TF-FVIIa 
complex. Methods We generated TF serine loop and exosite mutants. The mutants 
were tested in FIX and FX enzyme activation assays as well as thrombin 
generation assays. Results Changes in the length of the serine loop affected 
rates of FIX and FX activation very differently. FX activation was decreased by 
up to 200-fold when the loop length was changed by just one residue. In 
contrast, FIX activation was largely unaffected. Substrate selectivity was also 
detected in thrombin generation assays. Activation assays with TF serine loop 
and exosite double mutants revealed that the serine loop has no effect on the 
exosite during FIX activation. In contrast, the serine loop regulates the 
exosite during FX activation. Conclusions Our results provide new insights into 
how the TF-FVIIa complex actively selects between its major protein substrates, 
which is mediated by a TF serine loop.

Â© 2020 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.15087
PMCID: PMC7790960
PMID: 32885882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors report no 
conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.