1. Molecules. 2020 Sep 4;25(18):4039. doi: 10.3390/molecules25184039.

Multistep Synthesis and In Vitro Anticancer Evaluation of 2-Pyrazolyl-Estradiol 
Derivatives, Pyrazolocoumarin-Estradiol Hybrids and Analogous Compounds.

Molnár B(1), Gopisetty MK(2), Adamecz DI(2), Kiricsi M(2), Frank É(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, Doctoral School of Chemistry, University of 
Szeged, Dóm tér 8, H-6720 Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Doctoral School of Biology, 
University of Szeged, Közép fasor 52, H-6726 Szeged, Hungary.

Although the hormone independent cytotoxic activity of several estradiol 
derivatives endowed with a simple substituent at C-2 has been reported so far, 
2-heterocyclic and 2,3-condensed analogs are less investigated from both 
synthetic and pharmacological points of view. Therefore, novel A-ring-connected 
2-pyrazoles of estradiol and, for comparison, their structurally simplified 
non-steroidal pairs were synthesized from estradiol 3-methyl ether and 
6-methoxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalene. Friedel-Crafts acetylation of the 
protected phenolic compounds and subsequent O-demethylation led to 
ortho-substituted derivatives regioselectively, which were converted to 
arylhydrazones with phenylhydrazine, 4-tolylhydrazine and 
4-chloro-phenylhydrazine, respectively, under microwave conditions. The 
hydrazones were subjected to cyclization with the Vilsmeier-Haack reagent 
immediately after preparation and the ring closure/formylation sequence resulted 
in steroidal and non-steroidal 4'-formylpyrazoles in moderate to good yields. 
During reductive transformations, 4-hydroxymethyl-pyrazoles were obtained, while 
oxidative lactonization of the 4-formylpyrazole moiety with the phenolic OH in 
the presence of the Jones reagent afforded A-ring-integrated pyrazolocoumarin 
hybrids and related analogs. Steroidal pyrazoles, which were produced as C-17 
acetates due to acetylation of C-17 OH during the primary Friedel-Crafts 
reaction, underwent deacetylation in alkaline methanol to furnish 2-heterocyclic 
estradiol derivatives. Pharmacological studies revealed the overall and cancer 
cell-specific cytotoxicity of the derivatives and the half maximal inhibitory 
concentrations were obtained for the most promising compounds.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25184039
PMCID: PMC7571145
PMID: 32899643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.