1. Nature. 2020 Sep;585(7825):453-458. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2706-x. Epub 2020 
Sep 9.

Epigenetic gene silencing by heterochromatin primes fungal resistance.

Torres-Garcia S(1), Yaseen I(1), Shukla M(1), Audergon PNCB(1)(2), White SA(1), 
Pidoux AL(1), Allshire RC(3).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of 
Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of 
Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 
robin.allshire@ed.ac.uk.

Heterochromatin that depends on histone H3 lysine 9 methylation (H3K9me) renders 
embedded genes transcriptionally silent1-3. In the fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, H3K9me heterochromatin can be transmitted through 
cell division provided the counteracting demethylase Epe1 is absent4,5. 
Heterochromatin heritability might allow wild-type cells under certain 
conditions to acquire epimutations, which could influence phenotype through 
unstable gene silencing rather than DNA change6,7. Here we show that 
heterochromatin-dependent epimutants resistant to caffeine arise in fission 
yeast grown with threshold levels of caffeine. Isolates with unstable resistance 
have distinct heterochromatin islands with reduced expression of embedded genes, 
including some whose mutation confers caffeine resistance. Forced 
heterochromatin formation at implicated loci confirms that resistance results 
from heterochromatin-mediated silencing. Our analyses reveal that epigenetic 
processes promote phenotypic plasticity, letting wild-type cells adapt to 
unfavourable environments without genetic alteration. In some isolates, 
subsequent or coincident gene-amplification events augment resistance. Caffeine 
affects two anti-silencing factors: Epe1 is downregulated, reducing its 
chromatin association, and a shortened isoform of Mst2 histone acetyltransferase 
is expressed. Thus, heterochromatin-dependent epimutation provides a bet-hedging 
strategy allowing cells to adapt transiently to insults while remaining 
genetically wild type. Isolates with unstable caffeine resistance show 
cross-resistance to antifungal agents, suggesting that related 
heterochromatin-dependent processes may contribute to resistance of plant and 
human fungal pathogens to such agents.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2706-x
PMCID: PMC7116710
PMID: 32908306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.