1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2020 Sep 30;12(39):44039-44048. doi: 
10.1021/acsami.0c11730. Epub 2020 Sep 20.

Thermochromic Luminescent Nanomaterials Based on Mn(4+)/Tb(3+) Codoping for 
Temperature Imaging with Digital Cameras.

Piotrowski W(1), Trejgis K(1), Maciejewska K(1), Ledwa K(1), Fond B(2), 
Marciniak L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Low Temperature and Structure Research, Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Okólna 2, 50-422 Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Institute of Fluid Mechanics and Thermodynamics, Otto-von-Guericke 
Universität Magdeburg, Universitätsplatz 2, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany.

A new thermographic nanocrystalline Sr4Al14O25:Mn4+,Tb3+ phosphor was developed, 
and the concentrations of both dopants and the synthesis conditions were 
optimized. The combination of the thermally quenched luminescence from the Mn4+ 
ions to the almost temperature-independent emission from Tb3+ provides a 
sensitive luminescent thermometer (SR = 2.8%/°C at 150 °C) with strong emission 
color variability. In addition, a figure of merit for this luminescence 
thermochromism was proposed, as the relative sensitivities of the x and y CIE 
coordinates, which for this phosphor reaches at 150 °C SR(x) = 0.6%/°C and SR(y) 
= 0.4%/°C, respectively. Noncontact thermal imaging was demonstrated with this 
phosphor using a single consumer digital camera and exploiting the ratio of red 
(R) and green (G) channels of the RGB images, thereby confirming the high 
application potential of Sr4Al14O25:Mn4+,Tb3+ nanocrystals for thermal sensing 
and mapping.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.0c11730
PMCID: PMC7586289
PMID: 32902945

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.