1. Nat Commun. 2020 Sep 9;11(1):4501. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-18336-5.

Uncovering the cytochrome P450-catalyzed methylenedioxy bridge formation in 
streptovaricins biosynthesis.

Sun G(1), Hu C(1), Mei Q(1), Luo M(1), Chen X(1), Li Z(1), Liu Y(1), Deng Z(1), 
Zhang Z(2), Sun Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, Wuhan University School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 430071, Wuhan, P. 
R. China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, Wuhan University School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 430071, Wuhan, P. 
R. China. zhengyu.zhang@whu.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, Wuhan University School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 430071, Wuhan, P. 
R. China. yhsun@whu.edu.cn.

Streptovaricin C is a naphthalenic ansamycin antibiotic structurally similar to 
rifamycins with potential anti-MRSA bioactivities. However, the formation 
mechanism of the most fascinating and bioactivity-related methylenedioxy bridge 
(MDB) moiety in streptovaricins is unclear. Based on genetic and biochemical 
evidences, we herein clarify that the P450 enzyme StvP2 catalyzes the MDB 
formation in streptovaricins, with an atypical substrate inhibition kinetics. 
Furthermore, X-ray crystal structures in complex with substrate and 
structure-based mutagenesis reveal the intrinsic details of the enzymatic 
reaction. The mechanism of MDB formation is proposed to be an intramolecular 
nucleophilic substitution resulting from the hydroxylation by the heme core and 
the keto-enol tautomerization via a crucial catalytic triad (Asp89-His92-Arg72) 
in StvP2. In addition, in vitro reconstitution uncovers that C6-O-methylation 
and C4-O-acetylation of streptovaricins are necessary prerequisites for the MDB 
formation. This work provides insight for the MDB formation and adds evidence in 
support of the functional versatility of P450 enzymes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-18336-5
PMCID: PMC7481197
PMID: 32908132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.