1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2020 Aug 12;8:772. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00772. 
eCollection 2020.

IP3R-Mediated Compensatory Mechanism for Calcium Handling in Human Induced 
Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiomyocytes With Cardiac Ryanodine Receptor 
Deficiency.

Luo X(1), Li W(1), Künzel K(1), Henze S(2), Cyganek L(2)(3), Strano A(1), 
Poetsch MS(1), Schubert M(1), Guan K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Technische Universität Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany.
(2)Clinic for Cardiology and Pneumology, Universitätsmedizin Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(3)DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany.

In adult cardiomyocytes (CMs), the type 2 ryanodine receptor (RYR2) is an 
indispensable Ca2+ release channel that ensures the integrity of 
excitation-contraction coupling, which is fundamental for every heartbeat. 
However, the role and importance of RYR2 during human embryonic cardiac 
development are still poorly understood. Here, we generated two human induced 
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based RYR2 knockout (RYR2-/-) lines using the 
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology. We found that RYR2-/--iPSCs could 
differentiate into CMs with the efficiency similar to control-iPSCs 
(Ctrl-iPSCs); however, the survival of iPSC-CMs was markedly affected by the 
lack of functional RYR2. While Ctrl-iPSC-CMs exhibited regular Ca2+ handling, we 
observed significantly reduced frequency and intense abnormalities of Ca2+ 
transients in RYR2-/--iPSC-CMs. Ctrl-iPSC-CMs displayed sensitivity to 
extracellular Ca2+ ([Ca2+ ]o) and caffeine in a concentration-dependent manner, 
while RYR2-/--iPSC-CMs showed inconsistent reactions to [Ca2+ ]o and were 
insensitive to caffeine, indicating there is no RYR2-mediated Ca2+ release from 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). Instead, compensatory mechanism for calcium 
handling in RYR2-/--iPSC-CMs is partially mediated by the inositol 
1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R). Similar to Ctrl-iPSC-CMs, SR Ca2+ refilling 
in RYR2-/--iPSC-CMs is mediated by SERCA. Additionally, RYR2-/--iPSC-CMs showed 
a decreased beating rate and a reduced peak amplitude of L-type Ca2+ current. 
These findings demonstrate that RYR2 is not required for CM lineage commitment 
but is important for CM survival and contractile function. IP3R-mediated Ca2+ 
release is one of the major compensatory mechanisms for Ca2+ cycling in human 
CMs with the RYR2 deficiency.

Copyright © 2020 Luo, Li, Künzel, Henze, Cyganek, Strano, Poetsch, Schubert and 
Guan.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00772
PMCID: PMC7434870
PMID: 32903370