1. Epigenomics. 2020 Aug;12(16):1363-1375. doi: 10.2217/epi-2020-0048. Epub 2020 
Sep 11.

Genome-wide resolution peripheral blood methylome profiling reveals signatures 
for cholestatic liver disease.

Moore RM(1), Sun Z(1), Juran BD(2), Lazaridis KN(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Statistics & Informatics Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Aim: To profile DNA methylation changes of primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) and 
primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). Materials & methods: Patients with: PBC, 
PSC with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), PSC without IBD, and age-, 
sex-matched controls were profiled for methylomes of peripheral blood by reduced 
representation bisulfite sequencing. Differentially methylated CpG (DMC) and 
differentially methylated region (DMR) were detected and compared. Results: We 
identified consistently altered DMCs and DMRs across diseases with involvement 
in key pathways. Many similarities noted between two subtypes of PSC, 
interestingly few existed between PBC and PSC. DMRs were highly enriched with 
transcription factor binding. Top DMC changes were validated in liver tissue of 
an independent cohort. Conclusion: Methylome profiling provides insights to PBC 
and PSC.

DOI: 10.2217/epi-2020-0048
PMCID: PMC7506472
PMID: 32914644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial & competing interests disclosure This 
study was supported by RC2 DK118619 (KN Lazaridis) and the Chris M Carlos and 
Catharine Nicole Jockisch Carlos Endowment Fund in primary sclerosing 
cholangitis (PSC) (KN Lazaridis). The authors have no other relevant 
affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a 
financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials 
discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed. No writing assistance 
was utilized in the production of this manuscript.