1. JCO Precis Oncol. 2017 Dec 11;1:PO.17.00140. doi: 10.1200/PO.17.00140. 
eCollection 2017.

Genomic Resistance Patterns to Second-Generation Androgen Blockade in Paired 
Tumor Biopsies of Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer.

Han GC(1), Hwang J(1), Wankowicz SAM(1), Zhang Z(1), Liu D(1), Cibulskis C(1), 
Gaviola GC(1), Ghazikhanian V(1), McKay RR(1), Bubley GJ(1), Carter SL(1), Balk 
SP(1), Hahn WC(1), Taplin ME(1), Van Allen EM(1).

Author information:
(1), , , , , , , , and , Dana-Farber Cancer Institute; , , , and , Brigham and 
Women's Hospital; and , Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston; , , , , , 
, , and , Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA; and , University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA.

PURPOSE: Patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) receive 
second-generation androgen-deprivation therapy, but frequently experience 
relapse or do not respond. Understanding the genetic mechanisms of resistance 
will help to identify strategies and biomarkers that are essential for the next 
line of therapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed whole exomes of patient-matched pre- and 
post-treatment tumors from patients with CRPC. These patients had received the 
secondary androgen-deprivation therapy agent, abiraterone, which suppresses 
androgens to below castration levels, or enzalutamide, which competitively 
inhibits the key androgen signaling effector, androgen receptor.
RESULTS: We observed that abiraterone-resistant tumors harbored alterations in 
AR and MYC, whereas enzalutamide-resistant tumors gained alterations in 
cell-cycle pathway genes, such as mutation in cyclin-dependent kinase N2A 
(CDKN2A) or amplification of CDK6. Experimentally, overexpressing cell-cycle 
kinases promoted enzalutamide resistance in androgen-sensitive LnCAP cells that 
was mitigated via CDK4/6 blockade-palbociclib and ribociclib.
CONCLUSION: CDK4/6-mediated resistance observed in preclinical experiments 
suggests that CDK4/6 amplifications may sufficiently promote enzalutamide 
resistance in CRPC, and that these patients may respond to palbociclib or 
ribociclib. The overall observations suggest that, in genomically selected 
advanced CRPC, clinical strategies against abiraterone- or 
enzalutamide-resistant tumors may require treatment strategies that are tailored 
to the resistance mechanisms that are specific to those patient subpopulations.

Â© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/PO.17.00140
PMCID: PMC7446377
PMID: 32913968

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information 
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered 
compensated. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I = Immediate Family 
Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate to the subject 
matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's conflict of 
interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
ascopubs.org/po/author-center. G. Celine HanStock and Other Ownership Interests: 
Amgen, Amarin Corporation, OrganovoJustin HwangNo relationship to 
discloseStephanie A.M. WankowiczNo relationship to discloseZhenwei ZhangNo 
relationship to discloseDavid LiuNo relationship to discloseCarrie CibulskisNo 
relationship to discloseGlenn C. GaviolaNo relationship to discloseVarand 
GhazikhanianNo relationship to discloseRana R. McKayResearch Funding: Pfizer 
(Inst), Bayer (Inst)Glenn J. BubleyNo relationship to discloseScott L. CarterNo 
relationship to discloseSteven P. BalkHonoraria: Janssen Pharmaceuticals 
Consulting or Advisory Role: Sanofi Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual 
Property: License to NKT Therapeutics for an antibody Expert Testimony: Astellas 
Medivation Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Janssen PharmaceuticalsWilliam C. 
HahnStock and Other Ownership Interests: Blueprint Medicines Consulting or 
Advisory Role: Novartis, Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences, AJU IB, MPM 
Capital, KSQ Therapeutics Research Funding: NovartisMary-Ellen TaplinHonoraria: 
Medivation, Janssen-Ortho, Clovis Oncology, Bayer Consulting or Advisory Role: 
Medivation, Janssen-Ortho, Sanofi, Bayer, Guidepoint Global, Best Doctors, 
UpToDate, Clovis Oncology, Research to Practice, DAVAOncology, Myovant Research 
Funding: Janssen-Ortho (Inst), Medivation (Inst), Genentech (Inst), Bayer 
(Inst), Tokai Pharmaceuticals (Inst) Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: 
Medivation, Janssen Oncology, Tokai PharmaceuticalsEliezer M. Van AllenStock and 
Other Ownership Interests: Syapse, Tango Therapeutics, Genome Medical Consulting 
or Advisory Role: Syapse, Roche, Third Rock Ventures, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, 
Novartis, Genome Medical, InVitae Speakers' Bureau: Illumina Research Funding: 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis