1. Molecules. 2020 Sep 8;25(18):4106. doi: 10.3390/molecules25184106.

Click Decoration of Bombyx mori Silk Fibroin for Cell Adhesion Control.

Teramoto H(1), Shirakawa M(2), Tamada Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Silk Materials Research Unit, Division of Biotechnology, National Agriculture 
and Food Research Organization (NARO), 1-2 Owashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8634, 
Japan.
(2)Faculty of Textile Science and Technology, Shinshu University, 3-15-1 Tokida, 
Ueda, Nagano 386-8567, Japan.

Silk fibroin produced by the domesticated silkworm, Bombyx mori, has been 
studied widely as a substrate for tissue engineering applications because of its 
mechanical robustness and biocompatibility. However, it is often difficult to 
precisely tune silk fibroin's biological properties due to the lack of easy, 
reliable, and versatile methodologies for decorating it with functional 
molecules such as those of drugs, polymers, peptides, and enzymes necessary for 
specific applications. In this study we applied an azido-functionalized silk 
fibroin, AzidoSilk, produced by a state-of-the-art biotechnology, genetic code 
expansion, to produce silk fibroin decorated with cell-repellent polyethylene 
glycol (PEG) chains for controlling the cell adhesion property of silk fibroin 
film. Azido groups can act as selective handles for chemical reactions such as a 
strain-promoted azido-alkyne cycloaddition (SPAAC), known as a click chemistry 
reaction. We found that azido groups in AzidoSilk film were selectively 
decorated with PEG chains using SPAAC. The PEG-decorated film demonstrated 
decreased cell adhesion depending on the lengths of the PEG chains. Azido groups 
in AzidoSilk can be decomposed by UV irradiation. By partially decomposing azido 
groups in AzidoSilk film in a spatially controlled manner using photomasks, 
cells could be spatially arranged on the film. These results indicated that 
SPAAC could be an easy, reliable, and versatile methodology to produce silk 
fibroin substrates having adequate biological properties.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25184106
PMCID: PMC7570510
PMID: 32911813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.