1. PLoS One. 2020 Sep 11;15(9):e0239101. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239101. 
eCollection 2020.

Association of IL16 polymorphisms with periodontitis in Brazilians: A case- 
control study.

Souza VH(1)(2), Visentainer JEL(1)(2), Zacarias JMV(1)(2), Alencar JB(1)(2), 
Tsuneto PY(1)(2), Silva CO(3), Salmeron S(4), Colli CM(1)(2), Sell AM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Post-Graduation Program in Biosciences and Physiopathology, Department of 
Clinical Analysis and Biomedicine, and Laboratory of Immunogenetics, State 
University of Maringá, Maringá, Paraná, Brazil.
(2)Department of Basic Health Sciences, State University of Maringá, Maringá, 
Paraná, Brazil.
(3)Department of Dentistry, State University of Maringá, Maringá, Brazil.
(4)Ingá University Center, Maringá, Brazil.

Periodontitis (PD) is a chronic inflammatory process resulting from the 
relationship of the immune response with the components in dental plaque. 
Cytokines and their genetic polymorphisms seem to be involved in the 
immunopathogenesis of this disease. This study aimed to evaluate the correlation 
of IL16 polymorphism with PD. A case-control study was conducted in a sample of 
individuals from southern Brazil. The genotyping of IL16, rs11556218 T>G, 
rs4072111 C>T e rs4778889 T>C, was performed using the PCR-RFLP methodology. The 
serum level of IL-16 was determined using an IL-16 ELISA kit for humans. 
SNPStats and OpenEpi software and Wilcoxon's U test were used to perform 
statistical analysis. IL16 rs11556218 polymorphism was significantly associated 
to PD in nonsmoking patients: individuals with G/G genotype were less likely to 
develop PD compared to the T/T genotype (OR = 0.10; Pc = 0.019, codominant 
model). In addition, the TTT haplotype was associated with a high risk for PD 
(OR = 2.45; P = 0.01). A low IL-16 serum level was observed among individuals 
with PD when compared to controls (P = 0.027). Thus, the IL16 rs16556218 
polymorphism and the serum levels of IL-16 were associated with periodontitis in 
a Brazilian sample, and this was influenced by environmental factors such as 
smoking.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239101
PMCID: PMC7485854
PMID: 32915917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.