1. Clin Chim Acta. 2020 Nov;510:767-771. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2020.08.039. Epub
2020  Sep 12.

Suppression tumorigenicity 2 (ST2) turbidimetric immunoassay compared to 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in predicting survival in heart failure 
patients with reduced ejection fraction.

Aurora L(1), Peterson E(2), Gui H(3), Zeld N(3), McCord J(1), Pinto Y(4), Cook 
B(5), Sabbah HN(1), Keoki Williams L(3), Snider J(6), Lanfear DE(7).

Author information:
(1)Heart and Vascular Institute, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.
(3)Center for Individualized and Genomic Medicine Research, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.
(6)Critical Diagnostics Inc., San Diego, CA, USA.
(7)Heart and Vascular Institute, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, USA; 
Center for Individualized and Genomic Medicine Research, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA. Electronic address: 
dlanfea1@hfhs.org.

BACKGROUND: Suppressor of tumorigenicity 2 (ST2) is a powerful marker of 
prognosis and treatment response in heart failure (HF), however, it is an 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) which may be cumbersome and costly. A 
turbidimetric immunoassay (TIA) that can run on common chemistry analyzers could 
overcome this. We studied a novel TIA for ST2, comparing it to commercial ST2 
(ELISA).
METHODS: Patients age ≥ 18 years meeting Framingham definition for HF were 
enrolled in a prospective registry (Oct 2007 - March 2015) at Henry Ford 
Hospital and donated blood samples. Participants with reduced ejection fraction 
(<50%) and available plasma samples were included and valid ST2 measurements 
were obtained on the same sample using both TIA and ELISA (N = 721). The primary 
endpoint was all cause death. Correlation between the methods was quantified. 
The association with survival was tested using unadjusted and adjusted (for 
MAGGIC score and NTproBNP) Cox models and comparing the Area Under the Curve 
(AUC).
RESULTS: The inter-assay Spearman correlation coefficient was 0.77. 
Nonparametric regression showed no significant proportional difference 
(slope = 0.97) and a very small systematic difference (3.2 ng/mL). In univariate 
analyses, both TIA and ELISA ST2 were significant associates of survival with 
similar effect sizes (HR 4.46 and 3.50, respectively, both p < 0.001). In models 
adjusted for MAGGIC score, both ST2 remained significant in Cox models and 
incrementally improved AUC vs. MAGGIC alone (MAGGIC AUC = 0.757; TIA + MAGGIC 
AUC = 0.786, p = 0.025; ELISA + MAGGIC AUC = 0.793, p = 0.033). In models with 
both MAGGIC and NTproBNP included, both ST2 still remained significant but did 
not improve AUC.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel TIA method for ST2 quantification correlates highly with 
ELISA and offers similarly powerful risk-stratification.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2020.08.039
PMCID: PMC7572613
PMID: 32926842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Competing Interests Dr Snider 
works for Critical Diagnostics, the provider of the sST2 assay. Dr. Lanfear is a 
consultant for Amgen, Janssen, Ortho Diagnostics and DCRI (Novartis) and has 
participated in research with Amgen, Bayer, and Janssen. Dr. Pinto holds <5% 
share in ACS Biomarker Services. Dr. Cook reports research grants from Abbott 
Diagnostics, Beckman Coulter, Critical Diagnostics, Roche Diagnostics and is a 
consultant to Beckman Coulter, and Roche Diagnostics. Dr. McCord reports 
research support from Beckman, Abbott Diagnostics, Roche Diagnostics, and 
Siemens and is a consultant to Beckman Coulter, Roche Diagnostics, and Siemens. 
All other authors have no relevant relationships to disclose.