1. J Bras Nefrol. 2020 Oct-Dec;42(4):494-497. doi:
10.1590/2175-8239-JBN-2020-0001.

Vitamin D-dependent rickets (VDDR) type 1: case series of two siblings with a 
CYP27B1 mutation and review of the literature.

Dhull RS(1), Jain R(1), Deepthi B(1), Cheong HI(2)(3), Saha A(1), Mehndiratta 
M(4), Basu S(1).

Author information:
(1)Lady Hardinge Medical College and associated Kalawati Saran Children 
Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Nephrology, New Delhi, 
India.
(2)Seoul National University Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, 
Seoul, Korea.
(3)Seoul National University College of Medicine, Kidney Research Institute, 
Medical Research Centre, Seoul, Korea.
(4)University College of Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry, New 
Delhi, India.

Two siblings presented with clinical and biochemical features of rickets, 
initially suspected as hypophosphatemic rickets. There was no improvement 
initially, hence the siblings were reinvestigated and later diagnosed as having 
vitamin D-dependent rickets (VDDR) type 1 due to a rare mutation in the CYP27B1 
gene encoding the 1α-hydroxylase enzyme. Both siblings improved with calcitriol 
supplementation. The initial presentation of VDDR is often confusing and 
algorithmic evaluation helps in diagnosis. We also present a brief review of the 
literature, including genetics.

Dois irmãos apresentaram características clínicas e bioquímicas do raquitismo, 
com suspeita clínica inicial de raquitismo hipofosfatêmico. Não houve melhora no 
início, portanto os irmãos foram reavaliados e, posteriormente, diagnosticados 
com raquitismo dependente de vitamina D (VDDR) tipo 1 devido a uma rara mutação 
no gene CYP27B1, que codifica a enzima 1a-hidroxilase. Ambos os irmãos 
melhoraram com a suplementação de calcitriol. A apresentação inicial do VDDR 
geralmente é confusa e a avaliação algorítmica ajuda no diagnóstico. Também 
apresentamos uma breve revisão da literatura, incluindo genética.

DOI: 10.1590/2175-8239-JBN-2020-0001
PMCID: PMC7860650
PMID: 32926064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]