1. Neurology. 2020 Nov 3;95(18):e2586-e2594. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000010868. 
Epub 2020 Sep 16.

Contribution of iron and Aβ to age differences in entorhinal and hippocampal 
subfield volume.

Foster CM(1), Kennedy KM(1), Daugherty AM(1), Rodrigue KM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences (C.M.F., K.M.K., K.M.R.), 
Center for Vital Longevity, University of Texas at Dallas; and Department of 
Psychology (A.M.D.) and Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, 
Institute of Gerontology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI.
(2)From the School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences (C.M.F., K.M.K., K.M.R.), 
Center for Vital Longevity, University of Texas at Dallas; and Department of 
Psychology (A.M.D.) and Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, 
Institute of Gerontology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI. 
krodrigue@utdallas.edu.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2020 Nov 3;95(18):809-810. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000010869.

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that the combination of elevated global 
β-AMYLOID (Aβ) burden and greater striatal iron content would be associated with 
smaller entorhinal cortex (ERC) volume, but not hippocampal subfield volumes, we 
measured volume and iron content using high-resolution MRI and Aβ using PET 
imaging in a cross-sectional sample of 70 cognitively normal older adults.
METHODS: Participants were scanned with florbetapir 18F PET to obtain Aβ 
standardized uptake value ratios. Susceptibility-weighted MRI was collected and 
processed to yield R2* images, and striatal regions of interest (ROIs) were 
manually placed to obtain a measure of striatal iron burden. Ultra-high 
resolution T2/PD-weighted MRIs were segmented to measure medial temporal lobe 
(MTL) volumes. Analyses were conducted using mixed-effects models with MTL ROI 
as a within-participant factor; age, iron content, and Aβ as between-participant 
factors; and MTL volumes (ERC and 3 hippocampal subfield regions) as the 
dependent variable.
RESULTS: The model indicated a significant 4-way interaction among age, iron, 
Aβ, and MTL region. Post hoc analyses indicated that the 3-way interaction among 
age, Aβ, and iron content was selective to the ERC (β = -3.34, standard error = 
1.33, 95% confidence interval -5.95 to -0.72), whereas a significant negative 
association between age and ERC volume was present only in individuals with both 
elevated iron content and Aβ.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings highlight the importance of studying Aβ in the 
context of other, potentially synergistic age-related brain factors such as iron 
accumulation and the potential role for iron as an important contributor to the 
earliest, preclinical stages of pathologic aging.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000010868
PMCID: PMC7682827
PMID: 32938781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]