1. J Oral Pathol Med. 2021 Jan;50(1):85-91. doi: 10.1111/jop.13108. Epub 2020 Oct
 9.

Discrepancy between immunohistochemistry and sequencing for BRAF V600E in 
odontogenic tumours: Comparative analysis of two VE1 antibodies.

Oh KY(1), Cho SD(1), Yoon HJ(1), Lee JI(1), Hong SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, School of Dentistry and Dental Research 
Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Although immunohistochemistry (IHC) along with molecular tests has 
been investigated in ameloblastoma for BRAF V600E detection, VE1 IHC has not 
been studied in odontogenic carcinomas (OCs) and benign mixed epithelial and 
mesenchymal odontogenic tumours (BMOTs). Here, we performed BRAF V600E mutation 
analysis, examined the expression pattern of VE1 IHC, and comparatively 
evaluated the performance of two VE1 antibodies in ameloblastomas, OCs and 
BMOTs.
METHODS: BRAF V600E detection was performed using Sanger sequencing in a total 
of 47 odontogenic tumours: 28 ameloblastomas, 6 OCs and 13 BMOTs. VE1 IHC was 
conducted using two different antibodies (IHC-A and IHC-V), and their 
performance was analysed by calculating the sensitivity and specificity compared 
with sequencing.
RESULTS: BRAF V600E mutations were identified in 24/28 (85.7%) ameloblastomas, 
2/5 (40.0%) ameloblastic carcinomas (ACs), 3/7 (42.9%) ameloblastic fibromas and 
1/2 (50.0%) ameloblastic fibro-odontomas. In the presence of the mutation, VE1 
showed diffuse cytoplasmic staining in ameloblastomas and ACs, whereas all BMOTs 
were negative for VE1. IHC-A and IHC-V yielded a sensitivity of 76.7% and 60.0%, 
respectively, although both antibodies showed 100% specificity.
CONCLUSION: OCs and BMOTs have BRAF V600E mutations in common at lower 
frequencies than ameloblastoma. Diffuse VE1 cytoplasmic staining in AC suggests 
the utility of MAPK-targeted therapy as selectively applied in ameloblastoma, 
and consistent VE1 false-negative expression in BMOTs requires further 
investigation. Considering the high specificity but low sensitivity of VE1 IHC, 
molecular tests should be performed to determine the presence of BRAF V600E 
mutations in odontogenic tumours.

Â© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jop.13108
PMID: 32939809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]