1. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2021 Feb;18(2):85-100. doi: 10.1038/s41571-020-0426-7.
Epub  2020 Sep 15.

Exploring the NK cell platform for cancer immunotherapy.

Myers JA(1), Miller JS(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. mille011@umn.edu.

Natural killer (NK) cells are cytotoxic lymphocytes of the innate immune system 
that are capable of killing virally infected and/or cancerous cells. Nearly 20 
years ago, NK cell-mediated immunotherapy emerged as a safe and effective 
treatment approach for patients with advanced-stage leukaemia. Subsequently, the 
field of NK cell-based cancer therapy has grown exponentially and currently 
constitutes a major area of immunotherapy innovation. In general, the 
development of NK cell-directed therapies has two main focal points: optimizing 
the source of therapeutic NK cells for adoptive transfer and enhancing NK cell 
cytotoxicity and persistence in vivo. A wide variety of sources of therapeutic 
NK cells are currently being tested clinically, including haploidentical NK 
cells, umbilical cord blood NK cells, stem cell-derived NK cells, NK cell lines, 
adaptive NK cells, cytokine-induced memory-like NK cells and chimeric antigen 
receptor NK cells. A plethora of methods to augment the cytotoxicity and 
longevity of NK cells are also under clinical investigation, including 
cytokine-based agents, NK cell-engager molecules and immune-checkpoint 
inhibitors. In this Review, we highlight the variety of ways in which diverse NK 
cell products and their auxiliary therapeutics are being leveraged to target 
human cancers. We also identify future avenues for NK cell therapy research.

DOI: 10.1038/s41571-020-0426-7
PMCID: PMC8316981
PMID: 32934330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests J.S.M. consults for and 
holds stock in Fate Therapeutics and GT Biopharma. These competing interests 
have been reviewed and managed by the University of Minnesota in accordance with 
its conflict of interest policy. J.A.M. declares no competing interests.