1. JCI Insight. 2020 Oct 15;5(20):e134464. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.134464.

TRPV4 channels are essential for alveolar epithelial barrier function as 
protection from lung edema.

Weber J(1), Rajan S(1), Schremmer C(1), Chao YK(1), Krasteva-Christ G(2), 
Kannler M(1), Yildirim AÃ–(3), Brosien M(4), Schredelseker J(1), Weissmann N(4), 
Grimm C(1), Gudermann T(1), Dietrich A(1).

Author information:
(1)Walther Straub Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, a member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, 
Munich Germany.
(2)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Saarland 
University, Homburg, Germany.
(3)Comprehensive Pneumology Center, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, a 
member of the DZL, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for 
Environmental Health, Munich, Germany.
(4)Justus Liebig University Giessen, Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, University of 
Giessen and Marburg Lung Center, a member of the DZL, Giessen, Germany.

Ischemia/reperfusion-induced edema (IRE), one of the most significant causes of 
mortality after lung transplantation, can be mimicked ex vivo in isolated 
perfused mouse lungs (IPL). Transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4) is 
a nonselective cation channel studied in endothelium; however, its role in the 
lung epithelium remains elusive. Here, we show enhanced IRE in TRPV4-deficient 
(TRPV4-/-) IPL compared with that of WT controls, indicating a protective role 
of TRPV4 in maintenance of the alveolar epithelial barrier. By 
immunohistochemistry, mRNA profiling, and electrophysiological characterization, 
we detected TRPV4 in bronchial epithelium, alveolar epithelial type I (ATI), and 
alveolar epithelial type II (ATII) cells. Genetic ablation of TRPV4 resulted in 
reduced expression of the water-conducting aquaporin-5 (AQP-5) channel in ATI 
cells. Migration of TRPV4-/- ATI cells was reduced, and cell barrier function 
was impaired. Analysis of isolated primary TRPV4-/- ATII cells revealed a 
reduced expression of surfactant protein C, and the TRPV4 activator GSK1016790A 
induced increases in current densities only in WT ATII cells. Moreover, TRPV4-/- 
lungs of adult mice developed significantly larger mean chord lengths and 
altered lung function compared with WT lungs. Therefore, our data illustrate 
essential functions of TRPV4 channels in alveolar epithelial cells and in 
protection from edema formation.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.134464
PMCID: PMC7605532
PMID: 32931478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.