1. Oncol Rep. 2020 Oct;44(4):1638-1648. doi: 10.3892/or.2020.7732. Epub 2020 Aug 
12.

RP11‑284F21.9 promotes lung carcinoma proliferation and invasion via the 
regulation of miR‑627‑3p/CCAR1.

Li D(1), Wang L(1), Feng J(1), Shen YW(2), Liu LN(1), Wang Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Medical Imaging, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.

Lung carcinoma is a prominent cause of mortality among patients with cancer. 
Previous studies have reported the vital role of long non‑coding RNAs (lncRNAs) 
in the malignant progression of lung cancer. lncRNA RP11‑284F21.9 was originally 
identified to be expressed in lung carcinoma, but its specific function remains 
unknown. Therefore, the present study aimed to elucidate the role of lncRNA 
RP11‑284F21.9 in lung carcinoma progression. The expression of RP11‑284F21.9 in 
lung cell lines and tissues was measured using reverse 
transcription‑quantitative PCR. The endogenous expression of RP11‑284F21.9 was 
silenced using RNA interference, and cell viabilities were measured with a Cell 
Counting Kit‑8 assay. The invasion and apoptosis of cells were determined via 
Transwell assays and flow cytometry, respectively. The protein expression levels 
were measured by western blotting. An increased expression of RP11‑284F21.9 was 
identified in both lung carcinoma tissues and cells. Knockdown of RP11‑284F21.9 
in lung carcinoma cells inhibited cell proliferation and invasion, but promoted 
cell apoptosis. The present study identified the existence of a direct 
interaction between RP11‑284F21.9 and microRNA (miRNA/miR)‑627‑3p. 
Mechanistically, it was demonstrated that RP11‑284F21.9 promoted the 
proliferation and invasiveness of lung carcinoma cells, in part, via the 
regulation of miR‑627‑3p. Furthermore, cell division cycle and apoptosis 
regulator 1 (CCAR1) was identified as a target gene of miR‑627‑3p. The in vivo 
tumor growth assay also demonstrated that the knockdown of RP11‑284F21.9 
suppressed tumor growth, upregulated miR‑627‑3p and downregulated CCAR1 in the 
xenograft model of nude mice. Thus, the present findings indicated the tumor 
promoting functions of RP11‑284F21.9 in the progression of lung carcinoma, and 
provided a novel lncRNA/miRNA axis as a target for the management of lung 
cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2020.7732
PMCID: PMC7448446
PMID: 32945522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]