1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2020 Nov 26;533(1):168-174. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.08.010. Epub 2020 Sep 15.

Pathogenic mutations perturb calmodulin regulation of Na(v)1.8 channel.

Hong L(1), Zhang M(2), Sridhar A(2), Darbar D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. 
Electronic address: hong2004@uic.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 
Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 
Jesse Brown Veterans Administration, Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic address: 
darbar@uic.edu.

The voltage-gated sodium channels play a key role in the generation and 
propagation of the cardiac action potential. Emerging data indicate that the 
Nav1.8 channel, encoded by the SCN10A gene, is a modulator of cardiac conduction 
and variation in the gene has been associated with arrhythmias such as atrial 
fibrillation (AF) and Brugada syndrome (BrS). The voltage gated sodium channels 
contain a calmodulin (CaM)-binding IQ domain involved in channel slow 
inactivation, we here investigated the role of CaM regulation of Nav1.8 channel 
function, and showed that CaM enhanced slow inactivation of the Nav1.8 channel 
and hyperpolarized steady-state inactivation curve of sodium currents. The 
effects of CaM on the channel gating were disrupted in the Nav1.8 channel 
truncated IQ domain. We studied Nav1.8 IQ domain mutations associated with AF 
and BrS, and found that a BrS-linked mutation (R1863Q) reduced the CaM-induced 
hyperpolarization shift, AF-linked mutations (R1869C and R1869G) disrupted 
CaM-induced enhanced inactivation, and effects of CaM on both development and 
recovery from slow inactivation were attenuated in all pathogenic mutations. Our 
findings indicate a role of CaM in the regulation of Nav1.8 channel function in 
cardiac arrhythmias.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.08.010
PMCID: PMC11038804
PMID: 32948286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interests The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.