1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2020 Nov;19(11):2308-2318. doi:
10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-19-0858.  Epub 2020 Sep 17.

Efficacy, Tolerability, and Pharmacokinetics of Combined Targeted MEK and Dual 
mTORC1/2 Inhibition in a Preclinical Model of Mucosal Melanoma.

Wei BR(1)(2), Hoover SB(1), Peer CJ(3), Dwyer JE(1), Adissu HA(1), Shankarappa 
P(3), Yang H(1), Lee M(1), Peat TJ(1), Figg WD(3), Simpson RM(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick, Maryland.
(3)Clinical Pharmacology Program and the Genitourinary Malignancies Branch, 
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. ms43b@nih.gov.

Melanomas arising in the mucous membranes are a rare and aggressive subtype. New 
treatment approaches are needed, yet accumulating sufficient evidence to improve 
patient outcomes is difficult. Clinical and pathological correlates between 
human and canine mucosal melanomas are substantial, and the relatively greater 
incidence of spontaneous naturally occurring mucosal melanoma in dogs represents 
a promising opportunity for predictive modeling. The genomic landscapes of human 
and canine mucosal melanoma appear highly diverse and generally lack recurring 
hotspot mutations associated with cutaneous melanomas. Although much remains to 
be determined, evidence indicates that Ras/MAPK and/or PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling 
pathway activations are common in both species and may represent targets for 
therapeutic intervention. Sapanisertib, an mTORC1/2 inhibitor, was selected from 
a PI3K/mTOR inhibitor library to collaborate with MEK inhibition; the latter 
preclinical efficacy was demonstrated previously for canine mucosal melanoma. 
Combined inhibition of MEK and mTORC1/2, using trametinib and sapanisertib, 
produced apoptosis and cell-cycle alteration, synergistically reducing cell 
survival in canine mucosal melanoma cell lines with varying basal signaling 
activation levels. Compared with individual inhibitors, a staggered sapanisertib 
dose, coupled with daily trametinib, was optimal for limiting primary mucosal 
melanoma xenograft growth in mice, and tumor dissemination in a metastasis 
model, while minimizing hematologic and renal side effects. Inhibitors 
downmodulated respective signaling targets and the combination additionally 
suppressed pathway reciprocal crosstalk. The combination did not significantly 
change plasma sapanisertib pharmacokinetics; however, trametinib area under the 
curve was increased in the presence of sapanisertib. Targeting Ras/MAPK and 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signal transduction pathways appear rational therapies for canine 
and human mucosal melanoma.

Â©2020 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-19-0858
PMCID: PMC8914349
PMID: 32943547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none