1. Heliyon. 2020 Sep 6;6(9):e04846. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04846.
eCollection  2020 Sep.

Determination of malathion's toxic effect on Lens culinaris Medik cell cycle.

Salazar Mercado SA(1), Quintero Caleño JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Universidad Francisco de Paula Santander, Avenida 
Gran, Colombia No. 12E-96B Colsag, San José de Cúcuta, Colombia.
(2)Department of Agricultural Sciences, Universidad Francisco de Paula 
Santander, Colombia.

The present study aimed to determine the toxic effect of malathion pesticide on 
root growth, cell division and the chromosomal abnormalities frequency using the 
L. culinaris test. Initially, the lentil seeds were subjected to different doses 
of malathion (0.0 0.5, 1, 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30 mgL-1) and during 24, 
48, and 72 h, the root length was measured. Subsequently, at 72h, the mitotic 
index, mitotic inhibition, and cellular abnormalities were calculated for all 
treatments. According to the obtained results, it was visualized that the root 
growth was inversely proportional to the concentration of malathion at all times 
of exposure. After 72h of exposure, the lowest values of the mitotic index and 
inhibition were presented at malathion concentrations 20, 25 and 30 mgL-1. 
Additionally, micronuclei cell abnormalities, metaphase sticky chromosomes, 
split chromosomes, nuclear lesions, irregular anaphase, anaphase bridges, 
binucleated cells, absence of nucleus and telophase bridge were observed. 
Finally, Malathion induced mitodepressive and cytotoxic effects in the 
meristematic cells of the L. culinaris root tip. A high frequency of abnormality 
was found in the micronuclei, which represented an indicator of a high degree of 
toxicity at the cellular level.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04846
PMCID: PMC7486440
PMID: 32954032