1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Nov 20;295(47):16156-16165. doi: 10.1074/jbc.AC120.015720. 
Epub 2020 Sep 23.

Template-dependent inhibition of coronavirus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase by 
remdesivir reveals a second mechanism of action.

Tchesnokov EP(1), Gordon CJ(1), Woolner E(1), Kocinkova D(1), Perry JK(2), Feng 
JY(2), Porter DP(2), Götte M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Gilead Sciences, Inc., Foster City, California, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. Electronic address: gotte@ualberta.ca.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2021 Aug;297(2):101048. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101048.

Remdesivir (RDV) is a direct-acting antiviral agent that is used to treat 
patients with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). RDV targets the viral 
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) of severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). We have previously shown that incorporation of the 
active triphosphate form of RDV (RDV-TP) at position i causes delayed chain 
termination at position i + 3. Here we demonstrate that the S861G mutation in 
RdRp eliminates chain termination, which confirms the existence of a steric 
clash between Ser-861 and the incorporated RDV-TP. With WT RdRp, increasing 
concentrations of NTP pools cause a gradual decrease in termination and the 
resulting read-through increases full-length product formation. Hence, RDV 
residues could be embedded in copies of the first RNA strand that is later used 
as a template. We show that the efficiency of incorporation of the complementary 
UTP opposite template RDV is compromised, providing a second opportunity to 
inhibit replication. A structural model suggests that RDV, when serving as the 
template for the incoming UTP, is not properly positioned because of a 
significant clash with Ala-558. The adjacent Val-557 is in direct contact with 
the template base, and the V557L mutation is implicated in low-level resistance 
to RDV. We further show that the V557L mutation in RdRp lowers the nucleotide 
concentration required to bypass this template-dependent inhibition. The 
collective data provide strong evidence to show that template-dependent 
inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 RdRp by RDV is biologically relevant.

© 2020 Tchesnokov et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.AC120.015720
PMCID: PMC7681019
PMID: 32967965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—M. G. received funding from 
Gilead Sciences in support for studies on the mechanism of action of remdesivir. 
J. K. P., J. Y. F., and D. P. P. are employees of Gilead Sciences, Inc.