1. Molecules. 2020 Sep 18;25(18):4272. doi: 10.3390/molecules25184272.

A Paradigm for Peptide Hormone-GPCR Analyses.

Naider F(1), Becker JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Staten Island, CUNY, 2800 Victory Blvd, 
Staten Island, NY 10314, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee, 610 Ken and Blaire 
Mossman Building, 1311 Cumberland Avenue, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA.

Work from our laboratories over the last 35 years that has focused on Ste2p, a G 
protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), and its tridecapeptide ligand α-factor is 
reviewed. Our work utilized the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model system 
for understanding peptide-GPCR interactions. It explored the structure and 
function of synthetic α-factor analogs and biosynthetic receptor domains, as 
well as designed mutations of Ste2p. The results and conclusions are described 
using the nuclear magnetic resonance interrogation of synthetic Ste2p 
transmembrane domains (TMs), the fluorescence interrogation of agonist and 
antagonist binding, the biochemical crosslinking of peptide analogs to Ste2p, 
and the phenotypes of receptor mutants. We identified the ligand-binding domain 
in Ste2p, the functional assemblies of TMs, unexpected and interesting ligand 
analogs; gained insights into the bound α-factor structure; and unraveled the 
function and structures of various Ste2p domains, including the N-terminus, TMs, 
loops connecting the TMs, and the C-terminus. Our studies showed interactions 
between specific residues of Ste2p in an active state, but not resting state, 
and the effect of ligand activation on the dimerization of Ste2p. We show that, 
using a battery of different biochemical and genetic approaches, deep insight 
can be gained into the structure and conformational dynamics of GPCR-peptide 
interactions in the absence of a crystal structure.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25184272
PMCID: PMC7570734
PMID: 32961885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.