1. Vet Res. 2020 Sep 22;51(1):120. doi: 10.1186/s13567-020-00846-1.

Chicken bromodomain-containing protein 2 interacts with the Newcastle disease 
virus matrix protein and promotes viral replication.

Duan Z(1)(2), Han Y(3), Zhou L(3), Yuan C(3), Wang Y(3), Zhao C(3), Tang H(3), 
Chen J(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction in the Plateau 
Mountainous Region, Ministry of Education, Guizhou University, Guiyang, China. 
zqduan@gzu.edu.cn.
(2)College of Animal Science, Guizhou University, Jiaxiu South Road, Huaxi 
District, Guiyang, 550025, Guizhou, China. zqduan@gzu.edu.cn.
(3)College of Animal Science, Guizhou University, Jiaxiu South Road, Huaxi 
District, Guiyang, 550025, Guizhou, China.

Bromodomain-containing protein 2 (BRD2) is a nucleus-localized serine-threonine 
kinase that plays pivotal roles in the transcriptional control of diverse genes. 
In our previous study, the chicken BRD2 (chBRD2) protein was found to interact 
with the Newcastle disease virus (NDV) matrix (M) protein using a yeast 
two-hybrid screening system, but the role of the chBRD2 protein in the 
replication of NDV remains unclear. In this study, we first confirmed the 
interaction between the M protein and chBRD2 protein using fluorescence 
co-localization, co-immunoprecipitation and pull-down assays. Intracellular 
binding studies indicated that the C-terminus (aa 264-313) of the M protein and 
the extra-terminal (ET) domain (aa 619-683) of the chBRD2 protein were 
responsible for interactions with each other. Interestingly, although two amino 
acids (T621 and S649) found in the chBRD2/ET domain were different from those in 
the human BRD2/ET domain and in that of other mammals, they did not disrupt the 
BRD2-M interaction or the chBRD2-M interaction. In addition, we found that the 
transcription of the chBRD2 gene was obviously decreased in both NDV-infected 
cells and pEGFP-M-transfected cells in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, small 
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of chBRD2 or overexpression of chBRD2 
remarkably enhanced or reduced NDV replication by upregulating or downregulating 
viral RNA synthesis and transcription, respectively. Overall, we demonstrate for 
the first time that the interaction of the M protein with the chBRD2 protein in 
the nucleus promotes NDV replication by downregulating chBRD2 expression and 
facilitating viral RNA synthesis and transcription. These results will provide 
further insight into the biological functions of the M protein in the 
replication of NDV.

DOI: 10.1186/s13567-020-00846-1
PMCID: PMC7509934
PMID: 32962745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.