1. ASN Neuro. 2020 Jan-Dec;12:1759091420944658. doi: 10.1177/1759091420944658.

Involvement of Hyperpolarization-Activated Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated Channel 3 in 
Oxytocin Neuronal Activity in Lactating Rats With Pup Deprivation.

Li D(1), Liu H(1), Liu X(1), Wang H(1), Li T(1), Wang X(1), Jia S(1), Wang P(2), 
Wang YF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Harbin Medical 
University.
(2)Department of Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Harbin Medical 
University.

Oxytocin, a hypothalamic neuropeptide essential for breastfeeding, is mainly 
produced in oxytocin neurons in the supraoptic nucleus (SON) and paraventricular 
nucleus. However, mechanisms underlying oxytocin secretion, specifically the 
involvement of hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channel 3 
(HCN3) in oxytocin neuronal activity, remain unclear. Using a rat model of 
intermittent and continuous pup deprivation (PD) at the middle stage of 
lactation, we analyzed the contribution of HCN3 in oxytocin receptor 
(OTR)-associated signaling cascade to oxytocin neuronal activity in the SON. PD 
caused maternal depression, anxiety, milk shortage, involution of the mammary 
glands, and delays in uterine recovery, particularly in continuous PD. PD 
increased hypothalamic but not plasma oxytocin levels in enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. In the SON, PD increased c-Fos expression but reduced 
expressions of cyclooxygenase-2 and HCN3 in Western blots and/or 
immunohistochemistry. Moreover, PD significantly increased the molecular 
association of OTR with HCN3 in coimmunoprecipitation. In brain slices, 
inhibition of HCN3 activity with DK-AH269 blocked prostaglandin E2-evoked 
increase in the firing activity and burst discharge in oxytocin neurons in 
patch-clamp recordings. In addition, oxytocin-evoked increase in the molecular 
association between OTR and HCN3 in brain slices of the SON was blocked by 
pretreatment with indomethacin, an inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2. These results 
indicate that normal activity of oxytocin neurons is under the regulation of an 
oxytocin receptor-cyclooxygenase-2-HCN3 pathway and that PD disrupts maternal 
behavior through increasing intranuclear oxytocin secretion in the SON but 
likely reducing bolus oxytocin release into the blood through inhibition of HCN3 
activity.

DOI: 10.1177/1759091420944658
PMCID: PMC7517985
PMID: 32962418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]