1. J Med Virol. 2021 Apr;93(4):2010-2020. doi: 10.1002/jmv.26553. Epub 2020 Nov
1.

Evolution of SARS-CoV-2 genome from December 2019 to late March 2020: 
Emerged haplotypes and informative Tag nucleotide variations.

Safari I(1), InanlooRahatloo K(1), Elahi E(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, 
Tehran, Iran.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes serious 
disease in humans. First identified in November/December 2019 in China, it has 
rapidly spread worldwide. We analyzed 2790 SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences from 56 
countries that were available on April 2, 2020, to assess the evolution of the 
virus during this early phase of its expansion. We aimed to assess sequence 
variations that had evolved in virus genomes, giving the greatest attention to 
the S gene. We also aimed to identify haplotypes that the variations may define 
and consider their geographic and chronologic distribution. Variations at 1930 
positions that together cause 1203 amino acid changes were identified. The 
frequencies of changes normalized to the lengths of genes and encoded proteins 
were relatively high in ORF3a and relatively low in M. A variation that causes 
an Asp614Gly near the receptor-binding domain of S were found at a high 
frequency, and it was considered that this may contribute to the rapid spread of 
viruses with this variation. Our most important findings relate to haplotypes. 
Sixty-six haplotypes that constitute thirteen haplotype groups (H1-H13) were 
identified, and 84.6% of the 2790 sequences analyzed were associated with these 
haplotypes. The majority of the sequences (75.1%) were associated with haplotype 
groups H1-H3. The distribution pattern of the haplotype groups differed in 
various geographic regions. A few were country/territory specific. The location 
and time of emergence of some haplotypes are discussed. Importantly, nucleotide 
variations that define the various haplotypes and Tag/signature variations for 
most of the haplotypes are reported. The practical applications of these 
variations are discussed.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.26553
PMCID: PMC7537300
PMID: 32975856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflict 
of interests.