1. Pharmaceutics. 2020 Sep 22;12(9):898. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12090898.

Frequency of CYP3A5 Genetic Polymorphisms and Tacrolimus Pharmacokinetics in 
Pediatric Liver Transplantation.

Buend√≠a JA(1), Halac E(2), Bosaleh A(3), Garcia de Davila MT(3), Imvertasa O(2), 
Bramuglia G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Antioquia, Medellin 050010, Colombia.
(2)Liver Transplant Service, J.P. Garrahan Hospital, Buenos Aires C1245AAM, 
Argentina.
(3)Pathology Service, J.P. Garrahan Hospital, Buenos Aires C1245AAM, Argentina.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos 
Aires C1113, Argentina.

The evidence available in the pediatric population is limited for making 
clinical decisions regarding the optimization of tacrolimus (TAC) in 
pharmacotherapy. The objective of this study was to estimate the frequency of 
CYP3A5 genetic polymorphisms and their relationship with tacrolimus requirements 
in the pediatric population. This was a longitudinal cohort study with a 
two-year follow-up of 77 patients under 18 years old who underwent a liver 
transplant during the period 2009-2012 at the J.P. Garrahan Pediatric Hospital. 
Tacrolimus levels from day five up to two years after the transplant were 
obtained from hospital records of routine therapeutic drug monitoring. The 
genotyping of CYP3A5 (CYP3A5*1/*3 or *3/*3) was performed in liver biopsies from 
both the donor and the recipient. The frequency of CYP3A5*1 expression for 
recipients was 37.1% and 32.2% for donors. Patients who received an expresser 
organ showed lower Co/dose, especially following 90 days after the surgery. The 
role of each polymorphism is different according to the number of days after the 
transplant, and it must be taken into account to optimize the benefits of TAC 
therapy during the post-transplant induction and maintenance phases.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12090898
PMCID: PMC7557928
PMID: 32971783

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.