1. PLoS One. 2020 Sep 28;15(9):e0238497. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238497. 
eCollection 2020.

Signatures of somatic mutations and gene expression from p16INK4A positive head 
and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC).

Saba NF(1), Dinasarapu AR(2), Magliocca KR(1), Dwivedi B(1), Seby S(3), Qin 
ZS(4), Patel M(1), Griffith CC(5), Wang X(1), El-Deiry M(1), Steuer CE(1), 
Kowalski J(6), Shin DM(1), Zwick ME(2), Chen ZG(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States of 
America.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States of 
America.
(3)Centers for Disease Control (CDC), Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory University Atlanta, 
Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(5)Department of Pathology, Cleveland Clinics, Cleveland, OH, United States of 
America.
(6)Department of Oncology, Dell Medical School, Austin, Texas, United States of 
America.
(7)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University Atlanta, 
Atlanta, GA, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2024 Aug 8;19(8):e0308819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0308819.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) causes a subset of head and neck squamous cell 
carcinomas (HNSCC) of the oropharynx. We combined targeted DNA- and genome-wide 
RNA-sequencing to identify genetic variants and gene expression signatures 
respectively from patients with HNSCC including oropharyngeal squamous cell 
carcinomas (OPSCC). DNA and RNA were purified from 35- formalin fixed and 
paraffin embedded (FFPE) HNSCC tumor samples. Immuno-histochemical evaluation of 
tumors was performed to determine the expression levels of p16INK4A and 
classified tumor samples either p16+ or p16-. Using ClearSeq Comprehensive 
Cancer panel, we examined the distribution of somatic mutations. Somatic 
single-nucleotide variants (SNV) were called using GATK-Mutect2 ("tumor-only" 
mode) approach. Using RNA-seq, we identified a catalog of 1,044 and 8 genes as 
significantly expressed between p16+ and p16-, respectively at FDR 0.05 (5%) and 
0.1 (10%). The clinicopathological characteristics of the patients including 
anatomical site, smoking and survival were analyzed when comparing p16+ and p16- 
tumors. The majority of tumors (65%) were p16+. Population sequence variant 
databases, including gnomAD, ExAC, COSMIC and dbSNP, were used to identify the 
mutational landscape of somatic sequence variants within sequenced genes. 
Hierarchical clustering of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) samples based on 
HPV-status was observed using differentially expressed genes. Using RNA-seq in 
parallel with targeted DNA-seq, we identified mutational and gene expression 
signatures characteristic of p16+ and p16- HNSCC. Our gene signatures are 
consistent with previously published data including TCGA and support the need to 
further explore the biologic relevance of these alterations in HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238497
PMCID: PMC7521680
PMID: 32986729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No Authors have competing interests.