1. Redox Biol. 2020 Oct;37:101729. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2020.101729. Epub 2020
Sep  15.

The functional significance of redox-mediated intersubunit cross-linking in 
regulation of human type 2 ryanodine receptor.

Nikolaienko R(1), Bovo E(1), Rebbeck RT(2), Kahn D(1), Thomas DD(2), Cornea 
RL(2), Zima AV(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Loyola University Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Loyola University Chicago, IL, 
USA. Electronic address: azima@luc.edu.

The type 2 ryanodine receptor (RyR2) plays a key role in the cardiac 
intracellular calcium (Ca2+) regulation. We have previously shown that oxidative 
stress activates RyR2 in rabbit cardiomyocytes by promoting the formation of 
disulfide bonds between neighboring RyR2 subunits. However, the functional 
significance of this redox modification for human RyR2 (hRyR2) remains largely 
unknown. Here, we studied the redox regulation of hRyR2 in HEK293 cells 
transiently expressing the ryr2 gene. Analysis of hRyR2 cross-linking and of the 
redox-GFP readout response to diamide oxidation revealed that hRyR2 cysteines 
involved in the intersubunit cross-linking are highly sensitive to oxidative 
stress. In parallel experiments, the effect of diamide on endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) Ca2+ release was studied in cells co-transfected with hRyR2, ER Ca2+ pump 
(SERCA2a) and the ER-targeted Ca2+ sensor R-CEPIA1er. Expression of hRyR2 and 
SERCA2a produced "cardiac-like" Ca2+ waves due to spontaneous hRyR2 activation. 
Incubation with diamide caused a fast decline of the luminal ER Ca2+ (or ER Ca2+ 
load) followed by the cessation of Ca2+ waves. The maximal effect of diamide on 
ER Ca2+ load and Ca2+ waves positively correlates with the maximum level of 
hRyR2 cross-linking, indicating a functional significance of this redox 
modification. Furthermore, the level of hRyR2 cross-linking positively 
correlates with the degree of calmodulin (CaM) dissociation from the hRyR2 
complex. In skeletal muscle RyR (RyR1), cysteine 3635 (C3635) is viewed as 
dominantly responsible for the redox regulation of the channel. Here, we showed 
that the corresponding cysteine 3602 (C3602) in hRyR2 does not participate in 
intersubunit cross-linking and plays a limited role in the hRyR2 regulation by 
CaM during oxidative stress. Collectively, these results suggest that 
redox-mediated intersubunit cross-linking is an important regulator of hRyR2 
function under pathological conditions associated with oxidative stress.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2020.101729
PMCID: PMC7522892
PMID: 32980662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this article.