1. Animals (Basel). 2020 Sep 25;10(10):1740. doi: 10.3390/ani10101740.

Dietary Supplementation of Inorganic, Organic, and Fatty Acids in Pig: A Review.

Ferronato G(1), Prandini A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Food and Nutrition (DIANA), Faculty of 
Agriculture, Food and Environmental Science, Universit√† Cattolica del Sacro 
Cuore, Via Emilia Parmense 84, 29100 Piacenza, Italy.

Reduction of antibiotic use has been a hot topic of research over the past 
decades. The European ban on growth-promoter use has increased the use of feed 
additivities that can enhance animal growth performance and health status, 
particularly during critical and stressful phases of life. Pig farming is 
characterized by several stressful periods, such as the weaning phase, and 
studies have suggested that the proper use of feed additives during stress could 
prevent disease and enhance performance through modulation of the 
gastrointestinal tract mucosa and microbiome. The types of feed additive include 
acids, minerals, prebiotics, probiotics, yeast, nucleotides, and phytoproducts. 
This review focuses on commonly used acids, classified as inorganic, organic, 
and fatty acids, and their beneficial and potential effects, which are widely 
reported in the bibliography. Acids have long been used as feed acidifiers and 
preservatives, and were more recently introduced into feed formulated for young 
pigs with the goal of stabilizing the stomach pH to offset their reduced 
digestive capacity. In addition, some organic acids represent intermediary 
products of the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA), and thus could be considered an 
energy source. Moreover, antimicrobial properties have been exploited to 
modulate microbiota populations and reduce pathogenic bacteria. Given these 
potential benefits, organic acids are no longer seen as simple acidifiers, but 
rather as growth promoters and potential antibiotic substitutes owing to their 
beneficial action on the gastrointestinal tract (GIT).

DOI: 10.3390/ani10101740
PMCID: PMC7600838
PMID: 32992813

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.