1. Viruses. 2020 Sep 25;12(10):1084. doi: 10.3390/v12101084.

FUT2, Secretor Status and FUT3 Polymorphisms of Children with Acute Diarrhea 
Infected with Rotavirus and Norovirus in Brazil.

Loureiro Tonini MA(1), Pires Gonçalves Barreira DM(1), Bueno de Freitas Santolin 
L(1), Bondi Volpini LP(1), Gagliardi Leite JP(2), Le Moullac-Vaidye B(3), Le 
Pendu J(3), Cruz Spano L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Gastroenteritis, Pathology Department, 
Health Science Center, Federal University of Espírito Santo, Maruípe, Vitória 
1468, ES, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Comparative and Environmental Virology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, 
Rio de Janeiro 4365, RJ, Brazil.
(3)CRCINA, Inserm, Université de Nantes, F-44000 Nantes, France.

Host susceptibility according to human histo-blood group antigens (HBGAs) is 
widely known for norovirus infection, but is less described for rotavirus. Due 
to the variable HBGA polymorphism among populations, we aimed to evaluate the 
association between HBGA phenotypes (ABH, Lewis and secretor status) and 
susceptibility to rotavirus and norovirus symptomatic infection, and the 
polymorphisms of FUT2 and FUT3, of children from southeastern Brazil. Paired 
fecal-buccal specimens from 272 children with acute diarrhea were used to 
determine rotavirus/norovirus genotypes and HBGAs phenotypes/genotypes, 
respectively. Altogether, 100 (36.8%) children were infected with rotavirus and 
norovirus. The rotavirus P[8] genotype predominates (85.7%). Most of the 
noroviruses (93.8%) belonged to genogroup II (GII). GII.4 Sydney represented 76% 
(35/46) amongst five other genotypes. Rotavirus and noroviruses infected 
predominantly children with secretor status (97% and 98.5%, respectively). 
However, fewer rotavirus-infected children were Lewis-negative (8.6%) than the 
norovirus-infected ones (18.5%). FUT3 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) 
occurred mostly at the T59G > G508A > T202C > C314T positions. Our results 
reinforce the current knowledge that secretors are more susceptible to infection 
by both rotavirus and norovirus than non-secretors. The high rate for Lewis 
negative (17.1%) and the combination of SNPs, beyond the secretor status, may 
reflect the highly mixed population in Brazil.

DOI: 10.3390/v12101084
PMCID: PMC7600990
PMID: 32992989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.