1. Microb Biotechnol. 2021 Nov;14(6):2605-2616. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.13667.
Epub  2020 Sep 29.

Multi-modular engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for high-titre production 
of tyrosol and salidroside.

Liu H(1), Tian Y(1), Zhou Y(1), Kan Y(1), Wu T(1), Xiao W(2), Luo Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West 
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(2)Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems 
Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), School of Chemical Engineering and 
Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China.

Tyrosol and its glycosylated product salidroside are important ingredients in 
pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals and cosmetics. Despite the ability of 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae to naturally synthesize tyrosol, high yield from de 
novo synthesis remains a challenge. Here, we used metabolic engineering 
strategies to construct S. cerevisiae strains for high-level production of 
tyrosol and salidroside from glucose. First, tyrosol production was unlocked 
from feedback inhibition. Then, transketolase and ribose-5-phosphate 
ketol-isomerase were overexpressed to balance the supply of precursors. Next, 
chorismate synthase and chorismate mutase were overexpressed to maximize the 
aromatic amino acid flux towards tyrosol synthesis. Finally, the competing 
pathway was knocked out to further direct the carbon flux into tyrosol 
synthesis. Through a combination of these interventions, tyrosol titres reached 
702.30 ± 0.41 mg l-1 in shake flasks, which were approximately 26-fold greater 
than that of the WT strain. RrU8GT33 from Rhodiola rosea was also applied to 
cells and maximized salidroside production from tyrosol in S. cerevisiae. 
Salidroside titres of 1575.45 ± 19.35 mg l-1 were accomplished in shake flasks. 
Furthermore, titres of 9.90 ± 0.06 g l-1 of tyrosol and 26.55 ± 0.43 g l-1 of 
salidroside were achieved in 5 l bioreactors, both are the highest titres 
reported to date. The synergistic engineering strategies presented in this study 
could be further applied to increase the production of high value-added aromatic 
compounds derived from the aromatic amino acid biosynthesis pathway in S. 
cerevisiae.

© 2020 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by Society for Applied 
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1751-7915.13667
PMCID: PMC8601180
PMID: 32990403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared the competing 
financial interests in the form of a pending patent application.