1. Sci Rep. 2020 Sep 30;10(1):16111. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-73094-0.

An association study of C9orf3, a novel component of the renin-angiotensin 
system, and hypertension in diabetes.

Ichikawa M(1), Konoshita T(2), Makino Y(1), Suzuki J(1), Ishizuka T(1), Nakamura 
H(3).

Author information:
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, University of Fukui Faculty of Medical 
Sciences, 23-3, Matsuokashimoaizuki, Eiheiji, Fukui, 910-1193, Japan.
(2)Third Department of Internal Medicine, University of Fukui Faculty of Medical 
Sciences, 23-3, Matsuokashimoaizuki, Eiheiji, Fukui, 910-1193, Japan. 
konosita@u-fukui.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Environmental and Preventive Medicine, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Japan.

The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) is important in the onset and course of 
cardiovascular, kidney, and metabolic disorders. Previous reports showed that 
the RAS blockade protects organs and suppress the development of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. A novel component of the RAS, namely, chromosome 9 open reading frame 
3 (C9orf3), was recently identified, however, its effects are unclear. We 
evaluated whether the genetic variant of C9orf3 is associated with morbidity of 
hypertension among subjects with type 2 diabetes. We enrolled 382 subjects with 
type 2 diabetes, 222 of whom were diagnosed with hypertension. Human leukocyte 
genomic DNA was isolated and a genetic variant was analyzed for a C/T variant of 
C9orf3 (rs4385527) via PCR analysis. The relationship between the genotype and 
hypertension morbidity among subjects with diabetes was examined. The proportion 
of the respective C9orf3 genetic variants were as follows 247 CC, 119 CT, and 16 
TT. The risk of hypertension was determined to be 1.58, with a 95% confidence 
interval of 1.11-2.27. Moreover, the p value was 0.012 for allelic comparison 
and for Armitage's trend test, with the C allele identified as the risk factor. 
Consequently, hypertension was markedly associated with type 2 diabetes in 
subjects with the C9orf3 variant, exhibiting a nearly 1.6-fold increased risk. 
The C variant of a new component of the RAS, C9orf3 (rs4385527) might have a 
considerable impact on the pathogenesis of hypertension in diabetes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-73094-0
PMCID: PMC7528017
PMID: 32999396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.