1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Sep 25;12(10):2757. doi: 10.3390/cancers12102757.

AXL Inactivation Inhibits Mesothelioma Growth and Migration via Regulation of 
p53 Expression.

Song W(1), Wang H(1), Lu M(1), Ni X(1), Bahri N(2), Zhu S(1), Chen L(1), Wu 
Y(1), Qiu J(1), Fletcher JA(2), Ou WB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Silkworm Bioreactor and Biomedicine, 
College of Life Sciences and Medicine, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 
310018, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Malignant mesothelioma is a locally aggressive and highly lethal neoplasm. 
Dysregulation and activation of Gas6/AXL tyrosine kinase signaling are 
associated with mesothelioma progression, but the mechanisms of these AXL 
tumorigenic roles are poorly understood. p53 mutants in lung carcinoma 
upregulate AXL expression by binding and acetylating the AXL promoter. Although 
TP53 mutations are uncommon in mesothelioma, we hypothesized that these tumors 
might have alternative feedback mechanisms between AXL and p53. In the current 
report, we investigated AXL regulation of TP53 transcription, expression, and 
biological function in mesothelioma. AXL expression was stronger in mesothelioma 
than most of the other tumor types from the TCGA gene expression profile 
dataset. AXL knockdown by shRNA induced wild-type and mutant p53 expression in 
mesothelioma cell lines, suggesting that AXL pro-tumorigenic roles result in 
part from the suppression of p53 function. Likewise, induced AXL inhibited 
expression of wild type p53 in COS-7 cells and 293T cells. Immunofluorescence 
staining showed nuclear colocalization of AXL and p53; however, association of 
AXL and p53 was not demonstrated in immunoprecipitation complexes. The AXL 
effects on p53 expression resulted from the inhibition of TP53 transcription, as 
demonstrated by qRT-PCR after AXL silencing and TP53 promotor dual luciferase 
activity assays. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-qPCR and sequencing showed that 
AXL bound to the initial 600 bp sequence at the 5' end of the TP53 promoter. AXL 
inhibition (shRNA or R428) reduced mesothelioma cell viability, migration, and 
invasion, whereas TP53 shRNA knockdown attenuated antiproliferative, migration, 
and invasive effects of AXL silencing or AXL inactivation in these cells. These 
studies demonstrate a novel feedback regulation loop between AXL and p53, and 
provide a rationale for mesothelioma therapies targeting AXL/p53 signaling.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12102757
PMCID: PMC7601862
PMID: 32992696

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.