1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2020 Sep 30;56(10):511. doi: 10.3390/medicina56100511.

Depression, Metabolic Syndrome, Serum TSH, and Vitamin D Concentrations in Rural 
and Urban Postmenopausal Women.

Bojar I(1), Raczkiewicz D(2), Sarecka-Hujar B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's Health, Institute of Rural Health, 20-950 Lublin, 
Poland.
(2)Institute of Statistics and Demography, Collegium of Economic Analysis, SGH 
Warsaw School of Economics, 02-554 Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Basic Biomedical Science, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences in 
Sosnowiec, Medical University of Silesia in Katowice, 41-200 Sosnowiec, Poland.

Background and objectives: Depression is a serious problem affecting people 
worldwide, however it more commonly concerns women. Depression reduces the 
quality of life and, in many cases, leads to suicide. Numerous new biological 
factors have been demonstrated to have an impact on the pathogenesis of 
depression, including vitamin D, thyroid hormones, as well as factors related to 
heart disease. The aim of the study was to assess the impact of serum thyroid 
stimulating hormone (TSH) and vitamin D concentrations as well as metabolic 
syndrome on the severity of depression in Polish postmenopausal women from urban 
and rural areas. Materials and Methods: The study was conducted in 2018-2019 in 
the Lublin region, Poland, and comprised 396 postmenopausal women (239 living in 
rural areas and 157 living in urban areas). Metabolic syndrome criteria 
according to the International Diabetes Federation and Beck Depression Inventory 
were used, and laboratory blood tests were performed. Results: A significantly 
higher percentage of the examined rural residents had moderate or severe 
depression in comparison to the urban ones (p = 0.049). The examined women from 
rural areas had a significantly higher serum vitamin D concentration in 
comparison to the urban ones (p < 0.001). The rural residents more commonly had 
below-normal levels of serum TSH and less commonly had normal levels in 
comparison to the urban residents. Metabolic syndrome was found in 70% of the 
rural residents, and that number was significantly lower in the urban ones (22%, 
p < 0.001). Conclusions: The severity of depression in postmenopausal Polish 
women was correlated negatively with the serum TSH concentration in women from 
rural areas. The severity of depression was increased in urban postmenopausal 
women with hypertension. No correlation of the depression severity with the 
serum vitamin D concentration or other criteria of metabolic syndrome was found.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina56100511
PMCID: PMC7599760
PMID: 33008063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.