1. Mol Microbiol. 2021 Apr;115(4):526-538. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14620. Epub 2020 Nov
3.

L-Aspartate as a high-quality nitrogen source in Escherichia coli: Regulation of 
L-aspartase by the nitrogen regulatory system and interaction of L-aspartase 
with GlnB.

Schubert C(1), Zedler S(1), Strecker A(1), Unden G(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology and Wine Research, Institute for Molecular Physiology, Johannes 
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

Escherichia coli uses the C4-dicarboxylate transporter DcuA for 
L-aspartate/fumarate antiport, which results in the exploitation of L-aspartate 
for fumarate respiration under anaerobic conditions and for nitrogen 
assimilation under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. L-Aspartate represents a 
high-quality nitrogen source for assimilation. Nitrogen assimilation from 
L-aspartate required DcuA, and aspartase AspA to release ammonia. Ammonia is 
able to provide by established pathways the complete set of intracellular 
precursors (ammonia, L-aspartate, L-glutamate, and L-glutamine) for synthesizing 
amino acids, nucleotides, and amino sugars. AspA was regulated by a central 
regulator of nitrogen metabolism, GlnB. GlnB interacted with AspA and stimulated 
its L-aspartate deaminase activity (NH3 -forming), but not the reverse amination 
reaction. GlnB stimulation required 2-oxoglutarate and ATP, or uridylylated 
GlnB-UMP, consistent with the activation of nitrogen assimilation under nitrogen 
limitation. Binding to AspA was lost in the GlnB(Y51F) mutant of the 
uridylylation site. AspA, therefore, represents a new type of GlnB target that 
binds GlnB (with ATP and 2-oxoglutarate), or GlnB-UMP (with or without 
effectors), and both situations stimulate AspA deamination activity. Thus, AspA 
represents the central enzyme for nitrogen assimilation from L-aspartate, and 
AspA is integrated into the nitrogen assimilation network by the regulator GlnB.

Â© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14620
PMID: 33012071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]