1. Front Pediatr. 2020 Sep 8;8:543. doi: 10.3389/fped.2020.00543. eCollection
2020.

Familial Interstitial Lung Disease Caused by Mutation of the STING1 Gene.

Li J(1)(2), An S(2), Du Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory, Children's Hospital of Hebei Province, 
Shijiazhuang, China.

Mutations that affect the STING1 (TMEM173) gene cause a rare autoinflammatory 
syndrome, which is known as STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy 
(SAVI) and which was initially described in 2014 (1). Thus far, only four 
reports have been conducted regarding families affected with SAVI in the 
literature. In this article, the clinical, laboratory, and genetic 
characteristics of two generations (three cases) of SAVI are described. Unlike 
previously reported cases that were caused by STING1 mutation, the initial and 
major clinical manifestations of the mentioned cases are largely identified in 
the lungs with interstitial lung disease (ILD), and the evidence of typical 
extrapulmonary symptoms of early-onset systemic inflammation (e.g., cutaneous 
vasculopathy) were minimal except for the proband, who was diagnosed with 
arthritis 8 years after onset. In addition, a younger sibling showed no 
symptoms. Such reports are rarely related to mutations in STING1. The proband 
was examined with bronchoscopy and alveolar lavage to determine the cause. This 
study emphasizes that, in the clinical assessment of interstitial pneumonia in 
children, the possibility of STING1 mutation should be considered, especially in 
patients with arthritis in addition.

Copyright Â© 2020 Li, An and Du.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2020.00543
PMCID: PMC7505928
PMID: 33014937