1. J Gen Virol. 2020 Dec;101(12):1242-1250. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001503. Epub 2020 
Oct 5.

Neddylation of M1 negatively regulates the replication of influenza A virus.

Li Y(1), Chai W(2)(3), Min J(4)(2), Ye Z(2), Tong X(2), Qi D(2), Liu W(5)(4)(2), 
Luo E(1), Li J(2)(4), Ye X(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China 
Medical University, Shenyang 110122, PR China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China.
(3)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology, Beijing Pediatric Research Institute, Beijing 
Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, National Center for Children's 
Health, Beijing 100045, PR China.
(4)Savaid Medical School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100049, PR China.
(5)Institute of Microbiology, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China.

Post-translational modification plays a critical role in viral replication. 
Previously we reported that neddylation of PB2 of influenza A virus (IAV) can 
inhibit viral replication. However, we found that NEDD8 overexpression can still 
inhibit the replication of PB2 K699R mutant viruses, implying that other viral 
protein(s) can be neddylated. In this study, we revealed that M1 of IAV can also 
be modified by NEDD8. We found that the E3 ligase HDM2 significantly promotes M1 
neddylation. Furthermore, we identified M1 K187 as the major neddylation site. 
We generated an IAV M1 K187R mutant (WSN-M1 K187R) and compared the growth of 
wild-type and mutant viruses in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. The data 
showed that the replication of WSN-M1 K187R was more efficient than that of 
wild-type WSN. More importantly, we observed that overexpression of NEDD8 
inhibited the replication of the wild-type WSN more effectively than that of 
WSN-M1 K187R. In addition, we found that the neddylation-deficient M1 mutant (M1 
K187R) had a longer half-life than that of wild-type M1, indicating that the 
neddylation of M1 reduces stability. Then we performed a viral infection assay 
and found that WSN-M1 K187R exhibited greater virulence in mice than wild-type 
WSN, suggesting that the neddylation of M1 reduced IAV replication in vivo. In 
conclusion, we uncovered that neddylation of M1 by HDM2 negatively regulates the 
stability of M1, which in turn inhibits viral replication.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001503
PMID: 33016861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]