1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Oct 3;21(19):7320. doi: 10.3390/ijms21197320.

Drug Development and the Use of Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived 
Cardiomyocytes for Disease Modeling and Drug Toxicity Screening.

Ovics P(1), Regev D(1), Baskin P(1), Davidor M(1), Shemer Y(1), Neeman S(1), 
Ben-Haim Y(2)(3), Binah O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Biophysics and Systems Biology, The Rappaport 
Institute, Ruth & Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa 31096, 
Israel.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Clinical Sciences, St. George's University of 
London, London SW17 0RE, UK.
(3)Cardiology Clinical Academic Group, St. George's University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, London SW17 0QT, UK.

: Over the years, numerous groups have employed human induced pluripotent stem 
cell-derived cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs) as a superb human-compatible model for 
investigating the function and dysfunction of cardiomyocytes, drug screening and 
toxicity, disease modeling and for the development of novel drugs for heart 
diseases. In this review, we discuss the broad use of iPSC-CMs for drug 
development and disease modeling, in two related themes. In the first theme-drug 
development, adverse drug reactions, mechanisms of cardiotoxicity and the need 
for efficient drug screening protocols-we discuss the critical need to screen 
old and new drugs, the process of drug development, marketing and Adverse Drug 
reactions (ADRs), drug-induced cardiotoxicity, safety screening during drug 
development, drug development and patient-specific effect and different 
mechanisms of ADRs. In the second theme-using iPSC-CMs for disease modeling and 
developing novel drugs for heart diseases-we discuss the rationale for using 
iPSC-CMs and modeling acquired and inherited heart diseases with iPSC-CMs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21197320
PMCID: PMC7582587
PMID: 33023024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.