1. J Immunol. 2020 Nov 15;205(10):2861-2872. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2000810. Epub 
2020 Oct 5.

Peptide Binding to HLA-E Molecules in Humans, Nonhuman Primates, and Mice 
Reveals Unique Binding Peptides but Remarkably Conserved Anchor Residues.

Ruibal P(1), Franken KLMC(1), van Meijgaarden KE(1), van Loon JJF(1), van der 
Steen D(2), Heemskerk MHM(2), Ottenhoff THM(3), Joosten SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA 
Leiden, the Netherlands; and.
(2)Department of Hematology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA Leiden, 
the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA 
Leiden, the Netherlands; and t.h.m.ottenhoff@lumc.nl p.ruibal@lumc.nl.

Ag presentation via the nonclassical MHC class Ib molecule HLA-E, with nearly 
complete identity between the two alleles expressed in humans, HLA-E*01:01 and 
HLA-E*01:03, can lead to the activation of unconventional T cells in humans. 
Despite this virtual genetic monomorphism, differences in peptide repertoires 
binding to the two allelic variants have been reported. To further dissect and 
compare peptide binding to HLA-E*01:01 and HLA-E*01:03, we used an UV-mediated 
peptide exchange binding assay and an HPLC-based competition binding assay. In 
addition, we investigated binding of these same peptides to Mamu-E, the nonhuman 
primate homologue of human HLA-E, and to the HLA-E-like molecule Qa-1b in mice. 
We next exploited the differences and homologies in the peptide binding pockets 
of these four molecules to identify allele specific as well as common features 
of peptide binding motifs across species. Our results reveal differences in 
peptide binding preferences and intensities for each human HLA-E variant 
compared with Mamu-E and Qa-1b Using extended peptide libraries, we identified 
and refined the peptide binding motifs for each of the four molecules and found 
that they share main anchor positions, evidenced by conserved amino acid 
preferences across the four HLA-E molecules studied. In addition, we also 
identified differences in peptide binding motifs, which could explain the 
observed variations in peptide binding preferences and affinities for each of 
the four HLA-E-like molecules. Our results could help with guiding the selection 
of candidate pathogen-derived peptides with the capacity to target 
HLA-E-restricted T cells that could be mobilized in vaccination and 
immunotherapeutic strategies.

Copyright Â© 2020 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.2000810
PMCID: PMC7653511
PMID: 33020145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflicts of 
interest.