1. Pain. 2021 Mar 1;162(3):895-906. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002092.

Adaptive alterations in the mesoaccumbal network after peripheral nerve injury.

Ren W(1)(2), Centeno MV(1)(2), Wei X(1), Wickersham I(3), Martina M(1)(2), 
Apkarian AV(1)(2), Surmeier DJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States, Chicago, IL, 
United States.
(2)Center of Excellence for Chronic Pain and Drug Abuse Research.
(3)McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, United States.

The nucleus accumbens (NAc) and the ventral tegmental area (VTA) are critical 
hubs in the brain circuitry controlling chronic pain. Yet, how these 2 regions 
interact to shape the chronic pain state is poorly understood. Our studies show 
that in mice, spared nerve injury (SNI) induced alterations in the functional 
connectome of D2-receptor expressing spiny projection neurons in the core region 
of the NAc-enhancing connections with prelimbic cortex and weakening them with 
basolateral amygdala. These changes, which were attributable in part to 
SNI-induced suppression of VTA dopaminergic signaling, were adaptive because 
mimicking them chemogenetically alleviated the anxiety and social withdrawal 
accompanying injury. By contrast, chemogenetic enhancement of activity in VTA 
dopaminergic neurons projecting to the medial shell of the NAc selectively 
suppressed tactile allodynia in SNI mice. These results suggest that SNI induces 
regionally specific alterations in VTA dopaminergic signaling in the NAc to 
promote environmental reengagement after injury. However, countervailing, 
homeostatic mechanisms limit these adaptive changes, potentially leading to the 
chronic pain state.

Copyright Â© 2020 International Association for the Study of Pain.

DOI: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002092
PMCID: PMC9272541
PMID: 33021562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]