1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2020 Oct 7;8(1):164. doi: 10.1186/s40478-020-01039-9.

Overexpression of UBQLN1 reduces neuropathology in the P497S UBQLN2 mouse model 
of ALS/FTD.

Wang S(1), Tatman M(1), Monteiro MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biomedical Engineering and Technology and Department of Anatomy 
and Neurobiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Center for Biomedical Engineering and Technology and Department of Anatomy 
and Neurobiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. 
monteiro@som.umaryland.edu.

Missense mutations in UBQLN2 cause X-linked dominant inheritance of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal dementia (ALS/FTD). UBQLN2 belongs to a 
family of four highly homologous proteins expressed in humans that play diverse 
roles in maintaining proteostasis, but whether one isoform can substitute for 
another is not known. Here, we tested whether overexpression of UBQLN1 can 
alleviate disease in the P497S UBQLN2 mouse model of ALS/FTD by crossing 
transgenic (Tg) mouse lines expressing the two proteins and characterizing the 
resulting genotypes using a battery of pathologic and behavioral tests. The 
pathologic findings revealed UBQLN1 overexpression dramatically reduced the 
burden of UBQLN2 inclusions, neuronal loss and disturbances in proteostasis in 
double Tg mice compared to single P497S Tg mice. The beneficial effects of 
UBQLN1 overexpression were primarily confirmed by behavioral improvements seen 
in rotarod performance and grip strength in male, but not female mice. 
Paradoxically, although UBQLN1 overexpression reduced pathologic signatures of 
disease in P497S Tg mice, female mice had larger percentage of body weight loss 
than males, and this correlated with a corresponding lack of behavioral 
improvements in the females. These findings lead us to speculate that methods to 
upregulate UBQLN1 expression may reduce pathogenicity caused by UBQLN2 
mutations, but may also lead to gender-specific outcomes that will have to be 
carefully weighed with the therapeutic benefits of UBQLN1 upregulation.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-020-01039-9
PMCID: PMC7539388
PMID: 33028421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.