1. Genetics. 2020 Dec;216(4):995-1007. doi: 10.1534/genetics.120.303698. Epub
2020  Oct 9.

Humanized Drosophila Model of the Meier-Gorlin Syndrome Reveals Conserved and 
Divergent Features of the Orc6 Protein.

Balasov M(1), Akhmetova K(1), Chesnokov I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama 35294.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama 35294 ichesnokov@uab.edu.

Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS) is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by microtia, primordial dwarfism, small ears, and skeletal 
abnormalities. Patients with MGS often carry mutations in genes encoding the 
subunits of the Origin Recognition Complex (ORC), components of the 
prereplicative complex and replication machinery. Orc6 is an important component 
of ORC and has functions in both DNA replication and cytokinesis. A mutation in 
the conserved C-terminal motif of Orc6 associated with MGS impedes the 
interaction of Orc6 with core ORC. Recently, a new mutation in Orc6 was also 
identified; however, it is localized in the N-terminal domain of the protein. To 
study the functions of Orc6, we used the human gene to rescue the orc6 deletion 
in Drosophila Using this "humanized" Orc6-based Drosophila model of MGS, we 
discovered that unlike the previous Y225S MGS mutation in Orc6, the K23E 
substitution in the N-terminal TFIIB-like domain of Orc6 disrupts the protein 
ability to bind DNA. Our studies revealed the importance of evolutionarily 
conserved and variable domains of Orc6 protein, and allowed the studies of human 
protein functions and the analysis of the critical amino acids in live animal 
heterologous system, as well as provided novel insights into the mechanisms 
underlying MGS pathology.

Copyright Â© 2020 by the Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.120.303698
PMCID: PMC7768257
PMID: 33037049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]