1. Sci Rep. 2020 Oct 8;10(1):16805. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-73813-7.

Thermostability of a recombinant G protein-coupled receptor expressed at high 
level in mammalian cell culture.

Yeliseev A(1), van den Berg A(2), Zoubak L(3), Hines K(3), Stepnowski S(2), 
Williston K(2), Yan W(2), Gawrisch K(3), Zmuda J(2).

Author information:
(1)National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse, NIH, Bethesda, MD, 20892, 
USA. yeliseeva@mail.nih.gov.
(2)ThermoFisher Scientific, 7335 Executive Way, Frederick, MD, 21704, USA.
(3)National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse, NIH, Bethesda, MD, 20892, 
USA.

Rational design of pharmaceutical drugs targeting integral membrane G 
protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) requires thorough understanding of ligand 
binding and mechanism of activation through high resolution structural studies 
of purified proteins. Due to inherent conformational flexibility of GPCR, 
stabilization of these proteins solubilized from cell membranes into detergents 
is a challenging task. Here, we take advantage of naturally occurring 
post-translational modifications for stabilization of purified GPCR in detergent 
micelles. The recombinant cannabinoid CB2 receptor was expressed at high yield 
in Expi293F mammalian cell cultures, solubilized and purified in Fa√ßade 
detergent. We report superior stability of the mammalian cell-expressed receptor 
compared to its E. coli-expressed counterpart, due to contributions from 
glycosylation of the N terminus and palmitoylation of the C terminus of CB2. 
Finally, we demonstrate that the mammalian Expi293F amino acid labelling kit is 
suitable for preparation of multi-milligram quantities of high quality, 
selectively stable isotope-labeled GPCR for studies by nuclear magnetic 
resonance.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-73813-7
PMCID: PMC7546613
PMID: 33033368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.