1. Planta. 2020 Oct 12;252(5):84. doi: 10.1007/s00425-020-03485-0.

The dehydration- and ABA-inducible germin-like protein CpGLP1 from Craterostigma 
plantagineum has SOD activity and may contribute to cell wall integrity during 
desiccation.

Giarola V(1)(2), Chen P(3)(4), Dulitz SJ(3)(5), König M(3)(6), Manduzio S(3)(7), 
Bartels D(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Physiology and Biotechnology of Plants (IMBIO), 
University of Bonn, Kirschallee 1, 53115, Bonn, Germany. 
valentino.giarola@fmach.it.
(2)Department of Genomics and Biology of Fruit Crops, Research and Innovation 
Centre, Fondazione Edmund Mach, San Michele all'Adige, Italy. 
valentino.giarola@fmach.it.
(3)Institute of Molecular Physiology and Biotechnology of Plants (IMBIO), 
University of Bonn, Kirschallee 1, 53115, Bonn, Germany.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, 453007, China.
(5)IZMB, University of Bonn, Kirschallee 1, 53115, Bonn, Germany.
(6)Institute of Botany, University of Cologne, Zülpicher Straße 47a, 50674, 
Cologne, Germany.
(7)Department of Applied Biology, Chonnam National University, Buk-gu, Gwangju, 
South Korea.

CpGLP1 belongs to the large group of germin-like proteins and comprises a cell 
wall-localized protein which has superoxide dismutase activity and may 
contribute towards ROS metabolism and cell wall folding during desiccation. The 
plant cell wall is a dynamic matrix and its plasticity is essential for cell 
growth and processing of environmental signals to cope with stresses. A few 
so-called resurrection plants like Craterostigma plantagineum survive 
desiccation by implementing protection mechanisms. In C. plantagineum, the cell 
wall shrinks and folds upon desiccation to avoid mechanical and oxidative damage 
which contributes to cell integrity. Despite the high toxic potential, ROS are 
important molecules for cell wall remodeling processes as they participate in 
enzymatic reactions and act as signaling molecules. Here we analyzed the C. 
plantagineum germin-like protein 1 (CpGLP1) to understand its contribution to 
cell wall folding and desiccation tolerance. The analysis of the CpGLP1 sequence 
showed that this protein does not fit into the current GLP classification and 
forms a new group within the Linderniaceae. CpGLP1 transcripts accumulate in 
leaves in response to dehydration and ABA, and mannitol treatments transiently 
induce CpGLP1 transcript accumulation supporting the participation of CpGLP1 in 
desiccation-related processes. CpGLP1 protein from cell wall protein extracts 
followed transcript accumulation and protein preparations from bacteria 
overexpressing CpGLP1 showed SOD activity. In agreement with cell wall 
localization, CpGLP1 interacts with pectins which have not been reported for GLP 
proteins. Our data support a role for CpGLP1 in the ROS metabolism related to 
the control of cell wall plasticity during desiccation in C. plantagineum.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-020-03485-0
PMCID: PMC7550295
PMID: 33044571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]