1. Front Neurosci. 2020 Sep 15;14:567222. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.567222. 
eCollection 2020.

Neuroanatomical and Microglial Alterations in the Striatum of Levodopa-Treated, 
Dyskinetic Hemi-Parkinsonian Rats.

Fletcher EJR(1), Finlay CJ(1), Amor Lopez A(2), Crum WR(2), Vernon AC(3)(4), 
Duty S(1).

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Centre for Age Related Diseases, Wolfson Wing, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Maurice Wohl Clinical 
Neuroscience Institute, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, 
King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)MRC Centre for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, King's College London, London, 
United Kingdom.

Dyskinesia associated with chronic levodopa treatment in Parkinson's disease is 
associated with maladaptive striatal plasticity. The objective of this study was 
to examine whether macroscale structural changes, as captured by magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) accompany this plasticity and to identify plausible 
cellular contributors in a rodent model of levodopa-induced dyskinesia. Adult 
male Sprague-Dawley rats were rendered hemi-parkinsonian by stereotaxic 
injection of 6-hydroxydopamine into the left medial forebrain bundle prior to 
chronic treatment with saline (control) or levodopa to induce abnormal 
involuntary movements (AIMs), reflective of dyskinesia. Perfusion-fixed brains 
underwent ex vivo structural MRI before sectioning and staining for cellular 
markers. Chronic treatment with levodopa induced significant AIMs (p < 0.0001 
versus saline). The absolute volume of the ipsilateral, lesioned striatum was 
increased in levodopa-treated rats resulting in a significant difference in 
percentage volume change when compared to saline-treated rats (p < 0.01). 
Moreover, a significant positive correlation was found between this volume 
change and AIMs scores for individual levodopa-treated rats (r = 0.96; p < 
0.01). The density of Iba1+ cells was increased within the lesioned versus 
intact striatum (p < 0.01) with no difference between treatment groups. 
Conversely, Iba1+ microglia soma size was significantly increased (p < 0.01) in 
the lesioned striatum of levodopa-treated but not saline-treated rats. Soma size 
was not, however, significantly correlated with either AIMs or MRI volume 
change. Although GFAP+ astrocytes were elevated in the lesioned versus intact 
striatum (p < 0.001), there was no difference between treatment groups. No 
statistically significant effects of either lesion or treatment on RECA1, a 
marker for blood vessels, were observed. Collectively, these data suggest 
chronic levodopa treatment in 6-hydroxydopamine lesioned rats is associated with 
increased striatal volume that correlates with the development of AIMs. The 
accompanying increase in number and size of microglia, however, cannot alone 
explain this volume expansion. Further multi-modal studies are warranted to 
establish the brain-wide effects of chronic levodopa treatment.

Copyright Â© 2020 Fletcher, Finlay, Amor Lopez, Crum, Vernon and Duty.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2020.567222
PMCID: PMC7522511
PMID: 33041762