1. Environ Microbiol. 2020 Dec;22(12):4934-4952. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15274.
Epub  2020 Oct 21.

Mechanisms of triazole resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus.

Nywening AV(1)(2), Rybak JM(1), Rogers PD(1), Fortwendel JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Translational Sciences, The University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, 881 Madison Avenue, Memphis, TN, USA.
(2)College of Graduate Health Sciences, Integrated Biomedical Sciences Program, 
The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, 38163, USA.

The ubiquitous fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus is the primary cause of 
opportunistic mould infections in humans. Aspergilli disseminate via asexual 
conidia passively travelling through air currents to germinate within a broad 
range of environs, wherever suitable nutrients are found. Though the average 
human inhales hundreds of conidia daily, A. fumigatus invasive infections 
primarily affect the immunocompromised. At-risk individuals can develop often 
fatal invasive disease for which therapeutic options are limited. Regrettably, 
the global insurgence of isolates resistant to the triazoles, the frontline 
antifungal class used in medicine and agriculture to control A. fumigatus, is 
complicating the treatment of patients. Triazole antifungal resistance in A. 
fumigatus has become recognized as a global, yet poorly comprehended, problem. 
Due to a multitude of factors, the magnitude of resistant infections and their 
contribution to treatment outcomes are likely underestimated. Current studies 
suggest that human drug-resistant infections can be either environmentally 
acquired or de novo host selected during patient therapy. While much concerning 
development of resistance is yet unknown, recent investigations have revealed 
assorted underlying mechanisms enabling triazole resistance within individual 
clinical and environmental isolates. This review will provide an overview of 
triazole resistance as it is currently understood, as well as highlight some of 
the prominent biological mechanisms associated with clinical and environmental 
resistance to triazoles in A. fumigatus.

Â© 2020 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15274
PMCID: PMC7828461
PMID: 33047482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]