1. PLoS One. 2020 Oct 12;15(10):e0240554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0240554. 
eCollection 2020.

Development and characterization of protein kinase B/AKT isoform-specific 
nanobodies.

Merckaert T(1)(2), Zwaenepoel O(1), Gevaert K(1)(2), Gettemans J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, Ghent, Belgium.

The serine/threonine protein kinase AKT is frequently over-activated in cancer 
and is associated with poor prognosis. As a central node in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR 
pathway, which regulates various processes considered to be hallmarks of cancer, 
this kinase has become a prime target for cancer therapy. However, AKT has 
proven to be a highly complex target as it comes in three isoforms (AKT1, AKT2 
and AKT3) which are highly homologous, yet non-redundant. The isoform-specific 
functions of the AKT kinases can be dependent on context (i.e. different types 
of cancer) and even opposed to one another. To date, there is no 
isoform-specific inhibitor available and no alternative to genetic approaches to 
study the function of a single AKT isoform. We have developed and characterized 
nanobodies that specifically interact with the AKT1 or AKT2 isoforms. These new 
tools should enable future studies of AKT1 and AKT2 isoform-specific functions. 
Furthermore, for both isoforms we obtained a nanobody that interferes with the 
AKT-PIP3-interaction, an essential step in the activation of the kinase. The 
nanobodies characterized in this study are a new stepping stone towards 
unravelling AKT isoform-specific signalling.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0240554
PMCID: PMC7549812
PMID: 33045011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have read the journalâ€™s policy and 
have the following competing interests: JG is a shareholder of Gulliver Biomed 
BV, but receives no other financial compensation from the company. This does not 
alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. There 
are no patents, products in development or marketed products associated with 
this research to declare.