1. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2022 Nov 1;16(6):714-720. doi: 
10.1097/ICB.0000000000001067.

THE PROGRESSION OF MACULAR STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL CHANGES IN LATE-ONSET 
RETINAL DEGENERATION.

Papastavrou VT(1), O'Brien JM(1), Regan AJ(1), Aftab AM(1)(2), Browning AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Newcastle Eye Centre, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United 
Kingdom; and.
(2)Ophthalmology Department, Khyber Teaching Hospital/Khyber Medical College, 
Peshawar, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: To characterize the progression of structural and functional 
changes in the retinas of a small cohort of unrelated patients with early 
late-onset retinal degeneration and evaluate these changes as potential 
biomarkers for future treatment trials.
METHODS: Best-corrected visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, Goldman visual 
fields, retinal sensitivity measurement by mesopic microperimetry, extent of 
ellipsoid zone disruption using spectral domain optical coherence tomography, 
and fundus autofluorescence imaging were performed at each biennial visit.
PATIENTS: Three unrelated patients with molecularly confirmed late-onset retinal 
degeneration (S163R mutation in C1QTNF5 ) were prospectively followed for 4 
years.
RESULTS: The patient's ages were 44, 54, and 62 at baseline. Over the 4-year 
follow-up period, one patient demonstrated a significant reduction in 
best-corrected visual acuity (6 Early Treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy Study 
letters), whereas two patients suffered a significant reduction in contrast 
sensitivity. Early in the disease, there was a close relationship between 
ellipsoid zone disruption and a loss in retinal sensitivity. Later in the course 
of the disease, there were areas outside the zones of ellipsoid zone disruption 
that also suffered progressive loss of retinal sensitivity, suggesting that 
ellipsoid zone loss was not the only factor responsible for the loss of retinal 
sensitivity. Changes in fundus autofluorescence and Goldman visual field loss 
were not closely related to changes in ellipsoid zone disruption or retinal 
sensitivity loss.
CONCLUSION: This study has found that the monitoring of the progression of 
ellipsoid zone disruption and changes in mesopic microperimetry may be useful 
biomarkers in future clinical trials in patients with late-onset retinal 
degeneration.

DOI: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000001067
PMID: 33055555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]