1. Microorganisms. 2020 Oct 8;8(10):1552. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8101552.

Isolation and Investigation of Potential Non-Saccharomyces Yeasts to Improve the 
Volatile Terpene Compounds in Korean Muscat Bailey A Wine.

Lee SB(1), Park HD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, 80 
Daehakro, Daegu 41566, Korea.
(2)Institute of Fermentation Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, 80 
Daehakro, Daegu 41566, Korea.

The Muscat Bailey A (MBA) grape, one of the most prominent grape cultivars in 
Korea, contains considerable amounts of monoterpene alcohols that have very low 
odor thresholds and significantly affect the perception of wine aroma. To 
develop a potential wine starter for Korean MBA wine, nine types of 
non-Saccharomyces yeasts were isolated from various Korean food materials, 
including nuruk, Sémillon grapes, persimmons, and Muscat Bailey A grapes, and 
their physiological, biochemical, and enzymatic properties were investigated and 
compared to the conventional wine fermentation strain, Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
W-3. Through API ZYM analysis, Wickerhamomyces anomalus JK04, Hanseniaspora 
vineae S7, Hanseniaspora uvarum S8, Candida railenensis S18, and Metschnikowia 
pulcherrima S36 were revealed to have β-glucosidase activity. Their activities 
were quantified by culturing in growth medium composed of different carbon 
sources: 2% glucose, 1% glucose + 1% cellobiose, and 2% cellobiose. W. anomalus 
JK04 and M. pulcherrima S36 showed the highest β-glucosidase activities in all 
growth media; thus, they were selected and utilized for MBA wine fermentation. 
MBA wines co-fermented with non-Saccharomyces yeasts (W. anomalus JK04 or M. 
pulcherrima S36) and S. cerevisiae W-3 showed significantly increased levels of 
linalool, citronellol, and geraniol compared to MBA wine fermented with S. 
cerevisiae W-3 (control). In a sensory evaluation, the flavor, taste, and 
overall preference scores of the co-fermented wines were higher than those for 
the control wine, suggesting that W. anomalus JK04 and M. pulcherrima S36 are 
favorable wine starters for improving Korean MBA wine quality.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8101552
PMCID: PMC7601120
PMID: 33050030

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.