1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Oct 9;12(10):2900. doi: 10.3390/cancers12102900.

Aggressive NK Cell Leukemia: Current State of the Art.

El Hussein S(1), Medeiros LJ(1), Khoury JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Aggressive natural killer (NK) cell leukemia (ANKL) is a rare disease with a 
grave prognosis. Patients commonly present acutely with fever, constitutional 
symptoms, hepatosplenomegaly, and often disseminated intravascular coagulation 
or hemophagocytic syndrome. This acute clinical presentation and the variable 
pathologic and immunophenotypic features of ANKL overlap with other diagnostic 
entities, making it challenging to establish a timely and accurate diagnosis of 
ANKL. Since its original recognition in 1986, substantial progress in 
understanding this disease using traditional pathologic approaches has improved 
diagnostic accuracy. This progress, in turn, has facilitated the performance of 
recent high-throughput studies that have yielded insights into pathogenesis. 
Molecular abnormalities that occur in ANKL can be divided into three major 
groups: JAK/STAT pathway activation, epigenetic dysregulation, and impairment of 
TP53 and DNA repair. These high-throughput data also have provided potential 
therapeutic targets that promise to improve therapy and outcomes for patients 
with ANKL. In this review, we provide a historical context of the conception and 
evolution of ANKL as a disease entity, we highlight advances in diagnostic 
criteria to recognize this disease, and we review recent understanding of 
pathogenesis as well as biomarker discoveries that are providing groundwork for 
innovative therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12102900
PMCID: PMC7600035
PMID: 33050313

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.