1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020 Dec 15;165(Pt A):1438-1446. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.10.022. Epub 2020 Oct 12.

Papain-like cysteine proteinase zone (PCP-zone) and PCP structural catalytic 
core (PCP-SCC) of enzymes with cysteine proteinase fold.

Denessiouk K(1), Uversky VN(2), Permyakov SE(3), Permyakov EA(3), Johnson MS(1), 
Denesyuk AI(4).

Author information:
(1)Structural Bioinformatics Laboratory, Faculty of Science and Engineering, 
Biochemistry, Åbo Akademi University, Turku 20520, Finland.
(2)Institute for Biological Instrumentation of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Federal Research Center "Pushchino Scientific Center for Biological Research of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences", Pushchino 142290, Russia; Department of 
Molecular Medicine and USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Research Institute, Morsani 
College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. 
Electronic address: vuversky@usf.edu.
(3)Institute for Biological Instrumentation of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Federal Research Center "Pushchino Scientific Center for Biological Research of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences", Pushchino 142290, Russia.
(4)Structural Bioinformatics Laboratory, Faculty of Science and Engineering, 
Biochemistry, Åbo Akademi University, Turku 20520, Finland; Institute for 
Biological Instrumentation of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Federal Research 
Center "Pushchino Scientific Center for Biological Research of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences", Pushchino 142290, Russia.

There are several families of cysteine proteinases with different folds - for 
example the (chymo)trypsin fold family and papain-like fold family - but in both 
families the hydrolase activity of cysteine proteinases requires a cysteine 
residue as the catalytic nucleophile. In this work, we have analyzed the 
topology of the active site regions in 146 three-dimensional structures of 
proteins belonging to the Papain-like Cysteine Proteinase (PCP) superfamily, 
which includes papain as a typical representative of this protein superfamily. 
All analyzed enzymes contain a unique structurally closed conformation - a 
"PCP-Zone" - which can be divided into two groups, Class A and Class B. Eight 
structurally conserved amino acids of the PCP-Zone form a common Structural 
Core. The Structural Core, catalytic nucleophile, catalytic base and residue Xaa 
- which stabilizes the side-chain conformation of the catalytic base - make up a 
PCP Structural Catalytic Core (PCP-SCC). The PCP-SCC of Class A and Class B are 
divided into 5 and 2 types, respectively. Seven variants of the mutual 
arrangement of the amino-acid side chains of the catalytic triad - nucleophile, 
base and residue Xaa - within the same fold clearly demonstrate how enzymes with 
the papain-like fold adapt to the need to perform diverse functions in spite of 
their limited structural diversity. The roles of both the PCP-Zone of 
SARS-CoV-2-PLpro described in this study and the NBCZone of SARS-CoV-2-3CLpro 
presented in our earlier article (Denesyuk AI, Johnson MS, Salo-Ahen OMH, 
Uversky VN, Denessiouk K. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020;153:399-411) that are in 
contacts with inhibitors are discussed.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.10.022
PMCID: PMC7548629
PMID: 33058970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.