1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2021 Feb;78(4):1233-1261. doi: 10.1007/s00018-020-03656-y. 
Epub 2020 Oct 15.

TLR4 and CD14 trafficking and its influence on LPS-induced pro-inflammatory 
signaling.

Ciesielska A(1), Matyjek M(2), Kwiatkowska K(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Membrane Biology, Nencki Institute of Experimental 
Biology of Polish Academy of Sciences, 3 Pasteur St., 02-093, Warsaw, Poland. 
a.ciesielska@nencki.edu.pl.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Membrane Biology, Nencki Institute of Experimental 
Biology of Polish Academy of Sciences, 3 Pasteur St., 02-093, Warsaw, Poland.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 belongs to the TLR family of receptors inducing 
pro-inflammatory responses to invading pathogens. TLR4 is activated by 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS, endotoxin) of Gram-negative bacteria and sequentially 
triggers two signaling cascades: the first one involving TIRAP and MyD88 adaptor 
proteins is induced in the plasma membrane, whereas the second engaging adaptor 
proteins TRAM and TRIF begins in early endosomes after endocytosis of the 
receptor. The LPS-induced internalization of TLR4 and hence also the activation 
of the TRIF-dependent pathway is governed by a GPI-anchored protein, CD14. The 
endocytosis of TLR4 terminates the MyD88-dependent signaling, while the 
following endosome maturation and lysosomal degradation of TLR4 determine the 
duration and magnitude of the TRIF-dependent one. Alternatively, TLR4 may return 
to the plasma membrane, which process is still poorly understood. Therefore, the 
course of the LPS-induced pro-inflammatory responses depends strictly on the 
rates of TLR4 endocytosis and trafficking through the endo-lysosomal 
compartment. Notably, prolonged activation of TLR4 is linked with several 
hereditary human diseases, neurodegeneration and also with autoimmune diseases 
and cancer. Recent studies have provided ample data on the role of diverse 
proteins regulating the functions of early, late, and recycling endosomes in the 
TLR4-induced inflammation caused by LPS or phagocytosis of E. coli. In this 
review, we focus on the mechanisms of the internalization and intracellular 
trafficking of TLR4 and CD14, and also of LPS, in immune cells and discuss how 
dysregulation of the endo-lysosomal compartment contributes to the development 
of diverse human diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-020-03656-y
PMCID: PMC7904555
PMID: 33057840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.