1. Life (Basel). 2020 Oct 10;10(10):237. doi: 10.3390/life10100237.

Premature Adrenarche in Children with Prader-Willi Syndrome Treated with 
Recombinant Human Growth Hormone Seems to Not Influence the Course of Central 
Puberty and the Efficacy and Safety of the Therapy.

Lecka-Ambroziak A(1), Wysocka-Mincewicz M(1), Marsza≈Çek-Dziuba K(1), 
Rudzka-Kocjan A(1), Szalecki M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, The Children's Memorial Health 
Institute, 04-730 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Collegium Medicum, Jan Kochanowski University (JKU), 25-369 Kielce, Poland.

Puberty in children with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is usually delayed and/or 
incomplete but in some patients premature/early adrenarche is observed. We 
assessed the premature adrenarche (PA) in PWS patients during the recombinant 
human growth hormone (rhGH) therapy and influence of PA on the course of central 
puberty (CP), rhGH efficacy and safety, and patients' metabolic state. 
Forty-nine PWS patients were treated with rhGH, 11 presented with PA (group 1) 
and 14 had normal course of adrenarche (group 2). PA was observed in 22.5% of 
the PWS children treated with rhGH. The mean time between the rhGH start and the 
adrenarche, the rhGH dose, the growth velocity and the insulin-like growth 
factor 1 SD (IGF1 SD) during the treatment, as well as the time of CP, final 
height SD and BMI SD were similar in both groups. There were also no significant 
differences in the metabolic assessment-the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) 
and lipid profile results. PA may be a part of the clinical picture of PWS, 
apart from hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and it seems to have no influence on 
CP in PWS patients. The rhGH efficacy and safety were comparable in the patients 
with PA and the normal course of adrenarche.

DOI: 10.3390/life10100237
PMCID: PMC7600779
PMID: 33050529

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.