1. Toxins (Basel). 2020 Oct 13;12(10):656. doi: 10.3390/toxins12100656.

Phenotypic Differentiation of Two Morphologically Similar Aflatoxin-Producing 
Fungi from West Africa.

Singh P(1), Mehl HL(2), Orbach MJ(1), Callicott KA(2), Cotty PJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Plant Sciences, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.
(2)USDA-ARS, 416 W Congress St, First Floor, Tucson, AZ 85701, USA.
(3)College of Food Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 
266003, China.

Aflatoxins (AF) are hepatocarcinogenic metabolites produced by several 
Aspergillus species. Crop infection by these species results in aflatoxin 
contamination of cereals, nuts, and spices. Etiology of aflatoxin contamination 
is complicated by mixed infections of multiple species with similar morphology 
and aflatoxin profiles. The current study investigates variation in aflatoxin 
production between two morphologically similar species that co-exist in West 
Africa, A. aflatoxiformans and A. minisclerotigenes. Consistent distinctions in 
aflatoxin production during liquid fermentation were discovered between these 
species. The two species produced similar concentrations of AFB1 in defined 
media with either urea or ammonium as the sole nitrogen source. However, 
production of both AFB1 and AFG1 were inhibited (p < 0.001) for A. 
aflatoxiformans in a yeast extract medium with sucrose. Although production of 
AFG1 by both species was similar in urea, A. minisclerotigenes produced greater 
concentrations of AFG1 in ammonium (p = 0.039). Based on these differences, a 
reliable and convenient assay for differentiating the two species was designed. 
This assay will be useful for identifying specific etiologic agents of aflatoxin 
contamination episodes in West Africa and other regions where the two species 
are sympatric, especially when phylogenetic analyses based on multiple gene 
segments are not practical.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12100656
PMCID: PMC7602060
PMID: 33066284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.