1. Front Vet Sci. 2020 Sep 18;7:545818. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2020.545818.
eCollection  2020.

Pathogenicity of Shiga Toxin Type 2e Escherichia coli in Pig Colibacillosis.

Baldo V(1), Salogni C(1), Giovannini S(1), D'Incau M(1), Boniotti MB(1), Birbes 
L(1), Pitozzi A(1), Formenti N(1), Grassi A(1), Pasquali P(2), Alborali GL(1).

Author information:
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia Romagna 
"Bruno Ubertini", Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Veterinary Public Health and Food Safety, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Shiga toxin type 2e (Stx2e) Escherichia coli is the causative factor of diarrhea 
and edema in swine. The aims of this study were to determine the prevalence of 
Stx2e-producing E. coli isolates and to characterize isolates from clinical 
cases of pig colibacillosis and healthy swine. During the 11 years of the study 
(2006-2017), a total of 233 Stx2e-producing isolates were detected-230 out of 
2,060 (11.16%) E. coli isolated from diseased pigs and 3 out of 171 (1.75%) from 
healthy swine. Stx2e-producing isolates were indeed more present in clinical 
colibacillosis cases than in healthy pigs (p = 0.0002). The predominant 
serogroup was O139 (79.82%) and the most common fimbrial factor present in these 
isolates was F18 (177 isolates), followed by F6 (5 isolates). The enterotoxins 
LTI, STa, and STb were detected in 10.43, 41.73, and 48.26% of the isolates, 
respectively. The predominant virotypes F18-Stx2e and -STa-STb-Stx2e were 
similarly present in weaners (33.33 and 35.52%) and finishers (38.30 and 
25.53%). Among isolates from diseased pigs, O139 and F18 were the more 
frequently identified serogroup and virulence factor, respectively. Of the 
tested 230 Stx2e-producing isolates isolated from diseased pigs, 29 (12.60%) 
harbored genes encoding ESBL, particularly TEM (79.30%), CTX-M1 (17.20%), and 
CMY-2 (3.40%). Antimicrobial resistance to tetracycline was the most common 
characteristic (98.25%), followed by ampicillin (93.91%), cephalotin (90.43%) 
and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (82.17%). Our results showed that 
Stx2e-producing E. coli were more frequently associated with clinical forms of 
colibacillosis, with minimal probability to isolate these isolates from healthy 
pigs.

Copyright © 2020 Baldo, Salogni, Giovannini, D'Incau, Boniotti, Birbes, Pitozzi, 
Formenti, Grassi, Pasquali and Alborali.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2020.545818
PMCID: PMC7530191
PMID: 33062659