1. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2020 Sep 24;14:1689-1698. doi: 10.2147/PPA.S275887. 
eCollection 2020.

Perceived Self-Efficacy and Associated Factors Among Adult Patients with Type 2 
Diabetes Mellitus at Public Hospitals of Western Ethiopia, 2020.

Oluma A(1), Abadiga M(1), Mosisa G(1), Fekadu G(2), Turi E(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Institute of Health Sciences, Wollega 
University, Nekemte, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Institute of Health Sciences, Wollega University, 
Nekemte, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Public Health, Institute of Health Sciences, Wollega 
University, Nekemte, Ethiopia.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes Mellitus is a chronic disease and can be self-managed using 
five treatment approaches, including education, medical nutrition therapy, 
physical exercise, pharmacological intervention, and blood sugar monitoring. 
Improvement of patient compliance and self-efficacy are critical points that 
impact the self-care behavior in patients with type two diabetes mellitus in 
order to limit the morbidity and promote glycemic control. Therefore, the 
present study successfully assesses the effect of perceived self-efficacy and 
associated factors among patients with diabetes mellitus at public hospitals of 
western Ethiopia.
METHODS: The cross-sectional study design was employed on a sample of 423 
diabetic patients. A systematic random sampling method was employed. An 
interviewer-administered structured questionnaire was used. The data entered 
into Epi data version 3.1 and exported into Statistical Package for the Social 
Sciences window version 24 for analysis. All variables significant at p <0.25 in 
bivariate were entered into multivariate analysis. The multivariable logistic 
regressions were used to determine factors associated with perceived 
self-efficacy by considering adjusted odds ratio at CI 95% and the significance 
level was set at p <0.05.
RESULTS: Out of 423 participants sampled, 398 participated in the study giving a 
response rate of 94.1%. The level of perceived good self-efficacy among diabetes 
patients was 52.5%. Being married (AOR=1.611, 95% CI = 1.003, 2.587), home blood 
glucose test (AOR=3.359, 95% CI = 1.912,5.903), doing exercise (AOR=11.412, 95% 
CI = 2.488,52.346), having good appetite (AOR=2.587, 95% CI = 1.454,4.606), 
having special diet (AOR=4.902, 95% CI= 1.202, 19.992), and good self-care 
behavior (AOR=10.320, 95% CI= 5.657, 18.824) were significantly associated with 
good self-efficacy.
CONCLUSION: The level of perceived self-efficacy was high. Home blood glucose 
tests, good self-care behavior, married, doing exercise, good appetite, having a 
special diet were significantly associated with high perceived self-efficacy. 
The national policymaker focused on patients' behavioral change to develop 
perceived self-efficacy for confidently managing the disease.

Â© 2020 Oluma et al.

DOI: 10.2147/PPA.S275887
PMCID: PMC7522517
PMID: 33061312

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests for this work.