1. Biomed Res Int. 2020 Sep 28;2020:4753645. doi: 10.1155/2020/4753645.
eCollection  2020.

Periodontal Disease and Age-Related Macular Degeneration: A Meta-Analysis of 
112,240 Participants.

Lv X(1)(2), Li W(1)(2), Fang Z(1)(2), Xue X(1)(2), Pan C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School and Hospital of Stomatology, China Medical University, Shenyang, 
China.
(2)Liaoning Province Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Shenyang, China.

OBJECTIVE: Epidemiological studies have shown a correlation between periodontal 
disease (PD) and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). However, the results 
have been inconsistent, and no relevant meta-analysis has been performed on this 
topic. Hence, we performed a meta-analysis to evaluate whether the two diseases 
are related. Material and Methods. The PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, and Web 
of Science databases were searched up to April 20, 2020, for related articles. 
Two authors independently conducted literature screening and data extraction and 
then used the Stata 15.1 software to calculate the relative risk (RRs) and 95% 
confidence intervals (CIs) to assess the association between PD and AMD.
RESULTS: A total of 5 observational studies involving 112,240 participants and 
5,005 AMD patients were included. The results of meta-analysis using the 
random-effects model showed that the incidence of AMD in PD patients was 1.35 
times that of non-PD patients; the difference was statistically significant (RR 
= 1.35, 95%CI = 1.07-1.70, P = 0.011). Sensitivity analysis showed that the 
results were stable.
CONCLUSIONS: PD patients have a higher risk of AMD, but the causal relationship 
between PD and AMD has not been confirmed. Further research should be carried 
out to verify the exact relationship between the two.

Copyright Â© 2020 Xuewen Lv et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/4753645
PMCID: PMC7542535
PMID: 33062680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.