1. mBio. 2020 Oct 16;11(5):e02590-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02590-20.

Decline of Humoral Responses against SARS-CoV-2 Spike in Convalescent 
Individuals.

Beaudoin-Bussières G(#)(1)(2), Laumaea A(#)(1)(2), Anand SP(#)(1)(3), Prévost 
J(#)(1)(2), Gasser R(#)(1)(2), Goyette G(1), Medjahed H(1), Perreault J(4), 
Tremblay T(4), Lewin A(4), Gokool L(1), Morrisseau C(1), Bégin P(1)(5), Tremblay 
C(1)(2), Martel-Laferrière V(1)(2), Kaufmann DE(1)(6), Richard J(1)(2), Bazin 
R(4), Finzi A(7)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche du CHUM, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Département de Microbiologie, Infectiologie et Immunologie, Université de 
Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(4)Affaires Médicales et Innovation, Héma-Québec, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)CHU Ste-Justine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(6)Département de Médecine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(7)Centre de Recherche du CHUM, Quebec, Canada andres.finzi@umontreal.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

In the absence of effective vaccines and with limited therapeutic options, 
convalescent plasma is being collected across the globe for potential 
transfusion to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) patients. The therapy has 
been deemed safe, and several clinical trials assessing its efficacy are 
ongoing. While it remains to be formally proven, the presence of neutralizing 
antibodies is thought to play a positive role in the efficacy of this treatment. 
Indeed, neutralizing titers of ≥1:160 have been recommended in some convalescent 
plasma trials for inclusion. Here, we performed repeated analyses at 1-month 
intervals on 31 convalescent individuals to evaluate how the humoral responses 
against the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) Spike 
glycoprotein, including neutralization, evolve over time. We observed that the 
levels of receptor-binding-domain (RBD)-specific IgG and IgA slightly decreased 
between 6 and 10 weeks after the onset of symptoms but that RBD-specific IgM 
levels decreased much more abruptly. Similarly, we observed a significant 
decrease in the capacity of convalescent plasma to neutralize pseudoparticles 
bearing wild-type SARS-CoV-2 S or its D614G variant. If neutralization activity 
proves to be an important factor in the clinical efficacy of convalescent plasma 
transfer, our results suggest that plasma from convalescent donors should be 
recovered rapidly after resolution of symptoms.IMPORTANCE While waiting for an 
efficient vaccine to protect against SARS-CoV-2 infection, alternative 
approaches to treat or prevent acute COVID-19 are urgently needed. Transfusion 
of convalescent plasma to treat COVID-19 patients is currently being explored; 
neutralizing activity in convalescent plasma is thought to play a central role 
in the efficacy of this treatment. Here, we observed that plasma neutralization 
activity decreased a few weeks after the onset of the symptoms. If neutralizing 
activity is required for the efficacy of convalescent plasma transfer, our 
results suggest that convalescent plasma should be recovered rapidly after the 
donor recovers from active infection.

Copyright © 2020 Beaudoin-Bussières et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02590-20
PMCID: PMC7569150
PMID: 33067385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]