1. Nanoscale. 2020 Nov 7;12(41):21420-21428. doi: 10.1039/d0nr05390b. Epub 2020
Oct  20.

The dance of the nanobubbles: detecting acoustic backscatter from sub-micron 
bubbles using ultra-high frequency acoustic microscopy.

Moore MJ (1), Bodera F , Hernandez C , Shirazi N , Abenojar E , Exner AA , 
Kolios MC .

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada. 
mkolios@ryerson.ca.

Nanobubbles have gained attention for their use as highly stable ultrasound (US) 
contrast agents, but assessment of individual nanobubble size remains a 
challenge. Current sizing techniques require either extensive sample preparation 
or depend on assumed values of nanobubble density that are not well 
characterized. An US based approach would be desirable; however, probing 
individual nanobubbles using US transducers at clinical frequencies is not 
feasible due to the comparatively long acoustic wavelengths employed. Here we 
present a technique which can be used to estimate nano- or microbubble size by 
virtue of the amount of motion detected in an M-Mode image acquired using an 
acoustic microscope equipped with a 200 MHz transducer. A sample of a 
bubble-containing solution is incorporated into a phantom composed of molten 
agarose. The solidified agarose gel contains pores with well-defined sizes 
dictated by the agarose concentration. Bubbles in the gel matrix that are 
smaller in diameter than the gel pore size are capable of undergoing stochastic 
motion which manifests as intensity fluctuations in M-Mode images. Conversely, 
bubbles which are larger than the agarose pores become trapped and produce 
static M-Mode intensity patterns. In this study, agarose gels with 
concentrations ranging from 0.25% to 1.25% (mean pore sizes ranging from 2.68 μm 
to 0.34 μm) were loaded with either nanobubbles (mean diameter 0.326 μm) or 
microbubbles (mean diameter 2.71 μm) and imaged at 200 MHz. In the nanobubble 
loaded gels, M-Mode fluctuations were clearly visible up to a gel concentration 
of 1% (pore size of 0.39 μm). In contrast, the microbubble loaded gels exhibited 
minimal M-Mode fluctuation even at agarose concentrations of 0.25% (2.68 μm pore 
size). Autocorrelation curves generated from the M-Mode data demonstrated a 
clear trend of curve flattening (loss of motion) when the pore size was 
comparable to mean bubble diameter, indicating that individual bubbles trapped 
in the agarose pores are the main source of acoustic backscatter. In the future, 
decay parameters extracted from the autocorrelation curves could potentially be 
used as indicators of mean bubble diameter for bubble populations of unknown 
size.

DOI: 10.1039/d0nr05390b
PMCID: PMC7646462
PMID: 33079108