1. APMIS. 2021 Feb;129(2):61-69. doi: 10.1111/apm.13091. Epub 2020 Nov 6.

Frequency and coexistence of KRAS, NRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA mutations and 
occurrence of MMR deficiency in Danish colorectal cancer patients.

Poulsen TS(1), de Oliveira DVNP(1), Espersen MLM(1), Klarskov LL(1), 
Skovrider-Ruminski W(1), Hogdall E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, University of 
Copenhagen, Herlev, Denmark.

The MAPK signalling genes KRAS, NRAS and BRAF and the PIK3CA gene are routinely 
investigated for mutations in the diagnostic routine of colorectal cancer. Few 
studies have reported co-existing mutations in these genes with clinical 
relevance, while some have been previously regarded as mutually exclusive. We 
set to investigate the frequency and co-occurrent mutations in these targets, 
and the occurrence of mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) in a large cohort of 
Danish colorectal cancers. 1000 colorectal tumours were sequenced as part of our 
diagnostic workflow for KRAS, NRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA mutations using 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) and analysed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) for 
loss of the MMR proteins, MLH1, PMS2, MSH2 and MSH6. Co-existing mutations in 12 
patients (1.2%) occurred as multiple mutations in the same gene or spread across 
several genes (KRAS, NRAS and/or BRAF). The frequency of single mutations in the 
genes occurred with a frequency similar to previously reported, except for a 
higher frequency of BRAF mutations (18.0%). We found dMMR in 14.6% of the cases 
with a majority lacking expression of both MLH1 and PMS2. BRAF mutations were 
only present in dMMR cases involving MLH1 and/or PMS2. Our findings suggest that 
co-existing mutations occur, except for the hotspot BRAF V600E, which is 
mutually exclusive with KRAS/NRAS mutations. Therefore, instead of single gene 
alterations from the MAPK signalling, assessing co-occurrence of mutations 
within one or more of those genes should also be accounted. This may impact 
future oncological treatments and should be considered in the diagnostic 
workflow.

Â© 2020 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apm.13091
PMID: 33075161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]