1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2020 Dec 4;22:1025-1039. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtn.2020.10.017. Epub 2020 Oct 15.

lncRNA RP11-624L4.1 Is Associated with Unfavorable Prognosis and Promotes 
Proliferation via the CDK4/6-Cyclin D1-Rb-E2F1 Pathway in NPC.

Zhou L(1)(2), Liu R(1)(2), Liang X(1)(2), Zhang S(1)(2), Bi W(1)(2), Yang 
M(1)(2), He Y(1)(2), Jin J(1)(2), Li S(3), Yang X(3), Fu J(4), Zhang P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of Cancer Proteomics, Department of Oncology, Xiangya 
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Second Xiangya 
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, P.R. China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Epigenetics and Oncology, The Research Center for 
Preclinical Medicine, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, P.R. 
China.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is one of the most common malignant tumors in 
southern China and southeast Asia. Emerging evidence revealed that long 
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) might play important roles in the development and 
progression of many cancers, including NPC. The functions and mechanisms of the 
vast majority of lncRNAs involved in NPC remain unknown. In this study, a novel 
lncRNA RP11-624L4.1 was identified in NPC tissues using next-generation 
sequencing. In situ hybridization (ISH) was used to analyze the correlation 
between RP11-624L4.1 expression and the clinicopathological features or 
prognosis in NPC patients. RNA-Protein Interaction Prediction (RPISeq) 
predictions and RNA-binding protein immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays were used 
to identify RP11-624L4.1's interactions with cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4). 
As a result, we found that RP11-624L4.1 is hyper-expressed in NPC tissues, which 
was associated with unfavorable prognosis and clinicopathological features in 
NPC. By knocking down and overexpressing RP11-624L4.1, we also found that it 
promotes the proliferation ability of NPC in vitro and in vivo through the 
CDK4/6-Cyclin D1-Rb-E2F1 pathway. Overexpression of CDK4 in knocking down 
RP11-624L4.1 cells can partially rescue NPC promotion, indicating its role in 
the RP11-624L4.1-CDK4/6-Cyclin D1-Rb-E2F1 pathway. Taken together, RP11-624L4.1 
is required for NPC unfavorable prognosis and proliferation through the 
CDK4/6-Cyclin D1-Rb-E2F1 pathway, which may be a novel therapeutic target and 
prognostic in patients with NPC.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2020.10.017
PMCID: PMC7558227
PMID: 33078086

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.