1. Exp Mol Med. 2020 Oct;52(10):1673-1693. doi: 10.1038/s12276-020-00516-4. Epub 
2020 Oct 19.

Similar sequences but dissimilar biological functions of GDF11 and myostatin.

Suh J(1), Lee YS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics & Dental Pharmacology, School of Dentistry 
and Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics & Dental Pharmacology, School of Dentistry 
and Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea. yunlee@snu.ac.kr.

Growth differentiation factor 11 (GDF11) and myostatin (MSTN) are closely 
related TGFÎ² family members that are often believed to serve similar functions 
due to their high homology. However, genetic studies in animals provide clear 
evidence that they perform distinct roles. While the loss of Mstn leads to 
hypermuscularity, the deletion of Gdf11 results in abnormal skeletal patterning 
and organ development. The perinatal lethality of Gdf11-null mice, which 
contrasts with the long-term viability of Mstn-null mice, has led most research 
to focus on utilizing recombinant GDF11 proteins to investigate the postnatal 
functions of GDF11. However, the reported outcomes of the exogenous application 
of recombinant GDF11 proteins are controversial partly because of the different 
sources and qualities of recombinant GDF11 used and because recombinant GDF11 
and MSTN proteins are nearly indistinguishable due to their similar structural 
and biochemical properties. Here, we analyze the similarities and differences 
between GDF11 and MSTN from an evolutionary point of view and summarize the 
current understanding of the biological processing, signaling, and physiological 
functions of GDF11 and MSTN. Finally, we discuss the potential use of 
recombinant GDF11 as a therapeutic option for a wide range of medical conditions 
and the possible adverse effects of GDF11 inhibition mediated by MSTN 
inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1038/s12276-020-00516-4
PMCID: PMC8080601
PMID: 33077875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.