1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Nov 3;117(44):27346-27353. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2013244117. Epub 2020 Oct 19.

Unexpected specificity within dynamic transcriptional protein-protein complexes.

Henley MJ(1)(2), Linhares BM(3), Morgan BS(1), Cierpicki T(2)(3)(4), Fierke 
CA(5), Mapp AK(6)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.
(2)Program in Chemical Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.
(3)Department of Biophysics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843.
(6)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; 
amapp@umich.edu.
(7)Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

A key functional event in eukaryotic gene activation is the formation of dynamic 
protein-protein interaction networks between transcriptional activators and 
transcriptional coactivators. Seemingly incongruent with the tight regulation of 
transcription, many biochemical and biophysical studies suggest that activators 
use nonspecific hydrophobic and/or electrostatic interactions to bind to 
coactivators, with few if any specific contacts. Here a mechanistic dissection 
of a set of representative dynamic activator•coactivator complexes, comprised of 
the ETV/PEA3 family of activators and the coactivator Med25, reveals a different 
molecular recognition model. The data demonstrate that small sequence variations 
within an activator family significantly redistribute the conformational 
ensemble of the complex while not affecting overall affinity, and distal 
residues within the activator-not often considered as contributing to 
binding-play a key role in mediating conformational redistribution. The 
ETV/PEA3•Med25 ensembles are directed by specific contacts between the 
disordered activator and the Med25 interface, which is facilitated by structural 
shifts of the coactivator binding surface. Taken together, these data highlight 
the critical role coactivator plasticity plays in recognition of disordered 
activators and indicate that molecular recognition models of disordered proteins 
must consider the ability of the binding partners to mediate specificity.

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2013244117
PMCID: PMC7959569
PMID: 33077600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.