1. Life Sci. 2020 Dec 15;263:118564. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.118564. Epub 2020
Oct  17.

DEFA1B inhibits ZIKV replication and retards cell cycle progression through 
interaction with ORC1.

Li S(1), Zhu A(2), Ren K(2), Li S(2), Chen L(3).

Author information:
(1)Provincial Key Laboratory for Transfusion-Transmitted Infectious Diseases, 
Institute of Blood Transfusion, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Chengdu, Sichuan 610052, China. Electronic address: 
alyssa@bjmu.edu.cn.
(2)Provincial Key Laboratory for Transfusion-Transmitted Infectious Diseases, 
Institute of Blood Transfusion, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Chengdu, Sichuan 610052, China.
(3)Provincial Key Laboratory for Transfusion-Transmitted Infectious Diseases, 
Institute of Blood Transfusion, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Chengdu, Sichuan 610052, China; Toronto General Research 
Institute, University of Toronto, ON M5G 1L6, Canada. Electronic address: 
limin_chen_99@yahoo.com.

AIMS: Zika virus (ZIKV) infection causes a public health concern because of its 
potential association with the development of microcephaly. During viral 
infections, the host innate immune response is mounted quickly to produce some 
endogenous functional molecules to limit virus replication and spread. Exosomes 
contain molecules from their cell of origin following virus infection and can 
enter recipient cells for intercellular communication. Here, we aim to clarify 
whether ZIKV-induced exosomes can regulate viral pathogenicity by transferring 
specific RNAs.
MAIN METHODS: In this study, exosomes were isolated from the supernatants of 
A549 cells with or without ZIKV infection. Human transcriptome array (HTA) was 
performed to analyze the profiling of RNAs wrapped in exosomes. Then qPCR, 
western blotting and ELISA were used to determine ZIKV replication. CCK-8 and 
flow cytometry were used to test the cell proliferation and cell cycles. 
Co-culture assay was used to analyze the effect of exosomes on the cell cycles 
of recipient cells.
KEY FINDINGS: Through human transcriptome array (HTA) we found the defensin 
alpha 1B (DEFA1B) expression was significantly increased within exosomes 
isolated from ZIKV infected A549 cells. Additionally, we found that the 
extracellular DEFA1B exerts significant anti-ZIKV activity, mainly before ZIKV 
entering host cells. Interestingly, up-regulated DEFA1B retards the cell cycle 
of host cells. Further studies demonstrated that DEFA1B interacted with the 
origin recognition complex 1 (ORC1) which is required to initiate DNA 
replication during the cell cycle and increased DEFA1B expression decreased the 
ORC1 level in the cell nuclei. Accordingly, DEFA1B-containing exosomes can be 
internalized by the recipient cells to retard their cell cycles.
SIGNIFICANCE: Together, our results demonstrated that the anti-ZIKV activity of 
DEFA1B can be mediated by exosomes, and DEFA1B interacts with ORC1 to retard 
cell cycles. Our study provides a novel concept that DEFA1B not only acts as an 
antiviral molecule during ZIKV infection but also may correlate with cell 
proliferation by retarding the progression of cell cycles.

Copyright Â© 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.118564
PMCID: PMC7567675
PMID: 33075374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]