1. iScience. 2020 Sep 23;23(10):101596. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2020.101596. 
eCollection 2020 Oct 23.

Unique Epigenetic Programming Distinguishes Regenerative Spermatogonial Stem 
Cells in the Developing Mouse Testis.

Cheng K(1), Chen IC(1), Cheng CE(1), Mutoji K(1), Hale BJ(2), Hermann BP(1), 
Geyer CB(2), Oatley JM(3), McCarrey JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 
USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology at the Brody School of Medicine and 
East Carolina Diabetes and Obesity Institute, East Carolina University, 
Greenville, NC, USA.
(3)Center for Reproductive Biology, School of Molecular Biosciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA.

Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) both self-renew and give rise to progenitors 
that initiate spermatogenic differentiation in the mammalian testis. Questions 
remain regarding the extent to which the SSC and progenitor states are 
functionally distinct. Here we provide the first multiparametric integrative 
analysis of mammalian germ cell epigenomes comparable with that done for >100 
somatic cell types by the ENCODE Project. Differentially expressed genes 
distinguishing SSC- and progenitor-enriched spermatogonia showed distinct 
histone modification patterns, particularly for H3K27ac and H3K27me3. Motif 
analysis predicted transcription factors that may regulate spermatogonial 
subtype-specific fate, and immunohistochemistry and gene-specific chromatin 
immunoprecipitation analyses confirmed subtype-specific differences in target 
gene binding of a subset of these factors. Taken together, these results show 
that SSCs and progenitors display distinct epigenetic profiling consistent with 
these spermatogonial subtypes being differentially programmed to either 
self-renew and maintain regenerative capacity as SSCs or lose regenerative 
capacity and initiate lineage commitment as progenitors.

Â© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2020.101596
PMCID: PMC7552105
PMID: 33083754

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.