1. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2020 Nov;7(11):2326-2331. doi: 10.1002/acn3.51221.
Epub  2020 Oct 21.

Multimodal evaluation of an Italian family with a hereditary spastic paraplegia 
and POLR3A mutations.

Ruggiero L(1), Iovino A(1)(2), Dubbioso R(1), Cocozza S(2), Trovato R(3), Aruta 
F(1), Pontillo G(2), Barghigiani M(3), Brunetti A(2), Santorelli FM(3), 
Manganelli F(1), Iodice R(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive and Odontostomatological Sciences, 
University Federico II of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, 
Naples, Italy.
(3)Molecular Medicine, IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Calambrone, Pisa, Italy.
(4)IRCCS SDN (Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico), Naples, 
Italy.

We describe an Italian family with adult-onset pure hereditary spastic 
paraplegia due to biallelic variants in POLR3A gene [c.1909 + 22G > A and 
c.3839dupT (p.M1280fs*20]. MRI showed a mild hyperintensity of superior 
cerebellar peduncles and cervical spinal cord atrophy. The neurophysiological 
metrics about intracortical excitability showed higher values of motor 
thresholds and a significant reduction of short interval intracortical 
inhibition (SICI) in the patient with a more severe phenotype. Our multimodal 
evaluation further expands the wide phenotypic spectrum associated with 
mutations in the POLR3A gene. An extensive genotype-phenotype correlation study 
is necessary to explain the role of the many new mutations on the function of 
protein.

© 2020 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.51221
PMCID: PMC7664249
PMID: 33085208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.