1. MethodsX. 2020 Sep 22;7:101073. doi: 10.1016/j.mex.2020.101073. eCollection 
2020.

Reproducible differentiation and characterization of neurons from mouse 
embryonic stem cells.

Saxena S(1), Choudhury S(1), Mohan KN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science 
Pilani, Hyderabad Campus, Jawahar Nagar, Hyderabad 500 078, India.

Investigation on the effects of disease-associated mutations on neurodevelopment 
is an essential approach to understand the molecular basis of neurological 
disorders and can be achieved by generating suitable animal models. However, 
some of the mutations preclude development of animal models, leaving cell-based 
models as the only options. Mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) are attractive 
because of the well-established technologies for introducing disease-associated 
mutations and the feasibility of investigating the abnormalities during 
different stages of neurogenesis. Importantly, such transgenic mESCs enable 
large-scale screening and identification of the most promising small molecules 
and/or drug candidates before undertaking expensive animal studies. Although 
neuronal differentiation from mESCs is one of the earliest methods to be 
developed, we observed that the published as well as publicly available methods 
did not yield neurons consistently. Here, we describe a 16-day differentiation 
protocol that consistently induced differentiation of mESCs into neurons. This 
step-wise protocol enables monitoring of the neuronal differentiation process at 
different stages as well as characterization using the markers for immature and 
mature neurons by using immunocytochemistry and quantitative real-time 
PCRs.•Development of a method for differentiating mouse ES cells into 
neurons.•Differentiating the mouse ES cells into embryoid bodies prior to 
induction of neuronal differentiation results in better neuron formation.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mex.2020.101073
PMCID: PMC7551330
PMID: 33083240

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.