1. Cell Microbiol. 2021 Feb;23(2):e13281. doi: 10.1111/cmi.13281. Epub 2020 Nov
4.

MicroRNA-206 inhibits influenza A virus replication by targeting tankyrase 2.

Bamunuarachchi G(1)(2), Yang X(1)(2), Huang C(1)(2), Liang Y(1)(2), Guo Y, Liu 
L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Oklahoma Center for Respiratory and Infectious Diseases, Oklahoma State 
University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA.
(2)Lundberg-Kienlen Lung Biology and Toxicology Laboratory, Department of 
Physiological Sciences, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA.

Due to the frequent mutations, influenza A virus (IAV) becomes resistant to 
anti-viral drugs targeting influenza viral proteins. There are increasing 
interests in anti-viral agents that target host cellular proteins required for 
virus replication. Tankyrase (TNKS) has poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase activity 
and is a negative regulator of many host proteins. The objectives of this study 
are to study the role of TNKS2 in IAV infection, identify the microRNAs 
targeting TNKS2, and to understand the mechanisms involved. We found that TNKS2 
expression was elevated in human lung epithelial cells and mouse lungs during 
IAV infection. Knock-down of TNKS2 by RNA interference reduced viral 
replication. Using a computation approach and 3'-untranslation regions (3'-UTR) 
reporter assay, we identified miR-206 as the microRNA that targeted TNKS2. 
Overexpression of miR-206 reduced viral protein levels and virus production in 
cell culture. The effect of miR-206 on IAV replication was strain-independent. 
miR-206 activated JNK/c-Jun signalling, induced type I interferon expression and 
enhanced Stat signalling. Finally, the delivery of an adenovirus expressing 
miR-206 into the lung of mice challenged with IAV increased type I interferon 
response, suppressed viral load in the lungs and increased survival. Our results 
indicate that miR-206 has anti-influenza activity by targeting TNKS2 and 
subsequently activating the anti-viral state.

Â© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.13281
PMCID: PMC8279255
PMID: 33099847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.