1. PLoS One. 2020 Oct 22;15(10):e0241074. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241074. 
eCollection 2020.

Effective refolding of a cysteine rich glycoside hydrolase family 19 recombinant 
chitinase from Streptomyces griseus by reverse dilution and affinity 
chromatography.

Oyeleye AO(1)(2), Mohd Yusoff SF(1), Abd Rahim IN(1), Leow ATC(1)(2), Saidi 
NB(1), Normi YM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Biomolecular Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Enzyme and Microbial Technology Research Center, Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Biomolecular Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.

Conventional refolding methods are associated with low yields due to misfolding 
and high aggregation rates or very dilute proteins. In this study, we describe 
the optimization of the conventional methods of reverse dilution and affinity 
chromatography for obtaining high yields of a cysteine rich recombinant 
glycoside hydrolase family 19 chitinase from Streptomyces griseus HUT6037 
(SgChiC). SgChiC is a potential biocontrol agent and a reference enzyme in the 
study and development of chitinases for various applications. The overexpression 
of SgChiC was previously achieved by periplasmic localization from where it was 
extracted by osmotic shock and then purified by hydroxyapatite column 
chromatography. In the present study, the successful refolding and recovery of 
recombinant SgChiC (r-SgChiC) from inclusion bodies (IB) by reverse dilution and 
column chromatography methods is respectively described. Approximately 8 mg of 
r-SgChiC was obtained from each method with specific activities of 28 and 52 
U/mg respectively. These yields are comparable to that obtained from a 1 L 
culture volume of the same protein isolated from the periplasmic space of E. 
coli BL21 (DE3) as described in previous studies. The higher yields obtained are 
attributed to the successful suppression of aggregation by a stepwise reduction 
of denaturant from high, to intermediate, and finally to low concentrations. 
These methods are straight forward, requiring the use of fewer refolding agents 
compared with previously described refolding methods. They can be applied to the 
refolding of other cysteine rich proteins expressed as inclusion bodies to 
obtain high yields of actively folded proteins. This is the first report on the 
recovery of actively folded SgChiC from inclusion bodies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0241074
PMCID: PMC7580917
PMID: 33091044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.