1. Hum Genet. 2021 Apr;140(4):593-607. doi: 10.1007/s00439-020-02228-1. Epub 2020
 Oct 23.

A CRISPR and high-content imaging assay compliant with ACMG/AMP guidelines for 
clinical variant interpretation in ciliopathies.

Nazlamova L(1), Thomas NS(1)(2), Cheung MK(3), Legebeke J(1), Lord J(1)(4), 
Pengelly RJ(1)(4), Tapper WJ(1), Wheway G(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Human Development and Health, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK.
(2)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, 
UK.
(3)Centre for Research in Biosciences, University of the West of England, 
Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(4)University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Human Development and Health, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK. G.Wheway@soton.ac.uk.
(6)University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK. 
G.Wheway@soton.ac.uk.

Ciliopathies are a broad range of inherited developmental and degenerative 
diseases associated with structural or functional defects in motile or primary 
non-motile cilia. There are around 200 known ciliopathy disease genes and whilst 
genetic testing can provide an accurate diagnosis, 24-60% of ciliopathy patients 
who undergo genetic testing do not receive a genetic diagnosis. This is partly 
because following current guidelines from the American College of Medical 
Genetics and the Association for Molecular Pathology, it is difficult to provide 
a confident clinical diagnosis of disease caused by missense or non-coding 
variants, which account for more than one-third of cases of disease. Mutations 
in PRPF31 are the second most common cause of the degenerative retinal 
ciliopathy autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Here, we present a 
high-throughput high-content imaging assay providing quantitative measure of 
effect of missense variants in PRPF31 which meets the recently published 
criteria for a baseline standard in vitro test for clinical variant 
interpretation. This assay utilizes a new PRPF31+/- human retinal cell line 
generated using CRISPR gene editing to provide a stable cell line with 
significantly fewer cilia in which novel missense variants are expressed and 
characterised. We show that high-content imaging of cells expressing missense 
variants in a ciliopathy gene on a null background can allow characterisation of 
variants according to the cilia phenotype. We hope that this will be a useful 
tool for clinical characterisation of PRPF31 variants of uncertain significance, 
and can be extended to variant classification in other ciliopathies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-020-02228-1
PMCID: PMC7981318
PMID: 33095315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.