1. Exp Ther Med. 2020 Dec;20(6):164. doi: 10.3892/etm.2020.9293. Epub 2020 Oct 9.

Emerging role of long non-coding RNAs in pulmonary hypertension and their 
molecular mechanisms (Review).

Qin Y(1), Yan G(2), Qiao Y(2), Wang D(2), Luo E(1), Hou J(1), Tang C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Medical School of Southeast University, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu 210009, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Zhongda Hospital Affiliated to Southeast 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009, P.R. China.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a life-threatening cardiopulmonary condition 
caused by several pathogenic factors. All types of PH are characterized by the 
excessive proliferation of pulmonary artery endothelial cells and pulmonary 
artery smooth muscle cells, apoptosis resistance, pulmonary vascular remodeling, 
sustained elevated pulmonary arterial pressure, right heart failure and even 
death. Over the past decade, next generation sequencing, particularly 
RNA-sequencing, has identified some long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) that may act 
as regulators of cell differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis. Studies have 
shown that lncRNAs are closely associated with the development of several 
diseases, including cardiovascular diseases. In addition, a number of studies 
have reported that lncRNAs, including maternally expressed gene 3, 
metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1, taurine upregulated 1 
and cancer susceptibility candidate 2, serve important roles in the pathogenesis 
of PH. Despite the development of novel drug treatments, the mortality rate of 
PH remains high with no evident downward trend. Therefore, certain lncRNAs may 
be considered as therapeutic targets for the treatment of incurable PH. The 
present review summarizes the latest research on lncRNAs and PH, aiming to 
briefly describe PH-associated lncRNAs and their mechanisms of action.

Copyright: Â© Qin et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2020.9293
PMCID: PMC7571311
PMID: 33093902