1. PLoS One. 2020 Oct 27;15(10):e0240812. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0240812. 
eCollection 2020.

Transcriptome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms related to electric organ 
discharge differentiation among African weakly electric fish species.

Canitz J(1), Kirschbaum F(1)(2), Tiedemann R(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Evolutionary Biology/Systematic Zoology, Institute of Biochemistry 
and Biology, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany.
(2)Department of Crop and Animal Science, Faculty of Life Science, 
Humboldt-Universit√§t zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

African weakly electric fish of the mormyrid genus Campylomormyrus generate 
pulse-type electric organ discharges (EODs) for orientation and communication. 
Their pulse durations are species-specific and elongated EODs are a derived 
trait. So far, differential gene expression among tissue-specific transcriptomes 
across species with different pulses and point mutations in single ion channel 
genes indicate a relation of pulse duration and electrocyte 
geometry/excitability. However, a comprehensive assessment of expressed Single 
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) throughout the entire transcriptome of African 
weakly electric fish, with the potential to identify further genes influencing 
EOD duration, is still lacking. This is of particular value, as discharge 
duration is likely based on multiple cellular mechanisms and various genes. Here 
we provide the first transcriptome-wide SNP analysis of African weakly electric 
fish species (genus Campylomormyrus) differing by EOD duration to identify 
candidate genes and cellular mechanisms potentially involved in the 
determination of an elongated discharge of C. tshokwe. Non-synonymous 
substitutions specific to C. tshokwe were found in 27 candidate genes with 
inferred positive selection among Campylomormyrus species. These candidate genes 
had mainly functions linked to transcriptional regulation, cell proliferation 
and cell differentiation. Further, by comparing gene annotations between C. 
compressirostris (ancestral short EOD) and C. tshokwe (derived elongated EOD), 
we identified 27 GO terms and 2 KEGG pathway categories for which C. tshokwe 
significantly more frequently exhibited a species-specific expressed 
substitution than C. compressirostris. The results indicate that transcriptional 
regulation as well cell proliferation and differentiation take part in the 
determination of elongated pulse durations in C. tshokwe. Those cellular 
processes are pivotal for tissue morphogenesis and might determine the shape of 
electric organs supporting the observed correlation between electrocyte 
geometry/tissue structure and discharge duration. The inferred expressed SNPs 
and their functional implications are a valuable resource for future 
investigations on EOD durations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0240812
PMCID: PMC7591079
PMID: 33108393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.