1. Front Immunol. 2020 Sep 30;11:559576. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.559576. 
eCollection 2020.

High Metabolic Function and Resilience of NKG2A-Educated NK Cells.

Highton AJ(1), Diercks BP(2), Möckl F(2), Martrus G(1), Sauter J(3), Schmidt 
AH(3), Bunders MJ(1), Körner C(1), Guse AH(2), Altfeld M(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Department Virus Immunology, Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz 
Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)The Calcium Signaling Group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell 
Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Deutsche Knochenmarkspenderdatei (DKMS), Tübingen, Germany.

Natural killer (NK) cells are an important component of the innate immune system 
for the control of intracellular pathogens and cancer cells. NK cells 
demonstrate heterogeneous expression of inhibitory surface receptors. Signaling 
through these various receptors during NK cell development promotes 
functionality, referred to as NK cell education. Here we investigated the impact 
of education on NK cell metabolism through functional assessment of critical 
metabolic pathways and calcium signaling. Educated NK cells had an increased 
uptake of the metabolic substrates 2-NBDG, a fluorescent glucose analog, and 
BODIPY FL C16, a fluorescent palmitate, compared to uneducated NK cells. 
Comparison of NK cells educated via KIRs or NKG2A showed that NKG2A-educated NK 
cells were the main contributor to these differences in uptake of metabolites, 
and that NKG2A-educated NK cells were functionally more resilient in response to 
metabolic blockade of oxidative phosphorylation. Furthermore, NKG2A-educated NK 
cells exhibited higher peak calcium concentration following stimulation, 
indicating stronger signaling events taking place in these educated NK cells. 
These results demonstrate that cellular metabolism plays an important role in 
the functional differences observed between educated and uneducated NK cells, 
and show that NKG2A-educated NK cells remain more functionally competent than 
KIR-educated NK cells when oxidative phosphorylation is restricted. 
Understanding metabolic programming during NK cell education may unveil future 
targets to manipulate NK cell function for use in clinical settings, such as 
cancer therapies.

Copyright © 2020 Highton, Diercks, Möckl, Martrus, Sauter, Schmidt, Bunders, 
Körner, Guse and Altfeld.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.559576
PMCID: PMC7554334
PMID: 33101277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]