1. Cell. 2020 Nov 12;183(4):918-934.e49. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.060. Epub
2020  Oct 27.

Striosomes Mediate Value-Based Learning Vulnerable in Age and a Huntington's 
Disease Model.

Friedman A(1), Hueske E(1), Drammis SM(1), Toro Arana SE(1), Nelson ED(1), 
Carter CW(1), Delcasso S(1), Rodriguez RX(1), Lutwak H(1), DiMarco KS(1), Zhang 
Q(1), Rakocevic LI(1), Hu D(1), Xiong JK(1), Zhao J(1), Gibb LG(1), Yoshida 
T(1), Siciliano CA(1), Diefenbach TJ(2), Ramakrishnan C(3), Deisseroth K(3), 
Graybiel AM(4).

Author information:
(1)McGovern Institute for Brain Research and Department of Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(2)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(4)McGovern Institute for Brain Research and Department of Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 
Electronic address: graybiel@mit.edu.

Learning valence-based responses to favorable and unfavorable options requires 
judgments of the relative value of the options, a process necessary for species 
survival. We found, using engineered mice, that circuit connectivity and 
function of the striosome compartment of the striatum are critical for this type 
of learning. Calcium imaging during valence-based learning exhibited a selective 
correlation between learning and striosomal but not matrix signals. This 
striosomal activity encoded discrimination learning and was correlated with task 
engagement, which, in turn, could be regulated by chemogenetic excitation and 
inhibition. Striosomal function during discrimination learning was disturbed 
with aging and severely so in a mouse model of Huntington's disease. Anatomical 
and functional connectivity of parvalbumin-positive, putative fast-spiking 
interneurons (FSIs) to striatal projection neurons was enhanced in striosomes 
compared with matrix in mice that learned. Computational modeling of these 
findings suggests that FSIs can modulate the striosomal signal-to-noise ratio, 
crucial for discrimination and learning.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.060
PMCID: PMC7932131
PMID: 33113354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.