1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1273:135-145. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-49270-0_7.

The Hematopoietic Microenvironment in Myeloproliferative Neoplasms: The 
Interplay Between Nature (Stem Cells) and Nurture (the Niche).

Zhan H(1)(2), Kaushansky K(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stony Brook School 
of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY, USA. Huichun.Zhan@stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(2)Northport VA Medical Center, Northport, NY, USA. 
Huichun.Zhan@stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(3)Stony Brook School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY, USA. 
Kenneth.Kaushansky@stonybrookmedicine.edu.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) rely on instructive cues from the marrow 
microenvironment for their maintenance and function. Accumulating evidence 
indicates that the survival and proliferation of hematopoietic neoplasms are 
dependent not only on cell-intrinsic, genetic mutations, and other molecular 
alterations present within neoplastic stem cells, but also on the ability of the 
surrounding microenvironmental cells to nurture and promote the malignancy. It 
is anticipated that a better understanding of the molecular and cellular events 
responsible for these microenvironmental features of neoplastic hematopoiesis 
will lead to improved treatment for patients. This review will focus on the 
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), polycythemia vera (PV), essential 
thrombocythemia (ET), and primary myelofibrosis (PMF), in which an acquired 
signaling kinase mutation (JAK2V617F) plays a central, pathogenetic role in 
50-100% of patients with these disorders. Evidence is presented that the 
development of an MPN requires both an abnormal, mutation-bearing (i.e., 
neoplastic) HSC and an abnormal, mutation-bearing microenvironment.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-49270-0_7
PMID: 33119879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]