1. Cell Rep. 2020 Oct 27;33(4):108321. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108321.

Fat Body p53 Regulates Systemic Insulin Signaling and Autophagy under Nutrient 
Stress via Drosophila Upd2 Repression.

Ingaramo MC(1), Sánchez JA(1), Perrimon N(2), Dekanty A(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Agrobiotecnología del Litoral, Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Santa Fe 3000, Argentina.
(2)Department of Genetics, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
Electronic address: perrimon@genetics.med.harvard.edu.
(3)Instituto de Agrobiotecnología del Litoral, Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Santa Fe 3000, Argentina; 
Facultad de Bioquímica y Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral 
(UNL), Santa Fe 3000, Argentina. Electronic address: 
adekanty@santafe-conicet.gov.ar.

The tumor suppressor p53 regulates multiple metabolic pathways at the cellular 
level. However, its role in the context of a whole animal response to metabolic 
stress is poorly understood. Using Drosophila, we show that AMP-activated 
protein kinase (AMPK)-dependent Dmp53 activation is critical for sensing 
nutrient stress, maintaining metabolic homeostasis, and extending organismal 
survival. Under both nutrient deprivation and high-sugar diet, Dmp53 activation 
in the fat body represses expression of the Drosophila Leptin analog, Unpaired-2 
(Upd2), which remotely controls Dilp2 secretion in insulin-producing cells. In 
starved Dmp53-depleted animals, elevated Upd2 expression in adipose cells and 
activation of Upd2 receptor Domeless in the brain result in sustained Dilp2 
circulating levels and impaired autophagy induction at a systemic level, thereby 
reducing nutrient stress survival. These findings demonstrate an essential role 
for the AMPK-Dmp53 axis in nutrient stress responses and expand the concept that 
adipose tissue acts as a sensing organ that orchestrates systemic adaptation to 
nutrient status.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108321
PMCID: PMC9036415
PMID: 33113367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.