1. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2020 Jan-Dec;26:1076029620962225. doi: 
10.1177/1076029620962225.

Gene Variants Associated With Venous Thrombosis: A Replication Study in a 
Brazilian Multicentre Study.

Romano AVC(1), Barnabé A(1), Gadelha TB(2), Guerra JCC(3), Secolin R(4), Orsi 
FLA(1), Campanate GCS(2), Wolosker N(5), Annichino-Bizzacchi JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Hematology and Hemotherapy Center, 28132University of Campinas (UNICAMP), 
Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Hematology, 28125Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(3)Clinical Pathology, Israelite Hospital Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Hematology and Hemotherapy Center, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
28132University of Campinas-Unicamp, Campinas, Brazil.
(5)Vascular Surgery, Israelite Hospital Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) associated with Venous Thromboembolism 
(VTE) risk have been identified in European and American populations. Replicate 
SNPs associated with VTE in a Brazilian multicenter case-control study of the 
Southeast region. Patients with previous VTE assisted at the Outpatient Clinics 
of 3 centers of the Southeast Brazilian region were compared to normal controls 
of the same geographic region. We evaluated 29 SNPs associated with VTE risk in 
other populations, and 90 SNPs for stratification analysis of the population. 
Due to high admixture of Brazilian population and lack of previous studies, the 
calculation of the sample power was performed after genotyping. Sample size, 
allelic frequency and Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were estimated. The association 
and odds ratio analyses were estimated by logistic regression and the results 
were adjusted for multiple tests using Bonferroni correction. The evaluation of 
the genetic structure similarity in the cases and controls was performed by 
AMOVA. 436 cases and 430 controls were included. It was demonstrated that this 
sample has a statistical power to detect a genetic association of 79.4%. AMOVA 
showed that the genetic variability between groups was 0.0% and 100% within each 
group. None of the SNPs showed association with VTE in our population. A 
Brazilian multicenter case-control study with adequate sample power, high 
genetic variability though no stratification between groups, showed no 
replication of SNPs associated with VTE. The high admixture of Brazilian 
population may be responsible for these results, emphasizing the influence of 
the population genetic structure in association studies.

DOI: 10.1177/1076029620962225
PMCID: PMC7607786
PMID: 33119405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.