1. Biomed Res Int. 2020 Oct 16;2020:9586806. doi: 10.1155/2020/9586806.
eCollection  2020.

Multimodal MR Features of 8 Cases of Epithelioid Glioblastoma.

Zhao JP(1), Cui CX(1), Wang JC(1), Su HW(1), Duan CF(1), Liu XJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.

PURPOSE: The MRI features of epithelioid glioblastoma (eGBM) were analyzed. The 
apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), MR perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI), and 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) findings were quantitatively analyzed.
METHODS: The MRI images of 8 cases of eGBM were analyzed retrospectively. The 
location and edge, signal, peritumoral edema, adjacent meningeal invasion, and 
enhancement of the lesions were observed. The ADC value, relative cerebral blood 
volume (rCBV), relative cerebral blood flow (rCBF), and 
N-acetylaspartate/acetylcholine (NAA/Cho) value were analyzed.
RESULTS: Among the 8 patients, the tumors were mainly located in the temporal 
lobe (n = 3), frontal lobe (n = 3), and parietal lobe (n = 2). The lesion 
boundary was clear in 6 cases and unclear in 2. The lesions were superficial in 
5 cases and in the deep white matter in 3. Internal hemorrhage was observed in 4 
cases. There was cystic necrosis in 7 cases, and only 1 case was solid without 
cystic necrosis. There was no edema around the lesion in 1 case, severe edema in 
5, and moderate edema in 2. In 4 cases, the adjacent meninges were involved, and 
in 1 case, the ependyma was involved. Two patients developed leptomeningeal 
metastasis within 2 months after the operation. The average ADC value of the 
tumor parenchyma among all 8 patients was7.15 × 10-4 mm2/s,which was 17.6% lower 
than that of the contralateral side. The Cho/NAA metabolite ratio was 5.27 and 
0.81 in the lesions of 2 patients. The rCBV was 3.51 ml/100 g and 3.32 ml/100 g 
of lesions in 2 patients; these values were 36% and 29% higher, respectively, 
than those of the contralateral side. The rCBF was 31.5 ml/100 g/min and 
82.1 ml/100 g/min of lesions in two patients; these values were 49% and 203% 
higher, respectively, than those of the contralateral side.
CONCLUSION: eGBM characteristics include a superficial location, easy cyst 
degeneration, easy necrosis and hemorrhage, and clear boundaries. It easily 
invades adjacent meninges and shows cerebrospinal fluid dissemination and 
metastasis. Combining new MR techniques, such as ADC values, PWI, and MRS, could 
be helpful for improving diagnostic accuracy.

Copyright © 2020 Ji-ping Zhao et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/9586806
PMCID: PMC7586153
PMID: 33123592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.