1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Oct 27;21(21):7966. doi: 10.3390/ijms21217966.

Differential Defense Responses of Upland and Lowland Switchgrass Cultivars to a 
Cereal Aphid Pest.

Pingault L(1), Palmer NA(2), Koch KG(1), Heng-Moss T(1), Bradshaw JD(1), 
Seravalli J(3), Twigg P(4), Louis J(1)(5), Sarath G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68583, 
USA.
(2)Wheat, Sorghum, and Forage Research Unit, USDA-ARS, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA.
(3)Redox Biology Center, Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588, USA.
(4)Biology Department, University of Nebraska-Kearney, Kearney, NE 68849, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 
68583, USA.

Yellow sugarcane aphid (YSA) (Sipha flava, Forbes) is a damaging pest on many 
grasses. Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum L.), a perennial C4 grass, has been 
selected as a bioenergy feedstock because of its perceived resilience to abiotic 
and biotic stresses. Aphid infestation on switchgrass has the potential to 
reduce the yields and biomass quantity. Here, the global defense response of 
switchgrass cultivars Summer and Kanlow to YSA feeding was analyzed by RNA-seq 
and metabolite analysis at 5, 10, and 15 days after infestation. Genes 
upregulated by infestation were more common in both cultivars compared to 
downregulated genes. In total, a higher number of differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs) were found in the YSA susceptible cultivar (Summer), and fewer DEGs were 
observed in the YSA resistant cultivar (Kanlow). Interestingly, no downregulated 
genes were found in common between each time point or between the two 
switchgrass cultivars. Gene co-expression analysis revealed upregulated genes in 
Kanlow were associated with functions such as flavonoid, oxidation-response to 
chemical, or wax composition. Downregulated genes for the cultivar Summer were 
found in co-expression modules with gene functions related to plant defense 
mechanisms or cell wall composition. Global analysis of defense networks of the 
two cultivars uncovered differential mechanisms associated with resistance or 
susceptibility of switchgrass in response to YSA infestation. Several gene 
co-expression modules and transcription factors correlated with these 
differential defense responses. Overall, the YSA-resistant Kanlow plants have an 
enhanced defense even under aphid uninfested conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21217966
PMCID: PMC7672581
PMID: 33120946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.