1. Front Neurol. 2020 Oct 2;11:516211. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.516211.
eCollection  2020.

Regional Features of MuSK Antibody-Positive Myasthenia Gravis in Northeast 
China.

Zhang Z(1), Guan Y(1), Han J(2), Li M(1), Shi M(1), Deng H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience Center, First Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, 
China.

Objective: To summarize the characteristics of muscle-specific receptor tyrosine 
kinase antibody-positive myasthenia gravis (MuSK-MG) in Northeast China. 
Methods: We retrospectively collected 183 confirmed MG patients and divided them 
into three groups based on the type of serum antibodies: MuSK-MG (14 cases), 
acetylcholine receptor (AChR)-MG (130 cases), and double-seronegative (DSN)-MG 
(39 cases). The clinical, diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognosis data were 
analyzed. Results: MuSK antibody was detected in 26.7% of seronegative MG. The 
mean age of onset in MuSK-MG was 53.2 ± 13.6 years. Fifty percent of MuSK-MG 
patients with an onset symptom of pure ocular muscle weakness. The time from 
onset to other muscle groups' involvement and the time from onset to myasthenic 
crisis had no significant difference among the three groups (P > 0.05). The 
proportion of Osserman classification I in MuSK-MG group was lower than that in 
DSN-MG group. The proportion of Osserman classification IV in MuSK-MG group was 
higher than that in the other two groups. The incidences of other coexisting 
autoimmune diseases in MuSK-MG group were higher. Prognosis after the treatment 
of steroid combined with tacrolimus for MuSK-MG was similar to AChR-MG treated 
with steroid combined with an immunosuppressant agent (P > 0.05). Conclusion: 
Patients with MuSK-MG in Northeast China have a modestly later onset age and a 
proportion of patients may have a mild form of the disease with delayed disease 
progression. We confirmed the existence of a rare ocular MuSK-MG phenotype, a 
high proportion of coexisting with other autoimmune diseases, and a good 
response to steroids combined with tacrolimus for our MuSK-MG series.

Copyright © 2020 Zhang, Guan, Han, Li, Shi and Deng.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2020.516211
PMCID: PMC7566902
PMID: 33123066