1. Cells. 2020 Oct 27;9(11):2364. doi: 10.3390/cells9112364.

Equine Penile Squamous Cell Carcinomas as a Model for Human Disease: A 
Preliminary Investigation on Tumor Immune Microenvironment.

Porcellato I(1), Mecocci S(1), Mechelli L(1), Cappelli K(1)(2), Brachelente 
C(1), Pepe M(1)(2), Orlandi M(1), Gialletti R(1)(2), Passeri B(3), Ferrari A(4), 
Modesto P(4), Ghelardi A(5), Razzuoli E(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Perugia, 06126 Perugia, 
Italy.
(2)Centro di Ricerca sul Cavallo Sportivo, University of Perugia, 06126 Perugia, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Veterinary Science, University of Parma, 43126 Parma, Italy.
(4)Zooprophylactic Institute of Piemonte, Liguria and Valle d'Aosta, 16129 
Genova, Italy.
(5)Azienda Usl Toscana Nord-Ovest, UOC Ostetricia e Ginecologia, Ospedale 
Apuane, 54100 Massa, Italy.

Penile squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) are common tumors in older horses, with 
poor prognosis mostly due to local invasion and recurrence. These tumors are 
thought to be mainly caused by Equus caballus papillomavirus type 2 (EcPV-2). 
The aim of this study is to characterize the tumor immune environment (TIME) in 
equine penile tumors. Equine penile epithelial tumors (17 epSCCs; 2 carcinomas 
in situ, CIS; 1 papilloma, P) were retrospectively selected; immune infiltrate 
was assessed by histology and immunohistochemistry; RT-qPCR tested the 
expression of selected chemokines and EcPV-2 DNA and RNA. The results confirmed 
EcPV-2-L1 DNA in 18/20 (90%) samples. L1 expression was instead retrieved in 
13/20 cases (65%). The samples showed an increased infiltration of 
CD3+lymphocytes, macrophages (MAC387; IBA1), plasma cells (MUM1), and 
FoxP3+lymphocytes in the intra/peritumoral stroma when compared to extratumoral 
tissues (p < 0.05). Only MAC387+neutrophils were increased in EcPV-2high viral 
load samples (p < 0.05). IL12/p35 was differentially expressed in EcPVhigh and 
EcPVlow groups (p = 0.007). A significant decrease of IFNG and IL2 expression 
was highlighted in TGFB1-positive samples (p < 0.05). IBA1 and CD20 were 
intratumorally increased in cases where IL-10 was expressed (p < 0.005). EpSCCs 
may represent a good spontaneous model for the human counterpart. Further 
prospective studies are needed in order to confirm these preliminary results.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9112364
PMCID: PMC7693514
PMID: 33121116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.