1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2021 May;187:114311. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2020.114311. Epub 
2020 Oct 29.

Medicinal chemistry of P2 and adenosine receptors: Common scaffolds adapted for 
multiple targets.

Jacobson KA(1), IJzerman AP(2), MÃ¼ller CE(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Recognition Section, Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. Electronic address: 
kennethj@niddk.nih.gov.
(2)Division of Drug Discovery and Safety, LACDR, Leiden University, the 
Netherlands.
(3)PharmaCenter Bonn, Pharmaceutical Institute, Pharmaceutical & Medicinal 
Chemistry, University of Bonn, An der Immenburg 4, D-53121 Bonn, Germany.

Prof. Geoffrey Burnstock originated the concept of purinergic signaling. He 
demonstrated the interactions and biological roles of ionotropic P2X and 
metabotropic P2Y receptors. This review paper traces the historical origins of 
many currently used antagonists and agonists for P2 receptors, as well as 
adenosine receptors, in early attempts to identify ligands for these receptors - 
prior to the use of chemical libraries for screening. Rather than presenting a 
general review of current purinergic ligands, we focus on common chemical 
scaffolds (privileged scaffolds) that can be adapted for multiple receptor 
targets. By carefully analyzing the structure activity relationships, one can 
direct the selectivity of these scaffolds toward different receptor subtypes. 
For example, the weak and non-selective P2 antagonist reactive blue 2 (RB-2) was 
derivatized using combinatorial synthetic approaches, leading to the 
identification of selective P2Y2, P2Y4, P2Y12 or P2X2 receptor antagonists. A 
P2X4 antagonist NC-2600 is in a clinical trial, and A3 adenosine agonists show 
promise, for chronic pain. P2X7 antagonists have been in clinical trials for 
depression (JNJ-54175446), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), Crohn's disease, 
rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory pain and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). P2X3 antagonists are in clinical trials for chronic cough, and 
an antagonist named after Burnstock, gefapixant, is expected to be the first 
P2X3 antagonist filed for approval. We are seeing that the vision of Prof. 
Burnstock to use purinergic signaling modulators, most recently at P2XRs, for 
treating disease is coming to fruition.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2020.114311
PMCID: PMC8081756
PMID: 33130128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.