1. ACS Omega. 2020 Oct 16;5(42):27626-27632. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.0c04197. 
eCollection 2020 Oct 27.

Simultaneous and Rapid Detection of Multiple Epimers and Isomers of Aspartyl 
Residues in Lens Proteins Using an LC-MS-MRM Method.

Fujii N(1), Takata T(1), Kim I(1), Matsubara T(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Integrated Radiation and Nuclear Science, Kyoto University, 2 
Asashironishi, Kumatori-cho, Sennan-gun, Osaka 590-0494, Japan.
(2)Shimadzu Corporation, 1 Nisinokyo Kuwabara, Nakagyo-ku, Kyoto 604-8511, 
Japan.

Traditionally, studies of post translational modifications (PTMs) by mass 
analysis have been limited to modifications such as deamidation and oxidation 
that have a mass shift. Although Asp isomerization is an important PTM, the 
selective detection of Asp isomers by mass spectrometry was originally thought 
to be impossible due to the identical mass of the isomers. The recent 
development of an LC-MS-based method has facilitated rapid and accurate 
quantitative analysis of Asp isomers in long-lived proteins; however, because 
the quantification is based on the extracted ion chromatogram acquired by an MS1 
scan, this methodology is not always efficient for detecting extremely 
low-abundance peptides in complex biological samples. In this paper, we 
evaluated Asp isomer-containing peptides of αA-crystallin present in tryptic 
digests of human lens samples with different degrees of protein aggregation and 
different ages using LC coupled with multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). In a 
single analysis, the LC-MRM method enabled three tryptic peptides containing 
isomers of Asp58, Asp91/92, and Asp151 to be detected simultaneously. The extent 
of isomerization and epimerization of these specific Asp sites in αA-crystallin 
increased with the progress of α-crystallin aggregation. For the analysis of 
samples known to isomerize at specific Asp residues, MRM gives a more rapid, 
less laborious, and high-quality separation of Asp isomer-containing peptides 
relative to the previous MS1-based quantitative method.

© 2020 American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.0c04197
PMCID: PMC7594319
PMID: 33134726

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.