1. Biochem J. 2020 Nov 27;477(22):4397-4423. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20200458.

Endogenous Rab29 does not impact basal or stimulated LRRK2 pathway activity.

Kalogeropulou AF(1), Freemantle JB(1), Lis P(1), Vides EG(2), Polinski NK(3), 
Alessi DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, 
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, U.K.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford 
94305-5307, U.S.A.
(3)Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research, Grand Central Station, PO 
Box 4777, New York, NY 10163, U.S.A.

Mutations that enhance LRRK2 protein kinase activity cause inherited Parkinson's 
disease. LRRK2 phosphorylates a group of Rab GTPase proteins, including Rab10 
and Rab12, within the effector-binding switch-II motif. Previous work has 
indicated that the PARK16 locus, which harbors the gene encoding for Rab29, is 
involved in Parkinson's, and that Rab29 operates in a common pathway with LRRK2. 
Co-expression of Rab29 and LRRK2 stimulates LRRK2 activity by recruiting LRRK2 
to the surface of the trans Golgi network. Here, we report that knock-out of 
Rab29 does not influence endogenous LRRK2 activity, based on the assessment of 
Rab10 and Rab12 phosphorylation, in wild-type LRRK2, LRRK2[R1441C] or 
VPS35[D620N] knock-in mouse tissues and primary cell lines, including brain 
extracts and embryonic fibroblasts. We find that in brain extracts, Rab12 
phosphorylation is more robustly impacted by LRRK2 inhibitors and pathogenic 
mutations than Rab10 phosphorylation. Transgenic overexpression of Rab29 in a 
mouse model was also insufficient to stimulate basal LRRK2 activity. We observed 
that stimulation of Rab10 and Rab12 phosphorylation induced by agents that 
stress the endolysosomal system (nigericin, monensin, chloroquine and LLOMe) is 
suppressed by LRRK2 inhibitors but not blocked in Rab29 deficient cells. From 
the agents tested, nigericin induced the greatest increase in Rab10 and Rab12 
phosphorylation (5 to 9-fold). Our findings indicate that basal, pathogenic, as 
well as nigericin and monensin stimulated LRRK2 pathway activity is not 
controlled by Rab29. Further work is required to establish how LRRK2 activity is 
regulated, and whether other Rab proteins can control LRRK2 by targeting it to 
diverse membranes.

Â© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20200458
PMCID: PMC7702304
PMID: 33135724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.