1. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2021 May;259(5):1343-1355. doi: 
10.1007/s00417-020-04996-y. Epub 2020 Nov 3.

Spectral-domain OCT changes in retina and optic nerve in children with 
hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy.

Grego L(1)(2), Pignatto S(1)(2), Busolini E(3), Rassu N(1)(2), Samassa F(1)(2), 
Prosperi R(1)(2), Pittini C(3), Cattarossi L(3), Lanzetta P(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Ophthalmology, University of Udine, Udine, Italy.
(2)Clinica Oculistica, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Friuli Centrale (ASUFC), 
Ospedale Santa Maria della Misericordia, Piazzale Santa Maria della 
Misericordia, 15, 33100, Udine, Italy.
(3)Patologia Neonatale - Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Friuli Centrale (ASUFC) 
- Ospedale Santa Maria della Misericordia, Piazzale Santa Maria della 
Misericordia, 15, Udine, 33100, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine, Ophthalmology, University of Udine, Udine, Italy. 
paolo.lanzetta@uniud.it.
(5)Clinica Oculistica, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Friuli Centrale (ASUFC), 
Ospedale Santa Maria della Misericordia, Piazzale Santa Maria della 
Misericordia, 15, 33100, Udine, Italy. paolo.lanzetta@uniud.it.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the effect of neonatal hypoxic-ischaemic injury on the 
retina and the optic nerve and to correlate ocular damage with systemic 
parameters, laboratory tests, neurological imaging and therapeutic hypothermia 
at birth.
METHODS: Forty-one children with hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy (HIE) at birth 
(9.09 ± 3.78 years) and a control group of 38 healthy subjects 
(9.57 ± 3.47 years) were enrolled in a cohort study. The HIE population was 
divided into three subgroups, based on the degree of encephalopathy according to 
Sarnat score and the treatment with therapeutic hypothermia (TH): Sarnat score I 
not treated with hypothermia, Sarnat score II-III treated with TH and Sarnat 
score II-III not subjected to TH. Total macular thickness, individual retinal 
layers and peripapillary nerve fibre layer thickness were measured with 
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography. Clinical data of perinatal period 
of HIE children were collected: APGAR score, pH and base excess of funiculus 
blood at birth, apnoea duration, brain ultrasound, cerebral MRI ischaemic 
lesions and blood chemistry tests.
RESULTS: Children with Sarnat score I did not show a reduction of peripapillary 
nerve fibres and ganglion cell layer compared to the control group (p = 0.387, 
p = 0.316). Peripapillary nerve fibre layer was 109.06 ± 7.79 μm in children 
with Sarnat score II-III treated with TH, 108.31 ± 7.83 μm in subjects with 
Sarnat score II-III not subjected to TH and 114.27 ± 6.81 μm in the control 
group (p = 0.028, p = 0.007). Ganglion cell layer was thinner in children with 
Sarnat score II-III treated with TH (50.31 ± 5.13 μm) compared to the control 
group (54.04 ± 2.81 μm) (p = 0.01). Inner retinal layers damage correlated with 
C-reactive protein and lactate dehydrogenase increase, while higher levels of 
total bilirubin were protective against retinal impairment (p < 0.05). Cerebral 
oedema was related to peripapillary nerve fibre layer damage (p = 0.046).
CONCLUSIONS: Thickness reduction of inner retinal layer and peripapillary nerve 
fibre impairment was related to encephalopathy severity. Ocular damage was 
associated with inflammation and cerebral oedema following hypoxic-ischaemic 
damage.

DOI: 10.1007/s00417-020-04996-y
PMCID: PMC8102460
PMID: 33141256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PL is a consultant for Bayer, Centervue, 
Novartis Pharma AG, outside the submitted work. All authors, except PL, certify 
that they have no affiliations with or involvement in any organisation or entity 
with any financial interest (such as honoraria; educational grants; 
participation in speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment, consultancies, stock 
ownership, or other equity interest and expert testimony or patent-licencing 
arrangements), or non-financial interest (such as personal or professional 
relationships, affiliations, knowledge or beliefs) in the subject matter or 
materials discussed in this manuscript.