1. J Neurosci Res. 2021 Jan;99(1):110-123. doi: 10.1002/jnr.24747. Epub 2020 Nov
3.

An epilepsy-associated ACTL6B variant captures neuronal hyperexcitability in a 
human induced pluripotent stem cell model.

Ahn LY(1)(2), Coatti GC(1), Liu J(3), Gumus E(4)(5), Schaffer AE(1)(6), Miranda 
HC(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Medical Scientist Training Program, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Mugla Sitki Kocman 
University, Mugla, Turkey.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Harran, 
Sanliurfa, Turkey.
(6)Center for RNA Science and Therapeutics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(7)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 
USA.

ACTL6B is a component of the neuronal BRG1/brm-associated factor (nBAF) complex, 
which is required for chromatin remodeling in postmitotic neurons. We recently 
reported biallelic pathogenic variants in ACTL6B in patients diagnosed with 
early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, subtype 76 (EIEE-76), presenting with 
severe, global developmental delay, epileptic encephalopathy, cerebral atrophy, 
and abnormal central nervous system myelination. However, the pathophysiological 
mechanisms underlying their phenotype is unknown. Here, we investigate the 
molecular pathogenesis of ACTL6B p.(Val421_Cys425del) using in silico 3D protein 
modeling predictions and patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cell-derived 
neurons. We found neurons derived from EIEE-76 patients showed impaired 
accumulation of ACTL6B compared to unaffected relatives, caused by reduced 
protein stability. Furthermore, EIEE-76 patient-derived neurons had dysregulated 
nBAF target gene expression, including genes important for neuronal development 
and disease. Multielectrode array system analysis unveiled elevated 
electrophysiological activity of EIEE-76 patients-derived neurons, consistent 
with the patient phenotype. Taken together, our findings validate a new model 
for EIEE-76 and reveal how reduced ACTL6B expression affects neuronal function.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Neuroscience Research published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.24747
PMCID: PMC7756336
PMID: 33141462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no known or 
potential conflict of interest, including financial, personal, or other 
relationships, which could inappropriately influence or be perceived to 
influence the work presented here.