1. BMC Med Genomics. 2020 Nov 3;13(1):164. doi: 10.1186/s12920-020-00815-9.

Considering the APOE locus in Alzheimer's disease polygenic scores in the Health 
and Retirement Study: a longitudinal panel study.

Ware EB(1), Faul JD(2), Mitchell CM(2), Bakulski KM(3).

Author information:
(1)Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research, University of 
Michigan, 426 Thompson St., Rm. 3320 ISR-Thompson, Ann Arbor, MI, 48104, USA. 
ebakshis@umich.edu.
(2)Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research, University of 
Michigan, 426 Thompson St., Rm. 3320 ISR-Thompson, Ann Arbor, MI, 48104, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.

BACKGROUND: Polygenic scores are a strategy to aggregate the small, additive 
effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms across the genome. With phenotypes 
like Alzheimer's disease, which have a strong and well-established genomic locus 
(APOE), the cumulative effect of genetic variants outside of this area has not 
been well established in a population-representative sample.
METHODS: Here we examine the association between polygenic scores for 
Alzheimer's disease both with and without the APOE region (chr19: 45,384,477 to 
45,432,606, build 37/hg 19) at different P value thresholds and dementia. We 
also investigate the addition of APOE-ε4 carrier status and its effect on the 
polygenic score-dementia association in the Health and Retirement Study using 
generalized linear models accounting for repeated measures by individual and use 
a binomial distribution, logit link, and unstructured correlation structure.
RESULTS: In a large sample of European ancestry participants of the Health and 
Retirement Study (n = 9872) with an average of 5.2 (standard deviation 1.8) 
visit spaced two years apart, we found that including the APOE region through 
weighted variants in a polygenic score was insufficient to capture the large 
amount of risk attributed to this region. We also found that a polygenic score 
with a P value threshold of 0.01 had the strongest association with the odds of 
dementia in this sample (odds ratio = 1.10 95%CI 1.0 to 1.2).
CONCLUSION: We recommend removing the APOE region from polygenic score 
calculation and treating the APOE locus as an independent covariate when 
modeling dementia. We also recommend using a moderately conservative P value 
threshold (e.g. 0.01) when creating polygenic scores for Alzheimer's disease on 
dementia. These recommendations may help elucidate relationships between 
polygenic scores and regions of strong significance for phenotypes similar to 
Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-020-00815-9
PMCID: PMC7607711
PMID: 33143703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.