1. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2020 Dec;35(1):1953-1963. doi: 
10.1080/14756366.2020.1835884.

Scaffold hopping and optimisation of 3',4'-dihydroxyphenyl- containing 
thienopyrimidinones: synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives as novel allosteric 
inhibitors of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase-associated ribonuclease H.

Tocco G(1), Esposito F(1), Caboni P(1), Laus A(1), Beutler JA(2), Wilson JA(2), 
Corona A(1), Le Grice SFJ(3), Tramontano E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Cagliari, 
Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy.
(2)Molecular Targets Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, USA.
(3)Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, USA.

Bioisosteric replacement and scaffold hopping are powerful strategies in drug 
design useful for rationally modifying a hit compound towards novel lead 
therapeutic agents. Recently, we reported a series of thienopyrimidinones that 
compromise dynamics at the p66/p51 HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT)-associated 
Ribonuclease H (RNase H) dimer interface, thereby allosterically interrupting 
catalysis by altering the active site geometry. Although they exhibited good 
submicromolar activity, the isosteric replacement of the thiophene ring, a 
potential toxicophore, is warranted. Thus, in this article, the most active 
2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-5,6-dimethylthieno[2,3-d]pyrimidin-4(3H)-one 1 was 
selected as the hit scaffold and several isosteric substitutions of the 
thiophene ring were performed. A novel series of highly active RNase H 
allosteric quinazolinone inhibitors was thus obtained. To determine their target 
selectivity, they were tested against RT-associated RNA-dependent DNA polymerase 
(RDDP) and integrase (IN). Interestingly, none of the compounds were 
particularly active on (RDDP) but many displayed micromolar to submicromolar 
activity against IN.

DOI: 10.1080/14756366.2020.1835884
PMCID: PMC7646544
PMID: 33143469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no other relevant affiliations 
or financial involvement with any organisation or entity with a financial 
interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed 
in the manuscript apart from those disclosed. No writing assistance was utilised 
in the production of this manuscript.