1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Oct 31;21(21):8164. doi: 10.3390/ijms21218164.

In Vivo Imaging with Genetically Encoded Redox Biosensors.

Kostyuk AI(1)(2), Panova AS(1)(2), Kokova AD(1)(2), Kotova DA(1)(2), Maltsev 
DI(1)(3), Podgorny OV(1)(2), Belousov VV(1)(2)(3)(4), Bilan DS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, 117997 Moscow, 
Russia.
(2)Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic Technologies for Biomedicine, 
Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, 117997 Moscow, Russia.
(3)Federal Center for Cerebrovascular Pathology and Stroke, 117997 Moscow, 
Russia.
(4)Institute for Cardiovascular Physiology, Georg August University Göttingen, 
D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

Redox reactions are of high fundamental and practical interest since they are 
involved in both normal physiology and the pathogenesis of various diseases. 
However, this area of research has always been a relatively problematic field in 
the context of analytical approaches, mostly because of the unstable nature of 
the compounds that are measured. Genetically encoded sensors allow for the 
registration of highly reactive molecules in real-time mode and, therefore, they 
began a new era in redox biology. Their strongest points manifest most brightly 
in in vivo experiments and pave the way for the non-invasive investigation of 
biochemical pathways that proceed in organisms from different systematic groups. 
In the first part of the review, we briefly describe the redox sensors that were 
used in vivo as well as summarize the model systems to which they were applied. 
Next, we thoroughly discuss the biological results obtained in these studies in 
regard to animals, plants, as well as unicellular eukaryotes and prokaryotes. We 
hope that this work reflects the amazing power of this technology and can serve 
as a useful guide for biologists and chemists who work in the field of redox 
processes.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21218164
PMCID: PMC7662651
PMID: 33142884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.