1. CEN Case Rep. 2021 May;10(2):241-243. doi: 10.1007/s13730-020-00551-0. Epub
2020  Nov 7.

A case of HDR syndrome coexisting with tetralogy of Fallot, with a novel GATA3 
mutation, which manifested as a renal abscess.

Ikeuchi M(1), Kiyota K(1), Itonaga T(1), Kawano-Matsuda F(1), Ohata Y(2), 
Fujiwara M(2), Kubota T(2), Ozono K(2), Ihara K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, 1-1 Idaigaoka, 
Hasama, Yufu, Oita, 879-5593, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Suita, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, 1-1 Idaigaoka, 
Hasama, Yufu, Oita, 879-5593, Japan. k-ihara@oita-u.ac.jp.

HDR syndrome is characterized by the triad of primary hypoparathyroidism, 
sensorineural hearing loss and renal malformation with widely variable 
manifestations. It is an autosomal dominant inherited disease caused by a 
mutation of the GATA3 (NM_001002295.2), which is located on chromosome 10p14. 
Congenital heart disease, such as tetralogy of Fallot, a typical complication of 
DiGeorge syndrome, is a rare complication of HDR syndrome. We herein report a 
case of HDR syndrome coexisting tetralogy of Fallot with a novel mutation, 
c.964C > T (p.Gln322*). This case suggested that the screening of renal 
involvement should be carefully performed in patients with a phenotypic 
combination of hypoparathyroidism and sensorineural hearing loss, to facilitate 
the early diagnosis of HDR syndrome. In addition, when the deletion of 
chromosome 22q11.2 is not detected by a fluorescence in situ hybridization 
analysis in patients exhibiting the partial phenotype of DiGeorge syndrome, the 
possibility of HDR syndrome should be considered and the renal function should 
be repeatedly evaluated.

DOI: 10.1007/s13730-020-00551-0
PMCID: PMC8019435
PMID: 33159669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]