1. Pharmacogenomics J. 2021 Apr;21(2):128-139. doi: 10.1038/s41397-020-00198-1. 
Epub 2020 Nov 5.

A review of the existing literature on buprenorphine pharmacogenomics.

Meaden CW(1), Mozeika A(2), Asri R(2), Santos CD(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Toxicology Fellow, Department of Emergency Medicine, Rutgers New 
Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA.
(2)Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA.
(3)Emergency Medicine, Medical Toxicology, Addiction Medicine, Rutgers New 
Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA. Cynthia.D.Santos@Rutgers.edu.

Buprenorphine is an effective treatment for opioid dependence; however, it 
demonstrates individual variability in efficacy. Pharmacogenomics may explain 
this drug response variability and could allow for tailored therapy on an 
individual basis. The Food and Drug Administration and the Clinical 
Pharmacogenomics Implementation Consortium have guidelines on pharmacogenomic 
testing for some opioids (e.g., codeine); however, no guidelines exist for the 
partial opioid agonist buprenorphine. Pharmacogenomic testing targets for 
buprenorphine include pharmacodynamic genes like the mu-opioid receptor (MOP 
receptor) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), as well as the 
pharmacokinetic genes like the CYP enzymes. In this review we identified 
genotypes in patients with opioid addiction receiving buprenorphine that may 
result in altered therapeutic dosing and increased rate of relapse. The OPRM1 
A118G single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP rs1799971) gene variant encoding the 
N40D MOP receptor has been associated with variable efficacy and response to 
treatment in both adult and neonatal patients receiving buprenorphine for 
treatment of opioid withdrawal. An SNP associated with rs678849 of OPRD1, coding 
for the delta opioid receptor, was associated with opioid relapse as indicated 
by opioid positive urine drug screens; there was also sex specific SNP 
identified at rs581111 and rs529520 in the European American population. COMT 
variability, particularly in rs4680, has been associated with length of stay and 
need for opioid treatment in patients with neonatal abstinence syndrome. 
Variations of the pharmacokinetic gene for CYP3A4 showed that the ultrarapid 
metabolizer phenotype required higher doses of buprenorphine. Genotyping of 
patients may allow us to appropriately tailor buprenorphine therapy to 
individual patients and lead to improved patient outcomes; however, further 
research on the pharmacogenomics of buprenorphine is needed.

DOI: 10.1038/s41397-020-00198-1
PMID: 33154520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]