1. Rom J Intern Med. 2021 Mar 5;59(1):50-57. doi: 10.2478/rjim-2020-0033. Print 
2021 Mar 1.

Interleukin-10 (IL-10) 1082 promoter polymorphisms and plasma IL-10 levels in 
patients with bacterial sepsis.

Vivas MC(1), Villamarín-Guerrero HF(2), Sanchez CA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health, Universidad Santiago de 
Cali, Colombia.
(2)Physical Therapy-ICU, Fundacion Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia, Grupo de 
investigación GIIMMEIN.
(3)Hospital Piloto de Popayan, Cauca, Colombia.

Background. Interleukin-10 (IL-10) is a multifunctional cytokine which has been 
seen to play a relevant role in the pathogenesis of sepsis. We examined the 
association between a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in IL-10-1082G/A in 
patients with sepsis in Cali city.Methods. A total of 100 patients with sepsis 
and 50 control subjects were enrolled in this study. Blood samples were 
collected from all patients in EDTA containing tubes. IL-10-1082G/A gene 
promoter polymorphism was analyzed by Sequence Specific Polymerase Chain 
Reaction (SS-PCR), while levels of serum IL-10 were measured by Enzyme Linked 
Immunoassay Assay (ELISA) in patients with sepsis and healthy controls.Results. 
AA homozygous genotype was found more frequently in patients (32%), compared 
with controls (18%). AA homozygous patients showed an increased risk of 
developing infection by Gram-negative bacteria (OR = 2,875; 95% CI = 
1.162-7.113; p = 0.020), and significantly high plasma levels of IL-10 (OR = 
4.800, 95% CI 1.652-13.944; p = 0.002). AA homozygous patients high plasma IL-10 
levels have greater risk of developing sepsis (63.6%; OR = 4,894; 95% CI: 
1,337-17,909; p = 0.002). In this group, Afro-Colombian individuals were 
overrepresented among the sepsis patients with high plasma IL-10 levels (OR = 
1.661; 95% CI: 1.408-1.959; p = 0.036).Conclusion. Our study concluded that AA 
genotype of IL-10-1082G/A polymorphism is a risk factor for high IL-10 
production and development of sepsis by Gram negative bacteria, especially in 
Afro-Colombian patients.

© 2021 Monica Chavez Vivas et al., published by Sciendo.

DOI: 10.2478/rjim-2020-0033
PMID: 33155998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]