1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100049. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013500. Epub 2020
 Nov 24.

LY6D-induced macropinocytosis as a survival mechanism of senescent cells.

Nagano T(1), Iwasaki T(2), Onishi K(3), Awai Y(4), Terachi A(3), Kuwaba S(4), 
Asano S(3), Katasho R(3), Nagai K(1), Nakashima A(5), Kikkawa U(5), Kamada S(6).

Author information:
(1)Biosignal Research Center, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan.
(2)Biosignal Research Center, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan; Department of 
Biology, Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan; Department of 
Biology, Faculty of Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan.
(3)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Kobe, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan.
(5)Biosignal Research Center, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan; Department of 
Bioresource Science, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, 
Kobe, Japan.
(6)Biosignal Research Center, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan; Department of 
Biology, Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan; Department of 
Biology, Faculty of Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan. Electronic address: 
skamada@kobe-u.ac.jp.

Although senescent cells display various morphological changes including vacuole 
formation, it is still unclear how these processes are regulated. We have 
recently identified the gene, lymphocyte antigen 6 complex, locus D (LY6D), to 
be upregulated specifically in senescent cells. LY6D is a 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored cell-surface protein whose function 
remains unknown. Here, we analyzed the functional relationship between LY6D and 
the senescence processes. We found that overexpression of LY6D induced vacuole 
formation and knockdown of LY6D suppressed the senescence-associated vacuole 
formation. The LY6D-induced vacuoles were derived from macropinocytosis, a 
distinct form of endocytosis. Furthermore, Src family kinases and Ras were found 
to be recruited to membrane lipid rafts in an LY6D-dependent manner, and 
inhibition of their activity impaired the LY6D-induced macropinocytosis. 
Finally, reduction of senescent-cell survival induced by glutamine deprivation 
was recovered by albumin supplementation to the culture media in an 
LY6D-dependent manner. Because macropinocytosis acts as an amino acid supply 
route, these results suggest that LY6D-mediated macropinocytosis contributes to 
senescent-cell survival through the incorporation of extracellular nutrients.

Copyright Â© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013500
PMCID: PMC7948989
PMID: 33168631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.