1. iScience. 2020 Oct 15;23(11):101683. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2020.101683. 
eCollection 2020 Nov 20.

Estrogens Determine Adherens Junction Organization and E-Cadherin Clustering in 
Breast Cancer Cells via Amphiregulin.

Bischoff P(1)(2), Kornhuber M(1)(3), Dunst S(1), Zell J(1)(2), Fauler B(4), 
Mielke T(4), Taubenberger AV(5), Guck J(6), Oelgeschläger M(1), Schönfelder 
G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR), German Centre for the 
Protection of Laboratory Animals (Bf3R), Max-Dohrn-Straße 8-10, 10589 Berlin, 
Germany.
(2)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität 
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, 10117 
Berlin, Germany.
(3)Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(4)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Microscopy and Cryo-Electron 
Microscopy Service Group, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(5)Biotechnology Center, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(6)Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light, Max-Planck-Zentrum für Physik 
und Medizin, 91058 Erlangen, Germany.

Estrogens play an important role in the development and progression of human 
cancers, particularly in breast cancer. Breast cancer progression depends on the 
malignant destabilization of adherens junctions (AJs) and disruption of tissue 
integrity. We found that estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) inhibition led to a 
striking spatial reorganization of AJs and microclustering of E-Cadherin (E-Cad) 
in the cell membrane of breast cancer cells. This resulted in increased 
stability of AJs and cell stiffness and a reduction of cell motility. These 
effects were actomyosin-dependent and reversible by estrogens. Detailed 
investigations showed that the ERα target gene and epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) ligand Amphiregulin (AREG) essentially regulates AJ 
reorganization and E-Cad microclustering. Our results not only describe a 
biological mechanism for the organization of AJs and the modulation of 
mechanical properties of cells but also provide a new perspective on how 
estrogens and anti-estrogens might influence the formation of breast tumors.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2020.101683
PMCID: PMC7607435
PMID: 33163938

Conflict of interest statement: A European (EP 3517967 A1) and international 
(PCT) (WO 2019145517 A1) patent application for the use of the here-described 
endpoint (estrogen-dependent reorganization of adherens junctions) to screen 
substances for estrogenic or anti-estrogenic activity has been filed at the 
European Patent Office by the employer (German Federal Institute for Risk 
Assessment [BfR]) of the following authors: P.B., M.K., S.D., M.O., and G.S.. 
The German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR) is a scientifically 
independent institution within the portfolio of the Federal Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture (BMEL) in Germany. The authors' freedom to design, conduct, 
interpret, and publish research is explicitly not compromised. All remaining 
authors do not have any competing financial interests.