1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Nov 8;21(21):8381. doi: 10.3390/ijms21218381.

Comparative Transcriptome Analysis of Rutabaga (Brassica napus) Cultivars 
Indicates Activation of Salicylic Acid and Ethylene-Mediated Defenses in 
Response to Plasmodiophora brassicae.

Zhou Q(1), Galindo-Gonz√°lez L(1), Manolii V(1), Hwang SF(1), Strelkov SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2P5, Canada.

Clubroot, caused by Plasmodiophora brassicae Woronin, is an important soilborne 
disease of Brassica napus L. and other crucifers. To improve understanding of 
the mechanisms of resistance and pathogenesis in the clubroot pathosystem, the 
rutabaga (B. napus subsp. rapifera Metzg) cultivars 'Wilhelmsburger' (resistant) 
and 'Laurentian' (susceptible) were inoculated with P. brassicae pathotype 3A 
and their transcriptomes were analyzed at 7, 14, and 21 days after inoculation 
(dai) by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). Thousands of transcripts with significant 
changes in expression were identified in each host at each time-point in 
inoculated vs. non-inoculated plants. Molecular responses at 7 and 14 dai 
supported clear differences in the clubroot response mechanisms of the two 
genotypes. Both the resistant and the susceptible cultivars activated 
receptor-like protein (RLP) genes, resistance (R) genes, and genes involved in 
salicylic acid (SA) signaling as clubroot defense mechanisms. In addition, genes 
related to calcium signaling and genes encoding leucine-rich repeat (LRR) 
receptor kinases, the respiratory burst oxidase homolog (RBOH) protein, and 
transcription factors such as WRKYs, ethylene responsive factors, and basic 
leucine zippers (bZIPs), appeared to be upregulated in 'Wilhelmsburger' to 
restrict P. brassicae development. Some of these genes are essential components 
of molecular defenses, including ethylene (ET) signaling and the oxidative 
burst. Our study highlights the importance of activation of genes associated 
with SA- and ET-mediated responses in the resistant cultivar. A set of candidate 
genes showing contrasting patterns of expression between the resistant and 
susceptible cultivars was identified and includes potential targets for further 
study and validation through approaches such as gene editing.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21218381
PMCID: PMC7664628
PMID: 33171675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.