1. Zookeys. 2020 Oct 20;976:1-100. doi: 10.3897/zookeys.976.53859. eCollection 
2020.

Integrative taxonomic revision of the land snail genus Sarika Godwin-Austen, 
1907 in Thailand, with descriptions of nine new species (Eupulmonata, 
Ariophantidae).

Pholyotha A(1)(2), Sutcharit C(2), Tongkerd P(2), Panha S(2).

Author information:
(1)Biological Sciences Program, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok 10330, Thailand Chulalongkorn University Bangkok Thailand.
(2)Animal Systematics Research Unit, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand Chulalongkorn University 
Bangkok Thailand.

Members of the land snail genus SarikaGodwin-Austen 1907 are superficially 
similar and difficult to differentiate by their shell morphology so that their 
species limits are still unclear. In order to resolve the taxonomy of this 
group, a phylogenetic reconstruction of Sarika is presented, based on 
morphological and anatomical characters, as well as on partial sequences of the 
mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI) gene. In total, 23 species of 
Sarika are recognised in Thailand, and nine species are new to science, namely 
S. caligina Pholyotha & Panha, sp. nov., S. gratesi Pholyotha & Panha, sp. nov., 
S. inferospira Pholyotha & Panha, sp. nov., S. lactospira Pholyotha & Panha, sp. 
nov., S. megalogyne Pholyotha & Panha, sp. nov., S. melanospira Pholyotha & 
Panha, sp. nov., S. pellosa Pholyotha & Panha, sp. nov., S. solemi Pholyotha & 
Panha, sp. nov., and S. subheptagyra Pholyotha & Panha, sp. nov. Results from 
genital examination and COI analyses confirm the monophyly of Sarika and its 
species. The intra- and inter-specific genetic distances of Sarika were 0-3.7% 
and 4.6-12.0%, respectively. Colour images of the living adults, shell, and 
genitalia along with SEM images of the spermatophore and radula are given. In 
addition, an identification key and a geographical distribution map of Sarika 
species are provided.

Arthit Pholyotha, Chirasak Sutcharit, Piyoros Tongkerd, Somsak Panha.

DOI: 10.3897/zookeys.976.53859
PMCID: PMC7591553
PMID: 33173395