1. Front Physiol. 2020 Oct 16;11:595009. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.595009. 
eCollection 2020.

Functional Analyses of House Fly Carboxylesterases Involved in Insecticide 
Resistance.

Feng X(1)(2), Liu N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 
United States.
(2)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, San 
Diego, CA, United States.

Carboxylesterase-mediated metabolism is one of major mechanisms involved in 
insecticide resistance. Our previous study has identified multiple 
carboxylesterase genes with their expression levels were significantly 
upregulated in pyrethroid resistant house flies. To further explore their 
metabolic functions, we used insect Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) cells to express 
these carboxylesterases in vitro and measure their hydrolytic activities toward 
esterase substrates. Our results indicated that these carboxylesterases can 
efficiently hydrolyze α-naphthyl acetate rather than β- naphthyl acetate. A cell 
based MTT cytotoxicity assay indicated that carboxylesterase-expressing cells 
show enhanced tolerance to permethrin, suggesting important roles of these 
carboxylesterases in metabolizing permethrin and thereby protecting cells from 
permethrin treatments. The metabolic functions of carboxylesterases were further 
verified by conducting in vitro metabolism studies toward permethrin and its 
potential metabolites 3-phenoxybenzyl alcohol and 3-phenoxybenzaldehyde, which 
not only suggested the potential metabolic pathway of permethrin in insects, but 
also important roles of these candidate carboxylesterases in metabolizing 
permethrin and conferring resistance in house flies. Homology modeling and 
docking were finally conducted to reflect interactions between permethrin ligand 
and carboxylesterase proteins, visually confirming the metabolic functions of 
carboxylesterases to insecticides in house flies.

Copyright © 2020 Feng and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.595009
PMCID: PMC7596742
PMID: 33178052