1. J Mother Child. 2020 Nov 10;24(2):21-31. doi: 
10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2018.000005.

Hormonal dysfunction in adult patients affected with inherited metabolic 
disorders.

Stepien KM(1).

Author information:
(1)The Mark Holland Metabolic Unit, Adult Inherited Metabolic Diseases 
Department, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, United Kingdom.

Inherited metabolic disorders (IMDs ) are a rare and diverse group of metabolic 
conditions mainly caused by enzyme deficiencies, and in some of these, hormonal 
dysfunction is a relatively common complication. It may present in childhood and 
subsequently hormonal replacement is required throughout their life. 
Endocrinopathies can be a presenting symptom of an IMD in adulthood, which 
should be suspected when associated with multiorgan involvement (neurological, 
musculoskeletal or liver, etc.). A single IMD can affect any gland with 
hypogonadism, adrenal insufficiency, diabetes mellitus and thyroid dysfunction 
being the most common. In some cases, however, it is diagnosed later in their 
adult life as a secondary complication of previous therapies such as 
chemotherapy used during Haematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT) in 
childhood.The mechanisms of endocrine dysfunction in this group of conditions 
are not well understood. Regardless, patients require ongoing clinical support 
from the endocrine, metabolic, bone metabolism and fertility specialists 
throughout their life.Hormonal profiling should be part of the routine blood 
test panel to diagnose asymptomatic endocrine disorders with delayed 
manifestations. It is also worth considering screening for common hormonal 
dysfunction when patients exhibit atypical non-IMD related symptoms. In some 
adult-onset cases presenting with multiple endocrinopathies, the diagnosis of an 
IMD should be suspected.Given that new therapies are in development (e.g. gene 
therapies, stem cell therapies, pharmacological chaperone and substrate 
reduction therapies), clinicians should be aware of their potential long-term 
effect on the endocrine system.

DOI: 10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2018.000005
PMCID: PMC8518094
PMID: 33179602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None