1. Sci Rep. 2020 Nov 12;10(1):19703. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-76855-z.

Characterization of Affitin proteolytic digestion in biorelevant media and 
improvement of their stabilities via protein engineering.

Loussouarn A(1), Béhar G(1), Pecorari F(2), Croyal M(3)(4), Renodon-Cornière 
A(5).

Author information:
(1)CRCINA, INSERM, CNRS, Université d'Angers, Université de Nantes, Nantes, 
France.
(2)CRCINA, INSERM, CNRS, Université d'Angers, Université de Nantes, Nantes, 
France. frederic.pecorari@univ-nantes.fr.
(3)NUN, INRA, CHU Nantes, UMR 1280, PhAN, IMAD, CRNH-O, 44000, Nantes, France.
(4)CRNH-O Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, 44000, Nantes, France.
(5)CRCINA, INSERM, CNRS, Université d'Angers, Université de Nantes, Nantes, 
France. axelle.renodon-corniere@univ-nantes.fr.

Affitins are a novel class of small 7 kDa artificial proteins which can be used 
as antibody substitutes in therapeutic, diagnostic and biotechnological 
applications. One challenge for this type of protein agent is their behaviour in 
the context of oral administration. The digestive system is central, and 
biorelevant media have fast emerged as relevant and reliable tools for 
evaluating the bioavailability of drugs. This study describes, for the first 
time, the stability of Affitins under simulated gastric and intestinal digestion 
conditions. Affitins appear to be degraded into stable fragments in in vitro 
gastric medium. We identified cleavage sites generated by pepsin that were 
silenced by site-directed mutagenesis. This protein engineering allowed us to 
enhance Affitin properties. We showed that a mutant M1 containing a double 
mutation of amino acid residues 6 and 7 in H4 and C3 Affitins acquired a 
resistance against proteolytic digestion. In addition, these mutations were 
beneficial for target affinity, as well as for production yield. Finally, we 
found that the mutated residues kept or increased the important pH and 
temperature stabilities of Affitins. These improvements are particularly sought 
after in the development of engineered binding proteins for research tools, 
preclinical studies and clinical applications.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-76855-z
PMCID: PMC7661517
PMID: 33184451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.L., G.B., M.C. and A.R.C. declare no competing 
financial interests. F.P. is an inventor of a patent application 
(PCT/IB2007/004388), owned by the Institut Pasteur and Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), which covers one process for the generation of 
Affitins. F.P. is a co-founder of a spin-off company of the Institut 
Pasteur/CNRS/Université de Nantes, which has a license agreement related to this 
patent application.