1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2020 Nov;24(11):732-744. doi:
10.1089/gtmb.2020.0136.

A Meta-Analysis of the Association Between the VEGF +936C>T Gene Polymorphism 
and Digestive System Cancer Susceptibility.

Feng C(1), Li P(1), Zhang F(1), Chen H(1), Yu P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery and Center of Minimal Invasive Gastrointestinal 
Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 
China.

Background: We aimed to evaluate the association between the vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene +936C>T polymorphism and digestive system 
tumors using a meta-analysis. Methods: Studies of the association between the 
VEGF+936C>T polymorphism and digestive system tumors published before December 
2019 were searched in PubMed, EMBASE, Web of Sciences, the Chinese Biological 
and Medical Database (CBM), and the China National Knowledge Infrastructure 
(CNKI). The odds ratio and the corresponding 95% confidence interval were used 
as the effect indicators. A meta-analysis of original data was performed with 
different genetic models using the Stata 13.0 software. The reliability of the 
association was evaluated using the heterogeneity test, sensitivity analysis, 
false-positive report probability (FPRP), and bias test. Results: This 
meta-analysis included 37 publications with a total of 8568 digestive system 
tumor patients and 10,870 cases in the control populations. The overall combined 
analyses showed that the VEGF+936C>T gene polymorphism was significantly 
correlated with digestive system cancer susceptibility with the T allele 
increasing the risk of digestive system cancers. A stratified analysis based on 
ethnicity showed that the VEGF+936C>T gene polymorphism significantly increased 
the risk of digestive system tumors in both Asian and Caucasian populations. 
Additional stratified analyses based on tumor type showed that the VEGF +936C>T 
gene polymorphism was associated with colorectal cancer, oral cancer, and 
esophageal cancer. The sensitivity analysis (p < 0.2) and FPRP results also 
confirmed the reliability of these associations. Conclusions: This meta-analysis 
supported previous findings that the VEGF +936C>T gene polymorphism is 
significantly associated with an increased risk of the development of digestive 
system malignant tumors. This association still requires large-scale 
epidemiological studies for further validation.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2020.0136
PMID: 33186081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]