1. PLoS One. 2020 Nov 12;15(11):e0242211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0242211. 
eCollection 2020.

Ikaros antagonizes DNA binding by STAT5 in pre-B cells.

Heizmann B(1)(2)(3)(4), Le Gras S(1)(2)(3)(4), Simand C(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Marchal 
P(1)(2)(3)(4), Chan S(1)(2)(3)(4), Kastner P(1)(2)(3)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), 
Illkirch, France.
(2)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1258, 
Illkirch, France.
(3)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), UMR7104, Illkirch, 
France.
(4)Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(5)Service d'Hématologie, Institut de Cancérologie Strasbourg Europe (ICANS), 
Strasbourg, France.
(6)Faculté de Médecine, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2021 Jan 29;16(1):e0246570. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0246570.

The IKZF1 gene, which encodes the Ikaros transcription factor, is frequently 
deleted or mutated in patients with B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic 
leukemias that express oncogenes, like BCR-ABL, which activate the JAK-STAT5 
pathway. Ikaros functionally antagonizes the transcriptional programs downstream 
of IL-7/STAT5 during B cell development, as well as STAT5 activity in leukemic 
cells. However, the mechanisms by which Ikaros interferes with STAT5 function is 
unknown. We studied the genomic distribution of Ikaros and STAT5 on chromatin in 
a murine pre-B cell line, and found that both proteins colocalize on >60% of 
STAT5 target regions. Strikingly, Ikaros activity leads to widespread loss of 
STAT5 binding at most of its genomic targets within two hours of Ikaros 
induction, suggesting a direct mechanism. Ikaros did not alter the level of 
total or phosphorylated STAT5 proteins, nor did it associate with STAT5. Using 
sequences from the Cish, Socs2 and Bcl6 genes that Ikaros and STAT5 target, we 
show that both proteins bind overlapping sequences at GGAA motifs. Our results 
demonstrate that Ikaros antagonizes STAT5 DNA binding, in part by competing for 
common target sequences. Our study has implications for understanding the 
functions of Ikaros and STAT5 in B cell development and transformation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0242211
PMCID: PMC7660478
PMID: 33180866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.