1. Gene. 2021 Feb 5;768:145304. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145304. Epub 2020 Nov
10.

Single nucleotide variants c.-13G → C (rs17429833) and c.108C → T (rs72466472) 
in the CLDN1 gene and increased risk for familial colorectal cancer.

Battagin AS(1), Bertuzzo CS(2), Carvalho PO(3), Ortega MM(4), Marson FAL(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Medical 
Sciences, University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: 
andrebattagin@terra.com.br.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Medical 
Sciences, University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: 
bertuzzo@fcm.unicamp.br.
(3)Multidisciplinary Research Laboratory, São Francisco University, Bragança 
Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: patricia.carvalho@usf.edu.br.
(4)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Tumor Biology and Bioactive Compounds, São 
Francisco University, Bragança Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil; Laboratory of Human 
and Medical Genetics, São Francisco University, Bragança Paulista, São Paulo, 
Brazil. Electronic address: manoela.ortega@usf.edu.br.
(5)Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Tumor Biology and Bioactive Compounds, São 
Francisco University, Bragança Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil; Laboratory of Human 
and Medical Genetics, São Francisco University, Bragança Paulista, São Paulo, 
Brazil. Electronic address: fernando.marson@usf.edu.br.

BACKGROUND: The Claudin-1 (CLDN1) protein plays an important role in the 
function of the tight junction and studies have shown it is aberrantly 
downregulated in many tumors including colorectal cancer (CRC). The aim of this 
study was to determine the relationship between four SNVs in the CLDN1 gene 
[c.-13G → C (rs17429833), c.108C → T (rs72466472), c.369T → C (rs9869263), and 
c.370G → A (rs140846629)] and the risk of familial colorectal cancer (FCC).
METHODS: A case-control study was conducted with peripheral blood DNAs from 50 
patients with CRC that belong to FCC families and 96 healthy control 
individuals. The analysis of genetic variants was performed by PCR and 
restriction enzymatic digestion.
RESULTS: The patients and control groups presented in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium 
for all evaluated SNVs. No significant differences occurred in wild-type 
homozygous, heterozygous and variant homozygous genotypes, separately or 
together, in patient and control groups for the SNVs rs72466472, rs9869263, and 
rs140846629. However, for the SNV rs17429833, increased frequency of GC genotype 
occurred in patients compared to healthy individuals (58.30% vs. 41.70%), with 
an OR = 3.28 (95%CI = 1.22 to 9.09) for CRC. In the patients' group, individuals 
harboring combined genotypes rs17429833 (GC) and rs72466472 (CC) (26% vs. 8.42%) 
showed an OR = 3.78 (95%CI = 1.33 to 11.48). Moreover, patients harboring GC 
genotype for SNV rs17429833 presented significantly association with well 
differentiated adenocarcinoma when compared to moderately differentiated 
adenocarcinoma [60% vs. 22.58%, OR = 6.3 (95%CI = 1.15 to 39.76)].
CONCLUSIONS: The GC genotype for the SNV rs17429833 or combined genotypes for 
SNVs rs17429833 (GC) and rs72466472 (CC) seems to be risk factors for patients 
with FCC in Brazilian patients; however, a larger number of patients needs to be 
evaluated to confirm our results.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145304
PMID: 33186612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]