1. Brain Sci. 2020 Nov 11;10(11):839. doi: 10.3390/brainsci10110839.

7q11.23 Microduplication Syndrome: Clinical and Neurobehavioral Profiling.

Dentici ML(1)(2), Bergonzini P(3), Scibelli F(3), Caciolo C(3), De Rose P(3), 
Cumbo F(3), Alesi V(4), Capolino R(1)(2), Zanni G(2)(5), Sinibaldi L(1)(2), 
Novelli A(4), Tartaglia M(2), Digilio MC(1)(2), Dallapiccola B(6), Vicari 
S(3)(7), Alfieri P(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetic Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 00165 Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(3)Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry Unit, Department of Neurological and 
Psychiatric Science, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 
00165 Rome, Italy.
(5)Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of 
Neuroscience, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(6)Scientific Directorate, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 00165 Rome, 
Italy.
(7)Department of Life Sciences and Public Health, Catholic University, 00168 
Rome, Italy.

7q11.23 Microduplication (dup7q11.23) syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant 
disorder due to a recurring 1.5 to 1.8 Mb duplication of the Williams-Beuren 
Syndrome critical region. Dup7q11.23 has been associated with several 
neuro-behavioral characteristics such as low cognitive and adaptive functioning, 
expressive language impairment, anxiety problems and autistic features. In the 
present study, we analyze the clinical features of ten individuals in which 
array-CGH detected dup7q11.23, spanning from 1.4 to 2.1 Mb. The clinical 
characteristics associated with dup7q11.23 are discussed with respect to its 
reciprocal deletion. Consistent with previous studies, we confirm that 
individuals with dup7q11.23 syndrome do not have a homogeneous clinical profile, 
although some recurring dysmorphic features were found, including macrocephaly, 
prominent forehead, elongated palpebral fissures, thin lip vermilion and 
microstomia. Minor congenital malformations include patent ductus arteriosus, 
cryptorchidism and pes planus. A common finding is hypotonia and joint laxity, 
resulting in mild motor delay. Neuropsychological and psychodiagnostic 
assessment confirm that mild cognitive impairment, expressive language deficits 
and anxiety are recurring neurobehavioral features. New insights into adaptive, 
psychopathological and neurodevelopmental profiles are discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci10110839
PMCID: PMC7697259
PMID: 33187326

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.