1. Plants (Basel). 2020 Nov 11;9(11):1540. doi: 10.3390/plants9111540.

In Silico Identification of MYB and bHLH Families Reveals Candidate 
Transcription Factors for Secondary Metabolic Pathways in Cannabis sativa L.

Bassolino L(1), Buti M(2), Fulvio F(1), Pennesi A(1), Mandolino G(1), Milc J(3), 
Francia E(3), Paris R(1).

Author information:
(1)CREA-Research Centre for Cereal and Industrial Crops, 40128 Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Agriculture, Food, Environment and Forestry, University of 
Florence, 50144 Firenze, Italy.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Centre BIOGEST-SITEIA, University of Modena and 
Reggio Emilia, 42122 Reggio Emilia, Italy.

Plant secondary metabolic pathways are finely regulated by the activity of 
transcription factors, among which members of the bHLH and MYB subfamilies play 
a main role. Cannabis sativa L. is a unique officinal plant species with over 
600 synthesized phytochemicals having diverse scale-up industrial and 
pharmaceutical usage. Despite comprehensive knowledge of cannabinoids' metabolic 
pathways, very little is known about their regulation, while the literature on 
flavonoids' metabolic pathways is still scarce. In this study, we provide the 
first genome-wide analysis of bHLH and MYB families in C. sativa reference 
cultivar CBDRx and identification of candidate coding sequences for these 
transcription factors. Cannabis sativa bHLHs and MYBs were then classified into 
functional subfamilies through comparative phylogenetic analysis with A. 
thaliana transcription factors. Analyses of gene structure and motif 
distribution confirmed that CsbHLHs and CsMYBs belonging to the same 
evolutionary clade share common features at both gene and amino acidic level. 
Candidate regulatory genes for key metabolic pathways leading to flavonoid and 
cannabinoid synthesis in Cannabis were also retrieved. Furthermore, a candidate 
gene approach was used to identify structural enzyme-coding genes for flavonoid 
and cannabinoid synthesis. Taken as a whole, this work represents a valuable 
resource of candidate genes for further investigation of the C. sativa 
cannabinoid and flavonoid metabolic pathways for genomic studies and breeding 
programs.

DOI: 10.3390/plants9111540
PMCID: PMC7697600
PMID: 33187168

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.