1. Nutrients. 2020 Nov 11;12(11):3462. doi: 10.3390/nu12113462.

Omega-3 Eicosapentaenoic Acid Is Related to Happiness and a Sense of 
Fulfillment-A Study among Female Nursing Workers.

Tsuboi H(1)(2), Sakakibara H(3)(4), Matsunaga M(2)(5), Tatsumi A(6), 
Yamakawa-Kobayashi K(4), Yoshida N(1), Shimoi K(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical & Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, 
Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology and Internal Psychosomatic Medicine, Bantane 
Hospital, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, Nagoya 454-8509, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Agriculture, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki 889-2192, Japan.
(4)School of Food and Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka 
422-8526, Japan.
(5)Department of Health and Psychosocial Medicine, School of Medicine, Aichi 
Medical University, Nagakute 480-1195, Japan.
(6)Department of Nursing, University of Human Environments, Obu 474-0035, Japan.

Background: Omega (ω) 3 fatty acid (FA) is a polyunsaturated FA (PUFA) that can 
modulate some mental statuses. However, most studies have not considered the 
functional differences between eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic 
acid (DHA). We investigated associations among happiness, a sense of fulfillment 
and serum ω3 PUFA levels. Methods: Participants were 133 female staff from a 
hospital and nursing homes. Happiness was measured using the Japanese version of 
the subjective happiness scale (SHS); a sense of fulfillment was assessed using 
a visual analogue scale. Serum FA concentrations were measured. A partial 
correlation test and a regression model were applied. Results: The SHS scores 
showed significantly positive correlations with a sense of fulfillment, DHA% and 
EPA% (p < 0.05, < 0.05 and < 0.005, respectively), after controlling for age, 
BMI, menopause, snacking habits and leisure-time physical activities. A sense of 
fulfillment was significantly negatively correlated with α-linoleic acid%, and 
positively correlated with DHA% and EPA% (p < 0.05, < 0.05 and < 0.005, 
respectively), after controlling for the confounders. A regression model showed 
that a sense of fulfillment, EPA, and not stopping menstruation explained 
happiness (standardised beta, B = 0.18, p < 0.05; B = 0.24, p < 0.01; and B = 
0.32, and p < 0.05, respectively), whereas age, BMI and snacking habits could 
not. Simultaneously, a regression model could not explain the association 
between DHA and happiness. Conclusion: Happiness was related with serum EPA%, a 
sense of fulfillment, and premenopause.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12113462
PMCID: PMC7696953
PMID: 33187281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.