1. Front Plant Sci. 2020 Oct 30;11:575699. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2020.575699. 
eCollection 2020.

The Wild Rice Locus CTS-12 Mediates ABA-Dependent Stomatal Opening Modulation to 
Limit Water Loss Under Severe Chilling Stress.

Cen W(1), Zhao W(1), Ma M(1), Lu S(1), Liu J(1), Cao Y(1), Zeng Z(1), Wei H(1), 
Wang S(2), Li R(3), Luo J(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Science and Technology State Key Laboratory for Conservation 
and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, Guangxi University, Nanning, 
China.
(2)College of Agriculture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)College of Agriculture, Guangxi University, Nanning, China.

A near-isogenic line (NIL) DC90 which was generated by introgressing a wild rice 
(Oryza rufipogon Griff.) locus CTS-12 into the 9311(Oryza sativa L. ssp. indica) 
background confers chilling tolerance phenotype. Here, our pilot trials showed 
that chilling tolerance was positively correlated with abscisic acid (ABA) 
biosynthesis. To understand how CTS-12 mediated the ABA-dependent multi-levels 
of regulation, the integration of transcriptomic and metabolomic profiling using 
the two-way orthogonal projections to latent structures (O2PLS) and discriminant 
analysis (OPLS-DA) modeling was performed to investigate the mechanisms 
underlying chilling tolerance. Our results revealed that metabolic shifts, 
including the activation of stachyose biosynthesis, amino acid metabolism 
pathways, phenylpropanoid/flavonoid biosynthesis, ABA biosynthesis, and 
perturbation of glycolysis, occurred under chilling treatment; in the recovery 
period, glutamate-related pathways, β-alanine biosynthesis and degradation, and 
serotonin biosynthesis pathways were differentiated between 9311 and DC90. 
Particularly, the differentially accumulated metabolites (DAMs) and 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs), including galactinol, β-alanine, 
glutamate, naringenin, serotonin, ABA, and LOC_Os03g44380 (9-cis-epoxycarotenoid 
dioxygenase 3, OsNCED3), might be involved in the chilling tolerance variation 
of 9311 and DC90. CRISPR/Cas9-edited OsNCED3 resulted in chilling sensitive of 
japonica rice ZH11, demonstrating the involvement of ABA pathway in chilling 
stress response. In addition, chilling tolerance of rice was associated with the 
balance of water uptake and loss that was modulated by stomatal movement under 
chilling stress. Therefore, we speculated that the CTS-12-mediated ABA signaling 
pathway leads to transcriptional regulation of chilling-responsive genes and, in 
turn, triggers metabolic shifts to coordinately regulate the stomatal movement 
of guard cells. The results of this study improve our understanding of the 
multilevel regulation of wild rice in response to chilling stress.

Copyright © 2020 Cen, Zhao, Ma, Lu, Liu, Cao, Zeng, Wei, Wang, Li and Luo.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2020.575699
PMCID: PMC7661758
PMID: 33193516