1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Dec 1;117(48):30441-30450. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2020306117. Epub 2020 Nov 16.

An S/T motif controls reversible oligomerization of the Hsp40 chaperone DNAJB6b 
through subtle reorganization of a β sheet backbone.

Karamanos TK(1), Tugarinov V(1), Clore GM(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.
(2)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 
mariusc@mail.nih.gov.

Chaperone oligomerization is often a key aspect of their function. Irrespective 
of whether chaperone oligomers act as reservoirs for active monomers or exhibit 
a chaperoning function themselves, understanding the mechanism of 
oligomerization will further our understanding of how chaperones maintain the 
proteome. Here, we focus on the class-II Hsp40, human DNAJB6b, a highly 
efficient inhibitor of protein self-assembly in vivo and in vitro that forms 
functional oligomers. Using single-quantum methyl-based relaxation dispersion 
NMR methods we identify critical residues for DNAJB6b oligomerization in its 
C-terminal domain (CTD). Detailed solution NMR studies on the structure of the 
CTD showed that a serine/threonine-rich stretch causes a backbone twist in the 
N-terminal β strand, stabilizing the monomeric form. Quantitative analysis of an 
array of NMR relaxation-based experiments (including Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill 
relaxation dispersion, off-resonance R1ρ profiles, lifetime line broadening, and 
exchange-induced shifts) on the CTD of both wild type and a point mutant (T142A) 
within the S/T region of the first β strand delineates the kinetics of the 
interconversion between the major twisted-monomeric conformation and a more 
regular β strand configuration in an excited-state dimer, as well as exchange of 
both monomer and dimer species with high-molecular-weight oligomers. These data 
provide insights into the molecular origins of DNAJB6b oligomerization. Further, 
the results reported here have implications for the design of β sheet proteins 
with tunable self-assembling properties and pave the way to an atomic-level 
understanding of amyloid inhibition.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2020306117
PMCID: PMC7720152
PMID: 33199640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.