1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Oct 22;11:539702. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.539702. 
eCollection 2020.

Calcineurin Regulates Conidiation, Chlamydospore Formation and Virulence in 
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici.

Hou YH(1), Hsu LH(1), Wang HF(1), Lai YH(1), Chen YL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.

Fusarium wilt of tomato caused by the ascomycetous fungus Fusarium oxysporum f. 
sp. lycopersici (Fol) is widespread in most tomato planting areas. Calcineurin 
is a heterodimeric calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein phosphatase comprised of 
catalytic (Cna1) and regulatory (Cnb1) subunits. Calcineurin has been studied 
extensively in human fungal pathogens, but less is known about its roles in 
plant fungal pathogens. It is known that calcineurin regulates fungal calcium 
signaling, growth, drug tolerance, and virulence. However, the roles of 
calcineurin in Fol have not yet been characterized. In this study, we deleted 
calcineurin CNA1 and CNB1 genes to characterize their roles in conidiation, 
chlamydospore formation and virulence in Fol. Our results revealed that both 
cna1 and cnb1 mutants show defects in calcineurin phosphatase activity, 
vegetative growth and conidiation as compared to the wild type. Furthermore, 
calcineurin mutants exhibited blunted and swollen hyphae as observed by scanning 
electron microscopy. Interestingly, we found that Fol calcineurin is critical 
for chlamydospore formation, a function of calcineurin previously undocumented 
in the fungal kingdom. According to transcriptome analysis, the expression of 
323 and 414 genes was up- and down-regulated, respectively, in both cna1 and 
cnb1 mutants. Based on the pathogen infection assay, tomato plants inoculated 
with cna1 or cnb1 mutant have a dramatic reduction in disease severity, 
indicating that calcineurin has a vital role in Fol virulence. In conclusion, 
our findings suggest that Fol calcineurin is required, at least in part, for 
phosphatase activity, vegetative growth, conidiation, chlamydospore formation, 
and virulence.

Copyright Â© 2020 Hou, Hsu, Wang, Lai and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.539702
PMCID: PMC7641966
PMID: 33193126