1. Virol Sin. 2021 Jun;36(3):438-448. doi: 10.1007/s12250-020-00314-2. Epub 2020 
Nov 16.

Sumoylation of Human Parainfluenza Virus Type 3 Phosphoprotein Correlates with A 
Reduction in Viral Replication.

Cheng Q(1), Huai W(1), Wu X(1), Chen M(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Modern Virology Research Center, College of 
Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Modern Virology Research Center, College of 
Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China. chenmz@whu.edu.cn.

Human parainfluenza virus type 3 (HPIV3), a member of the Paramyxoviridae 
family, can cause lower respiratory disease in infants and young children. The 
phosphoprotein (P) of HPIV3 is an essential cofactor of the viral RNA-dependent 
RNA polymerase large protein (L). P connects nucleocapsid protein (N) with L to 
initiate genome transcription and replication. Sumoylation influences many 
important pathways of the target proteins, and many viral proteins are also 
themselves sumoylated. In this study, we found that the P of HPIV3 could be 
sumoylated, and mutation of K492 and K532 to arginine (PK492R/K532R) failed to 
be sumoylated within P, which enhances HPIV3 minigenome activity. Biochemical 
studies showed that PK492R/K532R had no effect on its interactions with N, 
formation of homo-tetramers and formation of inclusion bodies. Finally, we found 
that incorporation of K492R/K532R into a recombinant HPIV3 (rHPIV3-PK492R/K532R) 
increased viral production in culture cells, suggesting that sumoylation 
attenuates functions of P and down-regulates viral replication.

DOI: 10.1007/s12250-020-00314-2
PMCID: PMC8257846
PMID: 33197004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.