1. Front Pharmacol. 2020 Oct 29;11:580897. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.580897. 
eCollection 2020.

Pleiotropic Functions of Cytochrome P450 Monooxygenase-Derived Eicosanoids in 
Cancer.

Luo Y(1), Liu JY(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Changning Maternity and Infant Health 
Hospital, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Center for Novel Target & Therapeutic Intervention, Institute of Life 
Sciences, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Eicosanoids are a class of functionally bioactive lipid mediators derived from 
the metabolism of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) mediated by 
multiple enzymes of three main branches, including cyclooxygenases (COXs), 
lipoxygenases (LOXs), and cytochrome P450s (CYPs). Recently, the role of 
eicosanoids derived by COXs and LOXs pathways in the control of physiological 
and pathological processes associated with cancer has been well documented. 
However, the role of CYPs-mediated eicosanoids, such as epoxyeicosatrienoic 
acids (EETs), epoxyoctadecenoic acids (EpOMEs), epoxyeicosatetraenoic acids 
(EpETEs), and epoxydocosapentaenoic acids (EDPs), as well as 
hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs), in tumorigenesis and cancer progression 
have not been fully elucidated yet. Here we summarized the association of 
polymorphisms of CYP monooxygenases with cancers and the pleiotropic functions 
of CYP monooxygenase-mediated eicosanoids (EETs, EpOMEs, EpETE, EDPs, and 
20-HETE) in the tumorigenesis and metastasis of multiple cancers, including but 
not limited to colon, liver, kidney, breast and prostate cancers, which 
hopefully provides valuable insights into cancer therapeutics. We believe that 
manipulation of CYPs with or without supplement of ω-3 PUFAs to regulate 
eicosanoid profile is a promising strategy to prevent and/or treat cancers.

Copyright © 2020 Luo and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.580897
PMCID: PMC7658919
PMID: 33192522