1. J Leukoc Biol. 2021 Aug;110(2):357-374. doi: 10.1002/JLB.3A0120-001RRR. Epub 
2020 Nov 17.

Monocytes differentiated into macrophages and dendritic cells in the presence of 
human IFN-λ3 or IFN-λ4 show distinct phenotypes.

De M(1), Bhushan A(1), Chinnaswamy S(1).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kalyani, West Bengal, India.

Human IFN-λ4 is expressed by only a subset of individuals who possess the ΔG 
variant allele at the dinucleotide polymorphism rs368234815. Recent genetic 
studies have shown an association between rs368234815 and different infectious 
and inflammatory disorders. It is not known if IFN-λ4 has immunomodulatory 
activity. The expression of another type III IFN, IFN-λ3, is also controlled by 
genetic polymorphisms that are strongly linked to rs368234815. Therefore, it is 
of interest to compare these two IFNs for their effects on immune cells. Herein, 
using THP-1 cells, it was confirmed that IFN-λ4 could affect the differentiation 
status of macrophage-like cells and dendritic cells (DCs). The global gene 
expression changes induced by IFN-λ4 were also characterized in in vitro 
generated primary macrophages. Next, human PBMC-derived CD14+ monocytes were 
used to obtain M1 and M2 macrophages and DCs in the presence of IFN-λ3 or 
IFN-λ4. These DCs were cocultured with CD4+ Th cells derived from allogenic 
donors and their in vitro cytokine responses were measured. The specific 
activity of recombinant IFN-λ4 was much lower than that of IFN-λ3, as shown by 
induction of IFN-stimulated genes. M1 macrophages differentiated in the presence 
of IFN-λ4 showed higher IL-10 secretion than those differentiated in IFN-λ3. 
Coculture experiments suggested that IFN-λ4 could confer a Th2-biased phenotype 
to allogenic Th cells, wherein IFN-λ3, under similar circumstances, did not 
induce a significant bias toward either a Th1 or Th2 phenotype. This study shows 
for the first time that IFN-λ4 may influence immune responses by 
immunomodulation.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Leukocyte Biology published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC on behalf of Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/JLB.3A0120-001RRR
PMCID: PMC7611425
PMID: 33205487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.