1. Cell Rep Med. 2020 Jul 21;1(4):100053. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100053. 
eCollection 2020 Jul 21.

Inferring Multiple Sclerosis Stages from the Blood Transcriptome via Machine 
Learning.

Acquaviva M(1), Menon R(1), Di Dario M(1), Dalla Costa G(1), Romeo M(1), 
Sangalli F(1), Colombo B(1), Moiola L(1), Martinelli V(1), Comi G(1), Farina 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Experimental Neurology and Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) bear specific dysregulations in genes 
and pathways at distinct stages of multiple sclerosis (MS) that may help with 
classifying MS and non-MS subjects, specifying the early stage of disease, or 
discriminating among MS courses. Here we describe an unbiased machine learning 
workflow to build MS stage-specific classifiers based on PBMC transcriptomics 
profiles from more than 300 individuals, including healthy subjects and patients 
with clinically isolated syndromes, relapsing-remitting MS, primary or secondary 
progressive MS, or other neurological disorders. The pipeline, designed to 
optimize and compare the performance of distinct machine learning algorithms in 
the training cohort, generates predictive models not influenced by demographic 
features, such as age and gender, and displays high accuracy in the independent 
validation cohort. Proper application of machine learning to transcriptional 
profiles of circulating blood cells may allow identification of disease state 
and stage in MS.

Â© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100053
PMCID: PMC7659538
PMID: 33205062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: F.S. and L.M. report personal fees from Merck 
Serono, Novartis, Biogen, Sanofi-Genzyme, Teva, and Roche outside of the 
submitted work. M.R. reports personal fees from Merck-Serono and Genzyme and 
non-financial support from Novartis, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, and 
Almirall outside of the submitted work. V.M. reports honoraria for speaking 
and/or for consultancy and support for travel expenses and participation in 
congresses from Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Roche, Genzyme, Almirall, and Teva. 
G.C. reports personal fees from Novartis, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., 
Teva Italia Srl, Sanofi Genzyme, Genzyme Corporation, Genzyme Europe, Merck 
KGaA, Merck Serono SpA, Celgene Group, Biogen Idec, Biogen Italia Srl, F. 
Hoffman-La Roche, Roche SpA, Almirall SpA, Forward Pharma, Medday, and Excemed 
outside of the submitted work. C.F. reports grants from Merck-Serono and the 
Italian Ministry of Health during the conduct of the study and grants from Teva, 
Novartis, and Fondazione Italiana Sclerosi Multipla outside of the submitted 
work.