1. Mod Pathol. 2021 Jun;34(6):1133-1142. doi: 10.1038/s41379-020-00716-3. Epub
2020  Nov 17.

TP53 mutations and CDKN2A mutations/deletions are highly recurrent molecular 
alterations in the malignant progression of sinonasal papillomas.

Brown NA(1), Plouffe KR(1)(2), Yilmaz O(1), Weindorf SC(1), Betz BL(1), Carey 
TE(3)(4), Seethala RR(5), McHugh JB(1), Tomlins SA(1), Udager AM(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
(2)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)University of Michigan Rogel Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA. udager@umich.edu.
(7)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
udager@umich.edu.
(8)University of Michigan Rogel Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
udager@umich.edu.

Sinonasal papillomas are benign epithelial tumors of the sinonasal tract that 
are associated with a synchronous or metachronous sinonasal carcinoma in a 
subset of cases. Our group recently identified mutually exclusive EGFR mutations 
and human papillomavirus (HPV) infection in inverted sinonasal papillomas and 
frequent KRAS mutations in oncocytic sinonasal papillomas. We also demonstrated 
concordant mutational and HPV infection status in sinonasal papilloma-associated 
sinonasal carcinomas, confirming a clonal relationship between these tumors. 
Despite our emerging understanding of the oncogenic mechanisms driving formation 
of sinonasal papillomas, little is currently known about the molecular 
mechanisms of malignant progression to sinonasal carcinoma. In the present 
study, we utilized targeted next-generation DNA sequencing to characterize the 
molecular landscape of a large cohort of sinonasal papilloma-associated 
sinonasal carcinomas. As expected, EGFR or KRAS mutations were present in the 
vast majority of tumors. In addition, highly recurrent TP53 mutations, CDKN2A 
mutations, and/or CDKN2A copy-number losses were detected; overall, nearly all 
tumors (n = 28/29; 96.6%) harbored at least one TP53 or CDKN2A alteration. TERT 
copy-number gains also occurred frequently (27.6%); however, no TERT promoter 
mutations were identified. Other recurrent molecular alterations included NFE2L2 
and PIK3CA mutations and SOX2, CCND1, MYC, FGFR1, and EGFR copy-number gains. 
Importantly, TP53 mutations and CDKN2A alterations were not detected in matched 
sinonasal papillomas, suggesting that these molecular events are associated with 
malignant transformation. Compared to aerodigestive tract squamous cell 
carcinomas from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project, sinonasal 
papilloma-associated sinonasal carcinomas have a distinct molecular phenotype, 
including more frequent EGFR, KRAS, and CDKN2A mutations, TERT copy-number 
gains, and low-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. These findings shed 
light on the molecular mechanisms of malignant progression of sinonasal 
papillomas and may have important diagnostic and therapeutic implications for 
patients with advanced sinonasal cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-020-00716-3
PMCID: PMC8126579
PMID: 33203919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST S.A.T. is 
co-founder and chief medical officer of Strata Oncology. K.R.P. is a current 
employee of Strata Oncology. All other authors have no relevant disclosures.