1. J Clin Med. 2020 Nov 16;9(11):3674. doi: 10.3390/jcm9113674.

The Role of the Liquid Biopsy in Decision-Making for Patients with Non-Small 
Cell Lung Cancer.

Akhoundova D(1), Mosquera Martinez J(2), Musmann LE(3), Britschgi C(1), Rütsche 
C(1), Rechsteiner M(4), Nadal E(5), Garcia Campelo MR(2), Curioni-Fontecedro 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Zurich, University Hospital Zurich and University of Zurich, 8091 Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital A Coruña, 15006 A Coruña, 
Spain.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Zurich, 8091 Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Pathology and Molecular Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, 
8091 Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Catalan Institute of Oncology, 08908 
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.

Liquid biopsy is a rapidly emerging tool of precision oncology enabling 
minimally invasive molecular diagnostics and longitudinal monitoring of 
treatment response. For the clinical management of advanced stage lung cancer 
patients, detection and quantification of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is now 
widely adopted into clinical practice. Still, interpretation of results and 
validation of ctDNA-based treatment decisions remain challenging. We report here 
our experience implementing liquid biopsies into the clinical management of lung 
cancer. We discuss advantages and limitations of distinct ctDNA assay techniques 
and highlight our approach to the analysis of recurrent molecular alterations 
found in lung cancer. Moreover, we report three exemplary clinical cases 
illustrating the complexity of interpreting liquid biopsy results in clinical 
practice. These cases underscore the potential and current limitations of liquid 
biopsy, focusing on the difficulty of interpreting discordant findings. In our 
view, despite all current limitations, the analysis of ctDNA in lung cancer 
patients is an essential and highly versatile complementary diagnostic tool for 
the clinical management of lung cancer patients in the era of precision 
oncology.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9113674
PMCID: PMC7696948
PMID: 33207619

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.