1. Acta Crystallogr E Crystallogr Commun. 2020 Oct 16;76(Pt 11):1757-1761. doi: 
10.1107/S2056989020013547. eCollection 2020 Nov 1.

Crystal structure and spectroscopic properties of 
aqua-dichlorido-{1,1'-[(pyridine-2,6-diyl-κN)bis(methyl-ene)]bis-(4-butyl-4,5-di-hydro-1H-1,2,4-triazole-5-thione-κN 
(2))}cobalt(II).

Miecznikowski JR(1), Jasinski JP(2), Ostrowski TJ(1), Landy KR(1), Bonitatibus 
SC(1), Smolinsky AN(1), Bertolotti NR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Fairfield University, 1073 North 
Benson Road, Fairfield, CT 06824, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Keene State College, 229 Main Street, Keene, NH 
03435, USA.

The structure of the title compound, [CoCl2(C19H27N7S2)(H2O)], at 173 K has 
monoclinic (C2/c) symmetry. We report here the synthesis, single-crystal 
structure, electrospray mass spectrum and NMR spectroscopy of a new 
six-coordinate cobalt(II) pincer complex. The pincer ligand, in this complex, 
which is novel, coordinates via three nitro-gen atoms (two triazole and one 
pyridine). The ligand is ambidentate and can coordinate via three nitro-gen 
atoms or two sulfur and one nitro-gen atoms. The cobalt(II) metal center has 
pseudo-octa-hedral geometry and based on the single-crystal structure, the 
pincer ligand coordinates in a meridional fashion with the metal and adjacent 
six-membered ring ligands all in a similar plane and forming two slightly 
distorted boat configurations. The other two coordinated monodentate ligands are 
one water mol-ecule and two chloride ions with four cobalt(II) complexes in the 
unit cell. The asymmetric unit of the complex is comprised of half the pyridine 
ring and water mol-ecule with the CoII atom at the center of the pincer situated 
about a twofold axis. The Co-N, Co-O, and Co-Cl bond lengths are consistent with 
single bonds. In the crystal, the complex forms a three-centre bifurcated weak 
hydrogen-bonding inter-action with a chlorine ion, forming one inter-molecular 
inter-action with the pincer group and a water mol-ecule and a second 
intra-molecular inter-action with a C-H group within the pincer group. Crystal 
packing is also highlighted with C 2 2(6)>a<a infinite chains forming along 
[001] supported by R 2 2(8)>a>a ring motifs, forming a three-dimensional 
supra-molecular network structure. While some stacking of the pyridine rings in 
the unit cell is observed, there are no relevant π-π inter-actions in the 
crystal packing. The 1H and 13C{1H} NMR spectra of the complex are consistent 
with a plane of symmetry being present. The electrospray mass spectrum, which 
was collected in positive ion mode, showed the loss of one water mol-ecule and 
one chloride ligand from the complex. In the future, we plan to screen this 
cobalt(II) complex for electrocatalysis reactivity.

© Miecznikowski et al. 2020.

DOI: 10.1107/S2056989020013547
PMCID: PMC7643238
PMID: 33209348