1. Oncol Res. 2021 Mar 16;28(6):631-644. doi: 10.3727/096504020X16056983169118. 
Epub 2020 Nov 18.

PNN and KCNQ1OT1 Can Predict the Efficacy of Adjuvant Fluoropyrimidine-Based 
Chemotherapy in Colorectal Cancer Patients.

Lapucci A(1), Perrone G(1), Di Paolo A(2), Napoli C(1), Landini I(1), Roviello 
G(1), Calosi L(3), Naccarato AG(4), Falcone A(4), Bani D(3), Mini E(1), Nobili 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of FlorenceFlorenceItaly.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of 
PisaPisaItaly.
(3)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of 
FlorenceFlorenceItaly.
(4)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of PisaPisaItaly.

The benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy in the early stages of colorectal cancer 
(CRC) is still disappointing and the prediction of treatment outcome quite 
difficult. Recently, through a transcriptomic approach, we evidenced a role of 
PNN and KCNQ1OT1 gene expression in predicting response to 
fluoropyrimidine-based adjuvant chemotherapy in stage III CRC patients. Thus, 
the aim of this study was to validate in an independent cohort of stages IIIII 
CRC patients our previous findings. PNN and KCNQ1OT1 mRNA expression levels were 
evaluated in 74 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor and matched normal mucosa 
samples obtained by stages IIIII CRC patients treated with 
fluoropyrimidine-based adjuvant chemotherapy. PININ, the protein encoded by PNN, 
was immunohistochemically evaluated in 15 tumor and corresponding normal mucosa 
samples, selected on the basis of a low, medium, or high mRNA expression 
tumor/mucosa ratio. PNN and KCNQ1OT1 mRNA mean expression levels were 
significantly higher in tumor compared with normal tissues. Patients with high 
PNN or KCNQ1OT1 tumor mRNA levels according to ROC-based cutoffs showed a 
shorter disease-free survival (DFS) compared with patients with low tumor mRNA 
gene expression. Also, patients with tumor mRNA expression values of both genes 
below the identified cutoffs had a significantly longer DFS compared with 
patients with the expression of one or both genes above the cutoffs. In a 
representative large cohort of stages IIIII CRC untreated patients retrieved 
from GEO datasets, no difference in DFS was observed between patients with high 
and low PNN or KCNQ1OT1 gene expression levels. These data confirm our previous 
findings and underscore the relevance of PNN and KCNQ1OT1 expression in 
predicting DFS in early stages of CRC treated with fluoropyrimidine-based 
adjuvant chemotherapy. If further validated in a prospective case series, both 
biomarkers could be used to identify patients who benefit from this treatment 
and to offer alternative chemotherapy regimens to potential unresponsive 
patients. In relation to the suggested biological role of PNN and KCNQ1OT1 in 
CRC, they might also be exploited as potential therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.3727/096504020X16056983169118
PMCID: PMC7962934
PMID: 33208224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.