1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Nov 20;99(47):e22339. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000022339.

Tumor Necrosis Factor-α 308 G/A polymorphism and psoriasis risk: A pooled 
analysis in different populations.

Shen C(1), Wang H, Song Q, Zhang B, Liu X, Li J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Henan University of Chinese Medicine First 
Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.

More and more researches have been carried out on the association between the 
tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) 308 G/A polymorphism and psoriasis, however, 
controversial results have emerged in these studies. This meta-analysis was 
performed to quantitatively clarify the relationship between TNF-α 308 G/A 
polymorphism and the risk of psoriasis in different populations. Databases of 
PubMed, Springer Link, Ovid, Chinese Wanfang Data Bases, Chinese National 
Knowledge Infrastructure and Chinese Biology Medicine were investigated until 
June 2019. The association between the TNF-α 308 G/A polymorphism and psoriasis 
was evaluated by calculating the pooled odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs). A total of 26 studies including 3657 patients and 3197 controls 
were screened out. In the overall population, the pooled results showed a 
reduced psoriasis risk with the TNF-α 308 G/A polymorphism (A vs G: OR = 0.77, 
95% CI = 0.67-0.89; AA+GA vs GG: OR = 0.72, 95% CI = 0.61-0.86). In the subgroup 
analysis stratified by geographic locations, the TNF-α 308 G/A polymorphism was 
significantly associated with a reduced risk of psoriasis in Germany (A vs G: 
OR = 0.67, 95% CI = 0.57-0.78; AA+GA vs GG: OR = 0.62, 95% CI = 0.52-0.75), as 
well as in China (AA+GA vs GG: OR = 0.71, 95% CI = 0.52-0.98) and Poland (A vs 
G: OR = 0.61, 95% CI = 0.38-0.97; AA+GA vs GG: OR = 0.59, 95% CI = 0.35-0.99). 
This study indicated a significantly reduced psoriasis risk associated with the 
TNF-α 308 G/A polymorphism in Germans, as well as in Chinese and Poles 
populations compared with other populations. Ethnicity and geographic locations 
probably play a pivotal role in the genetic association of psoriasis.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000022339
PMCID: PMC7676592
PMID: 33217788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.