1. Molecules. 2020 Nov 17;25(22):5376. doi: 10.3390/molecules25225376.

Neuroprotective Activities of Boophone haemanthoides (Amaryllidaceae) Extract 
and Its Chemical Constituents.

Ibrakaw AS(1), Omoruyi SI(2), Ekpo OE(3), Hussein AA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, University of the 
Western Cape, Cape Town, Robert Sobukwe Road, Bellville 7535, South Africa.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Cape Peninsula University of Technology, Symphony 
Road, Bellville 7535, South Africa.
(3)Department of Medical Biosciences, University of the Western Cape, Cape Town, 
Robert Sobukwe Road, Bellville 7535, South Africa.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative condition that progresses as age 
increases, and some of its major symptoms include tremor and postural and 
movement-related difficulties. To date, the treatment of PD remains a challenge 
because available drugs only treat the symptoms of the disease or possess 
serious side effects. In light of this, new treatment options are needed; hence, 
this study investigates the neuroprotective effects of an organic Boophone 
haemanthoides extract (BHE) and its bioactive compounds using an in vitro model 
of PD involving the toxin 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) and SH-SY5Y 
neuroblastoma cells. A total of seven compounds were isolated from BHE, viz 
distichamine (1), 1α,3α-diacetylnerbowdine (2), hippadine (3), 
stigmast-4-ene-3,6-dione (4), cholest-4-en-3-one (5), tyrosol (6), and 
3-hydroxy-1-(4'-hydroxyphenyl)-1-propanone (7). Six compounds (1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 
7) were investigated, and five showed neuroprotection alongside the BHE. This 
study gives insight into the bioactivity of the non-alkaloidal constituents of 
Amaryllidaceae, since the isolated compounds and the BHE showed improved cell 
viability, increased ATP generation in the cells as well as inhibition of 
MPP+-induced apoptosis. Together, these findings support the claim that the 
Amaryllidaceae plant family could be a potential reserve of bioactive compounds 
for the discovery of neuroprotective agents.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25225376
PMCID: PMC7698425
PMID: 33212961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.