1. J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep. 2020 Jan-Dec;8:2324709620974871. doi: 
10.1177/2324709620974871.

Long-Term Observation of a Man With Severe Obesity and Undiagnosed Monogenic 
Diabetes Serendipitously Treated With Metabolic Surgery.

Pandian B(1), Moh MC(1), Tan C(1), Lai W(1), Ang SF(1), Lim BK(1), Tan CH(1), 
Sum CF(1), Subramaniam T(1), Cheng A(1), Lim SC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Khoo Teck Puat Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.

A 43-year-old man, with severe obesity (43 kg/m2) and diabetes (presumed as type 
2 diabetes [T2D]), underwent vertical sleeve gastrectomy in 2009 and Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass in 2013. Recently, whole exome sequencing (conducted to search 
for monogenic obesity) serendipitously revealed that the individual harbored a 
heterozygous glucokinase (GCK) variant p.(Arg422Leu) that was bioinformatically 
strongly predicted to be likely pathogenic. Therefore, he is likely to have 
concomitant maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) type 2 (GCK-MODY). A 
retrospective evaluation of the clinical data showed that the subject was 
diagnosed with T2D (given his severe obesity) in 2005 and was treated with oral 
antidiabetic monotherapy. His hyperglycemia was mostly mild (HbA1c [hemoglobin] 
< 8.1%), consistent with that of MODY2, despite severe obesity. After vertical 
sleeve gastrectomy, complete diabetes remission (HbA1c <6.0% and fasting plasma 
glucose <5.6 mmol/L without use of antidiabetic medication) was achieved. The 
percentage of maximum body weight loss attained after surgery was 23.6%. 
Euglycemia was maintained during the subsequent decade, up to the last follow-up 
in 2019, without any sign of hypoglycemia. In conclusion, we report a 
decade-long clinical experience of a man with severe obesity and diabetes likely 
due to the coexistence of GCK-MODY and T2D, serendipitously treated with 
metabolic surgery. Interestingly, metabolic surgery was effective and safe for 
him.

DOI: 10.1177/2324709620974871
PMCID: PMC7683913
PMID: 33218273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.