1. Viruses. 2020 Nov 17;12(11):1320. doi: 10.3390/v12111320.

Transcriptional Landscape of Staphylococcus aureus Kayvirus Bacteriophage 
vB_SauM-515A1.

Kornienko M(1), Fisunov G(1), Bespiatykh D(1), Kuptsov N(1), Gorodnichev R(1), 
Klimina K(1), Kulikov E(2), Ilina E(1), Letarov A(2), Shitikov E(1).

Author information:
(1)Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal 
Medical Biological Agency, 119435 Moscow, Russia.
(2)Research Center of Biotechnology of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, 117312 Moscow, Russia.

The Twort-like myoviruses (Kayvirus genus) of S. aureus are promising agents for 
bacteriophage therapy due to a broad host range and high killing activity 
against clinical isolates. This work improves the current understanding of the 
phage infection physiology by transcriptome analysis. The expression profiles of 
a typical member of the Kayvirus genus (vB_SauM-515A1) were obtained at three 
time-points post-infection using RNA sequencing. A total of 35 transcription 
units comprising 238 ORFs were established. The sequences for 58 early and 12 
late promoters were identified in the phage genome. The early promoters 
represent the strong sigma-70 promoters consensus sequence and control the 
host-dependent expression of 26 transcription units (81% of genes). The late 
promoters exclusively controlled the expression of four transcription units, 
while the transcription of the other five units was directed by both types of 
promoters. The characteristic features of late promoters were long -10 box of 
TGTTATATTA consensus sequence and the absence of -35 boxes. The data obtained 
are also of general interest, demonstrating a strategy of the phage genome 
expression with a broad overlap of the early and late transcription phases 
without any middle transcription, which is unusual for the large phage genomes 
(>100 kbp).

DOI: 10.3390/v12111320
PMCID: PMC7698491
PMID: 33213043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.