1. Microorganisms. 2020 Nov 17;8(11):1805. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8111805.

Aeromonas hydrophila RIT668 and Citrobacter portucalensis RIT669-Potential 
Zoonotic Pathogens Isolated from Spotted Turtles.

Thomas SG(1), Abajorga M(1), Glover MA(1), Wengert PC(1), Parthasarathy A(1), 
Savka MA(1), Wadsworth CB(1), Shipman PA(1), Hudson AO(1).

Author information:
(1)Thomas H. Gosnell School of Life Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology, 
Rochester, NY 14623, USA.

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is one of the biggest challenges of the 21st 
century, and biofilm formation enables bacteria to resist antibiotic at much 
higher concentrations than planktonic cells. Earlier, we showed that the 
Gram-negative Aeromonas hydrophila RIT668 and Citrobacter portucalensis RIT669 
(closely related to C. freundii NBRC 12681) from infected spotted turtles 
(Clemmys guttata), formed biofilms and upregulated toxin expression on plastic 
surfaces, and were predicted to possess multiple antibiotic resistance genes. 
Here, we show that they each resist several antibiotics in the planktonic phase, 
but were susceptible to neomycin, and high concentrations of tetracycline and 
cotrimoxazole. The susceptibility of their biofilms to neomycin and 
cotrimoxazole was tested using the Calgary device. For A. hydrophila, the 
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) = 500-1000, and the minimum biofilm 
eradication concentration (MBEC) > 1000 μg/mL, using cotrimoxazole, and MIC = 
32.3-62.5, and MBEC > 1000 μg/mL, using neomycin. For C. freundii MIC = 
7.8-15.6, and, MBEC > 1000 μg/mL, using cotrimoxazole, and MIC = 7.8, and MBEC > 
1000 μg/mL, using neomycin. Both A. hydrophila and C. portucalensis activated an 
acyl homoserine lactone (AHL) dependent biosensor, suggesting that quorum 
sensing could mediate biofilm formation. Their multidrug resistance in the 
planktonic form, and weak biofilm eradication even with neomycin and 
cotrimoxazole, indicate that A. hydrophila and C. portucalensis are potential 
zoonotic pathogens, with risks for patients living with implants.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8111805
PMCID: PMC7698337
PMID: 33212916

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.