1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Nov 19;21(22):8727. doi: 10.3390/ijms21228727.

Age-Dependent Decline in Synaptic Mitochondrial Function Is Exacerbated in 
Vulnerable Brain Regions of Female 3xTg-AD Mice.

Espino de la Fuente-Muñoz C(1), Rosas-Lemus M(2), Moreno-Castilla P(3), 
Bermúdez-Rattoni F(3), Uribe-Carvajal S(2), Arias C(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Medicina Genómica y Toxicología Ambiental, Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de 
México 04510, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México 04510, Mexico.
(3)Departmento de Neurociencia Cognitiva, Instituto de Fisiología Celular, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México 04510, Mexico.

Synaptic aging has been associated with neuronal circuit dysfunction and 
cognitive decline. Reduced mitochondrial function may be an early event that 
compromises synaptic integrity and neurotransmission in vulnerable brain regions 
during physiological and pathological aging. Thus, we aimed to measure 
mitochondrial function in synapses from three brain regions at two different 
ages in the 3xTg-AD mouse model and in wild mice. We found that aging is the 
main factor associated with the decline in synaptic mitochondrial function, 
particularly in synapses isolated from the cerebellum. Accumulation of toxic 
compounds, such as tau and Aβ, that occurred in the 3xTg-AD mouse model seemed 
to participate in the worsening of this decline in the hippocampus. The changes 
in synaptic bioenergetics were also associated with increased activation of the 
mitochondrial fission protein Drp1. These results suggest the presence of 
altered mechanisms of synaptic mitochondrial dynamics and their quality control 
during aging and in the 3xTg-AD mouse model; they also point to bioenergetic 
restoration as a useful therapeutic strategy to preserve synaptic function 
during aging and at the early stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD).

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21228727
PMCID: PMC7699171
PMID: 33227902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.