1. Cancer Inform. 2020 Nov 6;19:1176935120969696. doi: 10.1177/1176935120969696. 
eCollection 2020.

Prognostic Significance of Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide Synthase-2 Expressions in 
Human Breast Carcinoma: A Multiomic Approach.

Saindane M(1), Rallabandi HR(1), Park KS(1)(2), Heil A(3), Nam SE(1)(2), Yoo 
YB(1)(2), Yang JH(1)(2), Yun IJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Konkuk University, School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Research Institute of Medical Science, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Institute of Botany and Molecular Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 
Germany.

Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase-2 (PTGS2) plays a pivotal role in 
inflammation and carcinogenesis in human breast cancer. Our aim of the study is 
to find the prognostic value of PTGS2 in breast cancer. We conducted a multiomic 
analysis to determine whether PTGS2 functions as a prognostic biomarker in human 
breast cancer. We explored PTGS2 mRNA expressions using different public 
bioinformatics portals. Oncomine, Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE), 
GEPIA, ULCAN, PrognoScan database, Kaplan-Meier Plotter, bc-GenExMiner, USC 
XENA, and Cytoscape/STRING DB were used to identify the prognostic roles of 
PTGS2 in breast cancer. Based on the clinicopathological analysis, decreased 
PTGS2 expressions correlated positively with older age, lymph node status, the 
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status (P < .0001), estrogen 
receptor (ER+) expression (P < .0001) Luminal A (P < .0001), and Luminal B 
(P < .0001). Interestingly, progesterone receptor (PR) (P < .0001) negative 
showed a high expression of PTGS2. Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase-2 was 
downregulated in breast cancer tissues than in normal tissues. In the PrognoScan 
database and, Kaplan-Meier Scanner, downregulated expressions of PTGS2 
associated with poor overall survival (OS), relapse-free survival (RFS), and 
distant metastasis-free survival. The methylation levels were significantly 
higher in the Luminal B subtype. Through oncomine coexpressed gene analysis, we 
found a positive correlation between PTGS2 and interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression 
in breast cancer tissues. These results indicate that downregulated expressions 
of PTGS2 can be used as a promising prognostic biomarker and Luminal B hyper 
methylation may play an important role in the development of breast cancers. 
However, to clarify our results, extensive study is required.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/1176935120969696
PMCID: PMC7656875
PMID: 33223820

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests:The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.