1. Front Immunol. 2020 Nov 5;11:583513. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.583513.
eCollection  2020.

Roles of Interactions Between Toll-Like Receptors and Their Endogenous Ligands 
in the Pathogenesis of Systemic Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis and Adult-Onset 
Still's Disease.

Jung JY(1), Kim JW(1), Suh CH(1), Kim HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Ajou University of Medical School, Suwon, South 
Korea.

Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and adult-onset Still's disease 
(AOSD) are systemic inflammatory disorders that manifest as high-spiking fever, 
joint pain, evanescent skin rash, and organomegaly. Their pathogenesis is 
unclear, but inflammation is triggered by activation of the innate immune system 
with aberrant production of proinflammatory cytokines. Along with extrinsic 
factors, intrinsic pathways can trigger an unexpected immune response. 
Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) induce the activation of innate 
immune cells, leading to sterile inflammation in systemic JIA and AOSD. These 
endogenous proteins interact with Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which are pattern 
recognition receptors, and mediate immune signaling following stimulation by 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns and DAMPs. Several DAMPs, such as S100 
proteins, play a role in the development or severity of systemic JIA and AOSD, 
in which their interactions with TLRs are altered. Also, the expression levels 
of genes encoding DAMPs contribute to the susceptibility to systemic JIA and 
AOSD. Herein, we review reports that TLR and DAMP signaling initiates and/or 
maintains the inflammatory response in systemic JIA and AOSD, and their 
correlations with the clinical characteristics of those diseases. In addition, 
we assess their utility as biomarkers or therapeutics for systemic JIA and AOSD.

Copyright Â© 2020 Jung, Kim, Suh and Kim.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.583513
PMCID: PMC7674197
PMID: 33224145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]