1. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1292-1305. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa287.

Evolution of Hominin Detoxification: Neanderthal and Modern Human Ah Receptor 
Respond Similarly to TCDD.

Aarts JMMJG(1)(2), Alink GM(1), Franssen HJ(2), Roebroeks W(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Origins Group, Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Plant Sciences, Wageningen 
University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

In studies of hominin adaptations to fire use, the role of the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor (AHR) in the evolution of detoxification has been highlighted, 
including statements that the modern human AHR confers a significantly better 
capacity to deal with toxic smoke components than the Neanderthal AHR. To 
evaluate this, we compared the AHR-controlled induction of cytochrome P4501A1 
(CYP1A1) mRNA in HeLa human cervix epithelial adenocarcinoma cells transfected 
with an Altai-Neanderthal or a modern human reference AHR expression construct, 
and exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). We compared the 
complete AHR mRNA sequences including the untranslated regions (UTRs), 
maintaining the original codon usage. We observe no significant difference in 
CYP1A1 induction by TCDD between Neanderthal and modern human AHR, whereas a 
150-1,000 times difference was previously reported in a study of the AHR coding 
region optimized for mammalian codon usage and expressed in rat cells. Our study 
exemplifies that expression in a homologous cellular background is of major 
importance to determine (ancient) protein activity. The Neanderthal and modern 
human dose-response curves almost coincide, except for a slightly higher 
extrapolated maximum for the Neanderthal AHR, possibly caused by a 5'-UTR 
G-variant known from modern humans (rs7796976). Our results are strongly at odds 
with a major role of the modern human AHR in the evolution of hominin 
detoxification of smoke components and consistent with our previous study based 
on 18 relevant genes in addition to AHR, which concluded that efficient 
detoxification alleles are more dominant in ancient hominins, chimpanzees, and 
gorillas than in modern humans.

Â© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa287
PMCID: PMC8042735
PMID: 33230523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]