1. mBio. 2020 Nov 24;11(6):e02901-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02901-20.

Transcriptional Silencing by TsrA in the Evolution of Pathogenic Vibrio cholerae 
Biotypes.

Caro F(1), Caro JA(2), Place NM(1), Mekalanos JJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA john_mekalanos@hms.harvard.edu.

Vibrio cholerae is a globally important pathogen responsible for the severe 
epidemic diarrheal disease called cholera. The current and ongoing seventh 
pandemic of cholera is caused by El Tor strains, which have completely replaced 
the sixth-pandemic classical strains of V. cholerae To successfully establish 
infection and disseminate to new victims, V. cholerae relies on key virulence 
factors encoded on horizontally acquired genetic elements. The expression of 
these factors relies on the regulatory architecture that coordinates the timely 
expression of virulence determinants during host infection. Here, we apply 
transcriptomics and structural modeling to understand how type VI secretion 
system regulator A (TsrA) affects gene expression in both the classical and El 
Tor biotypes of V. cholerae We find that TsrA acts as a negative regulator of V. 
cholerae virulence genes encoded on horizontally acquired genetic elements. The 
TsrA regulon comprises genes encoding cholera toxin (CT), the toxin-coregulated 
pilus (TCP), and the type VI secretion system (T6SS), as well as genes involved 
in biofilm formation. The majority of the TsrA regulon is carried on 
horizontally acquired AT-rich genetic islands whose loss or acquisition could be 
directly ascribed to the differences between the classical and El Tor strains 
studied. Our modeling predicts that the TsrA protein is a structural homolog of 
the histone-like nucleoid structuring protein (H-NS) oligomerization domain and 
is likely capable of forming higher-order superhelical structures, potentially 
with DNA. These findings describe how TsrA can integrate into the intricate V. 
cholerae virulence gene expression program, controlling gene expression through 
transcriptional silencing.IMPORTANCE Pathogenic Vibrio cholerae strains express 
multiple virulence factors that are encoded by bacteriophage and chromosomal 
islands. These include cholera toxin and the intestinal colonization pilus 
called the toxin-coregulated pilus, which are essential for causing severe 
disease in humans. However, it is presently unclear how the expression of these 
horizontally acquired accessory virulence genes can be efficiently integrated 
with preexisting transcriptional programs that are presumably fine-tuned for 
optimal expression in V. cholerae before its conversion to a human pathogen. 
Here, we report the role of a transcriptional regulator (TsrA) in silencing 
horizontally acquired genes encoding important virulence factors. We propose 
that this factor could be critical to the efficient acquisition of accessory 
virulence genes by silencing their expression until other signals trigger their 
transcriptional activation within the host.

Copyright Â© 2020 Caro et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02901-20
PMCID: PMC7701989
PMID: 33234688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]