1. J Clin Med. 2020 Nov 20;9(11):3739. doi: 10.3390/jcm9113739.

Abnormal Head Size in Children and Adolescents with Congenital Nervous System 
Disorders or Neurological Syndromes with One or More Neurodysfunction Visible 
since Infancy.

Perenc L(1)(2), Guzik A(1)(2), Podgórska-Bednarz J(1)(2), Drużbicki M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, Institute of Health Sciences, Medical College, 
University of Rzeszów, 35-959 Rzeszów, Poland.
(2)Centre for Innovative Research in Medical and Natural Sciences, University of 
Rzeszow, Warzywna 1a, 35-310 Rzeszow, Poland.

The current study was designed to investigate co-occurrence of absolute/relative 
microcephaly, absolute/relative macrocephaly and congenital nervous system 
disorders or neurological syndromes with symptoms visible since infancy, based 
on fundamental data acquired during the admission procedure at a neurological 
rehabilitation ward for children and adolescents. The study applied a 
retrospective analysis of data collected during the hospitalization of 327 
children and adolescents, aged 4-18 years, affected since infancy by congenital 
disorders of the nervous system and/or neurological syndromes associated with a 
minimum of one neurodysfunction. To identify subjects with absolute/relative 
microcephaly, absolute/relative macrocephaly in the group of children and 
adolescents, the adopted criteria took into account z-score values for head 
circumference (z-score hc) and head circumference index (z-score HCI). 
Dysmorphological (x+/-3s) and traditional (x+/-2s) criteria were adopted to 
diagnose developmental disorders of head size. Regardless of the adopted 
criteria, absolute macrocephaly often coexists with state after surgery of 
lumbar myelomeningocele and hydrocephalus, isolated hydrocephalus, hereditary 
motor and sensory polyneuropathy, and Becker's muscular dystrophy (p < 0.001, p 
= 0.002). Absolute macrocephaly is often associated with neural tube defects and 
neuromuscular disorders (p = 0.001, p = 0.001). Relative microcephaly often 
occurs with non-progressive encephalopathy (p = 0.017, p = 0.029). Absolute 
microcephaly, diagnosed on the basis of traditional criteria, is often 
associated with epilepsy (p = 0.043). In children and adolescents with 
congenital nervous system disorders or neurological syndromes with one or more 
neurodysfunction visible since infancy, there is variation in abnormal head size 
(statistically significant relationships and clinical implications were 
established). The definitions used allowed for the differentiation of abnormal 
head size.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9113739
PMCID: PMC7699836
PMID: 33233862

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.