1. Antib Ther. 2020 Jul;3(3):179-192. doi: 10.1093/abt/tbaa017. Epub 2020 Aug 8.

Preclinical and Clinical Development of Therapeutic Antibodies Targeting 
Functions of CD47 in the Tumor Microenvironment.

Kaur S(1), Cicalese KV(1), Bannerjee R(1), Roberts DD(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

CD47 is a ubiquitously expressed cell surface glycoprotein that functions as a 
signaling receptor for thrombospondin-1 and as the counter-receptor for signal 
regulatory protein-α (SIRPα). Engaging SIRPα on macrophages inhibits 
phagocytosis, and CD47 thereby serves as a physiological marker of self. 
However, elevated CD47 expression on some cancer cells also protects tumors from 
innate immune surveillance and limits adaptive antitumor immunity via inhibitory 
SIRPα signaling in antigen presenting cells. CD47 also mediates inhibitory 
thrombospondin-1 signaling in vascular cells, T cells, and NK cells, and 
blocking inhibitory CD47 signaling on cytotoxic T cells directly increases tumor 
cell killing. Therefore, CD47 functions as an innate and adaptive immune 
checkpoint. These findings have led to the development of antibodies and other 
therapeutic approaches to block CD47 functions in the tumor microenvironment. 
Preclinical studies in mice demonstrated that blocking CD47 can limit the growth 
of hematologic malignancies and solid tumors and enhance the efficacy of 
conventional chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and some targeted cancer 
therapies. Humanized CD47 antibodies are showing promise in early clinical 
trials, but side effects related to enhanced phagocytic clearance of circulating 
blood cells remain a concern. Approaches to circumvent these include antibody 
preloading strategies, development of antibodies that recognize tumor-specific 
epitopes of CD47, SIRPα antibodies, and bivalent antibodies that restrict CD47 
blockade to specific tumor cells. Preclinical and clinical development of 
antibodies and related biologics that inhibit CD47/SIRPα signaling are reviewed, 
including strategies to combine these agents with various conventional and 
targeted therapeutics to improve patient outcome for various cancers.

DOI: 10.1093/abt/tbaa017
PMCID: PMC7687918
PMID: 33244513