1. IUBMB Life. 2021 Jan;73(1):40-63. doi: 10.1002/iub.2418. Epub 2020 Nov 27.

Structure, catalysis, and inhibition mechanism of prenyltransferase.

Chang HY(1), Cheng TH(1), Wang AH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National 
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Isoprenoids, also known as terpenes or terpenoids, represent a large family of 
natural products composed of five-carbon isopentenyl diphosphate or its isomer 
dimethylallyl diphosphate as the building blocks. Isoprenoids are structurally 
and functionally diverse and include dolichols, steroid hormones, carotenoids, 
retinoids, aromatic metabolites, the isoprenoid side-chain of ubiquinone, and 
isoprenoid attached signaling proteins. Productions of isoprenoids are catalyzed 
by a group of enzymes known as prenyltransferases, such as farnesyltransferases, 
geranylgeranyltransferases, terpenoid cyclase, squalene synthase, aromatic 
prenyltransferase, and cis- and trans-prenyltransferases. Because these enzymes 
are key in cellular processes and metabolic pathways, they are expected to be 
potential targets in new drug discovery. In this review, six distinct subsets of 
characterized prenyltransferases are structurally and mechanistically 
classified, including (1) head-to-tail prenyl synthase, (2) head-to-head prenyl 
synthase, (3) head-to-middle prenyl synthase, (4) terpenoid cyclase, (5) 
aromatic prenyltransferase, and (6) protein prenylation. Inhibitors of those 
enzymes for potential therapies against several diseases are discussed. Lastly, 
recent results on the structures of integral membrane enzyme, undecaprenyl 
pyrophosphate phosphatase, are also discussed.

Â© 2020 The Authors. IUBMB Life published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/iub.2418
PMCID: PMC7839719
PMID: 33246356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest 
with the contents of this article.