1. Poult Sci. 2020 Dec;99(12):6525-6532. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2020.09.033. Epub
2020  Sep 25.

Concurrent infection of Avibacterium paragallinarum and fowl adenovirus in layer 
chickens.

Mei C(1), Xian H(1), Blackall PJ(2), Hu W(1), Zhang X(1), Wang H(3).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in 
Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, 
Beijing Municipal Academy of Agriculture and Forestry, Beijing, China.
(2)Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation, The University of 
Queensland, Brisbane 4067, Australia.
(3)Beijing Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases in 
Livestock and Poultry, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, 
Beijing Municipal Academy of Agriculture and Forestry, Beijing, China. 
Electronic address: whj_1209@163.com.

The diagnosis of a concurrent infection of Avibacterium paragallinarum and fowl 
adenovirus (FAdV) in an infectious coryza-like outbreak in the outskirt of 
Beijing is reported. The primary signs of the infection were acute respiratory 
signs, a drop in egg production, and the presence of hydropericardium-hepatitis 
syndrome-like gross lesions. Laboratory examination confirmed the presence of A. 
paragallinarum by bacterial isolation and a species-specific PCR test. In 
addition, conventional serotyping identified the isolates as Page serovar A. 
Fowl adenovirus was isolated from chicken liver specimen and identified by hexon 
gene amplification. In addition, histopathologic analysis and transmission 
electron microscopy examination further confirmed the presence of the virus. 
Both hexon gene sequencing and phylogenetic analysis defined the viral isolate 
as FAdV-4. The pathogenic role of A. paragallinarum and FAdV was evaluated by 
experimental infection of specific-pathogen-free chickens. The challenge trial 
showed that combined A. paragallinarum and FAdV infection resulted in more 
severe clinical signs than that by FAdV infection alone. The concurrent 
infection caused 50% mortality compared with 40% mortality by FAdV infection 
alone and zero mortality by A. paragallinarum infection alone. To our knowledge, 
this is the first report of A. paragallinarum coinfection with FAdV. The case 
implies that concurrent infections with these 2 agents do occur and more 
attention should be given to the potential of multiple agents during disease 
diagnosis and treatment.

Copyright Â© 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2020.09.033
PMCID: PMC7704954
PMID: 33248567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]