1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2021 Feb;42(1):45-52. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2020.1849313.
Epub  2020 Nov 29.

OPA1 haploinsufficiency due to a novel splicing variant resulting in 
mitochondrial dysfunction without mitochondrial DNA depletion.

Sun C(1), Wu X(2), Bai HX(1), Wang C(2), Liu Z(3), Yang C(2), Lu Y(2), Jiang 
P(2).

Author information:
(1)Eye Center, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine , Hangzhou, China.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics and Genomics, the Children's Hospitals, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child 
Health , Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital , 
Hangzhou, China.

Background: To identify and investigate the effects of a novel splicing variant, 
c.1444-2A>C of OPA1, on its transcript, translation, and mitochondrial function, 
which was found in an 8-year-old patient with dominantly inherited optic atrophy 
(DOA). Materials and Methods: The clinical evaluations were performed at the Eye 
Center. Lymphoblast cell lines were generated from the patient, mother, and a 
normal control with the same haplotype of mitochondrial genome. The novel 
variant was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The splicing alteration of cDNA was 
checked by both Sanger sequencing and agarose gel. OPA1 expression was carried 
out by RT-PCR and Western blotting. Transmission electron microscopy was used 
for mitochondrial morphology. Mitochondrial functions, including the rates of 
oxygen consumption, ATP generation, ROS product and membrane potential were 
assayed in lymphoblast cells. Results: The novel OPA1 splicing variant, 
c.1444-2A>C, led to a deletion of the 15th exon in mRNA transcript. 
Approximately 50% reduction of mRNA and protein expression was present in mutant 
cells as compared with controls. No marked depletion of mtDNA nor mitochondrial 
mass was caused by the splicing variant. However, defects that the impaired 
capacity of OXPHOS, reduced ATP generation, increased ROS and decreased membrane 
potential were observed in the mutant cells, which promoted a ubiquitin-binding 
mitophagy instead of apoptosis. Conclusions: The novel splicing variant, 
c.1444-2A>C resulted in OPA1 haploinsufficiency effect on its expression and 
mitochondrial function without mtDNA depletion. Our findings may provide new 
insights into the understanding of pathophysiology of DOA.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2020.1849313
PMID: 33251885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]