1. ACS Omega. 2020 Nov 11;5(46):30315-30322. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.0c04847. 
eCollection 2020 Nov 24.

A Screening of Neuraminidase Inhibition Activities of Isoquinolone Alkaloids in 
Coptis chinensis Using Molecular Docking and Pharmacophore Analysis.

Le K(1), Tran D(1), Nguyen A(1), Le L(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biotechnology, International University, Vietnam National 
University, Ho Chi Minh City 71380, Vietnam.

Coptis chinensis has been long used as the potential herbal remedy for the 
treatment of influenza A infection. The six isoquinolone alkaloids extracted 
from C. chinensis rhizomes are reported to have good inhibition activity on 
neuraminidase (NA) of Clostridium perfringens, A/H1N1/1918, and recombinant 
NA-1; however, the study of the effect of these candidates on other NAs of 
threatening influenza A causing pandemic and seasonal flu recently has not 
considered yet. The purpose of this study is to investigate the interaction 
between these compounds and NAs of different wild and mutant subtypes of 
influenza A. This process involved the molecular docking of 3D structures of 
those compounds (ligand) into target proteins NA of A/H1N1/1918, A/H1N1/2009pdm, 
H3N2/2010 wild type, H3N2/2010 D151G mutant, H5N1 wild type, and H5N1 H274Y 
mutant. Then, the Protein-Ligand Interaction Profiler (PLIP) was utilized to 
demonstrate the bond formed between the ligand and the binding pocket of 
receptors of interest. The results showed that six candidates including 
palmatine, berberine, jatrorrhizine, epiberberine, columbamine, and coptisine 
have a higher affinity to all six selected proteins than commercial drugs such 
as oseltamivir, zanamivir, and natural binding ligand sialic acid. The results 
could be explained via the 2D picture, which showed the hydrophobic interaction 
and hydrogen bonding forming between the oxygen molecules of the ligand with the 
free residue of proteins.

Â© 2020 American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.0c04847
PMCID: PMC7689928
PMID: 33251466

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.