1. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2020 Jan-Dec;26:1076029620977906. doi: 
10.1177/1076029620977906.

Relationship of Platelet Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa and CD62P With Hypercoagulable 
State After Oncologic Surgery.

Zhong X(1), Cao Z(2), Song J(2), Liu Y(2), Guo Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pancreatic Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China.
(2)West China Medical School of Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, 
China.
(3)Department of Vascular Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China.

The biomarkers for predicting venous thromboembolic events (VTEs) after 
oncologic surgery are still lacking. The current study aimed to analyze the 
relationships of CD62P and GP IIb/IIIa with hypercoagulation after oncologic 
surgery. A total of 76 patients with primary abdominopelvic tumors in our 
hospital were enrolled. The patients were divided into groups A (malignancy with 
no VTE group), B (malignancy with VTE group), and C (benign with no VTE group). 
Twenty healthy volunteers were selected as control. The plasma CD62P (4.69 ± 
2.55 vs. 1.76 ± 0.48) and the GP IIb/IIIa (9.28 ± 3.79 vs. 1.76 ± 0.48) levels 
in group A were significantly higher than those in the control group 
preoperatively. The CD62P (31.46 ± 17.13 vs. 13.51 ± 7.43, P < 0.05), GP 
IIb/IIIa (42.33 ± 21.82 vs. 13.51 ± 7.43, P < 0.05), and D-dimer (7.33 ± 2.34 
vs. 2.03 ± 0.55, P < 0.05) levels in group B were markedly higher 7 days after 
operation compared with those in group A. The CD62P and the GP IIb/IIIa 
exhibited a positive correlation with the hypercoagulable state after oncologic 
surgery.

DOI: 10.1177/1076029620977906
PMCID: PMC7711223
PMID: 33259230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.