1. Front Physiol. 2020 Nov 4;11:604941. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.604941.
eCollection  2020.

STIM1/ORAI1 Loss-of-Function and Gain-of-Function Mutations Inversely Impact on 
SOCE and Calcium Homeostasis and Cause Multi-Systemic Mirror Diseases.

Silva-Rojas R(1), Laporte J(1), Böhm J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), 
Inserm U1258, CNRS UMR 7104, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.

Store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) is a ubiquitous and essential mechanism 
regulating Ca2+ homeostasis in all tissues, and controls a wide range of 
cellular functions including keratinocyte differentiation, osteoblastogenesis 
and osteoclastogenesis, T cell proliferation, platelet activation, and muscle 
contraction. The main SOCE actors are STIM1 and ORAI1. Depletion of the 
reticular Ca2+ stores induces oligomerization of the luminal Ca2+ sensor STIM1, 
and the oligomers activate the plasma membrane Ca2+ channel ORAI1 to trigger 
extracellular Ca2+ entry. Mutations in STIM1 and ORAI1 result in abnormal SOCE 
and lead to multi-systemic disorders. Recessive loss-of-function mutations are 
associated with CRAC (Ca2+ release-activated Ca2+) channelopathy, involving 
immunodeficiency and autoimmunity, muscular hypotonia, ectodermal dysplasia, and 
mydriasis. In contrast, dominant STIM1 and ORAI1 gain-of-function mutations give 
rise to tubular aggregate myopathy and Stormorken syndrome (TAM/STRMK), forming 
a clinical spectrum encompassing muscle weakness, thrombocytopenia, ichthyosis, 
hyposplenism, short stature, and miosis. Functional studies on patient-derived 
cells revealed that CRAC channelopathy mutations impair SOCE and extracellular 
Ca2+ influx, while TAM/STRMK mutations induce excessive Ca2+ entry through SOCE 
over-activation. In accordance with the opposite pathomechanisms underlying both 
disorders, CRAC channelopathy and TAM/STRMK patients show mirror phenotypes at 
the clinical and molecular levels, and the respective animal models recapitulate 
the skin, bones, immune system, platelet, and muscle anomalies. Here we review 
and compare the clinical presentations of CRAC channelopathy and TAM/STRMK 
patients and the histological and molecular findings obtained on human samples 
and murine models to highlight the mirror phenotypes in different tissues, and 
to point out potentially undiagnosed anomalies in patients, which may be 
relevant for disease management and prospective therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2020 Silva-Rojas, Laporte and Böhm.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.604941
PMCID: PMC7672041
PMID: 33250786