1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Nov 30;21(23):9134. doi: 10.3390/ijms21239134.

Synthesis and in Silico Modelling of the Potential Dual Mechanistic Activity of 
Small Cationic Peptides Potentiating the Antibiotic Novobiocin against 
Susceptible and Multi-Drug Resistant Escherichia coli.

Passarini I(1), Resende PE(2), Soares S(2), Tahmasi T(1), Stapleton P(2), 
Malkinson J(2), Zloh M(1)(3), Rossiter S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life and Medical Sciences, University of Hertfordshire, College 
Lane, Hatfield AL10 9AB, UK.
(2)UCL School of Pharmacy, 29-39 Brunswick Square, London WC1N 1AX, UK.
(3)NanoPuzzle Medicines Design, Stevenage SG1 2DX, UK.

Cationic antimicrobial peptides have attracted interest, both as antimicrobial 
agents and for their ability to increase cell permeability to potentiate other 
antibiotics. However, toxicity to mammalian cells and complexity have hindered 
development for clinical use. We present the design and synthesis of very short 
cationic peptides (3-9 residues) with potential dual bacterial membrane 
permeation and efflux pump inhibition functionality. Peptides were designed 
based upon in silico similarity to known active peptides and efflux pump 
inhibitors. A number of these peptides potentiate the activity of the antibiotic 
novobiocin against susceptible Escherichia coli and restore antibiotic activity 
against a multi-drug resistant E. coli strain, despite having minimal or no 
intrinsic antimicrobial activity. Molecular modelling studies, via docking 
studies and short molecular dynamics simulations, indicate two potential 
mechanisms of potentiating activity; increasing antibiotic cell permeation via 
complexation with novobiocin to enable self-promoted uptake, and binding the E. 
coli RND efflux pump. These peptides demonstrate potential for restoring the 
activity of hydrophobic drugs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21239134
PMCID: PMC7730182
PMID: 33266278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.