1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2020 Nov 11;8:590903. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.590903. 
eCollection 2020.

Integrated Genetics and Micronutrient Data to Inform the Causal Association 
Between Serum Calcium Levels and Ischemic Stroke.

Meng Q(1), Huang L(2), Tao K(2), Liu Y(1), Jing J(1), Wang W(3), Qin H(2), Feng 
D(2), Cai Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery and Institute for Functional Brain Disorders, 
Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Radiology & Functional and Molecular Imaging Key Lab of Shaanxi 
Province, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Erratum in
    Front Cell Dev Biol. 2020 Dec 18;8:634957. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.634957.

There has been an increased interest for observational studies or randomized 
controlled trials exploring the impact of calcium intake on cardiovascular 
diseases (CVD) including coronary artery disease (CAD) and ischemic stroke (IS). 
However, a direct relationship between total calcium intake and CVD has not been 
well established and remains controversial. Mendelian randomization (MR) studies 
have been performed to evaluate the causal association between serum calcium 
levels and CAD risk and found that increased serum calcium levels could increase 
the risk of CAD. However, MR analysis found no significant association between 
genetically higher serum calcium levels and IS as well as its subtypes. Hence, 
three MR studies reported inconsistent effects of serum calcium levels on CAD 
and IS. Here, we performed an updated MR study to investigate the association of 
serum calcium levels with the risk of IS using large-scale genome-wide 
association study (GWAS) datasets. We selected 14 independent genetic variants 
as the potential instrumental variables from a large-scale serum calcium GWAS 
dataset and extracted summary statistics corresponding to the 14 serum calcium 
genetic variants from the MEGASTROKE Consortium IS GWAS dataset. Interestingly, 
we found a significant association between serum calcium levels and IS risk 
using the robust inverse-variance weighted (IVW) and penalized robust IVW 
methods, with β = 0.243 and P = 0.002. Importantly, the MR results from the 
robust MR-Egger and penalized robust MR-Egger methods further supported the 
causal association between serum calcium levels and IS risk, with β = 0.256 and 
P = 0.005. Meanwhile, the estimates from other MR methods are also consistent 
with the above findings.

Copyright © 2020 Meng, Huang, Tao, Liu, Jing, Wang, Qin, Feng and Cai.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2020.590903
PMCID: PMC7686510
PMID: 33262986