1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Nov 30;21(23):9117. doi: 10.3390/ijms21239117.

Molecular Determinants of West Nile Virus Virulence and Pathogenesis in 
Vertebrate and Invertebrate Hosts.

Fiacre L(1)(2), Pag√®s N(2), Albina E(2), Richardson J(1), Lecollinet S(1), 
Gonzalez G(1).

Author information:
(1)UMR 1161 Virology, ANSES, INRAE, ENVA, ANSES Animal Health Laboratory, EURL 
for Equine Diseases, 94704 Maisons-Alfort, France.
(2)CIRAD, UMR ASTRE, 97170 Petit Bourg, France.

West Nile virus (WNV), like the dengue virus (DENV) and yellow fever virus 
(YFV), are major arboviruses belonging to the Flavivirus genus. WNV is emerging 
or endemic in many countries around the world, affecting humans and other 
vertebrates. Since 1999, it has been considered to be a major public and 
veterinary health problem, causing diverse pathologies, ranging from a mild 
febrile state to severe neurological damage and death. WNV is transmitted in a 
bird-mosquito-bird cycle, and can occasionally infect humans and horses, both 
highly susceptible to the virus but considered dead-end hosts. Many studies have 
investigated the molecular determinants of WNV virulence, mainly with the 
ultimate objective of guiding vaccine development. Several vaccines are used in 
horses in different parts of the world, but there are no licensed WNV vaccines 
for humans, suggesting the need for greater understanding of the molecular 
determinants of virulence and antigenicity in different hosts. Owing to 
technical and economic considerations, WNV virulence factors have essentially 
been studied in rodent models, and the results cannot always be transported to 
mosquito vectors or to avian hosts. In this review, the known molecular 
determinants of WNV virulence, according to invertebrate (mosquitoes) or 
vertebrate hosts (mammalian and avian), are presented and discussed. This 
overview will highlight the differences and similarities found between WNV hosts 
and models, to provide a foundation for the prediction and anticipation of WNV 
re-emergence and its risk of global spread.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21239117
PMCID: PMC7731113
PMID: 33266206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.