1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2021 Jan 5:2020.11.24.390039. doi: 
10.1101/2020.11.24.390039.

Ipomoeassin-F inhibits the in vitro biogenesis of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein 
and its host cell membrane receptor.

O'Keefe S(1), Roboti P(1), Duah KB(2), Zong G(3), Schneider H(2), Shi WQ(2), 
High S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PT, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Ball State University, Muncie, Indiana 47306, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College 
Park, Maryland 20742, USA.

Update in
    J Cell Sci. 2021 Feb 19;134(4):jcs257758. doi: 10.1242/jcs.257758.

In order to produce proteins essential for their propagation, many pathogenic 
human viruses, including SARS-CoV-2 the causative agent of COVID-19 respiratory 
disease, commandeer host biosynthetic machineries and mechanisms. Three major 
structural proteins, the spike, envelope and membrane proteins, are amongst 
several SARS-CoV-2 components synthesised at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of 
infected human cells prior to the assembly of new viral particles. Hence, the 
inhibition of membrane protein synthesis at the ER is an attractive strategy for 
reducing the pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 and other obligate viral pathogens. 
Using an in vitro system, we demonstrate that the small molecule inhibitor 
ipomoeassin F (Ipom-F) potently blocks the Sec61-mediated ER membrane 
translocation/insertion of three therapeutic protein targets for SARS-CoV-2 
infection; the viral spike and ORF8 proteins together with 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, the host cell plasma membrane receptor. Our 
findings highlight the potential for using ER protein translocation inhibitors 
such as Ipom-F as host-targeting, broad-spectrum, antiviral agents.

DOI: 10.1101/2020.11.24.390039
PMCID: PMC7709170
PMID: 33269350

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.