1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100131. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.016203. Epub 2020
 Dec 4.

Muscle-specific TGR5 overexpression improves glucose clearance in 
glucose-intolerant mice.

Sasaki T(1), Watanabe Y(2), Kuboyama A(2), Oikawa A(3), Shimizu M(4), Yamauchi 
Y(2), Sato R(5).

Author information:
(1)Food Biochemistry Laboratory, Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, 
Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 
Japan. Electronic address: atsasaki@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
(2)Food Biochemistry Laboratory, Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, 
Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan; 
Faculty of Agriculture, Yamagata University, Tsuruoka, Yamagata, Japan.
(4)Nutri-Life Science Laboratory, Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, 
Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Food Biochemistry Laboratory, Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, 
Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 
Japan; Nutri-Life Science Laboratory, Department of Applied Biological 
Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; AMED-CREST, Japan Agency for Medical Research and 
Development, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: roysato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

TGR5, a G protein-coupled bile acid receptor, is expressed in various tissues 
and regulates several physiological processes. In the skeletal muscle, TGR5 
activation is known to induce muscle hypertrophy; however, the effects on 
glucose and lipid metabolism are not well understood, despite the fact that the 
skeletal muscle plays a major role in energy metabolism. Here, we demonstrate 
that skeletal muscle-specific TGR5 transgenic (Tg) mice exhibit increased 
glucose utilization, without altering the expression of major genes related to 
glucose and lipid metabolism. Metabolite profiling analysis by capillary 
electrophoresis time-of-flight mass spectrometry showed that glycolytic flux was 
activated in the skeletal muscle of Tg mice, leading to an increase in glucose 
utilization. Upon long-term, high-fat diet challenge, blood glucose clearance 
was improved in Tg mice without an accompanying increase in insulin sensitivity 
in skeletal muscle and a reduction of body weight. Moreover, Tg mice showed 
improved age-associated glucose intolerance. These results strongly suggest that 
TGR5 ameliorated glucose metabolism disorder that is caused by diet-induced 
obesity and aging by enhancing the glucose metabolic capacity of the skeletal 
muscle. Our study demonstrates that TGR5 activation in the skeletal muscle is 
effective in improving glucose metabolism and may be beneficial in developing a 
novel strategy for the prevention or treatment of hyperglycemia.

Copyright Â© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.016203
PMCID: PMC7949087
PMID: 33262218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.