1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Nov 30;21(23):9126. doi: 10.3390/ijms21239126.

Citrullination-Resistant LL-37 Is a Potent Antimicrobial Agent in the 
Inflammatory Environment High in Arginine Deiminase Activity.

Bryzek D(1), Golda A(1), Budziaszek J(1), Kowalczyk D(1), Wong A(1), Bielecka 
E(2), Shakamuri P(3), Svoboda P(3), Pohl J(3), Potempa J(1)(4), Koziel J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Biotechnology of Jagiellonian University, 30-387 Krakow, Poland.
(2)Malopolska Center of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, 30-387 Krakow, 
Poland.
(3)Biotechnology Core Facility Branch, Division of Scientific Resources, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.
(4)Department of Oral Immunity and Infectious Diseases, University of Louisville 
School of Dentistry, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

LL-37, the only member of the mammalian cathelicidin in humans, plays an 
essential role in innate immunity by killing pathogens and regulating the 
inflammatory response. However, at an inflammatory focus, arginine residues in 
LL-37 can be converted to citrulline via a reaction catalyzed by 
peptidyl-arginine deiminases (PAD2 and PAD4), which are expressed in neutrophils 
and are highly active during the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps 
(NETs). Citrullination impairs the bactericidal activity of LL-37 and abrogates 
its immunomodulatory functions. Therefore, we hypothesized that 
citrullination-resistant LL-37 variants would retain the functionality of the 
native peptide in the presence of PADs. To test this hypothesis, we synthetized 
LL-37 in which arginine residues were substituted by homoarginine (hArg-LL-37). 
Bactericidal activity of hArg-LL-37 was comparable with that of native LL-37, 
but neither treatment with PAD4 nor exposure to NETs affected the antibacterial 
and immunomodulatory activities of hArg-LL-37. Importantly, the susceptibilities 
of LL-37 and hArg-LL-37 to degradation by proteases did not significantly 
differ. Collectively, we demonstrated that citrullination-resistant hArg-LL-37 
is an attractive lead compound for the generation of new agents to treat 
bacterial infections and other inflammatory diseases associated with enhanced 
PAD activity. Moreover, our results provide a proof-of-concept for synthesis of 
therapeutic peptides using homoarginine.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21239126
PMCID: PMC7730452
PMID: 33266231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the official position of CDC.