1. J Psychiatr Pract. 2020 Nov;26(6):510-517. doi: 10.1097/PRA.0000000000000505.

A New Onset of Mania in a 49-Year-Old Man: An Interesting Case of Wilson 
Disease.

Sloan S(1), Dosumu-Johnson RT.

Author information:
(1)SLOAN and DOSUMU-JOHNSON: Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University 
Medical Center, New York, NY.

Wilson disease is a rare copper metabolism disorder that generally occurs in 
individuals between 5 and 35 years of age. Common clinical manifestations are 
hepatic, neurological, and psychiatric symptoms. Roughly, 4% of all cases occur 
in patients over 40 years of age and, among these patients, the presenting 
symptoms are generally neuropsychiatric, which often leads to misdiagnosis as a 
primary psychiatric disorder and a delay in correct diagnosis. This report 
presents the case of a 49-year-old man with no formal psychiatric history who 
presented with a new onset of mania. We outline the distinctive characteristics 
that appeared inconsistent with a primary psychiatric disorder and pointed 
toward secondary mania. Despite low serum ceruloplasmin, the absence of brain 
abnormalities more typical of Wilson disease on magnetic resonance imaging led a 
neurology consultant to advise that the diagnosis was likely primarily 
psychiatric. Due to atypical components of the patient's presentation, such as 
his late age of onset for bipolar disorder and acute cognitive decline, the 
psychiatric team advocated for further diagnostic workup. The subsequent 
evaluation confirmed Wilson disease based on specific ophthalmological and 
hepatic abnormalities and further copper studies. In addition, once diagnosed, 
the management of Wilson disease involves distinct clinical considerations given 
patients' presumed vulnerability to neurological side effects. This case 
illustrates the role psychiatric providers play in advocating for diagnostic 
workup in patients with atypical presentations of primary psychiatric disorders 
and the distinct diagnostic and treatment considerations associated with Wilson 
disease.

DOI: 10.1097/PRA.0000000000000505
PMCID: PMC10170309
PMID: 33275388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.