1. World J Surg Oncol. 2020 Dec 6;18(1):321. doi: 10.1186/s12957-020-02103-3.

Predictive value of clinical toxicities of chemotherapy with fluoropyrimidines 
and oxaliplatin in colorectal cancer by DPYD and GSTP1 gene polymorphisms.

Deng X(1)(2), Hou J(1)(2), Deng Q(1)(2), Zhong Z(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Research Experimental Center, Meizhou People's Hospital 
(Huangtang Hospital), Meizhou Hospital Affiliated to Sun Yat-Sen University, No. 
63 Huangtang Road, Meijiang District, Meizhou, 514031, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Precision Medicine and Clinical 
Translational Research of Hakka Population, Meizhou, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Research Experimental Center, Meizhou People's Hospital 
(Huangtang Hospital), Meizhou Hospital Affiliated to Sun Yat-Sen University, No. 
63 Huangtang Road, Meijiang District, Meizhou, 514031, People's Republic of 
China. zhongzhixiong@mzrmyy.com.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Precision Medicine and Clinical 
Translational Research of Hakka Population, Meizhou, People's Republic of China. 
zhongzhixiong@mzrmyy.com.

BACKGROUND: Fluoropyrimidines and platinum are still widely used for colorectal 
cancer (CRC) management. Several studies have reported that mutations of 
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPYD) and glutathione S-transferase pi-1 
(GSTP1) polymorphisms are related to chemotherapy-related adverse events. In the 
present study, we purposed to assess the impact of DPYD and GSTP1 variants on 
the toxicity of adjuvant chemotherapy risk among the Hakka population, minimize 
adverse events, and to maximize therapy outcome for individualized treatment.
METHODS: Genotyping was examined in 104 patients diagnosed with CRC cases and 
receiving fluoropyrimidine and platinum drug-based chemotherapy regimen by 
direct sequencing of DPYD and GSTP1 polymorphisms. Three DPYD variants including 
*2A, *5A, *9A, and GSTP1 c.313A>G were analyzed and clinical outcomes were 
assessed.
RESULTS: The data suggest that the incidence of DPYD*5A, DPYD*9A, and GSTP1 
c.313A>G variants were 38.4%, 24%, and 32.7%, respectively. DPYD*2A variant was 
not found. A total of 23 patients (22.1%) suffered severe vomiting and 19 
patients (18.3%) suffered severe anemia. DPYD*5A polymorphism was found 
significantly associated with grade 3/4 ulceration (p = 0.001). GSTP1 was 
determined to be an independent risk factor for severe vomiting and skin 
ulceration (p = 0.042 and p = 0.018, respectively). Patients with GSTP1 c. 
313A>G mutant type contributed to a higher risk for grade severe toxicity 
compared with wild genotype (p = 0.027). Nevertheless, no significant difference 
was found between patients with DPYD*2A, *5A, and *9A for chemotherapeutic 
toxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrated that GSTP1 polymorphisms were useful 
predictors of severe events. Screening of single-nucleotide polymorphisms of 
GSTP1 in colorectal cancer patients before chemotherapy may help to realize 
personalized therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12957-020-02103-3
PMCID: PMC7720377
PMID: 33280607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.