1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2020 Dec 15;9(24):e018399. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.120.018399.
Epub  2020 Dec 8.

Associations Between Atrial Cardiopathy and Cerebral Amyloid: The ARIC-PET 
Study.

Johansen MC(1), Mosley TH(2), Knopman DS(3), Wong DF(4), Ndumele C(1), Shah 
AM(5), Solomon SD(5), Gottesman RF(1).

Author information:
(1)The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore MD.
(2)University of Mississippi Medical Center Jackson MS.
(3)Mayo Clinic Rochester MN.
(4)Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine St. Louis MO.
(5)Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston MA.

Background Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a risk factor for cognitive decline, 
possibly from silent brain infarction. Left atrial changes in structure or 
function (atrial cardiopathy) can lead to AF but may impact cognition 
independently. It is unknown if AF or atrial cardiopathy also acts on Alzheimer 
disease-specific mechanisms, such as deposition of β-amyloid. Methods and 
Results A total of 316 dementia-free participants from the ARIC (Atherosclerosis 
Risk in Communities) study underwent florbetapir positron emission tomography, 
electrocardiography, and 2-dimensional echocardiography. Atrial cardiopathy was 
defined as ≥1: (1) left atrial volume index >34 mL/m2; (2) P-wave terminal force 
>5000 µV×ms; and (3) serum NT-proBNP (N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide) 
>250 pg/mL. Cross-sectional associations between global cortical β-amyloid (>1.2 
standardized uptake value ratio) and adjudicated history of AF and atrial 
cardiopathy, each, were evaluated using multivariable logistic regression. 
Participants (mean age, 76 years) were 56% women and 42% Black individuals. Odds 
of elevated florbetapir standardized uptake value ratio were significantly 
increased among those with atrial cardiopathy (odds ratio, 1.81; 95% CI, 
1.02-3.22) and doubled for those with enlarged left atrial volume index after 
adjustment for demographics/risk factors (95% CI, 1.04-4.61). There was no 
association between P-wave terminal force or NT-proBNP and elevated florbetapir 
standardized uptake value ratio, nor between AF and elevated standardized uptake 
value ratio. Conclusions Among healthy, nondemented community-dwelling older 
individuals, we report an association between atrial cardiopathy, left atrial 
volume index, and elevated brain amyloid, by positron emission tomography, 
without a similar association in individuals with AF. Potential limitations 
include reverse causation and survival bias. Ongoing work will help determine if 
changes in cardiac structure and function precede or occur simultaneously with 
amyloid deposition.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.120.018399
PMCID: PMC7955392
PMID: 33289449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Gottesman is an Associate Editor for 
Neurology (significant). Dr Knopman reports the following disclosures: DIAN TU 
(modest), Biogen (significant), and Lilly (significant). Dr Shah reports the 
following disclosures: Novartis (significant), Phillips (modest), and 
Bellerophon (modest). Dr Solomon reports the following disclosures: Alnylam 
(significant), Amgen (significant), Akros (modest), Arena (modest), AoBiome 
(modest), AstraZeneca (significant), Bellerophon (modest), Bayer (modest), BMS 
(modest), Cardiac Dimensions (modest), Cardurion (modest), Cardior (modest), 
Celladon (modest), Corvia (modest), Cytokinetics (significant), Daiichi‐Sankyo 
(modest), Eidos (modest), Gilead (modest), GSK (significant), Janssen (modest), 
Ironwood (modest), Ionis (modest), Lone Star Heart (modest), Merk (modest), 
Mesoblast (modest), MyoKardia (significant), National Institutes of Health 
(significant), Novartis (significant), Quantum Genetics (modest), Roche 
(modest), Sanofi Pasteur (modest), Takeda (modest), Tenaya (modest), and 
Theracos (significant). Dr Wong reports the following disclosures: AVID/Lilly 
(significant), Roche (significant), Lundbeck (modest), and Five Eleven Pharma 
(significant). The remaining authors have no disclosures to report.