1. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2021 Feb;81(1):52-58. doi: 
10.1080/00365513.2020.1852598. Epub 2020 Dec 7.

Hb Athens-Georgia (beta 40(C6) Arg > Lys, HBB:c.122G > A) with a single α-globin 
gene (Hb H disease) in a Thai family: molecular, hematological, and diagnostic 
aspects.

Panyasai S(1), Kunyanone N(2), Satthakarn S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Technology, School of Allied Health Sciences, 
University of Phayao, Phayao, Thailand.
(2)Department of Medical Technology, Chiang Rai Prachanukroh Hospital, Chiang 
Rai, Thailand.

Interaction of structural hemoglobin (Hb) variants with α- or β-globin defects 
are occasional in Southeast Asia. Herein we provide the first description of Hb 
Athens-Georgia (Hb A-Ga) in association with deletional Hb H disease, a novel 
combination previously undescribed in the population. Hematological, Hb and DNA 
analysis, and β-globin haplotype analyses were performed in seven participants 
from one ethnic Thai family. Hemoglobin analysis by capillary electrophoresis 
revealed an abnormal Hb fraction in the proband, his father and grandmother 
(I-2). DNA sequencing revealed that the G > A substitution at codon 40 of the 
β-globin gene was identical to the Hb A-Ga (HBB:c.122G > A). Interestingly, 
α-thal-1 (SEA deletion) and α-thal-2 (-α3.7 deletion) were identified in the 
proband resulting in Hb H disease, while α-thal-1 was identified in the father, 
and no α-thal was observed in I-2. Hematological analysis indicated that the 
proband (βA-Ga/βA, -SEA/-α3.7) had moderate anemia and was markedly hypochromic 
with microcytic red blood cells (RBCs). The father (βA-Ga/βA, -SEA/αα) presented 
mild microcytic anemia, while normal hematology was observed in the I-2 who was 
heterozygous for Hb Athens-Georgia (βA-Ga/βA, αα/αα). The relative level of Hb 
A-Ga was distinctly reduced according to the degree of α-globin defects. The 
developed allele-specific PCR method can successfully be used for confirmation 
of Hb A-Ga. The Thai Hb A-Ga allele associated with a β-haplotype [+ - - - - - 
+]. These findings were in accordance with the previous conclusion that this 
variant is a non-pathological β-Hb variant.

DOI: 10.1080/00365513.2020.1852598
PMID: 33287582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]