1. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2020 Oct 31;66(7):72-75.

Relationship between TIM-3 gene polymorphisms and steroid-resistant primary 
nephrotic syndrome in children.

Lei J(1), Ma S(1).

Author information:
(1)The Ninth Pediatrics, Hunan Provincial People's Hospital(The first-affiliated 
hospital of Hunan normal university), Changsha, Hunan410016, China.

Nephrotic syndrome, also known as nephrosis, is a collection of symptoms in 
medicine and urology caused by damage to the basement membrane of the kidney 
glomeruli and the kidneys excrete a large amount of protein. This experiment was 
carried out to investigate the association of three single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) of T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin-domain-containing-3 
(Tim-3) with childhood primary nephrotic syndrome (PNS) steroid response in Han 
Chinese. For this purpose, a total of 218 children with steroid-resistant PNS 
and 189 children with steroid-responsive PNS were enrolled in this case-control 
study. Three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the TIM-3 gene promoter 
region (rs4704853, rs1051746, and rs10053538) were analyzed by polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) and restriction enzyme digestion.Â  Results showed that there were 
124 males and 94 females in the steroid-resistant PNS group and 114 males and 75 
females in the steroid-responsive PNS group. The mean ages of the two groups 
were 7.9 years and 7.7 years, respectively. The distribution of alleles of 
Rs1051746 and Rs10053538 were significantly different between the 
steroid-resistant PNS group and the steroid-responsive PNS group (P-value = 
0.047 and 0.012, respectively). The distribution of their genotypes was also 
significantly different between the steroid-resistant PNS group and the 
steroid-responsive PNS group (P-value = 0.044 and 0.010, respectively). 
Haplotype G-C-G was less frequent among steroid-resistant PNS children than the 
steroid-responsive PNS children (P = 0.015). There was no significant difference 
between the three SNPs of TIM-3 and the clinical features of these PNS children 
(P&gt;0.05). It concluded that this study provided evidence showing that the 
polymorphisms of Rs1051746 and Rs10053538 at the TIM-3 gene were related to 
childhood PNS steroid response. This result provided fundamental support for 
future studies on the role of TIM-3 in pathogenesis and therapy of childhood 
PNS.

PMID: 33287925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]