1. Cancer Cell Int. 2020 Oct 29;20(1):524. doi: 10.1186/s12935-020-01614-z.

Combination strategies to overcome resistance to the BCL2 inhibitor venetoclax 
in hematologic malignancies.

Yue X(1), Chen Q(1), He J(2).

Author information:
(1)Bone Marrow Transplantation Center, Department of Hematology, The First 
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, No. 79, Qingchun 
Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Bone Marrow Transplantation Center, Department of Hematology, The First 
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, No. 79, Qingchun 
Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. hejingsong@zju.edu.cn.

Venetoclax has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration 
since 2016 as a monotherapy for treating patients with relapsed/refractory 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia having 17p deletion. It has led to a breakthrough 
in the treatment of hematologic malignancies in recent years. However, 
unfortunately, resistance to venetoclax is inevitable. Multiple studies 
confirmed that the upregulation of the anti-apoptotic proteins of the B-cell 
lymphoma 2 (BCL2) family mediated by various mechanisms, such as tumor 
microenvironment, and the activation of intracellular signaling pathways were 
the major factors leading to resistance to venetoclax. Therefore, only targeting 
BCL2 often fails to achieve the expected therapeutic effect. Based on the 
mechanism of resistance in specific hematologic malignancies, the combination of 
specific drugs with venetoclax was a clinically optional treatment strategy for 
overcoming resistance to venetoclax. This study aimed to summarize the possible 
resistance mechanisms of various hematologic tumors to venetoclax and the 
corresponding clinical strategies to overcome resistance to venetoclax in 
hematologic malignancies.

DOI: 10.1186/s12935-020-01614-z
PMCID: PMC7597043
PMID: 33292251

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.