1. Stem Cell Reports. 2020 Dec 8;15(6):1260-1274. doi: 
10.1016/j.stemcr.2020.11.004.

Embryonic Stem Cell Differentiation Is Regulated by SET through Interactions 
with p53 and β-Catenin.

Harikumar A(1), Lim PSL(1), Nissim-Rafinia M(1), Park JE(2), Sze SK(2), Meshorer 
E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, The Institute of Life Sciences, Edmond J. Safra 
Campus, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang 
Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore.
(3)Department of Genetics, The Institute of Life Sciences, Edmond J. Safra 
Campus, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel; The 
Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences, Edmond J. Safra Campus, The 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel. Electronic address: 
eran.meshorer@mail.huji.ac.il.

The multifunctional histone chaperone, SET, is essential for embryonic 
development in the mouse. Previously, we identified SET as a factor that is 
rapidly downregulated during embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation, 
suggesting a possible role in the maintenance of pluripotency. Here, we explore 
SET's function in early differentiation. Using immunoprecipitation coupled with 
protein quantitation by LC-MS/MS, we uncover factors and complexes, including 
P53 and β-catenin, by which SET regulates lineage specification. Knockdown for 
P53 in SET-knockout (KO) ESCs partially rescues lineage marker misregulation 
during differentiation. Paradoxically, SET-KO ESCs show increased expression of 
several Wnt target genes despite reduced levels of active β-catenin. Further 
analysis of RNA sequencing datasets hints at a co-regulatory relationship 
between SET and TCF proteins, terminal effectors of Wnt signaling. Overall, we 
discover a role for both P53 and β-catenin in SET-regulated early 
differentiation and raise a hypothesis for SET function at the β-catenin-TCF 
regulatory axis.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2020.11.004
PMCID: PMC7724474
PMID: 33296674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]