1. Molecules. 2020 Dec 7;25(23):5770. doi: 10.3390/molecules25235770.

Synthesis and Biological Evaluation of Halogenated E-Stilbenols as Promising 
Antiaging Agents.

Di Filippo ES(1), Giampietro L(2), De Filippis B(2), Balaha M(2)(3), Ferrone 
V(2), Locatelli M(2), Pietrangelo T(1), Tartaglia A(2), Amoroso R(2), Fulle 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience Imaging and Clinical Sciences, Interuniversity 
Institute of Myology, University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti-Pescara, 66100 
Chieti, Italy.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti-Pescara, 66100 
Chieti, Italy.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Kafrelsheikh 
University, Kafr El Sheikh 33516, Egypt.

The increased risk of illness and disability is related to the age inevitable 
biological changes. Oxidative stress is a proposed mechanism for many 
age-related diseases. The crucial importance of polyphenol pharmacophore for 
aging process is largely described thanks to its effects on concentrations of 
reactive oxygen species. Resveratrol (3,5,4'-trihydroxy-trans-stilbene, RSV) 
plays a critical role in slowing the aging process but has a poor bioavailabity 
after oral intake. In this present work, a series of RSV derivatives was 
designed, synthesized, and evaluated as potential antioxidant agents. These 
derivatives contain substituents with different electronic and steric properties 
in different positions of aromatic rings. This kind of substituents affects the 
activity and the bioavailability of these compounds compared with RSV used as 
reference compound. Studies of Log P values demonstrated that the introduction 
of halogens gives the optimum lipophilicity to be considered promising active 
agents. Among them, compound 6 showed the higher antioxidant activity than RSV. 
The presence of trifluoromethyl group together with a chlorine atom increased 
the antioxidant activity compared to RSV.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25235770
PMCID: PMC7731283
PMID: 33297520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.