1. Exp Cell Res. 2021 Feb 1;399(1):112417. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2020.112417. Epub
 2020 Dec 8.

Revealing functional insights into ER proteostasis through proteomics and 
interactomics.

Wright MT(1), Plate L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA; 
Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. 
Electronic address: lars.plate@vanderbilt.edu.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER), responsible for processing approximately 
one-third of the human proteome including most secreted and membrane proteins, 
plays a pivotal role in protein homeostasis (proteostasis). Dysregulation of ER 
proteostasis has been implicated in a number of disease states. As such, 
continued efforts are directed at elucidating mechanisms of ER protein quality 
control which are mediated by transient and dynamic protein-protein interactions 
with molecular chaperones, co-chaperones, protein folding and trafficking 
factors that take place in and around the ER. Technological advances in mass 
spectrometry have played a pivotal role in characterizing and understanding 
these protein-protein interactions that dictate protein quality control 
mechanisms. Here, we highlight the recent progress from mass spectrometry-based 
investigation of ER protein quality control in revealing the topological 
arrangement of the proteostasis network, stress response mechanisms that adjust 
the ER proteostasis capacity, and disease specific changes in proteostasis 
network engagement. We close by providing a brief outlook on underexplored areas 
of ER proteostasis where mass spectrometry is a tool uniquely primed to further 
expand our understanding of the regulation and coordination of protein quality 
control processes in diverse diseases.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2020.112417
PMCID: PMC8128161
PMID: 33301765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]