1. PhytoKeys. 2020 Nov 20;167:57-82. doi: 10.3897/phytokeys.167.55171.
eCollection  2020.

A phylogeny of species near Agrostis supporting the recognition of two new 
genera, Agrostula and Alpagrostis (Poaceae, Pooideae, Agrostidinae) from Europe.

Peterson PM(1), Sylvester SP(2), Romaschenko K(1), Soreng RJ(1), Barberá P(3), 
Quintanar A(4), Aedo C(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany MRC-166, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington DC 20013-7012, USA.
(2)College of Biology and the Environment, Nanjing Forestry University, Long Pan 
Road No. 159, Nanjing, 210037, China.
(3)Department of Africa and Madagascar, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110-2291, USA.
(4)Herbarium MA, Unidad de Herbarios, Real Jardín Botánico, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas, 28014, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Biodiversity and Conservation, Real Jardín Botánico, Consejo 
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 28014, Madrid, Spain.

Based on a molecular DNA phylogeny of three plastid (rpl32-trnK, rps16 intron, 
and rps16-trnK) and nuclear ITS regions investigating 32 species of 
Agrostidinae, we describe two new genera, Agrostula gen. nov. with a single 
species and Alpagrostis gen. nov. with four species; provide support for five 
species in a monophyletic Podagrostis; and include a small sample of 12 species 
of a monophyletic Agrostis s.s. (including the type and most species of 
Neoschischkinia), that separates into two clades corresponding to A. subg. 
Agrostis and A. subg. Vilfa. Agrostula differs from Agrostis in having leaf 
blades with pillars of sclerenchyma which are continuous between the adaxial and 
abaxial surface of the blades, dorsally rounded glumes with blunt to truncate 
and erose to denticulate apices, florets ½ the length of the glumes, lemmas 
equally wide as long, widest at (or near) apex, apices broadly truncate, 
irregularly 5 to 7 denticulate to erose, awnless, anthers longer than the 
lemmas, and rugose-papillose caryopses. Alpagrostis differs from Agrostis in 
having geniculate basally inserted awns and truncate lemma apices with lateral 
veins prolonged from the apex in (2)4 setae. The following eight new 
combinations are made: Agrostula truncatula, Agrostula truncatula subsp. 
durieui, Alpagrostis alpina, Alpagrostis alpina var. flavescens, Alpagrostis 
barceloi, Alpagrostis setacea, Alpagrostis setacea var. flava, and Alpagrostis 
schleicheri. In addition, we provide a key separating Agrostula and Alpagrostis 
from Agrostis s.s. and other genera previously considered as synonyms of 
Agrostis; lectotypify Agrostis alpina Scop., A. schleicheri Jord. & Verl., A. 
truncatula Parl., and A. truncatula var. durieui Henriq.; and neotypify A. 
setacea Curtis.

Publisher: ResumenSobre la base de una filogenia molecular de ADN de tres 
regiones plastidiales (rpl32-trnK, rps16 intrón y rps16-trnK) e ITS nuclear de 
32 especies de Agrostidinae, describimos dos nuevos géneros, Agrostula gen. nov. 
con una sola especie, y Alpagrostis gen. nov. con cuatro especies; mostramos el 
apoyo para las cinco especies dentro de Podagrostis monofilético; e incluimos 
una pequeña muestra de 12 especies de Agrostis s.s (que incluye el tipo y la 
mayoría de las especies de Neoschischkinia), este último dividido en dos 
subclados que corresponden a A. subg. Agrostis y A. subg. Vilfa. Agrostula se 
diferencia de otras especies de Agrostis por tener láminas foliares con haces de 
esclerénquima continuos entre las superficies adaxial y abaxial de los limbos, 
glumas de dorso redondeado y ápice embotado a truncado y eroso a denticulado, 
antecios de ½ de la longitud de las glumas, lemas tan anchas como largas, lo más 
ancho en o cerca del ápice, ápices anchamente truncados, irregularmente 5 a 7 
denticulados o erosos, sin arista, anteras más largas que los lemas y cariopsis 
rugosa-papilosa. Alpagrostis se diferencia de otras especies de Agrostis por 
tener aristas geniculadas insertas basalmente y ápices de lema truncados con 
venas laterales que se prolongan en (2)4 arístulas apicales. Presentamos las 
siguientes ocho nuevas combinaciones: Agrostula truncatula, Agrostula truncatula 
subsp. durieui, Alpagrostis alpina, Alpagrostis alpina var. flavescens, 
Alpagrostis barceloi, Alpagrostis setacea, Alpagrostis setacea var. flava y 
Alpagrostis schleicheri. Además, proporcionamos una clave que separa Agrostula y 
Alpagrostis de Agrostis s.s. y otros géneros previamente considerados como 
sinónimos de Agrostis, lectotipificamos Agrostis alpina Scop., A. schleicheri 
Jord. & Verl., A. truncatula Parl. y A. truncatula var. durieui Henriq. y 
neotipificamos A. setacea Curtis.

DOI: 10.3897/phytokeys.167.55171
PMCID: PMC7695677
PMID: 33306060