1. Front Plant Sci. 2020 Nov 11;11:528550. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2020.528550. 
eCollection 2020.

Overexpression Levels of LbDREB6 Differentially Affect Growth, Drought, and 
Disease Tolerance in Poplar.

Yang J(1), Wang H(1), Zhao S(2), Liu X(1), Zhang X(1), Wu W(3), Li C(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Forest Genetics and Breeding, Northeast Forestry 
University, Harbin, China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Harbin University of Commerce, Harbin, China.
(3)Agriculture College of Yanbian University, Yanji, China.

The application of drought stress-regulating transcription factors (TFs) offers 
a credible way to improve drought tolerance in plants. However, many drought 
resistant TFs always showed unintended adverse effects on plant growth or other 
traits. Few studies have been conducted in trees to evaluate and overcome the 
pleiotropic effects of drought tolerance TFs. Here, we report the dose-dependent 
effect of the Limonium bicolor LbDREB6 gene on its overexpression in Populus 
ussurensis. High- and moderate-level overexpression of LbDREB6 significantly 
increased drought tolerance in a dose-dependent manner. However, the OE18 plants 
showed stunted growth under normal conditions, but they were also more sensitive 
to Marssonina brunnea infection than wild type (WT) and OE14 plants. While, OE14 
showed normal growth, the pathogen tolerance of them was not significantly 
different from WT. Many stress-responsive genes were up-regulated in OE18 and 
OE14 compared to WT, especially for OE18 plants. Meanwhile, more pathogen 
tolerance related genes were down-regulated in OE18 compared to OE14 and WT 
plants. We achieved improved drought tolerance by adjusting the increased levels 
of exogenous DREB genes to avoid the occurrence of growth reduction and reduced 
disease tolerance.

Copyright Â© 2020 Yang, Wang, Zhao, Liu, Zhang, Wu and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2020.528550
PMCID: PMC7693672
PMID: 33304356