1. Elife. 2020 Dec 10;9:e60821. doi: 10.7554/eLife.60821.

HIV-1 Vpr antagonizes innate immune activation by targeting karyopherin-mediated 
NF-κB/IRF3 nuclear transport.

Khan H(#)(1), Sumner RP(#)(1), Rasaiyaah J(1), Tan CP(1), Rodriguez-Plata MT(1), 
Van Tulleken C(1), Fink D(1), Zuliani-Alvarez L(1), Thorne L(1), Stirling D(1), 
Milne RS(1), Towers GJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

HIV-1 must replicate in cells that are equipped to defend themselves from 
infection through intracellular innate immune systems. HIV-1 evades innate 
immune sensing through encapsidated DNA synthesis and encodes accessory genes 
that antagonize specific antiviral effectors. Here, we show that both particle 
associated, and expressed HIV-1 Vpr, antagonize the stimulatory effect of a 
variety of pathogen associated molecular patterns by inhibiting IRF3 and NF-κB 
nuclear transport. Phosphorylation of IRF3 at S396, but not S386, was also 
inhibited. We propose that, rather than promoting HIV-1 nuclear import, Vpr 
interacts with karyopherins to disturb their import of IRF3 and NF-κB to promote 
replication in macrophages. Concordantly, we demonstrate Vpr-dependent rescue of 
HIV-1 replication in human macrophages from inhibition by cGAMP, the product of 
activated cGAS. We propose a model that unifies Vpr manipulation of nuclear 
import and inhibition of innate immune activation to promote HIV-1 replication 
and transmission.

© 2020, Khan et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.60821
PMCID: PMC7759385
PMID: 33300875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HK, RS, JR, CT, CV, DF, LZ, LT, DS, RM, GT No 
competing interests declared, MR Maria Teresa Rodriguez-Plata is affiliated with 
Black Belt TX Ltd. The author has no financial interests to declare.