1. Front Immunol. 2020 Nov 16;11:601740. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.601740. 
eCollection 2020.

Extracellular Vesicles and Damage-Associated Molecular Patterns: A Pandora's Box 
in Health and Disease.

Picca A(1)(2), Guerra F(3), Calvani R(1)(2), Coelho-Júnior HJ(4), Landi F(1)(4), 
Bernabei R(1)(4), Romano R(3), Bucci C(3), Marzetti E(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione Policlinico Universitario "Agostino Gemelli" IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Aging Research Center, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, 
Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Technologies, 
University of Salento, Lecce, Italy.
(4)Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.

Sterile inflammation develops as part of an innate immunity response to 
molecules released upon tissue injury and collectively indicated as 
damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). While coordinating the clearance 
of potential harmful stimuli, promotion of tissue repair, and restoration of 
tissue homeostasis, a hyper-activation of such an inflammatory response may be 
detrimental. The complex regulatory pathways modulating DAMPs generation and 
trafficking are actively investigated for their potential to provide relevant 
insights into physiological and pathological conditions. Abnormal circulating 
extracellular vesicles (EVs) stemming from altered endosomal-lysosomal system 
have also been reported in several age-related conditions, including cancer and 
neurodegeneration, and indicated as a promising route for therapeutic purposes. 
Along this pathway, mitochondria may dispose altered components to preserve 
organelle homeostasis. However, whether a common thread exists between DAMPs and 
EVs generation is yet to be clarified. A deeper understanding of the highly 
complex, dynamic, and variable intracellular and extracellular trafficking of 
DAMPs and EVs, including those of mitochondrial origin, is needed to unveil 
relevant pathogenic pathways and novel targets for drug development. Herein, we 
describe the mechanisms of generation of EVs and mitochondrial-derived vesicles 
along the endocytic pathway and discuss the involvement of the 
endosomal-lysosomal in cancer and neurodegeneration (i.e., Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's disease).

Copyright © 2020 Picca, Guerra, Calvani, Coelho-Júnior, Landi, Bernabei, Romano, 
Bucci and Marzetti.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.601740
PMCID: PMC7701251
PMID: 33304353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]