1. Aging (Albany NY). 2020 Dec 14;12(24):26000-26011. doi: 10.18632/aging.202219.
 Epub 2020 Dec 14.

Suppression of long noncoding RNA LINC00324 restricts cell proliferation and 
invasion of papillary thyroid carcinoma through downregulation of TRIM29 via 
upregulating microRNA-195-5p.

Xu J(1), Li Z(1), Su Q(1), Zhao J(1), Ma J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710004, Shaanxi, China.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are identified as novel regulators of 
carcinogenesis. To date, the precise functions of lncRNAs in papillary thyroid 
carcinoma (PTC) remains poorly understood. The purposes of this work were to 
explore the potential relevance of lncRNA 00324 (LINC00324) in PTC. Levels of 
LINC00324 were markedly up-regulated in PTC. Silencing of LINC00324 
significantly repressed the proliferation and invasion of PTC cells. LINC00324 
was documented as a sponge of microRNA-195-5p (miR-195-5p). Decreased levels of 
miR-195-5p were detected in PTC. The up-regulation of miR-195-5p suppressed PTC 
cellular proliferation and invasion. Suppression of miR-195-5p partially 
reversed the LINC00324-knockdown-mediated effects in PTC cells. We identified 
tripartite motif-containing 29 (TRIM29) as a target gene of miR-195-5p. TRIM29 
overexpression partially reversed the LINC00324-knockdown- or 
miR-195-5p-overexpression-mediated effects in PTC cells. In short, this work 
demonstrates that LINC00324 knockdown inhibits the proliferation and invasion of 
PTC cells by decreasing TRIM29 expression via up-regulating miR-195-5p 
expression.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.202219
PMCID: PMC7803523
PMID: 33318312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.