1. Arab J Urol. 2020 May 24;18(4):257-266. doi: 10.1080/2090598X.2020.1760589.

New frontiers on the molecular underpinnings of hypospadias according to 
severity.

Piñeyro-Ruiz C(1), Serrano H(2), Pérez-Brayfield MR(3), Jorge JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, School of Medicine, University of 
Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Section of Urology, School of Medicine, University of 
Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico, USA.

Hypospadias, which is characterised by the displacement of the urethral meatus 
from its typical anatomical location in males, shows various degrees of 
severity. In this systematic review, we surveyed our current understanding of 
the genetics of isolated hypospadias in humans according to the severity of the 
condition. We found that sequencing and genotyping approaches were the preferred 
methods of study and that single nucleotide polymorphisms were the most common 
finding associated with hypospadias. Most genes fell into four gene-pathway 
categories related to androgens, oestrogens, growth factors, or transcription 
factors. Few hypospadias studies classify their findings by severity. Taken 
together, we argue that it is advantageous to take into consideration the 
severity of the condition in search of novel candidates in the aetiology of 
hypospadias. Abbreviations: AR: androgen receptor; ATF3: activating 
transcription factor 3; BMP4: bone morphogenetic protein 4; BMP7: bone 
morphogenetic protein 7; CYP17: steroid 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase; 
CYP1A1: cytochrome P450 1A1; CYP3A4: cytochrome P450 3A4; CNVs: copy number 
variants; DGKK: diacylglycerol kinase kappa; ESR1: oestrogen receptor 1; ESR2: 
oestrogen receptor 2; FGF8: fibroblast growth factor 8; FGF10: fibroblast growth 
factor 10; FGFR2: fibroblast growth factor receptor 2; HOXA4: homeobox protein 
Hox-A4; HOXB6: homeobox protein Hox-B6; HSD17B3: hydroxysteroid 17-beta 
dehydrogenase 3; MAMLD1: mastermind-like domain-containing protein 1; SF-1: 
splicing factor 1; SHH: sonic hedgehog; SNPs: single nucleotide polymorphisms; 
SOX9: SRY-box 9; SRD5A2: steroid 5 alpha-reductase 2; SRY: sex-determining 
region Y protein; STAR: steroidogenic acute regulatory protein; STARD3: 
StAR-related lipid transfer protein 3; STS: steryl-sulfatase; WT1: Wilms tumour 
protein; ZEB1: zinc finger oestrogen-box binding homeobox 1.

© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & 
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/2090598X.2020.1760589
PMCID: PMC7717703
PMID: 33312738

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.