1. ACS Catal. 2020 Dec 4;10(23):14245-14257. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.0c03138. Epub 
2020 Nov 21.

Influence of Nanoscale Intimacy and Zeolite Micropore Size on the Performance of 
Bifunctional Catalysts for n-Heptane Hydroisomerization.

Oenema J(1), Harmel J(1), Vélez RP(1), Meijerink MJ(1), Eijsvogel W(1), 
Poursaeidesfahani A(2), Vlugt TJH(2), Zečević J(1), de Jong KP(1).

Author information:
(1)Inorganic Chemistry and Catalysis, Debye Institute for Nanomaterials Science, 
Utrecht University, Universiteitsweg 99, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Process & Energy Department, Delft University of Technology, Leeghwaterstraat 
39, 2628 CB Delft, The Netherlands.

In this study, Pt nanoparticles on zeolite/γ-Al2O3 composites (50/50 wt) were 
located either in the zeolite or on the γ-Al2O3 binder, hereby varying the 
average distance (intimacy) between zeolite acid sites and metal sites from 
"closest" to "nanoscale". The catalytic performance of these catalysts was 
compared to physical mixtures of zeolite and Pt/γ-Al2O3 powders, which provide a 
"microscale" distance between sites. Several beneficial effects on catalytic 
activity and selectivity for n-heptane hydroisomerization were observed when Pt 
nanoparticles are located on the γ-Al2O3 binder in nanoscale proximity with 
zeolite acid sites, as opposed to Pt nanoparticles located inside zeolite 
crystals. On ZSM-5-based catalysts, mostly monobranched isomers were produced, 
and the isomer selectivity of these catalysts was almost unaffected with an 
intimacy ranging from closest to microscale, which can be attributed to the high 
diffusional barriers of branched isomers within ZSM-5 micropores. For composite 
catalysts based on large-pore zeolites (zeolite Beta and zeolite Y), the 
activity and selectivity benefitted from the nanoscale intimacy with Pt, 
compared to both the closest and microscale intimacies. Intracrystalline 
gradients of heptenes as reaction intermediates are likely contributors to 
differences in activity and selectivity. This paper aims to provide insights 
into the influence of the metal-acid intimacy in bifunctional catalysts based on 
zeolites with different framework topologies.

© 2020 American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.0c03138
PMCID: PMC7723304
PMID: 33312750

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.