1. AMB Express. 2020 Dec 14;10(1):215. doi: 10.1186/s13568-020-01152-x.

Oral administration of recombinant Bacillus subtilis spores expressing mutant 
staphylococcal enterotoxin B provides potent protection against lethal 
enterotoxin challenge.

Xiong Z(1), Mai J(1), Li F(1), Liang B(1), Yao S(1), Liang Z(1), Zhang C(1), Gao 
F(1), Ai X(1), Wang J(1), Long Y(1), Yang M(2), Gong S(2), Zhou Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical laboratory, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, 510623, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical 
Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510623, Guangdong, China.
(3)Clinical laboratory, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, 510623, Guangdong, China. zzw6248@126.com.

Pathogenicity of Staphylococcus aureus is induced by staphylococcal enterotoxin 
B (SEB). A mutant form of SEB (mSEB) is immunogenic as well as less toxic. 
Recombinant mSEB and SEB were expressed in pET28a prokaryotic plasmids. Tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels in mSEB-stimulated 
macrophages were lower than those in SEB-stimulated macrophages (p < 0.001, 
p < 0.01 respectively). Using CotC as a fusion protein, we constructed 
recombinant Bacillus subtilis spores expressing mSEB on the spore surface and 
evaluated their safety and protective efficacy via mouse models. Oral 
administration of mSEB-expressing spores increased SEB-specific IgA in feces and 
SEB-specific IgG1 and IgG2a in the sera, compared with mice in naïve and CotC 
spore-treated groups (p < 0.001, p < 0.01, p < 0.001 respectively). Six weeks 
following oral dosing of recombinant spores, significant differences were not 
found in the serum biochemical indices between the mSEB group and the naïve and 
CotC groups. Furthermore, oral administration of mSEB spores increased the 
survival rate by 33.3% in mice intraperitoneally injected with 5 µg of wild-type 
SEB plus 25 µg lipopolysaccharide (LPS). In summation, recombinant spores stably 
expressing mSEB were developed, and oral administration of such recombinant 
spores induced a humoral immune response and provided protection against SEB 
challenge in mice.

DOI: 10.1186/s13568-020-01152-x
PMCID: PMC7734462
PMID: 33315153

Conflict of interest statement: The authors all declare that they have no 
competing interests.