1. PLoS One. 2020 Dec 16;15(12):e0243986. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0243986. 
eCollection 2020.

Activation of neuronal adenosine A1 receptors causes hypothermia through central 
and peripheral mechanisms.

Province HS(1), Xiao C(1), Mogul AS(1), Sahoo A(2), Jacobson KA(3), Pi√±ol RA(1), 
Gavrilova O(2), Reitman ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Obesity Branch, National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of 
America.
(2)Mouse Metabolism Core, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of 
America.

Extracellular adenosine, a danger signal, can cause hypothermia. We generated 
mice lacking neuronal adenosine A1 receptors (A1AR, encoded by the Adora1 gene) 
to examine the contribution of these receptors to hypothermia. 
Intracerebroventricular injection of the selective A1AR agonist (Cl-ENBA, 
5'-chloro-5'-deoxy-N6-endo-norbornyladenosine) produced hypothermia, which was 
reduced in mice with deletion of A1AR in neurons. A non-brain penetrant A1AR 
agonist [SPA, N6-(p-sulfophenyl) adenosine] also caused hypothermia, in wild 
type but not mice lacking neuronal A1AR, suggesting that peripheral neuronal 
A1AR can also cause hypothermia. Mice expressing Cre recombinase from the Adora1 
locus were generated to investigate the role of specific cell populations in 
body temperature regulation. Chemogenetic activation of Adora1-Cre-expressing 
cells in the preoptic area did not change body temperature. In contrast, 
activation of Adora1-Cre-expressing dorsomedial hypothalamus cells increased 
core body temperature, concordant with agonism at the endogenous inhibitory A1AR 
causing hypothermia. These results suggest that A1AR agonism causes hypothermia 
via two distinct mechanisms: brain neuronal A1AR and A1AR on neurons outside the 
blood-brain barrier. The variety of mechanisms that adenosine can use to induce 
hypothermia underscores the importance of hypothermia in the mouse response to 
major metabolic stress or injury.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0243986
PMCID: PMC7743955
PMID: 33326493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.