1. Front Immunol. 2020 Nov 23;11:559740. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.559740. 
eCollection 2020.

IL-Y Aggravates Murine Chronic Graft-Versus-Host Disease by Enhancing T and B 
Cell Responses.

Wan L(1)(2), Jin Z(1)(2), Hu B(1)(2), Lv K(1)(2), Lei L(1)(2), Liu Y(3), Song 
Y(3), Zhu Y(3), Gong H(1)(2), Xu M(1)(2), Du Y(1)(2), Xu Y(1)(2), Liu H(3), Wu 
D(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Clinical Research Center for Hematologic Diseases, Jiangsu Institute 
of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Institute of 
Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Suzhou, China.
(2)Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Soochow University, Suzhou, 
China.
(3)Immunology Programme, Life Sciences Institute and Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology, Yoo Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

IL-Y, a synthetic member of IL-12 cytokine family, was found to exert potent 
immunosuppressive effects by inhibiting the differentiation and activation of 
Th1 and Th17 cells. However, the role of IL-Y in the development of chronic 
graft-versus-host disease (cGVHD) remains unknown. Here, using murine models of 
scleroderma-like and lupus-like cGVHD, we examined the function of IL-Y in the 
pathogenesis of cGVHD by hydrodynamically injecting minicircle-IL-Y expressing 
plasmids (MC IL-Y). In contrast with the reported immune suppressive function of 
IL-Y, administration of MC IL-Y enhanced cGVHD severity reflected by 
deteriorated multi-organ pathologic damages. In lupus-like cGVHD model, urine 
protein and the serum anti-dsDNA antibody (IgG) were significantly upregulated 
by IL-Y treatment. Further study demonstrated that IL-Y impacts both donor T and 
B cell response. In T cells, IL-Y inhibited the generation of CD4+Foxp3+ 
regulator T (Treg) cells during the development of cGVHD. IL-Y may also increase 
the infiltration of pathogenic TNF-α producing CD4+ and CD8+ T cells through 
IL-27Rα in recipient spleens, as this effect was diminished in IL-27Rα deficient 
T cells. Moreover, IL-Y enhanced the differentiation of ICOS+ T follicular 
helper (Tfh) cells. In B cells, the percentage of germinal center (GC) B cells 
in recipient spleens was significantly upregulated by MC IL-Y plasmid 
administration. The levels of co-stimulatory molecules, MHC-II and CD86, on B 
cells were also enhanced by IL-Y expression. Taken together, our data indicated 
that IL-Y promoted the process of cGVHD by activating pathogenic T and B cells.

Copyright © 2020 Wan, Jin, Hu, Lv, Lei, Liu, Song, Zhu, Gong, Xu, Du, Xu, Liu, 
Wu and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.559740
PMCID: PMC7719702
PMID: 33329519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.