1. Front Genet. 2020 Nov 27;11:561687. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.561687.
eCollection  2020.

Xeroderma Pigmentosum C (XPC) Mutations in Primary Fibroblasts Impair Base 
Excision Repair Pathway and Increase Oxidative DNA Damage.

Fayyad N(1), Kobaisi F(1)(2)(3), Beal D(1), Mahfouf W(4), Ged C(4)(5), 
Morice-Picard F(5), Fayyad-Kazan M(2), Fayyad-Kazan H(2), Badran B(2), Rezvani 
HR(4)(5), Rachidi W(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)University Grenoble Alpes, SyMMES/CIBEST UMR 5819 UGA-CNRS-CEA, Grenoble, 
France.
(2)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Molecular Immunology, Faculty of Sciences I, 
Lebanese University, Hadath, Lebanon.
(3)University Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Inserm, BIG-BGE U1038, Grenoble, France.
(4)Université de Bordeaux, Inserm, BMGIC, U1035, Bordeaux, France.
(5)Centre de Référence pour les Maladies Rares de la Peau, CHU de Bordeaux, 
Bordeaux, France.

Xeroderma Pigmentosum C (XPC) is a multi-functional protein that is involved not 
only in the repair of bulky lesions, post-irradiation, via nucleotide excision 
repair (NER) per se but also in oxidative DNA damage mending. Since base 
excision repair (BER) is the primary regulator of oxidative DNA damage, we 
characterized, post-Ultraviolet B-rays (UVB)-irradiation, the detailed effect of 
three different XPC mutations in primary fibroblasts derived from XP-C patients 
on mRNA, protein expression and activity of different BER factors. We found that 
XP-C fibroblasts are characterized by downregulated expression of different BER 
factors including OGG1, MYH, APE1, LIG3, XRCC1, and Polβ. Such a downregulation 
was also observed at OGG1, MYH, and APE1 protein levels. This was accompanied 
with an increase in DNA oxidative lesions, as evidenced by 8-oxoguanine levels, 
immediately post-UVB-irradiation. Unlike in normal control cells, these 
oxidative lesions persisted over time in XP-C cells having lower excision repair 
capacities. Taken together, our results indicated that an impaired BER pathway 
in XP-C fibroblasts leads to longer persistence and delayed repair of oxidative 
DNA damage. This might explain the diverse clinical phenotypes in XP-C patients 
suffering from cancer in both photo-protected and photo-exposed areas. 
Therapeutic strategies based on reinforcement of BER pathway might therefore 
represent an innovative path for limiting the drawbacks of NER-based diseases, 
as in XP-C case.

Copyright © 2020 Fayyad, Kobaisi, Beal, Mahfouf, Ged, Morice-Picard, 
Fayyad-Kazan, Fayyad-Kazan, Badran, Rezvani and Rachidi.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.561687
PMCID: PMC7728722
PMID: 33329698

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.