1. Front Physiol. 2020 Nov 24;11:591681. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.591681. 
eCollection 2020.

Prediction of Cardiac Mechanical Performance From Electrical Features During 
Ventricular Tachyarrhythmia Simulation Using Machine Learning Algorithms.

Jeong DU(1), Lim KM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Computational Medicine Lab, Department of IT Convergence Engineering, Kumoh 
National Institute of Technology, Gumi, South Korea.
(2)Computational Medicine Lab, Department of Medical IT Convergence Engineering, 
Kumoh National Institute of Technology, Gumi, South Korea.

In ventricular tachyarrhythmia, electrical instability features including action 
potential duration, dominant frequency, phase singularity, and filaments are 
associated with mechanical contractility. However, there are insufficient 
studies on estimated mechanical contractility based on electrical features 
during ventricular tachyarrhythmia using a stochastic model. In this study, we 
predicted cardiac mechanical performance from features of electrical instability 
during ventricular tachyarrhythmia simulation using machine learning algorithms, 
including support vector regression (SVR) and artificial neural network (ANN) 
models. We performed an electromechanical tachyarrhythmia simulation and 
extracted 12 electrical instability features and two mechanical properties, 
including stroke volume and the amplitude of myocardial tension (ampTens). We 
compared predictive performance according to kernel types of the SVR model and 
the number of hidden layers of the ANN model. In the SVR model, the prediction 
accuracies of stroke volume and ampTens were the highest when using the 
polynomial kernel and linear kernel, respectively. The predictive performance of 
the ANN model was better than that of the SVR model. The prediction accuracies 
were the highest when the ANN model consisted of three hidden layers. 
Accordingly, we propose the ANN model with three hidden layers as an optimal 
model for predicting cardiac mechanical contractility in ventricular 
tachyarrhythmia. The results of this study are expected to be used to indirectly 
estimate the hemodynamic response from the electrical cardiac map measured by 
the optical mapping system during cardiac surgery, as well as cardiac 
contractility under normal sinus rhythm conditions.

Copyright Â© 2020 Jeong and Lim.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.591681
PMCID: PMC7732497
PMID: 33329041