1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2020 Nov 26;13:609073. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2020.609073. 
eCollection 2020.

Modulation of β-Amyloid Fibril Formation in Alzheimer's Disease by Microglia and 
Infection.

Brown MR(1), Radford SE(1), Hewitt EW(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Astbury Centre for Structural 
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, 
United Kingdom.

Amyloid plaques are a pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease. The major 
component of these plaques are highly ordered amyloid fibrils formed by 
amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides. However, whilst Aβ amyloid fibril assembly has been 
subjected to detailed and extensive analysis in vitro, these studies may not 
reproduce how Aβ fibrils assemble in the brain. This is because the brain 
represents a highly complex and dynamic environment, and in Alzheimer's disease 
multiple cofactors may affect the assembly of Aβ fibrils. Moreover, in vivo 
amyloid plaque formation will reflect the balance between the assembly of Aβ 
fibrils and their degradation. This review explores the roles of microglia as 
cofactors in Aβ aggregation and in the clearance of amyloid deposits. In 
addition, we discuss how infection may be an additional cofactor in Aβ fibril 
assembly by virtue of the antimicrobial properties of Aβ peptides. Crucially, by 
understanding the roles of microglia and infection in Aβ amyloid fibril assembly 
it may be possible to identify new therapeutic targets for Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2020 Brown, Radford and Hewitt.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2020.609073
PMCID: PMC7725705
PMID: 33324164

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.