1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2021 Feb;41(2):564-584. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.305565. Epub 2020 Dec 17.

Lysolipids in Vascular Development, Biology, and Disease.

Engelbrecht E(1), MacRae CA(2), Hla T(1).

Author information:
(1)Vascular Biology Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Department of Surgery 
(E.E., T.H.), Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Department 
of Medicine (C.A.M.), Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

Membrane phospholipid metabolism forms lysophospholipids, which possess unique 
biochemical and biophysical properties that influence membrane structure and 
dynamics. However, lysophospholipids also function as ligands for 
G-protein-coupled receptors that influence embryonic development, postnatal 
physiology, and disease. The 2 most well-studied species-lysophosphatidic acid 
and S1P (sphingosine 1-phosphate)-are particularly relevant to vascular 
development, physiology, and cardiovascular diseases. This review summarizes the 
role of lysophosphatidic acid and S1P in vascular developmental processes, 
endothelial cell biology, and their roles in cardiovascular disease processes. 
In addition, we also point out the apparent connections between lysophospholipid 
biology and the Wnt (int/wingless family) pathway, an evolutionarily conserved 
fundamental developmental signaling system. The discovery that components of the 
lysophospholipid signaling system are key genetic determinants of cardiovascular 
disease has warranted current and future research in this field. As 
pharmacological approaches to modulate lysophospholipid signaling have entered 
the clinical sphere, new findings in this field promise to influence novel 
therapeutic strategies in cardiovascular diseases.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.305565
PMCID: PMC8105276
PMID: 33327749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]