1. PLoS Genet. 2020 Dec 15;16(12):e1009243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009243. 
eCollection 2020 Dec.

Locus-specific paramutation in Zea mays is maintained by a PICKLE-like 
chromodomain helicase DNA-binding 3 protein controlling development and male 
gametophyte function.

Deans NC(1)(2), Giacopelli BJ(1), Hollick JB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, 
United States of America.
(2)Centers for RNA Biology and Applied Plant Sciences, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

Paramutations represent directed and meiotically-heritable changes in gene 
regulation leading to apparent violations of Mendelian inheritance. Although the 
mechanism and evolutionary importance of paramutation behaviors remain largely 
unknown, genetic screens in maize (Zea mays) identify five components affecting 
24 nucleotide RNA biogenesis as required to maintain repression of a paramutant 
purple plant1 (pl1) allele. Currently, the RNA polymerase IV largest subunit 
represents the only component also specifying proper development. Here we 
identify a chromodomain helicase DNA-binding 3 (CHD3) protein orthologous to 
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) PICKLE as another component maintaining both 
pl1 paramutation and normal somatic development but without affecting overall 
small RNA biogenesis. In addition, genetic tests show this protein contributes 
to proper male gametophyte function. The similar mutant phenotypes documented in 
Arabidopsis and maize implicate some evolutionarily-conserved gene regulation 
while developmental defects associated with the two paramutation mutants are 
largely distinct. Our results show that a CHD3 protein responsible for normal 
plant ontogeny and sperm transmission also helps maintain meiotically-heritable 
epigenetic regulatory variation for specific alleles. This finding implicates an 
intersection of RNA polymerase IV function and nucleosome positioning in the 
paramutation process.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009243
PMCID: PMC7837471
PMID: 33320854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All rmr12 materials and their uses are covered 
by U.S. patent 8134047 assigned to The Regents of the University of California.