1. Pharmaceutics. 2020 Dec 15;12(12):1216. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12121216.

Current Status and Challenges Associated with CNS-Targeted Gene Delivery across 
the BBB.

Kimura S(1)(2), Harashima H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Design of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Innovative Nanomedicine, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

The era of the aging society has arrived, and this is accompanied by an increase 
in the absolute numbers of patients with neurological disorders, such as 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). Such neurological 
disorders are serious costly diseases that have a significant impact on society, 
both globally and socially. Gene therapy has great promise for the treatment of 
neurological disorders, but only a few gene therapy drugs are currently 
available. Delivery to the brain is the biggest hurdle in developing new drugs 
for the central nervous system (CNS) diseases and this is especially true in the 
case of gene delivery. Nanotechnologies such as viral and non-viral vectors 
allow efficient brain-targeted gene delivery systems to be created. The purpose 
of this review is to provide a comprehensive review of the current status of the 
development of successful drug delivery to the CNS for the treatment of 
CNS-related disorders especially by gene therapy. We mainly address three 
aspects of this situation: (1) blood-brain barrier (BBB) functions; (2) 
adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors, currently the most advanced gene delivery 
vector; (3) non-viral brain targeting by non-invasive methods.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12121216
PMCID: PMC7765480
PMID: 33334049

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.