1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2020 Dec 1;8:609800. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.609800. 
eCollection 2020.

Recent Advances on Feasible Strategies for Monoterpenoid Production in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Gao Q(1)(2)(3), Wang L(4), Zhang M(5), Wei Y(4), Lin W(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine & Holistic 
Integrative Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University, 
Nanjing, China.
(3)Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Chinese Medicinal Resources 
Industrialization, Nanjing, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Advanced Drug Preparation Technologies, Ministry of 
Education and School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(5)The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Jiangsu 
Province Hospital of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China.

Terpenoids are a large diverse group of natural products which play important 
roles in plant metabolic activities. Monoterpenoids are the main components of 
plant essential oils and the active components of some traditional Chinese 
medicinal herbs. Some monoterpenoids are widely used in medicine, cosmetics and 
other industries, and they are mainly obtained by plant biomass extraction 
methods. These plant extraction methods have some problems, such as low 
efficiency, unstable quality, and high cost. Moreover, the monoterpenoid 
production from plant cannot satisfy the growing monoterpenoids demand. The 
development of metabolic engineering, protein engineering and synthetic biology 
provides an opportunity to produce large amounts of monoterpenoids eco-friendly 
using microbial cell factories. This mini-review covers current monoterpenoids 
production using Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The monoterpenoids biosynthetic 
pathways, engineering of key monoterpenoids biosynthetic enzymes, and current 
monoterpenoids production using S. cerevisiae were summarized. In the future, 
metabolically engineered S. cerevisiae may provide one possible green and 
sustainable strategy for monoterpenoids supply.

Copyright Â© 2020 Gao, Wang, Zhang, Wei and Lin.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.609800
PMCID: PMC7736617
PMID: 33335897

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.