1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2020 Nov 23;8:606685. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.606685. 
eCollection 2020.

Wheat Germination Is Dependent on Plant Target of Rapamycin Signaling.

Smailov B(1)(2), Alybayev S(1)(2), Smekenov I(1)(2), Mursalimov A(1)(2), 
Saparbaev M(1)(3), Sarbassov D(4), Bissenbaev A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Biology and 
Biotechnology, Al-Farabi Kazakh National University, Almaty, Kazakhstan.
(2)Scientific Research Institute of Biology and Biotechnology Problems, 
Al-Farabi Kazakh National University, Almaty, Kazakhstan.
(3)Groupe «Mechanisms of DNA Repair and Carcinogenesis», Equipe Labellisée LIGUE 
2016, CNRS UMR 9019, Université Paris-Sud, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, 
Villejuif, France.
(4)Department of Biology, Nazarbayev University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan.

Germination is a process of seed sprouting that facilitates embryo growth. The 
breakdown of reserved starch in the endosperm into simple sugars is essential 
for seed germination and subsequent seedling growth. At the early stage of 
germination, gibberellic acid (GA) activates transcription factor GAMYB to 
promote de novo synthesis of isoforms of α-amylase in the aleurone layer and 
scutellar epithelium of the embryo. Here, we demonstrate that wheat germination 
is regulated by plant target of rapamycin (TOR) signaling. TOR is a central 
component of the essential-nutrient-dependent pathway controlling cell growth in 
all eukaryotes. It is known that rapamycin, a highly specific allosteric 
inhibitor of TOR, is effective in yeast and animal cells but ineffective in most 
of higher plants likely owing to structural differences in ubiquitous rapamycin 
receptor FKBP12. The action of rapamycin on wheat growth has not been studied. 
Our data show that rapamycin inhibits germination of wheat seeds and of their 
isolated embryos in a dose-dependent manner. The involvement of Triticum 
aestivum TOR (TaTOR) in wheat germination was consistent with the suppression of 
wheat embryo growth by specific inhibitors of the TOR kinase: pp242 or torin1. 
Rapamycin or torin1 interfered with GA function in germination because of a 
potent inhibitory effect on α-amylase and GAMYB gene expression. The TOR 
inhibitors selectively targeted the GA-dependent gene expression, whereas 
expression of the abscisic acid-dependent ABI5 gene was not affected by either 
rapamycin or torin1. To determine whether the TaTOR kinase activation takes 
place during wheat germination, we examined phosphorylation of a ribosomal 
protein, T. aestivum S6 kinase 1 (TaS6K1; a substrate of TOR). The 
phosphorylation of serine 467 (S467) in a hydrophobic motif on TaS6K1 was 
induced in a process of germination triggered by GA. Moreover, the 
germination-induced phosphorylation of TaS6K1 on S467 was dependent on TaTOR and 
was inhibited by rapamycin or torin1. Besides, a gibberellin biosynthesis 
inhibitor (paclobutrazol; PBZ) blocked not only α-amylase gene expression but 
also TaS6K1 phosphorylation in wheat embryos. Thus, a hormonal action of GA 
turns on the synthesis of α-amylase in wheat germination via activation of the 
TaTOR-S6K1 signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2020 Smailov, Alybayev, Smekenov, Mursalimov, Saparbaev, Sarbassov 
and Bissenbaev.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2020.606685
PMCID: PMC7719826
PMID: 33330509