1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2020 Nov 23;7:601364. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2020.601364. 
eCollection 2020.

Biomarkers for Heart Failure Prognosis: Proteins, Genetic Scores and Non-coding 
RNAs.

Shrivastava A(1)(2), Haase T(1)(2), Zeller T(1)(2), Schulte C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Cardiology, University Heart and Vascular Center, University 
Medical Center Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner Site 
Hamburg/Kiel/Luebeck, University Medical Center Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)King's British Heart Foundation Centre, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

Heart failure (HF) is a complex disease in which cardiomyocyte injury leads to a 
cascade of inflammatory and fibrosis pathway activation, thereby causing 
decrease in cardiac function. As a result, several biomolecules are released 
which can be identified easily in circulating body fluids. The complex 
biological processes involved in the development and worsening of HF require an 
early treatment strategy to stop deterioration of cardiac function. Circulating 
biomarkers provide not only an ideal platform to detect subclinical changes, 
their clinical application also offers the opportunity to monitor disease 
treatment. Many of these biomarkers can be quantified with high sensitivity; 
allowing their clinical application to be evaluated beyond diagnostic purposes 
as potential tools for HF prognosis. Though the field of biomarkers is dominated 
by protein molecules, non-coding RNAs (microRNAs, long non-coding RNAs, and 
circular RNAs) are novel and promising biomarker candidates that encompass 
several ideal characteristics required in the biomarker field. The application 
of genetic biomarkers as genetic risk scores in disease prognosis, albeit in its 
infancy, holds promise to improve disease risk estimation. Despite the multitude 
of biomarkers that have been available and identified, the majority of novel 
biomarker candidates are not cardiac-specific, and instead may simply be a 
readout of systemic inflammation or other pathological processes. Thus, the true 
value of novel biomarker candidates in HF prognostication remains unclear. In 
this article, we discuss the current state of application of protein, genetic as 
well as non-coding RNA biomarkers in HF risk prognosis.

Copyright Â© 2020 Shrivastava, Haase, Zeller and Schulte.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2020.601364
PMCID: PMC7719677
PMID: 33330662