1. Front Plant Sci. 2020 Dec 3;11:607161. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2020.607161. 
eCollection 2020.

Simultaneous CRISPR/Cas9 Editing of Three PPO Genes Reduces Fruit Flesh Browning 
in Solanum melongena L.

Maioli A(1), Gianoglio S(2), Moglia A(1), Acquadro A(1), Valentino D(1), Milani 
AM(1), Prohens J(3), Orzaez D(2), Granell A(2), Lanteri S(1), Comino C(1).

Author information:
(1)DISAFA, Plant Genetics and Breeding, University of Torino, Grugliasco, Italy.
(2)Crop Biotechnology Department, Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de 
Plantas (IBMCP), CSIC-UPV, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Conservación y Mejora de la Agrodiversidad Valenciana, 
Universitat Politècnica de València, Valencia, Spain.

Polyphenol oxidases (PPOs) catalyze the oxidization of polyphenols, which in 
turn causes the browning of the eggplant berry flesh after cutting. This has a 
negative impact on fruit quality for both industrial transformation and fresh 
consumption. Ten PPO genes (named SmelPPO1-10) were identified in eggplant 
thanks to the recent availability of a high-quality genome sequence. A 
CRISPR/Cas9-based mutagenesis approach was applied to knock-out three target PPO 
genes (SmelPPO4, SmelPPO5, and SmelPPO6), which showed high transcript levels in 
the fruit after cutting. An optimized transformation protocol for eggplant 
cotyledons was used to obtain plants in which Cas9 is directed to a conserved 
region shared by the three PPO genes. The successful editing of the SmelPPO4, 
SmelPPO5, and SmelPPO6 loci of in vitro regenerated plantlets was confirmed by 
Illumina deep sequencing of amplicons of the target sites. Besides, deep 
sequencing of amplicons of the potential off-target loci identified in silico 
proved the absence of detectable non-specific mutations. The induced mutations 
were stably inherited in the T1 and T2 progeny and were associated with a 
reduced PPO activity and browning of the berry flesh after cutting. Our results 
provide the first example of the use of the CRISPR/Cas9 system in eggplant for 
biotechnological applications and open the way to the development of eggplant 
genotypes with low flesh browning which maintain a high polyphenol content in 
the berries.

Copyright © 2020 Maioli, Gianoglio, Moglia, Acquadro, Valentino, Milani, 
Prohens, Orzaez, Granell, Lanteri and Comino.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2020.607161
PMCID: PMC7744776
PMID: 33343607

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.