1. Archaeol Anthropol Sci. 2021;13(1):3. doi: 10.1007/s12520-020-01237-5. Epub
2020  Dec 15.

Let's groove: attachment techniques of Eurasian elk (Alces alces) tooth pendants 
at the Late Mesolithic cemetery Yuzhniy Oleniy Ostrov (Lake Onega, Russia).

Mannermaa K(1)(2), Rainio R(1), Girya EY(3), Gerasimov DV(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cultures, Archaeology, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 59, 
00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Institute of History and Archaeology, University of Tartu, Jakobi 2, -206 
Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Russian Academy of Sciences, Institute for History of Material Culture, Saint 
Petersburg, Russia.
(4)Russian Academy of Sciences, Peter the Great Museum of Anthropology and 
Ethnography, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

More than 4300 Eurasian elk (Alces alces) incisors, most of them pendants, were 
found in 84 burials in the Late Mesolithic cemetery of Yuzhniy Oleniy Ostrov, 
Northwest Russia. We analysed the manufacture techniques of elk teeth (4014), in 
the collection of the Peter the Great Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography, St 
Petersburg. A striking observation is that the manufacture of these pendants is 
similar in all burials. Teeth were worked by carving one or several grooves 
around the root tip. In addition to grooved ones, a number of teeth were not 
worked at all. The uniformity of the chosen species, tooth and techniques 
indicates that strict norms prevailed in the pendant industry. Despite the 
overall similarity, our study shows some variation in making pendants. A groove 
can cut the whole circumference of the root, or several distinct grooves can 
mark opposite sides of the root. Sometimes the grooves are deep and made 
carefully, and sometimes they are weak and made hastily. A typology of various 
groove types was created. In many graves, one groove type dominates. We 
interpret that this inter-burial variation and domination of one type resulted 
from personal choice and taste based on practicality. Such variation could also 
be associated with kin identifiers, but we did not find clear support for that 
in our study. Our study indicates that the groove types as such had no 
connection with particular ornaments, garments or hanging positions.

Â© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1007/s12520-020-01237-5
PMCID: PMC7738352
PMID: 33343760