1. Exp Mol Pathol. 2021 Feb;118:104598. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2020.104598. Epub
2020  Dec 23.

The CTGF gene -945 G/C polymorphism is associated with target lesion 
revascularization for in-stent restenosis.

Bujak K(1), Lejawa M(2), Gąsior M(3), Osadnik T(4).

Author information:
(1)3rd Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences in Zabrze, Medical 
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. Electronic address: k.bujak@sccs.pl.
(2)Kardio-Med Silesia, Zabrze, Poland; Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of 
Medical Sciences in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(3)3rd Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences in Zabrze, Medical 
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences in Zabrze, Medical 
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland; 2nd Department of Cardiology and 
Angiology, Silesian Center for Heart Diseases, Zabrze, Poland.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Previous studies have shown that transforming growth factor 
β (TGF-β) and vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) pathways are 
involved in the in-stent restenosis (ISR) process. The present study aimed to 
assess the relationship between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes 
encoding downstream proteins of TGF-β and VEGF-A pathways and the risk of target 
lesion revascularization (TLR) for in-stent restenosis.
METHODS: A total of 657 patients (with 781 treated lesions) who underwent 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with stent implantation at our center 
between 2007 and 2012 and completed a 4-year follow-up for clinically-driven 
TLR, were included. SNPs in CTGF (rs6918698), TGFBR2 (rs2228048), SMAD3 
(rs17293632), KDR (rs2071559), CCL2 (rs1024610) were genotyped using TaqMan 
assay.
RESULTS: Major allele carriers of CTGF gene -945 G/C polymorphism (rs6918698) 
were significantly less likely to underwent clinically-driven TLR during 
follow-up than minor allele carriers. After adjustment for clinical, 
angiographic, and procedural covariates, CTGF polymorphism was significantly 
associated with TLR, and minor allele (C) carriers had nearly two times higher 
risk of developing ISR requiring TLR (HR of 1.93, 95%CI 1.15-3.24) compared to 
patients with major (GG) genotype. No significant relationship was found between 
other analyzed polymorphisms and cumulative incidence of TLR at 4-years.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that functional -945 G/C polymorphism in the 
gene encoding connective tissue growth factor is associated with the need for 
TLR in patients who underwent PCI for stable coronary artery disease.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2020.104598
PMID: 33358742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]