1. Nutrients. 2020 Dec 18;12(12):3883. doi: 10.3390/nu12123883.

Exploring Patterns of Disturbed Eating in Psychosis: A Scoping Review.

Stogios N(1)(2), Smith E(1)(2), Asgariroozbehani R(1)(2), Hamel L(1), Gdanski 
A(3), Selby P(1)(4)(5)(6), Sockalingam S(1)(2)(6)(7), Graff-Guerrero A(1)(2)(6), 
Taylor VH(8), Agarwal SM(1)(2)(6), Hahn MK(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH), Toronto, ON M6J 1H3, Canada.
(2)Institute of Medical Science (IMS), University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 
1A8, Canada.
(3)Department of Human Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3J6, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON M5G 1V7, Canada.
(5)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 
3M7, Canada.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 1R8, Canada.
(7)Bariatric Surgery Program, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5T 2S8, 
Canada.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.

Disturbed eating behaviours have been widely reported in psychotic disorders 
since the early 19th century. There is also evidence that antipsychotic (AP) 
treatment may induce binge eating or other related compulsive eating behaviours. 
It is therefore possible that abnormal eating patterns may contribute to the 
significant weight gain and other metabolic disturbances observed in patients 
with psychosis. In this scoping review, we aimed to explore the underlying 
psychopathological and neurobiological mechanisms of disrupted eating behaviours 
in psychosis spectrum disorders and the role of APs in this relationship. A 
systematic search identified 35 studies that met our eligibility criteria and 
were included in our qualitative synthesis. Synthesizing evidence from 
self-report questionnaires and food surveys, we found that patients with 
psychosis exhibit increased appetite and craving for fatty food, as well as 
increased caloric intake and snacking, which may be associated with increased 
disinhibition. Limited evidence from neuroimaging studies suggested that 
AP-na√Øve first episode patients exhibit similar neural processing of food to 
healthy controls, while chronic AP exposure may lead to decreased activity in 
satiety areas and increased activity in areas associated with reward 
anticipation. Overall, this review supports the notion that AP use can lead to 
disturbed eating patterns in patients, which may contribute to AP-induced weight 
gain. However, intrinsic illness-related effects on eating behaviors remain less 
well elucidated, and many confounding factors as well as variability in study 
designs limits interpretation of existing literature in this field and precludes 
firm conclusions from being made.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12123883
PMCID: PMC7768542
PMID: 33353080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.