1. Probl Radiac Med Radiobiol. 2020 Dec;25:502-515. doi: 
10.33145/2304-8336-2020-25-502-515.

CONTRIBUTION OF THE G1691A ALLELE CARRYING OF THE COAGULATION FACTOR V GENE TO 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THROMBOSES IN RADIATION-EXPOSED PATIENTS WITH REACTIVE 
CHANGES IN PERIPHERAL BLOOD.

[Article in English, Ukrainian; Abstract available in Ukrainian from the 
publisher]

Mishcheniuk OY(1), Kostiukevych OM(1), Benkovska LK(1), Kravchenko OM(1), 
Klymenko SV(2).

Author information:
(1)State Institution of Sciences «Research and Practical Center of Preventive 
and Clinical Medicine», State Administrative Department, 5 Verkhnia St., Kyiv, 
01014, Ukraine.
(2)State Institution «National Research Center for Radiation Medicine of 
National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine», 53 Yuriia Illienka St., Kyiv, 
04050, UkraineShupyk National Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, 9 
Dorohozhytska St., Kyiv, 04112, Ukraine.

Thrombosis triggers, in addition to «classic» risk factors (RFs) of 
cardiovascular events, includes the reactive changesof peripheral blood (RCPB), 
markers of the hereditary thrombophilia and radiation anamnesis. However, 
results ofmost studies suggest the «classic» RFs are able to neutralize the 
prothrombogenic potential of the hereditary thrombophilia and other, less 
powerful predictors of thrombosis.
OBJECTIVE: to determine the influence of the G1691A allele of the proaccelerin 
gene carrying to the thrombosis development, taking into account the vascular 
type of their occurrence, the presence of RFs in individuals with RCPB (reactive 
leukocytosis and thrombocytosis, and secondary erythrocytosis), as well as with 
and without radiation anamnesis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In general, it was analyzed the results of clinical and 
molecular-genetic data of 152 patientswith RCPB, 19 patients had radiation 
anamnesis, 133 - did not have. The thrombotic complications were detected in5 
(26.31 %) of radiation-exposer patients and 25 (18.79 %) patients without 
radiation anamneses. The carrying ofthe G1691A allele proaccelerin gene (APG) 
(Leiden mutation (LM)) was detected using the allele-specific polymerasechain 
reaction.
RESULTS: The LM was found in 5.9 % (9 carriers) of the general cohort (GC) of 
RPBC patients. There were no differencein the LM frequency between the groups of 
patients with and without radiation anamnesis (р = 0.312). In the groupof 
radiation-exposer patients (р = 0.017), as well as in the group without its (р = 
0.031), venous thromboses only weremore frequently in the LM carriers. In the 
presence of a radiation anamnesis, G1691A APG carriers with RFs have thehigher 
frequency (р = 0.008) and the probability of the occurrence (relative risk [RR] 
= 25.00; CI 95 %: 1.56-399.68)of venous thrombosis. In the group without 
radiation anamnesis, the frequency of venues thrombosis in the LMcarriers is 
higher in the younger age subgroup (р = 0.001), without RFs (p = 0.044) and 
without RFs under 60 years(р = 0.023). The risk of venous thrombosis in the 
G1691A APG carriers of the group without radiation anamnesis is5.78 (95 % CI: 
1.58-21.13). In LM carriers without radiation anamnesis and RFs, as well as 
under the 60 years of age,the probability of venous thrombosis was 6.85 (95 % 
CI: 1.86-25.22) and 19.40 (95 % CI: 4.64-81.09), respectively,and in the absence 
of both criteria - 9.57 (95 % CI: 2.49-36.73).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with and without radiation anamnesis, the risk of 
venues thrombosis are observed moreoften in carriers of LM. The carrying of the 
G1691A APG in patients with RPBC and without RA increased the risk ofvenues 
thrombosis development in subjects without FRs and below 60 years of age. In the 
radiation-exposure group,the frequency and the risk of venues thrombosis in the 
G1691A APG carriers was higher in the subgroup with RFs. It isprobably due to 
the peculiarity of the samples, or prothrombogenic interaction between LM and 
radiation-associated endothelial damage.

Publisher: Do trygeriv rozvytku tromboziv, okrim «klasychnykh» faktoriv ryzyku 
(FR) sertsevo-sudynnykh podiĭ, nalezhat' reaktyvni zminy v peryferiĭniĭ krovi, 
spadkova trombofiliia ta radiatsiĭnyĭ anamnez. Prote rezul'taty 
bil'shostivyprobuvan' prodemonstruvaly, shcho FR spromozhni niveliuvaty 
protrombogennyĭ potentsial spadkovoï trombofiliï ta inshykh, mensh potuzhnykh, 
predyktoriv tromboziv.Meta: vyznachyty vplyv nosiĭstva alelia G1691A gena 
proaktselerynu na rozvytok tromboziv z urakhuvanniam sudynnogo rusla ïkh 
vynyknennia, zalezhno vid suputn'oï naiavnosti FR v osib z reaktyvnymy zminamy v 
peryferiĭniĭkrovi (reaktyvnym leĭkotsytozom i trombotsytozom, a takozh vtorynnym 
erytrotsytozom), iak iz radiatsiĭnym anamnezom tak i bez n'ogo.Materialy ta 
metody. Provedeno analiz klinichnykh, molekuliarno-genetychnykh danykh 152 
patsiientiv z reaktyvnymyzminamy v peryferiĭniĭ krovi, 19 iz nykh maly 
radiatsiĭnyĭ anamnez, 133 – ni. U 5 (26,31 %) patsiientiv z radiatsiĭnym 
anamnezom i 25 (18,79%) bez n'ogo vyiavleni trombotychni uskladnennia. G1691A 
alel' gena proaktselerynu(AGP) (Leĭdens'ku mutatsiiu (LM)) vyznachaly metodom 
alel'-spetsyfichnoï polimeraznoï lantsiugovoï reaktsiï.Rezul'taty. U zagal'niĭ 
kogorti patsiientiv iz reaktyvnymy zminamy v peryferiĭniĭ krovi LM zustrichalas' 
u5,92 % (9 nosiïv) vypadkiv, riznytsi v ïï chastoti ne vyiavleno mizh 
patsiientamy z radiatsiĭnym anamnezom ta bez n'ogo (r = 0,312). U grupi iak iz 
radiatsiĭnym anamnezom (r = 0,017), tak i bez n'ogo (r = 0,031), til'ky venozni 
trombozy sposterigalas' chastishe v nosiïv LM. Za naiavnosti radiatsiĭnogo 
anamnezu, nosiï G1691A AGP, shcho nalezhaly dopidgrupy z naiavnistiu FR maly 
bil'shu chastotu (r = 0,008) ta vyshchyĭ riven' ryzyku rozvytku venoznykh 
tromboziv(vidnosnyĭ ryzyk (VR) = 25,00; DI 95%: 1,56–399,68). U grupi bez 
radiatsiĭnogo anamnezu chastota venoznykh tromboziv u nosiïv LM bil'she u 
molodshiĭ vikoviĭ pidgrupi (r = 0,001), bez FR (r = 0,044) i v osib bez FR 
molodshe 60rokiv (r = 0,023). Ryzyk venoznykh tromboziv u nosiïv G1691A AGP 
grupy bez radiatsiĭnogo anamnezu skladaie 5,78(95% DI: 1,58–21,13). U nosiïv LM 
bez radiatsiĭnogo anamnezu ta FR, a takozh za viku molodshe 60 rokiv ĭmovirnist' 
venoznykh tromboziv dorivniuvala 6,85 (95 %DI: 1,86–25,22) i 19,40 (95% DI: 
4,64–81,09), vidpovidno; zavidsutnosti obokh kryteriï – 9,57 (95% DI: 
2,49–36,73).Vysnovky. U patsiientiv iak iz radiatsiĭnym anamnezom, tak i bez 
n'ogo, ryzyk same venoznykh tromboziv zrostaie zanosiĭstva LM. Naiavnist' G1691A 
AGP u patsiientiv z reaktyvnymy zminamy v peryferiĭniĭ krovi bez 
radiatsiĭnogoanamnezu zbil'shuie ĭmovirnist' venoznykh tromboziv za vidsutnosti 
FR ta v pidgrupi molodshe 60 rokiv. Za radiatsiĭnogo anamnezu chastota venoznykh 
tromboziv u nosiïv LM bil'sha v pidgrupi z FR, ĭmovirno, za rakhunok osoblyvosti 
vybirky, abo protrombogennoï vzaiemodiï mizh LM i perenesenym 
radiatsiĭno-asotsiĭovanym poshkodzhenniamendoteliiu.

О.Yu. Mishcheniuk, О.М. Kostiukevych, L.K. Benkovska, О.М. Kravchenko, S.V. 
Klymenko.

DOI: 10.33145/2304-8336-2020-25-502-515
PMID: 33361857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]