1. Infect Drug Resist. 2020 Dec 16;13:4487-4493. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S288865. 
eCollection 2020.

Molecular Characterization of Carbapenem/Colistin-Resistant Acinetobacter 
baumannii Clinical Isolates from Egypt by Whole-Genome Sequencing.

Fam NS(1), Gamal D(1), Mohamed SH(2), Wasfy RM(1), Soliman MS(3), El-Kholy 
AA(3), Higgins PG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Theodor Bilharz Research Institute, Giza, Egypt.
(2)Department of Microbiology, National Organization for Drug Control and 
Research, Giza, Egypt.
(3)Clinical Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, 
Egypt.
(4)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of 
Cologne, Cologne 50935, Germany.

PURPOSE: The rise of carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii (CRAB) is considered a 
public health problem limiting the treatment options. Our current work studied 
the emergence and mechanisms of colistin-resistance among CRAB isolates in 
Egypt.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventeen clinically recovered A. baumannii were 
identified and screened for their antimicrobial susceptibilities using VITEK-2 
system. Colistin susceptibility was evaluated using broth microdilution, and 
characterization of carbapenem/colistin resistance determinants was performed 
using whole-genome sequencing (Illumina MiSeq).
RESULTS: About 52.9% (9/17) were colistin-resistant. PCR results revealed that 
all isolates carried bla OXA-51-like genes, bla OXA-23-like was detected in 
82.3% (14/17) and bla NDM in 23.5% (4/17). Two isolates harboured bla GES-35 and 
bla OXA-23. Furthermore, genome analysis of seven isolates revealed six belonged 
to international clone 2 (IC2) while the remaining isolate was a singleton 
(ST158), representing a clone circulating in Mediterranean/Middle Eastern 
countries.
CONCLUSION: The emergence and high incidence of colistin-resistance among CRAB 
clinical isolates in Egypt are alarming because it further limits therapy 
options and requires prudent antimicrobial stewardship and stringent infection 
control measures. Whole-genome sequence analyses suggest that the resistance to 
colistin was associated with multiple mutations in the pmrCAB genes. The high 
incidence of the high-risk lineage IC2 harbouring bla OXA-23-like as well as bla 
NDM is also of concern.

Â© 2020 Fam et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S288865
PMCID: PMC7751577
PMID: 33364795

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.