1. Dis Model Mech. 2020 Nov 18;13(11):dmm046565. doi: 10.1242/dmm.046565.

Mouse models of myocardial infarction: comparing permanent ligation and 
ischaemia-reperfusion.

De Villiers C(1)(2), Riley PR(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX1 3PT, UK.
(2)British Heart Foundation Oxbridge Centre of Regenerative Medicine, University 
of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PT, UK.
(3)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX1 3PT, UK paul.riley@dpag.ox.ac.uk.

Myocardial infarction (MI) is a disease of major consequence in the modern 
world, causing permanent, irreversible damage to the heart. Survivors are at 
risk for developing further cardiovascular pathologies such as heart failure. 
Further study of MI injury is crucial to improve the understanding and treatment 
of the post-MI heart. The most commonly used model for MI in vivo is surgical 
ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD). There are two 
predominant approaches: permanent ligation (PL), where the LAD is permanently 
occluded with a suture, or ischaemia-reperfusion (IR), where the LAD is 
temporarily occluded before removing the suture to restore blood flow and tissue 
reperfusion. PL results in the majority of the area at risk becoming infarcted, 
leading to significant apoptotic cell death and a large scar. Conversely, IR 
salvages some of the area at risk; thus, the scar is smaller and includes 
reperfusion injury, an additional, albeit smaller, second wave of necrotic 
damage. PL may be a more appropriate model choice for studies of heart tissue 
injury and wound healing, owing to the larger, more consistent infarcts, while 
IR enables the study of reperfusion injury. Both are clinically relevant, and 
the choice of model depends upon the precise pre-clinical research questions to 
be addressed.

Â© 2020. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.046565
PMCID: PMC7687859
PMID: 33361140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsP.R.R. is co-founder of and 
an equity holder in OxStem Cardio, an Oxford University spin-out that seeks to 
exploit therapeutic strategies stimulating endogenous repair in cardiovascular 
regenerative medicine.