1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Dec 9;11:526266. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.526266. 
eCollection 2020.

Enzymatic Browning in Wheat Kernels Produces Symptom of Black Point Caused by 
Bipolaris sorokiniana.

Li Q(1), Xu K(1), Wang S(1), Li M(1), Jiang Y(1), Liang X(1), Niu J(1), Wang 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Research Centre for Wheat/National Key Laboratory of 
Wheat and Maize Crop Science, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, China.

To understand the blackening mechanism in black point diseased kernels, 
ultraviolet-visible light (UV-Vis) and Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) 
absorbance spectra of extracts made from the blackening parts of black 
point-affected (BP) kernels and the analogous part of black point-free (BPF) 
kernels were measured using susceptible wheat genotypes "PZSCL6" inoculated with 
Bipolaris sorokiniana (the dominant pathogen causing this disease). In addition, 
metabolite differences between BP and BPF kernels were identified by a method 
that combines gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and liquid 
chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Successively, symptoms 
of black point were produced in vitro. The results showed (i) the spectroscopic 
properties of the extracts from BP and BPF kernels were very similar, with an 
absorption peak at 235 nm and a small shoulder at 280-300 nm in both UV-Vis 
spectra and shared vibrations at 3400-3300, 2925 and 2852, 1512 and 1463, 1709, 
1220, 600-860 cm-1 in FT-IR spectra that are consistent with similar bonding 
characteristics. In contrast, spectroscopic properties of extracts from wheat 
kernels were different from those of synthetic melanin and extracellular and 
intracellular melanin produced by B. sorokiniana. (ii) Levels of 156 metabolites 
in BP kernels were different from those in BPF kernels. Among those 156 
metabolites, levels of phenolic acids (ferulic acid and p-coumaric acid), 11 
phenolamides compounds, and four benzoxazinone derivatives were significantly 
higher in BP kernels than in BPF kernels. (iii) Symptom of black point could be 
produced in vitro in wheat kernels with supplement of phenol substrate 
(catechol) and H2O2. This result proved that blackening substance causing 
symptom of black point was produced by enzymatic browning in wheat kernels 
instead of by B. sorokiniana.

Copyright Â© 2020 Li, Xu, Wang, Li, Jiang, Liang, Niu and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.526266
PMCID: PMC7756095
PMID: 33362724

Conflict of interest statement: Shanghai ProfLeader Biotech Co., Ltd. is 
acknowledged for assistance with the metabolomics experiments and data analysis. 
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.