1. Mitochondrial DNA B Resour. 2019 Jul 12;4(2):2266-2280. doi: 
10.1080/23802359.2019.1627921.

Frequency and spectrum of MT-TT variants associated with Leber's hereditary 
optic neuropathy in a Chinese cohort of subjects.

Lyu Y(1)(2), Xu M(1)(2), Chen J(1)(2), Ji Y(3), Guan MX(2)(3), Zhang J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Ophthalmology and Optometry, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(2)School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Attardi Institute of 
Mitochondrial Biomedicine, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)School of Medicine, Institute of Genetics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.

Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a maternally inherited eye 
disease. In our previous investigations, we have reported the spectrum and 
frequency of mitochondrial MT-ND1, MT-ND4 and MT-ND6 gene in Chinese LHON 
population. This study aimed to assess the molecular epidemiology of MT-TT 
mutations in Chinese families with LHON. A cohort of 352 Chinese Han probands 
lacking the known LHON-associated mtDNA mutations and 376 control subjects 
underwent molecular analysis of mtDNA. All variants were evaluated for 
evolutionary conservation, structural and functional consequences. Fifteen 
variants were identified in the MT-TT gene by mitochondrial genome analysis of 
LHON pedigrees, which was substantially higher than that of individuals from 
general Chinese populations. The incidences of the two known LHON-associated 
mutations, m.15927G > A and m.15951A > G, were 2.27% and 1.14%, respectively. 
Nine putative LHON-associated variants were identified in 20 probands, 
translated into 2.1% cases of this cohort. Moreover, mtDNAs in 41 probands 
carrying the MT-TT mutation(s) were widely dispersed among nine Eastern Asian 
haplogroups. Our results suggest that the MT-TT gene is a mutational hotspot for 
these 352 Chinese families lacking the known LHON-associated mutations. These 
data further showed the molecular epidemiology of MT-TT mutations in Chinese Han 
LHON pedigrees.

© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & 
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/23802359.2019.1627921
PMCID: PMC7687527
PMID: 33365504

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have no proprietary or commercial 
interest in any of materials discussed in this article.