1. Vaccines (Basel). 2020 Dec 23;9(1):4. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9010004.

Development of a Safe and Highly Efficient Inactivated Vaccine Candidate against 
Lumpy Skin Disease Virus.

Wolff J(1), Moritz T(1), Schlottau K(1), Hoffmann D(1), Beer M(1), Hoffmann 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal 
Research Institute for Animal Health, SÃ¼dufer 10, D-17493 Greifswald-Insel 
Riems, Germany.

Capripox virus (CaPV)-induced diseases (lumpy skin disease, sheeppox, goatpox) 
are described as the most serious pox diseases of livestock animals, and 
therefore are listed as notifiable diseases under guidelines of the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE). Until now, only live-attenuated vaccines 
are commercially available for the control of CaPV. Due to numerous potential 
problems after vaccination (e.g., loss of the disease-free status of the 
respective country, the possibility of vaccine virus shedding and transmission 
as well as the risk of recombination with field strains during natural 
outbreaks), the use of these vaccines must be considered carefully and is not 
recommended in CaPV-free countries. Therefore, innocuous and efficacious 
inactivated vaccines against CaPV would provide a great tool for control of 
these diseases. Unfortunately, most inactivated Capripox vaccines were reported 
as insufficient and protection seemed to be only short-lived. Nevertheless, a 
few studies dealing with inactivated vaccines against CaPV are published, giving 
evidence for good clinical protection against CaPV-infections. In our studies, a 
low molecular weight copolymer-adjuvanted vaccine formulation was able to induce 
sterile immunity in the respective animals after severe challenge infection. Our 
findings strongly support the possibility of useful inactivated vaccines against 
CaPV-infections, and indicate a marked impact of the chosen adjuvant for the 
level of protection.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9010004
PMCID: PMC7823700
PMID: 33374808

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.