1. Genes (Basel). 2020 Dec 22;12(1):1. doi: 10.3390/genes12010001.

Whole Exome Sequencing Identifies Novel De Novo Variants Interacting with Six 
Gene Networks in Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Kim N(1)(2), Kim KH(1)(2), Lim WJ(1)(2), Kim J(3), Kim SA(4), Yoo HJ(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Genome Editing Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 34141, Korea.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics, KRIBB School of Bioscience, Korea University of 
Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon 34141, Korea.
(3)Quantitative Biomedical Research Center, Department of Clinical Sciences, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Eulji University, Daejeon 
34824, Korea.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, 
Seoul 03080, Korea.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Gyeonggi 13620, Korea.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable condition caused by a 
combination of environmental and genetic factors such as de novo and inherited 
variants, as well as rare or common variants among hundreds of related genes. 
Previous genome-wide association studies have identified susceptibility genes; 
however, most ASD-associated genes remain undiscovered. This study aimed to 
examine rare de novo variants to identify genetic risk factors of ASD using 
whole exome sequencing (WES), functional characterization, and genetic network 
analyses of identified variants using Korean familial dataset. We recruited 
children with ASD and their biological parents. The clinical best estimate 
diagnosis of ASD was made according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-5TM), using comprehensive diagnostic instruments. The 
final analyses included a total of 151 individuals from 51 families. Variants 
were identified and filtered using the GATK Best Practices for bioinformatics 
analysis, followed by genome alignments and annotation to the reference genome 
assembly GRCh37 (liftover to GRCh38), and further annotated using dbSNP 154 
build databases. To evaluate allele frequencies of de novo variants, we used the 
dbSNP, gnomAD exome v2.1.1, and genome v3.0. We used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis 
(IPA, Qiagen) software to construct networks using all identified de novo 
variants with known autism-related genes to find probable relationships. We 
identified 36 de novo variants with potential relations to ASD; 27 missense, two 
silent, one nonsense, one splice region, one splice site, one 5' UTR, and one 
intronic SNV and two frameshift deletions. We identified six networks with 
functional relationships. Among the interactions between de novo variants, the 
IPA assay found that the NF-ÎºB signaling pathway and its interacting genes were 
commonly observed at two networks. The relatively small cohort size may affect 
the results of novel ASD genes with de novo variants described in our findings. 
We did not conduct functional experiments in this study. Because of the 
diversity and heterogeneity of ASD, the primary purpose of this study was to 
investigate probable causative relationships between novel de novo variants and 
known autism genes. Additionally, we based functional relationships with known 
genes on network analysis rather than on statistical analysis. We identified new 
variants that may underlie genetic factors contributing to ASD in Korean 
families using WES and genetic network analyses. We observed novel de novo 
variants that might be functionally linked to ASD, of which the variants 
interact with six genetic networks.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12010001
PMCID: PMC7822011
PMID: 33374967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.