1. Int J Cardiol. 2021 Apr 15;329:167-174. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2020.12.050.
Epub  2020 Dec 26.

Functional characterization of novel alpha-helical rod domain desmin (DES) 
pathogenic variants associated with dilated cardiomyopathy, atrioventricular 
block and a risk for sudden cardiac death.

Fischer B(1), Dittmann S(2), Brodehl A(3), Unger A(4), Stallmeyer B(1), Paul 
M(5), Seebohm G(1), Kayser A(1), Peischard S(1), Linke WA(4), Milting H(3), 
Schulze-Bahr E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genetics of Heart Disease (IfGH), Department of Cardiovascular 
Medicine, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(2)Institute for Genetics of Heart Disease (IfGH), Department of Cardiovascular 
Medicine, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany. Electronic address: 
sven.dittmann@ukmuenster.de.
(3)Erich and Hanna Klessmann Institute, Heart and Diabetes Center NRW, 
University Hospital of the Ruhr-University Bochum, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Physiology II, University of Muenster, Germany.
(5)Department of Cardiology I, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

Comment in
    Int J Cardiol. 2021 May 15;331:208-209. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2021.01.013.

BACKGROUND: Desmin is the major intermediate filament (IF) protein in human 
heart and skeletal muscle. So-called 'desminopathies' are disorders due to 
pathogenic variants in the DES gene and are associated with skeletal myopathies 
and/or various types of cardiomyopathies. So far, only a limited number of DES 
pathogenic variants have been identified and functionally characterized.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using a Sanger- and next generation sequencing (NGS) 
approach in patients with various types of cardiomyopathies, we identified two 
novel, non-synonymous missense DES variants: p.(Ile402Thr) and p.(Glu410Lys). 
Mutation carriers developed dilated (DCM) or arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy 
(ACM), and cardiac conduction disease, leading to spare out the exercise-induced 
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia; we moved this variant to data in brief. To 
investigate the functional impact of these four DES variants, transfection 
experiments using SW-13 and H9c2 cells with native and mutant desmin were 
performed and filament assembly was analyzed by confocal microscopy. The 
DES_p.(Ile402Thr) and DES_p.(Glu410Lys) cells showed filament assembly defects 
forming cytoplasmic desmin aggregates. Furthermore, immunohistochemical and 
ultrastructural analysis of myocardial tissue from mutation carriers with the 
DES_p.(Glu410Lys) pathogenic variant supported the in vitro results.
CONCLUSIONS: Our in vitro results supported the classification of 
DES_p.(Ile402Thr) and DES_p.(Glu410Lys) as novel pathogenic variants and 
demonstrated that the cardiac phenotypes associated with DES variants are 
diverse and cell culture experiments improve in silico analysis and genetic 
counseling because the pathogenicity of a variant can be clarified.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2020.12.050
PMID: 33373648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.