1. Mol Cells. 2020 Dec 31;43(12):1035-1045. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2020.0192.

Structural and Biochemical Characterization of the Two Drosophila Low Molecular 
Weight-Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases DARP and Primo-1.

Lee HS(1)(2), Mo Y(1)(2), Shin HC(1), Kim SJ(1), Ku B(1).

Author information:
(1)Disease Target Structure Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 34141, Korea.
(2)These authors contributed equally to this work.

The Drosophila genome contains four low molecular weightprotein tyrosine 
phosphatase (LMW-PTP) members: Primo-1, Primo-2, CG14297, and CG31469. The lack 
of intensive biochemical analysis has limited our understanding of these 
proteins. Primo-1 and CG31469 were previously classified as pseudophosphatases, 
but CG31469 was also suggested to be a putative protein arginine phosphatase. 
Herein, we present the crystal structures of CG31469 and Primo-1, which are the 
first Drosophila LMW-PTP structures. Structural analysis showed that the two 
proteins adopt the typical LMW-PTP fold and have a canonically arranged P-loop. 
Intriguingly, while Primo-1 is presumed to be a canonical LMW-PTP, CG31469 is 
unique as it contains a threonine residue at the fifth position of the P-loop 
motif instead of highly conserved isoleucine and a characteristically narrow 
active site pocket, which should facilitate the accommodation of 
phosphoarginine. Subsequent biochemical analysis revealed that Primo-1 and 
CG31469 are enzymatically active on phosphotyrosine and phosphoarginine, 
respectively, refuting their classification as pseudophosphatases. Collectively, 
we provide structural and biochemical data on two Drosophila proteins: Primo-1, 
the canonical LMW-PTP protein, and CG31469, the first investigated eukaryotic 
protein arginine phosphatase. We named CG31469 as DARP, which stands for 
Drosophila ARginine Phosphatase.

DOI: 10.14348/molcells.2020.0192
PMCID: PMC7772506
PMID: 33372666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors have no 
potential conflicts of interest to disclose.