1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Dec 18;99(51):e23573. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000023573.

The recent effects of small dose of folic acid on lipoprotein-associated 
phospholipase A2 and systolic blood pressure variability in coronary heart 
disease patients with hyperhomocysteinemia: A single-center prospective cohort 
study.

Liu X(1), Tang L(1), Fan W(1), Li A(1), Pang J(1), Feng Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology.
(2)Department of Physical Diagnostics, Yue Bei People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Shantou University, Shaoguan, Guangdong, China.

To Investigate the recent effects of small dose of folic acid on 
lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (LP-PLA2) and systolic blood pressure 
variability in coronary heart disease (CHD) patients with 
hyperhomocysteinemia.In this prospective cohort study, a total of 167 CHD 
patients with hyperhomocysteinemia were consecutively enrolled, and they were 
divided into Group A (without folic acid intervention, n = 99), Group B (with 
0.4 mg of folic acid intervention, n = 34), Group C (0.8 mg of folic acid 
intervention, n = 34). General information, fasting blood glucose, and blood 
lipid, folic acid, homocysteine, Lp-PLA2, and blood pressure variability were 
compared among 3 groups. The above indicators were reviewed after 3 months of 
treatment.There were no statistically significant differences of age, gender, 
blood pressure, incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus, fasting blood glucose, 
folic acid, homocysteine, Lp-PLA2, total cholesterol, 3 acyl glycerin, 
apolipoprotein B, lipoprotein (a), high density lipoprotein cholesterol, and low 
density lipoprotein cholesterol were found among 3 groups (P > .05); however, 
after being treated for 3 months, there was statistically significant difference 
in folic acid among 3 groups (P < .05), there was statistically significant 
difference in apolipoprotein A between Group A and Group B (t = 0.505, 
P = .039), and also between Group A and Group C (t = 0.052, P = .017). There 
were statistically significant differences in Lp-PLA2 (t = 24.320, P = .016) and 
systolic blood pressure variability (t = 0.154, P = .018) between Group A and 
Group C.For CHD patients with hyperhomocysteinemia, the higher dose (0.8 mg) of 
folic acid supplement was beneficial for increasing the apolipoprotein A, 
reducing the Lp-PLA2, and improving the systolic blood pressure variation, which 
might help to improve the prognosis in these patients.

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000023573
PMCID: PMC7748170
PMID: 33371087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.