1. Epidemiol Infect. 2021 Jan 5;149:e27. doi: 10.1017/S0950268820003167.

Efficacy of artemisinin-lumefantrine for treatment of uncomplicated malaria 
after more than a decade of its use in Kenya.

Kishoyian G(1), Njagi ENM(2), Orinda GO(2), Kimani FT(3), Thiongo K(3), 
Matoke-Muhia D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Kenya Medical Training College, 
P.O. Box2268-40100, Kisumu, Kenya.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Kenyatta University, P.O.BOX 
43844-00100, Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)Centre for Biotechnology Research and Development, Kenya Medical Research 
Institute, P.O. Box 54840-00200, Nairobi, Kenya.

The resistance of Plasmodium falciparum to antimalarial drugs remains a major 
impairment in the treatment and eradication of malaria globally. Following the 
introduction of artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT), there have been 
reports of delayed parasite clearance. In Kenya, artemether-lumefantrine (AL) is 
the recommended first-line treatment of uncomplicated malaria. This study sought 
to assess the efficacy of AL after a decade of use as the preferred method of 
managing malarial infections in Kenya. We assessed clinical and parasitological 
responses of children under 5 years between May and November 2015 in Chulaimbo 
sub-County, Kisumu, Kenya. Patients aged between 6 and 60 months with 
uncomplicated P. falciparum mono-infection, confirmed through microscopy, were 
enrolled in the study. The patients were admitted at the facility for 3 days, 
treated with a standard dose of AL, and then put under observation for the next 
28 days for the assessment of clinical and parasitological responses. Of the 90 
patients enrolled, 14 were lost to follow-up while 76 were followed through to 
the end of the study period. Seventy-five patients (98.7%) cleared the 
parasitaemia within a period of 48 h while one patient (1.3%) cleared on day 3. 
There was 100% adequate clinical and parasitological response. All the patients 
cleared the parasites on day 3 and there were no re-infections observed during 
the stated follow-up period. This study, therefore, concludes that AL is highly 
efficacious in clearing P. falciparum parasites in children aged ≥6 and ≤60 
months. The study, however, underscores the need for continued monitoring of the 
drug to forestall both gradual ineffectiveness and possible resistance to the 
drug in all target users.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268820003167
PMCID: PMC8057502
PMID: 33397548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.