1. Theranostics. 2021 Jan 1;11(2):491-505. doi: 10.7150/thno.51215. eCollection 
2021.

Inter and intra-tumor somatostatin receptor 2 heterogeneity influences peptide 
receptor radionuclide therapy response.

Feijtel D(1)(2), Doeswijk GN(1), Verkaik NS(2)(3), Haeck JC(1), Chicco D(4), 
Angotti C(4), Konijnenberg MW(1), de Jong M(1), Nonnekens J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Oncode Institute, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Advanced Accelerator Applications SA, a Novartis Company, Erasmus MC 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Patients with neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) can be treated with peptide receptor 
radionuclide therapy (PRRT). Here, the somatostatin analogue octreotate 
radiolabeled with lutetium-177 is targeted to NET cells by binding to the 
somatostatin receptor subtype 2 (SST2). During radioactive decay, DNA damage is 
induced, leading to NET cell death. Although the therapy proves to be effective, 
mortality rates remain high. To appropriately select more optimal treatment 
strategies, it is essential to first better understand the radiobiological 
responses of tumor cells to PRRT. Methods: We analyzed PRRT induced 
radiobiological responses in SST2 expressing cells and xenografted mice using 
SPECT/MRI scanning and histological and molecular analyses. We measured 
[177Lu]Lu-DOTA-TATE uptake and performed analyses to visualize induction of DNA 
damage, cell death and other cellular characteristics. Results: The highest 
accumulation of radioactivity was measured in the tumor and kidneys. PRRT 
induced DNA damage signaling and repair in a time-dependent manner. We observed 
intra-tumor heterogeneity of DNA damage and apoptosis, which was not attributed 
to proliferation or bioavailability. We found a strong correlation between high 
DNA damage levels and high SST2 expression. PRRT elicited a different 
therapeutic response between models with different SST2 expression levels. 
Heterogeneous SST2 expression levels were also confirmed in patient NETs. 
Conclusion: Heterogeneous SST2 expression levels within NETs cause 
differentially induced DNA damage levels, influence recurrent tumor phenotypes 
and impact the therapeutic response in different models and potentially in 
patients. Our results contribute to a better understanding of PRRT effects, 
which might impact future therapeutic outcome of NET patients.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.51215
PMCID: PMC7738856
PMID: 33391488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Part of this research was 
sponsored by Advanced Accelerator Applications, a Novartis Company.