1. Georgian Med News. 2020 Nov;(308):63-67.

[MODEL FOR PREDICTING THE PROGRESSION OF LIVER FIBROSIS BASED ON BIOCHEMICAL AND 
GENETIC CRITERIA IN PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC HEPATITIS C].

[Article in Russian]

Usychenko K(1), Usychenko O(1).

Author information:
(1)Odessa National Medical University, Department of Infectious Diseases, 
Ukraine.

Parenteral viral hepatitis is one of the most pressing medical and social 
problems, both in Ukraine and in the world, due to its high prevalence, the 
formation of chronic liver diseases, high risk of developing cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. The purpose of the study was to investigate the 
relationship between IL-4 (rs2243250), IL-10 (rs1800896) and TNFα (rs1800620), 
SMAD 7 (rs4939827) gene polymorphisms, and the degree of liver fibrosis to 
create a prognostic scale. A pilot study included 100 patients with chronic 
hepatitis C. Non-invasive Fibrotest, an alternative to puncture liver biopsy, 
was used to assess the degree of morphological changes. It has been suggested 
that the genotypes of СС IL-4 (rs2243250), GG TNFα (rs1800620), СС SMAD family 
member 7 (rs4939827) and have a protective effect on the course of chronic 
hepatitis C, as they are established in patients with HCV with less fibrosis. 
Homozygous genotypes of TT IL-4 (rs2243250), AA TNFα (rs1800620), TT SMAD family 
member 7 (rs4939827) have a pro-fibrotic effect on the course of chronic 
hepatitis C, as they are established in patients with high-fibrosis HCV. To 
create a prognostic scale, the projective and profibrotic genotypes of each 
individual patient were summarized. To simplify the summation, coding was 
performed: each pro-fibrotic genotype was assigned a -1 point, each protective 
one a +1 mark, and then all genotype variants were summed together. The higher 
the score in a patient, the lower the likelihood of developing high-grade 
fibrosis. Comprehensive assessment of allelic gene polymorphism and degree of 
liver fibrosis allows to estimate with high degree of certainty the individual 
risk of disease progression, to predict the course of the disease in the early 
stages and to plan the tactics of patient management.

PMID: 33395643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]