1. Mol Psychiatry. 2021 Jun;26(6):2200-2211. doi: 10.1038/s41380-020-00989-9.
Epub  2021 Jan 4.

Long tracks of homozygosity predict the severity of alcohol use disorders in an 
American Indian population.

Peng Q(1), Ehlers CL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, 
92037, USA. qpeng@scripps.edu.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, 
92037, USA. cindye@scripps.edu.

Runs of homozygosity (ROH) arise when an individual inherits two copies of the 
same haplotype segment. While ROH are ubiquitous across human populations, 
Native populations-with shared parental ancestry arising from isolation and 
endogamy-can carry a substantial enrichment for ROH. We have been investigating 
genetic and environmental risk factors for alcohol use disorders (AUD) in a 
group of American Indians (AI) who have higher rates of AUD than the general U. 
S. population. Here we explore whether ROH might be associated with incidence 
and severity of AUD in this admixed AI population (n = 742) that live on 
geographically contiguous reservations, using low-coverage whole genome 
sequences. We have found that the genomic regions in the ROH that were 
identified in this population had significantly elevated American Indian 
heritage compared with the rest of the genome. Increased ROH abundance and ROH 
burden are likely risk factors for AUD severity in this AI population, 
especially in those diagnosed with severe and moderate AUD. The association 
between ROH and AUD was mostly driven by ROH of moderate lengths between 1 and 
2 Mb. An ROH island on chromosome 1p32.3 and a rare ROH pool on chromosome 
3p12.3 were found to be significantly associated with AUD severity. They contain 
genes involved in lipid metabolism, oxidative stress and inflammatory responses; 
and OSBPL9 was found to reside on the consensus part of the ROH island. These 
data demonstrate that ROH are associated with risk for AUD severity in this AI 
population.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited part 
of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-020-00989-9
PMCID: PMC8254832
PMID: 33398086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.