1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2021 Jan 6;21(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s12876-020-01568-6.

Non-celiac wheat sensitivity: rationality and irrationality of a gluten-free 
diet in individuals affected with non-celiac disease: a review.

Sergi C(1), Villanacci V(2), Carroccio A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Stollery Children's 
Hospital, University of Alberta, 8440 112 St., Edmonton, AB, T6G 2B7, Canada. 
sergi@ualberta.ca.
(2)Institute of Pathology, ASST-Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Internal Medicine Unit, "V Cervello Hospital", Department of Health Promotion 
Sciences, Maternal and Infant Care, Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties 
(PROMISE), University of Palermo, 90129, Palermo, Italy.

Non-celiac gluten or wheat sensitivity (NCWS) is a "clinical entity induced by 
the ingestion of wheat leading to intestinal and/or extraintestinal symptoms 
that improve once the wheat-containing foodstuff is removed from the diet, and 
celiac disease and wheat allergy have been excluded". This mostly accepted 
definition raises several points that remain controversial on this condition. In 
the present review, the authors summarize the most recent advances in the clinic 
and research on NCWS through an accurate analysis of different studies. We 
screened PubMed, Medline, Embase, and Scopus using the keywords "non-celiac 
gluten sensitivity", "non-celiac wheat sensitivity", and "diagnosis". We would 
like to emphasize two main points, including (A) the controversial clinical and 
etiological aspects in different trials and experiences with particular 
attention to the Salerno criteria for the diagnosis of NCWS and (B) the 
histological aspects. The etiology of NCWS remains controversial, and the 
relationship with irritable bowel syndrome is obscure. Histologically, the 
duodenal mucosa may show a variable pattern from unremarkable to a slight 
increase in the number of T lymphocytes in the superficial epithelium of villi. 
The endorsement of this disease is based on a positive response to a gluten-free 
diet for a limited period, followed by the reappearance of symptoms after gluten 
challenge. The Salerno expert criteria may help to diagnose NCWS accurately. 
Social media and inaccurate interpretation of websites may jeopardize the 
diagnostic process if individuals self-label as gluten intolerant.

DOI: 10.1186/s12876-020-01568-6
PMCID: PMC7788993
PMID: 33407153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.