1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Jan 4;13(1):137. doi: 10.3390/cancers13010137.

The Evolutionary Landscape of Treatment for BRAF(V600E) Mutant Metastatic 
Colorectal Cancer.

Mauri G(1)(2), Bonazzina E(1), Amatu A(1), Tosi F(1), Bencardino K(1), Gori 
V(1)(2), Massihnia D(1)(2), Cipani T(1), Spina F(1), Ghezzi S(1), Siena S(1)(2), 
Sartore-Bianchi A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Niguarda Cancer Center, Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, 20162 Milano, 
Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Oncologia ed Emato-Oncologia, Universit√† degli Studi di 
Milano, 20122 Milano, Italy.

The BRAFV600E mutation is found in 8-10% of metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) 
patients and it is recognized as a poor prognostic factor with a median overall 
survival inferior to 20 months. At present, besides immune checkpoint inhibitors 
(CPIs) for those tumors with concomitant MSI-H status, recommended treatment 
options include cytotoxic chemotherapy + anti-VEGF in the first line setting, 
and a combination of EGFR and a BRAF inhibitor (cetuximab plus encorafenib) in 
second line. However, even with the latter targeted approach, acquired 
resistance limits the possibility of more than an incremental benefit and 
survival is still dismal. In this review, we discuss current treatment options 
for this subset of patients and perform a systematic review of ongoing clinical 
trials. Overall, we identified six emerging strategies: targeting MAPK pathway 
(monotherapy or combinations), targeting MAPK pathway combined with cytotoxic 
agents, intensive cytotoxic regimen combinations, targeted agents combined with 
CPIs, oxidative stress induction, and cytotoxic agents combined with 
antiangiogenic drugs and CPIs. In the future, the integration of new therapeutic 
strategies targeting key players in the BRAFV600E oncogenic pathways with 
current treatment approach based on cytotoxic chemotherapy and surgery is likely 
to redefine the treatment landscape of these CRC patients.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13010137
PMCID: PMC7795863
PMID: 33406649

Conflict of interest statement: Salvatore Siena is advisory board member for 
Amgen, Bayer, BMS, CheckmAb, Clovis, Daiichi-Sankyo, Merck, Roche-Genentech, and 
Seattle Genetics. Andrea Sartore-Bianchi is advisory board member for Amgen, 
Bayer, Sanofi and Servier. The other authors declare no competing interests.