1. Virus Evol. 2020 Dec 11;6(2):veaa092. doi: 10.1093/ve/veaa092. eCollection
2020  Jul.

Mapping the evolutionary landscape of Zika virus infection in immunocompromised 
mice.

Johnson KEE(1), Noval MG(2), Rangel MV(2), De Jesus E(2), Geber A(1), Schuster 
S(2), Cadwell K(2), Ghedin E(1), Stapleford KA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Genomics & Systems Biology, New York 
University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10016, USA.

The fundamental basis of how arboviruses evolve in nature and what regulates the 
adaptive process remain unclear. To address this problem, we established a Zika 
virus (ZIKV) vector-borne transmission system in immunocompromised mice to study 
the evolutionary characteristics of ZIKV infection. Using this system, we 
defined factors that influence the evolutionary landscape of ZIKV infection and 
show that transmission route and specific organ microenvironments impact viral 
diversity and defective viral genome production. In addition, we identified in 
mice the emergence of ZIKV mutants previously seen in natural infections, 
including variants present in currently circulating Asian and American strains, 
as well as mutations unique to the mouse infections. With these studies, we have 
established an insect-to-mouse transmission model to study ZIKV evolution in 
vivo. We also defined how organ microenvironments and infection route impact the 
ZIKV evolutionary landscape, providing a deeper understanding of the factors 
that regulate arbovirus evolution and emergence.

Â© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/veaa092
PMCID: PMC7772475
PMID: 33408879