1. Stem Cells Dev. 2021 Feb;30(4):177-189. doi: 10.1089/scd.2021.0001. Epub 2021 
Feb 8.

Rewinding Extinction in the Northern White Rhinoceros: Genetically Diverse 
Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Bank for Genetic Rescue.

Korody ML(1)(2), Ford SM(1), Nguyen TD(1)(2), Pivaroff CG(2), Valiente-Alandi 
I(1), Peterson SE(2), Ryder OA(1), Loring JF(2).

Author information:
(1)San Diego Zoo Global, Beckman Center for Conservation Research, Escondido, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Scripps Research, La Jolla, California, 
USA.

Extinction rates are rising, and current conservation technologies may not be 
adequate for reducing species losses. Future conservation efforts may be aided 
by the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from highly 
endangered species. Generation of a set of iPSCs from multiple members of a 
species can capture some of the dwindling genetic diversity of a disappearing 
species. We generated iPSCs from fibroblasts cryopreserved in the Frozen ZooÂ®: 
nine genetically diverse individuals of the functionally extinct northern white 
rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum cottoni) and two from the closely related 
southern white rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum simum). We used a nonintegrating 
Sendai virus reprogramming method and developed analyses to confirm the cells' 
pluripotency and differentiation potential. This work is the first step of a 
long-term interdisciplinary plan to apply assisted reproduction techniques to 
the conservation of this highly endangered species. Advances in iPSC 
differentiation may enable generation of gametes in vitro from deceased and 
nonreproductive individuals that could be used to repopulate the species.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2021.0001
PMCID: PMC7891310
PMID: 33406994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.L.K., S.M.F., T.D.N., I.V.A., S.E.P., and 
O.A.R. have no disclosures. J.F.L. is a founder and has stock options in Aspen 
Neuroscience. C.G.P. has stock options in Aspen Neuroscience.