1. JNCI Cancer Spectr. 2020 Oct 26;4(6):pkaa094. doi: 10.1093/jncics/pkaa094. 
eCollection 2020 Dec.

Prevalence of Germline Pathogenic and Likely Pathogenic Variants in Patients 
With Second Breast Cancers.

Yao K KA(1), Clifford J(2), Li S(2), LaDuca H(2), Hulick P(3), Gutierrez S(2), 
Black MH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USA.
(2)Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Center for Medical Genetics, NorthShore University 
HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Few studies have examined gene-specific associations with 
contralateral and/or second breast cancer (SBC).
METHODS: The frequency of pathogenic and likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants in 
clinically actionable genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, PTEN, TP53, CHEK2, CDH1, ATM, PALB2, 
NBN, and NF1) was compared between women with a primary breast cancer (PBC) and 
SBC who underwent multigene panel testing at a single diagnostic testing 
laboratory. Race- and ethnicity-specific logistic regression burden tests 
adjusted for age at diagnosis of first breast cancer, histology, presence of 
first- or second-degree relatives with breast cancer, and prior testing for 
BRCA1/2 genes were used to test for associations with SBC. All statistical tests 
were 2-sided.
RESULTS: The study was comprised of 75 550 women with PBC and 7728 with SBC. 
Median time between breast cancers for SBC was 11 (interquartile range = 6-17) 
years. Restricting to women tested for all actionable genes (n = 60 310), there 
were 4231 (7.8%) carriers of P/LP variants in actionable genes among the 
controls (PBC) compared with 652 (11.1%) women with SBC (P< .001). Among 
Caucasians, exclusive of Ashkenazi Jewish women, those carrying a P/LP variant 
in a clinically actionable gene were 1.44 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.30 
to 1.60) times as likely to have SBC than noncarriers, after accounting for 
potential confounders. Among African American and Hispanic women, a P/LP variant 
in a clinically actionable gene was 1.88 (95% CI = 1.36 to 2.56) and 1.66 (9% CI 
= 1.02 to 2.58) times as likely to be associated with SBC, respectively (P < 
.001 and P = .03).
CONCLUSION: Women with P/LP variants in breast cancer predisposition genes are 
more likely to have SBC than noncarriers. Prospective studies are needed confirm 
these findings.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/jncics/pkaa094
PMCID: PMC7771422
PMID: 33409458