1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2020 Dec 22;7:605669. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2020.605669. 
eCollection 2020.

Association of Soluble Suppression of Tumorigenesis 2 (sST2) With Platelet 
Activation, Monocyte Tissue Factor and Ischemic Outcomes Following Angioplasty 
and Stenting.

Stojkovic S(1), Demyanets S(2), Kopp CW(1), Hengstenberg C(1), Wojta J(1)(3)(4), 
Eichelberger B(5), Panzer S(5), Gremmel T(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Core Facilities, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cardiovascular Research, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Blood Group Serology and Transfusion Medicine, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine I, Cardiology and Intensive Care Medicine, 
Landesklinikum Mistelbach-Gänserndorf, Mistelbach, Austria.

Background: Peripheral artery disease (PAD) patients undergoing infrainguinal 
angioplasty with stenting suffer high rates of target lesion restenosis and 
ischemic events. Blood-based prognostic markers in these patients are currently 
limited. The IL-33/ST2-system is involved in atherothrombosis. Soluble ST2 has 
been proposed as a biomarker in patients with cardiovascular disease. Aim: To 
investigate the association of sST2 with platelet activation and monocyte tissue 
factor (TF) in 316 patients undergoing elective angioplasty and stenting for 
cardiovascular disease, and its predictive value for ischemic outcomes following 
infrainguinal angioplasty with stent implantation in 104 PAD patients within 
this cohort. Methods and Results: Circulating levels of sST2, platelet surface 
P-selectin, monocyte TF expression as well as soluble P-selectin were determined 
in 316 consecutive patients on dual antiplatelet therapy following angioplasty 
and stenting. sST2 was independently associated with soluble P-selectin (B = 
6.4, 95% CI 2.0-10.7, p = 0.004) and TF expression (B = 0.56, 95% CI 0.02-1.1, p 
= 0.041) but not with platelet surface P-selectin (B = 0.1, 95% CI -0.1-0.3, p = 
0.307) after adjustment for age, sex, clinical risk factors and inflammatory 
parameters. During the follow-up of 24 months, the primary endpoint occurred in 
41 of 104 PAD patients (39.4%). However, circulating levels of sST2 did not 
predict the primary endpoint in PAD patients (HR 1.1, 95% CI 0.76-1.71, p = 
0.527). Conclusion: sST2 is associated with soluble P-selectin and monocyte TF 
expression in atherosclerosis but not with ischemic outcomes following 
infrainguinal angioplasty with stent implantation for PAD.

Copyright © 2020 Stojkovic, Demyanets, Kopp, Hengstenberg, Wojta, Eichelberger, 
Panzer and Gremmel.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2020.605669
PMCID: PMC7782352
PMID: 33415128

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.