1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2020 Dec 17;19:145-152. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2020.12.015. eCollection 2021.

Crystal structure of AmpC BER and molecular docking lead to the discovery of 
broad inhibition activities of halisulfates against β-lactamases.

Jeong BG(1), Na JH(1), Bae DW(1), Park SB(1), Lee HS(2), Cha SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry & Nanoscience, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 03760, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Marine Natural Products Chemistry Laboratory, Korea Institute of Ocean 
Science and Technology, Busan 49111, Republic of Korea.

AmpC BER is an extended-spectrum (ES) class C β-lactamase with a two-amino-acid 
insertion in the H10 helix region located at the boundary of the active site 
compared with its narrow spectrum progenitor. The crystal structure of the 
wild-type AmpC BER revealed that the insertion widens the active site by 
restructuring the flexible H10 helix region, which is the structural basis for 
its ES activity. Besides, two sulfates originated from the crystallization 
solution were observed in the active site. The presence of sulfate-binding 
subsites, together with the recognition of ring-structured chemical scaffolds by 
AmpC BER, led us to perform in silico molecular docking experiments with 
halisulfates, natural products isolated from marine sponge. Inspired by the snug 
fit of halisulfates within the active site, we demonstrated that halisulfate 3 
and 5 significantly inhibit ES class C β-lactamases. Especially, halisulfate 5 
is comparable to avibactam in terms of inhibition efficiency; it inhibits the 
nitrocefin-hydrolyzing activity of AmpC BER with a Ki value of 5.87 μM in a 
competitive manner. Furthermore, halisulfate 5 displayed moderate and weak 
inhibition activities against class A and class B/D enzymes, respectively. The 
treatment of β-lactamase inhibitors (BLIs) in combination with β-lactam 
antibiotics is a working strategy to cope with infections by pathogens producing 
ES β-lactamases. Considering the emergence and dissemination of enzymes 
insensitive to clinically-used BLIs, the broad inhibition spectrum and 
structural difference of halisulfates would be used to develop novel BLIs that 
can escape the bacterial resistance mechanism mediated by β-lactamases.

© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Research Network of 
Computational and Structural Biotechnology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2020.12.015
PMCID: PMC7773887
PMID: 33425247

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.