1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2020 Dec 7;7:602251. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2020.602251. 
eCollection 2020.

Safety and Efficacy of Adding Dapagliflozin to Furosemide in Type 2 Diabetic 
Patients With Decompensated Heart Failure and Reduced Ejection Fraction.

Ibrahim A(1), Ghaleb R(1), Mansour H(1), Hanafy A(1), Mahmoud NM(1), Abdelfatah 
Elsharef M(1), Kamal Salama M(1), Elsaughier SM(1), Abdel-Wahid L(2), Embarek 
Mohamed M(3), Ibrahim AK(4), Abdel-Galeel A(5).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology Department, Aswan University, Aswan, Egypt.
(2)Internal Medicine Department, Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt.
(3)Microbiology and Immunology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut 
University, Assiut, Egypt.
(4)Community Medicine Department, Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt.
(5)Cardiovascular Medicine Department, Assiut University Heart Hospital, Assiut 
University, Assiut, Egypt.

Background: Heart failure is the most common cause of hospitalization in elderly 
patients. It is likely that many of the mechanisms that contribute to reductions 
in systolic and diastolic function, seen in diabetic patients, place them at an 
increased risk of heart failure. Diuretic therapy, especially loop diuretics, is 
the usual way of managing congestion, particularly in volume-overloaded 
patients. Little is known about the beneficial effect of dapagliflozin when 
added to loop diuretics in managing patients with decompensated heart failure. 
Aim: To assess the effect of the addition of dapagliflozin to furosemide in 
managing decompensated patient with heart failure and reduced left ventricular 
ejection fraction in terms of weight loss and dyspnea improvement. Patients and 
Methods: The study included 100 type 2 diabetic patients who were admitted with 
decompensated heart failure. The study population was randomly divided into two 
arms. Serum electrolytes and kidney functions were followed up during their 
hospital stay. Results: With dapagliflozin, there was a statistically 
significant difference between the two groups regarding the change in body 
weight and body mass index. The diuresis parameters including urine output, 
total fluid loss, and fluid balance also showed a statistically significant 
difference in favor of the use of dapagliflozin, with no significant change in 
serum potassium or kidney functions. There was significant improvement in 
patient-reported dyspnea scores with the use of dapagliflozin. Conclusions: 
Dapagliflozin may provide a new drug option in the treatment of heart failure 
especially among vulnerable group of diabetics. It had no remarkable effects on 
serum potassium level and kidney functions. Clinical Trial Registration: 
www.ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier: NCT04385589.

Copyright Â© 2020 Ibrahim, Ghaleb, Mansour, Hanafy, Mahmoud, Abdelfatah Elsharef, 
Kamal Salama, Elsaughier, Abdel-Wahid, Embarek Mohamed, Ibrahim and 
Abdel-Galeel.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2020.602251
PMCID: PMC7793915
PMID: 33426003

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.