1. Front Genet. 2020 Dec 23;11:608517. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.608517.
eCollection  2020.

Association of Fibroblast Growth Factor 23 With Ischemic Stroke and Its 
Subtypes: A Mendelian Randomization Study.

Zheng K(1), Lin L(1)(2), Cui P(1), Liu T(3), Chen L(4), Yang C(1), Jiang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin Medical 
University General Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(2)School of Brain Science and Brain Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(4)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Tianjin Medical 
University General Hospital, Tianjin, China.

Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), which is involved in the regulation of 
vitamin D, is an emerging independent risk factor for cardiovascular diseases. 
Previous studies have demonstrated a positive association between FGF23 and 
stroke. In this study, we aimed to assess the association of FGF23 with ischemic 
stroke and its subtypes by applying a Mendelian randomization (MR) framework. 
Five genetic variants obtained from a genome-wide association study involving 
16,624 European subjects were used as valid instruments of circulating FGF23 
levels. MR was applied to infer the causality of FGF23 levels and the risk of 
ischemic stroke using data from the MEGASTROKE consortium. Subsequently, several 
MR analyses, including inverse-variance weighted meta-analysis, MR-Egger, 
weighted median estimate (WME), MR Pleiotropy Residual Sum and Outlier were 
performed. The heterogeneity test analysis, including Cochran's Q, I 2 test and 
leave-one-out analysis were also applied. Furthermore, potential 
horizontal/vertical pleiotropy was assessed. Lastly, the power of MR analysis 
was tested. Three validated variants were found to be associated with 
circulating FGF23 levels and were used for further investigation. We found that 
high expression level of FGF23 was not associated with any ischemic stroke. 
However, a causal association between genetically predicted FGF23 levels and the 
risk of large-artery atherosclerotic stroke (LAS) was significant, with an odds 
ratio of 1.74 (95% confidence interval = 1.08-2.81) per standard deviation 
increase in circulating FGF23 levels. Our findings provide support for the 
causal association between FGF23 and LAS, and therefore, offer potential 
therapeutic targets for LAS. The specific roles of FGF23 in LAS and associated 
molecules require further investigation.

Copyright Â© 2020 Zheng, Lin, Cui, Liu, Chen, Yang and Jiang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.608517
PMCID: PMC7785587
PMID: 33424930

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.