1. Chem Biodivers. 2021 Feb;18(2):e2000883. doi: 10.1002/cbdv.202000883. Epub
2021  Jan 15.

Investigation of the Effects of Primary Structure Modifications within the RRE 
Motif on the Conformation of Synthetic Bovine Herpesvirus 1-Encoded UL49.5 
Protein Fragments.

Karska N(1)(2), Graul M(2), Sikorska E(1), Ślusarz MJ(1), Zhukov I(3)(4), 
Kasprzykowski F(1), Kubiś A(1), Lipińska AD(2), Rodziewicz-Motowidło S(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdańsk, 80-308, Gdańsk, Poland.
(2)Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Gdańsk and Medical 
University of Gdańsk, 80-307, Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Pawińskiego 5a, 02-106, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)NanoBioMedical Center, Adam Mickiewicz University, Umultowska 85, 61-614, 
Poznań, Poland.

Herpesviruses are the most prevalent viruses that infect the human and animal 
body. They can escape a host immune response in numerous ways. One way is to 
block the TAP complex so that viral peptides, originating from proteasomal 
degradation, cannot be transported to the endoplasmic reticulum. As a result, a 
reduced number of MHC class I molecules appear on the surface of infected cells 
and, thus, the immune system is not efficiently activated. BoHV-1-encoded UL49.5 
protein is one such TAP transporter inhibitor. This protein binds to TAP in such 
a way that its N-terminal fragment interacts with the loops of the TAP complex, 
and the C-terminus stimulates proteasomal degradation of TAP. Previous studies 
have indicated certain amino acid residues, especially the RRE(9-11) motif, 
within the helical structure of the UL49.5 N-terminal fragment, as being crucial 
to the protein's activity. In this work, we investigated the effects of 
modifications within the RRE region on the spatial structure of the UL49.5 
N-terminal fragment. The introduced RRE(9-11) variations were designed to 
abolish or stabilize the structure of the α-helix and, consequently, to increase 
or decrease protein activity compared to the wild type. The terminal structure 
of the peptides was established using circular dichroism (CD), 2D nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR), and molecular dynamics (MD) in membrane-mimetic or 
membrane-model environments. Our structural results show that in the 
RRE(9-11)AAA and E11G peptides the helical structure has been stabilized, 
whereas for the RRE(9-11)GGG peptide, as expected, the helix structure has 
partially unfolded compared to the native structure. These RRE modifications, in 
the context of the entire UL49.5 proteins, slightly altered their biological 
activity in human cells.

© 2021 Wiley-VHCA AG, Zurich, Switzerland.

DOI: 10.1002/cbdv.202000883
PMID: 33427369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]