1. Transplant Direct. 2021 Jan 7;7(2):e650. doi: 10.1097/TXD.0000000000001102. 
eCollection 2021 Feb.

Precision Medicine in Kidney Transplantation: Just Hype or a Realistic Hope?

Nobakht E(1), Jagadeesan M(1), Paul R(1), Bromberg J(2), Dadgar S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, George 
Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD.
(3)Personalized Medicine Care Diagnostics Laboratory (PMCDx), Inc., Germantown, 
MD.

Desirable outcomes including rejection- and infection-free kidney 
transplantation are not guaranteed despite current strategies for 
immunosuppression and using prophylactic antimicrobial medications. Graft 
survival depends on factors beyond human leukocyte antigen matching such as the 
level of immunosuppression, infections, and management of other comorbidities. 
Risk stratification of transplant patients based on predisposing genetic 
modifiers and applying precision pharmacotherapy may help improving the 
transplant outcomes. Unlike certain fields such as oncology in which consistent 
attempts are being carried out to move away from the "error and trial approach," 
transplant medicine is lagging behind in implementing personalized 
immunosuppressive therapy. The need for maintaining a precarious balance between 
underimmunosuppression and overimmunosuppression coupled with adverse effects of 
medications calls for a gene-based guidance for precision pharmacotherapy in 
transplantation. Technologic advances in molecular genetics have led to 
increased accessibility of genetic tests at a reduced cost and have set the 
stage for widespread use of gene-based therapies in clinical care. 
Evidence-based guidelines available for precision pharmacotherapy have been 
proposed, including guidelines from Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation 
Consortium, the Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base National Institute of General 
Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health, and the US Food and Drug 
Administration. In this review, we discuss the implications of pharmacogenetics 
and potential role for genetic variants-based risk stratification in kidney 
transplantation. A single score that provides overall genetic risk, a polygenic 
risk score, can be achieved by combining of allograft rejection/loss-associated 
variants carried by an individual and integrated into practice after clinical 
validation.

Copyright Â© 2020 The Author(s). Transplantation Direct. Published by Wolters 
Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/TXD.0000000000001102
PMCID: PMC7793397
PMID: 33437865

Conflict of interest statement: S.D. is the clinical laboratory director of 
PMCDx, Inc. The other authors declare no conflicts of interest.