1. Sci Rep. 2021 Jan 12;11(1):840. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-80747-7.

Effect of biomass immobilization and reduced graphene oxide on the microbial 
community changes and nitrogen removal at low temperatures.

Banach-Wiśniewska A(1), Tomaszewski M(2), Hellal MS(3), Ziembińska-Buczyńska 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Biotechnology Department, Faculty of Power and Environmental 
Engineering, Silesian University of Technology, Akademicka 2, 44-100, Gliwice, 
Poland.
(2)Environmental Biotechnology Department, Faculty of Power and Environmental 
Engineering, Silesian University of Technology, Akademicka 2, 44-100, Gliwice, 
Poland. mariusz.tomaszewski@polsl.pl.
(3)Water Pollution Research Department, National Research Centre, 33 El-Behooth 
St., Dokki, Cairo, Egypt.

The slow growth rate and high optimal temperatures for the anaerobic ammonium 
oxidation (anammox) bacteria are significant limitations of the anammox 
processes application in the treatment of mainstream of wastewater entering 
wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). In this study, we investigate the nitrogen 
removal and microbial community changes in sodium alginate (SA) and sodium 
alginate-reduced graphene oxide (SA-RGO) carriers, depending on the process 
temperature, with a particular emphasis on the temperature close to the 
mainstream of wastewater entering the WWTP. The RGO addition to the SA matrix 
causes suppression of the beads swelling, which intern modifies the mechanical 
properties of the gel beads. The effect of the temperature drop on the nitrogen 
removal rate was reduced for biomass entrapped in SA and SA-RGO gel beads in 
comparison to non-immobilized biomass, this suggests a ''protective" effect 
caused by immobilization. However, analyses performed using next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) and qPCR revealed that the microbial community composition and 
relative gene abundance changed significantly, after the implementation of the 
new process conditions. The microbial community inside the gel beads was 
completely remodelled, in comparison with inoculum, and denitrification 
contributed to the nitrogen transformation inside the beads.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-80747-7
PMCID: PMC7804202
PMID: 33436937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.