1. Rev Bras Farmacogn. 2020;30(6):832-837. doi: 10.1007/s43450-020-00116-3. Epub 
2021 Jan 7.

Glucose-6-Phosphatase and α-Glucosidase Inhibitors from Smilax moranensis Roots 
Identified by Affinity-Directed Fractionation.

Rosas-Ramírez D(1), Escandón-Rivera S(2), Andrade-Cetto A(2), Arreguín-Espinosa 
R(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Química de Biomacromoléculas, Instituto de Química, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad Universitaria, 04360 Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México, Ciudad Universitaria, 04360 Mexico City, Mexico.

The ethanol/water-soluble extracts of the roots of Smilax moranensis M. Martens 
& Galeotti, Smilacaceae, which have been appreciated since pre-Hispanic times 
and traditionally used to treat type 2 diabetes in Mexico, were fractionated by 
the application of the affinity-directed method to identify 
glucose-6-phosphatase and α-glucosidase inhibitors. Mass spectrometry was used 
to identify the inhibitor as free ligands after released from the enzymatic 
complex by denaturing acidic conditions. The affinity study led to the 
identification of chlorogenic acid as a glucose-6-phosphatase inhibitor, which 
is the most abundant metabolite present in the analyzed crude drug. In addition, 
the affinity studies led to the identification of a flavonolignan glycoside as 
an α-glucosidase inhibitor. In silico analysis with α-glucosidase MAL12 from the 
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae allowed to determine the best conformational 
rearrangement for the α-glucosidase inhibitors. Graphical abstract.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1007/s43450-020-00116-3.

© Sociedade Brasileira de Farmacognosia 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s43450-020-00116-3
PMCID: PMC7790519
PMID: 33437105

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.