1. J Nanobiotechnology. 2021 Jan 12;19(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s12951-020-00767-3.

Genomic instability-derived plasma extracellular vesicle-microRNA signature as a 
minimally invasive predictor of risk and unfavorable prognosis in breast cancer.

Bao S(1), Hu T(2), Liu J(3), Su J(1), Sun J(1), Ming Y(4), Li J(3), Wu N(5), 
Chen H(6), Zhou M(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, School of Ophthalmology & Optometry and Eye 
Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325027, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Center/National 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, People's Republic of 
China.
(3)Department of Breast Surgical Oncology, National Cancer Center/National 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, People's Republic of 
China.
(4)PET-CT Center, National Cancer Center/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, People's 
Republic of China.
(5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing Key Laboratory for Genetic Research 
of Skeletal Deformity & Key Laboratory of Big Data for Spinal Deformities, State 
Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, All at Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing, 100730, People's Republic of China. dr.wunan@pumch.cn.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Center/National 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, People's Republic of 
China. chenhongyan@cicams.ac.cn.
(7)School of Biomedical Engineering, School of Ophthalmology & Optometry and Eye 
Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325027, People's Republic of 
China. zhoumeng@wmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the 
leading cause of cancer-associated deaths in women. Recent studies have 
indicated that microRNA (miRNA) regulation in genomic instability (GI) is 
associated with disease risk and clinical outcome. Herein, we aimed to identify 
the GI-derived miRNA signature in extracellular vesicles (EVs) as a minimally 
invasive biomarker for early diagnosis and prognostic risk stratification.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Integrative analysis of miRNA expression and somatic 
mutation profiles was performed to identify GI-associated miRNAs. Then, we 
constructed a discovery and validation study with multicenter prospective 
cohorts. The GI-derived miRNA signature (miGISig) was developed in the TCGA 
discovery cohort (n = 261), and was subsequently independently validated in 
internal TCGA validation (n = 261) and GSE22220 (n = 210) cohorts for prognosis 
prediction, and in GSE73002 (n = 3966), GSE41922 (n = 54), and in-house clinical 
exosome (n = 30) cohorts for diagnostic performance.
RESULTS: We identified a GI-derived three miRNA signature (MIR421, MIR128-1 and 
MIR128-2) in the serum extracellular vesicles of BC patients, which was 
significantly associated with poor prognosis in all the cohorts tested and 
remained as an independent prognostic factor using multivariate analyses. When 
integrated with the clinical characteristics, the composite miRNA-clinical 
prognostic indicator showed improved prognostic performance. The miGISig also 
showed high accuracy in differentiating BC from healthy controls with the area 
under the receiver operating characteristics curve (ROC) with 0.915, 0.794 and 
0.772 in GSE73002, GSE41922 and TCGA cohorts, respectively. Furthermore, 
circulating EVs from BC patients in the in-house cohort harbored elevated levels 
of miGISig, with effective diagnostic accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a novel GI-derived three miRNA signature in EVs, as an 
excellent minimally invasive biomarker for the early diagnosis and unfavorable 
prognosis in BC.

DOI: 10.1186/s12951-020-00767-3
PMCID: PMC7802300
PMID: 33436002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.