1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Jan 5;118(1):e2021958118. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2021958118.

Single-molecule nanopore sequencing reveals extreme target copy number 
heterogeneity in arylomycin-resistant mutants.

Girgis HS(1), DuPai CD(2), Lund J(3), Reeder J(2), Guillory J(3), Durinck S(4), 
Liang Y(3), Kaminker J(2), Smith PA(5), Skippington E(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080.
(2)Department of OMNI Bioinformatics, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080.
(3)Department of Proteomics, Lipidomics and Next Generation Sequencing, 
Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080.
(4)Department of Oncology Bioinformatics, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 
94080.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080; 
smith.peter@gene.com skippington.elizabeth@gene.com.
(6)Department of OMNI Bioinformatics, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080; 
smith.peter@gene.com skippington.elizabeth@gene.com.

Tandem gene amplification is a frequent and dynamic source of antibiotic 
resistance in bacteria. Ongoing expansions and contractions of repeat arrays 
during population growth are expected to manifest as cell-to-cell differences in 
copy number (CN). As a result, a clonal bacterial culture could comprise 
subpopulations of cells with different levels of antibiotic sensitivity that 
result from variable gene dosage. Despite the high potential for 
misclassification of heterogenous cell populations as either 
antibiotic-susceptible or fully resistant in clinical settings, and the 
concomitant risk of inappropriate treatment, CN distribution among cells has 
defied analysis. Here, we use the MinION single-molecule nanopore sequencer to 
uncover CN heterogeneity in clonal populations of Escherichia coli and 
Acinetobacter baumannii grown from single cells isolated while selecting for 
resistance to an optimized arylomycin, a member of a recently discovered class 
of Gram-negative antibiotic. We found that gene amplification of the arylomycin 
target, bacterial type I signal peptidase LepB, is a mechanism of unstable 
arylomycin resistance and demonstrate in E. coli that amplification instability 
is independent of RecA. This instability drives the emergence of a nonuniform 
distribution of lepB CN among cells with a range of 1 to at least 50 copies of 
lepB identified in a single clonal population. In sum, this remarkable 
heterogeneity, and the evolutionary plasticity it fuels, illustrates how gene 
amplification can enable bacterial populations to respond rapidly to novel 
antibiotics. This study establishes a rationale for further nanopore-sequencing 
studies of heterogeneous cell populations to uncover CN variability at 
single-molecule resolution.

Copyright Â© 2021 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2021958118
PMCID: PMC7817135
PMID: 33443214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest statement: P.A.S. is listed 
as an inventor on patent WO2017084630. H.S.G., C.D.D., J.R., J.L., S.D., Y.L., 
J.K., P.A.S. and E.S. are employees of Genentech, a member of the Roche Group, 
and are shareholders in Roche. J.G. is employed by Oxford Nanopore Technologies 
Ltd.