1. ERJ Open Res. 2020 Dec 21;6(4):00213-2020. doi: 10.1183/23120541.00213-2020. 
eCollection 2020 Oct.

Whole-exome sequencing accuracy in the diagnosis of primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Gileles-Hillel A(1), Mor-Shaked H(2), Shoseyov D(1), Reiter J(1), Tsabari R(1), 
Hevroni A(1), Cohen-Cymberknoh M(1), Amirav I(3), Brammli-Greenberg S(4), Horani 
A(5), Kerem E(1), Breuer O(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Pulmonology and CF Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hadassah Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Dana-Dwek Children's Hospital, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Pediatric Pulmonology Unit, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(4)The Department of Management, Policy and Health Economics, School of Public 
Health, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO, USA.

The diagnosis of primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) relies on clinical features 
and sophisticated studies. The detection of bi-allelic disease-causing variants 
confirms the diagnosis. However, a standardised genetic panel is not widely 
available and new disease-causing genes are continuously identified. To assess 
the accuracy of untargeted whole-exome sequencing (WES) as a diagnostic tool for 
PCD, patients with symptoms highly suggestive of PCD were consecutively 
included. Patients underwent measurement of nasal nitric oxide (nNO) levels, 
ciliary transmission electron microscopy analysis (TEM) and WES. A confirmed PCD 
diagnosis in symptomatic patients was defined as a recognised ciliary 
ultrastructural defect on TEM and/or two pathogenic variants in a known 
PCD-causing gene. Forty-eight patients (46% male) were enrolled, with a median 
age of 10.0 years (range 1.0-37 years). In 36 patients (75%) a diagnosis of PCD 
was confirmed, of which 14 (39%) patients had normal TEM. A standalone 
untargeted WES had a diagnostic yield of 94%, identifying bi-allelic variants in 
11 known PCD-causing genes in 34 subjects. A nNO<77 nL·min was nonspecific when 
including patients younger than 5 years (area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC) 0.75, 95% CI 0.60-0.90). Consecutive WES considerably 
improved the diagnostic accuracy of nNO in young children (AUC 0.97, 95% CI 
0.93-1). Finally, WES established an alternative diagnosis in four patients. In 
patients with clinically suspected PCD and low nNO levels, WES is a simple, 
beneficial and accurate next step to confirm the diagnosis of PCD or suggest an 
alternative diagnosis, especially in preschool-aged children in whom nNO is less 
specific.

Copyright ©ERS 2020.

DOI: 10.1183/23120541.00213-2020
PMCID: PMC7792814
PMID: 33447612

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: A. Gileles-Hillel has 
nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: H. Mor-Shaked has nothing to 
disclose. Conflict of interest: D. Shoseyov has nothing to disclose. Conflict of 
interest: J. Reiter has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: R. Tsabari 
has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: A. Hevroni has nothing to 
disclose. Conflict of interest: M. Cohen-Cymberknoh has nothing to disclose. 
Conflict of interest: I. Amirav has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: 
S. Brammli-Greenberg has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: A. Horani 
has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: E. Kerem has nothing to disclose. 
Conflict of interest: O. Breuer has nothing to disclose.