1. J Cancer. 2021 Jan 1;12(4):1011-1022. doi: 10.7150/jca.48310. eCollection
2021.

EHMT2 inhibitor BIX-01294 induces endoplasmic reticulum stress mediated 
apoptosis and autophagy in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cells.

Xu L(1)(2)(3), Gao X(1)(3), Yang P(4), Sang W(1)(2)(3), Jiao J(1)(3), Niu 
M(1)(2)(3), Liu M(1)(3), Qin Y(1)(3), Yan D(2), Song X(2), Sun C(2), Tian Y(2), 
Zhu F(1)(2)(3), Sun X(1)(3), Zeng L(1)(2)(3), Li Z(1)(2)(3), Xu K(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Blood Diseases Institute, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, the Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical 
University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Bone Marrow Stem Cell, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Department of Hematology, Luoyang Central Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou 
University, Luoyang, Henan, China.

Despite advancement in the treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), 
many patients tend to relapse or become refractory after initial therapy. 
Therefore, it is essential to identify novel therapeutic targets and drugs, 
understand the molecular pathogenesis mechanism of DLBCL, and find ways to 
prevent and treat relapsed or refractory DLBCL. BIX-01294 is a small molecule 
compound that specifically inhibits EHMT2 activity. In this study, we 
demonstrate that BIX-01294 triggered the inhibition of human DLBCL cell 
proliferation, lead to G1 phase arrest via increasing P21 level and reducing 
cyclin E level. BIX-01294 also induced apoptosis via endogenous and exogenous 
apoptotic pathways. Moreover, BIX-01294 triggered autophagy and activated ER 
stress in human DLBCL cells. Furthermore, we showed that both key components of 
ER stress, ATF3, and ATF4, are required for BIX-01294-induced apoptosis and 
autophagy. Hence, this study provides new evidence that EHMT2 may be a new 
therapeutic target, and BIX-01294 may be a potential therapeutic drug for 
treating DLBCL.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/jca.48310
PMCID: PMC7797660
PMID: 33442400

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.