1. Sci Rep. 2021 Jan 13;11(1):854. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-72125-0.

Color-tuning of natural variants of heliorhodopsin.

Kim SH(1), Chuon K(1), Cho SG(1), Choi A(2), Meas S(1), Cho HS(1), Jung KH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and Institute of Biological Interfaces, Sogang 
University, 35 Baekbeom-Ro, Mapo-Gu, Seoul, 04107, Korea.
(2)Research Center for Endangered Species, National Institute of Ecology, 23, 
Gowol-gil, Yeongyang-eup, Yeongyang-gun, 36531, Gyeongsangbuk-do, Korea.
(3)Department of Life Science and Institute of Biological Interfaces, Sogang 
University, 35 Baekbeom-Ro, Mapo-Gu, Seoul, 04107, Korea. kjung@sogang.ac.kr.

Microbial rhodopsins are distributed through many microorganisms. 
Heliorhodopsins are newly discovered but have an unclear function. They have 
seven transmembrane helices similar to type-I and type-II rhodopsins, but they 
are different in that the N-terminal region of heliorhodopsin is cytoplasmic. We 
chose 13 representative heliorhodopsins from various microorganisms, expressed 
and purified with an N-terminal His tag, and measured the absorption spectra. 
The 13 natural variants had an absorption maximum (λmax) in the range 530-556 nm 
similar to proteorhodopsin (λmax = 490-525 nm). We selected several candidate 
residues that influence rhodopsin color-tuning based on sequence alignment and 
constructed mutants via site-directed mutagenesis to confirm the spectral 
changes. We found two important residues located near retinal chromophore that 
influence λmax. We also predict the 3D structure via homology-modeling of 
Thermoplasmatales heliorhodopsin. The results indicate that the color-tuning 
mechanism of type-I rhodopsin can be applied to understand the color-tuning of 
heliorhodopsin.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-72125-0
PMCID: PMC7807009
PMID: 33441566

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.