1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2021 Feb 20;164:271-284. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2021.01.003. Epub 2021 Jan 13.

β-carotene oxygenase 2 deficiency-triggered mitochondrial oxidative stress 
promotes low-grade inflammation and metabolic dysfunction.

Wu L(1), Lu P(1), Guo X(1), Song K(2), Lyu Y(1), Bothwell J(1), Wu J(1), Hawkins 
O(1), Clarke SL(1), Lucas EA(1), Smith BJ(1), Chowanadisai W(1), Hartson SD(3), 
Ritchey JW(4), Wang W(5), Medeiros DM(6), Li S(2), Lin D(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
OK, 74078, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane University, New Orleans, 
LA, 70112, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oklahoma State University, 
Stillwater, OK, 74078, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
OK, 74078, USA.
(5)Department of Food, Nutrition, Dietetics, and Health, Kansas State 
University, Manhattan, KS, 66506, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of 
Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, 64110, USA.
(7)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
OK, 74078, USA. Electronic address: dingbo.lin@okstate.edu.

Low-grade inflammation is a critical pathological factor contributing to the 
development of metabolic disorders. β-carotene oxygenase 2 (BCO2) was initially 
identified as an enzyme catalyzing carotenoids in the inner mitochondrial 
membrane. Mutations in BCO2 are associated with inflammation and metabolic 
disorders in humans, yet the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. Here, we used 
loss-of-function approaches in mice and cell culture models to investigate the 
role of BCO2 in inflammation and metabolic dysfunction. We demonstrated 
decreases in BCO2 mRNA and protein levels and suppression of mitochondrial 
respiratory complex I proteins and mitochondrial superoxide dismutase levels in 
the liver of type 2 diabetic human subjects. Deficiency of BCO2 caused 
disruption of assembly of the mitochondrial respiratory supercomplexes, such as 
supercomplex III2+IV in mice, and overproduction of superoxide radicals in 
primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Further, deficiency of BCO2 increased 
protein carbonylation and populations of natural killer cells and M1 
macrophages, and decreased populations of T cells, including CD4+ and/or CD8+ in 
the bone marrow and white adipose tissues. Elevation of plasma inflammatory 
cytokines and adipose tissue hypertrophy and inflammation were also 
characterized in BCO2 deficient mice. Moreover, BCO2 deficient mice were more 
susceptible to high-fat diet-induced obesity and hyperglycemia. Double knockout 
of BCO2 and leptin receptor genes caused a significantly greater elevation of 
the fasting blood glucose level in mice at 4 weeks of age, compared to the age- 
and sex-matched leptin receptor knockout. Finally, administration of Mito-TEMPO, 
a mitochondrial specific antioxidant attenuated systemic low-grade inflammation 
induced by BCO2 deficiency. Collectively, these findings suggest that BCO2 is 
essential for mitochondrial respiration and metabolic homeostasis in mammals. 
Loss or decreased expression of BCO2 leads to mitochondrial oxidative stress, 
low-grade inflammation, and the subsequent development of metabolic disorders.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2021.01.003
PMCID: PMC7946548
PMID: 33453359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests No competing interests 
declared