1. Cell Death Differ. 2021 Jun;28(6):1849-1864. doi: 10.1038/s41418-020-00712-9. 
Epub 2021 Jan 18.

Akt1-associated actomyosin remodelling is required for nuclear lamina dispersal 
and nuclear shrinkage in epidermal terminal differentiation.

Rogerson C(1), Wotherspoon DJ(1), Tommasi C(2)(3), Button RW(1), O'Shaughnessy 
RFL(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cell Biology and Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and 
The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK.
(2)Immunobiology and Dermatology, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child 
Health, London, UK.
(3)School of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(4)Centre for Cell Biology and Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and 
The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK. r.f.l.oshaughnessy@qmul.ac.uk.

Keratinocyte cornification and epidermal barrier formation are tightly 
controlled processes, which require complete degradation of intracellular 
organelles, including removal of keratinocyte nuclei. Keratinocyte nuclear 
destruction requires Akt1-dependent phosphorylation and degradation of the 
nuclear lamina protein, Lamin A/C, essential for nuclear integrity. However, the 
molecular mechanisms that result in complete nuclear removal and their 
regulation are not well defined. Post-confluent cultures of rat epidermal 
keratinocytes (REKs) undergo spontaneous and complete differentiation, allowing 
visualisation and perturbation of the differentiation process in vitro. We 
demonstrate that there is dispersal of phosphorylated Lamin A/C to structures 
throughout the cytoplasm in differentiating keratinocytes. We show that the 
dispersal of phosphorylated Lamin A/C is Akt1-dependent and these structures are 
specific for the removal of Lamin A/C from the nuclear lamina; nuclear contents 
and Lamin B were not present in these structures. Immunoprecipitation identified 
a group of functionally related Akt1 target proteins involved in Lamin A/C 
dispersal, including actin, which forms cytoskeletal microfilaments, Arp3, 
required for actin filament nucleation, and Myh9, a component of myosin IIa, a 
molecular motor that can translocate along actin filaments. Disruption of actin 
filament polymerisation, nucleation or myosin IIa activity prevented formation 
and dispersal of cytoplasmic Lamin A/C structures. Live imaging of keratinocytes 
expressing fluorescently tagged nuclear proteins showed a nuclear volume 
reduction step taking less than 40â€‰min precedes final nuclear destruction. 
Preventing Akt1-dependent Lamin A/C phosphorylation and disrupting cytoskeletal 
Akt1-associated proteins prevented nuclear volume reduction. We propose 
keratinocyte nuclear destruction and differentiation requires myosin II activity 
and the actin cytoskeleton for two intermediate processes: Lamin A/C dispersal 
and rapid nuclear volume reduction.

DOI: 10.1038/s41418-020-00712-9
PMCID: PMC8184862
PMID: 33462407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.