1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jan 14;22(2):778. doi: 10.3390/ijms22020778.

Cannabis sativa L. as a Natural Drug Meeting the Criteria of a Multitarget 
Approach to Treatment.

Stasi≈Çowicz A(1), Tomala A(2), Podolak I(2), Cielecka-Piontek J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Swiecickiego 4, 61-781 Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy, Medical College, Jagiellonian University, 
Medyczna 9, 30-688 Cracow, Poland.

Cannabis sativa L. turned out to be a valuable source of chemical compounds of 
various structures, showing pharmacological activity. The most important groups 
of compounds include phytocannabinoids and terpenes. The pharmacological 
activity of Cannabis (in epilepsy, sclerosis multiplex (SM), vomiting and 
nausea, pain, appetite loss, inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), Parkinson's 
disease, Tourette's syndrome, schizophrenia, glaucoma, and coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19)), which has been proven so far, results from the affinity of 
these compounds predominantly for the receptors of the endocannabinoid system 
(the cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1), type two (CB2), and the G 
protein-coupled receptor 55 (GPR55)) but, also, for peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR), glycine receptors, serotonin receptors 
(5-HT), transient receptor potential channels (TRP), and GPR, opioid receptors. 
The synergism of action of phytochemicals present in Cannabis sp. raw material 
is also expressed in their increased bioavailability and penetration through the 
blood-brain barrier. This review provides an overview of phytochemistry and 
pharmacology of compounds present in Cannabis extracts in the context of the 
current knowledge about their synergistic actions and the implications of 
clinical use in the treatment of selected diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22020778
PMCID: PMC7830475
PMID: 33466734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.