1. Eur J Med Res. 2021 Jan 19;26(1):9. doi: 10.1186/s40001-021-00482-1.

Prognostic role of PHYH for overall survival (OS) in clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma (ccRCC).

Zhengqi Q(1), Zezhi G(2), Lei J(2), He Q(2), Jinyao P(2), Ying A(2).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Genome Stability and Human Disease Prevention, 
Carson International Cancer Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Health Science Center, Shenzhen 
University, Shenzhen, 518060, China. caspiansev@163.com.
(2)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Genome Stability and Human Disease Prevention, 
Carson International Cancer Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Health Science Center, Shenzhen 
University, Shenzhen, 518060, China.

This study attempts to evaluate the prognostic role of PHYH for overall survival 
(OS) in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) by means of publicly available 
data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Clinical pathologic features and PHYH 
expression were downloaded from the TCGA database and relationships between them 
were analyzed by univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses. Gene Set 
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and gene-gene interactions were also performed 
between tissues with different PHYH expression levels. PHYH expression levels 
were significantly lower in patient with ccRCC compared with normal tissues 
(p = 1.156e-19). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that high expression of 
PHYH had a better prognosis than low expression (p = 9e-05). Moreover, PHYH 
expression was also significantly associated with high grade (G2-4, p = 0.025), 
high stage (StageIII & IV, p = 5.604e-05), and high level of stage_T (T3-4, 
p = 4.373e-05). Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses indicated 
that PHYH could be acted as an independent prognostic factor (p < 0.05). 
Nomogram including clinical pathologic features and PHYH expression were also 
provided. GSEA revealed that butanoate metabolism, histidine metabolism, 
propanoate metabolism, pyruvate metabolism, tryptophan metabolism, PPAR 
signalling pathway, and renin-angiotensin system were differentially enriched in 
PHYH high-expression phenotype. ICGC database was utilized to verify the 
expression level and survival benefit of PHYH (both p < 0.05). We suspect that 
elevated PHYH expression may be served as a potential prognostic molecular 
marker of better survival in ccRCC. Besides, alpha-oxidation was closely 
regulated by PHYH, and PPAR signalling, pyruvate metabolism, butanoate 
metabolism, and RAS might be the key pathways regulated by PHYH in CCRC.

DOI: 10.1186/s40001-021-00482-1
PMCID: PMC7816304
PMID: 33468235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.