1. J Cell Biochem. 2021 Jun;122(6):653-666. doi: 10.1002/jcb.29894. Epub 2021 Jan
 19.

A mouse seminal vesicle-secreted lysozyme c-like protein modulates sperm 
capacitation.

Ou CM(1), Lee RK(2)(3), Lin MH(3)(4), Lu CH(3), Yang TH(2), Yeh LY(2), Tsai 
PJ(5)(6), Li SH(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Chemistry Division, Institute of Nuclear Energy Research, Taoyuan City, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medical Research, MacKay Memorial Hospital, New Taipei City, 
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(4)MacKay Junior College of Medicine, Nursing, and Management, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(6)Graduate Institute of Veterinary Medicine, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.

Lysozyme (LYZ) c-like proteins are primarily present in the testis and 
epididymis of male reproductive tissues. Here, we report a novel member of the 
c-type LYZ family, the seminal vesicle-secreted LYZ c-like protein (SVLLP). 
Three forms of SVLLP were purified from mouse seminal vesicle secretions and 
characterized as glycoproteins with the same protein core but different N-linked 
glycans. SVLLP is structurally similar to c-type LYZ proteins. Only one of the 
20 invariant residues was altered in the consensus sequence of c-type LYZs; 
however, the changed residue (N53S) is one of two essential catalytic residues. 
LYZ activity assays demonstrated that the three glycoforms of SVLLP lacked 
enzyme activity. SVLLP is primarily expressed in seminal vesicles. 
Immunohistochemistry revealed that it occurs in the luminal fluid and mucosal 
epithelium of the seminal vesicles. Testosterone is not the primary regulator 
for its expression in the seminal vesicle. SVLLP binds to sperm and suppresses 
bovine serum albumin-induced sperm capacitation, inhibits the acrosome reaction, 
and blocks sperm-oocyte interactions in vitro, suggesting that SVLLP is a sperm 
capacitation inhibitor.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.29894
PMID: 33469950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]