1. Materials (Basel). 2021 Jan 18;14(2):441. doi: 10.3390/ma14020441.

Surface Modification of Biodegradable Mg-Based Scaffolds for Human Mesenchymal 
Stem Cell Proliferation and Osteogenic Differentiation.

Wang SH(1), Lee SP(2), Yang CW(3), Lo CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 
11221, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Department of Dentistry, School 
of Dentistry, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, 
Taipei 11490, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Formosa University, 
Yunlin 632, Taiwan.

Magnesium alloys with coatings have the potential to be used for bone substitute 
alternatives since their mechanical properties are close to those of human bone. 
However, the surface modification of magnesium alloys to increase the surface 
biocompatibility and reduce the degradation rate remains a challenge. Here, 
FHA-Mg scaffolds were made of magnesium alloys and coated with 
fluorohydroxyapatite (FHA). Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) were cultured 
on FHA-Mg scaffolds and cell viability, proliferation, and osteogenic 
differentiation were investigated. The results showed that FHA-Mg scaffolds 
display a nano-scaled needle-like structure of aggregated crystallites on their 
surface. The average Mg2+ concentration in the conditioned media collected from 
FHA-Mg scaffolds (5.8-7.6 mM) is much lower than those collected from uncoated, 
Mg(OH)2-coated, and hydroxyapatite (HA)-coated samples (32.1, 17.7, and 21.1 mM, 
respectively). In addition, compared with hMSCs cultured on a culture dish, 
cells cultured on FHA-Mg scaffolds demonstrated better proliferation and 
comparable osteogenic differentiation. To eliminate the effect of osteogenic 
induction medium, hMSCs were cultured on FHA-Mg scaffolds in culture medium and 
an approximate 66% increase in osteogenic differentiation was observed three 
weeks later, indicating a significant effect of the nanostructured surface of 
FHA-Mg scaffolds on hMSC behaviors. With controllable Mg2+ release and favorable 
mechanical properties, porous FHA-Mg scaffolds have a great potential in 
cell-based bone regeneration.

DOI: 10.3390/ma14020441
PMCID: PMC7831072
PMID: 33477485

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.