1. Viruses. 2021 Jan 19;13(1):133. doi: 10.3390/v13010133.

Intra-Host Diversity of SARS-Cov-2 Should Not Be Neglected: Case of the State of 
Victoria, Australia.

Armero A(1), Berthet N(1), Avarre JC(2).

Author information:
(1)The Center for Microbes, Development and Health, Institut Pasteur of 
Shanghai-Chinese Academy of Sciences, Discovery and Molecular Characterization 
of Pathogens, Shanghai 200000, China.
(2)ISEM, University of Montpellier, CNRS, EPHE, IRD, 34095 Montpellier, France.

Since the identification of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) as the etiological agent of the current COVID-19 pandemic, a rapid 
and massive effort has been made to obtain the genomic sequences of this virus 
to monitor (in near real time) the phylodynamic and diversity of this new 
pathogen. However, less attention has been given to the assessment of intra-host 
diversity. RNA viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 inhabit the host as a population of 
variants called quasispecies. We studied the quasispecies diversity in four of 
the main SARS-CoV-2 genes (ORF1a, ORF1b, S and N genes), using a dataset 
consisting of 210 next-generation sequencing (NGS) samples collected between 
January and early April of 2020 in the State of Victoria, Australia. We found 
evidence of quasispecies diversity in 68% of the samples, 76% of which was 
nonsynonymous variants with a higher density in the spike (S) glycoprotein and 
ORF1a genes. About one-third of the nonsynonymous intra-host variants were 
shared among the samples, suggesting host-to-host transmission. Quasispecies 
diversity changed over time. Phylogenetic analysis showed that some of the 
intra-host single-nucleotide variants (iSNVs) were restricted to specific 
lineages, highlighting their potential importance in the epidemiology of this 
virus. A greater effort must be made to determine the magnitude of the genetic 
bottleneck during transmission and the epidemiological and/or evolutionary 
factors that may play a role in the changes in the diversity of quasispecies 
over time.

DOI: 10.3390/v13010133
PMCID: PMC7833370
PMID: 33477885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.