1. Nature. 2021 Feb;590(7844):122-128. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-03160-0. Epub 2021
 Jan 20.

Restoring metabolism of myeloid cells reverses cognitive decline in ageing.

Minhas PS(1)(2)(3), Latif-Hernandez A(#)(1), McReynolds MR(#)(4)(5), Durairaj 
AS(1), Wang Q(1), Rubin A(1)(2), Joshi AU(6), He JQ(7), Gauba E(1), Liu L(4)(5), 
Wang C(1), Linde M(8), Sugiura Y(9), Moon PK(1), Majeti R(8), Suematsu M(9), 
Mochly-Rosen D(6), Weissman IL(7), Longo FM(1), Rabinowitz JD(4)(5), Andreasson 
KI(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Neurosciences Graduate Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Medical Scientist Training Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(5)Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ, USA.
(6)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(7)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Hematology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(9)Department of Biochemistry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. kandreas@stanford.edu.
(11)Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 
kandreas@stanford.edu.
(12)Stanford Immunology Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 
kandreas@stanford.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nature. 2021 Feb;590(7844):44-45. doi: 10.1038/d41586-021-00063-6.
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2021 Mar;20(3):176. doi: 10.1038/d41573-021-00020-y.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2021 Mar;21(3):133. doi: 10.1038/s41577-021-00515-0.
    Cell Metab. 2021 Mar 2;33(3):468-470. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2021.02.004.
    Neuroscientist. 2021 Oct;27(5):453. doi: 10.1177/10738584211041575.

Ageing is characterized by the development of persistent pro-inflammatory 
responses that contribute to atherosclerosis, metabolic syndrome, cancer and 
frailty1-3. The ageing brain is also vulnerable to inflammation, as demonstrated 
by the high prevalence of age-associated cognitive decline and Alzheimer's 
disease4-6. Systemically, circulating pro-inflammatory factors can promote 
cognitive decline7,8, and in the brain, microglia lose the ability to clear 
misfolded proteins that are associated with neurodegeneration9,10. However, the 
underlying mechanisms that initiate and sustain maladaptive inflammation with 
ageing are not well defined. Here we show that in ageing mice myeloid cell 
bioenergetics are suppressed in response to increased signalling by the lipid 
messenger prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), a major modulator of inflammation11. In 
ageing macrophages and microglia, PGE2 signalling through its EP2 receptor 
promotes the sequestration of glucose into glycogen, reducing glucose flux and 
mitochondrial respiration. This energy-deficient state, which drives maladaptive 
pro-inflammatory responses, is further augmented by a dependence of aged myeloid 
cells on glucose as a principal fuel source. In aged mice, inhibition of myeloid 
EP2 signalling rejuvenates cellular bioenergetics, systemic and brain 
inflammatory states, hippocampal synaptic plasticity and spatial memory. 
Moreover, blockade of peripheral myeloid EP2 signalling is sufficient to restore 
cognition in aged mice. Our study suggests that cognitive ageing is not a static 
or irrevocable condition but can be reversed by reprogramming myeloid glucose 
metabolism to restore youthful immune functions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-03160-0
PMCID: PMC8274816
PMID: 33473210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.