1. Anal Chem. 2021 Feb 9;93(5):2749-2757. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.0c03070. Epub
 2021 Jan 22.

An Ion Chromatography-Ultrahigh-Resolution-MS(1)/Data-Independent 
High-Resolution MS(2) Method for Stable Isotope-Resolved Metabolomics 
Reconstruction of Central Metabolic Networks.

Sun Q(1), Fan TW(1)(2)(3), Lane AN(1)(2)(3), Higashi RM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Environmental and Systems Biochemistry (CESB), University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, United States.
(2)Department of Toxicology and Cancer Biology, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, Kentucky 40536, United States.
(3)Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, 
United States.

The metabolome comprises a complex network of interconnecting enzyme-catalyzed 
reactions that involve transfers of numerous molecular subunits. Thus, the 
reconstruction of metabolic networks requires metabolite substructures to be 
tracked. Subunit tracking can be achieved by tracing stable isotopes through 
metabolic transformations using NMR and ultrahigh -resolution (UHR)-mass 
spectrometry (MS). UHR-MS1 readily resolves and counts isotopic labels in 
metabolites but requires tandem MS to help identify isotopic enrichment in 
substructures. However, it is challenging to perform chromatography-based 
UHR-MS1 with its long acquisition time, while acquiring MS2 data on many 
coeluting labeled isotopologues for each metabolite. We have developed an ion 
chromatography (IC)-UHR-MS1/data-independent(DI)-HR-MS2 method to trace the fate 
of 13C atoms from [13C6]-glucose ([13C6]-Glc) in 3D A549 spheroids in response 
to anticancer selenite and simultaneously 13C/15N atoms from 
[13C5,15N2]-glutamine ([13C5,15N2]-Gln) in 2D BEAS-2B cells in response to 
arsenite transformation. This method retains the complete isotopologue 
distributions of metabolites via UHR-MS1 while simultaneously acquiring 
substructure label information via DI-MS2. These details in metabolite labeling 
patterns greatly facilitate rigorous reconstruction of multiple, intersecting 
metabolic pathways of central metabolism, which are illustrated here for the 
purine/pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis. The pathways reconstructed based on 
subunit-level isotopologue analysis further reveal specific enzyme-catalyzed 
reactions that are impacted by selenite or arsenite treatments.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.0c03070
PMCID: PMC8053425
PMID: 33482055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.