1. Front Oncol. 2021 Jan 7;10:602416. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2020.602416. eCollection 
2020.

The Metabolic Mechanisms of Breast Cancer Metastasis.

Wang L(1)(2), Zhang S(3), Wang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, 
Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Surgical Oncology and Cancer Institute, Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Institute of Translational Medicine, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, 
Hangzhou, China.

Breast cancer is one of the most common malignancy among women worldwide. 
Metastasis is mainly responsible for treatment failure and is the cause of most 
breast cancer deaths. The role of metabolism in the progression and metastasis 
of breast cancer is gradually being emphasized. However, the regulatory 
mechanisms that conduce to cancer metastasis by metabolic reprogramming in 
breast cancer have not been expounded. Breast cancer cells exhibit different 
metabolic phenotypes depending on their molecular subtypes and metastatic sites. 
Both intrinsic factors, such as MYC amplification, PIK3CA, and TP53 mutations, 
and extrinsic factors, such as hypoxia, oxidative stress, and acidosis, 
contribute to different metabolic reprogramming phenotypes in metastatic breast 
cancers. Understanding the metabolic mechanisms underlying breast cancer 
metastasis will provide important clues to develop novel therapeutic approaches 
for treatment of metastatic breast cancer.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wang, Zhang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2020.602416
PMCID: PMC7817624
PMID: 33489906

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.