1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Jan 8;10:608020. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2020.608020. eCollection 2020.

Investigating Major Recurring Campylobacter jejuni Lineages in Luxembourg Using 
Four Core or Whole Genome Sequencing Typing Schemes.

Nennig M(1)(2), Llarena AK(3), Herold M(1), Mossong J(1), Penny C(4), Losch 
S(5), Tresse O(2), Ragimbeau C(1).

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology and Microbial Genomics, Laboratoire National de Santé, 
Dudelange, Luxembourg.
(2)INRAE, Oniris, SECALIM, Nantes, France.
(3)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Oslo, 
Norway.
(4)Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, Environmental Research and 
Innovation Department, Belvaux, Luxembourg.
(5)Laboratoire de Médecine Vétérinaire de l'Etat, Veterinary Services 
Administration, Dudelange, Luxembourg.

Campylobacter jejuni is the leading cause of bacterial gastroenteritis, which 
has motivated the monitoring of genetic profiles circulating in Luxembourg since 
13 years. From our integrated surveillance using a genotyping strategy based on 
an extended MLST scheme including gyrA and porA markers, an unexpected endemic 
pattern was discovered in the temporal distribution of genotypes. We aimed to 
test the hypothesis of stable lineages occurrence by implementing whole genome 
sequencing (WGS) associated with comprehensive and internationally validated 
schemes. This pilot study assessed four WGS-based typing schemes to classify a 
panel of 108 strains previously identified as recurrent or sporadic profiles 
using this in-house typing system. The strain collection included four common 
lineages in human infection (N = 67) initially identified from recurrent 
combination of ST-gyrA-porA alleles also detected in non-human samples: 
veterinary (N = 19), food (N = 20), and environmental (N = 2) sources. An 
additional set of 19 strains belonging to sporadic profiles completed the tested 
panel. All the strains were processed by WGS by using Illumina technologies and 
by applying stringent criteria for filtering sequencing data; we ensure 
robustness in our genomic comparison. Four typing schemes were applied to 
classify the strains: (i) the cgMLST SeqSphere+ scheme of 637 loci, (ii) the 
cgMLST Oxford scheme of 1,343 loci, (iii) the cgMLST INNUENDO scheme of 678 
loci, and (iv) the wgMLST INNUENDO scheme of 2,795 loci. A high concordance 
between the typing schemes was determined by comparing the calculated adjusted 
Wallace coefficients. After quality control and analyses with these four typing 
schemes, 60 strains were confirmed as members of the four recurrent lineages 
regardless of the method used (N = 32, 12, 7, and 9, respectively). Our results 
indicate that, regardless of the typing scheme used, epidemic or endemic signals 
were detected as reflected by lineage B (ST2254-gyrA9-porA1) in 2014 or lineage 
A (ST19-gyrA8-porA7), respectively. These findings support the clonal expansion 
of stable genomes in Campylobacter population exhibiting a multi-host profile 
and accounting for the majority of clinical strains isolated over a decade. Such 
recurring genotypes suggest persistence in reservoirs, sources or environment, 
emphasizing the need to investigate their survival strategy in greater depth.

Copyright © 2021 Nennig, Llarena, Herold, Mossong, Penny, Losch, Tresse and 
Ragimbeau.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.608020
PMCID: PMC7819963
PMID: 33489938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.