1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jan 21;22(3):1044. doi: 10.3390/ijms22031044.

Genome-Wide Identification and Characterization of Calcium-Dependent Protein 
Kinase (CDPK) and CDPK-Related Kinase (CRK) Gene Families in Medicago 
truncatula.

Zhao P(1), Liu Y(1), Kong W(1), Ji J(1), Cai T(1), Guo Z(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Grassland Science, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 
210095, China.

Calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK or CPK) and CDPK-related kinase (CRK) 
play an important role in plant growth, development, and adaptation to 
environmental stresses. However, their gene families had been yet inadequately 
investigated in Medicago truncatula. In this study, six MtCRK genes were 
computationally identified, they were classified into five groups with MtCDPKs 
based on phylogenetic relationships. Six pairs of segmental duplications were 
observed in MtCDPK and MtCRK genes and the Ka/Ks ratio, an indicator of 
selection pressure, was below 0.310, indicating that these gene pairs underwent 
strong purifying selection. Cis-acting elements of morphogenesis, multiple 
hormone responses, and abiotic stresses were predicted in the promoter region. 
The spatial expression of MtCDPKs and MtCRKs displays diversity. The expression 
of MtCDPKs and MtCRKs could be regulated by various stresses. MtCDPK4, 14, 16, 
22, and MtCRK6 harbor both N-myristoylation site and palmitoylation site and 
were anchored on plasma membrane, while MtCDPK7, 9, and 15 contain no or only 
one N-acylation site and were distributed in cytosol and nucleus, suggesting 
that the N-terminal acylation sites play a key role in subcellular localization 
of MtCDPKs and MtCRKs. In summary, comprehensive characterization of MtCDPKs and 
MtCRKs provide a subset of candidate genes for further functional analysis and 
genetic improvement against drought, cold, salt and biotic stress.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22031044
PMCID: PMC7864493
PMID: 33494310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.