1. Mol Cancer Res. 2021 May;19(5):757-770. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-20-0188.
Epub  2021 Jan 25.

Adaptor Protein ShcD/SHC4 Interacts with Tie2 Receptor to Synergistically 
Promote Glioma Cell Invasion.

Tilak M(1), Alural B(1), Wismer SE(1), Brasher MI(1), New LA(1), Sheridan SD(2), 
Perlis RH(2), Coppolino MG(1), Lalonde J(1), Jones N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Center for Quantitative Health, Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of 
Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, 
Ontario, Canada. jonesmcb@uoguelph.ca.

Gliomas are characterized by diffuse infiltration of tumor cells into 
surrounding brain tissue, and this highly invasive nature contributes to disease 
recurrence and poor patient outcomes. The molecular mechanisms underlying glioma 
cell invasion remain incompletely understood, limiting development of new 
targeted therapies. Here, we have identified phosphotyrosine adaptor protein 
ShcD as upregulated in malignant glioma and shown that it associates with 
receptor tyrosine kinase Tie2 to facilitate invasion. In human glioma cells, we 
find that expression of ShcD and Tie2 increases invasion, and this significant 
synergistic effect is disrupted with a ShcD mutant that cannot bind Tie2 or 
hyperphosphorylate the receptor. Expression of ShcD and/or Tie2 further 
increases invadopodia formation and matrix degradation in U87 glioma cells. In a 
coculture model, we show that U87-derived tumor spheroids expressing both ShcD 
and Tie2 display enhanced infiltration into cerebral organoids. Mechanistically, 
we identify changes in focal adhesion kinase phosphorylation in the presence of 
ShcD and/or Tie2 in U87 cells upon Tie2 activation. Finally, we identify a 
strong correlation between transcript levels of ShcD and Tie2 signaling 
components as well as N-cadherin in advanced gliomas and those with classical or 
mesenchymal subtypes, and we show that elevated expression of ShcD correlates 
with a significant reduction in patient survival in higher grade gliomas with 
mesenchymal signature. Altogether, our data highlight a novel Tie2-ShcD 
signaling axis in glioma cell invasion, which may be of clinical significance. 
IMPLICATIONS: ShcD cooperates with Tie2 to promote glioma cell invasion and its 
elevated expression correlates with poor patient outcome in advanced gliomas.

Â©2021 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-20-0188
PMCID: PMC10290522
PMID: 33495401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
potential conflicts of interest.