1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Jan 22;13(3):418. doi: 10.3390/cancers13030418.

Targeting the Sonic Hedgehog Pathway to Suppress the Expression of the Cancer 
Stem Cell (CSC)-Related Transcription Factors and CSC-Driven Thyroid Tumor 
Growth.

Lu Y(1), Zhu Y(1), Deng S(1), Chen Y(1), Li W(2), Sun J(1), Xu X(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Comparative Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou 225009, Jiangsu, China.
(2)College of Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal 
Infectious Diseases and Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, Jiangsu, 
China.

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway plays important roles in tumorigenesis, tumor 
growth, drug resistance, and metastasis. We and others have reported earlier 
that this pathway is highly activated in thyroid cancer. However, its role in 
thyroid cancer stem cell (CSC) self-renewal and tumor development remains 
incompletely understood. B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region 1 homolog (BMI1) and 
SRY-Box Transcription Factor 2 (SOX2) are two CSC-related transcription factors 
that have been implicated in promoting CSC self-renewal. The objective of our 
current investigation was to determine the role of the Shh pathway in regulating 
BMI1 and SOX2 expression in thyroid cancer and promoting thyroid tumor growth 
and development. Here we report that inhibition of the Shh pathway by Gli1 siRNA 
or by cyclopamine and GANT61 reduced BMI1 and SOX2 expression in SW1736 and 
KAT-18 cells, two anaplastic thyroid cancer cell lines. The opposite results 
were obtained in cells overexpressing Gli1 or its downstream transcription 
factor Snail. The Shh pathway regulated SOX2 and BMI1 expression at a 
transcriptional and post-transcriptional level, respectively. GANT61 treatment 
suppressed the growth of SW1736 CSC-derived tumor xenografts but did not 
significantly inhibit the growth of tumors grown from bulk tumor cells. 
Clinicopathological analyses of thyroid tumor specimens by immunohistochemical 
(IHC) staining revealed that BMI1 and SOX2 were highly expressed in thyroid 
cancer and correlated with Gli1 expression. Our study provides evidence that 
activation of the Shh pathway leads to increased BMI1 and SOX2 expression in 
thyroid cancer and promotes thyroid CSC-driven tumor initiation. Targeting the 
Shh pathway may have therapeutic value for treating thyroid cancer and 
preventing recurrence.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13030418
PMCID: PMC7866109
PMID: 33499351

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.