1. JMIR Bioinform Biotechnol. 2021 Jan 22;2(1):e25995. doi: 10.2196/25995. 
eCollection 2021 Jan-Dec.

Isolating SARS-CoV-2 Strains From Countries in the Same Meridian: Genome 
Evolutionary Analysis.

Mastriani E(#)(1)(2), Rakov AV(3), Liu SL(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Systemomics Center, College of Pharmacy, Genomics Research Center, 
State-Province Key Laboratories of Biomedicine-Pharmaceutics of China, Harbin 
Medical University, Harbin, China.
(2)HMU-UCCSM Centre for Infection and Genomics, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin, China.
(3)Somov Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Vladivostok, Russian 
Federation.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: COVID-19, caused by the novel SARS-CoV-2, is considered the most 
threatening respiratory infection in the world, with over 40 million people 
infected and over 0.934 million related deaths reported worldwide. It is 
speculated that epidemiological and clinical features of COVID-19 may differ 
across countries or continents. Genomic comparison of 48,635 SARS-CoV-2 genomes 
has shown that the average number of mutations per sample was 7.23, and most 
SARS-CoV-2 strains belong to one of 3 clades characterized by geographic and 
genomic specificity: Europe, Asia, and North America.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to compare the genomes of SARS-CoV-2 
strains isolated from Italy, Sweden, and Congo, that is, 3 different countries 
in the same meridian (longitude) but with different climate conditions, and from 
Brazil (as an outgroup country), to analyze similarities or differences in 
patterns of possible evolutionary pressure signatures in their genomes.
METHODS: We obtained data from the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza 
Data repository by sampling all genomes available on that date. Using HyPhy, we 
achieved the recombination analysis by genetic algorithm recombination detection 
method, trimming, removal of the stop codons, and phylogenetic tree and mixed 
effects model of evolution analyses. We also performed secondary structure 
prediction analysis for both sequences (mutated and wild-type) and "disorder" 
and "transmembrane" analyses of the protein. We analyzed both protein structures 
with an ab initio approach to predict their ontologies and 3D structures.
RESULTS: Evolutionary analysis revealed that codon 9628 is under episodic 
selective pressure for all SARS-CoV-2 strains isolated from the 4 countries, 
suggesting it is a key site for virus evolution. Codon 9628 encodes the P0DTD3 
(Y14_SARS2) uncharacterized protein 14. Further investigation showed that the 
codon mutation was responsible for helical modification in the secondary 
structure. The codon was positioned in the more ordered region of the gene 
(41-59) and near to the area acting as the transmembrane (54-67), suggesting its 
involvement in the attachment phase of the virus. The predicted protein 
structures of both wild-type and mutated P0DTD3 confirmed the importance of the 
codon to define the protein structure. Moreover, ontological analysis of the 
protein emphasized that the mutation enhances the binding probability.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that RNA secondary structure may be affected 
and, consequently, the protein product changes T (threonine) to G (glycine) in 
position 50 of the protein. This position is located close to the predicted 
transmembrane region. Mutation analysis revealed that the change from G 
(glycine) to D (aspartic acid) may confer a new function to the protein-binding 
activity, which in turn may be responsible for attaching the virus to human 
eukaryotic cells. These findings can help design in vitro experiments and 
possibly facilitate a vaccine design and successful antiviral strategies.

Â©Emilio Mastriani, Alexey V Rakov, Shu-Lin Liu. Originally published in JMIR 
Research Protocols (http://www.researchprotocols.org), 22.01.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/25995
PMCID: PMC7837406
PMID: 33497425

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.