1. J Otol. 2021 Jan;16(1):34-39. doi: 10.1016/j.joto.2020.10.004. Epub 2020 Nov
20.

Viewing the current situation of pig model application in China's medical field 
from the application and funding of NSFC.

Zhang XB(1), Yang SM(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, National Natural Science Foundation of China, 
China.
(2)College of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Chinese PLA Medical School, No. 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, 
China.
(3)National Clinical Research Center for Otolaryngologic Diseases, Beijing, 
100853, China.
(4)State Key Lab of Hearing Science, Ministry of Education, Beijing, 100853, 
China.
(5)Beijing Key Lab of Hearing Impairment Prevention and Treatment, Beijing, 
100853, China.

BACKGROUND: The National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) is an 
important part of China's innovation system. In the last decade, the pig has 
become more and more widely used in the field of medical science, especially in 
otology research.
OBJECTIVE: By analyzing and summarizing the funding information over recent 
years, we intend to identify the characteristics and trends of funding for 
research using pig models and provide references for future development.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This is a comprehensive analysis of features in funding 
for research projects involving pig models by the NSFC in the past 10 years, 
with a focus on projects in the field of otolaryngology/head and neck surgery.
RESULTS: Both the number and amount of funding provided by the NSFC for research 
involving pig models are on the rise with each passing year. Researchers at the 
PLA General Hospital have completed a number of studies using miniature pigs in 
cochlear morphology, electrophysiology, cochlear implantation, cochlear 
transcription analysis, gene therapy, inner ear disease modeling and Eustachian 
tube pathology modeling.
CONCLUSION: Pigs as an ideal large mammal model are well suited in the current 
national basic research strategy in China, and can help further strengthen 
China's leading position in basic research in the world.

Â© 2020 PLA General Hospital Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery. 
Production and hosting by Elsevier (Singapore) Pte Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joto.2020.10.004
PMCID: PMC7814078
PMID: 33505448