1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Jan 25;13(3):451. doi: 10.3390/cancers13030451.

Cancer of Unknown Primary: Challenges and Progress in Clinical Management.

Laprovitera N(1)(2), Riefolo M(1), Ambrosini E(1), Klec C(3), Pichler M(3), 
Ferracin M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine (DIMES), 
University of Bologna, 40126 Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of Ferrara, 44121 
Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Division of Oncology, Medical University of Graz, 8036 Graz, Austria.

Distant metastases are the main cause of cancer-related deaths in patients with 
advanced tumors. A standard diagnostic workup usually contains the 
identification of the tissue-of-origin of metastatic tumors, although under 
certain circumstances, it remains elusive. This disease setting is defined as 
cancer of unknown primary (CUP). Accounting for approximately 3-5% of all cancer 
diagnoses, CUPs are characterized by an aggressive clinical behavior and 
represent a real therapeutic challenge. The lack of determination of a tissue of 
origin precludes CUP patients from specific evidence-based therapeutic options 
or access to clinical trial, which significantly impacts their life expectancy. 
In the era of precision medicine, it is essential to characterize CUP molecular 
features, including the expression profile of non-coding RNAs, to improve our 
understanding of CUP biology and identify novel therapeutic strategies. This 
review article sheds light on this enigmatic disease by summarizing the current 
knowledge on CUPs focusing on recent discoveries and emerging diagnostic 
strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13030451
PMCID: PMC7866161
PMID: 33504059

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.