1. Oncologist. 2021 May;26(5):e756-e768. doi: 10.1002/onco.13695. Epub 2021 Feb
8.

Deep Targeted Sequencing and Its Potential Implication for Cancer Therapy in 
Chinese Patients with Gastric Adenocarcinoma.

Yu P(#)(1), Wang Y(#)(2), Yu Y(3), Wang A(3), Huang L(1), Zhang Y(3), Liu W(3), 
Wu H(3), Yao M(3), Du YA(1), Cheng X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastric Surgery, Institute of Cancer Research and Basic Medical 
Sciences of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Cancer Hospital of University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)Digestion Department, Shanxi Provincial Cancer Hospital, Taiyuan, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)OrigiMed Inc., Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Gastric cancer (GC) has a high incidence and mortality rate, 
especially in East Asians, and about 90% of GCs are adenocarcinomas. 
Histological and etiological heterogeneity and ethnic diversity make molecular 
subtyping of GC complicated, thus making it difficult to determine molecular 
division systems and standard treatment modalities. Limited cohorts from South 
Korea, Singapore, Australia, and Japan have been studied; however, the 
mutational landscape of gastric adenocarcinomas in Chinese patients is still 
unknown.
METHODS: We performed a targeted sequencing panel focusing on cancer-related 
genes and tumor-associated microorganisms of 529 gastric adenocarcinoma samples 
with matched blood controls. We identified 449 clinically relevant gene 
mutations.
RESULTS: Approximately 47.1% of Chinese patients with GC harbored at least one 
actionable mutation. The top somatic mutations were TP53, ARID1A, LRP1B, PIK3CA, 
ERBB2, CDH1, KRAS, FAT4, CCNE1, and KMT2D. Truncation mutations of ARID1A, 
KMT2D, RNF43, TGFBR2, and CIC occurred in patients with high tumor mutational 
burden. Gene amplifications of ERBB2, CCNE1, CDK12, and CCND1 were detected in 
patients with low tumor mutational burden. Pathway analysis revealed common gene 
alterations in the Wnt and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways. The ratio of patients 
with high microsatellite instability was significantly lower than other cohorts, 
and high microsatellite instability and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive 
features seemed mutually inclusive in Chinese patients with GC. In 44 (8.3%) 
patients, 45 germline mutations were identified, among which SPINK1 mutations, 
all SPINK1 c.194 + 2T > C, were present in 15.9% (7/44) of patients. 
Microorganisms found in Chinese patients with GC included Helicobacter pylori, 
EBV, hepatitis B virus, and human papillomavirus types 16 and 18.
CONCLUSION: Identification of varied molecular features by targeted 
next-generation sequencing provides more insight into patient stratification and 
offers more possibilities for both targeted therapies and immunotherapies of 
Chinese patients with GC.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: This study investigated the genomic alteration 
profile of 529 Chinese patients with gastric adenocarcinoma by deep targeting 
sequencing, which might be the largest Chinese cohort on the genomic research of 
gastric adenocarcinoma up to now.

Â© 2021 The Authors. The Oncologist published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/onco.13695
PMCID: PMC8100567
PMID: 33511732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures of potential conflicts of interest 
may be found at the end of this article.