1. Front Genet. 2021 Jan 13;11:632311. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.632311.
eCollection  2020.

A Density Peak-Based Method to Detect Copy Number Variations From 
Next-Generation Sequencing Data.

Xie K(1), Tian Y(1)(2), Yuan X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi'an, 
China.
(2)Xi'an Key Laboratory of Computational Bioinformatics, The School of Computer 
Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi'an, China.

Copy number variation (CNV) is a common type of structural variations in human 
genome and confers biological meanings to human complex diseases. Detection of 
CNVs is an important step for a systematic analysis of CNVs in medical research 
of complex diseases. The recent development of next-generation sequencing (NGS) 
platforms provides unprecedented opportunities for the detection of CNVs at a 
base-level resolution. However, due to the intrinsic characteristics behind NGS 
data, accurate detection of CNVs is still a challenging task. In this article, 
we propose a new density peak-based method, called dpCNV, for the detection of 
CNVs from NGS data. The algorithm of dpCNV is designed based on density peak 
clustering algorithm. It extracts two features, i.e., local density and minimum 
distance, from sequencing read depth (RD) profile and generates a 
two-dimensional data. Based on the generated data, a two-dimensional null 
distribution is constructed to test the significance of each genome bin and then 
the significant genome bins are declared as CNVs. We test the performance of the 
dpCNV method on a number of simulated datasets and make comparison with several 
existing methods. The experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method 
outperforms others in terms of sensitivity and F1-score. We further apply it to 
a set of real sequencing samples and the results demonstrate the validity of 
dpCNV. Therefore, we expect that dpCNV can be used as a supplementary to 
existing methods and may become a routine tool in the field of genome mutation 
analysis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Xie, Tian and Yuan.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.632311
PMCID: PMC7838601
PMID: 33519925

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.