1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2020 Nov 5;23:577-591. doi:
10.1016/j.omtn.2020.10.044.  eCollection 2021 Mar 5.

HDAC1-mediated deacetylation of HIF1α prevents atherosclerosis progression by 
promoting miR-224-3p-mediated inhibition of FOSL2.

Wang H(1)(2), Sugimoto K(3)(2), Lu H(1), Yang WY(1), Liu JY(1), Yang HY(1), Song 
YB(3), Yan D(3), Zou TY(4), Shen S(1).

Author information:
(1)Stroke Center, the First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University, Guangzhou 
510630, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Dongzhimen Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese 
Medicine, Beijing 100700, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Encephalopathy, Heilongjiang Academy of Chinese Medical 
Sciences, Harbin 150001, P.R. China.

We intended to characterize functional relevance of microRNA (miR)-224-3p in 
endothelial cell (EC) apoptosis and reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation 
in atherosclerosis, considering also the integral involvement of histone 
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)-mediated hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF1α) 
deacetylation. The binding affinity between miR-224-3p and Fos-like antigen 2 
(FOSL2) was predicted and validated. Furthermore, we manipulated miR-224-3p, 
FOSL2, HDAC1, and HIF1α expression in oxidized low-density lipoprotein 
(ox-LDL)-induced ECs, aiming to clarify their effects on cell activities, 
inflammation, and ROS level. Additionally, we examined the impact of miR-224-3p 
on aortic atherosclerotic plaque and lesions in a high-fat-diet-induced 
atherosclerosis model in ApoE-/- mice. Clinical atherosclerotic samples and 
ox-LDL-induced human aortic ECs (HAECs) exhibited low HDAC1/miR-224-3p 
expression and high HIF1α/FOSL2 expression. miR-224-3p repressed EC cell 
apoptosis, inflammatory responses, and intracellular ROS levels through 
targeting FOSL2. HIF1α reduced miR-224-3p expression to accelerate EC apoptosis 
and ROS accumulation. Moreover, HDAC1 inhibited HIF1α expression by 
deacetylation, which in turn enhanced miR-224-3p expression to attenuate EC 
apoptosis and ROS accumulation. miR-224-3p overexpression reduced 
atherosclerotic lesions in vivo. In summary, HDAC1 overexpression may enhance 
the anti-atherosclerotic and endothelial-protective effects of 
miR-224-3p-mediated inhibition of FOSL2 by deacetylating HIF1α, underscoring a 
novel therapeutic insight against experimental atherosclerosis.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2020.10.044
PMCID: PMC7815465
PMID: 33510945

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.