1. J Appl Genet. 2021 May;62(2):235-248. doi: 10.1007/s13353-021-00609-4. Epub
2021  Jan 29.

Herbicide stress-induced DNA methylation changes in two Zea mays inbred lines 
differing in Roundup® resistance.

Tyczewska A(1), Gracz-Bernaciak J(2), Szymkowiak J(2), Twardowski T(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland. 
agatat@ibch.poznan.pl.
(2)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland.

DNA methylation plays a crucial role in the regulation of gene expression, 
activity of transposable elements, defense against foreign DNA, and inheritance 
of specific gene expression patterns. The link between stress exposure and 
sequence-specific changes in DNA methylation was hypothetical until it was shown 
that stresses can induce changes in the gene expression through hypomethylation 
or hypermethylation of DNA. To detect changes in DNA methylation under herbicide 
stress in two local Zea mays inbred lines exhibiting differential susceptibility 
to Roundup®, the methylation-sensitive amplified polymorphism (MSAP) technique 
was used. The overall DNA methylation levels were determined at approximately 
60% for both tested lines. The most significant changes were observed for the 
more sensitive Z. mays line, where 6 h after the herbicide application, a large 
increase in the level of DNA methylation (attributed to the increase in fully 
methylated bands (18.65%)) was noted. DNA sequencing revealed that changes in 
DNA methylation profiles occurred in genes encoding heat shock proteins, 
membrane proteins, transporters, kinases, lipases, methyltransferases, 
zinc-finger proteins, cytochromes, and transposons. Herbicide stress-induced 
changes depended on the Z. mays variety, and the large increase in DNA 
methylation level in the sensitive line resulted in a lower ability to cope with 
stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/s13353-021-00609-4
PMCID: PMC8032638
PMID: 33512663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.