1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 May 7;49(8):e43. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab009.

Single cell epigenetic visualization assay.

Kint S(1)(2), Van Criekinge W(1), Vandekerckhove L(2), De Vos WH(3), Bomsztyk 
K(4), Krause DS(5), Denisenko O(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Data Analysis and Mathematical Modeling, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.
(3)Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(5)Depts. of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology and Cell Biology; Yale Stem Cell 
Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Characterization of the epigenetic status of individual cells remains a 
challenge. Current sequencing approaches have limited coverage, and it is 
difficult to assign an epigenetic status to the transcription state of 
individual gene alleles in the same cell. To address these limitations, a 
targeted microscopy-based epigenetic visualization assay (EVA) was developed for 
detection and quantification of epigenetic marks at genes of interest in single 
cells. The assay is based on an in situ biochemical reaction between an 
antibody-conjugated alkaline phosphatase bound to the epigenetic mark of 
interest, and a 5'-phosphorylated fluorophore-labeled DNA oligo tethered to a 
target gene by gene-specific oligonucleotides. When the epigenetic mark is 
present at the gene, phosphate group removal by the phosphatase protects the 
oligo from λ-exonuclease activity providing a quantitative fluorescent readout. 
We applied EVA to measure 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and H3K9Ac levels at different 
genes and the HIV-1 provirus in human cell lines. To link epigenetic marks to 
gene transcription, EVA was combined with RNA-FISH. Higher 5mC levels at the 
silenced compared to transcribed XIST gene alleles in female somatic cells 
validated this approach and demonstrated that EVA can be used to relate 
epigenetic marks to the transcription status of individual gene alleles.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab009
PMCID: PMC8096246
PMID: 33511400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]