1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jan 28;22(3):1306. doi: 10.3390/ijms22031306.

Effect of Increased IL-1β on Expression of HK in Alzheimer's Disease.

Han S(1), He Z(2), Jacob C(1), Hu X(1), Liang X(1), Xiao W(1), Wan L(1), Xiao 
P(1), D'Ascenzo N(1)(3), Ni J(2), Liu Q(2), Xie Q(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan 430074, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 
518055, China.
(3)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Istituto 
Neurologico Mediterraneo, Neuromed IRCCS, 86077 Pozzilli, Italy.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by 
decreased glucose metabolism and increased neuroinflammation. Hexokinase (HK) is 
the key enzyme of glucose metabolism and is associated with mitochondria to 
exert its function. Recent studies have demonstrated that the dissociation of HK 
from mitochondria is enough to activate the NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) 
inflammasome and leads to the release of interleukin-1β (IL-1β). However, the 
effect of increased IL-1β on the expression of HK is still unclear in AD. In 
this paper, we used positron emission tomography (PET), Western blotting and 
immunofluorescence to study the glucose metabolism, and the expression and 
distribution of HK in AD. Furthermore, we used lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 
nigericin (Nig), CY-09 and lonidamine (LND) to treat N2a and N2a-sw cells to 
investigate the link between IL-1β and HK in AD. The results show decreased 
expression of HK and the dissociation of HK from mitochondria in AD. 
Furthermore, a reduction of the expression of IL-1β could increase the 
expression of HK in AD. These results suggest that inhibiting inflammation may 
help to restore glucose metabolism in AD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22031306
PMCID: PMC7865721
PMID: 33525649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial 
interests or personal relationships that may be considered as potential 
competing interests: Q.X. reports that he is the chief scientist and co-founder 
of Suzhou RAYCAN Technology Co., Ltd. (Suzhou, Jiangsu, China); and is also the 
co-founder of Wuhan RAYDATA Technology Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, Hubei, China). L.W. 
reports that he is the CEO and co-founder of Wuhan RAYDATA Technology Co., Ltd., 
Wuhan, Hubei, China. S.H., Z.H., C.J., X.H., X.L., W.X., P.X., N.D., J.N. and 
Q.L. have nothing to disclose.