1. ACS Catal. 2020 Jun 5;10(11):6113-6118. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.0c01231. Epub
2020  May 11.

Engineer P. multocida Heparosan Synthase 2 (PmHS2) for Size-Controlled Synthesis 
of Longer Heparosan Oligosaccharides.

Na L(1), Yu H(1), McArthur JB(1), Ghosh T(1), Asbell T(1), Chen X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, One Shields Avenue, Davis, 
California 95616, United States.

Pasteurella multocida heparosan synthase 2 (PmHS2) is a dual-function 
polysaccharide synthase having both α1-4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 
(α1-4-GlcNAcT) and β1-4-glucuronyltransferase (β1-4-GlcAT) activities located in 
two separate catalytic domains. We found that removing PmHS2 N-terminal 80-amino 
acid residues improved enzyme stability and expression level while retaining its 
substrate promiscuity. We also identified the reverse glycosylation activities 
of PmHS2 which complicated its application in size-controlled synthesis of 
oligosaccharides longer than hexasaccharide. Engineered Δ80PmHS2 
single-function-glycosyltransferase mutants Δ80PmHS2_D291N (α1-4-GlcNAcT lacking 
both forward and reverse β1-4-GlcAT activities) and Δ80PmHS2_D569N (β1-4-GlcAT 
lacking both forward and reverse α1-4-GlcNAcT activities) were designed and 
showed to minimize side product formation. They were successfully used in a 
sequential one-pot multienzyme (OPME) platform for size-controlled high-yield 
production of oligosaccharides up to decasaccharide. The study draws attention 
to the consideration of reverse glycosylation activities of 
glycosyltransferases, including polysaccharide synthases, when applying them in 
the synthesis of oligosaccharides and polysaccharides. The mutagenesis strategy 
has the potential to be extended to other multifunctional polysaccharide 
synthases with reverse glycosylation activities to generate catalysts with 
improved synthetic efficiency.

DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.0c01231
PMCID: PMC7842274
PMID: 33520345

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.