1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2021 Feb;71(2):004644. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.004644.

Limosilactobacillus balticus sp. nov., Limosilactobacillus agrestis sp. nov., 
Limosilactobacillus albertensis sp. nov., Limosilactobacillus rudii sp. nov. and 
Limosilactobacillus fastidiosus sp. nov., five novel Limosilactobacillus species 
isolated from the vertebrate gastrointestinal tract, and proposal of six 
subspecies of Limosilactobacillus reuteri adapted to the gastrointestinal tract 
of specific vertebrate hosts.

Li F(1), Cheng CC(2), Zheng J(3), Liu J(1), Quevedo RM(1), Li J(1), Roos S(4), 
Gänzle MG(1), Walter J(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2E1, Canada.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
T6G 2E1, Canada.
(3)Huazhong Agricultural University, State Key Laboratory of Agricultural 
Microbiology, Hubei Key Laboratory of Agricultural Bioinformatics, Wuhan, Hubei, 
430070, PR China.
(4)Department of Molecular Sciences, Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, 750 07, Sweden.
(5)APC Microbiome Ireland, School of Microbiology, and Department of Medicine, 
University College Cork, Cork, T12 YT20, Ireland.

Ten strains, BG-AF3-AT, pH52_RY, WF-MT5-AT, BG-MG3-A, Lr3000T, RRLNB_1_1, 
STM3_1T, STM2_1, WF-MO7-1T and WF-MA3-C, were isolated from intestinal or faecal 
samples of rodents, pheasant and primate. 16S rRNA gene analysis identified them 
as Limosilactobacillus reuteri. However, average nucleotide identity and digital 
DNA-DNA hybridization values based on whole genomes were below 95 and 70 %, 
respectively, and thus below the threshold levels for bacterial species 
delineation. Based on genomic, chemotaxonomic and morphological analyses, we 
propose five novel species with the names Limosilactobacillus balticus sp. nov. 
(type strain BG-AF3-AT=DSM 110574T=LMG 31633T), Limosilactobacillus agrestis sp. 
nov. (type strain WF-MT5-AT=DSM 110569T=LMG 31629T), Limosilactobacillus 
albertensis sp. nov. (type strain Lr3000T=DSM 110573T=LMG 31632T), 
Limosilactobacillus rudii sp. nov. (type strain STM3_1T=DSM 110572T=LMG 31631T) 
and Limosilactobacillus fastidiosus sp. nov. (type strain WF-MO7-1T=DSM 
110576T=LMG 31630T). Core genome phylogeny and experimental evidence of host 
adaptation of strains of L. reuteri further provide a strong rationale to 
consider a number of distinct lineages within this species as subspecies. Here 
we propose six subspecies of L. reuteri: L. reuteri subsp. kinnaridis subsp. 
nov. (type strain AP3T=DSM 110703T=LMG 31724T), L. reuteri subsp. porcinus 
subsp. nov. (type strain 3c6T=DSM 110571T=LMG 31635T), L. reuteri subsp. murium 
subsp. nov. (type strain lpuph1T=DSM 110570T=LMG 31634T), L. reuteri subsp. 
reuteri subsp. nov. (type strain F 275T=DSM 20016T=ATCC 23272T), L. reuteri 
subsp. suis subsp. nov. (type strain 1063T=ATCC 53608T=LMG 31752T) and L. 
reuteri subsp. rodentium subsp. nov. (type strain 100-23T=DSM 17509T=CIP 
109821T).

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.004644
PMCID: PMC8346765
PMID: 33533708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.