1. J Pathol. 2021 Jun;254(2):105-108. doi: 10.1002/path.5637. Epub 2021 Mar 23.

Implications of a granulocyte-high glioblastoma microenvironment in immune 
suppression and therapy resistance(†).

Krishnan S(1), Amoozgar Z(1), Fukumura D(1), Jain RK(1).

Author information:
(1)Edwin L. Steele Laboratories, Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment on
    J Pathol. 2021 Feb;253(2):160-173. doi: 10.1002/path.5569.

The failure of anti-VEGF/R and immune checkpoint therapies to improve overall 
survival in Phase III clinical trials in glioblastoma (GBM) is considered to be 
due in part to the prevalent immunosuppression in the GBM tumor 
microenvironment. Immune suppression is mediated in part by resident microglia 
and bone-marrow-derived myeloid cells recruited during tumor progression. A 
paper by Blank et al published in a recent issue of The Journal of Pathology 
proposes a myeloid cell-mediated mechanism that could contribute to resistance 
to anti-VEGF/R in GBM patients. A granulocyte-rich GBM tumor microenvironment 
may push the associated microglia/macrophages to exhibit an activated and immune 
suppressive phenotype. The identification of pro-angiogenic factors produced by 
microglia/macrophages and granulocytes in such a tumor microenvironment may 
offer new targets for improving antiangiogenic therapy of GBM beyond VEGF. 
Further, consideration of parameters such as IDH status, corticosteroid dosage, 
tumor mutational burden, gender, vascular function, and pericyte coverage could 
exploit current immunotherapies to the fullest to reprogram the granulocyte-rich 
immunosuppressive GBM tumor microenvironment to an immunostimulatory one. © 2021 
The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & 
Sons, Ltd.

© 2021 The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.5637
PMCID: PMC8262382
PMID: 33534142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: SK, ZA, and DF 
report no conflicts of interest. RKJ has received an Honorarium from Amgen; 
consultant fees from Chugai, Elpis, Merck, Ophthotech, Pfizer, SPARC, SynDevRx, 
and XTuit; owns equity in Accurius, Enlight, Ophthotech, and SynDevRx; is on the 
Board of Trustees of Tekla Healthcare Investors, Tekla Life Sciences Investors, 
Tekla Healthcare Opportunities Fund, and Tekla World Healthcare Fund; and 
received a research grant from Boehringer Ingelheim.