1. Channels (Austin). 2021 Dec;15(1):253-261. doi: 10.1080/19336950.2021.1875645.

Expression defect of the rare variant/Brugada mutation R1512W depends upon the 
SCN5A splice variant background and can be rescued by mexiletine and the common 
polymorphism H558R.

Hu RM(1)(2), Song EJ(3), Tester DJ(4), Deschenes I(5), Ackerman MJ(4), Makielski 
JC(2), Tan BH(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Heart Center & Beijing Key Laboratory of 
Hypertension, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University , Beijing, 
China.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin , Madison, WI, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Departments of Medicine, Pediatrics, and Molecular Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester , MN, USA.
(5)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, The Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, the Ohio 
State University , Columbus, OH, USA.

Background : Mutations in SCN5A that decrease Na current underlie arrhythmia 
syndromes such as the Brugada syndrome (BrS). SCN5A in humans has two splice 
variants, one lacking a glutamine at position 1077 (Q1077del) and one containing 
Q1077. We investigated the effect of splice variant background on 
loss-of-function and rescue for R1512W, a mutation reported to cause BrS. 
Methods and results : We made the mutation in both variants and expressed them 
in HEK-293 cells for voltage-clamp study. After 24 hours of transfection, the 
current expression level of R1512W was reduced by ~50% in both Q1077del and 
Q1077 compared to the wild-type (WT) channel, respectively. The activation and 
inactivation midpoint were not different between WT and mutant channels in both 
splice variant backgrounds. However, slower time constants of recovery and 
enhanced intermediate inactivation were observed for R1512W/Q1077 compared with 
WT-Q1077, while the recovery and intermediate inactivation parameters of 
R1512W/Q1077del were similar to WT-Q1077del. Furthermore, both mexiletine and 
the common polymorphism H558R restored peak sodium current (INa) amplitude of 
the mutant channel by increasing the cell surface expression of SCN5A. 
Conclusion : These findings provide further evidence that the splice variant 
affects the molecular phenotype with implications for the clinical phenotype, 
and they provide insight into the expression defect mechanisms and potential 
treatment in BrS.

DOI: 10.1080/19336950.2021.1875645
PMCID: PMC7872018
PMID: 33535892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.