1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Feb 3;22(4):1536. doi: 10.3390/ijms22041536.

A Mechanistic Model of NMDA and AMPA Receptor-Mediated Synaptic Transmission in 
Individual Hippocampal CA3-CA1 Synapses: A Computational Multiscale Approach.

Micheli P(1), Ribeiro R(1)(2), Giorgetti A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy.
(2)Institute for Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-9) and Institute for Advanced 
Simulations (IAS-5), "Computational Biomedicine", Forschungszentrum Jülich, 
52428 Jülich, Germany.

Inside hippocampal circuits, neuroplasticity events that individual cells may 
undergo during synaptic transmissions occur in the form of Long-Term 
Potentiation (LTP) and Long-Term Depression (LTD). The high density of NMDA 
receptors expressed on the surface of the dendritic CA1 spines confers to 
hippocampal CA3-CA1 synapses the ability to easily undergo NMDA-mediated LTP and 
LTD, which is essential for some forms of explicit learning in mammals. 
Providing a comprehensive kinetic model that can be used for running computer 
simulations of the synaptic transmission process is currently a major challenge. 
Here, we propose a compartmentalized kinetic model for CA3-CA1 synaptic 
transmission. Our major goal was to tune our model in order to predict the 
functional impact caused by disease associated variants of NMDA receptors 
related to severe cognitive impairment. Indeed, for variants Glu413Gly and 
Cys461Phe, our model predicts negative shifts in the glutamate affinity and 
changes in the kinetic behavior, consistent with experimental data. These 
results point to the predictive power of this multiscale viewpoint, which aims 
to integrate the quantitative kinetic description of large interaction networks 
typical of system biology approaches with a focus on the quality of a few, key, 
molecular interactions typical of structural biology ones.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22041536
PMCID: PMC7913719
PMID: 33546429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.