1. Sci Rep. 2021 Feb 4;11(1):3138. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-82737-9.

Adaptor Template Oligo-Mediated Sequencing (ATOM-Seq) is a new ultra-sensitive 
UMI-based NGS library preparation technology for use with cfDNA and cfRNA.

Dunwell TL(1), Dailey SC(1), Ottestad AL(2)(3), Yu J(1), Becker PW(1), Scaife 
S(1), Richman SD(4), Wood HM(4), Slaney H(4), Bottomley D(4), Yang X(5), Xiao 
H(5), Wahl SGF(2)(3), Grønberg BH(2)(3), Dai H(2)(6), Fu G(7).

Author information:
(1)GeneFirst Ltd, Building E5, Culham Science Centre, Abingdon, OX14 3DB, UK.
(2)Department of Oncology, St. Olav's Hospital, Trondheim University Hospital, 
Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, 
Norway.
(4)Pathology and Data Analytics, Leeds Institute of Medical Research, University 
of Leeds, St James University Hospital, Leeds, LS9 7TF, UK.
(5)Guangzhou Biotron Technology Co., Ltd, Room 204, Zone C, Science and 
Technology Innovation Base, No. 80, Lanyue Road, Science City, Guangzhou, China.
(6)Department of Pathology, St. Olav's Hospital, Trondheim University Hospital, 
Trondheim, Norway.
(7)GeneFirst Ltd, Building E5, Culham Science Centre, Abingdon, OX14 3DB, UK. 
Guoliang.Fu@genefirst.com.

Liquid biopsy testing utilising Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) is rapidly 
moving towards clinical adoption for personalised oncology. However, before NGS 
can fulfil its potential any novel testing approach must identify ways of 
reducing errors, allowing separation of true low-frequency mutations from 
procedural artefacts, and be designed to improve upon current technologies. 
Popular NGS technologies typically utilise two DNA capture approaches; PCR and 
ligation, which have known limitations and seem to have reached a development 
plateau with only small, stepwise improvements being made. To maximise the 
ultimate utility of liquid biopsy testing we have developed a highly versatile 
approach to NGS: Adaptor Template Oligo Mediated Sequencing (ATOM-Seq). 
ATOM-Seq's strengths and versatility avoid the major limitations of both PCR- 
and ligation-based approaches. This technology is ligation free, simple, 
efficient, flexible, and streamlined, and it offers novel advantages that make 
it perfectly suited for use on highly challenging clinical material. Using 
reference and clinical materials, we demonstrate detection of known SNVs down to 
allele frequencies of 0.1% using as little as 20-25 ng of cfDNA, as well as the 
ability to detect fusions from RNA. We illustrate ATOM-Seq's suitability for 
clinical testing by showing high concordance rates between paired cfDNA and FFPE 
clinical samples.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82737-9
PMCID: PMC7862664
PMID: 33542447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: G.F., T.L.D., S.C.D., J.Y, P.B. and S.S. are or 
were direct employees of GeneFirst Ltd. X.Y. and H.X. are or were employees of 
Guangzhou Biotron Technology Co., Ltd which has financial interest in GeneFirst. 
All other authors declare no conflicts of interest.