1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Jan 22;100(3):e24359. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000024359.

Association of plasma polyunsaturated fatty acids with arterial blood pressure: 
A Mendelian randomization study.

Ma M(1), Yang F, Wang Z, Bao Q, Shen J, Xie X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

High polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) intake is recommended for primary and 
secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD). However, the association 
of PUFAs with blood pressure (BP) is still controversial. In the present study, 
two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis was performed to investigate 
the causal relationship of PUFAs with BP, including systolic blood pressure 
(SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and pulse pressure (PP).Genetic 
instruments and summary statistics for two-sample MR analysis were obtained from 
3 large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWASs). Eight single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) significantly (P < 5 × 10-8) related to 6 PUFAs were used 
as instrumental variables. Conventional inverse-variance weighted method was 
adopted to evaluate the causality of PUFAs with BP; the Weighted Median, 
MR-egger, and Leave-one-out method were used for sensitivity analyses.As a 
result, there was no evidence of a causal association between all PUFAs and SBP. 
In addition, arachidonic acid (AA, β = -0.04, P < .001) and eicosapentaenoic 
acid (EPA, β = -0.47, P = .02) were negatively associated with DBP, while 
linoleic acid (LA, β = 0.03, P = .005) and α-linolenic acid (ALA, β = 3.83, 
P < .001) were positively associated with DBP. There was no evidence of a causal 
relationship between either docosapentaenoic acid (DPA) or docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA) with DBP.In conclusion, a genetic predisposition to plasma polyunsaturated 
fatty acid (PUFA) had a divergent effect on DBP, independent of SBP. It 
suggested that it is helpful for lower DBP level to supplemental intake of AA 
and EPA or promote the conversion of LA and ALA to AA and EPA respectively, 
which need to be further validated with randomized controlled studies.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000024359
PMCID: PMC7837969
PMID: 33546071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.