1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2021 Jul;46(8):1407-1413. doi: 
10.1038/s41386-020-00945-9. Epub 2021 Feb 10.

Prospective randomized pharmacogenetic study of topiramate for treating alcohol 
use disorder.

Kranzler HR(1)(2), Morris PE(3), Pond T(3)(4), Crist RC(3), Kampman KM(3)(4), 
Hartwell EE(3)(4), Lynch KG(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. kranzler@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(2)Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Integrated 
Service Network 4, Crescenz VAMC, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. 
kranzler@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(4)Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Integrated 
Service Network 4, Crescenz VAMC, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    Neuropsychopharmacology. 2021 Jul;46(8):1546. doi: 
10.1038/s41386-021-01013-6.

In a prior study, topiramate reduced heavy drinking among individuals who sought 
to reduce their drinking, with the effect moderated by a single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP; rs2832407) in GRIK1, which encodes the kainate GluK1 receptor 
subunit (Kranzler et al. 2014). The present study sought to replicate 
prospectively the effect of topiramate and rs2832407 in patients with DSM-5 
alcohol use disorder (AUD) who sought to reduce or stop their drinking. We 
stratified the randomization on genotype (rs2832407*C-allele homozygotes vs. 
A-allele carriers) and assigned 170 European-American participants (71.2% male) 
to receive 12 weeks of treatment with topiramate (N  = 85), at a maximal daily 
dosage of 200 mg, or matching placebo (N = 85). At each of nine treatment visits 
participants received brief counseling to reduce drinking and increase abstinent 
days. We hypothesized that topiramate-treated patients with the rs2832407*CC 
genotype would reduce heavy drinking days (HDDs) more than the other three 
groups. The rate of treatment completion was 91.8% in both groups. The mean 
number of HDDs per week in the placebo group was 1.67 (95% CI = (1.29, 2.16), 
p = 0.0001) times greater than in the topiramate group, which was confirmed by 
the topiramate group's significantly greater reduction in the concentration of 
the liver enzyme γ-glutamyltransferase and lower alcohol-related problems score. 
There was no significant difference in topiramate's effect on HDDs between 
genotype groups. Although consistent with other studies showing a reduction in 
heavy drinking with topiramate treatment, the prior finding of a moderating 
effect of rs2832407 genotype was not replicated in this prospective trial.

DOI: 10.1038/s41386-020-00945-9
PMCID: PMC8209023
PMID: 33568796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]