1. G3 (Bethesda). 2021 Jan 18;11(1):jkaa051. doi: 10.1093/g3journal/jkaa051.

Independent evolution toward larger body size in the distinctive Faroe Island 
mice.

Wilches R(1), Beluch WH(1), McConnell E(2), Tautz D(2), Chan YF(1).

Author information:
(1)Friedrich Miescher Laboratory of the Max Planck Society, 72076 Tübingen, 
Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Department of Evolutionary 
Genetics, 24306 Plön, Germany.

Most phenotypic traits in nature involve the collective action of many genes. 
Traits that evolve repeatedly are particularly useful for understanding how 
selection may act on changing trait values. In mice, large body size has evolved 
repeatedly on islands and under artificial selection in the laboratory. 
Identifying the loci and genes involved in this process may shed light on the 
evolution of complex, polygenic traits. Here, we have mapped the genetic basis 
of body size variation by making a genetic cross between mice from the Faroe 
Islands, which are among the largest and most distinctive natural populations of 
mice in the world, and a laboratory mouse strain selected for small body size, 
SM/J. Using this F2 intercross of 841 animals, we have identified 111 loci 
controlling various aspects of body size, weight and growth hormone levels. By 
comparing against other studies, including the use of a joint meta-analysis, we 
found that the loci involved in the evolution of large size in the Faroese mice 
were largely independent from those of a different island population or other 
laboratory strains. We hypothesize that colonization bottleneck, historical 
hybridization, or the redundancy between multiple loci have resulted in the 
Faroese mice achieving an outwardly similar phenotype through a distinct 
evolutionary path.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Genetics 
Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/g3journal/jkaa051
PMCID: PMC8022703
PMID: 33561246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]