1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2021 Jan;10(1):462-474. doi: 10.21037/tlcr-20-588.

Narrative review: mesenchymal-epithelial transition inhibitors-meeting their 
target.

Safi D(1), Abu Hejleh T(2), Furqan M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Iowa, IA, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology, Oncology and Blood and Marrow Transplantation, 
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, IA, USA.

Genetic alterations in mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) are commonly 
found in solid tumors, especially in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 
However, agents targeting MET have not progressed until recently. Advancements 
in our understanding of the role of various MET aberrations in carcinogenesis 
have allowed MET-directed therapy to find its way to clinic use. Of all MET 
alterations, MET exon 14 skipping (METex14 skip+ or MET âˆ† 14 ), stands out as a 
true oncogenic driver. Recently, MET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) targeting 
METex14 skipping were able to demonstrate significant improvement in clinical 
outcomes including response rate and progression free survival. Of these, 
capmatinib was granted accelerated approval by the FDA in May 2020 for patients 
with advanced NSCLC harboring METex14 skip alterations. Tepotinib, another TKI, 
has shown significant activity in a phase II trial and received breakthrough 
therapy designation from the FDA in September 2019. MET amplification (METAmp ) 
and overexpression are usually a late phenomenon in tumorigenesis and aggravate 
malignant properties of transformed cells. Capmatinib and savolitinib have shown 
activity in patients with NSCLC with high levels of METAmp . Several other 
agents are being developed and under evaluation in clinical trials involving 
multiple tumor types. In addition to TKIs, MET overexpression is also an 
appealing target for development of antibody conjugated chemotherapy. 
Understanding the mechanisms of resistance to MET TKIs and alterations in 
anti-tumor immunity through MET inhibition are clinically relevant areas that 
need further exploration.

2021 Translational Lung Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr-20-588
PMCID: PMC7867750
PMID: 33569327

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tlcr-20-588). ME serves as an unpaid editorial board 
member of Translational Lung Cancer Research from Sep 2019 to Sep 2021. The 
other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.