1. Dermatol Online J. 2021 Jan 15;27(1):13030/qt18k3573s.

BRAF L597K mutation: an opportunity to treat.

Lobo-Martins S(1), Pais HL, Soares-de-Almeida L, Costa L, Mansinho A, Teixeira 
de Sousa R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital de Santa Maria-Centro Hospitalar 
Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon Instituto de Medicina Molecular-João Lobo 
Antunes, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon. 
slmoncology@gmail.com.

The outcomes of patients with metastatic melanoma (MM) have significantly 
improved after the introduction of BRAF-specific inhibitors. Herein is reported 
a patient with MM and non-V600-BRAF mutation who responded to iBRAF/iMEK 
therapy. In July 2014, a 63-year-old man presented with a 4.1mm-thick V600E-BRAF 
wild type melanoma on the back. Metastases were identified in one sentinel node 
and two of 11 subsequently excised lymph nodes, with no signs of distant 
metastatic disease. In September 2017, lung metastasis was observed and 
pembrolizumab was started. Progressive disease was apparent at cycle 10 and 
therapy was switched to ipilimumab. After four cycles, an asymmetric response 
was observed. In November 2017, next generation sequencing genomic profiling 
disclosed a rare L597K-BRAF mutation and vemurafenib plus cobimetinib therapy 
was initiated in January 2018. Seven days after treatment start, a remarkable 
clinical improvement was observed. In April 2018, the patient achieved partial 
response, which was sustained until October 2018. Cases of patients with 
non-V600-BRAF mutations responding to iBRAF/iMEK therapy have been reported over 
the last years. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case reporting 
response to combined iBRAF/iMEK therapy in a patient with metastatic melanoma 
harboring L597K mutation.

PMID: 33560788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]