1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2021 Jan;10(1):221-232. doi: 10.21037/tlcr-20-777.

Pretreatment neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio predicts treatment efficacy and 
prognosis of cytotoxic anticancer drugs, molecular targeted drugs, and immune 
checkpoint inhibitors in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Ishihara M(1), Ochiai R(1), Haruyama T(1), Sakamoto T(1), Tanzawa S(1), Honda 
T(1), Ota S(1), Ichikawa Y(1), Ishida T(2), Watanabe K(1), Seki N(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo 
University School of Medicine, Kaga, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Kaga, 
Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) has recently attracted 
attention as a prognostic predictor in patients with non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) who receive immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). However, the utility of 
NLR in relation to cytotoxic anticancer drugs or molecular targeted drugs 
remains unclear. We determined if NLR could predict the treatment efficacy and 
prognosis in NSCLC patients who receive cytotoxic anticancer drugs or molecular 
targeted drugs, as well as ICIs, in a cross-sectional manner.
METHODS: Of 658 patients with advanced NSCLC who received first-line systemic 
treatment in our hospital between 2008 and 2019, 312 who met the analytical 
criteria were included in the study. We retrospectively analyzed the ability of 
NLR with a cut-off value of 5 to predict time to treatment failure (TTF) and 
overall survival (OS) in patients who received the following treatments: 
first-line treatment with molecular targeted drugs (mt group, n=100); first-line 
treatment with cytotoxic anticancer drugs (wt group, n=212); and first-line 
treatment with cytotoxic anticancer drugs followed by ICIs (ICI group, n=58).
RESULTS: In the high- and low-NLR mt subgroups, median TTFs were 6.7 and 14.9 
months (P<0.01), respectively, and median survival times (MSTs) were 17.8 and 
39.1 months (P<0.01), respectively. In the high- and low-NLR wt subgroups, 
median TTFs were 1.5 and 5.8 months (P<0.01), and MSTs were 6.3 and 20.7 months 
(P<0.01), respectively. In the high- and low-NLR ICI subgroups, median TTFs were 
1.3 and 6.8 months (P<0.01), and MSTs were 9.2 and 25.8 months (P<0.01), 
respectively. Multivariate analysis identified NLR as a significant independent 
predictor of TTF [hazard ratio (HR) 1.89, P=0.01; HR 2.51, P<0.01; and HR 5.06, 
P<0.01 in the mt, wt, and ICI groups, respectively) and OS (HR 3.81, P<0.01; HR 
2.59, P<0.01; and HR 2.48, P<0.01, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that NLR might be a predictor of treatment 
efficacy and prognosis in advanced NSCLC patients who receive various systemic 
treatments. This finding of consistent applicability of NLR to a wide variety of 
systemic treatments is of great significance.

2021 Translational Lung Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr-20-777
PMCID: PMC7867774
PMID: 33569306

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tlcr-20-777). Dr. ST reports personal fees from 
AstraZeneca outside the submitted work. Dr. NS reports personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees from Taiho 
Pharmaceutical, personal fees from Daiichi Sankyo, personal fees from Ono 
Pharmaceutical, personal fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb, personal fees from MSD 
Oncology, personal fees from Nihon Medi-Physics, personal fees from Chugai 
Pharma, personal fees from Lilly Japan, personal fees from Pfizer Japan outside 
the submitted work. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.