1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Feb 7;13(4):663. doi: 10.3390/cancers13040663.

Recent Advancements in the Mechanisms Underlying Resistance to PD-1/PD-L1 
Blockade Immunotherapy.

Yuan Y(1), Adam A(1), Zhao C(2), Chen H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Hubei Province Key Laboratory of Allergy and 
Immune-Related Diseases, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430071, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, 
China.

Release of immunoreactive negative regulatory factors such as immune checkpoint 
limits antitumor responses. PD-L1 as a significant immunosuppressive factor has 
been involved in resistance to therapies such as chemotherapy and target therapy 
in various cancers. Via interacting with PD-1, PD-L1 can regulate other factors 
or lead to immune evasion of cancer cells. Besides, immune checkpoint blockade 
targeting PD-1/PD-L1 has promising therapeutic efficacy in the different tumors, 
but a significant percentage of patients cannot benefit from this therapy due to 
primary and acquired resistance during treatment. In this review, we described 
the utility of PD-L1 expression levels for predicting poor prognosis in some 
tumors and present evidence for a role of PD-L1 in resistance to therapies 
through PD-1/PD-L1 pathway and other correlating signaling pathways. Afterwards, 
we elaborate the key mechanisms underlying resistance to PD-1/PD-L1 blockade in 
cancer immunotherapy. Furthermore, promising combination of therapeutic 
strategies for patients resistant to PD-1/PD-L1 blockade therapy or other 
therapies associated with PD-L1 expression was also summarized.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13040663
PMCID: PMC7915065
PMID: 33562324

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.