1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Feb 10;18(4):1725. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18041725.

Associations of Sleep and Health Functioning with Premature Exit from Work: A 
Cohort Study with a Methodological Emphasis.

Kronholm E(1), Marshall NS(2)(3), Mänty M(4)(5), Lahti J(4), Lahelma E(4), 
Pietiläinen O(4), Rahkonen O(4), Lallukka T(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, P.O. Box 40, 00032 Helsinki, 
Finland.
(2)Sydney Nursing School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
(3)NHMRC Centre for Integrated Research and Understanding of Sleep (CIRUS), 
Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, 431 Glebe Pt Rd., Glebe, NSW 2036, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Tukholmankatu 8B, P.O. 
Box 20, FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(5)City of Vantaa, Unit of Statistics and Research, Asematie 7, 01300 Vantaa, 
Finland.

Sleep and functioning are associated with a risk of early workforce exit. 
However, patterns of change in sleep and functioning through time have not been 
investigated using person-oriented approaches to show what features of sleep and 
functioning are associated with an early exit. We examined the pattern of 
interactions between sleep and health functioning characterizing homogenous 
subgroups of employees and their associations with premature work exit. An 
additional aim was to provide a tutorial providing detailed description on how 
to apply these models, compared to traditional variable based risk factors. We 
analyzed data from 5148 midlife employees of the City of Helsinki, Finland, 
surveyed over three phases (2000-02, 2007, and 2012). Using repeated measures 
latent class analyses (RMLCA) we classified people into groups based on their 
trajectories in sleep and functioning. We identified four longitudinal groups: 
(1) Stable good sleep and functioning (reference), (2) Persistent sleep problems 
and good or moderate functioning, (3) Poor functioning with good sleep, and (4) 
Problematic sleep and health functioning. Compared to group 1, elevated risk was 
found in all classes with group 4 being the worst. In conclusion, focusing on 
person-orientated patterns of interactions between sleep and functioning helped 
produce qualitatively different and quantitatively stronger predictions than 
using conventional risk factor methodology. Thus, longitudinal person-oriented 
approaches may be a more powerful method for quantifying the role of sleep and 
health functioning as risks for premature exit from work.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18041725
PMCID: PMC7916758
PMID: 33578989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the 
decision to publish the results.