1. Oncol Lett. 2021 Mar;21(3):204. doi: 10.3892/ol.2021.12465. Epub 2021 Jan 12.

Gene expression profiling of CD34(+) cells from patients with myeloproliferative 
neoplasms.

Sharma M(1), Bhavani C(2), Suresh SB(1), Paul J(1), Yadav L(3), Ross C(1), 
Srivastava S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, St. John's Medical College and Hospital, Bengaluru, 
Karnataka 560034, India.
(2)St. John's Research Institute, St. John's National Academy of Health 
Sciences, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560034, India.
(3)Department of Transfusion Medicine and Immunohematology, St. John's Medical 
College and Hospital, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560034, India.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are clonal disorders characterized by the 
increased proliferation of hematopoietic stem cell precursors and mature blood 
cells. Mutations of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2), Calreticulin (CALR) and MPL 
(myeloproliferative leukemia virus) are key driver mutations in MPN. However, 
the molecular profile of triple negative MPN has been a subject of ambiguity 
over the past few years. Mutations of, methylcytosine dioxygenase TET2, polycomb 
group protein ASXL1 and histone-lysine N-methyltransferase EZH2 genes have 
accounted for certain subsets of triple negative MPNs but the driving cause for 
majority of cases is still unexplored. The present study performed a 
microarray-based transcriptomic profile analysis of bone marrow-derived CD34(+) 
cells from seven MPN samples. A total of 21,448 gene signatures were obtained, 
which were further filtered into 472 upregulated and 202 downregulated genes. 
Gene ontology and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis highlighted 
an upregulation of genes involved in cell cycle and chromatin modification in 
JAK2V617F negative vs. positive MPN samples. Out of the upregulated genes, seven 
were associated with the hematopoietic stem cell signature, while forty-seven 
were associated with the embryonic stem cell signature. The majority of the 
genes identified were under the control of NANOG and E2F4 transcription factors. 
The PPI network indicated a strong interaction between chromatin modifiers and 
cell cycle genes, such as histone-lysine N-methyltransferase SUV39H1, SWI/SNF 
complex subunit SMARCC2, SMARCE2, chromatin remodeling complex subunit SS18, 
tubulin β (TUBB) and cyclin dependent kinase CDK1. Among the upregulated 
epigenetic markers, there was a ~10-fold increase in MYB expression in JAK2V617F 
negative samples. A significant increase in total CD34 counts in JAK2V617F 
negative vs. positive samples (P<0.05) was also observed. Overall, the present 
data showed a distinct pattern of expression in JAK2V617F negative vs. positive 
samples with upregulated genes involved in epigenetic modification.

Copyright: © Sharma et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2021.12465
PMCID: PMC7816297
PMID: 33574943