1. Proteins. 2021 Jul;89(7):819-831. doi: 10.1002/prot.26061. Epub 2021 Feb 24.

Investigation of the aquaporin-2 gating mechanism with molecular dynamics 
simulations.

Hadidi H(1), Kamali R(1), Binesh A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Fars, Iran.
(2)Hydro-Aerodynamics Division, Malek-e-Ashtar University of Technology, Shiraz, 
Tehran, Iran.

Aquaporin-2 plays a vital role in the human kidney as a water passage channel. 
Any disorder with its function can cause water imbalance and consequently 
disease in humans, especially nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI). For this 
reason, an accurate understanding of its performance can be useful for 
therapeutic purposes. In this article, we investigate the gating mechanism 
induced by spontaneous fluctuations in aquaporin-2's (AQP2) channels in the 
palmitoyl-oleoyl-phosphatidyl-ethanolamine lipid bilayer by molecular dynamics. 
Our results show that the selectivity filter (SF) in AQP2 is also a gating site 
depending on the side-chain conformation of His172. The important role of His172 
in modulating the wide and narrow conformations has been further investigated by 
the simulation of the H172G mutant. The osmotic permeability values of all four 
monomers are in the range of wide state and the average is very close to that of 
the wide channel formed by wild-type AQP2. Moreover, by calculating the osmotic 
permeability and the potential of mean force of each of the AQP2 monomers for 
wide/narrow states of the SF, it is seen that the SF at its narrow conformation 
can induce a much larger energy barrier for water molecules permeation, 
hindering the transport of water molecules remarkably. The reason for the 
discrepancy among osmotic permeabilities of different monomers of aquaporins is 
revealed by investigating the osmotic permeability of each monomer through the 
wide/narrow states of their SF.

Â© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.26061
PMID: 33576101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]