1. Viruses. 2021 Jan 31;13(2):220. doi: 10.3390/v13020220.

Development of Monoclonal Antibodies for Detection of Conserved and Variable 
Epitopes of Large Protein of Rabies Virus.

Zhao W(1), Su J(1), Zhao N(1), Liu J(1), Su S(1).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Engineering Laboratory of Animal Immunology, Institute of Immunology 
and College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 
210095, China.

Rabies virus (RABV) causes fatal neurological encephalitis and results in 
approximately 6000 human death cases worldwide every year. The large (L) protein 
of RABV, possessing conserved domains, is considered as the target for 
detection. In this study, three monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), designated as 3F3, 
3A6 and L-C, against L protein were generated by using the recombinant truncated 
L protein (aa 1431-1754) and the epitopes were also identified using a series of 
overlapping truncated polypeptides for testing the reactivity of mAbs with 
different RABV strains. The 1479EIFSIP1484, 1659RALSK1663 and 1724VFNSL1728 were 
identified as the minimal linear epitopes recognized by mAbs 3F3, 3A6 and L-C, 
respectively. Amino acid alignment showed epitope 1724VFNSL1728 recognized by 
mAb L-C is completely conserved among RABV strains, indicating that mAb L-C 
could be used to detect all of the RABV strains. Epitope 1479EIFSIP1484 is 
highly conserved among RABV strains except for a P1484S substitution in a China 
I sub-lineage strain of Asian lineage, which eliminated the reactivity of the 
epitope with mAb 3F3. However, the epitope 1659RALSK1663 was only completely 
conserved in the Africa-2 and Indian lineages, and a single A1660T substitution, 
mainly appeared in strains of the China I belonging to Asian lineage and a 
Cosmopolitan lineage strain, still retained the reactivity of the epitope with 
mAb 3A6. While both A1660T and K1663R substitutions in a China I lineage strain, 
single K1663R/Q substitution in some China II strains of Asian lineage and some 
Arctic-like lineage strains and R1659Q mutation in a strain of Africa-3 lineage 
eliminated the reactivity of the epitope with mAb 3A6, suggesting mAb 3A6 could 
be used for differentiation of variable epitopes of some strains in different 
lineages. Thus, variability and conservation of the three epitopes of L protein 
showed the reactive difference of mAbs among RABV strains of different lineages. 
These results may facilitate future studies in development of detection methods 
for RABV infection, the structure and function of RABV L protein.

DOI: 10.3390/v13020220
PMCID: PMC7911920
PMID: 33572652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.