1. Mar Drugs. 2021 Feb 9;19(2):98. doi: 10.3390/md19020098.

New Prenylated Indole Homodimeric and Pteridine Alkaloids from the 
Marine-Derived Fungus Aspergillus austroafricanus Y32-2.

Li P(1)(2)(3), Zhang M(1)(2)(3), Li H(1), Wang R(1)(3), Hou H(1)(3), Li X(1)(3), 
Liu K(1)(3), Chen H(4).

Author information:
(1)Engineering Research Center of Zebrafish Models for Human Diseases and Drug 
Screening of Shandong Province, Shandong Provincial Engineering Laboratory for 
Biological Testing Technology, Biology Institute, Qilu University of Technology 
(Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250103, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biobased Material and Green Papermaking, Qilu 
University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250353, China.
(3)Key Laboratory for Biosensor of Shandong Province, Biology Institute, Qilu 
University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250103, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Marine Bioactive Substances, First Institute of 
Oceanography, Ministry of Natural Resources, Qingdao 266061, China.

Chemical investigation of secondary metabolites from the marine-derived fungus 
Aspergillus austroafricanus Y32-2 resulted in the isolation of two new 
prenylated indole alkaloid homodimers, di-6-hydroxydeoxybrevianamide E (1) and 
dinotoamide J (2), one new pteridine alkaloid asperpteridinate A (3), with 
eleven known compounds (4-14). Their structures were elucidated by various 
spectroscopic methods including HRESIMS and NMR, while their absolute 
configurations were determined by ECD calculations. Each compound was evaluated 
for pro-angiogenic, anti-inflammatory effects in zebrafish models and 
cytotoxicity for HepG2 human liver carcinoma cells. As a result, compounds 2, 4, 
5, 7, 10 exhibited pro-angiogenic activity in a PTK787-induced vascular injury 
zebrafish model in a dose-dependent manner, compounds 7, 8, 10, 11 displayed 
anti-inflammatory activity in a CuSO4-induced zebrafish inflammation model, and 
compound 6 showed significant cytotoxicity against HepG2 cells with an IC50 
value of 30 Âµg/mL.

DOI: 10.3390/md19020098
PMCID: PMC7916005
PMID: 33572212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.