1. NAR Genom Bioinform. 2021 Feb 9;3(1):lqab002. doi: 10.1093/nargab/lqab002. 
eCollection 2021 Mar.

Increased yields of duplex sequencing data by a series of quality control tools.

Povysil G(1), Heinzl M(1), Salazar R(1), Stoler N(2), Nekrutenko A(2), 
Tiemann-Boege I(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University, 4020 Linz, Austria.
(2)Graduate Program in Bioinformatics and Genomics, The Huck Institutes for Life 
Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Erratum in
    NAR Genom Bioinform. 2021 Mar 01;3(1):lqab014. doi: 10.1093/nargab/lqab014.

Duplex sequencing is currently the most reliable method to identify ultra-low 
frequency DNA variants by grouping sequence reads derived from the same DNA 
molecule into families with information on the forward and reverse strand. 
However, only a small proportion of reads are assembled into duplex consensus 
sequences (DCS), and reads with potentially valuable information are discarded 
at different steps of the bioinformatics pipeline, especially reads without a 
family. We developed a bioinformatics toolset that analyses the tag and family 
composition with the purpose to understand data loss and implement modifications 
to maximize the data output for the variant calling. Specifically, our tools 
show that tags contain polymerase chain reaction and sequencing errors that 
contribute to data loss and lower DCS yields. Our tools also identified 
chimeras, which likely reflect barcode collisions. Finally, we also developed a 
tool that re-examines variant calls from raw reads and provides different 
summary data that categorizes the confidence level of a variant call by a 
tier-based system. With this tool, we can include reads without a family and 
check the reliability of the call, that increases substantially the sequencing 
depth for variant calling, a particular important advantage for low-input 
samples or low-coverage regions.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of NAR 
Genomics and Bioinformatics.

DOI: 10.1093/nargab/lqab002
PMCID: PMC7872198
PMID: 33575654