1. J Chem Inf Model. 2021 Mar 22;61(3):1354-1367. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c01407. 
Epub 2021 Feb 11.

Structural Mechanism of ω-Currents in a Mutated Kv7.2 Voltage Sensor Domain from 
Molecular Dynamics Simulations.

Alberini G(1)(2), Benfenati F(1)(3), Maragliano L(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Synaptic Neuroscience and Technology (NSYN@UniGe), Istituto 
Italiano di Tecnologia, Largo Rosanna Benzi, 10, 16132 Genova, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Università degli Studi di Genova, Viale 
Benedetto XV, 3, 16132 Genova, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Largo Rosanna Benzi, 10, 16132 
Genova, Italy.
(4)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic University of 
Marche, Via Brecce Bianche, 60131 Ancona, Italy.

Activation of voltage-gated ion channels is regulated by conformational changes 
of the voltage sensor domains (VSDs), four water- and ion-impermeable modules 
peripheral to the central, permeable pore domain. Anomalous currents, defined as 
ω-currents, have been recorded in response to mutations of residues on the VSD 
S4 helix and associated with ion fluxes through the VSDs. In humans, gene 
defects in the potassium channel Kv7.2 result in a broad range of epileptic 
disorders, from benign neonatal seizures to severe epileptic encephalopathies. 
Experimental evidence suggests that the R207Q mutation in S4, associated with 
peripheral nerve hyperexcitability, induces ω-currents at depolarized 
potentials, but the fine structural details are still elusive. In this work, we 
use atom-detailed molecular dynamics simulations and a refined model structure 
of the Kv7.2 VSD in the active conformation in a membrane/water environment to 
study the effect of R207Q and four additional mutations of proven clinical 
importance. Our results demonstrate that the R207Q mutant shows the most 
pronounced increase of hydration in the internal VSD cavity, a feature favoring 
the occurrence of ω-currents. Free energy and kinetics calculations of sodium 
permeation through the native and mutated VSD indicate as more favorable the 
formation of a cationic current in the latter. Overall, our simulations 
establish a mechanistic linkage between genetic variations and their 
physiological outcome, by providing a computational description that includes 
both thermodynamic and kinetic features of ion permeation associated with 
ω-currents.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c01407
PMCID: PMC8023575
PMID: 33570938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.