1. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2021 Apr;51(3):741-747. doi:
10.1007/s11239-021-02386-7.  Epub 2021 Feb 13.

Use of the VerifyNow point of care assay to assess the pharmacodynamic effects 
of loading and maintenance dose regimens of prasugrel and ticagrelor.

Angiolillo DJ(1), Been L(2), Rubinstein M(3), Martin M(3), Rollini F(2), Franchi 
F(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Florida College of Medicine-Jacksonville, 655 West 8th Street, 
Jacksonville, FL, 32209, USA. dominick.angiolillo@jax.ufl.edu.
(2)University of Florida College of Medicine-Jacksonville, 655 West 8th Street, 
Jacksonville, FL, 32209, USA.
(3)Instrumentation Laboratory, San Diego, CA, USA.

Prasugrel and ticagrelor are potent oral platelet P2Y12 inhibitors and are 
recommended over clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS). 
Oral platelet P2Y12 inhibitors are characterized by varying degrees of 
pharmacodynamic response profiles as assessed by a variety of commercially 
available assays. Because of its ease of use, rapid turnaround times and ability 
to provide results specific to P2Y12 inhibitory effects, VerifyNow has emerged 
as one of the most commonly utilized platelet function assays. However, 
reference ranges with VerifyNow have been reported mainly for clopidogrel and 
there has not yet been any study specifically conducted to provide the expected 
on treatment reference ranges following administration of prasugrel and 
ticagrelor. This was a prospective single center investigation conducted in 120 
patients with ACS who were treated with prasugrel or ticagrelor as per standard 
of care. Patients who underwent percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) were 
treated with a loading dose of prasugrel (60 mg) or ticagrelor (180 mg), and 
patients who were on maintenance therapy were taking prasugrel (10 mg qd or 5 mg 
qd) or ticagrelor (90 mg bid). Platelet function testing was performed using the 
VerifyNow™ PRUTest™. The overall range of PRUTest values was lower than that 
observed in studies of patients treated with clopidogrel. The use of a 
maintenance dose regimen had a wider range of PRUTest values compared to the use 
of a loading dose for both prasugrel (1-179 vs. 2-128) and ticagrelor (1-196 vs. 
1-177). The average PRUTest values in patients on prasugrel and ticagrelor 
maintenance dosing were 20% and 9% higher those observed in patients treated 
with a loading dose. PRUTest results following loading dose administration were 
very similar between drugs, but were 20% higher with prasugrel compared with 
ticagrelor during maintenance dosing. This study establishes expected PRUTest 
ranges for patients taking loading and maintenance doses of prasugrel and 
ticagrelor.Clinical Trial Registration http://www.clinicaltrials.gov Unique 
Identifier: NCT04492423, registered July 2020 retrospectively registered.

DOI: 10.1007/s11239-021-02386-7
PMCID: PMC8049919
PMID: 33582955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]