1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jan 28;12:637381. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.637381. 
eCollection 2021.

The Potential of Single-Cell Oils Derived From Filamentous Fungi as Alternative 
Feedstock Sources for Biodiesel Production.

Mhlongo SI(1), Ezeokoli OT(2), Roopnarain A(3), Ndaba B(3), Sekoai PT(4), 
Habimana O(4), Pohl CH(2).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Medical Microbiology, School of Laboratory Medicine and Medical 
Sciences, Medical School, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.
(2)Department of Microbial, Biochemical and Food Biotechnology, University of 
the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa.
(3)Microbiology and Environmental Biotechnology Research Group, Institute for 
Soil, Climate and Water, Agricultural Research Council, Pretoria, South Africa.
(4)The School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, 
Hong Kong.

Microbial lipids, also known as single-cell oils (SCOs), are highly attractive 
feedstocks for biodiesel production due to their fast production rates, minimal 
labor requirements, independence from seasonal and climatic changes, and ease of 
scale-up for industrial processing. Among the SCO producers, the less explored 
filamentous fungi (molds) exhibit desirable features such as a repertoire of 
hydrolyzing enzymes and a unique pellet morphology that facilitates downstream 
harvesting. Although several oleaginous filamentous fungi have been identified 
and explored for SCO production, high production costs and technical 
difficulties still make the process less attractive compared to conventional 
lipid sources for biodiesel production. This review aims to highlight the 
ability of filamentous fungi to hydrolyze various organic wastes for SCO 
production and explore current strategies to enhance the efficiency and 
cost-effectiveness of the SCO production and recovery process. The review also 
highlights the mechanisms and components governing lipogenic pathways, which can 
inform the rational designs of processing conditions and metabolic engineering 
efforts for increasing the quality and accumulation of lipids in filamentous 
fungi. Furthermore, we describe other process integration strategies such as the 
co-production with hydrogen using advanced fermentation processes as a step 
toward a biorefinery process. These innovative approaches allow for integrating 
upstream and downstream processing units, thus resulting in an efficient and 
cost-effective method of simultaneous SCO production and utilization for 
biodiesel production.

Copyright Â© 2021 Mhlongo, Ezeokoli, Roopnarain, Ndaba, Sekoai, Habimana and 
Pohl.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.637381
PMCID: PMC7876240
PMID: 33584636

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.