1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Jan 29;12:622262. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.622262. 
eCollection 2021.

Metformin: A Novel Weapon Against Inflammation.

Bai B(1), Chen H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University Health Science Center, Shenzhen, 
China.

It has become widely accepted that inflammation is a driving force behind a 
variety of chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, kidney 
disease, cancer, neurodegenerative disorders, etc. However, the existing 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs show a limited utility in clinical 
patients. Therefore, the novel agents with different inflammation-inhibitory 
mechanisms are worth pursuing. Metformin, a synthetic derivative of guanidine, 
has a history of more than 50 years of clinical experience in treating patients 
with type 2 diabetes. Intense research efforts have been dedicated to proving 
metformin's inflammation-inhibitory effects in cells, animal models, patient 
records, and randomized clinical trials. The emerging evidence also indicates 
its therapeutic potential in clinical domains other than type 2 diabetes. 
Herein, this article appraises current pre-clinical and clinical findings, 
emphasizing metformin's anti-inflammatory properties under individual 
pathophysiological scenarios. In summary, the anti-inflammatory effects of 
metformin are evident in pre-clinical models. By comparison, there are still 
clinical perplexities to be addressed in repurposing metformin to 
inflammation-driven chronic diseases. Future randomized controlled trials, 
incorporating better stratification/targeting, would establish metformin's 
utility in this clinical setting.

Copyright © 2021 Bai and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.622262
PMCID: PMC7880161
PMID: 33584319

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.