1. Cardiology. 2021;146(3):315-323. doi: 10.1159/000512771. Epub 2021 Feb 17.

Anthracycline-Induced Cardiotoxicity: The Role of Endothelial Dysfunction.

Grakova EV(1), Shilov SN(2), Kopeva KV(3), Berezikova EN(2), Popova AA(2), 
Neupokoeva MN(2), Ratushnyak ET(2), Teplyakov AT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Myocardial Pathology, Tomsk National Research Medical Center of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences, Cardiology Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian 
Federation.
(2)Department of Pathological Physiology and Clinical Pathophysiology, 
Novosibirsk State Medical University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
(3)Department of Myocardial Pathology, Tomsk National Research Medical Center of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences, Cardiology Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian 
Federation, kristin-kop@inbox.ru.

Cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of mortality accounting up to 
40% of all deaths, but, currently, cancer is prominent cause of death globally. 
Anthracyclines are the cornerstone of chemotherapy in women with breast cancer. 
However, its clinical use is limited by their cardiotoxic effects that can 
trigger heart failure development. Vascular toxicity of chemotherapy may be 
linked with endothelial dysfunction because anthracycline damage of endothelial 
cells can lead to the development and progression of cardiomyopathy by 
decreasing the release and activity of endothelial factors and, ultimately, 
endothelial cell death. These processes suppress anti-inflammatory and vascular 
reparative functions and initiate the development of future cardiovascular 
events. Recent studies have shown that chemotherapy may induce toxicity in the 
vascular endothelium and is accompanied by systemic endothelial dysfunction in 
patients with diagnosed cardiovascular diseases. Because the initial endothelial 
cell insult is likely asymptomatic, there is often a long delay between the 
termination of doxorubicin therapy and the onset of vascular disorders. In this 
case, genetic susceptibility factor will help to identify susceptible patients 
in the future. The objectives of this study were to evaluate prognostic role of 
molecular (endothelin-1) and genetic factors (gene polymorphisms of endothelial 
nitric oxide (NO) synthase (NOS3, rs1799983), endothelin-1 receptor type A 
(EDNRA, C+70G, rs5335) and NADPH oxidase (C242T, rs4673) in development of 
endothelial dysfunction and anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity in women 
without cardiovascular diseases.

Â© 2021 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000512771
PMID: 33596565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]