1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Feb 16;17(2):e1008909. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008909. 
eCollection 2021 Feb.

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A and its posttranslational 
modifications play an important role in proliferation and potentially in 
differentiation of the human enteric protozoan parasite Entamoeba histolytica.

Jeelani G(1), Nozaki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Japan.

The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A (eIF5A) is a highly conserved 
protein and is essential in all eukaryotes. However, the specific roles of eIF5A 
in translation and in other biological processes remain elusive. In the present 
study, we described the role of eIF5A, its posttranslational modifications 
(PTM), and the biosynthetic pathway needed for the PTM in Entamoeba histolytica, 
the protozoan parasite responsible for amoebic dysentery and liver abscess in 
humans. E. histolytica encodes two isotypes of eIF5A and two isotypes of 
enzymes, deoxyhypusine synthase (DHS), responsible for their PTM. Both of the 
two eIF5A isotypes are functional, whereas only one DHS (EhDHS1, but not 
EhDHS2), is catalytically active. The DHS activity increased ~2000-fold when 
EhDHS1 was co-expressed with EhDHS2 in Escherichia coli, suggesting that the 
formation of a heteromeric complex is needed for full enzymatic activity. Both 
EhDHS1 and 2 genes were required for in vitro growth of E. histolytica 
trophozoites, indicated by small antisense RNA-mediated gene silencing. In 
trophozoites, only eIF5A2, but not eIF5A1, gene was actively transcribed. Gene 
silencing of eIF5A2 caused compensatory induction of expression of eIF5A1 gene, 
suggesting interchangeable role of the two eIF5A isotypes and also reinforcing 
the importance of eIF5As for parasite proliferation and survival. Furthermore, 
using a sibling species, Entamoeba invadens, we found that eIF5A1 gene was 
upregulated during excystation, while eIF5A2 was downregulated, suggesting that 
eIF5A1 gene plays an important role during differentiation. Taken together, 
these results have underscored the essentiality of eIF5A and DHS, for 
proliferation and potentially in the differentiation of this parasite, and 
suggest that the hypusination associated pathway represents a novel rational 
target for drug development against amebiasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008909
PMCID: PMC7909649
PMID: 33592076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We shall adhere to all PLoS Pathogens policies 
on sharing data and materials. Both authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.