1. J Immunol. 2021 Apr 1;206(7):1576-1585. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2000353. Epub
2021  Feb 17.

The Butyrate-Producing Bacterium Clostridium butyricum Suppresses Clostridioides 
difficile Infection via Neutrophil- and Antimicrobial Cytokine-Dependent but 
GPR43/109a-Independent Mechanisms.

Hayashi A(1)(2), Nagao-Kitamoto H(1), Kitamoto S(1), Kim CH(3)(4), Kamada N(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.
(2)Miyarisan Pharmaceutical, Central Research Institute, Saitama 331-0804, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; and.
(4)Mary H. Weiser Food Allergy Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; nkamada@umich.edu.

Short-chain fatty acids, such as butyrate, are major gut microbial metabolites 
that are beneficial for gastrointestinal health. Clostridium butyricum 
MIYAIRI588 (CBM588) is a bacterium that produces a robust amount of butyrate and 
therefore has been used as a live biotherapeutic probiotic in clinical settings. 
Clostridioides difficile causes life-threatening diarrhea and colitis. The gut 
resident microbiota plays a critical role in the prevention of C. difficile 
infection (CDI), as the disruption of the healthy microbiota by antibiotics 
greatly increases the risk for CDI. We report that CBM588 treatment in mice 
significantly improved clinical symptoms associated with CDI and increased the 
number of neutrophils and Th1 and Th17 cells in the colonic lamina propria in 
the early phase of CDI. The protective effect of CBM588 was abolished when 
neutrophils, IFN-γ, or IL-17A were depleted, suggesting that induction of the 
immune reactants is required to elicit the protective effect of the probiotic. 
The administration of tributyrin, which elevates the concentration of butyrate 
in the colon, also increased the number of neutrophils in the colonic lamina 
propria, indicating that butyrate is a potent booster of neutrophil activity 
during infection. However, GPR43 and GPR109a, two G protein-coupled receptors 
activated by butyrate, were dispensable for the protective effect of CBM588. 
These results indicate that CBM588 and butyrate suppress CDI, in part by 
boosting antimicrobial innate and cytokine-mediated immunity.

Copyright © 2021 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.2000353
PMCID: PMC7980534
PMID: 33597149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.H. is an employee of Miyarisan Pharmaceutical, 
N.K. received a research grant from Miyarisan Pharmaceutical. The other authors 
have no financial conflicts of interest.