1. J Med Internet Res. 2021 Feb 17;23(2):e23252. doi: 10.2196/23252.

Effect of Telemetric Interventions on Glycated Hemoglobin A1c and Management of 
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: Systematic Meta-Review.

Eberle C(1), Stichling S(1).

Author information:
(1)Medicine with Specialization in Internal Medicine and General Medicine, 
Hochschule Fulda-University of Applied Sciences, Fulda, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus is a chronic burden, with a prevalence that is 
increasing worldwide. Telemetric interventions have attracted great interest and 
may provide effective new therapeutic approaches for improving type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) care.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to analyze the clinical effectiveness 
of telemetric interventions on glycated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) specifically and 
T2DM management generally in a systematic meta-review.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was performed in PubMed, CINAHL, 
Cochrane Library, Web of Science Core Collection, and EMBASE databases from 
January 2008 to April 2020. Studies that addressed HbA1c, blood pressure, 
fasting blood glucose, BMI, diabetes-related and health-related quality of life, 
cost-effectiveness, time savings, and the clinical effectiveness of telemetric 
interventions were analyzed. In total, 73 randomized controlled trials (RCTs), 
10 systematic reviews/meta-analyses, 9 qualitative studies, 2 cohort studies, 2 
nonrandomized controlled studies, 2 observational studies, and 1 noncontrolled 
intervention study were analyzed.
RESULTS: Overall, 1647 citations were identified. After careful screening, 99 
studies (n=15,939 patients; n=82,436 patient cases) were selected by two 
independent reviewers for inclusion in the review. Telemetric interventions were 
categorized according to communication channels to health care providers: (1) 
"real-time video" interventions, (2) "real-time audio" interventions, (3) 
"asynchronous" interventions, and (4) "combined" interventions. To analyze 
changes in HbA1c, suitable RCTs were pooled and the average was determined. An 
HbA1c decrease of -1.15% (95% CI -1.84% to -0.45%), yielding an HbA1c value of 
6.95% (SD 0.495), was shown in studies using 6-month "real-time video" 
interventions.
CONCLUSIONS: Telemetric interventions clearly improve HbA1c values in both the 
short term and the long term and contribute to the effective management of T2DM. 
More studies need to be done in greater detail.

Â©Claudia Eberle, Stefanie Stichling. Originally published in the Journal of 
Medical Internet Research (http://www.jmir.org), 17.02.2021.

DOI: 10.2196/23252
PMCID: PMC7929744
PMID: 33595447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.