1. Sci Rep. 2021 Feb 18;11(1):4178. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-83498-1.

The PHP domain of PolX from Staphylococcus aureus aids high fidelity DNA 
synthesis through the removal of misincorporated deoxyribo-, ribo- and oxidized 
nucleotides.

Nagpal S(1)(2), Nair DT(3).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research, UAS-GKVK Campus, Bellary Road, Bangalore, 560065, India.
(2)Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, 3rd 
Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon Expressway, P.O. Box No. 3, Faridabad, Haryana, 
121001, India.
(3)Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, 3rd 
Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon Expressway, P.O. Box No. 3, Faridabad, Haryana, 
121001, India. deepak@rcb.res.in.

The X family is one of the eight families of DNA polymerases (dPols) and members 
of this family are known to participate in the later stages of Base Excision 
Repair. Many prokaryotic members of this family possess a Polymerase and 
Histidinol Phosphatase (PHP) domain at their C-termini. The PHP domain has been 
shown to possess 3'-5' exonuclease activity and may represent the proofreading 
function in these dPols. PolX from Staphylococcus aureus also possesses the PHP 
domain at the C-terminus, and we show that this domain has an intrinsic Mn2+ 
dependent 3'-5' exonuclease capable of removing misincorporated dNMPs from the 
primer. The misincorporation of oxidized nucleotides such as 8oxodGTP and rNTPs 
are known to be pro-mutagenic and can lead to genomic instability. Here, we show 
that the PHP domain aids DNA replication by the removal of misincorporated 
oxidized nucleotides and rNMPs. Overall, our study shows that the proofreading 
activity of the PHP domain plays a critical role in maintaining genomic 
integrity and stability. The exonuclease activity of this enzyme can, therefore, 
be the target of therapeutic intervention to combat infection by 
methicillin-resistant-Staphylococcus-aureus.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-83498-1
PMCID: PMC7893174
PMID: 33603016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.