1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Feb 23;118(8):e2012843118. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2012843118.

Nonselective cation permeation in an AMPA-type glutamate receptor.

Biedermann J(1)(2)(3), Braunbeck S(1)(2)(3), Plested AJR(4)(2)(3), Sun H(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biology, Cellular Biophysics, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, 
10115 Berlin, Germany.
(2)NeuroCure Cluster of Excellence, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
and Berlin Institute of Health, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Leibniz Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, 13125 Berlin, 
Germany.
(4)Institute of Biology, Cellular Biophysics, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, 
10115 Berlin, Germany; andrew.plested@hu-berlin.de hsun@fmp-berlin.de.
(5)Leibniz Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, 13125 Berlin, 
Germany. andrew.plested@hu-berlin.de hsun@fmp-berlin.de.

Fast excitatory synaptic transmission in the central nervous system relies on 
the AMPA-type glutamate receptor (AMPAR). This receptor incorporates a 
nonselective cation channel, which is opened by the binding of glutamate. 
Although the open pore structure has recently became available from 
cryo-electron microscopy (Cryo-EM), the molecular mechanisms governing cation 
permeability in AMPA receptors are not understood. Here, we combined microsecond 
molecular dynamic (MD) simulations on a putative open-state structure of GluA2 
with electrophysiology on cloned channels to elucidate ion permeation 
mechanisms. Na+, K+, and Cs+ permeated at physiological rates, consistent with a 
structure that represents a true open state. A single major ion binding site for 
Na+ and K+ in the pore represents the simplest selectivity filter (SF) structure 
for any tetrameric cation channel of known structure. The minimal SF comprised 
only Q586 and Q587, and other residues on the cytoplasmic side formed a 
water-filled cavity with a cone shape that lacked major interactions with ions. 
We observed that Cl- readily enters the upper pore, explaining anion permeation 
in the RNA-edited (Q586R) form of GluA2. A permissive architecture of the SF 
accommodated different alkali metals in distinct solvation states to allow 
rapid, nonselective cation permeation and copermeation by water. Simulations 
suggested Cs+ uses two equally populated ion binding sites in the filter, and we 
confirmed with electrophysiology of GluA2 that Cs+ is slightly more permeant 
than Na+, consistent with serial binding sites preferentially driving 
selectivity.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2012843118
PMCID: PMC7923540
PMID: 33602810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.