1. Sci Rep. 2021 Feb 18;11(1):4055. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-83619-w.

Identification of novel neuroblastoma biomarkers in urine samples.

Yokota K(1), Uchida H(2), Sakairi M(3)(4), Abe M(3), Tanaka Y(1), Tainaka T(1), 
Shirota C(1), Sumida W(1), Oshima K(1), Makita S(1), Amano H(1), Hinoki A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 65 Tsurumai, Showa, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.
(2)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 65 Tsurumai, Showa, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan. 
hiro2013@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.
(3)Hitachi, Ltd., R & D Group, Centre for Exploratory Research, Tokyo, 185-8601, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Rare/Intractable Cancer Analysis Research, Nagoya University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

Urine is a complex liquid containing numerous small molecular metabolites. The 
ability to non-invasively test for cancer biomarkers in urine is especially 
beneficial for screening child patients. This study attempted to identify 
neuroblastoma biomarkers by comprehensively analysing urinary metabolite samples 
from children. A total of 87 urine samples were collected from 54 participants 
(15 children with neuroblastoma and 39 without cancer) and used to perform a 
comprehensive analysis. Urine metabolites were extracted using liquid 
chromatography/mass spectrometry and analysed by Metabolon, Inc. Biomarker 
candidates were extracted using the Wilcoxon rank sum test, random forest method 
(RF), and orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA). RF 
identified three important metabolic pathways in 15 samples from children with 
neuroblastoma. One metabolite was selected from each of the three identified 
pathways and combined to create a biomarker candidate (3-MTS, CTN, and COR) that 
represented each of the three pathways; using this candidate, all 15 cases were 
accurately distinguishable from the control group. Two cases in which known 
biomarkers were negative tested positive using this new biomarker. Furthermore, 
the predictive value did not decrease in cases with a low therapeutic effect. 
This approach could be effectively applied to identify biomarkers for other 
cancer types.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-83619-w
PMCID: PMC7892837
PMID: 33603049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Uchida received joint research funding with 
Hitachi, Ltd [Grant number 2617Dm-08b]. All other authors have no conflict of 
interest to declare.