1. Exp Ther Med. 2021 Mar;21(3):220. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.9651. Epub 2021 Jan
18.

Schizandrin B attenuates hypoxia/reoxygenation injury in H9c2 cells by 
activating the AMPK/Nrf2 signaling pathway.

Zhao B(1), Li GP(1)(2), Peng JJ(1), Ren LH(1), Lei LC(1), Ye HM(1), Wang ZY(1), 
Zhao S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing 100038, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Ionic-Molecular Function 
of Cardiovascular Disease, Tianjin Institute of Cardiology, The Second Hospital 
of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300211, P.R. China.

Schizandrin B exhibits prominent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects, and 
plays an important role in ameliorating myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury. 
However, the underlying protective mechanisms remain to be elucidated. The aim 
of the present study was to explore the cardioprotective effects of schizandrin 
B against hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R)-induced H9c2 cell injury, focusing on the 
role of the adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK)/nuclear 
factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) pathway in this process. The results 
showed that schizandrin B attenuated the H/R-induced decrease in cell viability 
and the increase in lactate dehydrogenase release, as well as the apoptosis rate 
in H9c2 cells. Schizandrin B also mitigated H/R-induced oxidative stress, as 
illustrated by the decrease in intracellular reactive oxygen species generation, 
malondialdehyde content and NADPH oxidase 2 expression, and the increase in 
antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase activities. 
In addition, schizandrin B reversed the H/R-induced upregulation of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines [interleukin (IL)-1β (IL-1β) tumor necrosis factor-α, 
IL-6 and IL-8] and the downregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines 
(transforming growth factor-β and IL-10) in the culture supernatant. Notably, 
schizandrin B increased the expression of Nrf2, NAD(P)H: Quinone oxidoreductase 
(NQO-1) and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) in H/R-treated H9c2 cells, activating the 
Nrf2 signaling pathway. The cardioprotection of schizandrin B against H/R injury 
was inhibited by Nrf2 knockdown induced byNrf-2-specific small interfering RNA 
(siRNA; si-Nrf2) transfection. Furthermore, schizandrin B enhanced 
phosphorylated (p)-AMPK expression, while AMPK knockdown induced by 
AMPK-specific siRNA(si-AMPK) transfection remarkably eliminated schizandrin 
B-induced cardioprotection and reduced Nrf2 expression in H/R-treated H9c2 
cells. Taken together, these results suggested that schizandrin B exerts 
cardioprotection on H/R injury in H9c2 cells due to its antioxidant and 
anti-inflammatory activities via activation of the AMPK/Nrf2 pathway.

Copyright: © Zhao et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.9651
PMCID: PMC7851604
PMID: 33603829