1. Genes Dev. 2021 Mar 1;35(5-6):367-378. doi: 10.1101/gad.345686.120. Epub 2021 
Feb 18.

A coregulator shift, rather than the canonical switch, underlies thyroid hormone 
action in the liver.

Shabtai Y(1), Nagaraj NK(1), Batmanov K(1), Cho YW(2), Guan Y(1), Jiang C(1), 
Remsberg J(1), Forrest D(2), Lazar MA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology, National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Thyroid hormones (THs) are powerful regulators of metabolism with major effects 
on body weight, cholesterol, and liver fat that have been exploited 
pharmacologically for many years. Activation of gene expression by TH action is 
canonically ascribed to a hormone-dependent "switch" from corepressor to 
activator binding to thyroid hormone receptors (TRs), while the mechanism of 
TH-dependent repression is controversial. To address this, we generated a mouse 
line in which endogenous TRβ1 was epitope-tagged to allow precise chromatin 
immunoprecipitation at the low physiological levels of TR and defined 
high-confidence binding sites where TRs functioned at enhancers regulated in the 
same direction as the nearest gene in a TRβ-dependent manner. Remarkably, 
although positive and negative regulation by THs have been ascribed to different 
mechanisms, TR binding was highly enriched at canonical DR4 motifs irrespective 
of the transcriptional direction of the enhancer. The canonical NCoR1/HDAC3 
corepressor complex was reduced but not completely dismissed by TH and, 
surprisingly, similar effects were seen at enhancers associated with negatively 
as well as positively regulated genes. Conversely, coactivator CBP was found at 
all TH-regulated enhancers, with transcriptional activity correlating with the 
ratio of CBP to NCoR rather than their presence or absence. These results 
demonstrate that, in contrast to the canonical "all or none" coregulator switch 
model, THs regulate gene expression by orchestrating a shift in the relative 
binding of corepressors and coactivators.

© 2021 Shabtai et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.345686.120
PMCID: PMC7919419
PMID: 33602873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]