1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100444. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100444. Epub
2021  Feb 20.

Enzymatic bypass of an N(6)-deoxyadenosine DNA-ethylene dibromide-peptide 
cross-link by translesion DNA polymerases.

Ghodke PP(1), Gonzalez-Vasquez G(1), Wang H(1), Johnson KM(1), Sedgeman CA(1), 
Guengerich FP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA. Electronic address: f.guengerich@vanderbilt.edu.

Unrepaired DNA-protein cross-links, due to their bulky nature, can stall 
replication forks and result in genome instability. Large DNA-protein 
cross-links can be cleaved into DNA-peptide cross-links, but the extent to which 
these smaller fragments disrupt normal replication is not clear. Ethylene 
dibromide (1,2-dibromoethane) is a known carcinogen that can cross-link the 
repair protein O6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase (AGT) to the N6 position of 
deoxyadenosine (dA) in DNA, as well as four other positions in DNA. We 
investigated the effect of a 15-mer peptide from the active site of AGT, 
cross-linked to the N6 position of dA, on DNA replication by human translesion 
synthesis DNA polymerases (Pols) η, ⍳, and κ. The peptide-DNA cross-link was 
bypassed by the three polymerases at different rates. In steady-state kinetics, 
the specificity constant (kcat/Km) for incorporation of the correct nucleotide 
opposite to the adduct decreased by 220-fold with Pol κ, tenfold with pol η, and 
not at all with Pol ⍳. Pol η incorporated all four nucleotides across from the 
lesion, with the preference dT > dC > dA > dG, while Pol ⍳ and κ only 
incorporated the correct nucleotide. However, LC-MS/MS analysis of the 
primer-template extension product revealed error-free bypass of the cross-linked 
15-mer peptide by Pol η. We conclude that a bulky 15-mer peptide cross-linked to 
the N6 position of dA can retard polymerization and cause miscoding but that 
overall fidelity is not compromised because only correct pairs are extended.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100444
PMCID: PMC8024977
PMID: 33617883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest with the contents of this article.