1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2021 Feb 26;49(1):441-453. doi: 10.1042/BST20200780.

Keratan sulfate-based glycomimetics using Langerin as a target for COPD: lessons 
from studies on Fut8 and core fucose.

Ohkawa Y(1), Harada Y(1), Taniguchi N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Glyco-Oncology and Medical Biochemistry, Osaka International 
Cancer Institute, 3-1-69 Otemae, Chuo-ku, Osaka 541-8567, Japan.

Glycosylation represents one of the most abundant posttranslational modification 
of proteins. Glycosylation products are diverse and are regulated by the 
cooperative action of various glycosyltransferases, glycosidases, substrates 
thereof: nucleoside sugars and their transporters, and chaperons. In this 
article, we focus on a glycosyltransferase, α1,6-fucosyltransferase (Fut8) and 
its product, the core fucose structure on N-glycans, and summarize the potential 
protective functions of this structure against emphysema and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Studies of FUT8 and its enzymatic product, core 
fucose, are becoming an emerging area of interest in various fields of research 
including inflammation, cancer and therapeutics. This article discusses what we 
can learn from studies of Fut8 and core fucose by using knockout mice or in 
vitro studies that were conducted by our group as well as other groups. We also 
include a discussion of the potential protective functions of the keratan 
sulfate (KS) disaccharide, namely L4, against emphysema and COPD as a 
glycomimetic. Glycomimetics using glycan analogs is one of the more promising 
therapeutics that compensate for the usual therapeutic strategy that involves 
targeting the genome and the proteome. These typical glycans using KS 
derivatives as glycomimetics, will likely become a clue to the development of 
novel and effective therapeutic strategies.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BST20200780
PMCID: PMC7924997
PMID: 33616615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.