1. Brain Commun. 2021 Jan 25;3(1):fcaa237. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaa237. 
eCollection 2021.

The preterm social brain: altered functional networks for Theory of Mind in very 
preterm children.

Mossad SI(1), Vandewouw MM(2)(3), Smith ML(1)(4), Taylor MJ(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON 
M5G 1X8, Canada.
(3)Neurosciences & Mental Health, SickKids Research Institute, Toronto, ON M5G 
0A4, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G3, Canada.

Neurodevelopmental difficulties emerge in very preterm born children (<32-week 
gestation) in infancy and continue to early adulthood but little is known about 
their social-cognitive development. This study utilized the complementary 
methodological advantages of both functional MRI and magnetoencephalography to 
examine the neural underpinnings of Theory of Mind in very preterm birth. Theory 
of Mind, one of the core social-cognitive skills, is the ability to attribute 
mental states to others, and is crucial for predicting others' behaviours in 
social interactions. Eighty-three children (40 very preterm born, 24 boys, 
age = 8.7 ± 0.5 years, and 43 full-term born, 22 boys, age = 8.6 ± 0.5 years) 
completed the study. In functional MRI, both groups recruited classic Theory of 
Mind areas, without significant group differences. However, reduced Theory of 
Mind connectivity in the very preterm born group was found in 
magnetoencephalography in distinct theta, alpha and beta-band networks anchored 
in a set of brain regions that comprise the social brain. These networks 
included regions such as the angular gyrus, the medial pre-frontal cortex, the 
superior temporal gyrus and the temporal poles. Very preterm born children 
showed increased connectivity compared to controls in a network anchored in the 
occipital gyri rather than classical social-processing regions. Very preterm 
born children made significantly more attribution errors and mis-construed the 
social scenarios. Findings offer novel insight into the neural networks, 
supporting social cognition in very preterm born children and highlight the 
importance of multimodal neuroimaging to interrogate the social brain in 
clinical populations.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaa237
PMCID: PMC7882208
PMID: 33615217