1. ERJ Open Res. 2021 Feb 15;7(1):00592-2020. doi: 10.1183/23120541.00592-2020. 
eCollection 2021 Jan.

Characterisation of cough evoked by inhaled treprostinil and treprostinil 
palmitil.

Chapman RW(1), Corboz MR(1), Fernandez C(1), Sullivan E(1), Stautberg A(1), 
Plaunt AJ(1), Konicek DM(1), Malinin V(1), Li Z(1), Cipolla D(1), Perkins W(1).

Author information:
(1)Insmed Incorporated, Bridgewater, NJ, USA.

Cough is induced by inhaled prostacyclin analogues including treprostinil (TRE), 
and, at higher doses, treprostinil palmitil (TP), a prodrug of TRE. In this 
report, we have investigated mechanisms involved in TRE- and TP-induced cough, 
using a dry powder formulation of TP (TPIP) to supplement previous data obtained 
with an aqueous suspension formulation of TP (TPIS). Experiments in guinea pigs 
and rats investigated the prostanoid receptor subtype producing cough and 
whether it involved activation of sensory nerves in the airways and vasculature. 
Experiments involved treatment with prostanoid, tachykinin and bradykinin 
receptor antagonists, a cyclooxygenase inhibitor and TRE administration to the 
isolated larynx or intravenously. In guinea pigs, cough with inhaled TRE 
(1.23 µg·kg-1) was not observed with an equivalent dose of TPIP and required 
higher inhaled doses (12.8 and 35.8 µg·kg-1) to induce cough. TRE cough was 
blocked with IP and tachykinin NK1 receptor antagonists but not with EP1, EP2, 
EP3, DP1 or bradykinin B2 antagonists or a cyclooxygenase inhibitor. TRE 
administered to the isolated larynx or intravenously in rats produced no apnoea 
or swallowing, whereas citric acid, capsaicin and hypertonic saline had 
significant effects. The mechanisms inducing cough with inhaled TRE likely 
involves the activation of prostanoid IP receptors on jugular C-fibres in the 
tracheobronchial airways. Cough induced by inhaled dry powder and nebulised 
formulations of TP occurs at higher inhaled doses than TRE, presumably due to 
the slow, sustained release of TRE from the prodrug resulting in lower 
concentrations of TRE at the airway sensory nerves.

Copyright ©ERS 2021.

DOI: 10.1183/23120541.00592-2020
PMCID: PMC7882781
PMID: 33614774

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: R.W. Chapman is an 
employee of Insmed Incorporated. Conflict of interest: M.R. Corboz is an 
employee of Insmed Incorporated. Conflict of interest: C. Fernandez is an 
employee of Insmed Incorporated. Conflict of interest: E. Sullivan is an 
employee of Insmed Inc. Conflict of interest: A. Stautberg is an employee of 
Insmed Incorporated. Conflict of interest: A.J. Plaunt is an employee of Insmed 
Incorporated. In addition, he has patents pending or issued (patent numbers US 
10,010,518, US 10,526,274, US 9,255,064 and US 9,469,600) related to 
treprostinil palmitil and methods of treatment via administration of 
treprostinil palmitil. Conflict of interest: D.M. Konicek is an employee of 
Insmed Incorporated. In addition, she has patents pending or issued (patent 
numbers US 10,010,518, US 10,526,274, US 9,255,064 and US 9,469,600) related to 
treprostinil palmitil and methods of treatment via administration of 
treprostinil palmitil. Conflict of interest: V. Malinin is an employee of Insmed 
Incorporated. In addition, he has patents pending or issued(patent numbers US 
10,010,518, US 10,526,274, US 9,255,064 and US 9,469,600) related to 
treprostinil palmitil and methods of treatment via administration of 
treprostinil palmitil. Conflict of interest: Z. Li is an employee of Insmed 
Incorporated. In addition, he has patents pending or issued(patent numbers US 
10,010,518, US 10,526,274, US 9,255,064 and US 9,469,600) related to 
treprostinil palmitil and methods of treatment via administration of 
treprostinil palmitil. Conflict of interest: D. Cipolla is an employee of Insmed 
Incorporated. Conflict of interest: W. Perkins is an employee of Insmed 
Incorporated. In addition, he has patents pending or issued(patent numbers US 
10,010,518, US 10,526,274, US 9,255,064 and US 9,469,600) related to 
treprostinil palmitil and methods of treatment via administration of 
treprostinil palmitil.