1. J Pharm Pharm Sci. 2021;24:94-112. doi: 10.18433/jpps31305.

The CYP2R1 Enzyme: Structure, Function, Enzymatic Properties and Genetic 
Polymorphism.

Dong AN, Tan BH, Pan Y, Ong CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Monash University Malaysia.

Since the discovery of its role in vitamin D metabolism, significant progress 
has been made in the understanding of gene organisation, protein structure, 
catalytic function, and genetic polymorphism of cytochrome P450 2R1 (CYP2R1). 
Located on chromosome 11p15.2, CYP2R1 possesses five exons, unlike most other 
CYP isoforms that carry nine exons. CYP2R1 crystal structure displays a fold 
pattern typical of a CYP protein, with 12 a-helices as its structural core, and 
b-sheets mostly arranged on one side, and the heme buried in the interior part 
of the protein. Overall, CYP2R1 structure adopts a closed conformation with the 
B' helix serving as a gate covering the substrate access channel, with the 
substrate vitamin D3 occupying a position with the side chain pointing toward 
the heme group. In liver, CYP2R1 25-hydroxylates vitamin D and serves as an 
important determinant of 25(OH)D level in the tissue and in circulation. While 
substrate profile has been well studied, inhibitor specificity for CYP2R1 
requires further investigation. Both exonic and non-exonic single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) have been reported in CYP2R1, including the CYP2R1*2 
carrying Leu99Pro exchange, and a number of non-exonic SNPs with variable 
functional consequences in gene regulation. A non-exonic SNP, rs10741657, has 
its causal relationship with diseases established, including that of rickets, 
ovarian cancer, and multiple sclerosis. The role of other CYP2R1 SNPs in vitamin 
D deficiency and their causal link to other traits however remain uncertain 
currently and more studies are warranted to help identify possible physiological 
mechanisms underlying those complex traits.

DOI: 10.18433/jpps31305
PMID: 33626316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]