1. Nat Commun. 2021 Feb 23;12(1):1234. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-21416-9.

Extreme isotopic heterogeneity in Samoan clinopyroxenes constrains sediment 
recycling.

Adams JV(1), Jackson MG(2)(3), Spera FJ(2), Price AA(2), Byerly BL(2)(4), Seward 
G(2), Cottle JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth Science, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa 
Barbara, CA, USA. adams@ucsb.edu.
(2)Department of Earth Science, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa 
Barbara, CA, USA.
(3)Isotope Geochemistry Facility - Center for Mantle Zoology, University of 
California Santa Barbara, Department of Earth Science, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
(4)Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA.

Lavas erupted at hotspot volcanoes provide evidence of mantle heterogeneity. 
Samoan Island lavas with high 87Sr/86Sr (>0.706) typify a mantle source 
incorporating ancient subducted sediments. To further characterize this source, 
we target a single high 87Sr/86Sr lava from Savai'i Island, Samoa for detailed 
analyses of 87Sr/86Sr and 143Nd/144Nd isotopes and major and trace elements on 
individual magmatic clinopyroxenes. We show the clinopyroxenes exhibit a 
remarkable range of 87Sr/86Sr-including the highest observed in an oceanic 
hotspot lava-encompassing ~30% of the oceanic mantle's total variability. These 
new isotopic data, data from other Samoan lavas, and magma mixing calculations 
are consistent with clinopyroxene 87Sr/86Sr variability resulting from magma 
mixing between a high silica, high 87Sr/86Sr (up to 0.7316) magma, and a low 
silica, low 87Sr/86Sr magma. Results provide insight into the composition of 
magmas derived from a sediment-infiltrated mantle source and document the fate 
of sediment recycled into Earth's mantle.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-21416-9
PMCID: PMC7902626
PMID: 33623014

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.