1. Epileptic Disord. 2021 Feb 1;23(1):153-160. doi: 10.1684/epd.2021.1243.

Photoparoxysmal response in ADCK3 autosomal recessive ataxia: a case report and 
literature review.

Uccella S(1), Pisciotta L(2), Severino M(3), Bertini E(4), Giacomini T(1), Zanni 
G(4), Prato G(5), De Grandis E(1), Nobili L(1), Mancardi MM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics and 
Maternal and Child Health, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, Unit of Child 
Neuropsychiatry, Epilepsy Centre, Department of Medical and Surgical 
Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics and 
Maternal and Child Health, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, Unit of Child 
Neuropsychiatry, Department of Neurosciences, ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Neuroradiology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Bambino GesÃ¹ 
Children's Research Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(5)Unit of Child Neuropsychiatry, Epilepsy Centre, Department of Medical and 
Surgical Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 
Genoa, Italy.

Mutations in AarF domain-containing kinase 3 (ADCK3) are responsible for the 
most frequent form of hereditary coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) deficiency (Q10 
deficiency-4), which is mainly associated with autosomal recessive cerebellar 
ataxia type 2 (ARCA2). Clinical presentation is characterized by a variable 
degree of cerebellar atrophy and a broad spectrum of associated symptoms, 
including muscular involvement, movement disorders, neurosensory loss, cognitive 
impairment, psychiatric symptoms and epilepsy. In this report, we describe, for 
the first time, a case of photoparoxysmal response in a female patient with a 
mutation in ADCK3. Disease onset occurred in early childhood with gait ataxia, 
and mild-to-moderate degeneration. Seizures appeared at eight years and six 
months, occurring only during sleep. Photoparoxysmal response was observed at 14 
years, almost concomitant with the genetic diagnosis (c.901C>T;c.589-3C>G) and 
the start of CoQ10 oral supplementation. A year later, disease progression 
slowed down, and photosensitivity was attenuated. A review of the literature is 
provided focusing on epileptic features of ADCK3-related disease as well as the 
physiopathology of photoparoxysmal response and supposed cerebellar involvement 
in photosensitivity. Moreover, the potential role of CoQ10 oral supplementation 
is discussed. Prospective studies on larger populations are needed to further 
understand these data.

DOI: 10.1684/epd.2021.1243
PMID: 33622667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]