1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Feb 9;9:634587. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.634587. 
eCollection 2021.

Bil2 Is a Novel Inhibitor of the Yeast Formin Bnr1 Required for Proper Actin 
Cable Organization and Polarized Secretion.

Rands TJ(1), Goode BL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center, 
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, United States.

Cell growth in budding yeast depends on rapid and on-going assembly and turnover 
of polarized actin cables, which direct intracellular transport of post-Golgi 
vesicles to the bud tip. Saccharomyces cerevisiae actin cables are polymerized 
by two formins, Bni1 and Bnr1. Bni1 assembles cables in the bud, while Bnr1 is 
anchored to the bud neck and assembles cables that specifically extend filling 
the mother cell. Here, we report a formin regulatory role for YGL015c, a 
previously uncharacterized open reading frame, which we have named Bud6 
Interacting Ligand 2 (BIL2). bil2Δ cells display defects in actin cable 
architecture and partially-impaired secretory vesicle transport. Bil2 inhibits 
Bnr1-mediated actin filament nucleation in vitro, yet has no effect on the rate 
of Bnr1-mediated filament elongation. This activity profile for Bil2 resembles 
that of another yeast formin regulator, the F-BAR protein Hof1, and we find that 
bil2Δ with hof1Δ are synthetic lethal. Unlike Hof1, which localizes exclusively 
to the bud neck, GFP-Bil2 localizes to the cytosol, secretory vesicles, and 
sites of polarized cell growth. Further, we provide evidence that Hof1 and Bil2 
inhibitory effects on Bnr1 are overcome by distinct mechanisms. Together, our 
results suggest that Bil2 and Hof1 perform distinct yet genetically 
complementary roles in inhibiting the actin nucleation activity of Bnr1 to 
control actin cable assembly and polarized secretion.

Copyright © 2021 Rands and Goode.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.634587
PMCID: PMC7900418
PMID: 33634134

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.