1. Curr Biol. 2021 Apr 26;31(8):1666-1677.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.01.081.
Epub  2021 Feb 25.

β-propeller proteins WDR45 and WDR45B regulate autophagosome maturation into 
autolysosomes in neural cells.

Ji C(1), Zhao H(1), Chen D(1), Zhang H(2), Zhao YG(3).

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 15 
Datun Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, P.R. China.
(2)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 15 
Datun Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, P.R. China; College of Life 
Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P.R. China; 
Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. Electronic address: 
yan.zhao@umassmed.edu.

Comment in
    Autophagy. 2021 Jul;17(7):1783-1784. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1924039.

Mutations in WDR45 and WDR45B cause the human neurological diseases β-propeller 
protein-associated neurodegeneration (BPAN) and intellectual disability (ID), 
respectively. WDR45 and WDR45B, along with WIPI1 and WIPI2, belong to a WD40 
repeat-containing phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PI(3)P)-binding protein 
family. Their yeast homolog Atg18 forms a complex with Atg2 and is required for 
autophagosome formation in part by tethering isolation membranes (IMs) 
(autophagosome precursor) to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to supply lipid for 
IM expansion in the autophagy pathway. The exact functions of WDR45/45B are 
unclear. We show here that WDR45/45B are specifically required for neural 
autophagy. In Wdr45/45b-depleted cells, the size of autophagosomes is decreased, 
and this is rescued by overexpression of ATG2A, providing in vivo evidence for 
the lipid transfer activity of ATG2-WIPI complexes. WDR45/45B are dispensable 
for the closure of autophagosomes but essential for the progression of 
autophagosomes into autolysosomes. WDR45/45B interact with the tether protein 
EPG5 and target it to late endosomes/lysosomes to promote autophagosome 
maturation. In the absence of Wdr45/45b, formation of the fusion machinery, 
consisting of SNARE proteins and EPG5, is dampened. BPAN- and ID-related 
mutations of WDR45/45B fail to rescue the autophagy defects in 
Wdr45/45b-deficient cells, possibly due to their impaired binding to EPG5. 
Promoting autophagosome maturation by inhibiting O-GlcNAcylation increases SNARE 
complex formation and facilitates the fusion of autophagosomes with late 
endosomes/lysosomes in Wdr45/45b double knockout (DKO) cells. Thus, our results 
uncover a novel function of WDR45/45B in autophagosome-lysosome fusion and 
provide molecular insights into the development of WDR45/WDR45B 
mutation-associated diseases.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.01.081
PMID: 33636118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.