1. Cell Chem Biol. 2021 Jun 17;28(6):866-875.e5. doi: 
10.1016/j.chembiol.2021.01.025. Epub 2021 Feb 25.

Modulation of lanosterol synthase drives 24,25-epoxysterol synthesis and 
oligodendrocyte formation.

Hubler Z(1), Friedrich RM(1), Sax JL(1), Allimuthu D(1), Gao F(1), Rivera-León 
AM(1), Pleshinger MJ(2), Bederman I(1), Adams DJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. Electronic address: 
drew.adams@case.edu.

Small molecules that promote the formation of new myelinating oligodendrocytes 
from oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) are potential therapeutics for 
demyelinating diseases. We recently established inhibition of specific 
cholesterol biosynthesis enzymes and resulting accumulation of 8,9-unsaturated 
sterols as a unifying mechanism through which many such molecules act. To 
identify more potent sterol enhancers of oligodendrocyte formation, we 
synthesized a collection of 8,9-unsaturated sterol derivatives and found that 
24,25-epoxylanosterol potently promoted oligodendrocyte formation. In OPCs, 
24,25-epoxylanosterol was metabolized to 24,25-epoxycholesterol via the 
epoxycholesterol shunt pathway. Increasing flux through the epoxycholesterol 
shunt using genetic manipulation or small-molecule inhibition of lanosterol 
synthase (LSS) increased endogenous 24,25-epoxycholesterol levels and OPC 
differentiation. Notably, exogenously supplied 24,25-epoxycholesterol promoted 
oligodendrocyte formation despite lacking an 8,9-unsaturation. This work 
highlights epoxycholesterol shunt usage, controlled by inhibitors of LSS, as a 
target to promote oligodendrocyte formation. Additionally, sterols beyond the 
8,9-unsaturated sterols, including 24,25-epoxycholesterol, drive oligodendrocyte 
formation.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2021.01.025
PMCID: PMC8217109
PMID: 33636107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare the 
following competing interests: D.J.A. is a founder, consultant, director, and 
shareholder of Convelo Therapeutics, Inc., which seeks to develop remyelinating 
therapeutics. D.J.A., Z.H., and D.A. are inventors on patents and patent 
applications that have been licensed to Convelo.