1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2021 Mar;28(3):278-289. doi: 10.1038/s41594-021-00560-2. 
Epub 2021 Feb 25.

Target-induced clustering activates Trim-Away of pathogens and proteins.

Zeng J(1), Santos AF(2), Mukadam AS(3), Osswald M(2), Jacques DA(4), Dickson 
CF(4), McLaughlin SH(1), Johnson CM(1), Kiss L(1), Luptak J(1), Renner N(1), 
Vaysburd M(1), McEwan WA(5), Morais-de-Sá E(6), Clift D(7), James LC(8).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.
(2)i3S-Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde and IBMC Instituto de 
Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, UK Dementia Research Institute, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)EMBL Australia Node, Single Molecule Science, School of Medical Sciences, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, UK Dementia Research Institute, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. wm305@cam.ac.uk.
(6)i3S-Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde and IBMC Instituto de 
Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. 
eurico.sa@ibmc.up.pt.
(7)Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK. 
dclift@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.
(8)Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK. 
lcj@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.

Trim-Away is a recently developed technology that exploits off-the-shelf 
antibodies and the RING E3 ligase and cytosolic antibody receptor TRIM21 to 
carry out rapid protein depletion. How TRIM21 is catalytically activated upon 
target engagement, either during its normal immune function or when repurposed 
for targeted protein degradation, is unknown. Here we show that a mechanism of 
target-induced clustering triggers intermolecular dimerization of the RING 
domain to switch on the ubiquitination activity of TRIM21 and induce virus 
neutralization or drive Trim-Away. We harness this mechanism for selective 
degradation of disease-causing huntingtin protein containing long polyglutamine 
tracts and expand the Trim-Away toolbox with highly active TRIM21-nanobody 
chimeras that can also be controlled optogenetically. This work provides a 
mechanism for cellular activation of TRIM RING ligases and has implications for 
targeted protein degradation technologies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41594-021-00560-2
PMCID: PMC7611929
PMID: 33633400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.