1. EMBO J. 2021 Apr 1;40(7):e106812. doi: 10.15252/embj.2020106812. Epub 2021 Mar
 1.

Deprotection of centromeric cohesin at meiosis II requires APC/C activity but 
not kinetochore tension.

Mengoli V(1), Jonak K(1), Lyzak O(1), Lamb M(2), Lister LM(2), Lodge C(2), Rojas 
J(1), Zagoriy I(1), Herbert M(2), Zachariae W(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chromosome Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 
Martinsried, Germany.
(2)Biosciences Institute, Centre for Life, Times Square, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Genome haploidization involves sequential loss of cohesin from chromosome arms 
and centromeres during two meiotic divisions. At centromeres, cohesin's Rec8 
subunit is protected from separase cleavage at meiosis I and then deprotected to 
allow its cleavage at meiosis II. Protection of centromeric cohesin by 
shugoshin-PP2A seems evolutionarily conserved. However, deprotection has been 
proposed to rely on spindle forces separating the Rec8 protector from cohesin at 
metaphase II in mammalian oocytes and on APC/C-dependent destruction of the 
protector at anaphase II in yeast. Here, we have activated APC/C in the absence 
of sister kinetochore biorientation at meiosis II in yeast and mouse oocytes, 
and find that bipolar spindle forces are dispensable for sister centromere 
separation in both systems. Furthermore, we show that at least in yeast, 
protection of Rec8 by shugoshin and inhibition of separase by securin are both 
required for the stability of centromeric cohesin at metaphase II. Our data 
imply that related mechanisms preserve the integrity of dyad chromosomes during 
the short metaphase II of yeast and the prolonged metaphase II arrest of 
mammalian oocytes.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.2020106812
PMCID: PMC8013787
PMID: 33644894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.