1. Netw Model Anal Health Inform Bioinform. 2021;10(1):14. doi: 
10.1007/s13721-020-00276-1. Epub 2021 Feb 24.

Estimation of drug-likeness properties of GC-MS separated bioactive compounds in 
rare medicinal Pleione maculata using molecular docking technique and SwissADME 
in silico tools.

Sympli HD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Biosciences, Assam Don Bosco 
University, Tapesia, Kamarkuchi, Sonapur, Assam 782402 India.

The main aim of the paper was to determine bioactive compounds in Pleione 
maculata extracts using gas chromatographic technique and to investigate their 
drug-likeness potential using molecular docking algorithm and ADME studies on 
the recent intractable disease, for example, SARS-CoV-2. Pleione maculata sample 
was prepared for GC-MS analysis. The peak components were identified based on 
the NIST Library. Molecular docking was performed using PatchDock, and energy 
refinement was carried out using the FireDock algorithm followed by 
drug-likeness analysis using the SwissADME tool. The mass spectrum revealed 
various pharmacologically important compounds and novel compounds 
8-oxatetracyclo{5.2.1.1(2,6). 1(4,10)}dodecane, 7-tert-butyl-1,9,9-trimeth, 
docosane, 2,4-dimethyl, kryptogenin 2,4-dinitrophenyl hydrazine, and 
N-decyl-alpha,D-2-deoxyglycoside which are reported for the first time. 
Molecular docking using PatchDock illustrates GC-MS compounds 
Nor-diazepam,3-{N-hydroxymethyl}aminocarbonyloxy a good docking and high binding 
affinity with atomic contact energy -10.95 kcal/mol against SARS-CoV-2 spike 
protein S2 subunit. ADME analysis predicts 
Nor-diazepam,3-{N-hydroxymethyl}aminocarbonyloxy and andrographolide showed very 
high drug-likeness parameters with no metabolism disturbances. The random 
control antiviral drug arabidiol revealed a lower binding affinity and lower 
solubility compared to bioactive compounds of P. maculata. The study depicts the 
first and novel report on various pharmaceutical important GC-MS bioactive 
compounds and molecular docking study on Pleione maculata having potential 
against various intractable diseases.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1007/s13721-020-00276-1.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH, AT part of 
Springer Nature 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s13721-020-00276-1
PMCID: PMC7903411
PMID: 33643765

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe author declares no 
conflict of interest. The research work is original.