1. J Virol. 2021 Apr 26;95(10):e02006-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02006-20. Epub 2021
Mar  3.

The reovirus μ2 C-terminal loop inversely regulates NTPase and transcription 
functions versus binding to factory-forming μNS and promotes replication in 
tumorigenic cells.

Yip WKW(1), Cristi F(1), Trifonov G(1), Narayan N(1), Kubanski M(1), Shmulevitz 
M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Li Ka Shing Institute of 
Virology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Li Ka Shing Institute of 
Virology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada shmulevi@ualberta.ca.

Wild type reovirus serotype 3 'Dearing PL strain' (T3wt) is being heavily 
evaluated as an oncolytic and immunotherapeutic treatment for cancers. Mutations 
that promote reovirus entry into tumor cells were previously reported to enhance 
oncolysis; herein we aimed to discover mutations that enhance the post-entry 
steps of reovirus infection in tumor cells. Using directed evolution, we 
identified that reovirus variant T3v10M1 exhibited enhanced replication relative 
to T3wt on a panel of cancer cells. T3v10M1 contains an alanine-to-valine 
substitution (A612V) in the core-associated μ2, which was previously found to 
have NTPase activities in virions and to facilitate virus factory formation by 
association with μNS. Paradoxically, the A612V mutation in μ2 from T3v10M1 was 
discovered to impair NTPase activities and RNA synthesis, leading to five-fold 
higher probability of abortive infection for T3v10M1 relative to T3wt. The A612V 
mutation resides in a previously uncharacterized C-terminal region that 
juxtaposes the template entry site of the polymerase μ2; our findings thus 
support an important role for this domain during virus transcription. Despite 
crippled onset of infection, T3v10M1 exhibited greater accumulation of viral 
proteins and progeny during replication, leading to increased overall virus 
burst size. Both Far-Western and co-immunoprecipitation approaches corroborated 
that the A612V mutation in μ2 increased association with the non-structural 
virus protein μNS and enhances burst size. Altogether the data supports that 
mutations in the C-terminal loop domain of μ2 inversely regulate NTPase and RNA 
synthesis versus interactions with μNS, but with a net gain of replication in 
tumorigenic cells.SIGNIFICANCEReovirus is a model system for understanding virus 
replication but also a clinically relevant virus for cancer therapy. We 
identified the first mutation that increases reovirus infection in tumorigenic 
cells by enhancing post-entry stages of reovirus replication. The mutation is in 
a previously uncharacterized c-terminal region of the M1-derived μ2 protein, 
which we demonstrated affects multiple functions of μ2; NTPase, RNA synthesis, 
inhibition of antiviral immune response and association with the virus 
replication factory-forming μNS protein. These findings promote a mechanistic 
understanding of viral protein functions. In the future, the benefits of μ2 
mutations may be useful for enhancing reovirus potency in tumors.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02006-20
PMCID: PMC8139653
PMID: 33658345