1. Gene Ther. 2022 May;29(5):227-235. doi: 10.1038/s41434-021-00241-1. Epub 2021 
Mar 4.

Ectopic expression of BBS1 rescues male infertility, but not retinal 
degeneration, in a BBS1 mouse model.

Cring MR(1)(2)(3), Meyer KJ(4), Searby CC(1)(3), Hedberg-Buenz A(4), Cave M(1), 
Anderson MG(2)(3)(4), Wang K(5), Sheffield VC(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Carver 
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(2)Interdisciplinary Genetics Ph.D. Program, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Carver College of 
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA, USA.
(6)Division of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Carver 
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. 
val-sheffield@uiowa.edu.
(7)Interdisciplinary Genetics Ph.D. Program, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 
USA. val-sheffield@uiowa.edu.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. val-sheffield@uiowa.edu.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare ciliopathy for which there are no current 
effective treatments. BBS is a genetically heterogeneous disease, though the 
M390R mutation in BBS1 is involved in ~25% of all genetic diagnoses of BBS. The 
principle features of BBS include retinal degeneration, obesity, male 
infertility, polydactyly, intellectual disability, and renal abnormalities. 
Patients with mutations in BBS genes often present with night blindness within 
the first decade of life, which progresses to complete blindness. This is due to 
progressive loss of photoreceptor cells. Male infertility is caused by a lack of 
spermatozoa flagella, rendering them immobile. In this study, we have crossed 
the wild-type human BBS1 gene, driven by the CAG promoter, onto the 
Bbs1M390R/M390R mouse model to determine if ectopic expression of BBS1 rescues 
male infertility and retinal degeneration. qRT-PCR indicates that the BBS1 
transgene is expressed in multiple tissues throughout the mouse, with the 
highest expression seen in the testes, and much lower expression in the eye and 
hypothalamus. Immunohistochemistry of the transgene in the eye showed little if 
any expression in the photoreceptor outer nuclear layer. When male 
Bbs1M30R/M390R;BBS1TG+ mice are housed with WT females, they are able to sire 
offspring, indicating that the male infertility phenotype of BBS is rescued by 
the transgene. Using electroretinography (ERGs) to measure retinal function and 
optical coherence tomography to measure retinal thickness, we show that the 
transgene does not confer protection against retinal degeneration in 
Bbs1M300R/M390R;BBS1TG+ mice. The results of this study indicate that the male 
infertility aspect of BBS is an attractive target for gene therapy.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited part 
of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1038/s41434-021-00241-1
PMCID: PMC9422088
PMID: 33664503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None of the authors have 
any conflicts of interest to disclose.