1. Sci Rep. 2021 Mar 4;11(1):5199. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-84548-4.

Class II phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-C2α is essential for Notch signaling by 
regulating the endocytosis of γ-secretase in endothelial cells.

Shimizu S(1), Yoshioka K(1), Aki S(1), Takuwa Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Kanazawa University School of Medicine, 13-1 
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 920-8640, Japan.
(2)Department of Physiology, Kanazawa University School of Medicine, 13-1 
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 920-8640, Japan. ytakuwa@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

The class II α-isoform of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K-C2α) plays a 
crucial role in angiogenesis at least in part through participating in 
endocytosis and, thereby, endosomal signaling of several cell surface receptors 
including VEGF receptor-2 and TGFβ receptor in vascular endothelial cells (ECs). 
The Notch signaling cascade regulates many cellular processes including cell 
proliferation, cell fate specification and differentiation. In the present 
study, we explored a role of PI3K-C2α in Delta-like 4 (Dll4)-induced Notch 
signaling in ECs. We found that knockdown of PI3K-C2α inhibited Dll4-induced 
generation of the signaling molecule Notch intracellular domain 1 (NICD1) and 
the expression of Notch1 target genes including HEY1, HEY2 and NOTCH3 in ECs but 
not in vascular smooth muscle cells. PI3K-C2α knockdown did not inhibit 
Dll4-induced endocytosis of cell surface Notch1. In contrast, PI3K-C2α knockdown 
as well as clathrin heavy chain knockdown impaired endocytosis of 
Notch1-cleaving protease, γ-secretase complex, with the accumulation of Notch1 
at the perinuclear endolysosomes. Pharmacological blockage of γ-secretase also 
induced the intracellular accumulation of Notch1. Taken together, we conclude 
that PI3K-C2α is required for the clathrin-mediated endocytosis of γ-secretase 
complex, which allows for the cleavage of endocytosed Notch1 by γ-secretase 
complex at the endolysosomes to generate NICD1 in ECs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-84548-4
PMCID: PMC7933152
PMID: 33664344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.