1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Feb 16;9:634536. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.634536. 
eCollection 2021.

Genes Regulating Spermatogenesis and Sperm Function Associated With Rare 
Disorders.

Linn E(1), Ghanem L(1), Bhakta H(1), Greer C(1), Avella M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science, College of Engineering and Natural 
Sciences, University of Tulsa, Tulsa, OK, United States.

Spermatogenesis is a cell differentiation process that ensures the production of 
fertilizing sperm, which ultimately fuse with an egg to form a zygote. Normal 
spermatogenesis relies on Sertoli cells, which preserve cell junctions while 
providing nutrients for mitosis and meiosis of male germ cells. Several genes 
regulate normal spermatogenesis, some of which are not exclusively expressed in 
the testis and control multiple physiological processes in an organism. 
Loss-of-function mutations in some of these genes result in spermatogenesis and 
sperm functionality defects, potentially leading to the insurgence of rare 
genetic disorders. To identify genetic intersections between spermatogenesis and 
rare diseases, we screened public archives of human genetic conditions available 
on the Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center (GARD), the Online Mendelian 
Inheritance in Man (OMIM), and the Clinical Variant (ClinVar), and after an 
extensive literature search, we identified 22 distinct genes associated with 21 
rare genetic conditions and defective spermatogenesis or sperm function. These 
protein-coding genes regulate Sertoli cell development and function during 
spermatogenesis, checkpoint signaling pathways at meiosis, cellular organization 
and shape definition during spermiogenesis, sperm motility, and capacitation at 
fertilization. A number of these genes regulate folliculogenesis and oogenesis 
as well. For each gene, we review the genotype-phenotype association together 
with associative or causative polymorphisms in humans, and provide a description 
of the shared molecular mechanisms that regulate gametogenesis and fertilization 
obtained in transgenic animal models.

Copyright Â© 2021 Linn, Ghanem, Bhakta, Greer and Avella.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.634536
PMCID: PMC7921155
PMID: 33665191

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.