1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Feb 19;12(2):290. doi: 10.3390/genes12020290.

Deciphering Biochemical and Molecular Signatures Associated with Obesity in 
Context of Metabolic Health.

Masih D(1), Tripathi JK(1), Rakhra G(1), Vats A(1), Verma SK(1), Jha PK(2), 
Sharma M(3), Ashraf MZ(2), Singh SN(1).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Division, Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences, 
DRDO, Delhi 110054, India.
(2)Genomics Division, Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences, DRDO, 
Delhi 110054, India.
(3)Proteomics Division, Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences, 
DRDO, Delhi 110054, India.

This study aims to identify the clinical and genetic markers related to the two 
uncommon nutritional statuses-metabolically unhealthy normal-weight (MUNW) and 
metabolically healthy overweight/obese (MHOW) individuals in the physically 
active individuals. Physically active male volunteers (n = 120) were recruited, 
and plasma samples were analyzed for the clinical parameters. Triglycerides, 
HDL-Cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, total cholesterol, C-reactive protein, and 
insulin resistance were considered as markers of metabolic syndrome. The 
subjects were classified as 'healthy' (0 metabolic abnormalities) or 'unhealthy' 
(≥1 metabolic abnormalities) in their respective BMI group with a cut-off at 
24.9 kg/m2. Analysis of biochemical variables was done using enzyme linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits with further confirmation using western blot 
analysis. The microarray was conducted, followed by quantitative real-time PCR 
to identify and analyze differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The MHOW group 
constituted 12.6%, while the MUNW group constituted 32.4% of the total study 
population. Pro-inflammatory markers like interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-α, and ferritin were increased in metabolically unhealthy groups in 
comparison to metabolically healthy groups. Gene expression profiling of MUNW 
and MHOW individuals resulted in differential expression of 7470 and 5864 genes, 
respectively. The gene ontology (GO) biological pathway analysis showed 
significant enrichment of the 'JAK/STAT signaling pathway' in MUNW and 'The 
information-processing pathway at the IFN-β enhancer' pathway in MHOW. The G6PC3 
gene has genetically emerged as a new distinct gene showing its involvement in 
insulin resistance. Biochemical, as well as genetic analysis, revealed that MUNW 
and MHOW are the transition state between healthy and obese individuals with 
simply having fewer metabolic abnormalities. Moreover, it is possible that the 
state of obesity is a biological adaptation to cope up with the unhealthy 
parameters.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12020290
PMCID: PMC7923210
PMID: 33669862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of Interest.