1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2021 Mar;105(6):2297-2305. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-021-11199-w. Epub 2021 Mar 4.

Underground metabolism facilitates the evolution of novel pathways for vitamin 
B6 biosynthesis.

Richts B(1), Commichau FM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Microbiology, Institute for Microbiology and Genetics, 
University of Goettingen, Grisebachstrasse 8, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)FG Synthetic Microbiology, Institute for Biotechnology, BTU 
Cottbus-Senftenberg, Universitätsplatz 1, 01968, Senftenberg, Germany. 
fabian.commichau@b-tu.de.

The term vitamin B6 is a designation for the vitamers pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, 
pyridoxine and the respective phosphate esters pyridoxal-5'-phosphate (PLP), 
pyridoxamine-5'-phosphate and pyridoxine-5'-phosphate. Animals and humans are 
unable to synthesise vitamin B6. These organisms have to take up vitamin B6 with 
their diet. Therefore, vitamin B6 is of commercial interest as a food additive 
and for applications in the pharmaceutical industry. As yet, two naturally 
occurring routes for de novo synthesis of PLP are known. Both routes have been 
genetically engineered to obtain bacteria overproducing vitamin B6. Still, major 
genetic engineering efforts using the existing pathways are required for 
developing fermentation processes that could outcompete the chemical synthesis 
of vitamin B6. Recent suppressor screens using mutants of the Gram-negative and 
Gram-positive model bacteria Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, 
respectively, carrying mutations in the native pathways or heterologous genes 
uncovered novel routes for PLP biosynthesis. These pathways consist of 
promiscuous enzymes and enzymes that are already involved in vitamin B6 
biosynthesis. Thus, E. coli and B. subtilis contain multiple promiscuous enzymes 
causing a so-called underground metabolism allowing the bacteria to bypass 
disrupted vitamin B6 biosynthetic pathways. The suppressor screens also show the 
genomic plasticity of the bacteria to suppress a genetic lesion. We discuss the 
potential of the serendipitous pathways to serve as a starting point for the 
development of bacteria overproducing vitamin B6. KEY POINTS: • Known vitamin B6 
routes have been genetically engineered. • Underground metabolism facilitates 
the emergence of novel vitamin B6 biosynthetic pathways. • These pathways may be 
suitable to engineer bacteria overproducing vitamin B6.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-021-11199-w
PMCID: PMC7954711
PMID: 33665688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.