1. Neuron. 2021 Apr 21;109(8):1274-1282.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2021.02.018.
Epub  2021 Mar 4.

Spinal macrophages resolve nociceptive hypersensitivity after peripheral injury.

Niehaus JK(1), Taylor-Blake B(2), Loo L(2), Simon JM(3), Zylka MJ(4).

Author information:
(1)UNC Neuroscience Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Neuroscience Curriculum, The University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, The University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(3)UNC Neuroscience Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Carolina Institute for Developmental 
Disabilities, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599, USA.
(4)UNC Neuroscience Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; 
Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address: 
zylka@med.unc.edu.

Peripheral nerve injury induces long-term pro-inflammatory responses in spinal 
cord glial cells that facilitate neuropathic pain, but the identity of 
endogenous cells that resolve spinal inflammation has not been determined. 
Guided by single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), we found that MRC1+ spinal 
cord macrophages proliferated and upregulated the anti-inflammatory mediator 
Cd163 in mice following superficial injury (SI; nerve intact), but this response 
was blunted in nerve-injured animals. Depleting spinal macrophages in SI animals 
promoted microgliosis and caused mechanical hypersensitivity to persist. 
Conversely, expressing Cd163 in spinal macrophages increased Interleukin 10 
expression, attenuated micro- and astrogliosis, and enduringly alleviated 
mechanical and thermal hypersensitivity in nerve-injured animals. Our data 
indicate that MRC1+ spinal macrophages actively restrain glia to limit 
neuroinflammation and resolve mechanical pain following a superficial injury. 
Moreover, we show that spinal macrophages from nerve-injured animals mount a 
dampened anti-inflammatory response but can be therapeutically coaxed to promote 
long-lasting recovery of neuropathic pain.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2021.02.018
PMCID: PMC8068642
PMID: 33667343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.