1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Feb 24;22(5):2239. doi: 10.3390/ijms22052239.

Early Lipid Raft-Related Changes: Interplay between Unilateral Denervation and 
Hindlimb Suspension.

Bryndina IG(1), Shalagina MN(1), Protopopov VA(1), Sekunov AV(1), Zefirov AL(2), 
Zakirjanova GF(2)(3), Petrov AM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Immunology, Izhevsk State Medical Academy, 
Kommunarov St. 281, Izhevsk 426034, Russia.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience, Kazan State Medical University, Butlerova St. 49, 
Kazan 420012, Russia.
(3)Laboratory of Biophysics of Synaptic Processes, Kazan Institute of 
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Federal Research Center "Kazan Scientific Center of 
RAS", P. O. Box 30, Lobachevsky St. 2/31, Kazan 420111, Russia.

Muscle disuse and denervation leads to muscle atrophy, but underlying mechanisms 
can be different. Previously, we have found ceramide (Cer) accumulation and 
lipid raft disruption after acute hindlimb suspension (HS), a model of muscle 
disuse. Herein, using biochemical and fluorescent approaches the influence of 
unilateral denervation itself and in combination with short-term HS on 
membrane-related parameters of rat soleus muscle was studied. Denervation 
increased immunoexpression of sphingomyelinase and Cer in plasmalemmal regions, 
but decreased Cer content in the raft fraction and enhanced lipid raft 
integrity. Preliminary denervation suppressed (1) HS-induced Cer accumulation in 
plasmalemmal regions, shown for both nonraft and raft-fractions; (2) HS-mediated 
decrease in lipid raft integrity. Similar to denervation, inhibition of the 
sciatic nerve afferents with capsaicin itself increased Cer plasmalemmal 
immunoexpression, but attenuated the membrane-related effects of HS. Finally, 
both denervation and capsaicin treatment increased immunoexpression of 
proapoptotic protein Bax and inhibited HS-driven increase in antiapoptotic 
protein Bcl-2. Thus, denervation can increase lipid raft formation and attenuate 
HS-induced alterations probably due to decrease of Cer levels in the raft 
fraction. The effects of denervation could be at least partially caused by the 
loss of afferentation. The study points to the importance of motor and afferent 
inputs in control of Cer distribution and thereby stability of lipid rafts in 
the junctional and extrajunctional membranes of the muscle.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22052239
PMCID: PMC7956661
PMID: 33668129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.