1. Microb Biotechnol. 2021 Nov;14(6):2279-2290. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.13783.
Epub  2021 Mar 6.

Metabolic engineering of microorganisms for the production of multifunctional 
non-protein amino acids: γ-aminobutyric acid and δ-aminolevulinic acid.

Su A(1), Yu Q(1), Luo Y(1), Yang J(1), Wang E(2), Yuan H(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology and Key Laboratory of Soil 
Microbiology, Ministry of Agriculture, College of Biological Sciences, China 
Agricultural University, No.2 Yuanmingyuan West Road, Haidian District, Beijing, 
100193, China.
(2)Departamento de Microbiología, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, 
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City, 11340, Mexico.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA), playing 
important roles in agriculture, medicine and other fields, are multifunctional 
non-protein amino acids with similar and comparable properties and biosynthesis 
pathways. Recently, microbial synthesis has become an inevitable trend to 
produce GABA and ALA due to its green and sustainable characteristics. In 
addition, the development of metabolic engineering and synthetic biology has 
continuously accelerated and increased the GABA and ALA yield in microorganisms. 
Here, focusing on the current trends in metabolic engineering strategies for 
microbial synthesis of GABA and ALA, we analysed and compared the efficiency of 
various metabolic strategies in detail. Moreover, we provide the insights to 
meet challenges of realizing industrially competitive strains and highlight the 
future perspectives of GABA and ALA production.

© 2021 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by Society for Applied 
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/1751-7915.13783
PMCID: PMC8601173
PMID: 33675575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.