1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Feb 28;22(5):2442. doi: 10.3390/ijms22052442.

Immunogenomic Identification for Predicting the Prognosis of Cervical Cancer 
Patients.

Wang Q(1), Vattai A(1), Vilsmaier T(1), Kaltofen T(1), Steger A(2), Mayr D(3), 
Mahner S(1), Jeschke U(1)(4), Hildegard Heidegger H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital, LMU Munich, 
80377 Munich, Germany.
(2)Klinik für Innere Medizin I, Technische Universität München, 80333 Munich, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Pathology, LMU Munich, 80377 Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Hospital Augsburg, 
Stenglinstr. 2, 86156 Augsburg, Germany.

Cervical cancer is primarily caused by the infection of high-risk human 
papillomavirus (hrHPV). Moreover, tumor immune microenvironment plays a 
significant role in the tumorigenesis of cervical cancer. Therefore, it is 
necessary to comprehensively identify predictive biomarkers from immunogenomics 
associated with cervical cancer prognosis. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) public 
database has stored abundant sequencing or microarray data, and clinical data, 
offering a feasible and reliable approach for this study. In the present study, 
gene profile and clinical data were downloaded from TCGA, and the Immunology 
Database and Analysis Portal (ImmPort) database. Wilcoxon-test was used to 
compare the difference in gene expression. Univariate analysis was adopted to 
identify immune-related genes (IRGs) and transcription factors (TFs) correlated 
with survival. A prognostic prediction model was established by multivariate cox 
analysis. The regulatory network was constructed and visualized by correlation 
analysis and Cytoscape, respectively. Gene functional enrichment analysis was 
performed by Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG). A total of 204 differentially expressed IRGs were identified, and 22 of 
them were significantly associated with the survival of cervical cancer. These 
22 IRGs were actively involved in the JAK-STAT pathway. A prognostic model based 
on 10 IRGs (APOD, TFRC, GRN, CSK, HDAC1, NFATC4, BMP6, IL17RD, IL3RA, and LEPR) 
performed moderately and steadily in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) patients with 
FIGO stage I, regardless of the age and grade. Taken together, a risk score 
model consisting of 10 novel genes capable of predicting survival in SCC 
patients was identified. Moreover, the regulatory network of IRGs associated 
with survival (SIRGs) and their TFs provided potential molecular targets.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22052442
PMCID: PMC7957482
PMID: 33671013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Sven Mahner reports grants and personal fees 
from AstraZeneca, personal fees from Clovis, grants, and personal fees from 
Medac, grants, and personal fees from MSD. He also reports personal fees from 
Novartis, grants and personal fees from PharmaMar, grants and personal fees from 
Roche, personal fees from Sensor Kinesis, grants, and personal fees from Tesaro, 
grants and personal fees from Teva, outside the submitted work. All other 
authors declare no conflict of interest.