1. Cells. 2021 Feb 28;10(3):512. doi: 10.3390/cells10030512.

Role of Tumor-Derived Extracellular Vesicles in Glioblastoma.

Chen Y(1)(2), Jin Y(1)(3), Wu N(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081, 
China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Harbin Medical University-Daqing, Daqing 163319, 
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics (Harbin Medical University), Heilongjiang 
Higher Education Institutions, Harbin 150081, China.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary central nervous system tumor and 
one of the most lethal cancers worldwide, with morbidity of 5.26 per 100,000 
population per year. These tumors are often associated with poor prognosis and 
terrible quality of life. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are membrane-bound 
nanoparticles secreted by cells and contain lipid, protein, DNA, mRNA, miRNA and 
other bioactive substances. EVs perform biological functions by binding or 
horizontal transfer of bioactive substances to target cell receptors. In recent 
years, EVs have been considered as possible targets for GBM therapy. A great 
many types of research demonstrated that EVs played a vital role in the GBM 
microenvironment, development, progression, angiogenesis, invasion, and even the 
diagnosis of GBM. Nevertheless, the exact molecular mechanisms and roles of EVs 
in these processes are unclear. It can provide the basis for GBM treatment in 
the future that clarifying the regulatory mechanism and related signal pathways 
of EVs derived from GBM and their clinical value in GBM diagnosis and treatment. 
In this paper, the research progress and clinical application prospects of 
GBM-derived EVs are reviewed and discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10030512
PMCID: PMC7997231
PMID: 33670924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no conflict of 
interest.