1. Polymers (Basel). 2021 Feb 28;13(5):759. doi: 10.3390/polym13050759.

Study of the Synergetic Effect of Co-Pyrolysis of Lignite and High-Density 
Polyethylene Aiming to Improve Utilization of Low-Rank Coal.

Kojić I(1), Bechtel A(2), Aleksić N(3), Životić D(3), Trifunović S(4), Gajica 
G(5), Stojanović K(4).

Author information:
(1)Innovation Center of the Faculty of Chemistry, University of Belgrade, 
Studentski trg 12-16, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Department of Applied Geosciences and Geophysics, Montanuniversität Leoben, 
Peter-Tunner-Str. 5, A-8700 Leoben, Austria.
(3)Faculty of Mining and Geology, University of Belgrade, Đušina 7, 11000 
Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)Faculty of Chemistry, University of Belgrade, Studentski trg 12-16, 11000 
Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Institute of Chemistry, Technology and Metallurgy, Center of Chemistry, 
University of Belgrade, Studentski trg 12-16, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.

The mutual impact of low-quality lignite and high-density polyethylene (HDPE) 
during open system pyrolysis was investigated, aiming to improve utilization of 
lignite with simultaneous treatment of HDPE waste. Pyrolysis of lignite, HDPE, 
and their mixture (mass ratio, 1:1) was performed at temperatures 400, 450, 500, 
550, and 600 °C. Initial substrates and pyrolysis products were characterized by 
thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), 
specific carbon isotope analysis of individual hydrocarbons (δ13C), Rock-Eval 
pyrolysis, and elemental analysis. The positive synergetic effect during 
co-pyrolysis of lignite/HDPE mixture was observed at temperatures ≥450 °C, with 
the greatest being at 500 °C. The highest yield of liquid co-pyrolysis products 
with a similar composition to that of crude oils is also noticed at 500 °C. The 
yields of liquid and gaseous products and quality of pyrolytic products obtained 
by co-pyrolysis of lignite/HDPE mixture are notably improved compared with 
pyrolysis of lignite alone. On the other hand, data obtained from pyrolysis of 
HDPE alone indicate that it cannot be concurrent to well-developed catalytic 
thermal processes for polymer recycling. However, concerning the huge amount of 
produced HDPE, at least part of this plastic material can be reused for advanced 
thermal treatment of lignite, particularly in countries where this low-rank coal 
represents the main source of energy.

DOI: 10.3390/polym13050759
PMCID: PMC7957703
PMID: 33671005

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.