1. Cancer Sci. 2021 May;112(5):1811-1821. doi: 10.1111/cas.14874. Epub 2021 Mar
18.

RPL34-AS1-induced RPL34 inhibits cervical cancer cell tumorigenesis via the 
MDM2-P53 pathway.

Zhu Y(1), Ren C(1), Jiang D(1), Yang L(1), Chen Y(1), Li F(1), Wang B(1), Zhang 
Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, P.R. China.
(2)Department of pathology, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, P.R. China.

Ribosomal proteins (RPs) are important components of ribosomes and related to 
the occurrence and development of tumors. However, little is known about the 
effects of the RP network on cervical cancer (CC). In this study, we screened 
differentially expressed RPL34 in CC by high-throughput quantitative proteome 
assay. We found that RPL34 acted as a tumor suppressor and was downregulated in 
CC and inhibited the proliferation, migration, and invasion abilities of CC 
cells. Next, we verified that RPL34 regulated the CC through the MDM2-P53 
pathway by using Act D medicine, MDM2 inhibitor, and a series of western 
blotting（WB）assays. Moreover, an antisense lncRNA, RPL34-AS1, regulated the 
expression of RPL34 and participated in the tumorigenesis of CC. RPL34 can 
reverse the effect of RPL34-AS1 in CC cells. Finally, by RNA-binding protein 
immunoprecipitation (RIP) assay we found that eukaryotic initiation factor 4A3 
(EIF4A3), which binds to RPL34-AS1, regulated RPL34-AS1 expression in CC. 
Therefore, our findings indicate that RPL34-AS1-induced RPL34 inhibits CC cell 
proliferation, invasion, and metastasis through modulation of the MDM2-P53 
signaling pathway, which provides a meaningful target for the early diagnosis 
and treatment of CC.

© 2021 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.14874
PMCID: PMC8088949
PMID: 33675124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no commercial or other 
associations that might pose a conflict of interest.