1. Viruses. 2021 Feb 12;13(2):291. doi: 10.3390/v13020291.

Metatranscriptome Analysis of Sympatric Bee Species Identifies Bee Virus 
Variants and a New Virus, Andrena-Associated Bee Virus-1.

Daughenbaugh KF(1)(2), Kahnonitch I(3)(4), Carey CC(2), McMenamin AJ(2)(5), 
Wiegand T(2), Erez T(6), Arkin N(4)(7), Ross B(1)(2), Wiedenheft B(5), Sadeh 
A(4), Chejanovsky N(6), Mandelik Y(3), Flenniken ML(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences and Plant Pathology, Montana State University, 
Bozeman, MT 59717, USA.
(2)Pollinator Health Center, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717, USA.
(3)The Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Rehovot 5290002, Israel.
(4)Agroecology Lab, Newe Ya'ar Research Center, ARO, Ramat Yishay 30095, Israel.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT 59717, USA.
(6)Entomology Department, ARO, The Volcani Center, Rishon Lezion 7528809, 
Israel.
(7)The Mina & Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar Ilan University, 
Ramat Gan 5290002, Israel.

Bees are important plant pollinators in agricultural and natural ecosystems. 
High average annual losses of honey bee (Apis mellifera) colonies in some parts 
of the world, and regional population declines of some mining bee species 
(Andrena spp.), are attributed to multiple factors including habitat loss, lack 
of quality forage, insecticide exposure, and pathogens, including viruses. While 
research has primarily focused on viruses in honey bees, many of these viruses 
have a broad host range. It is therefore important to apply a community level 
approach in studying the epidemiology of bee viruses. We utilized 
high-throughput sequencing to evaluate viral diversity and viral sharing in 
sympatric, co-foraging bees in the context of habitat type. Variants of four 
common viruses (i.e., black queen cell virus, deformed wing virus, Lake Sinai 
virus 2, and Lake Sinai virus NE) were identified in honey bee and mining bee 
samples, and the high degree of nucleotide identity in the virus consensus 
sequences obtained from both taxa indicates virus sharing. We discovered a 
unique bipartite + ssRNA Tombo-like virus, Andrena-associated bee virus-1 
(AnBV-1). AnBV-1 infects mining bees, honey bees, and primary honey bee pupal 
cells maintained in culture. AnBV-1 prevalence and abundance was greater in 
mining bees than in honey bees. Statistical modeling that examined the roles of 
ecological factors, including floral diversity and abundance, indicated that 
AnBV-1 infection prevalence in honey bees was greater in habitats with low 
floral diversity and abundance, and that interspecific virus transmission is 
strongly modulated by the floral community in the habitat. These results suggest 
that land management strategies that aim to enhance floral diversity and 
abundance may reduce AnBV-1 spread between co-foraging bees.

DOI: 10.3390/v13020291
PMCID: PMC7917660
PMID: 33673324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.