1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2021 Mar 17;13(10):11657-11671. doi: 
10.1021/acsami.1c00347. Epub 2021 Mar 8.

Targeted Regulation of Blood-Brain Barrier for Enhanced Therapeutic Efficiency 
of Hypoxia-Modifier Nanoparticles and Immune Checkpoint Blockade Antibodies for 
Glioblastoma.

Meng L(1), Wang C(1), Lu Y(1), Sheng G(1), Yang L(1), Wu Z(1), Xu H(1), Han 
C(1), Lu Y(2), Han F(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular & Cerebrovascular Medicine, School of 
Pharmacy, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China.
(2)Department of Physiology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China.

Glioblastoma is the most destructive type of brain cancer. The blood-brain 
barrier (BBB) is a tremendous obstacle that hinders therapeutic agents, such as 
chemical drugs and antibodies, from reaching glioblastoma tissues. Meanwhile, 
the abnormal microenvironment of glioblastoma extremely restricts the expected 
therapeutic effects of accumulated drugs. Therefore, in the present study, 
BBB-regulating nanovesicles (BRN) are developed to achieve targeted and 
controlled BBB regulation, carrying adenosine 2A receptor (A2AR) agonists and 
perfluorocarbon (PF). The red-blood-cell membrane (RBCM) is included on the 
outside to avoid the premature release of therapeutic agents. In the presence of 
ultrasonication (US), A2AR agonists are released and induce effects on both 
F-actin and tight junctions of endothelial cells. Subsequently, BBB permeability 
is temporarily increased and enables small molecules and nanoparticles to enter 
brain parenchymal tissues. The high affinity between manganese dioxide and 
temozolomide (TMZ) is utilized to form multifunctional nanoparticles to 
ameliorate the hypoxic microenvironment, which yields improved glioblastoma 
inhibition combined with radiotherapy. Moreover, with the aid of targeted BBB 
regulation, programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) antibody induces a tumor-specific 
immune response. Taken together, the findings suggest that synergistic 
combination may have the potential in amplifying the therapeutic efficacies of 
clinical drugs and immune checkpoint blockade antibodies to overcome the 
therapeutic resistance of glioblastoma.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.1c00347
PMID: 33684289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]