1. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open. 2021 Feb 25;9(2):e3429. doi: 
10.1097/GOX.0000000000003429. eCollection 2021 Feb.

Treating Striae Distensae Albae in Asians: Efficacy and Safety of Combined MFU-V 
and CaHA.

Lim JTE(1).

Author information:
(1)Joyce Lim Skin and Laser Clinic, Singapore.

This study evaluated the efficacy and safety of a single treatment combining 
microfocused ultrasound with visualization (MFU-V) and subdermal diluted calcium 
hydroxylapatite with lidocaine (CaHA+) for Striae Distensae Albae (SDA).
METHODS: Ten prospectively enrolled women with abdominal, back or thigh SDA were 
treated with MFU-V at 3 focal depths (4.5, 3.0, and 1.5 mm), followed by 3-6 mL 
of diluted CaHA+ (1:1 ratio) in the same session. Outcomes were assessed at 1 
month, 3 months, and 5 months postprocedure using a 5-point quartile grading 
scale, an SDA scoring scale, a 10-point visual analog score, and a global 
aesthetic improvement scale.
RESULTS: All patients exhibited improvement in SDA at 3 months, with further 
improvement at 6 months. Physicians' assessment with the quartile grading scale 
showed that 8 patients improved moderately, whereas 2 had good improvement at 6 
months. The mean overall SDA score was 11.6 at baseline, 11.1 (not significant) 
at 1 month, 7.9 (P = 0.005) at 3 months, and 6.2 (P = 0.005) at 6 months. All 
patients had improved global aesthetic improvement scale at 3 and 6 months, with 
4 patients being much improved, and 3 patients being very much improved at 6 
months. At the end of the study, all patients were less bothered with their SDA 
compared with baseline with a mean reduction of 2.7 in visual analog score, and 
all patients were satisfied or very satisfied with the treatment. No adverse 
events occurred.
CONCLUSION: A single combination treatment of MFU-V and diluted CaHA+ improves 
SDA without side effects and may be considered for patients seeking to minimize 
SDA.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf 
of The American Society of Plastic Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000003429
PMCID: PMC7929617
PMID: 33680674