1. Front Immunol. 2021 Feb 22;12:628654. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.628654. 
eCollection 2021.

Circ_0088194 Promotes the Invasion and Migration of Rheumatoid Arthritis 
Fibroblast-Like Synoviocytes via the miR-766-3p/MMP2 Axis.

Cai Y(1), Liang R(1), Xiao S(1), Huang Q(1), Zhu D(1), Shi GP(2), Ouyang Q(1), 
Yang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, United States.

Dysregulation of circular RNAs (circRNAs) is involved in various human diseases. 
Fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs), which form the lining of the joint, are 
epigenetically imprinted with an aggressive phenotype and contribute to joint 
destruction in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In the present study, we identified a 
novel circRNA, Circ_0088194, which was upregulated in RA fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes (RA-FLSs) and correlated with the disease activity score in 28 
joints. Overexpression of Circ_0088194 promoted RA-FLS migration and invasion, 
while inhibition of Circ_0088194 had the opposite effect. Mechanistically, 
Circ_0088194 acted as a miR-766-3p sponge to relieve the repressive effect of 
miR-766-3p on its target, MMP2 (encoding matrix metalloproteinase 2), thereby 
promoting migration and invasion. The expression level of Circ_0088194 was 
inversely correlated with that of miR-766-3p in RA-FLSs. Importantly, 
overexpression of miR-766-3p partially blocked the migration and invasion 
induced by Circ_0088194 overexpression. Collectively, this study identified a 
novel circRNA Circ_0088194 that promotes RA-FLS invasion and migration via the 
miR-766-3p/MMP2 axis. Circ_0088194 might represent a novel therapeutic target to 
prevent and treat RA.

Copyright Â© 2021 Cai, Liang, Xiao, Huang, Zhu, Shi, Ouyang and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.628654
PMCID: PMC7937802
PMID: 33692802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.