1. J Magn Reson. 2021 May;326:106937. doi: 10.1016/j.jmr.2021.106937. Epub 2021
Feb  18.

Optimal design of adaptively sampled NMR experiments for measurement of methyl 
group dynamics with application to a ribosome-nascent chain complex.

Waudby CA(1), Burridge C(2), Christodoulou J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, UCL, Gower St, London WC1E 
6BT, UK. Electronic address: c.waudby@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, UCL, Gower St, London WC1E 
6BT, UK.
(3)Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, UCL, Gower St, London WC1E 
6BT, UK. Electronic address: j.christodoulou@ucl.ac.uk.

NMR measurements of cross-correlated nuclear spin relaxation provide powerful 
probes of polypeptide dynamics and rotational diffusion, free from contributions 
due to chemical exchange or interactions with external spins. Here, we report on 
the development of a sensitivity-optimized pulse sequence for the analysis of 
the differential relaxation of transitions within isolated 13CH3 spin systems, 
in order to characterise rotational diffusion and side chain order through the 
product S2τc. We describe the application of optimal design theory to implement 
a real-time 'on-the-fly' adaptive sampling scheme that maximizes the accuracy of 
the measured parameters. The increase in sensitivity obtained using this 
approach enables quantitative measurements of rotational diffusion within folded 
states of translationally-arrested ribosome-nascent chain complexes of the FLN5 
filamin domain, and can be used to place strong limits on interactions between 
the domain and the ribosome surface.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmr.2021.106937
PMCID: PMC7613274
PMID: 33706222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.