1. Thorac Cancer. 2021 May;12(9):1271-1278. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.13765. Epub
2021  Mar 11.

Mutation profile and immunoscore signature in thymic carcinomas: An exploratory 
study and review of the literature.

Asselta R(#)(1)(2), Di Tommaso L(#)(1)(3), Perrino M(4), Destro A(3), Giordano 
L(5), Cardamone G(1), Rubino L(4), Santoro A(1)(4), Duga S(#)(1)(2), Zucali 
PA(#)(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy.
(2)Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(3)Unit of Pathology, IRCCS, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Milan, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Oncology, IRCCS, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Milan, 
Italy.
(5)Statistic Unit, IRCCS, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Milan, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Significant efforts have been made to investigate the molecular 
pathways involved in thymic carcinogenesis. However, genetic findings have still 
not impacted clinical practice. The aim of this exploratory trial was to 
evaluate the immunoscore and molecular profile of a series of thymic carcinomas 
(TCs), correlating this data with clinical outcome.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) TC tissues were retrieved from 
our center archive. The immunoscore was evaluated according to Angell and 
Gallon. DNA was extracted from FFPE tumor samples and, when available, from 
adjacent histologically normal tissues. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was 
performed targeting hotspot regions of 50 oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes.
RESULTS: A series of 15 TCs were analyzed. After a median follow-up of 82.4 
months, the median overall survival was 104.7 months. The immunoscore was >2 in 
5/15 patients (33%). Among the investigated genes, absence of mutations was 
observed in 5/15 patients (33%), whereas three variants in 1/15 (6%) patient, 
two variants in 4/15 (26%) patients, and one variant in 5/15 patients (33%) were 
found. The most recurrently mutated genes were FGFR3 (five mutations) and CDKN2A 
(three mutations, two of which were nonsense). Patients with CDKN2A loss showed 
a statistically significantly worse survival (P = 0.0013), whereas patients with 
FGFR3 mutations showed a statistically significantly better survival (P = 
0.048).
CONCLUSIONS: This study adds data to the few existing reports on the mutational 
landscape of TCs, providing the first comprehensive analysis to date. Here, we 
confirm the low rate of mutations in TCs and suggest FGFR3 and CDKN2A mutations 
as intriguing potential therapeutic targets.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and 
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.13765
PMCID: PMC8088947
PMID: 33704917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]