1. Hawaii J Health Soc Welf. 2021 Mar 1;80(3):52-61.

Genetic Characteristics and Phylogeny of 969-bp S Gene Sequence of SARS-CoV-2 
from Hawai'i Reveals the Worldwide Emerging P681H Mutation.

Maison DP(1)(2), Ching LL(1)(2), Shikuma CM(1)(3), Nerurkar VR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology, and Pharmacology, John 
A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI (DPM, 
LLC, CMS, VRN).
(2)Pacific Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases Research, John A. Burns 
School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI (DPM, LLC, 
VRN).
(3)Hawai'i Center for AIDS, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of 
Hawai'i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI (CMS).

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Jan 07:2021.01.06.425497. doi: 10.1101/2021.01.06.425497.

The COVID-19 pandemic has ravaged the world, caused over 1.8 million deaths in 
its first year, and severely affected the global economy. Hawai'i has not been 
spared from the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the local population, including 
high infection rates in racial and ethnic minorities. Early in the pandemic, we 
described in this journal various technologies used for the detection of 
SARS-CoV-2. Herein we characterize a 969-bp SARS-CoV-2 segment of the S gene 
downstream of the receptor-binding domain. At the John A. Burns School of 
Medicine Biocontainment Facility, RNA was extracted from an oropharyngeal swab 
and a nasal swab from 2 patients from Hawai'i who were infected with SARS-CoV-2 
in August 2020. Following PCR, the 2 viral strains were sequenced using Sanger 
sequencing, and phylogenetic trees were generated using MEGAX. Phylogenetic tree 
results indicate that the virus has been introduced to Hawai'i from multiple 
sources. Further, we decoded 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms across 13 unique 
SARS-CoV-2 genomes within this region of the S gene, with 1 non-synonymous 
mutation (P681H) found in the 2 Hawai'i strains. The P681H mutation has unique 
and emerging characteristics with a significant exponential increase in 
worldwide frequency when compared to the plateauing of the now universal D614G 
mutation. The P681H mutation is also characteristic of the new SARS-CoV-2 
variants from the United Kingdom and Nigeria. Additionally, several mutations 
resulting in cysteine residues were detected, potentially resulting in 
disruption of the disulfide bridges in and around the receptor-binding domain. 
Targeted sequence characterization is warranted to determine the origin of 
multiple introductions of SARS-CoV-2 circulating in Hawai'i.

©Copyright 2021 by University Health Partners of Hawai‘i (UHP Hawai‘i).

PMCID: PMC7953241
PMID: 33718878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors identify a conflict of 
interest.