1. Front Oncol. 2021 Feb 26;11:644011. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.644011. eCollection
 2021.

Increased Expression of hsa_circ_0002111 and Its Clinical Significance in 
Papillary Thyroid Cancer.

Du G(1)(2)(3), Ma R(1)(2)(3), Li H(1)(2), He J(2), Feng K(1)(2)(3), Niu 
D(1)(2)(3), Yin D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thyroid Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Key Discipline Laboratory of Clinical Medicine Henan, Zhengzhou, China.
(3)Academy of Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

Circular RNA (circRNA) is a newly discovered non-coding RNA. Recent reports 
suggest that circRNAs are key regulators of tumorigenesis because of their 
special structure. In order to investigate the role of hsa_circ_0002111 in 
papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), we use quantitative real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (qRT-PCR) to determine the expression pattern of hsa_circ_0002111 in 82 
paired PTC and adjacent non-cancerous thyroid tissues. Cell counting kit-8, 
colony formation, and transwell assays were conducted to assess the effect of 
hsa_circ_0002111 on PTC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. We found 
that the expression of hsa_circ_0002111 was significantly up-regulated in PTC 
tissues compared with adjacent non-cancerous tissues (P < 0.0001). Expression of 
hsa_circ_0002111 was also associated with advanced TNM stage and lymph-node 
metastasis of patients with PTC. The area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve was 0.833. Further, cell function assays showed that 
hsa_circ_0002111 inhibition significantly suppressed the proliferation and 
invasion abilities of PTC cells in vitro. In conclusions, the study findings 
show that the over-expression of hsa_circ_0002111 promotes PTC, and thus 
hsa_circ_0002111 may be a potential diagnostic biomarker and therapeutic target 
for PTC.

Copyright Â© 2021 Du, Ma, Li, He, Feng, Niu and Yin.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.644011
PMCID: PMC7952861
PMID: 33718243

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.