1. Aging (Albany NY). 2021 Mar 10;13(6):8895-8915. doi: 10.18632/aging.202704.
Epub  2021 Mar 10.

Licochalcone A improves the cognitive ability of mice by regulating T- and 
B-cell proliferation.

Wu Y(1), Zhu J(1), Liu H(2), Liu H(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Xinjiang Phytomedicine Resource and Utilization of Ministry 
of Education, College of Life Sciences, Shihezi University, Shihezi 832003, 
China.
(2)China Colored-Cotton (Group) Co., Ltd., Urumqi 830016, Xinjiang, China.
(3)Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200123, China.

Licochalcone A (LA), a flavonoid found in licorice, has anticancer, antioxidant, 
anti-inflammatory, and neuroprotective properties. Here, we explored the effect 
of injecting LA into the tail vein of middle-aged C57BL/6 mice on their 
cognitive ability as measured by the Morris water maze (MWM) test and cerebral 
blood flow (CBF). The related mechanisms were assessed via RNA-seq, and T 
(CD3e+) and B (CD45R/B220+) cells in the spleen and whole blood were quantified 
via flow cytometry. LA improved the cognitive ability, according to the MWM test 
results, and upregulated the CBF level of treated mice. The RNA-seq results 
indicate that LA affected the interleukin (IL)-17 signaling pathway, which is 
related to T- and B-cell proliferation, and the flow cytometry data suggest that 
LA promoted T- and B-cell proliferation in the spleen and whole blood. We also 
performed immune reconstruction via a tail vein injection of lymphocytes into 
B-NDG (NOD-PrkdcscidIl2rgtm1/Bcge) mice before treating them with LA. We tested 
cognitive ability by subjecting these animals to new object recognition tests 
and quantified the splenic and whole blood T and B cells. Cognitive ability 
improved after immune reconstruction and LA treatment, and LA promoted T- and 
B-cell proliferation in the spleen and whole blood. This study demonstrates that 
LA, by activating the IL-17 signaling pathway, promotes T- and B-cell 
proliferation in the spleen and whole blood of mice and improves cognitive 
ability. Thus, LA may have immune-modulating therapeutic potential for improving 
cognition.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.202704
PMCID: PMC8034954
PMID: 33714945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.