1. Contemp Clin Trials. 2021 May;104:106338. doi: 10.1016/j.cct.2021.106338. Epub
 2021 Mar 10.

Shotgun: A Bayesian seamless phase I-II design to accelerate the development of 
targeted therapies and immunotherapy.

Jiang L(1), Li R(2), Yan F(3), Yap TA(4), Yuan Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Research Center of Biostatistics and Computational Pharmacy, China 
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China; Department of Biostatistics, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(2)The Center for Drug Evaluation, The National Medical Products Administration, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Research Center of Biostatistics and Computational Pharmacy, China 
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics (Phase I Program), The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA; Khalifa 
Institute for Personalized Cancer Therapy, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA; The Institute for Applied Cancer 
Science, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, 
USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. Electronic address: yyuan@mdanderson.org.

Drug development of novel antitumor agents is conventionally divided by phase 
and cancer indication. With the advent of new molecularly targeted therapies and 
immunotherapies, this approach has become inefficient and dysfunctional. We 
propose a Bayesian seamless phase I-II "shotgun" design to evaluate the safety 
and antitumor efficacy of a new drug in multiple cancer indications 
simultaneously. "Shotgun" is used to describe the design feature that the trial 
begins with an all-comer dose finding phase to identify the maximum tolerated 
dose (MTD) or recommended phase II dose (RP2D), and then is seamlessly split to 
multiple indication-specific cohort expansions. Patients treated during dose 
finding are rolled over to the cohort expansion for more efficient evaluation of 
efficacy, while patients enrolled in cohort expansion contribute to the 
continuous learning of the safety and tolerability of the new drug. During 
cohort expansion, interim analyses are performed to discontinue ineffective or 
unsafe expansion cohorts early. To improve the efficiency of such interim 
analyses, we propose a clustered Bayesian hierarchical model (CBHM) to 
adaptively borrow information across indications. A simulation study shows that 
compared to conventional approaches and the standard Bayesian hierarchical 
model, the shotgun design has substantially higher probabilities to discover 
indications that are responsive to the treatment in question, and is associated 
with a reasonable false discovery rate. The shotgun provides a phase I-II trial 
design for accelerating drug development and to build a more robust foundation 
for subsequent phase III trials. The proposed CBHM methodology also provides an 
efficient design for basket trials.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cct.2021.106338
PMCID: PMC8180491
PMID: 33711459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]