1. J Extracell Vesicles. 2021 Mar;10(5):e12073. doi: 10.1002/jev2.12073. Epub
2021  Mar 4.

Small extracellular vesicles ameliorate peripheral neuropathy and enhance 
chemotherapy of oxaliplatin on ovarian cancer.

Zhang Y(1), Li C(1), Qin Y(1), Cepparulo P(1), Millman M(2), Chopp M(1)(2), 
Kemper A(3), Szalad A(1), Lu X(1), Wang L(1), Zhang ZG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology Henry Ford Health System Detroit Michigan USA.
(2)Department of Physics Oakland University Rochester Michigan USA.
(3)Department of Pathology Henry Ford Health System Detroit Michigan USA.

Erratum in
    J Extracell Vesicles. 2021 Dec;10(14):e12180. doi: 10.1002/jev2.12180.

There are no effective treatments for chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy 
(CIPN). Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) facilitate intercellular 
communication and mediate nerve function and tumour progression. We found that 
the treatment of mice bearing ovarian tumour with sEVs derived from cerebral 
endothelial cells (CEC-sEVs) in combination with a chemo-drug, oxaliplatin, 
robustly reduced oxaliplatin-induced CIPN by decreasing oxaliplatin-damaged 
myelination and nerve fibres of the sciatic nerve and significantly amplified 
chemotherapy of oxaliplatin by reducing tumour size. The combination therapy 
substantially increased a set of sEV cargo-enriched miRNAs, but significantly 
reduced oxaliplatin-increased proteins in the sciatic nerve and tumour tissues. 
Bioinformatics analysis revealed the altered miRNAs and proteins formed two 
distinct networks that regulate neuropathy and tumour growth, respectively. 
Intravenously administered CEC-sEVs were internalized by axons of the sciatic 
nerve and cancer cells. Reduction of CEC-sEV cargo miRNAs abolished the effects 
of CEC-sEVs on oxaliplatin-inhibited axonal growth and on amplification of the 
anti-cancer effect in ovarian cancer cells, suggesting that alterations in the 
networks of miRNAs and proteins in recipient cells contribute to the therapeutic 
effect of CEC-sEVs on CIPN. Together, the present study demonstrates that 
CEC-sEVs suppressed CIPN and enhanced chemotherapy of oxaliplatin in the mouse 
bearing ovarian tumour.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Extracellular Vesicles published by Wiley 
Periodicals, LLC on behalf of the International Society for Extracellular 
Vesicles.

DOI: 10.1002/jev2.12073
PMCID: PMC7931803
PMID: 33728031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No