1. J Cell Sci. 2021 Apr 15;134(8):jcs252221. doi: 10.1242/jcs.252221. Epub 2021
Apr  27.

Differential cellular responses to adhesive interactions with galectin-8- and 
fibronectin-coated substrates.

Li W(1), Sancho A(2)(3), Chung WL(4), Vinik Y(5), Groll J(2), Zick Y(5), Medalia 
O(4), Bershadsky AD(5)(6), Geiger B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 7610001, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Functional Materials in Medicine and Dentistry and Bavarian 
Polymer Institute, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, 97070, Germany.
(3)Department of Automatic Control and Systems Engineering, University of the 
Basque Country UPV/EHU, San Sebastian, 20018, Spain.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Zurich, CH-8057, 
Switzerland.
(5)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
7610001, Israel.
(6)Mechanobiology Institute, National University of Singapore, 117411 Singapore.

The mechanisms underlying the cellular response to extracellular matrices (ECMs) 
that consist of multiple adhesive ligands are still poorly understood. Here, we 
address this topic by monitoring specific cellular responses to two different 
extracellular adhesion molecules - the main integrin ligand fibronectin and 
galectin-8, a lectin that binds β-galactoside residues  - as well as to mixtures 
of the two proteins. Compared with cell spreading on fibronectin, cell spreading 
on galectin-8-coated substrates resulted in increased projected cell area, 
more-pronounced extension of filopodia and, yet, the inability to form focal 
adhesions and stress fibers. These differences can be partially reversed by 
experimental manipulations of small G-proteins of the Rho family and their 
downstream targets, such as formins, the Arp2/3 complex and Rho kinase. We also 
show that the physical adhesion of cells to galectin-8 was stronger than 
adhesion to fibronectin. Notably, galectin-8 and fibronectin differently 
regulate cell spreading and focal adhesion formation, yet act synergistically to 
upregulate the number and length of filopodia. The physiological significance of 
the coherent cellular response to a molecularly complex matrix is discussed. 
This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of 
the paper.

© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.252221
PMCID: PMC8106957
PMID: 33722978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.