1. Biol Psychiatry. 2021 Jun 15;89(12):1162-1175. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2021.01.007. Epub 2021 Jan 21.

Activating Corticotropin-Releasing Factor Systems in the Nucleus Accumbens, 
Amygdala, and Bed Nucleus of Stria Terminalis: Incentive Motivation or Aversive 
Motivation?

Baumgartner HM(1), Schulkin J(2), Berridge KC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. 
Electronic address: hmbaum@umich.edu.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2021 Jun 15;89(12):1113-1115. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2021.03.032.

BACKGROUND: Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) neural systems are important 
stress mechanisms in the central amygdala (CeA), bed nucleus of stria terminalis 
(BNST), nucleus accumbens (NAc), and related structures. CRF-containing neural 
systems are traditionally posited to generate aversive distress states that 
motivate overconsumption of rewards and relapse in addiction. However, 
CRF-containing systems may alternatively promote incentive motivation to 
increase reward pursuit and consumption without requiring aversive states.
METHODS: We optogenetically stimulated CRF-expressing neurons in the CeA, BNST, 
or NAc using Crh-Cre+ rats (n = 37 female, n = 34 male) to investigate roles in 
incentive motivation versus aversive motivation. We paired CRF-expressing 
neuronal stimulations with earning sucrose rewards in two-choice and progressive 
ratio tasks and investigated recruitment of distributed limbic circuitry. We 
further assessed valence with CRF-containing neuron laser self-stimulation 
tasks.
RESULTS: Channelrhodopsin excitation of CRF-containing neurons in the CeA and 
NAc amplified and focused incentive motivation and recruited activation of 
mesocorticolimbic reward circuitry. CRF systems in both the CeA and NAc 
supported laser self-stimulation, amplified incentive motivation for sucrose in 
a breakpoint test, and focused "wanting" on laser-paired sucrose over a sucrose 
alternative in a two-choice test. Conversely, stimulation of CRF-containing 
neurons in the BNST produced negative valence or aversive effects and recruited 
distress-related circuitry, as stimulation was avoided and suppressed motivation 
for sucrose.
CONCLUSIONS: CRF-containing systems in the NAc and CeA can promote reward 
consumption by increasing incentive motivation without involving aversion. In 
contrast, stimulation of CRF-containing systems in the BNST is aversive but 
suppresses sucrose reward pursuit and consumption rather than increase, as 
predicted by traditional hedonic self-medication hypotheses.

Copyright © 2021 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2021.01.007
PMCID: PMC8178165
PMID: 33726937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors report no biomedical 
financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.