1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Feb 25;12:618989. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.618989. 
eCollection 2021.

Common Endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms are not 
Related With the Risk for Restless Legs Syndrome.

Jiménez-Jiménez FJ(1), Agúndez BG(2), Gómez-Tabales J(2), Alonso-Navarro H(1), 
Turpín-Fenoll L(3), Millán-Pascual J(3), Díez-Fairén M(4)(5), Álvarez I(4)(5), 
Pastor P(4)(5), Calleja M(1), García-Ruiz R(3), Navarro-Muñoz S(3), 
Recio-Bermejo M(3), Plaza-Nieto JF(1), García-Albea E(6), García-Martín E(2), 
Agúndez JAG(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, Hospital Universitario del Sureste, Arganda del Rey, 
Spain.
(2)UNEx, ARADyAL, University Institute of Molecular Pathology Biomarkers, 
Cáceres, Spain.
(3)Section of Neurology, Hospital La Mancha-Centro, Alcázar de San Juan, Spain.
(4)Fundació per la Recerca Biomèdica i Social Mútua de Terrassa, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitari Mutua 
de Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Medicine-Neurology, Universidad de Alcalá, Alcalá de Henares, 
Spain.

Because nitric oxide and endothelial dysfunction could play a role in the 
pathogenesis of idiopathic restless legs syndrome (RLS), as was suggested by 
some preliminary data, we investigated the possible association between the 
rs2070744 variants in the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS or NOS3) gene 
(chromosome 7q36.1) and the risk for RLS in a Caucasian Spanish population. We 
assessed the frequencies of NOS3 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
rs2070744, rs1799983, and rs79467411 genotypes and allelic variants in 273 
patients with idiopathic RLS and 325 healthy controls using a TaqMan-based qPCR 
assay. We also analyzed the possible influence of genotype frequency on age at 
onset of RLS symptoms, gender, family history of RLS, and response to drugs 
commonly used in the treatment of RLS such as dopaminergic drugs, clonazepam, 
and GABAergic drugs. The frequencies of genotypes and allelic variants were not 
associated with the risk for RLS and were not influenced by gender, age, and 
positive family history of RLS. We identified weak statistical associations of 
the SNP rs1799983 with the response to dopamine agonists (Pc = 0.018 for the 
rs1799983 G/T genotype) and of the SNP rs79467411 with the response to 
clonazepam (Pc = 0.018 for the rs79467411 G allele), although these findings 
should be cautiously interpreted and require further confirmation. These 
associations aside, our findings suggest that common NOS3 SNPs are not 
associated with the risk for idiopathic RLS in Caucasian Spanish people.

Copyright © 2021 Jiménez-Jiménez, Agúndez, Gómez-Tabales, Alonso-Navarro, 
Turpín-Fenoll, Millán-Pascual, Díez-Fairén, Álvarez, Pastor, Calleja, 
García-Ruiz, Navarro-Muñoz, Recio-Bermejo, Plaza-Nieto, García-Albea, 
García-Martín and Agúndez.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.618989
PMCID: PMC7959806
PMID: 33732155

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.