1. ACS Omega. 2021 Mar 5;6(10):6509-6527. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.0c06335. 
eCollection 2021 Mar 16.

Fomite Transmission, Physicochemical Origin of Virus-Surface Interactions, and 
Disinfection Strategies for Enveloped Viruses with Applications to SARS-CoV-2.

Castaño N(1), Cordts SC(1), Kurosu Jalil M(1), Zhang KS(1), Koppaka S(1), Bick 
AD(1), Paul R(1), Tang SKY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California 94305, United States.

Inanimate objects or surfaces contaminated with infectious agents, referred to 
as fomites, play an important role in the spread of viruses, including 
SARS-CoV-2, the virus responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic. The long 
persistence of viruses (hours to days) on surfaces calls for an urgent need for 
effective surface disinfection strategies to intercept virus transmission and 
the spread of diseases. Elucidating the physicochemical processes and surface 
science underlying the adsorption and transfer of virus between surfaces, as 
well as their inactivation, is important for understanding how diseases are 
transmitted and for developing effective intervention strategies. This review 
summarizes the current knowledge and underlying physicochemical processes of 
virus transmission, in particular via fomites, and common disinfection 
approaches. Gaps in knowledge and the areas in need of further research are also 
identified. The review focuses on SARS-CoV-2, but discussion of related viruses 
is included to provide a more comprehensive review given that much remains 
unknown about SARS-CoV-2. Our aim is that this review will provide a broad 
survey of the issues involved in fomite transmission and intervention to a wide 
range of readers to better enable them to take on the open research challenges.

© 2021 American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.0c06335
PMCID: PMC7944398
PMID: 33748563

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.