1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Mar 4;9:638190. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.638190. eCollection
 2021.

Novel Gross Deletion Mutations in NTRK1 Gene Associated With Congenital 
Insensitivity to Pain With Anhidrosis.

Li L(1), Jia C(2), Tang Y(1), Kong Y(1), Xia Y(2), Ma L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Newborn Screening Center, Beijing Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing Maternal and Child Health Care 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Neonatology, Hebei Provincial Children's Hospital, 
Shijiazhuang, China.

Background: Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA) is a rare 
inherited autosomal recessive disorder characterized by insensitivity to noxious 
stimuli, anhidrosis, recurrent fever, and intellectual disability. CIPA is 
mainly caused by mutations in the neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor type 1 
gene (NTRK1). This study aims to identify pathogenic mutations underlying CIPA 
in two unrelated Chinese families. Methods: DNA was extracted from blood samples 
of patients and their available family members and subjected to whole exome 
sequencing (WES). Real-time PCR (qPCR), Gap-PCR, and Sanger sequencing were 
applied to verify the identified variants. Result: We found novel compound gross 
deletion mutations [exon1-6 del (g.1-1258_10169del); exon5-7 del 
(g.6995_11999del)] of NTRK1 (MIM 191315) gene in family 1 and the compound 
heterozygous mutations [c.851-33T>A; exon5-7 del (g.6995_11999del)] in family 2. 
Interestingly, we discovered the intragenic novel gross deletion [exon5-7 del 
(g.6995_11999del)] mediated by recombination between Alu elements. Conclusions: 
The present study highlights two rare gross deletion mutations in the NTRK1 gene 
associated with CIPA in two unrelated Chinese families. The deletion of exon1-6 
(g.1-1258_10169del) is thought to be the largest NTRK1 deletion reported to 
date. Our findings expand the mutation spectrum of NTRK1 mutations in the 
Chinese and could be useful for prenatal interventions and more precise 
pharmacological treatments to patients. WES conducted in our study is a 
convenient and useful tool for clinical diagnosis of CIPA and other associated 
disorders.

Copyright Â© 2021 Li, Jia, Tang, Kong, Xia and Ma.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.638190
PMCID: PMC7969531
PMID: 33748046

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.