1. J Cell Mol Med. 2021 May;25(10):4649-4657. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.16390. Epub 2021 
Mar 19.

Cell cytoskeleton and proliferation study for the RANKL-induced RAW264.7 
differentiation.

Kong L(1), Ma R(2), Cao Y(1), Smith W(3), Liu Y(1), Yang X(1), Yan L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, School of Medicine, Honghui Hospital, Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Xi'an Children Hospital, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Although document studies (including ours) have been reported the achieved in 
vitro osteoclastic cellular model establishment from the RAW264.7 cell lineage, 
there was no study directly reported that American Type Culture Collection 
(ATCC) cell bank has various RAW264.7 cell lineages. Besides that, for our 
knowledge there was only one study compared the two different RAW264.7TIB-71 and 
RAW264.7CRL-2278 cell lineages for their osteoclastic differentiation, and they 
concluded that the RAW264.7CRL-2278 demonstrated to generate much osteoclast 
than RAW264.7TIB-71 . However, on the contrary to their results we noticed the 
fusion of RAW264.7TIB-71 in our previous studies was much compromising. 
Therefore, we try to explore the two cell lineages for their properties in 
osteoclastic differentiation with an in-depth cellular cytoskeletal study. Our 
current study has showed that comparing to the RAW264.7CRL-2278 , RAW264.7TIB-71 
demonstrated a much higher efficacies for RANKL-stimulated osteoclastic 
differentiation. Besides that, in our depth cytoskeletal studies, we found that 
the RANKL-induced RAW264.7TIB-71 cells could finally differentiate into mature 
osteoclasts. However, regardless the various pre-treatment conditions, there was 
no mature osteoclast formed in RANKL-induced RAW264.7CRL-2278 cell lineage.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by 
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.16390
PMCID: PMC8107080
PMID: 33742541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.