1. Theranostics. 2021 Mar 4;11(10):4809-4824. doi: 10.7150/thno.55814.
eCollection  2021.

WD repeat domain 5 promotes chemoresistance and Programmed Death-Ligand 1 
expression in prostate cancer.

Zhou Q(1)(2), Chen X(1)(2), He H(3)(4), Peng S(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Zhang 
J(1)(2), Cheng L(1)(2), Liu S(1)(2), Huang M(1)(2), Xie R(1)(2), Lin T(1)(2)(5), 
Huang J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou 510120, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene 
Regulation, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 
510120, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China & Collaborative Innovation 
Center of Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 
510060, China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, 510060, China.
(5)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Kashi Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Kashi, China.

Purpose: Advanced prostate cancer (PCa) has limited treatment regimens and shows 
low response to chemotherapy and immunotherapy, leading to poor prognosis. 
Histone modification is a vital mechanism of gene expression and a promising 
therapy target. In this study, we characterized WD repeat domain 5 (WDR5), a 
regulator of histone modification, and explored its potential therapeutic value 
in PCa. Experimental Design: We characterized specific regulators of histone 
modification, based on TCGA data. The expression and clinical features of WDR5 
were analyzed in two dependent cohorts. The functional role of WDR5 was further 
investigated with siRNA and OICR-9429, a small molecular antagonist of WDR5, in 
vitro and in vivo. The mechanism of WDR5 was explored by RNA-sequencing and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Results: WDR5 was overexpressed in PCa and 
associated with advanced clinicopathological features, and predicted poor 
prognosis. Both inhibition of WDR5 by siRNA and OICR-9429 could reduce 
proliferation, and increase apoptosis and chemosensitivity to cisplatin in vitro 
and in vivo. Interestingly, targeting WDR5 by siRNA and OICR-9429 could block 
IFN-γ-induced PD-L1 expression in PCa cells. Mechanistically, we clarified that 
some cell cycle, anti-apoptosis, DNA repair and immune related genes, including 
AURKA, CCNB1, E2F1, PLK1, BIRC5, XRCC2 and PD-L1, were directly regulated by 
WDR5 and OICR-9429 in H3K4me3 and c-Myc dependent manner. Conclusions: These 
data revealed that targeting WDR5 suppressed proliferation, enhanced apoptosis, 
chemosensitivity to cisplatin and immunotherapy in PCa. Therefore, our findings 
provide insight into OICR-9429 is a multi-potency and promising therapy drug, 
which improves the antitumor effect of cisplatin or immunotherapy in PCa.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.55814
PMCID: PMC7978315
PMID: 33754029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.