1. J Bacteriol. 2021 Jun 1;203(11):e00023-21. doi: 10.1128/JB.00023-21. Epub 2021
 Mar 22.

Exopolysaccharide anchoring creates an extreme resistance to sedimentation.

Kessler NG(1), Caraballo Delgado DM(1), Shah NK(1), Dickinson JA Jr(1), Moore 
SD(2).

Author information:
(1)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Central Florida, 
Orlando, Florida, USA.
(2)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Central Florida, 
Orlando, Florida, USA sean.moore@ucf.edu.

By evolving strains of E. coli that hyper-resist sedimentation, we discovered an 
uncharacterized mechanism that bacteria can use to remain in suspension 
indefinitely without expending energy. This unusual phenotype was traced to the 
anchoring of long colanic acid polymers (CAP) that project from the cell 
surface. Although each characterized mutant activated this same mechanism, the 
genes responsible and the strengths of the phenotypes varied. Mutations in rcsC, 
lpp, igaA, or the yjbEFGH operon were sufficient to stimulate sedimentation 
resistance, while mutations altering the cps promoter, cdgI, or yjbF provided 
phenotypic enhancements. The sedimentation resistances changed in response to 
temperature, growth phase, and carbon source and each mutant exhibited 
significantly reduced biofilm formation. We discovered that the degree of colony 
mucoidy exhibited by these mutants was not related to the degree of Rcs pathways 
activation or to the amount of CAP that was produced; rather, it was related to 
the fraction of CAP that was shed as a true exopolysaccharide. Therefore, these 
and other mutations that activate this phenotype are likely to be absent from 
genetic screens that relied on centrifugation to harvest bacteria. We also found 
that this anchored CAP form is not linked to LPS cores and may not be attached 
to the outer membrane.IMPORTANCEBacteria can partition in aqueous environments 
between surface-dwelling, planktonic, sedimentary, and biofilm forms. Residence 
in each location provides an advantage depending on nutritional and 
environmental stresses and a community of a single species is often observed to 
be distributed throughout two or more of these niches. Another adaptive strategy 
is to produce an extracellular capsule, which provides an environmental shield 
for the microbe and can allow escape from predators and immune systems. We 
discovered that bacteria can either shed or stably anchor capsules to 
dramatically alter their propensity to sediment. The degree to which the 
bacteria anchor their capsule is controlled by a stress sensing system, 
suggesting that anchoring may be used as an adaptive response to severe 
environmental challenges.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kessler et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00023-21
PMCID: PMC8117528
PMID: 33753470