1. Health Promot Perspect. 2021 Feb 7;11(1):45-53. doi: 10.34172/hpp.2021.07. 
eCollection 2021.

Attributes of screening and vaccination for cervical cancer: insights of an 
online survey among female school teachers of Kota, Rajasthan, India.

Sharma A(1), Biswas B(2), Sati B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Jodhpur School of Public Health, Maulana Azad 
University, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India.
(2)Department of Community and Family Medicine, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Patna, Bihar, India.

Background: Cervical cancer is largely preventable. The study was aimed to find 
out the attributes of screening and vaccination for cervical cancer among female 
school teachers of Kota, Rajasthan, India. Methods: It was an observational 
study, cross-sectional in design conducted among female school teachers of Kota, 
Rajasthan, India using a predesigned structured questionnaire administered by 
Google Form during the months of March to May, 2020. In total, 397 
schoolteachers from 18 different schools of Kota participated in our survey. 
Results: Among the study subjects, 33 (8.3%) had ever undergone screening for 
cervical cancer, whereas only 12 (3.0%) had taken vaccine against it. In 
multivariable logistic regression analysis; age (>40 years) [adjusted odds ratio 
(AOR): 5.7 (2.0-15.8)], correct knowledge regarding frequency of screening (yes) 
[AOR: 6.0 (2.4-15.5)], positive attitude for the disease (yes) [AOR:3.0 
(1.1-8.0)] and gynaecologist consultation behaviour (periodic) [AOR: 1.4 
(1.1-8.6)] were significant attributes of ever undergoing screening for cervical 
cancer. On the other hand, themultivariable significant attributes of 
vaccination were age (≤40 years) [AOR: 7.6 (1.5-38.9)]and positive attitude for 
the disease (yes) [AOR: 6.4 (1.1-38.2)]. Conclusion: Acceptance of screening and 
vaccination for cervical cancer among the study subjects was found to be quite 
low. Policymakers should more actively involve school teachers in generating 
awareness and in raising the demand for cervical cancer screening and 
vaccination in their native communities to curb the disease in the country.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.34172/hpp.2021.07
PMCID: PMC7967137
PMID: 33758755