1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2021 Jun;22(6):393-409. doi:
10.1038/s41580-021-00350-0.  Epub 2021 Mar 23.

The cellular and functional complexity of thermogenic fat.

Cohen P(1), Kajimura S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Metabolism, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, 
USA. pcohen@rockefeller.edu.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
skajimur@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(3)Department of Cell and Tissue Biology, UCSF Diabetes Center, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. skajimur@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Brown and beige adipocytes are mitochondria-enriched cells capable of 
dissipating energy in the form of heat. These thermogenic fat cells were 
originally considered to function solely in heat generation through the action 
of the mitochondrial protein uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1). In recent years, 
significant advances have been made in our understanding of the ontogeny, 
bioenergetics and physiological functions of thermogenic fat. Distinct subtypes 
of thermogenic adipocytes have been identified with unique developmental 
origins, which have been increasingly dissected in cellular and molecular 
detail. Moreover, several UCP1-independent thermogenic mechanisms have been 
described, expanding the role of these cells in energy homeostasis. Recent 
studies have also delineated roles for these cells beyond the regulation of 
thermogenesis, including as dynamic secretory cells and as a metabolic sink. 
This Review presents our current understanding of thermogenic adipocytes with an 
emphasis on their development, biological functions and roles in systemic 
physiology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41580-021-00350-0
PMCID: PMC8159882
PMID: 33758402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.