1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Mar 9;8:631769. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.631769. 
eCollection 2021.

Clinical, Serological, Whole Genome Sequence Analyses to Confirm SARS-CoV-2 
Reinfection in Patients From Mumbai, India.

Shastri J(1), Parikh S(1), Agrawal S(1), Chatterjee N(1), Pathak M(1), Chaudhary 
S(1), Sharma C(2), Kanakan A(3), A V(3), Srinivasa Vasudevan J(3), Maurya R(3), 
Fatihi S(3), Thukral L(3), Agrawal A(3), Pinto L(4), Pandey R(3), Sunil S(2).

Author information:
(1)Kasturba Hospital for Infectious Disease, Mumbai, India.
(2)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, 
India.
(3)Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Institute of Genomics and 
Integrative Biology (CSIR-IGIB), New Delhi, India.
(4)P. D. Hinduja Hospital, Mumbai, India.

Background: SARS-CoV-2 infection may not provide long lasting post-infection 
immunity. While hundreds of reinfections have reported only a few have been 
confirmed. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) of the viral isolates from the 
different episodes is mandatory to establish reinfection. Methods: 
Nasopharyngeal (NP), oropharyngeal (OP) and whole blood (WB) samples were 
collected from paired samples of four individuals who were suspected of 
SARS-CoV-2 reinfection based on distinct clinical episodes and RT-PCR tests. 
Details from their case record files and investigations were documented. RNA was 
extracted from the NP and OP samples and subjected to WGS, and the nucleotide 
and amino acid sequences were subjected to genome and protein-based functional 
annotation analyses. Serial serology was performed for Anti-N IgG, Anti- S1 RBD 
IgG, and sVNT (surrogate virus neutralizing test). Findings: Three patients were 
more symptomatic with lower Ct values and longer duration of illness. 
Seroconversion was detected soon after the second episode in three patients. WGS 
generated a genome coverage ranging from 80.07 to 99.7%. Phylogenetic analysis 
revealed sequences belonged to G, GR and "Other" clades. A total of 42mutations 
were identified in all the samples, consisting of 22 non-synonymous, 17 
synonymous, two in upstream, and one in downstream regions of the SARS-CoV-2 
genome. Comparative genomic and protein-based annotation analyses revealed 
differences in the presence and absence of specific mutations in the virus 
sequences from the two episodes in all four paired samples. Interpretation: 
Based on the criteria of genome variations identified by whole genome sequencing 
and supported by clinical presentation, molecular and serological tests, we were 
able to confirm reinfections in two patients, provide weak evidence of 
reinfection in the third patient and unable to rule out a prolonged infection in 
the fourth. This study emphasizes the importance of detailed analyses of 
clinical and serological information as well as the virus's genomic variations 
while assessing cases of SARS-CoV-2 reinfection.

Copyright Â© 2021 Shastri, Parikh, Agrawal, Chatterjee, Pathak, Chaudhary, 
Sharma, Kanakan, A, Srinivasa Vasudevan, Maurya, Fatihi, Thukral, Agrawal, 
Pinto, Pandey and Sunil.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.631769
PMCID: PMC7985553
PMID: 33768104

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.