1. PLoS Biol. 2021 Mar 24;19(3):e3000886. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000886. 
eCollection 2021 Mar.

Genome-wide analysis of DNA replication and DNA double-strand breaks using 
TrAEL-seq.

Kara N(1), Krueger F(2), Rugg-Gunn P(1), Houseley J(1).

Author information:
(1)Epigenetics Programme, Babraham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Babraham Bioinformatics, Babraham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Faithful replication of the entire genome requires replication forks to copy 
large contiguous tracts of DNA, and sites of persistent replication fork 
stalling present a major threat to genome stability. Understanding the 
distribution of sites at which replication forks stall, and the ensuing fork 
processing events, requires genome-wide methods that profile replication fork 
position and the formation of recombinogenic DNA ends. Here, we describe 
Transferase-Activated End Ligation sequencing (TrAEL-seq), a method that 
captures single-stranded DNA 3' ends genome-wide and with base pair resolution. 
TrAEL-seq labels both DNA breaks and replication forks, providing genome-wide 
maps of replication fork progression and fork stalling sites in yeast and 
mammalian cells. Replication maps are similar to those obtained by Okazaki 
fragment sequencing; however, TrAEL-seq is performed on asynchronous populations 
of wild-type cells without incorporation of labels, cell sorting, or biochemical 
purification of replication intermediates, rendering TrAEL-seq far simpler and 
more widely applicable than existing replication fork direction profiling 
methods. The specificity of TrAEL-seq for DNA 3' ends also allows accurate 
detection of double-strand break sites after the initiation of DNA end 
resection, which we demonstrate by genome-wide mapping of meiotic double-strand 
break hotspots in a dmc1Î” mutant that is competent for end resection but not 
strand invasion. Overall, TrAEL-seq provides a flexible and robust methodology 
with high sensitivity and resolution for studying DNA replication and repair, 
which will be of significant use in determining mechanisms of genome 
instability.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000886
PMCID: PMC8021198
PMID: 33760805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.