1. Front Genet. 2021 Mar 2;12:639418. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.639418. eCollection
 2021.

Genome-Wide Identification of Rare and Common Variants Driving Triglyceride 
Levels in a Nevada Population.

Read RW(1), Schlauch KA(1), Lombardi VC(2), Cirulli ET(3), Washington NL(3), Lu 
JT(3), Grzymski JJ(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, Desert Research Institute, Reno, NV, United 
States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of 
Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, United States.
(3)Helix Opco, LLC., San Mateo, CA, United States.
(4)Renown Health, Reno, NV, United States.

Clinical conditions correlated with elevated triglyceride levels are well-known: 
coronary heart disease, hypertension, and diabetes. Underlying genetic and 
phenotypic mechanisms are not fully understood, partially due to lack of 
coordinated genotypic-phenotypic data. Here we use a subset of the Healthy 
Nevada Project, a population of 9,183 sequenced participants with longitudinal 
electronic health records to examine consequences of altered triglyceride 
levels. Specifically, Healthy Nevada Project participants sequenced by the Helix 
Exome+ platform were cross-referenced to their electronic medical records to 
identify: (1) rare and common single-variant genome-wide associations; (2) 
gene-based associations using a Sequence Kernel Association Test; (3) 
phenome-wide associations with triglyceride levels; and (4) pleiotropic variants 
linked to triglyceride levels. The study identified 549 significant 
single-variant associations (p < 8.75 × 10-9), many in chromosome 11's 
triglyceride hotspot: ZPR1, BUD13, APOC3, APOA5. A well-known protective 
loss-of-function variant in APOC3 (R19X) was associated with a 51% decrease in 
triglyceride levels in the cohort. Sixteen gene-based triglyceride associations 
were identified; six of these genes surprisingly did not include a single 
variant with significant associations. Results at the variant and gene level 
were validated with the UK Biobank. The combination of a single-variant 
genome-wide association, a gene-based association method, and phenome 
wide-association studies identified rare and common variants, genes, and 
phenotypes associated with elevated triglyceride levels, some of which may have 
been overlooked with standard approaches.

Copyright © 2021 Read, Schlauch, Lombardi, Cirulli, Washington, Lu and Grzymski.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.639418
PMCID: PMC7982958
PMID: 33763119

Conflict of interest statement: JL, EC, and NW are employees of Helix Opco, LLC. 
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of 
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.