1. J Immunol. 2021 Apr 15;206(8):1719-1728. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2001266. Epub 
2021 Mar 24.

The Regulatory Subunit PPP2R2A of PP2A Enhances Th1 and Th17 Differentiation 
through Activation of the GEF-H1/RhoA/ROCK Signaling Pathway.

Pan W(1), Nagpal K(1), Suárez-Fueyo A(1), Ferretti A(1), Yoshida N(1), Tsokos 
MG(1), Tsokos GC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02215.
(2)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02215 gtsokos@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) composed of a scaffold subunit, a catalytic 
subunit, and multiple regulatory subunits is a ubiquitously expressed 
serine/threonine phosphatase. We have previously shown that the PP2A catalytic 
subunit is increased in T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus 
and promotes IL-17 production by enhancing the activity of Rho-associated kinase 
(ROCK) in T cells. However, the molecular mechanism whereby PP2A regulates ROCK 
activity is unknown. In this study, we show that the PP2A regulatory subunit 
PPP2R2A is increased in T cells from people with systemic lupus erythematosus 
and binds to, dephosphorylates, and activates the guanine nucleotide exchange 
factor GEF-H1 at Ser885, which in turn increases the levels of RhoA-GTP and the 
activity of ROCK in T cells. Genetic PPP2R2A deficiency in murine T cells 
reduced Th1 and Th17, but not regulatory T cell differentiation and mice with T 
cell-specific PPP2R2A deficiency displayed less autoimmunity when immunized with 
myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein peptide. Our studies indicate that PPP2R2A 
is the regulatory subunit that dictates the PP2A-directed enhanced Th1 and Th17 
differentiation, and therefore, it represents a therapeutic target for 
pathologies linked to Th1 and Th17 cell expansion.

Copyright © 2021 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.2001266
PMCID: PMC8026731
PMID: 33762326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]