1. Curr Transplant Rep. 2020 Dec;7(4):346-354. doi: 10.1007/s40472-020-00296-w. 
Epub 2020 Oct 21.

Interventions to Preserve Cognitive Functioning Among Older Kidney Transplant 
Recipients.

Chu NM(1)(2), Segev D(1)(2), McAdams-DeMarco MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize the research on effective interventions for 
preserving cognitive function and prevent cognitive decline in patients with 
end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) who are undergoing dialysis and/or kidney 
transplantation (KT).
RECENT FINDINGS: Among ESKD patients undergoing hemodialysis, exercise training 
has been administered through home-based and intradialytic interventions. 
Additionally, one pilot study identified intradialytic cognitive training, 
electronic brain games, as an intervention to preserve cognitive function among 
patients undergoing hemodialysis. Fewer studies have investigated interventions 
to preserver cognitive function among KT recipients. To date, the only 
randomized controlled trial in this population identified B-vitamin supplements 
as an intervention to preserve cognitive function. The evidence from these 
trials support a short-term benefit of cognitive and exercise training as well 
as B-vitamin supplementation among patients with ESKD. Future studies should: 1) 
replicate these findings, 2) identify interventions specific to KT candidates, 
and 3) investigate the synergistic impact of both cognitive and exercise 
training.
SUMMARY: Cognitive prehabilitation, with cognitive and/or exercise training, may 
be novel interventions for KT candidates that not only reduces delirium risk and 
long-term post-KT cognitive decline but also prevents dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/s40472-020-00296-w
PMCID: PMC7992368
PMID: 33777649