1. Brain Plast. 2021 Feb 9;6(2):155-166. doi: 10.3233/BPL-200104.

Preventing and Treating Neurological Disorders with the Flavonol Fisetin.

Maher P(1).

Author information:
(1)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 N. Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, 
CA.

Neurological disorders, including neurodegenerative diseases, have a significant 
negative impact on both patients and society at large. Since the prevalence of 
most of these disorders increases with age, the consequences for our aging 
population are only going to grow. It is now acknowledged that neurological 
disorders are multi-factorial involving disruptions in multiple cellular 
systems. While each disorder has specific initiating mechanisms and pathologies, 
certain common pathways appear to be involved in most, if not all, neurological 
disorders. Thus, it is becoming increasingly important to identify compounds 
that can modulate the multiple pathways that contribute to disease development 
or progression. One of these compounds is the flavonol fisetin. Fisetin has now 
been shown in preclinical models to be effective at preventing the development 
and/or progression of multiple neurological disorders including Alzheimer's 
disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, stroke (both ischemic and hemorrhagic) and traumatic brain injury as 
well as to reduce age-associated changes in the brain. These beneficial effects 
stem from its actions on multiple pathways associated with the different 
neurological disorders. These actions include its well characterized 
anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant effects as well as more recently described 
effects on the regulated cell death oxytosis/ferroptosis pathway, the gut 
microbiome and its senolytic activity. Therefore, the growing body of 
pre-clinical data, along with fisetin's ability to modulate a large number of 
pathways associated with brain dysfunction, strongly suggest that it would be 
worthwhile to pursue its therapeutic effects in humans.

© 2020 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3233/BPL-200104
PMCID: PMC7990461
PMID: 33782648

Conflict of interest statement: The author has no conflicts to report.