1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Mar 7;13(3):349. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13030349.

Development of Cephradine-Loaded Gelatin/Polyvinyl Alcohol Electrospun 
Nanofibers for Effective Diabetic Wound Healing: In-Vitro and In-Vivo 
Assessments.

Razzaq A(1), Khan ZU(2), Saeed A(3), Shah KA(1), Khan NU(1), Menaa B(4), Iqbal 
H(1), Menaa F(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, COMSATS Institute of Information and Technology, 
Abbottabad 22060, Pakistan.
(3)Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, School of 
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China.
(4)Department of Nanomedicine and Advanced Technologies, California Innovations 
Corporation, San Diego, CA 92037, USA.

Erratum in
    Pharmaceutics. 2025 Jan 17;17(1):126. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics17010126.

Diabetic wound infections caused by conventional antibiotic-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus strains are fast emerging, leading to life-threatening 
situations (e.g., high costs, morbidity, and mortality) associated with delayed 
healing and chronic inflammation. Electrospinning is one of the most widely used 
techniques for the fabrication of nanofibers (NFs), induced by a high voltage 
applied to a drug-loaded polymer solution. Particular attention is given to 
electrospun NFs for pharmaceutical applications (e.g., original drug delivery 
systems) and tissue regeneration (e.g., as tissue scaffolds). However, there is 
a paucity of reports related to their application in diabetic wound infections. 
Therefore, we prepared eco-friendly, biodegradable, low-immunogenic, and 
biocompatible gelatin (GEL)/polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) electrospun NFs (BNFs), in 
which we loaded the broad-spectrum antibiotic cephradine (Ceph). The resulting 
drug-loaded NFs (LNFs) were characterized physically using ultraviolet-visible 
(UV-Vis) spectrophotometry (for drug loading capacity (LC), drug encapsulation 
efficiency (EE), and drug release kinetics determination), thermogravimetric 
analysis (TGA) (for thermostability evaluation), scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM) (for surface morphology analysis), and Fourier-transform infrared 
spectroscopy (FTIR) (for functional group identification). LNFs were further 
characterized biologically by in-vitro assessment of their potency against S. 
aureus clinical strains (N = 16) using the Kirby-Bauer test and 
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, by 
ex-vivo assessment to evaluate their cytotoxicity against primary human 
epidermal keratinocytes using MTT assay, and by in-vivo assessment to estimate 
their diabetic chronic wound-healing efficiency using NcZ10 diabetic/obese mice 
(N = 18). Thin and uniform NFs with a smooth surface and standard size (<400 nm) 
were observed by SEM at the optimized 5:5 (GEL:PVA) volumetric ratio. FTIR 
analyses confirmed the drug loading into BNFs. Compared to free Ceph, LNFs were 
significantly more thermostable and exhibited sustained/controlled Ceph release. 
LNFs also exerted a significantly stronger antibacterial activity both in-vitro 
and in-vivo. LNFs were significantly safer and more efficient for bacterial 
clearance-induced faster chronic wound healing. LNF-based therapy could be 
employed as a valuable dressing material to heal S. aureus-induced chronic 
wounds in diabetic subjects.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13030349
PMCID: PMC7998169
PMID: 33799983

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.