1. Viruses. 2021 Mar 11;13(3):456. doi: 10.3390/v13030456.

Picornaviruses: A View from 3A.

Jackson T(1), Belsham GJ(2).

Author information:
(1)The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, Woking, Surrey GU24 0NF, UK.
(2)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 1870 
Frederiksberg, Denmark.

Picornaviruses are comprised of a positive-sense RNA genome surrounded by a 
protein shell (or capsid). They are ubiquitous in vertebrates and cause a wide 
range of important human and animal diseases. The genome encodes a single large 
polyprotein that is processed to structural (capsid) and non-structural 
proteins. The non-structural proteins have key functions within the viral 
replication complex. Some, such as 3Dpol (the RNA dependent RNA polymerase) have 
conserved functions and participate directly in replicating the viral genome, 
whereas others, such as 3A, have accessory roles. The 3A proteins are highly 
divergent across the Picornaviridae and have specific roles both within and 
outside of the replication complex, which differ between the different genera. 
These roles include subverting host proteins to generate replication organelles 
and inhibition of cellular functions (such as protein secretion) to influence 
virus replication efficiency and the host response to infection. In addition, 3A 
proteins are associated with the determination of host range. However, recent 
observations have challenged some of the roles assigned to 3A and suggest that 
other viral proteins may carry them out. In this review, we revisit the roles of 
3A in the picornavirus life cycle. The 3AB precursor and mature 3A have distinct 
functions during viral replication and, therefore, we have also included 
discussion of some of the roles assigned to 3AB.

DOI: 10.3390/v13030456
PMCID: PMC7999760
PMID: 33799649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.