1. J Mol Neurosci. 2021 Sep;71(9):1815-1824. doi: 10.1007/s12031-021-01837-3.
Epub  2021 Mar 31.

Clinical Characteristics of BRAF V600E Gene Mutation in Patients of 
Epilepsy-Associated Brain Tumor: a Meta-analysis.

Xing H(1), Song Y(2), Zhang Z(1), Koch PD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Rhode Island Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Providence, RI, 02903, USA.
(2)Department of Ultrasound, First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, China. yisong8219@gmail.com.
(3)Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 185 Cambridge 
Street, CPZN 5206, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.

Epilepsy-associated brain tumors (EATs) are usually slow-growing, with seizures 
as the primary and most dominant symptom. BRAF (v-raf murine sarcoma viral 
oncogene homolog B1) gene mutations have been found in several subsets of EATs; 
the V600E mutation is currently believed to contribute to the intrinsic 
epileptogenicity and tumor growth. However, the relationship between BRAF V600E 
gene mutation and clinical characteristics in EAT patients is not clear. In this 
study, we aimed to systematically review the frequency of BRAF V600E gene 
mutation, as well as the relationship between BRAF V600E gene mutation and 
clinical characteristics, which may help with the diagnosis and treatment of 
EATs. Cochrane Library, PubMed, Embase, CNKI, WanFang Data, CQVIP, and SinoMed 
databases were searched up to October 2020 to identify peer-reviewed human 
studies on assessing the relationship between BRAF V600E gene mutations and 
clinical characteristics in EATs. The following data were calculated: the 
frequency of BRAF V600E mutation and clinical feature comparison between BRAF 
V600E mutations and wild type in EATs, such as gender, age of seizure onset, 
duration of epilepsy, location of tumors, and Engel outcome. A total of 12 
articles were included in the analysis. Five hundred and nine patients with 
epilepsy-associated brain tumors were screened for the BRAF V600E gene mutation. 
Among them, 193 patients had the BRAF V600E mutation (34.06%, 95% CI = 0.25 to 
0.43). The subgroup analyses of BRAF V600E mutation showed positive frequency of 
44.76% (95% CI = 0.36 to 0.54) in ganglioglioma, 24.75% (95% CI = 0.14 to 0.37) 
in gysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor, 2.15% (95% CI = 0 to 0.19) in 
angiocentric glioma, and 50.16% (95% CI = 0.33 to 0.68) in pleomorphic 
xanthoastrocytoma. Compared with the overall frequency, the BRAF V600E positive 
frequency in ganglioglioma was significantly higher (P = 0.0283). We also found 
that BRAF V600E gene mutation was significantly associated with age at seizure 
onset (MD = -2.37; 95% CI = -4.33 to -0.41; P = 0.02). There was no statistical 
difference between BRAF V600E mutations and wild type in gender, duration of 
epilepsy, tumor site, and Engel outcome comparison. In conclusion, our updated 
and comprehensive meta-analysis based on a large number of clinical data 
demonstrated that BRAF V600E mutation is a specific biomarker and could be a 
pharmacological target for ganglioglioma patients and an exclusion diagnostic 
criterion for angiocentric glioma. This meta-analysis suggested the critical 
role of BRAF V600E mutation in the occurrence and development of EATs. Our 
findings help to elucidate the progression mechanisms in EATs and develop future 
therapeutic strategies for EATs.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-021-01837-3
PMID: 33791912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]