1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids. 2021 Jul;1866(7):158936. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbalip.2021.158936. Epub 2021 Mar 29.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids, specialized pro-resolving mediators, and targeting 
inflammation resolution in the age of precision nutrition.

Al-Shaer AE(1), Buddenbaum N(1), Shaikh SR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, Gillings School of Global Public Health and School 
of Medicine, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 170 Rosenau Hall, 
CB# 7400, 135 Dauer Drive, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Nutrition, Gillings School of Global Public Health and School 
of Medicine, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 170 Rosenau Hall, 
CB# 7400, 135 Dauer Drive, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Electronic address: 
shaikhsa@email.unc.edu.

Chronic inflammation contributes toward the pathogenesis of numerous diseases 
including, but not limited to, obesity, autoimmunity, cardiovascular diseases, 
and cancers. The discovery of specialized pro-resolving mediators (SPMs), which 
are critical for resolving inflammation, has commenced investigation into 
targeting pathways of inflammation resolution to improve physiological outcomes. 
SPMs are predominately synthesized from the n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids 
(PUFA) eicosapentaenoic (EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DHA) acids. Therefore, one 
viable strategy to promote inflammation resolution would be to increase dietary 
intake of EPA/DHA, which are deficient in select populations. However, there are 
inconsistencies between the use of EPA/DHA as dietary or pharmacological 
supplements and improved inflammatory status. Herein, we review the literature 
on the relationship between the high n-6/n-3 PUFA ratio, downstream SPM 
biosynthesis, and inflammatory endpoints. We highlight key studies that have 
investigated how dietary intake of EPA/DHA increase tissue SPMs and their 
effects on inflammation. We also discuss the biochemical pathways by which 
EPA/DHA drive SPM biosynthesis and underscore mechanistic gaps in knowledge 
about these pathways which include a neglect for host genetics/ethnic 
differences in SPM metabolism, sexual dimorphism in SPM levels, and potential 
competition from select dietary n-6 PUFAs for enzymes of SPM synthesis. 
Altogether, establishing how dietary PUFAs control SPM biosynthesis in a 
genetic- and sex-dependent manner will drive new precision nutrition studies 
with EPA/DHA to prevent chronic inflammation in select populations.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2021.158936
PMCID: PMC8496879
PMID: 33794384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]