1. Microorganisms. 2021 Mar 14;9(3):596. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9030596.

Phage Therapy for Mycobacterium Abscessus and Strategies to Improve Outcomes.

Hashemi Shahraki A(1), Mirsaeidi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, Miller School of 
Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33101, USA.

Members of Mycobacterium abscessus complex are known for causing severe, chronic 
infections. Members of M. abscessus are a new "antibiotic nightmare" as one of 
the most resistant organisms to chemotherapeutic agents. Treatment of these 
infections is challenging due to the either intrinsic or acquired resistance of 
the M. abscessus complex to the available antibiotics. Recently, successful 
phage therapy with a cocktail of three phages (one natural lytic phage and two 
engineered phages) every 12 h for at least 32 weeks has been reported against a 
severe case of the disseminated M. abscessus subsp. massiliense infection, which 
underlines the high value of phages against drug-resistant superbugs. This 
report also highlighted the limitations of phage therapy, such as the absence of 
lytic phages with a broad host-range against all strains and subspecies of the 
M. abscessus complex and also the risk of phage resistant bacteria over 
treatment. Cutting-edge genomic technologies have facilitated the development of 
engineered phages for therapeutic purposes by introducing new desirable 
properties, changing host-range and arming the phages with additional killing 
genes. Here, we review the available literature and suggest new potential 
solutions based on the progress in phage engineering that can help to overcome 
the present limitations of M. abscessus treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9030596
PMCID: PMC7999966
PMID: 33799414

Conflict of interest statement: A.H.S. declares no conflict of interest. M.M. is 
an Advisory Board member of Insmed.