1. Materials (Basel). 2021 Mar 25;14(7):1611. doi: 10.3390/ma14071611.

Effect of Calcium Nitrate on the Properties of Portland-Limestone Cement-Based 
Concrete Cured at Low Temperature.

Skripkiūnas G(1), Kičaitė A(1), Justnes H(2), Pundienė I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Building Materials and Fire Safety, Faculty of Civil 
Engineering, Vilnius Gediminas Technical University, Saulėtekio al. 11, LT-10223 
Vilnius, Lithuania.
(2)SINTEF Building and Infrastructure, Strindvegen 4, NO-7045 Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Laboratory of Concrete Technology, Institute of Building Materials, Vilnius 
Gediminas Technical University, Linkmenų str.28, LT-08217 Vilnius, Lithuania.

The effect of calcium nitrate (CN) dosages from 0 to 3% (of cement mass) on the 
properties of fresh cement paste rheology and hardening processes and on the 
strength of hardened concrete with two types of limestone-blended composite 
cements (CEM II A-LL 42.5 R and 42.5 N) at different initial (two-day) curing 
temperatures (-10 °C to +20 °C) is presented. The rheology results showed that a 
CN dosage up to 1.5% works as a plasticizing admixture, while higher amounts 
demonstrate the effect of increasing viscosity. At higher CN content, the 
viscosity growth in normal early strength (N type) cement pastes is much slower 
than in high early strength (R type) cement pastes. For both cement-type pastes, 
shortening the initial and final setting times is more effective when using 3% 
at +5 °C and 0 °C. At these temperatures, the use of 3% CN reduces the initial 
setting time for high early strength paste by 7.4 and 5.4 times and for normal 
early strength cement paste by 3.5 and 3.4 times when compared to a CN-free 
cement paste. The most efficient use of CN is achieved at -5 °C for compressive 
strength enlargement; a 1% CN dosage ensures the compressive strength of samples 
at a -5 °C initial curing temperature, with high early strength cement exceeding 
3.5 MPa but being less than the required 3.5 MPa in samples with normal early 
strength cement.

DOI: 10.3390/ma14071611
PMCID: PMC8036282
PMID: 33806178

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.