1. J Clin Med. 2021 Mar 5;10(5):1098. doi: 10.3390/jcm10051098.

Five-Year Outcome of Aflibercept Monotherapy for Exudative Age-Related Macular 
Degeneration with Good Baseline Visual Acuity.

Kikushima W(1), Sakurada Y(1), Sugiyama A(1), Yoneyama S(1), Matsubara M(1), 
Fukuda Y(1), Kashiwagi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Yamanashi, Chuo Yamanashi 
409-3898, Japan.

We investigated the long-term visual and anatomical outcomes of aflibercept 
monotherapy for exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD) with good 
baseline best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA). A medical chart review was 
performed for 40 consecutive patients with baseline decimal BCVA â‰¥ 0.6 secondary 
to exudative AMD. Three monthly injections were administrated, and thereafter 
additional injection was performed if needed over 5 years. In total, 13 eyes 
with neovascular AMD (nAMD) and 27 eyes with polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy 
(PCV) were enrolled. In both groups, the mean BCVA significantly improved at the 
12-month visit (p < 0.05). However, the significant improvement in BCVA 
disappeared at the 24-month visit, and the final mean BCVA was equivalent to 
that at baseline (p = 0.17 in the nAMD group and p = 0.15 in the PCV group). The 
median number of injections required after the loading dose was 15.0 during the 
5-year follow-up (nAMD:15.0 vs. PCV:15). During the study period, 37 (92.5%) 
eyes required retreatment(s). Cox regression analysis demonstrated that the 
protective allele of ARMS2 A69S was associated with a retreatment-free period 
from the initial injection (p = 0.041, repeated forward selection method). 
As-needed aflibercept monotherapy is a preferable treatment option for exudative 
AMD with good initial visual acuity regardless of nAMD or PCV during the 5-year 
study period.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10051098
PMCID: PMC7961756
PMID: 33807964

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.