1. Biology (Basel). 2021 Mar 21;10(3):242. doi: 10.3390/biology10030242.

PNPLA3 Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Prevalence and Association with Liver 
Disease in a Diverse Cohort of Persons Living with HIV.

Sherman KE(1), Rouster SD(1), Meeds H(1), Tamargo J(2), Chen J(3), Ehman R(3), 
Baum M(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.
(2)Robert Stempel School of Public Health, Florida International University, 
Miami, FL 33199, USA.
(3)Mayo Clinic, Department of Radiology, Rochester, MN 57058, USA.

In persons living with HIV (PLWH), there are multiple sources of liver injury. 
Gene polymorphisms of PNPLA3 (patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing 
protein 3) have been identified as an important cofactor for increased disease 
severity in both alcoholic and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). We utilized 
a well-characterized cohort of ethnically and racially diverse patients with HIV 
to define the prevalence of PNPLA3 SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphism) 
(rs738409), and to determine the relationship to hepatic steatosis and liver 
fibrosis. Steatosis was determined using MRI-PDFF (magnetic resonance 
imaging-determined proton density fat fraction) and fibrosis was estimated using 
MR Elastography (MRE). From the Miami Area HIV Study (MASH) cohort, 100 HIV 
positive participants and 40 controls (HCV/HIV = 20; HCV and HIV negative = 20) 
were evaluated. Nearly 40% of all participants carried the variant G allele 
associated with increased liver disease severity and 5% were homozygotic GG. The 
variant SNP occurred most frequently in those self-identified as Hispanic 
compared to white or Black participants. Hepatic steatosis (>5% fat) was present 
significantly more often in those without HIV vs. those with (p < 0.001). 
Putative NAFLD/NASH was found to be present in 6% of tested subjects, who were 
HIV monoinfected. BMI was lower in those that carried the G allele for PNPLA3. 
This finding suggests that PNPLA3 may be an independent component to NAFLD 
(non-alcoholic fatty liver disease)/NASH development and longitudinal follow-up 
of the cohort is warranted.

DOI: 10.3390/biology10030242
PMCID: PMC8004031
PMID: 33800964

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest 
relevant to the content of this manuscript.