1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2021 Mar 9;10(3):414. doi: 10.3390/antiox10030414.

Common and Novel Markers for Measuring Inflammation and Oxidative Stress Ex Vivo 
in Research and Clinical Practice-Which to Use Regarding Disease Outcomes?

Menzel A(1), Samouda H(2), Dohet F(1), Loap S(3), Ellulu MS(4), Bohn T(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoires Réunis, 38, Rue Hiehl, L-6131 Junglinster, Luxembourg.
(2)Nutrition and Health Research Group, Department of Population Health, 
Luxembourg Institute of Health, 1 A-B, Rue Thomas Edison, L-1445 Strassen, 
Luxembourg.
(3)Clinic Cryo Esthetic, 11 Rue Éblé, 75007 Paris, France.
(4)Department of Clinical Nutrition, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, 
Al-Azhar University of Gaza (AUG), Gaza City 00970, Palestine.

Many chronic conditions such as cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
type-2 diabetes, obesity, peripheral/coronary artery disease and auto-immune 
diseases are associated with low-grade inflammation. Closely related to 
inflammation is oxidative stress (OS), which can be either causal or secondary 
to inflammation. While a low level of OS is physiological, chronically increased 
OS is deleterious. Therefore, valid biomarkers of these signalling pathways may 
enable detection and following progression of OS/inflammation as well as to 
evaluate treatment efficacy. Such biomarkers should be stable and obtainable 
through non-invasive methods and their determination should be affordable and 
easy. The most frequently used inflammatory markers include acute-phase 
proteins, essentially CRP, serum amyloid A, fibrinogen and procalcitonin, and 
cytokines, predominantly TNFα, interleukins 1β, 6, 8, 10 and 12 and their 
receptors and IFNγ. Some cytokines appear to be disease-specific. Conversely, 
OS-being ubiquitous-and its biomarkers appear less disease or tissue-specific. 
These include lipid peroxidation products, e.g., F2-isoprostanes and 
malondialdehyde, DNA breakdown products (e.g., 8-OH-dG), protein adducts (e.g., 
carbonylated proteins), or antioxidant status. More novel markers include also 
-omics related ones, as well as non-invasive, questionnaire-based measures, such 
as the dietary inflammatory-index (DII), but their link to biological responses 
may be variable. Nevertheless, many of these markers have been clearly related 
to a number of diseases. However, their use in clinical practice is often 
limited, due to lacking analytical or clinical validation, or technical 
challenges. In this review, we strive to highlight frequently employed and 
useful markers of inflammation-related OS, including novel promising markers.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox10030414
PMCID: PMC8001241
PMID: 33803155

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.