1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Mar 29;13(7):1568. doi: 10.3390/cancers13071568.

Realizing Innate Potential: CAR-NK Cell Therapies for Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Gurney M(1), O'Dwyer M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Apoptosis Research Center, National University of Ireland Galway, H91 TK33 
Galway, Ireland.
(2)ONK Therapeutics Ltd., H91 V6KV Galway, Ireland.

Next-generation cellular immunotherapies seek to improve the safety and efficacy 
of approved CD19 chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell products or apply their 
principles across a growing list of targets and diseases. Supported by promising 
early clinical experiences, CAR modified natural killer (CAR-NK) cell therapies 
represent a complementary and potentially off-the-shelf, allogeneic solution. 
While acute myeloid leukemia (AML) represents an intuitive disease in which to 
investigate CAR based immunotherapies, key biological differences to B-cell 
malignancies have complicated progress to date. As CAR-T cell trials treating 
AML are growing in number, several CAR-NK cell approaches are also in 
development. In this review we explore why CAR-NK cell therapies may be 
particularly suited to the treatment of AML. First, we examine the established 
role NK cells play in AML biology and the existing anti-leukemic activity of NK 
cell adoptive transfer. Next, we appraise potential AML target antigens and 
consider common and unique challenges posed relative to treating B-cell 
malignancies. We summarize the current landscape of CAR-NK development in AML, 
and potential targets to augment CAR-NK cell therapies pharmacologically and 
through genetic engineering. Finally, we consider the broader landscape of 
competing immunotherapeutic approaches to AML treatment. In doing so we evaluate 
the innate potential, status and remaining barriers for CAR-NK based AML 
immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13071568
PMCID: PMC8036691
PMID: 33805422

Conflict of interest statement: Author M.O. holds equity and is Chief Scientific 
Officer of ONK Therapeutics LTD.