1. Materials (Basel). 2021 Mar 21;14(6):1531. doi: 10.3390/ma14061531.

Microstructural and Corrosion Properties of Hydroxyapatite Containing PEO 
Coating Produced on AZ31 Mg Alloy.

Pezzato L(1), Brunelli K(1), Diodati S(2)(3), Pigato M(1), Bonesso M(1), Dabalà 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Padua, Via Marzolo 9, 
35131 Padova, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemical Science, University of Padua, Via Marzolo 1, 35131 
Padova, Italy.
(3)ICMATE-CNR, Corso Stati Uniti 4, 35127 Padova, Italy.

In this work, the composition of an electrolyte was selected and optimized to 
induce the formation of hydroxyapatite during Plasma electrolytic oxidation 
(PEO) treatment on an AZ31 alloy for application in bioabsorbable implants. In 
detail, the PEO process, called PEO-BIO (Plasma Electrolytic 
Oxidation-Biocompatible), was performed using a silicate-phosphate-based 
electrolyte with the addition of calcium oxide in direct-current mode using high 
current densities and short treatment times. For comparison, a known PEO process 
for producing anticorrosive coatings, called standard, was applied on the same 
alloy. The coatings were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) and XPS analyses. The corrosion performance was 
evaluated in simulated body fluid (SBF) at 37 °C. The coating produced on the 
PEO-BIO sample was porous and thicker than the standard PEO one, with zones 
enriched in Ca and P. The XRD analysis showed the formation of hydroxyapatite 
and calcium oxides in addition to magnesium-silicon oxide and magnesium oxide in 
the PEO-BIO sample. The corrosion resistance of PEO-BIO sample was comparable 
with that of a traditional PEO treated sample, and higher than that of the 
untreated alloy.

DOI: 10.3390/ma14061531
PMCID: PMC8003846
PMID: 33801003

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding 
author states that there are no conflict of interest/competing interest.