1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Mar 13;11(3):509. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics11030509.

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Lobar Degenerations: 
Similarities in Genetic Background.

Parobkova E(1), Matej R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Third Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University and Thomayer University Hospital, 14059 Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(2)Department of Pathology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, and 
General University Hospital, 14059 Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Pathology, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, and 
University Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, 14059 Prague, Czech Republic.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating, uniformly lethal 
progressive degenerative disorder of motor neurons that overlaps with 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) clinically, morphologically, and 
genetically. Although many distinct mutations in various genes are known to 
cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, it remains poorly understood how they 
selectively impact motor neuron biology and whether they converge on common 
pathways to cause neuronal degeneration. Many of the gene mutations are in 
proteins that share similar functions. They can be grouped into those associated 
with cell axon dynamics and those associated with cellular phagocytic machinery, 
namely protein aggregation and metabolism, apoptosis, and intracellular nucleic 
acid transport. Analysis of pathways implicated by mutant ALS genes has provided 
new insights into the pathogenesis of both familial forms of ALS (fALS) and 
sporadic forms (sALS), although, regrettably, this has not yet yielded 
definitive treatments. Many genes play an important role, with TARDBP, SQSTM1, 
VCP, FUS, TBK1, CHCHD10, and most importantly, C9orf72 being critical genetic 
players in these neurological disorders. In this mini-review, we will focus on 
the molecular mechanisms of these two diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11030509
PMCID: PMC7998502
PMID: 33805659

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.