1. Pathogens. 2021 Mar 19;10(3):367. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10030367.

Isolation and Description of Catonella massiliensis sp. nov., a Novel Catonella 
Species, Isolated from a Stable Periodontitis Subject.

Antezack A(1)(2)(3)(4), Boxberger M(3)(4), La Scola B(3)(4), Monnet-Corti 
V(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Ecole de Médecine Dentaire, Faculté des Sciences Médicales et Paramédicales, 
Aix-Marseille Université, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin, 13385 Marseille, France.
(2)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille (AP-HM), Hôpital Timone, Service de 
Parodontologie, 264, rue Saint Pierre, 13385 Marseille, France.
(3)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Aix-Marseille Université, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille (AP-HM), MEPHI, 27 boulevard Jean 
Moulin, 13005 Marseille, France.
(4)IHU Méditerranée Infection, 19-21 boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille, 
France.

The genus Catonella currently counts a unique species, C. morbi, isolated from 
periodontal pockets and associated with periodontitis and endodontic infections. 
This study contributed to the taxonomical and clinical knowledge of this genus 
by describing a novel species isolated from a saliva sample from a man in 
clinical gingival health following successful treatment of periodontitis. 
Morphological and chemotaxonomic characteristics were investigated using 
different growth conditions, pH, and temperature. Cellular fatty acid methyl 
ester (FAME) analysis was conducted by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry 
(GC/MS). Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA, orthologous average nucleotide 
identity (OrthoANI), and digital DNA-DNA hybridization (dDDH) relatedness were 
performed. Strain Marseille-Q4567T was found to be an anaerobic and 
non-spore-forming rod-shaped bacterium that grew at 28-41.5 °C (optimum 37 °C), 
pH 6.5-8.5 (optimum pH 7.5), and 5-10 g/L of NaCl (optimum 5 g/L). The 
predominant cellular fatty acid was C16:0 (64.2%), followed by unsaturated 
structures C18:1n9 (12.5%) and C18:2n6 (7.8%). Based on 16S rRNA sequence 
comparison, the closest phylogenetic neighbor was C. morbi ATCC 51271T (98.23% 
similarity). The OrthoANI and dDDH values between strain Q4567T and C. morbi 
ATCC 51271T were respectively 79.43% and 23.8%. Therefore, we concluded that 
strain Marseille-Q4567T represents a novel species of the genus Catonella, for 
which the name Catonella massiliensis sp. nov. is proposed (= CSUR Q4567).

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10030367
PMCID: PMC8003473
PMID: 33808593

Conflict of interest statement: Boxberger M. received a PhD grant supported by 
L’Occitane Society. All other authors have no conflict of interest to declare.