1. Nutrients. 2021 Mar 19;13(3):992. doi: 10.3390/nu13030992.

Selection of Gut-Resistant Bacteria and Construction of Microbial Consortia for 
Improving Gluten Digestion under Simulated Gastrointestinal Conditions.

De Angelis M(1), Siragusa S(1), Vacca M(1), Di Cagno R(2), Cristofori F(3), 
Schwarm M(4), Pelzer S(4), Flügel M(4), Speckmann B(4), Francavilla R(3), 
Gobbetti M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Sciences, University of Bari Aldo Moro, 
70126 Bari, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Science and Technology, Free University of Bozen, 39100 Bolzano, 
Italy.
(3)Interdisciplinary Department of Medicine-Pediatric Section, University of 
Bari Aldo Moro, Ospedale Pediatrico Giovanni XXIII, 70125 Bari, Italy.
(4)Evonik Operations GmbH, 63457 Hanau-Wolfgang, Germany.

This work aimed to define the microbial consortia that are able to digest gluten 
into non-toxic and non-immunogenic peptides in the human gastrointestinal tract.
METHODS: 131 out of 504 tested Bacillus and lactic acid bacteria, specifically 
Bacillus (64), lactobacilli (63), Pediococcus (1), and Weissella (3), showed 
strong gastrointestinal resistance and were selected for their PepN, PepI, PepX, 
PepO, and PepP activities toward synthetic substrates. Based on multivariate 
analysis, 24 strains were clearly distinct from the other tested strains based 
on having the highest enzymatic activities. As estimated by RP-HPLC and 
nano-ESI-MS/MS, 6 cytoplasmic extracts out of 24 selected strains showed the 
ability to hydrolyze immunogenic epitopes, specifically 57-68 of α9-gliadin, 
62-75 of A-gliadin, 134-153 of γ-gliadin, and 57-89 (33-mer) of α2-gliadin. Live 
and lysed cells of selected strains were combined into different microbial 
consortia for hydrolyzing gluten under gastrointestinal conditions. Commercial 
proteolytic enzymes (Aspergillusoryzae E1, Aspergillusniger E2, Bacillussubtilis 
Veron HPP, and Veron PS proteases) were also added to each microbial consortium. 
Consortium activity was evaluated by ELISA tests, RP-HPLC-nano-ESI-MS/MS, and 
duodenal explants from celiac disease patients.
RESULTS: two microbial consortia (Consortium 4: Lactiplantibacillus (Lp.) 
plantarum DSM33363 and DSM33364, Lacticaseibacillus (Lc.) paracasei DSM33373, 
Bacillussubtilis DSM33298, and Bacilluspumilus DSM33301; and Consortium 16: Lp. 
plantarum DSM33363 and DSM33364, Lc. paracasei DSM33373, 
Limosilactobacillusreuteri DSM33374, Bacillusmegaterium DSM33300, B.pumilus 
DSM33297 and DSM33355), containing commercial enzymes, were able to hydrolyze 
gluten to non-toxic and non-immunogenic peptides under gastrointestinal 
conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: the results of this study provide evidence that selected microbial 
consortia could potentially improve the digestion of gluten in gluten-sensitive 
patients by hydrolyzing the immunogenic peptides during gastrointestinal 
digestion.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13030992
PMCID: PMC8003469
PMID: 33808622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.S., S.P., M.F., and B.S. declare competing 
interests as employees of Evonik Operations GmbH. Other authors declare no 
conflict of interest.