1. J Vet Res. 2020 Dec 29;65(1):15-25. doi: 10.2478/jvetres-2021-0001.
eCollection  2021 Mar.

The Main DNA Viruses Significantly Affecting Pig Livestock.

Díaz C(1), Celer V(2), Frébort I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Centre of the Region Haná for 
Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Palacký University, 783 71 Olomouc, 
Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Veterinary and 
Pharmaceutical University, 612 42 Brno, Czech Republic.

Swine DNA viruses have developed unique mechanisms for evasion of the host 
immune system, infection and DNA replication, and finally, construction and 
release of new viral particles. This article reviews four classes of DNA viruses 
affecting swine: porcine circoviruses, African swine fever virus, porcine 
parvoviruses, and pseudorabies virus. Porcine circoviruses belonging to the 
Circoviridae family are small single-stranded DNA viruses causing different 
diseases in swine including poly-weaning multisystemic wasting syndrome, porcine 
dermatitis and nephropathy syndrome, and porcine respiratory disease complex. 
African swine fever virus, the only member of the Asfivirus genus in the 
Asfarviridae family, is a large double-stranded DNA virus and for its propensity 
to cause high mortality, it is currently considered the most dangerous virus in 
the pig industry. Porcine parvoviruses are small single-stranded DNA viruses 
belonging to the Parvoviridae family that cause reproductive failure in pregnant 
gilts. Pseudorabies virus, or suid herpesvirus 1, is a large double-stranded DNA 
virus belonging to the Herpesviridae family and Alphaherpesvirinae subfamily. 
Recent findings including general as well as genetic classification, virus 
structure, clinical syndromes and the host immune system responses and vaccine 
protection are described for all four swine DNA virus classes.

© 2021 C. Díaz et al., published by Sciendo.

DOI: 10.2478/jvetres-2021-0001
PMCID: PMC8009578
PMID: 33817391

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Conflict of Interests 
Statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding 
the publication of this article.