1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Mar 17;8:634177. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.634177. 
eCollection 2021.

Deficits in Monocyte Function in Age Related Macular Degeneration: A Novel 
Systemic Change Associated With the Disease.

Gu BJ(1)(2), Huang X(1), Avula PK(1), Caruso E(3), Drysdale C(1), Vessey KA(4), 
Ou A(1), Fowler C(1), Liu TH(1), Lin Y(2), Horton A(1), Masters CL(1), Wiley 
JS(1), Guymer RH(3), Fletcher EL(4).

Author information:
(1)The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Aging and Medicine, Huashan Hospital, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Surgery (Ophthalmology), Centre for Eye Research Australia, 
Royal Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital, University of Melbourne, East Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is characterized by the accumulation of 
debris in the posterior eye. In this study we evaluated peripheral blood 
monocyte phagocytic function at various stages of AMD and in aged matched 
control participants. Real-time tri-color flow cytometry was used to quantify 
phagocytic function of peripheral blood monocyte subsets (non-classic, 
intermediate and classic) isolated from subjects with intermediate or late AMD 
and compared with age matched healthy controls. Assessment of phagocytic 
function of monocytes isolated from those with and without reticular 
pseudodrusen was also made, and the effect of glatiramer acetate on phagocytic 
function assessed. Phagocytic function was reduced in all subjects with AMD, 
irrespective of stage of disease. However, there was no correlation between 
phagocytic function and drusen load, nor any difference between the level of 
phagocytosis in those with or without reticular pseudodrusen. Treatment with 
glatiramer acetate increased phagocytosis of classical and non-classical 
monocytes, normalizing the reduction in phagocytosis observed in those with AMD. 
These findings suggest that defective systemic phagocytosis is associated with 
both intermediate and late stages of AMD, highlighting a potential role in the 
accumulation of debris that occurs early in the disease process. Assessing 
peripheral monocyte phagocytic function provides further insights into the 
etiology of this disease and offer a novel therapeutic target.

Copyright Â© 2021 Gu, Huang, Avula, Caruso, Drysdale, Vessey, Ou, Fowler, Liu, 
Lin, Horton, Masters, Wiley, Guymer and Fletcher.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.634177
PMCID: PMC8010137
PMID: 33816525

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.