1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2021 May 28;555:102-108. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.03.114. Epub 2021 Apr 1.

Structural analysis of the activation and DNA interactions of the response 
regulator VbrR from Vibrio parahaemolyticus.

Cho SY(1), Yoon SI(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Convergence, College of Biomedical Science, Kangwon 
National University, Chuncheon, 24341, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Biomedical Convergence, College of Biomedical Science, Kangwon 
National University, Chuncheon, 24341, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
sungil@kangwon.ac.kr.

VbrK and VbrR from the gastroenteritis-causing Vibrio parahaemolyticus are a 
histidine kinase and response regulator, respectively, that constitute a 
two-component regulatory system. VbrK responds to β-lactam antibiotics or 
nitrate and activates VbrR via phosphorylation. Consequently, VbrR 
transcriptionally regulates the expression of β-lactamase and ExsC and 
contributes to the survival or virulence of V. parahaemolyticus. Due to the 
unavailability of the VbrR structure, it remains unclear how VbrR is activated 
via its N-terminal receiver domain (RD) and recognizes dsDNA via its C-terminal 
DNA-binding domain (DBD). To reveal the mechanism underlying VbrR-mediated 
activation, we generated the phosphomimetic protein (VbrRRD-D51E) of the VbrR RD 
by replacing the D51 residue at the phosphorylation site with glutamate. 
VbrRRD-D51E exhibits a β7α5 structure rather than the typical β5α5 structure 
because it contains a unique two-stranded β-sheet. The VbrRRD-D51E structure 
represents an active state in which the D51E residue interacts with the T78 
residue. As a result, the Y97 residue adopts an inward conformation, allowing 
VbrRRD-D51E to dimerize using the α4-β5-α5 face. These activation events are 
facilitated by a VbrR-specific residue, R52. Further structural study 
demonstrated that the VbrR DBD adopts a β-strand-decorated three-helix 
structure. Based on a comparative structural study, we propose that VbrR 
recognizes dsDNA by inserting the α8 helix into the major groove of dsDNA and 
interacting with the minor groove of dsDNA via the β11-β12 region. Our findings 
will provide a new avenue for development of new antibacterial drugs for 
treating V. parahaemolyticus infections.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.03.114
PMID: 33813268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest There are no 
competing interests to declare.