1. Exp Ther Med. 2021 May;21(5):544. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.9976. Epub 2021 Mar
23.

Understanding the genetics and neurobiological pathways behind addiction 
(Review).

Popescu A(1), Marian M(1), Drăgoi AM(1), Costea RV(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, 'Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia' Clinical Hospital of 
Psychiatry, 041914 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of General Surgery, 'Carol Davila' University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 020021 Bucharest, Romania.

The hypothesis issued by modern medicine states that many diseases known to 
humans are genetically determined, influenced or not by environmental factors, 
which is applicable to most psychiatric disorders as well. This article focuses 
on two pending questions regarding addiction: Why do some individuals become 
addicted while others do not? along with Is it a learned behavior or is it 
genetically predefined? Recent data suggest that addiction is more than repeated 
exposure, it is the synchronicity between intrinsic factors (genotype, sex, age, 
preexisting addictive disorder, or other mental illness), extrinsic factors 
(childhood, level of education, socioeconomic status, social support, entourage, 
drug availability) and the nature of the addictive agent (pharmacokinetics, path 
of administration, psychoactive properties). The dopamine-mesolimbic 
motivation-reward-reinforcement cycle remains the most coherent physiological 
theory in addiction. While the common property of addictive substances is that 
they are dopamine-agonists, each class has individual mechanisms, 
pharmacokinetics and psychoactive potentials.

Copyright: © Popescu et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.9976
PMCID: PMC8014976
PMID: 33815617

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.