1. Scanning. 2021 Mar 21;2021:8891396. doi: 10.1155/2021/8891396. eCollection
2021.

Design of a Single-Tooth Model and Its Application in Oral Scan System 
Assessment.

Cai H(1), Zhao BC(1), Tian Y(1), Kim DH(2), Sun Y(1), Lim HK(2), Lee ES(2), 
Jiang HB(1).

Author information:
(1)Stomatological Materials Laboratory, School of Stomatology, Shandong First 
Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Tai'an, Shandong 
271016, China.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School of Clinical 
Dentistry, Korea University, Seoul 08308, Republic of Korea.

Intraoral scanners have been widely used in the application of dentistry. 
Accuracy includes trueness and precision; they have an important position in the 
assessment of intraoral scanners. The existing standard models are divided into 
the inlay and the crown, but the operation is relatively complicated. In this 
study, in order to simplify the current standard model, we designed a new 
integration model to compare the accuracy of two intraoral scanners (CEREC and 
TRIOS) and an extraoral scanner (SHINING). The coordinate measuring machine 
measured value is the gold standard. Values of the length and angle were 
analyzed by converting the scanned digital impressions into an STL (standard 
triangulation language) format to evaluate the accuracy of the intraoral scanner 
and to verify the feasibility of the designed model. The result shows that the 
integration model can be successfully scanned and imaged. In the case of the 
powder-free integration model, intraoral scanner precision, trueness, 3D 
fitting, and imaging are better than the extraoral scanner. It can be seen 
straightly from the measurement result and the 3D fitting result that the 
intraoral scanner can acquire the shape of the standard model integrally with 
good repeatability. Therefore, it can be concluded that TRIOS is superior to 
CEREC and SHINING in accuracy, and the integration model is feasible as a 
reference in the examination of intraoral scanners. The performance of the newly 
designed integration model that can be scanned is clinically significant, 
suggesting that this model can be used as a standard reference model.

Copyright Â© 2021 HongXin Cai et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/8891396
PMCID: PMC8009709
PMID: 33824693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare that we have no financial and 
personal relationships with other people or organizations that can 
inappropriately influence our work.