1. Nat Commun. 2021 Apr 6;12(1):2042. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-22313-x.

RCB initiates Arabidopsis thermomorphogenesis by stabilizing the thermoregulator 
PIF4 in the daytime.

Qiu Y(#)(1)(2), Pasoreck EK(#)(3), Yoo CY(#)(3), He J(3), Wang H(3), Bajracharya 
A(4), Li M(3), Larsen HD(3), Cheung S(3), Chen M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, Institute for Integrative Genome 
Biology, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA. yqiu@olemiss.edu.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Mississippi, Oxford, MS, USA. 
yqiu@olemiss.edu.
(3)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, Institute for Integrative Genome 
Biology, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Mississippi, Oxford, MS, USA.
(5)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, Institute for Integrative Genome 
Biology, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA. meng.chen@ucr.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Daytime warm temperature elicits thermomorphogenesis in Arabidopsis by 
stabilizing the central thermoregulator PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING transcription 
FACTOR 4 (PIF4), whose degradation is otherwise promoted by the photoreceptor 
and thermosensor phytochrome B. PIF4 stabilization in the light requires a 
transcriptional activator, HEMERA (HMR), and is abrogated when HMR's 
transactivation activity is impaired in hmr-22. Here, we report the 
identification of a hmr-22 suppressor mutant, rcb-101, which surprisingly 
carries an A275V mutation in REGULATOR OF CHLOROPLAST BIOGENESIS (RCB). 
rcb-101/hmr-22 restores thermoresponsive PIF4 accumulation and reverts the 
defects of hmr-22 in chloroplast biogenesis and photomorphogenesis. Strikingly, 
similar to hmr, the null rcb-10 mutant impedes PIF4 accumulation and thereby 
loses the warm-temperature response. rcb-101 rescues hmr-22 in an 
allele-specific manner. Consistently, RCB interacts directly with HMR. Together, 
these results unveil RCB as a novel temperature signaling component that 
functions collaboratively with HMR to initiate thermomorphogenesis by 
selectively stabilizing PIF4 in the daytime.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-22313-x
PMCID: PMC8024306
PMID: 33824329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.