1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Mar 22;12:622901. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.622901. eCollection 2021.

Nutrition and Obesity in the Pathogenesis of Youth-Onset Type 1 Diabetes and Its 
Complications.

March CA(1), Becker DJ(1), Libman IM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Pittsburgh, 
UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

Since the 1980s, there has been a dramatic rise in the prevalence of overweight 
and obesity in pediatric populations, in large part driven by sedentary 
lifestyles and changing dietary patterns with more processed foods. In parallel 
with the rise in pediatric obesity in the general population, the prevalence of 
overweight and obesity has increased among children and adolescents with type 1 
diabetes. Adiposity has been implicated in a variety of mechanisms both 
potentiating the risk for type 1 diabetes as well as exacerbating long-term 
complications, particularly cardiovascular disease. Treatment options targeting 
the unique needs of obese pediatric patients, both before and after diagnosis of 
type 1 diabetes, are limited. In this review, we discuss the history of the 
epidemiology of the obesity epidemic in the context of pediatric type 1 
diabetes, highlight the possible role of obesity in type 1 diabetes pathogenesis 
and review the concept of "double diabetes". The impact of obesity at and after 
diagnosis will be discussed, including noted differences in clinical and 
biochemical markers, lipid abnormalities, and long-term cardiovascular 
complications. Finally, we will review the existing literature on pharmacologic 
and nutritional interventions as potential treatment strategies for youth with 
coexisting type 1 diabetes and obesity.

Copyright Â© 2021 March, Becker and Libman.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.622901
PMCID: PMC8021094
PMID: 33828529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IL serves as Pediatric Type 2 Diabetes Expert 
Panel member for Novo Nordisk. The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.