1. Sci Rep. 2021 Apr 7;11(1):7574. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-87204-z.

Analyzing effect of quadruple multiple sequence alignments on deep learning 
based protein inter-residue distance prediction.

Jain A(1), Terashi G(2), Kagaya Y(3), Maddhuri Venkata Subramaniya SR(1), 
Christoffer C(1), Kihara D(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 
47907, USA.
(3)Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, 
USA. dkihara@purdue.edu.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 
47907, USA. dkihara@purdue.edu.

Protein 3D structure prediction has advanced significantly in recent years due 
to improving contact prediction accuracy. This improvement has been largely due 
to deep learning approaches that predict inter-residue contacts and, more 
recently, distances using multiple sequence alignments (MSAs). In this work we 
present AttentiveDist, a novel approach that uses different MSAs generated with 
different E-values in a single model to increase the co-evolutionary information 
provided to the model. To determine the importance of each MSA's feature at the 
inter-residue level, we added an attention layer to the deep neural network. We 
show that combining four MSAs of different E-value cutoffs improved the model 
prediction performance as compared to single E-value MSA features. A further 
improvement was observed when an attention layer was used and even more when 
additional prediction tasks of bond angle predictions were added. The 
improvement of distance predictions were successfully transferred to achieve 
better protein tertiary structure modeling.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-87204-z
PMCID: PMC8027171
PMID: 33828153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.