1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 May 7;49(8):4613-4628. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab244.

Histone deacetylases control lysine acetylation of ribosomal proteins in rice.

Xu Q(1), Liu Q(1), Chen Z(1), Yue Y(1), Liu Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhou DX(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, 430070 Wuhan, China.
(2)Institute of Plant Sciences Paris-Saclay (IPS2), CNRS, INRAE, University 
Paris-Saclay, 91405 Orsay, France.

Lysine acetylation (Kac) is well known to occur in histones for chromatin 
function and epigenetic regulation. In addition to histones, Kac is also 
detected in a large number of proteins with diverse biological functions. 
However, Kac function and regulatory mechanism for most proteins are unclear. In 
this work, we studied mutation effects of rice genes encoding 
cytoplasm-localized histone deacetylases (HDAC) on protein acetylome and found 
that the HDAC protein HDA714 was a major deacetylase of the rice non-histone 
proteins including many ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) and translation factors 
that were extensively acetylated. HDA714 loss-of-function mutations increased 
Kac levels but reduced abundance of r-proteins. In vitro and in vivo experiments 
showed that HDA714 interacted with r-proteins and reduced their Kac. 
Substitutions of lysine by arginine (depleting Kac) in several r-proteins 
enhance, while mutations of lysine to glutamine (mimicking Kac) decrease their 
stability in transient expression system. Ribo-seq analysis revealed that the 
hda714 mutations resulted in increased ribosome stalling frequency. 
Collectively, the results uncover Kac as a functional posttranslational 
modification of r-proteins which is controlled by histone deacetylases, 
extending the role of Kac in gene expression to protein translational 
regulation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab244
PMCID: PMC8096213
PMID: 33836077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]