1. BMC Genomics. 2021 Apr 12;22(1):261. doi: 10.1186/s12864-021-07464-x.

The transcriptomic responses of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) to high 
temperature stress alone, and in combination with moderate hypoxia.

Beemelmanns A(1)(2), Zanuzzo FS(3), Xue X(3), Sandrelli RM(3), Rise ML(3), 
Gamperl AK(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ocean Sciences, Memorial University, St. John's, NL, A1C 5S7, 
Canada. abeemelmanns@mun.ca.
(2)Current Address: Département de Biologie, Institut de Biologie Intégrative et 
des Systèmes (IBIS), Université Laval, Québec City, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada. 
abeemelmanns@mun.ca.
(3)Department of Ocean Sciences, Memorial University, St. John's, NL, A1C 5S7, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Ocean Sciences, Memorial University, St. John's, NL, A1C 5S7, 
Canada. kgamperl@mun.ca.

BACKGROUND: Increases in ocean temperatures and in the frequency and severity of 
hypoxic events are expected with climate change, and may become a challenge for 
cultured Atlantic salmon and negatively affect their growth, immunology and 
welfare. Thus, we examined how an incremental temperature increase alone (Warm & 
Normoxic-WN: 12 → 20 °C; 1 °C week- 1), and in combination with moderate hypoxia 
(Warm & Hypoxic-WH: ~ 70% air saturation), impacted the salmon's hepatic 
transcriptome expr\ession compared to control fish (CT: 12 °C, normoxic) using 
44 K microarrays and qPCR.
RESULTS: Overall, we identified 2894 differentially expressed probes (DEPs, 
FDR < 5%), that included 1111 shared DEPs, while 789 and 994 DEPs were specific 
to WN and WH fish, respectively. Pathway analysis indicated that the cellular 
mechanisms affected by the two experimental conditions were quite similar, with 
up-regulated genes functionally associated with the heat shock response, 
ER-stress, apoptosis and immune defence, while genes connected with general 
metabolic processes, proteolysis and oxidation-reduction were largely 
suppressed. The qPCR assessment of 41 microarray-identified genes validated that 
the heat shock response (hsp90aa1, serpinh1), apoptosis (casp8, jund, jak2) and 
immune responses (apod, c1ql2, epx) were up-regulated in WN and WH fish, while 
oxidative stress and hypoxia sensitive genes were down-regulated (cirbp, cyp1a1, 
egln2, gstt1, hif1α, prdx6, rraga, ucp2). However, the additional challenge of 
hypoxia resulted in more pronounced effects on heat shock and immune-related 
processes, including a stronger influence on the expression of 14 immune-related 
genes. Finally, robust correlations between the transcription of 19 genes and 
several phenotypic traits in WH fish suggest that changes in gene expression 
were related to impaired physiological and growth performance.
CONCLUSION: Increasing temperature to 20 °C alone, and in combination with 
hypoxia, resulted in the differential expression of genes involved in similar 
pathways in Atlantic salmon. However, the expression responses of heat shock and 
immune-relevant genes in fish exposed to 20 °C and hypoxia were more affected, 
and strongly related to phenotypic characteristics (e.g., growth). This study 
provides valuable information on how these two environmental challenges affect 
the expression of stress-, metabolic- and immune-related genes and pathways, and 
identifies potential biomarker genes for improving our understanding of fish 
health and welfare.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-021-07464-x
PMCID: PMC8042886
PMID: 33845767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.