1. Sci Rep. 2021 Apr 13;11(1):8075. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-87565-5.

Association of common TMPRSS6 and TF gene variants with hepcidin and iron status 
in healthy rural Gambians.

Jallow MW(1)(2), Campino S(2), Prentice AM(1), Cerami C(3).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Theme, MRC Unit, The Gambia at London School of Hygiene & Tropical 
Medicine, Atlantic Boulevard, Fajara, P.O. Box 273, Banjul, The Gambia.
(2)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, 
London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London, WC1E 7HT, 
UK.
(3)Nutrition Theme, MRC Unit, The Gambia at London School of Hygiene & Tropical 
Medicine, Atlantic Boulevard, Fajara, P.O. Box 273, Banjul, The Gambia. 
ccerami@mrc.gm.

Genome-wide association studies in Europeans and Asians have identified numerous 
variants in the transmembrane protease serine 6 (TMPRSS6) and transferrin 
(TF) genes that are associated with changes in iron status. We sought to 
investigate the effects of common TMPRSS6 and TF gene SNPs on iron status 
indicators in a cohort of healthy Africans from rural Gambia. We measured iron 
biomarkers and haematology traits on individuals participating in the Keneba 
Biobank with genotype data on TMPRSS6 (rs2235321, rs855791, rs4820268, 
rs2235324, rs2413450 and rs5756506) and TF (rs3811647 and rs1799852), n = 1316. 
After controlling for inflammation, age and sex, we analysed the effects of 
carrying either single or multiple iron-lowering alleles on iron status. TMPRSS6 
rs2235321 significantly affected plasma hepcidin concentrations (AA genotypes 
having lower hepcidin levels; F ratio 3.7, P = 0.014) with greater impact in 
individuals with low haemoglobin or ferritin. No other TMPRSS6 variant affected 
hepcidin. None of the TMPRSS6 variants nor a TMPRSS6 allele risk score affected 
other iron biomarkers or haematological traits. TF rs3811647 AA carriers had 21% 
higher transferrin (F ratio 16.0, P < 0.0001), 24% higher unsaturated 
iron-binding capacity (F ratio 12.8, P < 0.0001) and 25% lower transferrin 
saturation (F ratio 4.3, P < 0.0001) compared to GG carriers. TF rs3811647 was 
strongly associated with transferrin, unsaturated iron-binding capacity (UIBC) 
and transferrin saturation (TSAT) with a single allele effect of 8-12%. There 
was no association between either TF SNP and any haematological traits or iron 
biomarkers. We identified meaningful associations between TMPRSS6 rs2235321 and 
hepcidin and replicated the previous findings on the effects of TF rs3811647 on 
transferrin and iron binding capacity. However, the effects are subtle and 
contribute little to population variance. Further genetic and functional 
studies, including polymorphisms frequent in Africa populations, are needed to 
identify markers for genetically stratified approaches to prevention or 
treatment of iron deficiency anaemia.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-87565-5
PMCID: PMC8044158
PMID: 33850216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.