1. Poult Sci. 2021 Jun;100(6):101077. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101077. Epub 2021
Mar  1.

Screening and validation of candidate genes involved in the regulation of egg 
yolk deposition in chicken.

Zhang J(1), Duan Z(1), Wang X(1), Li F(1), Chen J(1), Lai X(1), Qu L(1), Sun 
C(1), Xu G(2).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding and Key Laboratory of 
Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing 100193, China.
(2)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding and Key Laboratory of 
Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic address: ncppt@cau.edu.cn.

Eggs with the same total weight may have considerable differences in yolk 
weight. Eggs with a high percentage of yolk have a higher nutritional value, 
more flavor, and are more desirable to consumers. However, a large yolk 
proportion means more dry matter in the eggs, which reduces the feed efficiency. 
The elucidation of the genetic factors of yolk quantity in eggs is of scientific 
and practical significance. Through RNA sequencing, we explored the 
transcriptome of ovarian tissue from 12 Wenchang chickens, including 6 chickens 
that laid eggs with a high yolk percentage (32%) and 6 that laid low yolk 
percentage eggs (25%). We identified a total of 362 differentially expressed 
genes (P-value < 0.01, log2 fold change < -1, log2 fold change > 1), of which 
220 were upregulated and 142 were downregulated in high yolk percentage hens. 
According to the Gene Ontology terms annotation and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes 
and Genomes enrichment analysis, the differentially expressed genes were 
associated with the regulation of various cell functions, cell differentiation 
and development, neuroactive ligand-receptor interactions, and calcium and 
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis signaling pathways. To further filter for genes 
that were directly involved in yolk accumulation, the chicken quantitative trait 
loci database, genes within 100 kb upstream and downstream of the yolk weight 
trait SNP, and intersection genes in protein-protein interaction network 
diagrams were used to detect genes that overlapped with the differentially 
expressed genes. We found 7 candidate genes in total, MNR2, AOX1, ANTXRL, 
GRAMD1C, EEF2, COMP, and JUND, which affect female reproductive performance and 
the growth and development of follicles, supporting cell transport, cell 
proliferation, and differentiation. All candidate genes and several randomly 
selected genes were verified by quantitative real time PCR, and the results were 
consistent with the RNA sequencing. In conclusion, investigating the molecular 
mechanisms of high yolk percentage traits will allow breeding strategies to be 
optimized to alter the percentage of yolk in chicken eggs.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101077
PMCID: PMC8054188
PMID: 33857910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]