1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2021 Mar 17;2021:5548130. doi: 10.1155/2021/5548130. 
eCollection 2021.

Bevacizumab-Induced Mitochondrial Dysfunction, Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress, and 
ERK Inactivation Contribute to Cardiotoxicity.

Li Y(1), Tian W(2), Yue D(1), Chen C(1), Li C(1), Zhang Z(1), Wang C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Lung Cancer, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and 
Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin's Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin 
Lung Cancer Center, Tianjin 300060, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Tianjin 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin 300060, China.

The molecular mechanisms underlying the cardiotoxicity associated with 
bevacizumab, a first-line immunotherapeutic agent used to treat lung cancer, are 
not fully understood. Here, we examined intracellular signal transduction in 
cardiomyocytes after exposure to different doses of bevacizumab in vitro. Our 
results demonstrated that bevacizumab significantly and dose-dependently reduces 
cardiomyocyte viability and increases cell apoptosis. Bevacizumab treatment also 
led to mitochondrial dysfunction in cardiomyocytes, as evidenced by the 
decreased ATP production, increased ROS production, attenuated antioxidative 
enzyme levels, and reduced respiratory complex function. In addition, 
bevacizumab induced intracellular calcium overload, ER stress, and caspase-12 
activation. Finally, bevacizumab treatment inhibited the ERK signaling pathway, 
which, in turn, significantly reduced cardiomyocyte viability and contributed to 
mitochondrial dysfunction. Together, our results demonstrate that 
bevacizumab-mediated cardiotoxicity is associated with mitochondrial 
dysfunction, ER stress, and ERK pathway inactivation. These findings may provide 
potential treatment targets to attenuate myocardial injury during lung cancer 
immunotherapy.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yue Li et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5548130
PMCID: PMC8009725
PMID: 33859777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest associated with this study.