1. Plant Pathol J. 2021 Apr;37(2):152-161. doi: 10.5423/PPJ.OA.12.2020.0223. Epub
 2021 Apr 1.

Complete Genomic Characterization of Two Beet Soil-Borne Virus Isolates from 
Turkey: Implications of Comparative Analysis of Genome Sequences.

Moradi Z(1), Maghdoori H(2), Nazifi E(3), Mehrvar M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Faculty of Crop Sciences, Sari Agricultural 
Sciences and Natural Resources University, P.O. Box 578, Sari, Iran.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, Faculty of Agriculture, Ferdowsi University of 
Mashhad, P.O. Box 91779-1163, Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, University of Mazandaran, 
P.O. Box 47416-95447, Babolsar, Iran.

Sugar beet (Beta vulgaris L.) is known as a key product for agriculture in 
several countries across the world. Beet soil-borne virus (BSBV) triggers 
substantial economic damages to sugar beet by reducing the quantity of the yield 
and quality of the beet sugars. We conducted the present study to report the 
complete genome sequences of two BSBV isolates in Turkey for the first time. The 
genome organization was identical to those previously established BSBV isolates. 
The tripartite genome of BSBV-TR1 and -TR3 comprised a 5,835-nucleotide (nt) 
RNA1, a 3,454-nt RNA2, and a 3,005-nt RNA3 segment. According to sequence 
identity analyses, Turkish isolates were most closely related to the BSBV 
isolate reported from Iran (97.83-98.77% nt identity). The BSBV isolates 
worldwide (n = 9) were phylogenetically classified into five (RNA-coat protein 
read through gene [CPRT], TGB1, and TGB2 segments), four (RNA-rep), or three 
(TGB3) lineages. In genetic analysis, the TGB3 revealed more genetic variability 
(Pi = 0.034) compared with other regions. Population selection analysis revealed 
that most of the codons were generally under negative selection or neutral 
evolution in the BSBV isolates studied. However, positive selection was detected 
at codon 135 in the TGB1, which could be an adaptation in order to facilitate 
the movement and overcome the host plant resistance genes. We expect that the 
information on genome properties and genetic variability of BSBV, particularly 
in TGB3, TGB1, and CPRT genes, assist in developing effective control measures 
in order to prevent severe losses and make amendments in management strategies.

DOI: 10.5423/PPJ.OA.12.2020.0223
PMCID: PMC8053846
PMID: 33866757

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.