1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2021 Apr 16;135(7):991-1007. doi: 10.1042/CS20200306.

Clonal haematopoiesis of indeterminate potential: intersections between 
inflammation, vascular disease and heart failure.

Mooney L(1), Goodyear CS(2), Chandra T(3), Kirschner K(4), Copland M(4), Petrie 
MC(1), Lang NN(1).

Author information:
(1)BHF Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, 
U.K.
(2)Institute of Immunity, Infection and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, U.K.
(3)The Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, 
Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, U.K.
(4)Paul O'Gorman Leukaemia Research Centre, Institute for Cancer Science, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, U.K.

Ageing is a major risk factor for the development of cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) and cancer. Whilst the cumulative effect of exposure to conventional 
cardiovascular risk factors is important, recent evidence highlights clonal 
haematopoiesis of indeterminant potential (CHIP) as a further key risk factor. 
CHIP reflects the accumulation of somatic, potentially pro-leukaemic gene 
mutations within haematopoietic stem cells over time. The most common mutations 
associated with CHIP and CVD occur in genes that also play central roles in the 
regulation of inflammation. While CHIP carriers have a low risk of 
haematological malignant transformation (<1% per year), their relative risk of 
mortality is increased by 40% and this reflects an excess of cardiovascular 
events. Evidence linking CHIP, inflammation and atherosclerotic disease has 
recently become better defined. However, there is a paucity of information about 
the role of CHIP in the development and progression of heart failure, 
particularly heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF). While 
systemic inflammation plays a role in the pathophysiology of both heart failure 
with reduced and preserved ejection fraction (EF), it may be of greater 
relevance in the pathophysiology of HFpEF, which is also strongly associated 
with ageing. This review describes CHIP and its pathogenetic links with ageing, 
inflammation and CVD, while providing insight into its putative role in HFpEF.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/CS20200306
PMCID: PMC8055963
PMID: 33861346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.G. has received research funding from 
AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, ISTESSO, Eli-Lilly, MedAnnex, Pfizer and UCB. 
C.G. is/has been an advisory board member for Bristol-Myers Squibb, MedAnnex, 
Medincell and Pfizer and has received honoraria from Abbvie and Bristol-Myers 
Squibb. M.C.P. has received research funding from Novartis, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Cyclacel and Takeda/Incyte, is/has been an advisory board member for 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Incyte, Daiichi Sankyo, Jazz and Pfizer and has 
received honoraria from Astellas, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Incyte, Pfizer 
and Gilead. M.C.P. has received research grants or consultancy fees from SQ 
Innovations, AstraZeneca, Roche, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Napp 
Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, and Novo Nordisk and has served on clinical events 
committees for AbbVie, Alnylam, Astra Zeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Resverlogix, and Novo Nordisk. N.N.L. has received research 
funding from Roche Diagnostics, Bristol-Myers Squibb, is/has been an advisory 
board member for Vifor Pharma, Pharmacosmos and has received honoraria from 
Roche Diagnostics, Takeda, Pfizer and Novartis.