1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Mar 31;12:659558. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.659558. 
eCollection 2021.

The Role of Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes Complexes in Meiosis and 
Genome Maintenance: Translating Biomedical and Model Plant Research Into Crop 
Breeding Opportunities.

Bolaños-Villegas P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Fabio Baudrit Agricultural Research Station, University of Costa Rica, 
Alajuela, Costa Rica.
(2)Lankester Botanical Garden, University of Costa Rica, Cartago, Costa Rica.

Cohesin is a multi-unit protein complex from the structural maintenance of 
chromosomes (SMC) family, required for holding sister chromatids together during 
mitosis and meiosis. In yeast, the cohesin complex entraps sister DNAs within 
tripartite rings created by pairwise interactions between the central ring units 
SMC1 and SMC3 and subunits such as the α-kleisin SCC1 (REC8/SYN1 in meiosis). 
The complex is an indispensable regulator of meiotic recombination in 
eukaryotes. In Arabidopsis and maize, the SMC1/SMC3 heterodimer is a key 
determinant of meiosis. In Arabidopsis, several kleisin proteins are also 
essential: SYN1/REC8 is meiosis-specific and is essential for double-strand 
break repair, whereas AtSCC2 is a subunit of the cohesin SCC2/SCC4 loading 
complex that is important for synapsis and segregation. Other important meiotic 
subunits are the cohesin EXTRA SPINDLE POLES (AESP1) separase, the acetylase 
ESTABLISHMENT OF COHESION 1/CHROMOSOME TRANSMISSION FIDELITY 7 (ECO1/CTF7), the 
cohesion release factor WINGS APART-LIKE PROTEIN 1 (WAPL) in Arabidopsis 
(AtWAPL1/AtWAPL2), and the WAPL antagonist AtSWITCH1/DYAD (AtSWI1). Other 
important complexes are the SMC5/SMC6 complex, which is required for homologous 
DNA recombination during the S-phase and for proper meiotic synapsis, and the 
condensin complexes, featuring SMC2/SMC4 that regulate proper clustering of rDNA 
arrays during interphase. Meiotic recombination is the key to enrich desirable 
traits in commercial plant breeding. In this review, I highlight critical 
advances in understanding plant chromatid cohesion in the model plant 
Arabidopsis and crop plants and suggest how manipulation of crossover formation 
during meiosis, somatic DNA repair and chromosome folding may facilitate 
transmission of desirable alleles, tolerance to radiation, and enhanced 
transcription of alleles that regulate sexual development. I hope that these 
findings highlight opportunities for crop breeding.

Copyright © 2021 Bolaños-Villegas.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.659558
PMCID: PMC8044525
PMID: 33868354

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.