1. Neurobiol Aging. 2021 Aug;104:111.e1-111.e4. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.03.006. Epub 2021 Mar 24.

Assessment of ANG variants in Parkinson's disease.

Grenn FP(1), Moore A(1), Bandres-Ciga S(1), Krohn L(2), Blauwendraat C(3); 
International Parkinson's Disease Genomics Consortium (IPDGC).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics Section, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute 
on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 
Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Molecular Genetics Section, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute 
on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: 
cornelis.blauwendraat@nih.gov.

Genetic risk factors are occasionally shared between different neurodegenerative 
diseases. Previous studies have linked ANG, a gene encoding angiogenin, to both 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Functional 
studies suggest ANG plays a neuroprotective role in both PD and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis by reducing cell death. We further explored the genetic 
association between ANG and PD by analyzing genotype data from the International 
Parkinson's Disease Genomics Consortium (14,671 cases and 17,667 controls) and 
whole genome sequencing data from the Accelerating Medicines Partnership - 
Parkinson's disease initiative (AMP-PD, https://amp-pd.org/) (1,647 cases and 
1,050 controls). Our analysis did not replicate the findings of previous studies 
and identified no significant association between ANG variants and PD risk.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.03.006
PMCID: PMC8225568
PMID: 33875291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.