1. BMC Cancer. 2021 Apr 20;21(1):432. doi: 10.1186/s12885-021-08078-y.

RB1 and TP53 co-mutations correlate strongly with genomic biomarkers of response 
to immunity checkpoint inhibitors in urothelial bladder cancer.

Manzano RG(1), Catalan-Latorre A(2), Brugarolas A(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics and Genomics Laboratory, Unidad de Consejo Genetico, 
Plataforma de Oncologia, Hospital Quironsalud Torrevieja, Pda. La Loma s/n, 
03184, Torrevieja (Alicante), Spain. ramon.manzano@quironsalud.es.
(2)Unidad de Farmacocinetica y Farmacoterapia Personalizada, Plataforma de 
Oncologia, Hospital Quironsalud Torrevieja, Pda. La Loma s/n, 03184, Torrevieja 
(Alicante), Spain.
(3)Medical Oncology Department, Plataforma de Oncologia, Hospital Quironsalud 
Torrevieja, Pda. La Loma s/n, 03184, Torrevieja (Alicante), Spain.

BACKGROUND: Muscle invasive urothelial bladder carcinoma (MIBC) present RB1 and 
TP53 somatic alterations in a variable percentage of tumors throughout all 
molecular subtypes. MIBCs with neuroendocrine features have a high response rate 
to immunity checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). Whether the presence of somatic 
co-alterations in these 2 genes in MIBCs is relevant to their responsiveness to 
ICIs is not known.
METHODS: The potential correlation of different genomic biomarkers of response 
to ICIs like tumor mutational burden (TMB), single nucleotide variants (SNV) 
predicted neoantigens, DNA damage response (DDR) genes, DNA somatic signatures 
and TILs infiltrate was explored in patients with somatic co-alterations in RB1 
and TP53 (RB1&TP53) as compared with patients with no alterations in any (double 
wild type, DWT) or with alterations in just one of the 2 genes. The Cancer 
Genome Atlas (TCGA) pancancer BLCA dataset of cystectomy specimens (n = 407) 
with mutation, copy number alterations and transcriptomic (RNA sequencing) data 
as well as the IMVigor 210 study (n = 348) of metastatic urothelial bladder 
cancers treated with atezolizumab (PD-L1 inhibitor) with clinical response data 
containing transcriptomic (RNA sequencing), along with a subset (n = 274) with 
mutation and copy number data were used for this purpose. A novel tumor 
microenvironment metascore (TMM) was developed based in a LASSO regularized Cox 
model with predictive and prognostic ability.
RESULTS: Samples with co-altered RB1&TP53: a) were enriched in immunity 
effectors (CD8 cytotoxic lymphocytes, NK cells) and display higher scores of a T 
cell inflamed signature; b) have a higher TMB, higher number of SNV predicted 
neoantigens and higher TILs fractions; c) have a higher number of DDR mutated 
and deep deleted DDR genes; d) have DNA somatic signatures 2 and 13 related to 
APOBEC mutagenesis. Using the IMVigor 210 dataset, RB1&TP53 samples had the 
highest response rate to atezolizumab and a strong correlation with TMB and TMM. 
The consensus molecular subtype classification in the IMVigor 210 dataset showed 
a significant correlation with both the response to treatment (p = 0.001, 
Chisquare) and the presence of RB1 and TP53 genomic alterations (p < 0.001, 
Chisquare).
CONCLUSIONS: RB1&TP53 co-alterations are strongly associated with genomic 
biomarkers of response to ICIs in MIBCs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-021-08078-y
PMCID: PMC8056512
PMID: 33879103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests