1. World J Gastrointest Oncol. 2021 Apr 15;13(4):231-237. doi: 
10.4251/wjgo.v13.i4.231.

Nanotechnology and pancreatic cancer management: State of the art and further 
perspectives.

Caputo D(1), Pozzi D(2), Farolfi T(3), Passa R(3), Coppola R(3), Caracciolo 
G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, University Campus Bio-Medico di Roma, Rome 
00128, Italy. d.caputo@unicampus.it.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome 00161, 
Italy.
(3)Department of General Surgery, University Campus Bio-Medico di Roma, Rome 
00128, Italy.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) represents a leading cause of cancer 
death and is often diagnosticated too late to allow adequate treatments. Lots of 
biomarkers have been discovered in lasts years but, to date, there is a lack of 
low-cost and non-invasive tools for PDAC early detection. Nonetheless, drugs 
commonly used in PDAC treatment do not allow achieving long-term satisfying 
results. Nanotechnology is gaining importance in both PDAC early detection and 
treatment. The main implications of nanotechnology in cancer diagnosis lay in 
the ability that nanoparticles have on concentrate the alteration in human 
proteome caused by cancer. Nanoparticle-enabled blood tests have been 
demonstrated to reach high rate of sensitivity (up to 85%) and specificity (up 
to 100%). In the field of cancer therapy nanoparticles can be used as 
nanocarriers able to reach specific tumour's cells and selectively release the 
drug they contain into them. A literature review was carried out with the aim to 
assess the state of the art and highlight the future perspectives of 
nanotechnology in PDAC early detection and therapy.

Â©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.4251/wjgo.v13.i4.231
PMCID: PMC8040067
PMID: 33889275

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All Authors 
declare that they do not have any conflict of interest.