1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2021 Apr 13;16:2819-2831. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S302514. 
eCollection 2021.

Double-Controlled Release of Poorly Water-Soluble Paliperidone Palmitate from 
Self-Assembled Albumin-Oleic Acid Nanoparticles in PLGA in situ Forming Implant.

Yu Y(1), Ngo HV(1), Jin G(1), Tran PHL(2), Tran TTD(3)(4), Nguyen VH(5), Park 
C(6), Lee BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Ajou University, Suwon, 16499, Republic of Korea.
(2)Deakin University, School of Medicine, Geelong, Australia.
(3)Institute of Research and Development, Duy Tan University, Danang, 550000, 
Vietnam.
(4)The Faculty of Pharmacy, Duy Tan University, Danang, 550000, Vietnam.
(5)Pharmaceutical Engineering Laboratory, Biomedical Engineering Department, 
International University, Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh City, 70000, 
Vietnam.
(6)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

PURPOSE: To investigate the effects of solvents on the formation of 
self-assembled nanonization of albumin-oleic acid conjugates (AOCs) using a 
solvent exchange mechanism for the construction of in situ forming implants 
(ISFI).
METHODS: A poorly water-soluble drug, paliperidone palmitate (PPP), was chosen 
as the model drug. AOC was synthesized with the 
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC) reaction. Dichloromethane, 
tetrahydrofuran, ethanol, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, dimethyl sulfoxide, and 
deionized water were selected to investigate the formation of self-assembled AOC 
nanoparticles (AONs). The volume ratios of organic solvents against water could 
determine the miscibility, injectability, and in situ nanonizing capability 
without aggregation.
RESULTS: As the polarity of the organic solvents increased, the AONs exhibited a 
spherical shape, and the larger the volume of the solvent, the smaller the size 
of the AONs. To use AOC in ISFI for controlled release of PPP, 
poly(d,l-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) was combined with the AOC in 2 mL of 
N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone and water solution (1.8/0.2 ratio). The release rates of 
all formulations exhibited similar curve patterns overall but were more 
controlled in decreasing order as follows: AOC, PLGA, and AOC/PLGA for 14 days.
CONCLUSION: A combined formulation of AOC and PLGA was found to effectively 
control the initial burst release of the drug.

Â© 2021 Yu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S302514
PMCID: PMC8056066
PMID: 33888982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest regarding the publication of this study.