1. Antimicrob Resist Infect Control. 2021 Apr 23;10(1):70. doi: 
10.1186/s13756-021-00936-5.

Genetic mechanisms and correlated risk factors of antimicrobial-resistant 
ESKAPEE pathogens isolated in a tertiary hospital in Malaysia.

Ngoi ST(1), Chong CW(2), Ponnampalavanar SSS(3), Tang SN(1), Idris N(1), Abdul 
Jabar K(1), Gregory MJ(4), Husain T(4), Teh CSJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya, 
50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Monash University Malaysia, 47500, Bandar Sunway, 
Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya, 50603, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)United States Naval Medical Research Unit Two (NAMRU-2), Phnom Penh, 
Cambodia.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya, 
50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. cindysjteh@um.edu.my.

BACKGROUND: Knowledge on the epidemiology, genotypic and phenotypic features of 
antimicrobial-resistant (AMR) ESKAPEE pathogens (Enterococcus faecium, 
Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter spp., and Escherichia coli) and their 
association with hospital-acquired infections (HAIs) are limited in Malaysia. 
Therefore, we evaluated the AMR features and resistance mechanisms of the 
ESKAPEE pathogens collected in a tertiary hospital located in the capital of 
Malaysia.
METHODS: A total of 378 AMR-ESKAPEE strains were obtained based on convenience 
sampling over a nine-month study period (2019-2020). All strains were subjected 
to disk diffusion and broth microdilution assays to determine the antimicrobial 
susceptibility profiles. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA sequence 
analyses were performed to determine the AMR genes profiles of the 
non-susceptible strains. Chi-square test and logistic regression analyses were 
used to correlate the AMR profiles and clinical data to determine the risk 
factors associated with HAIs.
RESULTS: High rates of multidrug resistance (MDR) were observed in A. baumannii, 
K. pneumoniae, E. coli, and S. aureus (69-89%). All organisms except E. coli 
were frequently associated with HAIs (61-94%). Non-susceptibility to the 
last-resort drugs vancomycin (in Enterococcus spp. and S. aureus), carbapenems 
(in A. baumannii, P. aeruginosa, and Enterobacteriaceae), and colistin (in 
Enterobacteriaceae) were observed. Both A. baumannii and K. pneumoniae harbored 
a wide array of extended-spectrum β-lactamase genes (blaTEM, blaSHV, blaCTX-M, 
blaOXA). Metallo-β-lactamase genes (blaVEB, blaVIM, blaNDM) were detected in 
carbapenem-resistant strains, at a higher frequency compared to other local 
reports. We detected two novel mutations in the quinolone-resistant determining 
region of the gyrA in fluoroquinolone-resistant E. coli (Leu-102-Ala; 
Gly-105-Val). Microbial resistance to ampicillin, methicillin, and 
cephalosporins was identified as important risk factors associated with HAIs in 
the hospital.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our findings may provide valuable insight into the 
microbial resistance pattern and the risk factors of ESKAPEE-associated HAIs in 
a tertiary hospital located in central Peninsular Malaysia. The data obtained in 
this study may contribute to informing better hospital infection control in this 
region.

DOI: 10.1186/s13756-021-00936-5
PMCID: PMC8062948
PMID: 33892804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.