1. Front Neurol. 2021 Apr 9;12:643964. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.643964.
eCollection  2021.

The Correlation of ELP4-PAX6 With Rolandic Spike Sources in Idiopathic Rolandic 
Epilepsy Syndromes.

Duan Y(1), Leng X(2), Liu C(1), Qi X(2), Zhang L(2), Tan W(3), Zhang X(1), Wang 
Y(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Xuanwu Hospital Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing in Medical Image, Northeastern 
University, Ministry of Education, Shenyang, China.
(4)Beijing Key Laboratory of Neuromodulation, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(5)Center of Epilepsy, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.

Objective: To study the single nucleotide polymorphism rs662702 of ELP4-PAX6 in 
patients with idiopathic rolandic epilepsy syndromes (IRES) in China and explore 
the relationship between the distribution of rolandic spike sources and the 
single nucleotide polymorphism rs662702 in ELP4-PAX6. Methods: First, clinical 
information was obtained from patients diagnosed with IRES. Next, the single 
nucleotide polymorphism rs662702 of ELP4 was analyzed by using the Sanger 
method. Resting-state magnetoencephalography data were collected from 17 
patients. We analyzed the epileptic spike sources using the single equivalent 
current dipole (SECD) model and determined the spike distributions across the 
whole brain. Finally, Fisher's test was performed to assess the correlation 
between the single nucleotide polymorphism rs662702 of ELP4-PAX6 and rolandic 
spike sources. Results: ELP4 rs662702 T alleles were found in 10.7% of IRES 
patients and occurred four times more frequently in these patients than in the 
healthy controls. TT homozygosity was found in one IRES patient (1.3%), while no 
TT homozygosity was found in the healthy control group. The IRES rolandic spike 
sources were unilateral in sixteen patients (94.1%) and were mainly located in 
the anterior central gyrus (58.8%). The spike source of patients without the 
ELP4 rs662702 T allele was correlated with the central region (p < 0.05). The 
rolandic spikes sources were significant correlated with the non-central gyrus 
(frontal and temporal lobes) in patients with the ELP4 rs662702 T allele (p < 
0.05). Conclusion: The rolandic spike sources of the IRES patients with the ELP4 
rs662702 T allele were significantly associated with the non-central gyrus, 
including the frontal and temporal lobes. Our study confirmed for the first time 
in vivo that ELP4 rs662702 T allele overexpression is correlated with the 
rolandic spike distribution in patients with IRES and provides important 
insights into how genetic abnormalities can lead to brain dysfunction and into 
the precise targeting of abnormal discharge sources in the brain.

Copyright Â© 2021 Duan, Leng, Liu, Qi, Zhang, Tan, Zhang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.643964
PMCID: PMC8064626
PMID: 33897599

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.