1. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2021 Jul 1;51(7):1051-1058. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyab058.

Oestrogen receptor alpha in papillary thyroid carcinoma: association with 
clinical features and BRAFV600E mutation.

Liu S(1), Jiao B(2), Li S(1), Zhao L(1), Zheng W(1), Wang K(1), Xu J(1), Tian 
Y(1), Liu C(1), Gui Z(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical 
College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical College of 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Papillary thyroid cancer cells can express oestrogen receptor alpha, 
which is encoded by the ESR1 gene and may bind to oestrogen to induce the 
occurrence and development of papillary thyroid cancer. The BRAFV600E mutation 
is also an important biomarker for the occurrence and progression of papillary 
thyroid cancer. However, the association between the BRAFV600E mutation and 
oestrogen receptor alpha expression has not been identified. This study aims to 
investigate the association between ESR1 expression and the BRAFV600E mutation 
and its clinical significance.
METHODS: Oestrogen receptor alpha and BRAFV600E proteins were detected by 
immunohistochemical staining of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded thyroid tissues 
from 1105 patients with papillary thyroid cancer at our institution. Messenger 
RNA expression counts of ESR1 and clinicopathologic information were obtained 
from The Cancer Genome Atlas database.
RESULTS: Oestrogen receptor alpha protein expression was significantly 
associated with BRAFV600E protein. The positive rate of oestrogen receptor alpha 
protein in papillary thyroid cancer patients was significantly higher in males, 
younger patients and patients with the multifocal type. In papillary thyroid 
cancer patients with positive BRAFV600E protein, oestrogen receptor alpha 
expression was significantly correlated with central lymph node metastasis. Data 
from the The Cancer Genome Atlas database also suggested that the ESR1 messenger 
RNA level was associated with the BRAFV600E mutation. Furthermore, 
classification analysis performed according to a tree-based classification 
method demonstrated that higher ESR1 messenger RNA expression indicated poorer 
overall survival in papillary thyroid cancer patients with the BRAFV600E 
mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: The percentage of BRAFV600E mutations is increased in patients with 
higher ESR1 messenger RNA levels, and the BRAFV600E protein might be 
co-expressed with oestrogen receptor alpha, which could be an indicator of 
cervical lymph node metastasis and poor overall survival in patients with 
papillary thyroid cancer.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permission@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyab058
PMID: 33893504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]