1. Mitochondrion. 2021 Jul;59:58-62. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2021.04.010. Epub 2021
Apr  22.

Homoplasmy of the m. 8993 T>G variant in a patient without MRI findings of Leigh 
syndrome, ataxia or retinal abnormalities.

Saneto RP(1), Patrick KE(2), Perez FA(3).

Author information:
(1)Program for Mitochondria Medicine and Metabolism, and Division of Pediatric 
Neurology, Seattle Children's Hospital/University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98150, United States. Electronic address: russ.saneto@seattlechildrens.org.
(2)Neuroscience Institute, Seattle Children's Hospital/University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98150, United States.
(3)Department of Radiology, Seattle Children's Hospital/University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, United States.

Leigh syndrome is a progressive neurodegenerative syndrome caused by multiple 
mitochondrial DNA and nuclear DNA pathological variants. Patients with Leigh 
syndrome consistently have distinct brain lesions found on MRI scanning 
involving abnormal signal in the basal ganglia, brainstem and/or cerebellum. 
Other clinical findings vary depending on the genetic etiology and epigenetic 
factors. Mitochondrial DNA-derived Leigh syndrome phenotype is thought to be 
modulated by heteroplasmy level. The classic example is the clinical expression 
of the pathological variant, m. 8993 T>G. At heteroplasmy levels above 90%, the 
resulting phenotype is Leigh syndrome, but at levels 70-90% patients present 
with a syndrome of neuropathy, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa. We describe a 
15-year old girl with homoplasmic variant in m.8993 T>G and clinical and 
biochemical findings consistent with Leigh syndrome but with normal brain MRI 
findings and without retinal abnormalities or ataxia.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mito.2021.04.010
PMCID: PMC8292191
PMID: 33894360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]