1. Sci Rep. 2021 Apr 27;11(1):9096. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-88618-5.

Inhibition of Wnt signalling by Notch via two distinct mechanisms.

Acar A(#)(1)(2), Hidalgo-Sastre A(#)(3), Leverentz MK(3), Mills CG(3), Woodcock 
S(3), Baron M(3), Collu GM(4), Brennan K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University, 
Universiteler Mah. Dumlupınar Bulvarı 1, 06800, Çankaya, Ankara, Turkey. 
acara@metu.edu.tr.
(2)Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Manchester Academic Health Science 
Centre, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. 
acara@metu.edu.tr.
(3)Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Manchester Academic Health Science 
Centre, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.
(4)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of 
Medicine At Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1020, New York, NY, 
10029, USA.
(5)Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Manchester Academic Health Science 
Centre, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. 
keith.brennan@manchester.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Notch and Wnt are two essential signalling pathways that help to shape animals 
during development and to sustain adult tissue homeostasis. Although they are 
often active at the same time within a tissue, they typically have opposing 
effects on cell fate decisions. In fact, crosstalk between the two pathways is 
important in generating the great diversity of cell types that we find in 
metazoans. Several different mechanisms have been proposed that allow Notch to 
limit Wnt signalling, driving a Notch-ON/Wnt-OFF state. Here we explore these 
different mechanisms in human cells and demonstrate two distinct mechanisms by 
which Notch itself, can limit the transcriptional activity of β-catenin. At the 
membrane, independently of DSL ligands, Notch1 can antagonise β-catenin activity 
through an endocytic mechanism that requires its interaction with Deltex and 
sequesters β-catenin into the membrane fraction. Within the nucleus, the 
intracellular domain of Notch1 can also limit β-catenin induced transcription 
through the formation of a complex that requires its interaction with RBPjκ. We 
believe these mechanisms contribute to the robustness of cell-fate decisions by 
sharpening the distinction between opposing Notch/Wnt responses.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-88618-5
PMCID: PMC8079408
PMID: 33907274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.