1. Cells. 2021 Apr 2;10(4):797. doi: 10.3390/cells10040797.

Distinct Classes of Flavonoids and Epigallocatechin Gallate, Polyphenol Affects 
an Oncogenic Mutant p53 Protein, Cell Growth and Invasion in a TNBC Breast 
Cancer Cell Line.

Kollareddy M(1), Martinez LA(2).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, 
University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.
(2)Stony Brook Cancer Center, Department of Pathology, Renaissance School of 
Medicine, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790, USA.

Mutant p53(s) are widely considered as oncogenes and promote several 
gain-of-function oncogenic activities. p53 mutations correlate with higher rates 
of metastasis and poor survival; therefore, it is paramount to inhibit mutant 
p53 protein either directly or indirectly. Although some compounds have been 
developed, none of them have achieved a desirable level of specificity. Some of 
these compounds only targeted specific mutations. In search of less-toxic 
compounds, we tested plant-derived compounds on mutant p53 triple-negative 
breast cancer cell lines. Here, we show that the compounds tested reduced the 
protein levels of one of the more frequent oncogenic p53 mutants (R249S; hot 
spot mutation), and its important targets that promote invasion and metastasis, 
including GMPS and IMPDH1. All compounds tested perturbed the invasion potential 
of the breast cancer cell line. These compounds downregulated several nucleotide 
metabolism genes (NMGs) which are essential for cell cycle progression. We 
observed S-phase arrest correlating to reduced cell proliferation and increased 
replication stress. Moreover, we also show a reduction of key ETS transcription 
family members including ETS2, ETS1, ETV1, and ETV4, which are involved in 
invasion and metastasis. We propose that these compounds may inhibit invasion by 
interfering with multiple pathways. Our findings exemplify that these tested 
compounds could inhibit invasion and cell growth in TNBC in a 
nucleotide-dependent manner.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10040797
PMCID: PMC8067228
PMID: 33918387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.