1. PLoS One. 2021 Apr 29;16(4):e0250729. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0250729. 
eCollection 2021.

Genome-wide association analysis of bean fly resistance and agro-morphological 
traits in common bean.

Nkhata W(1), Shimelis H(1), Melis R(1), Chirwa R(2), Mzengeza T(3), Mathew I(1), 
Shayanowako A(1).

Author information:
(1)African Centre for Crop Improvement, School of Agricultural, Earth and 
Environmental Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Scottsville, 
Pietermaritzburg, South Africa.
(2)Alliance of Biodiversity International and CIAT, Chitedze Agricultural 
Station, Lilongwe, Malawi.
(3)Department of Agricultural Research Service, Chitedze Agricultural Research 
Station, Lilongwe, Malawi.

The bean fly (Ophiomyia spp) is a key insect pest causing significant crop 
damage and yield loss in common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L., 2n = 2x = 22). 
Development and deployment of agronomic superior and bean fly resistant common 
bean varieties aredependent on genetic variation and the identification of genes 
and genomic regions controlling economic traits. This study's objective was to 
determine the population structure of a diverse panel of common bean genotypes 
and deduce associations between bean fly resistance and agronomic traits based 
on single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers. Ninety-nine common bean 
genotypes were phenotyped in two seasons at two locations and genotyped with 16 
565 SNP markers. The genotypes exhibited significant variation for bean fly 
damage severity (BDS), plant mortality rate (PMR), and pupa count (PC). 
Likewise, the genotypes showed significant variation for agro-morphological 
traits such as days to flowering (DTF), days to maturity (DTM), number of pods 
per plant (NPP), number of seeds per pod (NSP), and grain yield (GYD). The 
genotypes were delineated into two populations, which were based on the Andean 
and Mesoamerican gene pools. The genotypes exhibited a minimum membership 
coefficient of 0.60 to their respective populations. Eighty-three significant 
(P<0.01) markers were identified with an average linkage disequilibrium of 0.20 
at 12Mb across the 11 chromosomes. Three markers were identified, each having 
pleiotropic effects on two traits: M100049197 (BDS and NPP), M3379537 (DTF and 
PC), and M13122571 (NPP and GYD). The identified markers are useful for 
marker-assisted selection in the breeding program to develop common bean 
genotypes with resistance to bean fly damage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0250729
PMCID: PMC8084209
PMID: 33914796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.