1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Apr 8;13(4):514. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13040514.

Structural Analysis of the Simultaneous Activation and Inhibition of γ-Secretase 
Activity in the Development of Drugs for Alzheimer's Disease.

Svedružić ŽM(1)(2), Vrbnjak K(1)(3), Martinović M(1), Miletić V(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Rijeka, 51000 Rijeka, Croatia.
(2)Laboratory for Medical Biochemistry, Psychiatric Hospital Rab, Kampor 224, 
51280 Rab, Croatia.
(3)Laboratory for Mechanisms of Cell Transformation (VIB-KU Leuven), ON IV 
Herestraat-Box 912, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Informatics, University of Rijeka, 51000 Rijeka, Croatia.

Significance: The majority of the drugs which target membrane-embedded protease 
γ-secretase show an unusual biphasic activation-inhibition dose-response in 
cells, model animals, and humans. Semagacestat and avagacestat are two biphasic 
drugs that can facilitate cognitive decline in patients with Alzheimer's 
disease. Initial mechanistic studies showed that the biphasic drugs, and 
pathogenic mutations, can produce the same type of changes in γ-secretase 
activity. Results: DAPT, semagacestat LY-411,575, and avagacestat are four drugs 
that show different binding constants, and a biphasic activation-inhibition 
dose-response for amyloid-β-40 products in SH-SY5 cells. Multiscale molecular 
dynamics studies have shown that all four drugs bind to the most mobile parts in 
the presenilin structure, at different ends of the 29 Å long active site tunnel. 
The biphasic dose-response assays are a result of the modulation of γ-secretase 
activity by the concurrent binding of multiple drug molecules at each end of the 
active site tunnel. The drugs activate γ-secretase by facilitating the opening 
of the active site tunnel, when the rate-limiting step is the tunnel opening, 
and the formation of the enzyme-substrate complex. The drugs inhibit γ-secretase 
as uncompetitive inhibitors by binding next to the substrate, to dynamic enzyme 
structures which regulate processive catalysis. The drugs can modulate the 
production of different amyloid-β catalytic intermediates by penetration into 
the active site tunnel, to different depths, with different flexibility and 
different binding affinity. Conclusions: Biphasic drugs and pathogenic mutations 
can affect the same dynamic protein structures that control processive 
catalysis. Successful drug-design strategies must incorporate transient changes 
in the γ-secretase structure in the development of specific modulators of its 
catalytic activity.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13040514
PMCID: PMC8068388
PMID: 33917979

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.