1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Apr 7;13(4):506. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13040506.

Preparation and Preliminary Evaluation of Neurotensin Radiolabelled with (68)Ga 
and (177)Lu as Potential Theranostic Agent for Colon Cancer.

Leonte RA(1), Chilug LE(1), Șerban R(1)(2), Mustăciosu C(1), Raicu A(1), Manda 
G(3), Niculae D(1).

Author information:
(1)Radiopharmaceutical Research Centre, Horia Hulubei National Institute for 
Physics and Nuclear Engineering, 30 Reactorului Street, Măgurele, 077125 Ilfov, 
Romania.
(2)Faculty of Biology, University of Bucharest, 050095 Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Victor Babeș National Institute of Pathology, 050096 Bucharest, Romania.

The neurotensin is a tridecapeptide involved in the proliferation of colon 
cancer, the overexpression of neurotensin receptors occurring at an early stage 
development of many tumours. Targeting neurotensin receptors by using the same 
biological active molecule is an effective approach for both imaging 
quantification and treatment. The present work aimed to demonstrate the ability 
of radiolabelled neurotensin to specifically target colon cancer cells, and 
substantiate its usefulness in targeted imaging and radiotherapy, depending on 
the emission of the coupled radioisotope. Syntheses of 68Ga-DOTA-NT and 
177Lu-DOTA-NT were developed to obtain a level of quality suitable for 
preclinical use with consistent high synthesis yields. Radiochemical purity 
meets the pharmaceutical requirements, and it is maintained 4 h for 68Ga-DOTA-NT 
and 48 h for 177Lu-DOTA-NT. Extensive in vitro studies were conducted to assess 
the uptake and retention of 68Ga-DOTA-NT, the amount of non-specific binding of 
neurotensin and the effect of 177Lu-DOTA-NT on HT-29 cells. In vivo 
biodistribution of 68Ga-DOTA-NT revealed significant uptake at the tumour site, 
along with fast clearance evidenced by decreasing activity in kidneys and blood 
after 60 min p.i. 177Lu-DOTA-NT exhibited similar uptake in the tumour, but also 
a significant uptake at 14 days p.i. in the bone marrow was reported. These 
results successfully demonstrated the potential of neurotensin to deliver 
imaging/therapeutic 68Ga/177Lu radioisotopes pair, but also the need for further 
evaluation of the possible radiotoxicity effects on the liver, kidneys or bone 
marrow.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13040506
PMCID: PMC8067721
PMID: 33917046

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.