1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Apr 17;12(4):587. doi: 10.3390/genes12040587.

MTHFR C677T and A1298C Polymorphisms in Breast Cancer, Gliomas and Gastric 
Cancer: A Review.

Petrone I(1)(2), Bernardo PS(2)(3), Dos Santos EC(1)(2), Abdelhay E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Laboratory, Center for Bone Marrow Transplants, Brazilian National 
Cancer Institute-INCA, Rio de Janeiro 20230-240, Brazil.
(2)Stricto Sensu Graduate Program in Oncology, INCA, Rio de Janeiro 20230-240, 
Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Hemato-Oncology, Molecular 
Hemato-Oncology Program, Brazilian National Cancer Institute-INCA, Rio de 
Janeiro 20230-240, Brazil.

Folate (vitamin B9) is found in some water-soluble foods or as a synthetic form 
of folic acid and is involved in many essential biochemical processes. Dietary 
folate is converted into tetrahydrofolate, a vital methyl donor for most 
methylation reactions, including DNA methylation. 5,10-methylene 
tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is a critical enzyme in the folate metabolism 
pathway that converts 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate into 
5-methyltetrahydrofolate, which produces a methyl donor for the remethylation of 
homocysteine to methionine. MTHFR polymorphisms result in reduced enzyme 
activity and altered levels of DNA methylation and synthesis. MTHFR 
polymorphisms have been linked to increased risks of several pathologies, 
including cancer. Breast cancer, gliomas and gastric cancer are highly 
heterogeneous and aggressive diseases associated with high mortality rates. The 
impact of MTHFR polymorphisms on these tumors remains controversial in the 
literature. This review discusses the relationship between the MTHFR C677T and 
A1298C polymorphisms and the increased risk of breast cancer, gliomas, and 
gastric cancer. Additionally, we highlight the relevance of ethnic and dietary 
aspects of population-based studies and histological stratification of highly 
heterogeneous tumors. Finally, this review discusses these aspects as potential 
factors responsible for the controversial literature concerning MTHFR 
polymorphisms.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12040587
PMCID: PMC8073588
PMID: 33920562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest regarding this study.