1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Apr 24;22(9):4451. doi: 10.3390/ijms22094451.

Insights into the Functional Role of ADTRP (Androgen-Dependent TFPI-Regulating 
Protein) in Health and Disease.

Lupu C(1), Patel MM(2), Lupu F(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

The novel protein ADTRP, identified and described by us in 2011, is 
androgen-inducible and regulates the expression and activity of Tissue Factor 
Pathway Inhibitor, the major inhibitor of the Tissue Factor-dependent pathway of 
coagulation on endothelial cells. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms in ADTRP 
associate with coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction, and deep vein 
thrombosis/venous thromboembolism. Some athero-protective effects of androgen 
could exert through up-regulation of ADTRP expression. We discovered a critical 
role of ADTRP in vascular development and vessel integrity and function, 
manifested through Wnt signaling-dependent regulation of matrix 
metalloproteinase-9. ADTRP also hydrolyses fatty acid esters of hydroxy-fatty 
acids, which have anti-diabetic and anti-inflammatory effects and can control 
metabolic disorders. Here we summarize and analyze the knowledge on ADTRP and 
try to decipher its functions in health and disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22094451
PMCID: PMC8123165
PMID: 33923232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the article; in the collection, analyses, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision 
to publish the results.