1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2021 Apr 26;10(5):678. doi: 10.3390/antiox10050678.

Antioxidant Synergy of Mitochondrial Phospholipase PNPLA8/iPLA2γ with Fatty 
Acid-Conducting SLC25 Gene Family Transporters.

Jabůrek M(1), Průchová P(1), Holendová B(1), Galkin A(2), Ježek P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mitochondrial Physiology, Institute of Physiology of the Czech 
Academy of Sciences, Vídeňská 1084, 14220 Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Columbia University 
William Black Building, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing protein PNPLA8, also termed 
Ca2+-independent phospholipase A2γ (iPLA2γ), is addressed to the mitochondrial 
matrix (or peroxisomes), where it may manifest its unique activity to cleave 
phospholipid side-chains from both sn-1 and sn-2 positions, consequently 
releasing either saturated or unsaturated fatty acids (FAs), including oxidized 
FAs. Moreover, iPLA2γ is directly stimulated by H2O2 and, hence, is activated by 
redox signaling or oxidative stress. This redox activation permits the 
antioxidant synergy with mitochondrial uncoupling proteins (UCPs) or other SLC25 
mitochondrial carrier family members by FA-mediated protonophoretic activity, 
termed mild uncoupling, that leads to diminishing of mitochondrial superoxide 
formation. This mechanism allows for the maintenance of the steady-state redox 
status of the cell. Besides the antioxidant role, we review the relations of 
iPLA2γ to lipid peroxidation since iPLA2γ is alternatively activated by 
cardiolipin hydroperoxides and hypothetically by structural alterations of lipid 
bilayer due to lipid peroxidation. Other iPLA2γ roles include the remodeling of 
mitochondrial (or peroxisomal) membranes and the generation of specific lipid 
second messengers. Thus, for example, during FA β-oxidation in pancreatic 
β-cells, H2O2-activated iPLA2γ supplies the GPR40 metabotropic FA receptor to 
amplify FA-stimulated insulin secretion. Cytoprotective roles of iPLA2γ in the 
heart and brain are also discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox10050678
PMCID: PMC8146845
PMID: 33926059

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.