1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2021 Apr 26;10(5):493. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics10050493.

Serotyping and Antimicrobial Resistance Profile of Enteric Nontyphoidal 
Salmonella Recovered from Febrile Neutropenic Patients and Poultry in Egypt.

Youssef RA(1), Abbas AM(2), El-Shehawi AM(3), Mabrouk MI(1), Aboshanab KM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Egyptian Drug Authority (EDA), P.O. Box 11553, 
Giza 11553, Egypt.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams 
University, Organization of African Unity St., P.O. Box 11566, Cairo 11566, 
Egypt.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, College of Science, Taif University, P.O. Box 
11099, Taif 21944, Saudi Arabia.

A total of 300 human fecal samples were collected from febrile neutropenic 
patients suffering from severe gastroenteritis, followed by identification and 
serological characterization of recovered isolates. Fifty nontyphoidal 
Salmonella (NTS) serovars were recovered. A total of serologically identified 50 
NTS serovars recovered from poultry of the same geographical area and during the 
same period as well as one standard strain S. Poona were supplied by the 
Bacterial Bank of Animal Health Research Institute of Egypt. Antibiogram 
analysis revealed that the human and poultry serovars exhibited similar 
antimicrobial resistance patterns against 28 different antimicrobial agents, 
particularly against ampicillin, cefotaxime, oxytetracycline, and erythromycin. 
Plasmids harboring blaCTX-m, blaSHV, blaTEM, and aac(6')-Ib were detected in 11 
(22%) and 8 (16%) of human and poultry serovars, respectively. Molecular 
detection of the most clinically relevant virulence genes and analysis of the 
associated virulence genotypes proved that the human (n = 11) and poultry 
serovars (n = 12) shared 11 genotypes. Enterobacterial repetitive intergenic 
consensus PCR analysis revealed that human and poultry serovars were clustered 
together in 3 out of the 4 clusters with a similarity index ranged from 0.15 to 
1. Since poultry are usually consumed by humans, the presence of resistant 
bacteria harboring transmissible genetic elements is of great health concern.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics10050493
PMCID: PMC8147078
PMID: 33925773

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.