1. Nanomaterials (Basel). 2021 Apr 20;11(4):1048. doi: 10.3390/nano11041048.

Polymeric Nanoparticle Delivery of Combination Therapy with Synergistic Effects 
in Ovarian Cancer.

Levit SL(1), Tang C(1).

Author information:
(1)Chemical and Life Science Engineering Department, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond, VA 23284, USA.

Treatment of ovarian cancer is challenging due to late stage diagnosis, acquired 
drug resistance mechanisms, and systemic toxicity of chemotherapeutic agents. 
Combination chemotherapy has the potential to enhance treatment efficacy by 
activation of multiple downstream pathways to overcome drug resistance and 
reducing required dosages. Sequence of delivery and the dosing schedule can 
further enhance treatment efficacy. Formulation of drug combinations into 
nanoparticles can further enhance treatment efficacy. Due to their versatility, 
polymer-based nanoparticles are an especially promising tool for clinical 
translation of combination therapies with tunable dosing schedules. We review 
polymer nanoparticle (e.g., micelles, dendrimers, and lipid nanoparticles) 
carriers of drug combinations formulated to treat ovarian cancer. In particular, 
the focus on this review is combinations of platinum and taxane agents (commonly 
used first line treatments for ovarian cancer) combined with other small 
molecule therapeutic agents. In vitro and in vivo drug potency are discussed 
with a focus on quantifiable synergistic effects. The effect of drug sequence 
and dosing schedule is examined. Computational approaches as a tool to predict 
synergistic drug combinations and dosing schedules as a tool for future 
nanoparticle design are also briefly discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/nano11041048
PMCID: PMC8072532
PMID: 33923947

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.