1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Apr 12;18(8):4059. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18084059.

Cardiorespiratory Fitness in Volleyball Athletes Following a COVID-19 Infection: 
A Cross-Sectional Study.

Milovancev A(1), Avakumovic J(2), Lakicevic N(3), Stajer V(4), Korovljev D(4), 
Todorovic N(4), Bianco A(3), Maksimovic N(4), Ostojic S(4), Drid P(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia.
(2)Health Center "Novi Sad", 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia.
(3)Sport and Exercise Sciences Research Unit, University of Palermo, 90133 
Palermo, Italy.
(4)Faculty of Sport and Physical Education, University of Novi Sad, 21000 Novi 
Sad, Serbia.

Athletes' lifestyles have been dramatically affected by the coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Since COVID-19 primarily affects the respiratory 
system and to a lesser degree the cardiovascular system, the goal of this study 
was to examine the effects of COVID-19-caused detraining on cardiorespiratory 
fitness (CRF) of recently recovered volleyball athletes. Sixteen experienced 
volleyball athletes (age 24 ± 4.5 years) who were recently diagnosed and 
recovered from a COVID-19 infection volunteered to participate in this study and 
were tested for CRF and spirometry. Given that participants had only mild 
symptoms of infection, the primary focus of this study was on the effects of 
detraining on CRF. On average, the time to exhaustion was 9.4 ± 1.4 min. VE, 
VCO2, RER and oxygen pulse increased, heart rate exceeded 90% of predicted 
values, and peak VO2 values were typical for this level of athlete (44.1 ± 3.4 
mL/kg). Pulmonary function reflected in FVC, FEV1/FVC and MVV values were well 
above 80% of predicted values for each of the participants while 
electrocardiography revealed no ischemia, arrythmias or conduction and 
repolarization abnormalities were found in the tested subjects. Therefore, it 
can be concluded that participants experienced typical consequences of 
detraining. Due to a lack of CRF data prior to COVID-19 infection, we were 
unable to estimate the magnitude detraining had on CRF. Complete CRF assessment 
after COVID-19 infection in athletes can be useful for screening of residual 
myocardial and/or respiratory system damage for safe return-to-play decisions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18084059
PMCID: PMC8069636
PMID: 33921458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.