1. Pathogens. 2021 Apr 19;10(4):493. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10040493.

High Biofilm Formation of Non-Smooth Candida parapsilosis Correlates with 
Increased Incorporation of GPI-Modified Wall Adhesins.

Moreno-Martínez AE(1), Gómez-Molero E(1)(2), Sánchez-Virosta P(1), Dekker HL(3), 
de Boer A(1), Eraso E(4), Bader O(2), de Groot PWJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Albacete Regional Center for Biomedical Research, Castilla-La Mancha Science 
& Technology Park, University of Castilla-La Mancha, 02008 Albacete, Spain.
(2)Institute for Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Göttingen, 
Kreuzbergring 57, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Mass Spectrometry of Biomolecules, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, 
University of Amsterdam, 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Immunology, Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine 
and Nursing, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 48940 Bilbao, Spain.

Candida parapsilosis is among the most frequent causes of candidiasis. Clinical 
isolates of this species show large variations in colony morphotype, ranging 
from round and smooth to a variety of non-smooth irregular colony shapes. A 
non-smooth appearance is related to increased formation of pseudohyphae, higher 
capacity to form biofilms on abiotic surfaces, and invading agar. Here, we 
present a comprehensive study of the cell wall proteome of C. parapsilosis 
reference strain CDC317 and seven clinical isolates under planktonic and sessile 
conditions. This analysis resulted in the identification of 40 wall proteins, 
most of them homologs of known Candida albicans cell wall proteins, such as Gas, 
Crh, Bgl2, Cht2, Ecm33, Sap, Sod, Plb, Pir, Pga30, Pga59, and adhesin family 
members. Comparative analysis of exponentially growing and stationary phase 
planktonic cultures of CDC317 at 30 °C and 37 °C revealed only minor variations. 
However, comparison of smooth isolates to non-smooth isolates with high biofilm 
formation capacity showed an increase in abundance and diversity of putative 
wall adhesins from Als, Iff/Hyr, and Hwp families in the latter. This difference 
depended more strongly on strain phenotype than on the growth conditions, as it 
was observed in planktonic as well as biofilm cells. Thus, in the set of 
isolates analyzed, the high biofilm formation capacity of non-smooth C. 
parapsilosis isolates with elongated cellular phenotypes correlates with the 
increased surface expression of putative wall adhesins in accordance with their 
proposed cellular function.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10040493
PMCID: PMC8073168
PMID: 33921809

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.