1. Carbohydr Res. 2021 Jun;504:108317. doi: 10.1016/j.carres.2021.108317. Epub
2021  Apr 16.

An overview of therapeutic potential of N-alkylated 1-deoxynojirimycin 
congeners.

Iftikhar M(1), Lu Y(1), Zhou M(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science & Technology, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210094, PR China.
(2)School of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science & Technology, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210094, PR China. Electronic address: minzhou_njust@sina.com.

Polyhydroxylated alkaloids display a wide range of biological activities, 
suggesting their use in the treatment of various diseases. Their most famous 
representative, 1-deoxynojirimycin (DNJ), is a natural product that shows α- and 
β-glucosidase inhibition. This molecule has been since converted into two 
clinically approved drugs i.e., Zavesca® and Glyset®, targeting type I Gaucher's 
disease and type II diabetes mellitus, respectively. This review examines the 
therapeutic potential of important DNJ congeners reported in last decade and 
presents concise mechanism of glycosidase inhibition. A brief overview of 
substituents conjugation's impact on DNJ scaffold (including N-alkylated DNJ 
derivatives, mono-valent, di-valent and multivalent DNJ congeners, 
N-[5-(adamantan-1-yl-methoxy)-pentyl]-1-deoxynojirimycin (AMP-DNM) look alike 
DNJ based lipophilic derivatives, AMP-DNM based neoglycoconjugates, DNJ click 
derivatives with varying carboxylic acids and aromatic moieties, conjugates of 
DNJ and glucose, and N-bridged DNJ analogues) towards various enzymes such as 
α/β glucosidase, porcine trehalase, as F508del-CFTR correctors, α-mannosidase, 
human placental β-glucocerebrosidase, N370S β-GCase, α-amylase and insect 
trehalase as potent and selective inhibitors have been discussed with potential 
bioactivities, which can provide inspiration for future studies.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carres.2021.108317
PMID: 33932806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]