1. Arch Endocrinol Metab. 2021 Nov 3;65(3):328-335. doi: 
10.20945/2359-3997000000366. Epub 2021 Apr 29.

Third trimester HbA1c and the association with large-for-gestational-age 
neonates in women with gestational diabetes.

Fonseca L(1), Saraiva M(2), Amado A(2), Paredes S(3), Pichel F(4), Pinto C(5), 
Vilaverde J(2), Dores J(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Endocrinologia, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal, lilianafonsecaa@gmail.com.
(2)Departamento de Endocrinologia, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(3)Departamento de Endocrinologia, Hospital de Braga, Braga, Portugal.
(4)Departamento de Nutrição, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(5)Departamento de Ginecologia e Obstetrícia, Centro Materno-Infantil do Norte, 
Porto, Portugal.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between HbA1c levels measured in the 
third trimester and the risk for large for gestational age (LGA) in neonates of 
mothers affected by gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Secondarily, we aimed 
to identify an ideal cut-off for increased risk of LGA amongst pregnant women 
with GDM.
METHODS: Observational retrospective review of singleton pregnant women with GDM 
evaluated in a diabetes and pregnancy clinic of a tertiary and academic 
hospital. From January/2011 to December/2017, 1,085 pregnant women underwent 
evaluation due to GDM, of which 665 had an HbA1c test in the third trimester. A 
logistic regression model was performed to evaluate predictors of LGA. A 
receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC) curve was used to evaluate the 
predictive ability of third trimester HbA1c for LGA identification.
RESULTS: A total of 1,085 singleton pregnant women were evaluated during the 
study period, with a mean age of 32.9 ± 5.3 years. In the multivariate analysis, 
OGTT at 0 minutes (OR: 1.040; CI 95% 1.006-1.076, p = 0.022) and third trimester 
HbA1c (OR: 4.680; CI 95% 1.210-18.107, p = 0.025) were associated with LGA 
newborns. Using a ROC curve to evaluate the predictive ability of third 
trimester HbA1c for LGA identification, the optimal HbA1c cut-off point was 5.4% 
where the sensitivity was 77.4% and the specificity was 71.7% (AUC 0.782; p < 
0.001).
CONCLUSION: Few studies in the Mediterranean population have evaluated the role 
of HbA1c in predicting neonatal complications in women with GDM. A third 
trimester HbA1c > 5.4% was found to have good sensitivity and specificity for 
identifying the risk of LGA.

DOI: 10.20945/2359-3997000000366
PMCID: PMC10065336
PMID: 33939909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: no potential conflict of interest 
relevant to this article was reported.