1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Apr 14;8:613295. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.613295. 
eCollection 2021.

The Genetic Pathways Underlying Immunotherapy in Dilated Cardiomyopathy.

Kadhi A(1), Mohammed F(1), Nemer G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genomics and Translational Biomedicine, College of Health and 
Life Sciences, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, 
American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.

Heart failure (HF) is a global public health threat affecting 26 million 
individuals worldwide with an estimated prevalence increase of 46% by 2030. One 
of the main causes of HF and sudden death in children and adult is Dilated 
Cardiomyopathy (DCM). DCM is characterized by dilation and systolic dysfunction 
of one or both ventricles. It has an underlying genetic basis or can develop 
subsequent to various etiologies that cause myocardium inflammation (secondary 
causes). The morbidity and mortality rates of DCM remains high despite recent 
advancement to manage the disease. New insights have been dedicated to better 
understand the pathogenesis of DCM in respect to genetic and inflammatory basis 
by linking the two entities together. This cognizance in the field of cardiology 
might have an innovative approach to manage DCM through targeted treatment 
directed to the causative etiology. The following review summarizes the 
genetical and inflammatory causes underlying DCM and the pathways of the novel 
precision-medicine-based immunomodulatory strategies to salvage and prevent the 
associated heart failure linked to the disease.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kadhi, Mohammed and Nemer.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.613295
PMCID: PMC8079649
PMID: 33937353

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.