1. Front Genet. 2021 Apr 14;12:634217. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.634217.
eCollection  2021.

Germline Structural Variations in Cancer Predisposition Genes.

Pócza T(1), Grolmusz VK(1)(2), Papp J(1)(2), Butz H(1)(2)(3), Patócs A(1)(2)(3), 
Bozsik A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Oncology, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(2)Hereditary Cancers Research Group, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Semmelweis 
University, Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

In addition to single nucleotide variations and small-scale indels, structural 
variations (SVs) also contribute to the genetic diversity of the genome. SVs, 
such as deletions, duplications, amplifications, or inversions may also affect 
coding regions of cancer-predisposing genes. These rearrangements may abrogate 
the open reading frame of these genes or adversely affect their expression and 
may thus act as germline mutations in hereditary cancer syndromes. With the 
capacity of disrupting the function of tumor suppressors, structural variations 
confer an increased risk of cancer and account for a remarkable fraction of 
heritability. The development of sequencing techniques enables the discovery of 
a constantly growing number of SVs of various types in cancer predisposition 
genes (CPGs). Here, we provide a comprehensive review of the landscape of 
germline SV types, detection methods, pathomechanisms, and frequency in CPGs, 
focusing on the two most common cancer syndromes: hereditary breast- and ovarian 
cancer and gastrointestinal cancers. Current knowledge about the possible 
molecular mechanisms driving to SVs is also summarized.

Copyright © 2021 Pócza, Grolmusz, Papp, Butz, Patócs and Bozsik.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.634217
PMCID: PMC8081352
PMID: 33936164

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.