1. Front Immunol. 2021 Apr 16;12:659659. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.659659. 
eCollection 2021.

SAMD9 Is Relating With M2 Macrophage and Remarkable Malignancy Characters in 
Low-Grade Glioma.

Ma W(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhang K(1), Bao Z(2)(5), Jiang T(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhang 
Y(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuropathology, Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Center of Brain Tumor, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing, China.
(4)China National Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases, Beijing, 
China.
(5)Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas Network (CGGA) and Asian Glioma Genome Atlas 
Network (AGGA), Beijing, China.

Immunoreactions regulated by TAMs (Tumor-associated macrophages) play a pivotal 
role in tumorigenesis and metastasis. In recent decades, treatments based on 
immune regulation have achieved revolutionary breakthroughs in cancer targeted 
therapies. The phenotypes of TAMs in gliomas are more heterogeneous and 
inherently complex than can be simply defined by classification into the M1 and 
M2 polarized states. The detailed mechanisms surrounding infiltrating macrophage 
phenotype and glioma characteristics remain undefined. SAMD9 (Sterile Alpha 
Motif Domain-Containing Protein 9) was found to be highly expressed in glioma 
and closely related to histological and genetic features in CGGA and TCGA 
databases. Simultaneously, we present evidence to show that there was a positive 
association between SAMD9 and malignancy characters in LGG. Univariable and 
Multivariate proportional hazard Cox analysis showed that SAMD9 was an 
independent prognostic factor for LGG. Surprisingly, Gene Ontology (GO) analysis 
showed SAMD9 expression level was remarkably well correlated with immunological 
responses and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis 
supported the connection with immune responses and tumorigenesis. Immune 
infiltration analysis demonstrated that high SAMD9 expression resulted in an 
accumulation of macrophages by CIBERSORT and TIMER databases, especially 
positively related to macrophage total marker gene AIF1 and Macrophage M2 marker 
gene CD163. IHC staining further indicated a high correlation of SAMD9 with 
those specific macrophage markers in the immune response. Human THP-1 cells were 
induced into M2 macrophages, which were then co-cultured with LN229 cells. 
Silencing of SAMD9 by shRNA in LN229 cells attenuated the infiltration abilities 
of M2 macrophage. SAMD9 explored immune response via relating of M2 macrophage 
in vitro. Our results revealed SAMD9 acted as the malignancy characters in LGG, 
enrichment with M2 macrophage.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ma, Zhang, Bao, Jiang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.659659
PMCID: PMC8085496
PMID: 33936093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.