1. Front Neural Circuits. 2021 Apr 16;15:637638. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2021.637638. 
eCollection 2021.

Dark Rearing Promotes the Recovery of Visual Cortical Responses but Not the 
Morphology of Geniculocortical Axons in Amblyopic Cat.

Gotou T(1), Kameyama K(1)(2), Kobayashi A(1), Okamura K(1), Ando T(2), Terata 
K(1), Yamada C(1), Ohta H(1), Morizane A(2), Hata Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Integrative Bioscience, Tottori University Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, Yonago, Japan.
(2)Division of Neuroscience, School of Life Science, Faculty of Medicine, 
Tottori University, Yonago, Japan.

Monocular deprivation (MD) of vision during early postnatal life induces 
amblyopia, and most neurons in the primary visual cortex lose their responses to 
the closed eye. Anatomically, the somata of neurons in the closed-eye recipient 
layer of the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) shrink and their axons projecting 
to the visual cortex retract. Although it has been difficult to restore visual 
acuity after maturation, recent studies in rodents and cats showed that a period 
of exposure to complete darkness could promote recovery from amblyopia induced 
by prior MD. However, in cats, which have an organization of central visual 
pathways similar to humans, the effect of dark rearing only improves monocular 
vision and does not restore binocular depth perception. To determine whether 
dark rearing can completely restore the visual pathway, we examined its effect 
on the three major concomitants of MD in individual visual neurons, eye 
preference of visual cortical neurons and soma size and axon morphology of LGN 
neurons. Dark rearing improved the recovery of visual cortical responses to the 
closed eye compared with the recovery under binocular conditions. However, 
geniculocortical axons serving the closed eye remained retracted after dark 
rearing, whereas reopening the closed eye restored the soma size of LGN neurons. 
These results indicate that dark rearing incompletely restores the visual 
pathway, and thus exerts a limited restorative effect on visual function.

Copyright Â© 2021 Gotou, Kameyama, Kobayashi, Okamura, Ando, Terata, Yamada, 
Ohta, Morizane and Hata.

DOI: 10.3389/fncir.2021.637638
PMCID: PMC8085520
PMID: 33935657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.