1. Clin Genet. 2021 Aug;100(2):219-226. doi: 10.1111/cge.13976. Epub 2021 Jun 9.

Molecular diagnosis for 55 fetuses with skeletal dysplasias by whole-exome 
sequencing: A retrospective cohort study.

Zhang L(1), Pan L(1), Teng Y(1), Liang D(1)(2), Li Z(1), Wu L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics & Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, 
School of life sciences, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)Hunan Jiahui Genetics Hospital, Changsha, Hunan, China.

Skeletal dysplasias (SDs) are common birth defects, but they are difficult to 
diagnose accurately according to only the limited phenotypic information 
available from ultrasound during the pregnancy. To evaluate the application of 
whole-exome sequencing (WES) and expand the data in the prenatal molecular 
diagnosis of fetuses with SDs, we collected 55 fetuses with SDs based on 
ultrasonographic features. WES of the fetuses or parent-fetus trio were 
subjected to sequential tests and produced a diagnostic yield of 64% (35/55). 
65% (11/17) of families with a history of adverse pregnancies were diagnosed, 16 
genes were involved and 37 different pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants 
were identified, including 14 novel variants, which were first reported in this 
study. De novo variants were identified in 21 cases (60%, 21/35) among the 
fetuses with a genetic diagnosis. The pathogenicity of two novel splice-site 
variants was confirmed by constructing minigene in vitro. Our results revealed 
that WES can provide new evidence for the relationship between the genotype and 
phenotype of fetuses with SDs, as well as broaden the mutation spectrum of 
detected genes, which is significant for prenatal diagnosis and genetic 
counseling.

Â© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13976
PMID: 33942288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]