1. Hum Mutat. 2021 Jul;42(7):799-810. doi: 10.1002/humu.24212. Epub 2021 May 20.

Benchmarking deep learning splice prediction tools using functional splice 
assays.

Riepe TV(1)(2), Khan M(2), Roosing S(2), Cremers FPM(2), 't Hoen PAC(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for 
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Human Genetics and Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behavior, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Hereditary disorders are frequently caused by genetic variants that affect 
pre-messenger RNA splicing. Though genetic variants in the canonical splice 
motifs are almost always disrupting splicing, the pathogenicity of variants in 
the noncanonical splice sites (NCSS) and deep intronic (DI) regions are 
difficult to predict. Multiple splice prediction tools have been developed for 
this purpose, with the latest tools employing deep learning algorithms. We 
benchmarked established and deep learning splice prediction tools on published 
gold standard sets of 71 NCSS and 81 DI variants in the ABCA4 gene and 61 NCSS 
variants in the MYBPC3 gene with functional assessment in midigene and minigene 
splice assays. The selection of splice prediction tools included CADD, DSSP, 
GeneSplicer, MaxEntScan, MMSplice, NNSPLICE, SPIDEX, SpliceAI, SpliceRover, and 
SpliceSiteFinder-like. The best-performing splice prediction tool for the 
different variants was SpliceRover for ABCA4 NCSS variants, SpliceAI for ABCA4 
DI variants, and the Alamut 3/4 consensus approach (GeneSplicer, MaxEntScacn, 
NNSPLICE and SpliceSiteFinder-like) for NCSS variants in MYBPC3 based on the 
area under the receiver operator curve. Overall, the performance in a real-time 
clinical setting is much more modest than reported by the developers of the 
tools.

© 2021 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24212
PMCID: PMC8360004
PMID: 33942434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no 
conflict of interests.