1. Front Immunol. 2021 Apr 19;12:624324. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.624324. 
eCollection 2021.

Targeting SLC1A5 and SLC3A2/SLC7A5 as a Potential Strategy to Strengthen 
Anti-Tumor Immunity in the Tumor Microenvironment.

Nachef M(1)(2), Ali AK(1), Almutairi SM(1)(3), Lee SH(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Botany and Microbiology Department, College of Sciences, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)The University of Ottawa Centre for Infection, Immunity, and Inflammation, 
Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Cancer cells are metabolically vigorous and are superior in the uptake of 
nutrients and in the release of the tumor microenvironment (TME)-specific 
metabolites. They create an acidic, hypoxic, and nutrient-depleted TME that 
makes it difficult for the cytotoxic immune cells to adapt to the metabolically 
hostile environment. Since a robust metabolism in immune cells is required for 
optimal anti-tumor effector functions, the challenges caused by the TME result 
in severe defects in the invasion and destruction of the established tumors. 
There have been many recent developments in NK and T cell-mediated 
immunotherapy, such as engineering them to express chimeric antigen receptors 
(CARs) to enhance tumor-recognition and infiltration. However, to defeat the 
tumor and overcome the limitations of the TME, it is essential to fortify these 
novel therapies by improving the metabolism of the immune cells. One potential 
strategy to enhance the metabolic fitness of immune cells is to upregulate the 
expression of nutrient transporters, specifically glucose and amino acid 
transporters. In particular, the amino acid transporters SLC1A5 and SLC7A5 as 
well as the ancillary subunit SLC3A2, which are required for efficient uptake of 
glutamine and leucine respectively, could strengthen the metabolic capabilities 
and effector functions of tumor-directed CAR-NK and T cells. In addition to 
enabling the influx and efflux of essential amino acids through the plasma 
membrane and within subcellular compartments such as the lysosome and the 
mitochondria, accumulating evidence has demonstrated that the amino acid 
transporters participate in sensing amino acid levels and thereby activate 
mTORC1, a master metabolic regulator that promotes cell metabolism, and induce 
the expression of c-Myc, a transcription factor essential for cell growth and 
proliferation. In this review, we discuss the regulatory pathways of these amino 
acid transporters and how we can take advantage of these processes to strengthen 
immunotherapy against cancer.

Copyright Â© 2021 Nachef, Ali, Almutairi and Lee.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.624324
PMCID: PMC8089370
PMID: 33953707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.