1. Sci Adv. 2021 May 5;7(19):eabd9450. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abd9450. Print 2021
May.

Electrochemically controlled metasurfaces with high-contrast switching at 
visible frequencies.

Kaissner R(1), Li J(2), Lu W(3), Li X(4), Neubrech F(1), Wang J(5), Liu N(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)2nd Physics Institute, University of Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, 70569 
Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstrasse 1, 70569 
Stuttgart, Germany. jxli@is.mpg.de jfwang@phy.cuhk.edu.hk 
na.liu@pi2.uni-stuttgart.de.
(3)Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong 
SAR, China.
(4)School of Optics and Photonics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 
100081, China.
(5)Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong 
SAR, China. jxli@is.mpg.de jfwang@phy.cuhk.edu.hk na.liu@pi2.uni-stuttgart.de.
(6)2nd Physics Institute, University of Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, 70569 
Stuttgart, Germany. jxli@is.mpg.de jfwang@phy.cuhk.edu.hk 
na.liu@pi2.uni-stuttgart.de.
(7)Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstrasse 1, 70569 
Stuttgart, Germany.

Recently in nanophotonics, a rigorous evolution from passive to active 
metasurfaces has been witnessed. This advancement not only brings forward 
interesting physical phenomena but also elicits opportunities for practical 
applications. However, active metasurfaces operating at visible frequencies 
often exhibit low performance due to design and fabrication restrictions at the 
nanoscale. In this work, we demonstrate electrochemically controlled 
metasurfaces with high intensity contrast, fast switching rate, and excellent 
reversibility at visible frequencies. We use a conducting polymer, polyaniline 
(PANI), that can be locally conjugated on preselected gold nanorods to actively 
control the phase profiles of the metasurfaces. The optical responses of the 
metasurfaces can be in situ monitored and optimized by controlling the PANI 
growth of subwavelength dimension during the electrochemical process. We 
showcase electrochemically controlled anomalous transmission and holography with 
good switching performance. Such electrochemically powered optical metasurfaces 
lay a solid basis to develop metasurface devices for real-world optical 
applications.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 
4.0 (CC BY-NC).

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abd9450
PMCID: PMC8099187
PMID: 33952513