1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Apr 16;12:658734. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.658734. 
eCollection 2021.

Clozapine Metabolism is Associated With Absolute Neutrophil Count in Individuals 
With Treatment-Resistant Schizophrenia.

Willcocks IR(1), Legge SE(1), Nalmpanti M(1), Mazzeo L(2), King A(3), Jansen 
J(4), Helthuis M(4), Owen MJ(1), O'Donovan MC(1), Walters JTR(1), Pardiñas 
AF(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Division of 
Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(2)Hafan y Coed Mental Health Unit, University Hospital of Llandough, Cardiff, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Magna Laboratories Ltd., Ross-on-Wye, United Kingdom.
(4)Leyden Delta B.V., Nijmegen, Netherlands.

Up to one-third of those with schizophrenia fail to respond to standard 
antipsychotics and are considered to have treatment-resistant schizophrenia, a 
condition for which clozapine is the only evidence-based medication. While up to 
60% of treated individuals obtain therapeutic benefits from clozapine, it is 
currently underprescribed worldwide, partly because of concerns related to its 
broad adverse effect profile. In particular, the potential effects of clozapine 
on the immune system have gained relevance after a recent study showed that drug 
plasma concentrations were inversely correlated with neutrophil counts in 
individuals routinely undergoing treatment. Seeking to investigate this 
relationship in more detail, we extracted metabolic, immune, and genetic data 
from a UK cohort of long-term clozapine users linked to a clozapine monitoring 
service, CLOZUK2 (N = 208). Whilst a correlation analysis was compatible with 
the original results, a multiple linear regression accounting for dose and other 
confounding factors additionally allowed us to estimate the decrease in absolute 
neutrophil counts to approximately 141 cells/mm3 for every 0.1 mg/L increase in 
clozapine concentration. However, this association was attenuated after 
controlling for the metabolic ratio between clozapine and its main metabolite, 
norclozapine, which was itself negatively associated with neutrophil 
concentrations. Further analyses revealed that these relationships are likely 
moderated by genetic factors, as three pharmacogenomic SNPs previously 
associated to norclozapine plasma concentrations and the metabolic ratio 
(rs61750900, rs2011425 and rs1126545) were shown to be independently associated 
with a variation in neutrophil counts of about 400 cells/mm3 per effect allele. 
Such results are compatible with an effect of norclozapine, but not necessarily 
clozapine, on immune cell counts, and highlight the need for further 
investigations into the potential role of genetic determinants of clozapine 
pharmacokinetics in the occurrence of adverse effects during treatment.

Copyright © 2021 Willcocks, Legge, Nalmpanti, Mazzeo, King, Jansen, Helthuis, 
Owen, O’Donovan, Walters and Pardiñas.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.658734
PMCID: PMC8094024
PMID: 33959025

Conflict of interest statement: MH and JJ were employed by the company Leyden 
Delta. AK was employed by the company Magna Laboratories. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.