1. Sci Rep. 2021 May 5;11(1):9561. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-88965-3.

Adenosine-related small molecules show utility of recall antigen assay to screen 
compounds for off-target effects on memory T cells.

Kleiman E(1)(2), Sierra G(3)(4), Mao B(5), Magcase D(3), George MV(3), Daftarian 
PM(3).

Author information:
(1)JSR Life Sciences, 1280 North Mathilda Avenue, Sunnyvale, CA, 94089, USA. 
ekleiman@jsrlifesciences.com.
(2)Crown Bioscience Inc., 16550 W Bernardo Dr Building 5, Suite 525, San Diego, 
CA, 92127, USA. ekleiman@jsrlifesciences.com.
(3)JSR Life Sciences, 1280 North Mathilda Avenue, Sunnyvale, CA, 94089, USA.
(4)Department of Thoracic Head and Neck Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, The University of Texas, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Houston, TX, 77005, USA.
(5)Crown Bioscience Inc, Room 303, Building A6, No. 218, Xinghu Street, 
Industrial Park, Suzhou, 215000, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China.

Extracellular adenosine suppresses T cell immunity in the tumor microenvironment 
and in vitro treatment of memory T cells with adenosine can suppress 
antigen-mediated memory T cell expansion. We describe utilizing the recall 
antigen assay platform to screen small molecule drug off-target effects on 
memory T cell expansion/function using a dosing regimen based on adenosine 
treatment. As a proof of principle, we show low dose GS-5734, a 
monophosphoramidate prodrug of an adenosine analog, does not alter memory T cell 
recall at lower doses whereas toxicity observed at high dose favors 
antigen-specific memory T cell survival/proliferation over non-specific CD8+ T 
cells. Conversely, parent nucleoside GS-441524 at high dosage does not result in 
cellular toxicity and reduces antigen-specific T cell recall in most donors. 
Despite similar chemical structure, these drugs displayed opposing effects on 
memory T cell expansion and viability highlighting the sensitivity of this assay 
setup in screening compounds for off-target effects.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-88965-3
PMCID: PMC8100288
PMID: 33953256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.