1. Microb Genom. 2021 May;7(5):000571. doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.000571.

Characterization of beta-lactam-resistant Escherichia coli from Australian fruit 
bats indicates anthropogenic origins.

McDougall FK(1), Boardman WSJ(2), Power ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, NSW 2109, Australia.
(2)School of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 
SA 5371, Australia.

Antimicrobial-resistant Escherichia coli, particularly those resistant to 
critically important antimicrobials, are increasingly reported in wildlife. The 
dissemination of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria to wildlife indicates the 
far-reaching impact of selective pressures imposed by humans on bacteria through 
misuse of antimicrobials. The grey-headed flying fox (GHFF; Pteropus 
poliocephalus), a fruit bat endemic to eastern Australia, commonly inhabits 
urban environments and encounters human microbial pollution. To determine if 
GHFF have acquired human-associated bacteria, faecal samples from wild GHFF 
(n=287) and captive GHFF undergoing rehabilitation following illness or injury 
(n=31) were cultured to detect beta-lactam-resistant E. coli. Antimicrobial 
susceptibility testing, PCR and whole genome sequencing were used to determine 
phenotypic and genotypic antimicrobial resistance profiles, strain type and 
virulence factor profiles. Overall, 3.8 % of GHFF carried amoxicillin-resistant 
E. coli (wild 3.5 % and captive 6.5 %), with 38.5 % of the 13 GHFF E. coli 
isolates exhibiting multidrug resistance. Carbapenem (blaNDM-5) and 
fluoroquinolone resistance were detected in one E. coli isolate, and two 
isolates were resistant to third-generation cephalosporins (blaCTX-M-27 and 
ampC). Resistance to tetracycline and trimethoprim plus sulfamethoxazole were 
detected in 69.2% and 30.8 % of isolates respectively. Class 1 integrons, a 
genetic determinant of resistance, were detected in 38.5 % of isolates. Nine of 
the GHFF isolates (69.2 %) harboured extraintestinal virulence factors. 
Phylogenetic analysis placed the 13 GHFF isolates in lineages associated with 
humans and/or domestic animals. Three isolates were human-associated 
extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli (ST10 O89:H9, ST73 and ST394) and seven 
isolates belonged to lineages associated with extraintestinal disease in both 
humans and domestic animals (ST88, ST117, ST131, ST155 complex, ST398 and 
ST1850). This study provides evidence of anthropogenic multidrug-resistant and 
pathogenic E. coli transmission to wildlife, further demonstrating the necessity 
for incorporating wildlife surveillance within the One Health approach to 
managing antimicrobial resistance.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.000571
PMCID: PMC8209733
PMID: 33950805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.