1. Mol Vis. 2021 Apr 28;27:191-205. eCollection 2021.

Differences in activation of intracellular signaling in primary human retinal 
endothelial cells between isoforms of VEGFA 165.

Dailey W(1), Shunemann R(1), Yang F(1), Moore M(1), Knapp A(1), Chen P(1), 
Deshpande M(1), Metcalf B(1), Tompkins Q(1), Guzman AE(1), Felisky J(1), Mitton 
KP(1).

Author information:
(1)Eye Research Institute, Oakland University, Rochester, MI.

PURPOSE: There are reports that a b-isoform of vascular endothelial growth 
factor-A 165 (VEGFA165b) is predominant in normal human vitreous, switching to 
the a-isoform (VEGFA165a) in the vitreous of some diseased eyes. Although these 
isoforms appear to have a different ability to activate the VEGF receptor 2 
(VEGFR2) in various endothelial cells, the nature of their ability to activate 
intracellular signaling pathways is not fully characterized, especially in 
retinal endothelial cells. We determined their activation potential for two key 
intracellular signaling pathways (MAPK, AKT) over complete dose-response curves 
and compared potential effects on the expression of several VEGFA165 target 
genes in primary human retinal microvascular endothelial cells (HRMECs).
METHODS: To determine full dose-response curves for the activation of MAPK 
(ERK1/2), AKT, and VEGFR2, direct in-cell western assays were developed using 
primary HRMECs. Potential differences in dose-response effects on gene 
expression markers related to endothelial cell and leukocyte adhesion (ICAM1, 
VCAM1, and SELE) and tight junctions (CLDN5 and OCLN) were tested with 
quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: Activation dose-response analysis revealed much stronger activation of 
MAPK, AKT, and VEGFR2 by the a-isoform at lower doses. MAPK activation in 
primary HRMECs displayed a sigmoidal dose-response to a range of VEGFA 165 a 
concentrations spanning 10-250 pM, which shifted higher into the 100-5,000 pM 
range with VEGFA 165 b. Similar maximum activation of MAPK was achieved by both 
isoforms at high concentrations. Maximum activation of AKT by VEGFA 165 b was 
only half of the maximum activation from VEGFA 165 a. At a lower intermediate 
dose, where VEGFA 165 a activated intracellular signaling stronger than VEGFA 
165 b, the changes in VEGFA target gene expression were generally greater with 
VEGFA 165 a.
CONCLUSIONS: In primary HRMECs, VEGFA 165 a could maximally activate MAPK and 
AKT at lower concentrations where VEGFA 165 b had relatively little effect. The 
timing for maximum activation of MAPK was similar for the isoforms, which is 
different from that reported for non-retinal endothelial cells. Although 
differences in VEGFA 165 a and VEGFA 165 b are limited to the sequence of their 
six C-terminal six amino acids, this results in a large difference in their 
ability to activate at least two key intracellular signaling pathways and 
VEGF-target gene expression in primary human retinal endothelial cells.

Copyright © 2021 Molecular Vision.

PMCID: PMC8092446
PMID: 33953532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]