1. Development. 2021 May 1;148(9):dev199418. doi: 10.1242/dev.199418. Epub 2021
May  7.

Environmental oxygen regulates astrocyte proliferation to guide angiogenesis 
during retinal development.

Perelli RM(1)(2), O'Sullivan ML(2)(3), Zarnick S(1)(2), Kay JN(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 
27710, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 
27710, USA.
(3)Ophthalmology Residency Program, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, 
NC 27710, USA.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 
27710, USA.

Angiogenesis in the developing mammalian retina requires patterning cues from 
astrocytes. Developmental disorders of retinal vasculature, such as retinopathy 
of prematurity (ROP), involve arrest or mispatterning of angiogenesis. Whether 
these vascular pathologies involve astrocyte dysfunction remains untested. Here, 
we demonstrate that the major risk factor for ROP - transient neonatal exposure 
to excess oxygen - disrupts formation of the angiogenic astrocyte template. 
Exposing newborn mice to elevated oxygen (75%) suppressed astrocyte 
proliferation, whereas return to room air (21% oxygen) at postnatal day 4 
triggered extensive proliferation, massively increasing astrocyte numbers and 
disturbing their spatial patterning prior to the arrival of developing 
vasculature. Proliferation required astrocytic HIF2α and was also stimulated by 
direct hypoxia (10% oxygen), suggesting that astrocyte oxygen sensing regulates 
the number of astrocytes produced during development. Along with astrocyte 
defects, return to room air also caused vascular defects reminiscent of ROP. 
Strikingly, these vascular phenotypes were more severe in animals that had 
larger numbers of excess astrocytes. Together, our findings suggest that 
fluctuations in environmental oxygen dysregulate molecular pathways controlling 
astrocyte proliferation, thereby generating excess astrocytes that interfere 
with retinal angiogenesis.

© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.199418
PMCID: PMC8126409
PMID: 33960384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.