1. Theor Appl Genet. 2021 Jul;134(7):1867-1897. doi: 10.1007/s00122-021-03824-z. 
Epub 2021 May 9.

Major flowering time genes of barley: allelic diversity, effects, and comparison 
with wheat.

Fernández-Calleja M(1), Casas AM(1), Igartua E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Plant Production, Aula Dei Experimental Station, 
EEAD-CSIC, Avenida Montañana, 1005, 50059, Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Department of Genetics and Plant Production, Aula Dei Experimental Station, 
EEAD-CSIC, Avenida Montañana, 1005, 50059, Zaragoza, Spain. 
igartua@eead.csic.es.

This review summarizes the allelic series, effects, interactions between genes 
and with the environment, for the major flowering time genes that drive 
phenological adaptation of barley. The optimization of phenology is a major goal 
of plant breeding addressing the production of high-yielding varieties adapted 
to changing climatic conditions. Flowering time in cereals is regulated by 
genetic networks that respond predominately to day length and temperature. 
Allelic diversity at these genes is at the basis of barley wide adaptation. 
Detailed knowledge of their effects, and genetic and environmental interactions 
will facilitate plant breeders manipulating flowering time in cereal germplasm 
enhancement, by exploiting appropriate gene combinations. This review describes 
a catalogue of alleles found in QTL studies by barley geneticists, corresponding 
to the genetic diversity at major flowering time genes, the main drivers of 
barley phenological adaptation: VRN-H1 (HvBM5A), VRN-H2 (HvZCCTa-c), VRN-H3 
(HvFT1), PPD-H1 (HvPRR37), PPD-H2 (HvFT3), and eam6/eps2 (HvCEN). For each gene, 
allelic series, size and direction of QTL effects, interactions between genes 
and with the environment are presented. Pleiotropic effects on agronomically 
important traits such as grain yield are also discussed. The review includes 
brief comments on additional genes with large effects on phenology that became 
relevant in modern barley breeding. The parallelisms between flowering time 
allelic variation between the two most cultivated Triticeae species (barley and 
wheat) are also outlined. This work is mostly based on previously published 
data, although we added some new data and hypothesis supported by a number of 
studies. This review shows the wide variety of allelic effects that provide 
enormous plasticity in barley flowering behavior, which opens new avenues to 
breeders for fine-tuning phenology of the barley crop.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-021-03824-z
PMCID: PMC8263424
PMID: 33969431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.