1. Cell Rep. 2021 May 11;35(6):109094. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109094.

Dynamic modulation of spleen germinal center reactions by gut bacteria during 
Plasmodium infection.

Mandal RK(1), Denny JE(2), Namazzi R(3), Opoka RO(3), Datta D(4), John CC(4), 
Schmidt NW(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY 40202, USA; Ryan White Center for Pediatric Infectious Diseases 
and Global Health, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department of 
Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY 40202, USA.
(3)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Makerere University, Kampala, 
Uganda.
(4)Ryan White Center for Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Global Health, Herman 
B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY 40202, USA; Ryan White Center for Pediatric Infectious Diseases 
and Global Health, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department of 
Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. 
Electronic address: nwschmid@iu.edu.

Comment in
    Trends Parasitol. 2021 Oct;37(10):853-855. doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2021.07.007.

Gut microbiota educate the local and distal immune system in early life to 
imprint long-term immunological outcomes while maintaining the capacity to 
dynamically modulate the local mucosal immune system throughout life. It is 
unknown whether gut microbiota provide signals that dynamically regulate distal 
immune responses following an extra-gastrointestinal infection. We show here 
that gut bacteria composition correlated with the severity of malaria in 
children. Using the murine model of malaria, we demonstrate that parasite burden 
and spleen germinal center reactions are malleable to dynamic cues provided by 
gut bacteria. Whereas antibiotic-induced changes in gut bacteria have been 
associated with immunopathology or impairment of immunity, the data demonstrate 
that antibiotic-induced changes in gut bacteria can enhance immunity to 
Plasmodium. This effect is not universal but depends on baseline gut bacteria 
composition. These data demonstrate the dynamic communications that exist among 
gut bacteria, the gut-distal immune system, and control of Plasmodium infection.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109094
PMCID: PMC8141963
PMID: 33979614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.