1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 May 12;17(5):e1008977. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008977.  eCollection 2021 May.

Swarm: A federated cloud framework for large-scale variant analysis.

Bahmani A(1)(2)(3), Ferriter K(2)(3), Krishnan V(2)(3), Alavi A(2)(3), Alavi 
A(2)(3), Tsao PS(4)(5), Snyder MP(1)(2)(3), Pan C(5).

Author information:
(1)Stanford Healthcare Innovation Lab, Stanford University, California, United 
States of America.
(2)Stanford Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Stanford University, 
California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, California, United States of 
America.
(4)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University, California, United 
States of America.
(5)Palo Alto Epidemiology Research and Information Center for Genomics, VA Palo 
Alto, California, United States of America.

Genomic data analysis across multiple cloud platforms is an ongoing challenge, 
especially when large amounts of data are involved. Here, we present Swarm, a 
framework for federated computation that promotes minimal data motion and 
facilitates crosstalk between genomic datasets stored on various cloud 
platforms. We demonstrate its utility via common inquiries of genomic variants 
across BigQuery in the Google Cloud Platform (GCP), Athena in the Amazon Web 
Services (AWS), Apache Presto and MySQL. Compared to single-cloud platforms, the 
Swarm framework significantly reduced computational costs, run-time delays and 
risks of security breach and privacy violation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008977
PMCID: PMC8143397
PMID: 33979321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journalâ€™s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: MPS is the Cofounder 
and SAB member of Personalis, Mirvie, SensOmics, Qbio, January, Oralome, 
Filtricine, Protos; SAB of Genapsys, Jupiter.