1. J Radiat Res. 2021 May 5;62(Supplement_1):i44-i52. doi: 10.1093/jrr/rrab009.

Implications of the germline variants of DNA damage response genes detected by 
cancer precision medicine for radiological risk communication and cancer therapy 
decisions.

Hosoya N(1), Miyagawa K(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Radiology, Center for Disease Biology and Integrative 
Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Large-scale cancer-associated gene testing is now being rapidly incorporated 
into clinical settings, and is leading to incidental identification of the 
germline variants present in cancer patients. Because many cancer susceptibility 
genes are related to DNA damage response and repair, the variants may reflect 
not only the susceptibility to cancer but also the genetically defined radiation 
sensitivity of the patients and their relatives. When the presence of a certain 
germline variant increases the risk for developing radiation toxicity or 
radiation-induced secondary cancers, it will greatly influence the clinical 
decision-making. In order to achieve optimal radiological risk communication and 
to select the best cancer management for a given patient based on information 
from gene testing, healthcare professionals including genetic counselors, risk 
communicators and clinicians need to increase their knowledge of the health 
effects of various genetic variants. While germline loss-of-function mutations 
in both of the alleles of the DNA damage response genes cause rare hereditary 
diseases characterized by extreme hypersensitivity to radiation, the health 
effects of the carriers who have germline variants in one allele of such genes 
would be a matter of debate, especially when the significance of the variants is 
currently unknown. In this review, we describe the clinical significance of the 
genetic variants of the important DNA damage response genes, including ATM and 
TP53, and discuss how we can apply current knowledge to the management of cancer 
patients and their relatives from a radiological point of view.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Japanese Radiation Research Society and Japanese Society for Radiation Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/jrr/rrab009
PMCID: PMC8114223
PMID: 33978181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]