1. PLoS Genet. 2021 May 13;17(5):e1009513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009513. 
eCollection 2021 May.

To "Z" or not to "Z": Z-RNA, self-recognition, and the MDA5 helicase.

Herbert A(1).

Author information:
(1)Discovery, InsideOutBio, Charlestown, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.

Comment in
    RNA editing at a limited number of sites is sufficient to prevent MDA5 
activation in the mouse brain.

Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is produced both by virus and host. Its recognition 
by the melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) initiates type I 
interferon responses. How can a host distinguish self-transcripts from nonself 
to ensure that responses are targeted correctly? Here, I discuss a role for MDA5 
helicase in inducing Z-RNA formation by Alu inverted repeat (AIR) elements. 
These retroelements have highly conserved sequences that favor Z-formation, 
creating a site for the dsRNA-specific deaminase enzyme ADAR1 to dock. The 
subsequent editing destabilizes the dsRNA, ending further interaction with MDA5 
and terminating innate immune responses directed against self. By enabling 
self-recognition, Alu retrotransposons, once invaders, now are genetic elements 
that keep immune responses in check. I also discuss the possible but less 
characterized roles of the other helicases in modulating innate immune 
responses, focusing on DExH-box helicase 9 (DHX9) and Mov10 RISC complex RNA 
helicase (MOV10). DHX9 and MOV10 function differently from MDA5, but still use 
nucleic acid structure, rather than nucleotide sequence, to define self. Those 
genetic elements encoding the alternative conformations involved, referred to as 
flipons, enable helicases to dynamically shape a cell's repertoire of responses. 
In the case of MDA5, Alu flipons switch off the dsRNA-dependent responses 
against self. I suggest a number of genetic systems in which to study 
interactions between flipons and helicases further.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009513
PMCID: PMC8118290
PMID: 33983939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author has declared that no competing 
interests exist.