1. Front Chem. 2021 Apr 27;9:669452. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2021.669452. eCollection 
2021.

Quantification of Local Electric Field Changes at the Active Site of Cytochrome 
c Oxidase by Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroelectrochemical Titrations.

Baserga F(1), Dragelj J(2)(3), Kozuch J(1), Mohrmann H(1), Knapp EW(2), Stripp 
ST(1), Heberle J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Experimental Molecular Biophysics, Freie Universität 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Macromolecular Modelling Group, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 
Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Modeling of Biomolecular Systems, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.

Cytochrome c oxidase (CcO) is a transmembrane protein complex that reduces 
molecular oxygen to water while translocating protons across the mitochondrial 
membrane. Changes in the redox states of its cofactors trigger both O2 reduction 
and vectorial proton transfer, which includes a proton-loading site, yet 
unidentified. In this work, we exploited carbon monoxide (CO) as a vibrational 
Stark effect (VSE) probe at the binuclear center of CcO from Rhodobacter 
sphaeroides. The CO stretching frequency was monitored as a function of the 
electrical potential, using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) absorption 
spectroelectrochemistry. We observed three different redox states (R4CO, R2CO, 
and O), determined their midpoint potential, and compared the resulting electric 
field to electrostatic calculations. A change in the local electric field 
strength of +2.9 MV/cm was derived, which was induced by the redox transition 
from R4CO to R2CO. We performed potential jump experiments to accumulate the 
R2CO and R4CO species and studied the FTIR difference spectra in the protein 
fingerprint region. The comparison of the experimental and computational results 
reveals that the key glutamic acid residue E286 is protonated in the observed 
states, and that its hydrogen-bonding environment is disturbed upon the redox 
transition of heme a3. Our experiments also suggest propionate A of heme a3 
changing its protonation state in concert with the redox state of a second 
cofactor, heme a. This supports the role of propionic acid side chains as part 
of the proton-loading site.

Copyright © 2021 Baserga, Dragelj, Kozuch, Mohrmann, Knapp, Stripp and Heberle.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2021.669452
PMCID: PMC8111224
PMID: 33987170

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.