1. Front Immunol. 2021 Apr 26;12:662362. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.662362. 
eCollection 2021.

Ebosin Ameliorates Psoriasis-Like Inflammation of Mice via miR-155 Targeting 
tnfaip3 on IL-17 Pathway.

Guo W(1), Xu F(1)(2), Zhuang Z(1), Liu Z(1), Xie J(2), Bai L(1).

Author information:
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of Biotechnology of Antibiotics, CAMS Key Laboratory of 
Synthetic Biology for Drug Innovation, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Inner Mongolia Medical University, Inner Mongolia People's Hospital, Hohhot, 
China.

Psoriasis is a recurrent autoimmune skin disease with aberrant regulation of 
keratinocytes and immunocytes. There is no universally accepted single treatment 
available for psoriasis, and the establishment of a common treatment option to 
control its signs and symptoms is urgently needed. Here, we found Ebosin, a 
novel exopolysaccharide isolated from Streptomyces sp. 139 by our lab, not only 
could ameliorate inflammation in LPS-induced keratinocytes through IKK/NF-kapaB 
pathway, but also attenuate psoriatic skin lesions and reduce inflammatory 
factors expression in imiquimod (IMQ)-mediated psoriatic mice. Except for 
inhibiting the expression of epidermal differentiation related proteins, Ebosin 
significantly increased the percentage of CD4+Foxp3+CD25+ Tregs and decreased 
CD4+IL17A+ Th17 cells in psoriatic mice. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Ebosin 
significantly suppressed the IL-17 signaling pathway via A20 (encoded by 
tnfaip3) in vivo. As the direct binding of tnfaip3 to miR-155 has been 
demonstrated by luciferase reporter assay, and Ebosin has been demonstrated to 
inhibit miR-155 level in vitro and in vivo, our study first indicates that 
Ebosin reduces inflammation through the miR-155-tnfaip3-IL-17 axis and T cell 
differentiation in a psoriasis-like model. Thus, we conclude that Ebosin can act 
as a promising therapeutic candidate for the treatment of psoriasis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Guo, Xu, Zhuang, Liu, Xie and Bai.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.662362
PMCID: PMC8107364
PMID: 33981308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.