1. J Am Chem Soc. 2021 May 26;143(20):7839-7851. doi: 10.1021/jacs.1c03314. Epub 
2021 May 13.

Inclusion of the C-Terminal Domain in the β-Sheet Core of Heparin-Fibrillized 
Three-Repeat Tau Protein Revealed by Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
Spectroscopy.

Dregni AJ(1), Wang HK(1), Wu H(2), Duan P(1), Jin J(2), DeGrado WF(2), Hong 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 170 Albany 
Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, 555 Mission 
Bay Blvd. South, CVRB, Room 452 V, San Francisco, California 94158-9001, United 
States.

Many neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease are characterized by 
pathological β-sheet filaments of the tau protein, which spread in a prion-like 
manner in patient brains. To date, high-resolution structures of tau filaments 
obtained from patient brains show that the β-sheet core only includes portions 
of the microtubule-binding repeat domains and excludes the C-terminal residues, 
indicating that the C-terminus is dynamically disordered. Here, we use 
solid-state NMR spectroscopy to identify the β-sheet core of full-length 0N3R 
tau fibrillized using heparin. Assignment of 13C and 15N chemical shifts of the 
rigid core of the protein revealed a single predominant β-sheet conformation, 
which spans not only the R3, R4, R' repeats but also the entire C-terminal 
domain (CT) of the protein. This massive β-sheet core qualitatively differs from 
all other tau fibril structures known to date. Using long-range correlation NMR 
experiments, we found that the R3 and R4 repeats form a β-arch, similar to that 
seen in some of the brain-derived tau fibrils, but the R1 and R3 domains 
additionally stack against the CT, reminiscent of previously reported transient 
interactions of the CT with the microtubule-binding repeats. This expanded 
β-sheet core structure suggests that the CT may have a protective effect against 
the formation of pathological tau fibrils by shielding the amyloidogenic R3 and 
R4 domains, preventing side-on nucleation. Truncation and post-translational 
modification of the CT in vivo may thus play an important role in the 
progression of tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.1c03314
PMCID: PMC8283780
PMID: 33983722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.