1. Front Immunol. 2021 Apr 23;12:658372. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.658372. 
eCollection 2021.

ARTEMIS: A Novel Mass-Spec Platform for HLA-Restricted Self and 
Disease-Associated Peptide Discovery.

Finton KAK(1), Brusniak MY(2), Jones LA(3), Lin C(3), Fioré-Gartland AJ(4), 
Brock C(1), Gafken PR(3), Strong RK(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Science, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA, United States.
(2)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA, United States.
(3)Proteomics Shared Resource, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA, United States.
(4)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, WA, United States.

Conventional immunoprecipitation/mass spectroscopy identification of 
HLA-restricted peptides remains the purview of specializing laboratories, due to 
the complexity of the methodology, and requires computational post-analysis to 
assign peptides to individual alleles when using pan-HLA antibodies. We have 
addressed these limitations with ARTEMIS: a simple, robust, and flexible 
platform for peptide discovery across ligandomes, optionally including specific 
proteins-of-interest, that combines novel, secreted HLA-I discovery reagents 
spanning multiple alleles, optimized lentiviral transduction, and streamlined 
affinity-tag purification to improve upon conventional methods. This platform 
fills a middle ground between existing techniques: sensitive and adaptable, but 
easy and affordable enough to be widely employed by general laboratories. We 
used ARTEMIS to catalog allele-specific ligandomes from HEK293 cells for seven 
classical HLA alleles and compared results across replicates, against 
computational predictions, and against high-quality conventional datasets. We 
also applied ARTEMIS to identify potentially useful, novel HLA-restricted 
peptide targets from oncovirus oncoproteins and tumor-associated antigens.

Copyright © 2021 Finton, Brusniak, Jones, Lin, Fioré-Gartland, Brock, Gafken and 
Strong.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.658372
PMCID: PMC8111693
PMID: 33986749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.