1. Alzheimers Dement. 2021 Dec;17(12):2030-2042. doi: 10.1002/alz.12342. Epub
2021  May 13.

Knowledge gaps in Alzheimer's disease immune biomarker research.

Morgan DG(1), Mielke MM(2).

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Alliance, Department of Translational Neuroscience, College of 
Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA.
(2)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences Research, Department 
of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Considerable evidence has accumulated implicating a role for immune mechanisms 
in moderating the pathology in Alzheimer's disease dementia. However, the 
appropriate therapeutic target, the appropriate direction of manipulation, and 
the stage of disease at which to begin treatment remain unanswered questions. 
Part of the challenge derives from the absence of any selective pressure to 
develop a coordinated beneficial immune response to severe neural injury in 
adults. Thus, immune responses to the prevailing stimuli are likely to contain 
both beneficial and detrimental components. Knowledge gaps include: (1) how a 
biomarker change relates to the underlying biology, (2) the degree to which 
pathological stage group differences reflect a response to pathology versus 
trait differences among individuals regulating risk of developing pathology, (3) 
the degree to which biomarker levels are predictive of subsequent changes in 
pathology and/or cognition, and (4) experimental manipulations in model systems 
to determine whether differences in immune biomarkers are causally related to 
pathology.

© 2021 the Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.12342
PMCID: PMC8884450
PMID: 33984178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests Statement. Dr Morgan serves 
on the Speaker’s Bureau for Biogen and is a consultant with Abbvie. Dr Morgan is 
an MPI on an SBIR with Hesperos Inc. Dr Mielke is a consultant for Biogen and 
for the Brain Protection Company.