1. Front Neuroanat. 2021 Apr 29;15:669073. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2021.669073. 
eCollection 2021.

Elovl5 Expression in the Central Nervous System of the Adult Mouse.

Balbo I(1)(2), Montarolo F(1)(3), Boda E(1)(2), Tempia F(1)(2)(4), Hoxha 
E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri Ottolenghi (NICO), Turin, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of 
Torino, Turin, Italy.
(4)National Neuroscience Institute (Italy), Turin, Italy.

ELOVL5 (Elongase of Very-Long Fatty Acid 5) gene encodes for an enzyme that 
elongates long chain fatty acids, with a marked preference for polyunsaturated 
molecules. In particular, it plays an essential role in the elongation of 
omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids, precursors for long-chain polyunsaturated fatty 
acids (PUFAs). Mutations of ELOVL5 cause the spino-cerebellar ataxia type 38 
(SCA38), a rare autosomal neurological disease characterized by gait 
abnormality, dysarthria, dysphagia, hyposmia and peripheral neuropathy, 
conditions well represented by a mouse model with a targeted deletion of this 
gene (Elovl5-/- mice). However, the expression pattern of this enzyme in 
neuronal and glial cells of the central nervous system (CNS) is still 
uninvestigated. This work is aimed at filling this gap of knowledge by taking 
advantage of an Elovl5-reporter mouse line and immunofluorescence analyses on 
adult mouse CNS sections and glial cell primary cultures. Notably, Elovl5 
appears expressed in a region- and cell type-specific manner. Abundant 
Elovl5-positive cells were found in the cerebellum, brainstem, and primary and 
accessory olfactory regions, where mitral cells show the most prominent 
expression. Hippocampal pyramidal cells of CA2/CA3 where also moderately 
labeled, while in the rest of the telencephalon Elovl5 expression was high in 
regions related to motor control. Analysis of primary glial cell cultures 
revealed Elovl5 expression in oligodendroglial cells at various maturation steps 
and in microglia, while astrocytes showed a heterogeneous in vivo expression of 
Elovl5. The elucidation of Elovl5 CNS distribution provides relevant information 
to understand the physiological functions of this enzyme and its PUFA products, 
whose unbalance is known to be involved in many pathological conditions.

Copyright Â© 2021 Balbo, Montarolo, Boda, Tempia and Hoxha.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2021.669073
PMCID: PMC8116736
PMID: 33994961

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.