1. Hum Pathol. 2021 Aug;114:74-89. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2021.05.004. Epub 2021 
May 12.

Intraductal carcinoma of the salivary gland with NCOA4-RET: expanding the 
morphologic spectrum and an algorithmic diagnostic approach.

Fisch AS(1), Laklouk I(1), Nakaguro M(1), Nosé V(1), Wirth LJ(2), Deschler 
DG(3), Faquin WC(4), Dias-Santagata D(1), Sadow PM(5).

Author information:
(1)Pathology Service, Massachusetts General Hospital, 02114 USA; Department of 
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115 USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, 02114 USA; Department 
of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115 USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, 02114 USA; 
Department of Otolaryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115 USA.
(4)Pathology Service, Massachusetts General Hospital, 02114 USA; Department of 
Otolaryngology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, 02114 USA; Department of Pathology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115 USA.
(5)Pathology Service, Massachusetts General Hospital, 02114 USA; Department of 
Otolaryngology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, 02114 USA; Department of Pathology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115 USA. Electronic address: 
psadow@mgh.harvard.edu.

After the publication of the 2017 World Health Organization Classification of 
Head and Neck Tumours, there has been increasing interest in the classification 
of newly categorized intraductal carcinomas. Intraductal carcinoma (IC) is an 
indolent tumor, typically arising in the parotid gland, with an intact 
myoepithelial layer and a cystic, papillary, often cribriform architecture. 
Early studies of IC identified a heterogeneous group of molecular alterations 
driving neoplasia, and recent studies have defined three primary 
morphological/immunohistochemical variants, subsequently linking these 
morphologic variants with defined molecular signatures. Although studies to date 
have pointed toward distinct molecular alterations after histological 
classification, this study used a novel approach, focusing primarily on six 
cases of IC with NCOA4-RET gene rearrangement as determined by next-generation 
sequencing and describing the spectrum of clinicopathologic findings within that 
molecularly-defined group, among them a unique association between the NCOA4-RET 
fusion and hybrid variant IC and the first case of IC arising in association 
with a pleomorphic adenoma. RET-rearranged IC show histological and 
immunohistochemical overlap with the more widely recognized secretory carcinoma, 
including low-grade morphology, a lumen-forming or microcystic growth pattern, 
and co-expression of S100, SOX10, and mammaglobin, findings undoubtedly leading 
to misdiagnosis. Typically regarded to have ETV6-NTRK3 fusions, secretory 
carcinomas may alternatively arise with RET fusions as well. Adding our cohort 
of six NCOA4-RET fusion-positive IC compared with four cases of secretory 
carcinoma with ETV6-RET fusions and a single case of fusion-negative IC with 
salivary duct carcinoma-like genetics, we propose a diagnostic algorithm that 
integrates histological elements, including atypia and invasiveness, and the 
likelihood of specific molecular alterations to increase diagnostic accuracy in 
what can be a very subtle diagnosis with important clinical implications.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2021.05.004
PMCID: PMC9377626
PMID: 33991527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
relevant conflict of interests.