1. Thorac Cancer. 2021 Jul;12(13):2031-2034. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.13953. Epub 
2021 May 19.

Successful treatment of triple EGFR mutation T785A/L861Q/H297_E298 with 
afatinib.

Longo V(1), Catino A(1), Montrone M(1), Pizzutilo P(1), Pesola F(1), Marech 
I(1), Capone I(2), Prelaj A(3)(4), Galetta D(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Thoracic Oncology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Tumori "Giovanni Paolo II", 
Bari, Italy.
(2)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Department, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto 
Nazionale dei Tumori di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Medical Oncology Department, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, 
Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Electronics, Information, and Bioengineering, Polytechnic 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

Patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and uncommon epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) mutation are characterized by high heterogeneity, and 
globally considered to have a worse prognosis than patients with the two common 
mutations; exon 19 deletion, and exon 21 L858R. Nevertheless, some uncommon 
mutations do confer sensitivity to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) which is 
comparable with common mutations. In particular, some compound EGFR mutations 
seem to be characterized by a favorable prognosis. Unfortunately, the rarity of 
complex EGFR mutations results in difficult clinical decision-making. Herein, to 
the best of our knowledge, we report the first case of an NSCLC patient with an 
EGFR triple mutation containing T785A/L861Q/H297_E298 who was successfully 
treated with afatinib.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and 
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.13953
PMCID: PMC8258364
PMID: 34008923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.