1. Transl Pediatr. 2021 Apr;10(4):834-842. doi: 10.21037/tp-20-385.

Comprehensive analysis of clinical spectrum and genotype associations in Chinese 
and literature reported KBG syndrome.

Li Q(1), Sun C(1), Yang L(1), Lu W(1), Luo F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Inherited Metabolic Diseases, 
Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Patients with KBG Syndrome due to ANKRD11 mutations and 16q24.3 
microdeletions including ANKRD11 were identified. Classical and most frequent 
phenotypes include various degrees of intelligence disability (ID), short 
stature (SS), delayed bone age, macrodontia, distinctive facial features and 
skeletal anomalies. The variable expressivity of KBG syndrome makes it 
challenging to establish genotype-phenotype correlations, which also affects 
further studies for this novel syndrome. We aim to report three unrelated 
patients with KBG syndrome caused by ANKRD11 gene pathological variants and to 
evaluate potential associations among ANKRD11 gene variant types, the 16q24.3 
microdeletion, and the clinical spectrum of KBG syndrome.
METHODS: The genetic etiology of three unreported KBG patients was identified by 
whole exome sequencing and confirmed via Sanger sequencing. Literature review 
was conducted to summarize the phenotype-genotype relationship based on three 
unreported Chinese cases and 186 reported cases.
RESULTS: Two pathological variants (c.7407dupC, p.P2530Rfs*61; c.G3046A, 
p.D1016N) and one reported variant (c.6792dupC, p. P2271Pfs*8) were detected in 
our patients. Compared with the 16q24.3 microdeletion, patients harboring 
ANKRD11 gene mutations showed significantly higher frequency of malformations 
including macrodontia, long philtrum, abnormal eyebrows, widely spaced eyes, 
anteverted nares, eyelid ptosis, brachydactyly, brachycephaly (P<0.05), and 
significantly lower risk of congenital heart diseases and frontal bossing 
(P<0.05). The intellectual disability (ID) was significantly milder among 
patients carrying truncating variants located between repression domain 1 (RD1) 
and activation domain (AD) than those carrying mutations disrupting repression 
domain 2 (RD2) alone and disrupting all functional domain (RD1, AD or RD2) 
(P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Novel pathological variants harbored in the ANKRD11 gene contribute 
to the KBG syndrome variant spectrum. ANKRD11 gene variants disrupting RD1 and 
RD2 or RD2 alone are more likely to have more severe ID, which warrants 
different intervention strategies for KBG syndrome.

2021 Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-20-385
PMCID: PMC8107870
PMID: 34012832

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tp-20-385). The authors have no conflicts of interest 
to declare.