1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 May 4;8:624233. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.624233.
eCollection  2021.

Development of a Dissemination Platform for Spatiotemporal and Phylogenetic 
Analysis of Avian Infectious Bronchitis Virus.

Jara M(1), Crespo R(1), Roberts DL(2), Chapman A(2), Banda A(3), Machado G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, United States.
(2)Department of Computer Science North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 
United States.
(3)Poultry Research and Diagnostic Laboratory, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Mississippi State University, Pearl, MS, United States.

Infecting large portions of the global poultry populations, the avian infectious 
bronchitis virus (IBV) remains a major economic burden in North America. With 
more than 30 serotypes globally distributed, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware, 
Georgia, and Massachusetts are among the most predominant serotypes in the 
United States. Even though vaccination is widely used, the high mutation rate 
exhibited by IBV is continuously triggering the emergence of new viral strains 
and hindering control and prevention measures. For that reason, targeted 
strategies based on constantly updated information on the IBV circulation are 
necessary. Here, we sampled IBV-infected farms from one US state and collected 
and analyzed 65 genetic sequences coming from three different lineages along 
with the immunization information of each sampled farm. Phylodynamic analyses 
showed that IBV dispersal velocity was 12.3 km/year. The majority of IBV 
infections appeared to have derived from the introduction of the Arkansas DPI 
serotype, and the Arkansas DPI and Georgia 13 were the predominant serotypes. 
When analyzed against IBV sequences collected across the United States and 
deposited in the GenBank database, the most likely viral origin of our sequences 
was from the states of Alabama, Georgia, and Delaware. Information about 
vaccination showed that the MILDVAC-MASS+ARK vaccine was applied on 26% of the 
farms. Using a publicly accessible open-source tool for real-time interactive 
tracking of pathogen spread and evolution, we analyzed the spatiotemporal spread 
of IBV and developed an online reporting dashboard. Overall, our work 
demonstrates how the combination of genetic and spatial information could be 
used to track the spread and evolution of poultry diseases, providing timely 
information to the industry. Our results could allow producers and veterinarians 
to monitor in near-real time the current IBV strain circulating, making it more 
informative, for example, in vaccination-related decisions.

Copyright Â© 2021 Jara, Crespo, Roberts, Chapman, Banda and Machado.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.624233
PMCID: PMC8129014
PMID: 34017870

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.