1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 May 7;12:646222. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.646222. 
eCollection 2021.

Fine Mapping and Candidate Gene Identification of a White Flower Gene BrWF3 in 
Chinese Cabbage (Brassica rapa L. ssp. pekinensis).

Yang S(1)(2), Tian X(1)(2), Wang Z(1), Wei X(1), Zhao Y(1), Su H(1), Zhao X(1), 
Tian B(2), Yuan Y(1)(2), Zhang XW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Horticulture, Henan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Postgraduate T&R Base of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(2)School of Agricultural Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

Flower color is an important trait in plants. However, genes responsible for the 
white flower trait in Chinese cabbage are rarely reported. In this study, we 
constructed an F2 population derived from the Y640-288 (white flower) and 
Y641-87 (yellow flower) lines for the fine mapping of the white flower gene 
BrWF3 in Chinese cabbage. Genetic analysis indicated that BrWF3 was controlled 
by a single recessive gene. Using BSA-seq and KASP assays, BrWF3 was fine-mapped 
to an interval of 105.6 kb. Functional annotation, expression profiling, and 
sequence variation analyses confirmed that the AtPES2 homolog, Bra032957, was 
the most likely candidate gene for BrWF3. Carotenoid profiles and transmission 
electron microscopy analysis suggested that BrWF3 might participate in the 
production of xanthophyll esters (particularly violaxanthin esters), which in 
turn disrupt chromoplast development and the formation of plastoglobules (PGs). 
A SNP deletion in the third exon of BrWF3 caused the loss of protein function, 
and interfered with the normal assembly of PGs, which was associated with 
reduced expression levels of genes involved in carotenoid metabolism. 
Furthermore, we developed and validated the functional marker TXBH83 for BrWF3. 
Our results provide insight into the molecular mechanism underlying flower color 
pigmentation and reveal valuable information for marker-assisted selection (MAS) 
breeding in Chinese cabbage.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yang, Tian, Wang, Wei, Zhao, Su, Zhao, Tian, Yuan and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.646222
PMCID: PMC8138439
PMID: 34025693

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.