1. Acta Crystallogr E Crystallogr Commun. 2021 Apr 30;77(Pt 5):573-578. doi: 
10.1107/S2056989021004412. eCollection 2021 May 1.

Crystal structure of {N (1),N 
(3)-bis-[(1-tert-butyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl-idene]-2,2-di-methyl-propane-1,3-di-amine}-bis-(thio-cyanato)-iron(II).

Znovjyak K(1), Seredyuk M(1), Malinkin SO(1), Golenya IO(1), Amirkhanov VM(1), 
Shova S(2), Mulloev NU(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, 
Volodymyrska Street 64, Kyiv, 01601, Ukraine.
(2)Department of Inorganic Polymers, "Petru Poni" Institute of Macromolecular, 
Chemistry, Romanian Academy of Science, Aleea Grigore Ghica Voda 41-A, Iasi, 
700487, Romania.
(3)The Faculty of Physics, Tajik National University, Rudaki Avenue 17, 
Dushanbe, 734025, Tajikistan.

The unit cell of the title compound, [FeII(NCS)2(C19H32N8)], consists of two 
charge-neutral complex mol-ecules. In the complex mol-ecule, the tetra-dentate 
ligand N 1 ,N 
3-bis-[(1-tert-butyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl-ene]-2,2-di-methyl-propane-1,3-di-amine 
coordinates to the FeII ion through the N atoms of the 1,2,3-triazole and 
aldimine groups. Two thio-cyanate anions, also coordinated through their N 
atoms, complete the coordination sphere of the central Fe ion. In the crystal, 
neighbouring mol-ecules are linked through weak C-H⋯C/S/N inter-actions into a 
three-dimensional network. The inter-mol-ecular contacts were qu-anti-fied using 
Hirshfeld surface analysis and two-dimensional fingerprint plots, revealing the 
relative contributions of the contacts to the crystal packing to be H⋯H 50.8%, 
H⋯C/C⋯H 14.3%, H⋯S/S⋯H 20.5% and H⋯N/N⋯H 12.1%. The average Fe-N bond distance 
is 2.170 Å, indicating the high-spin state of the FeII ion, which does not 
change upon cooling, as demonstrated by low-temperature magnetic susceptibility 
measurements. DFT calculations of energy frameworks at the B3LYP/6-31 G(d,p) 
theory level were performed to account for the inter-actions involved in the 
crystal structure.

© Znovjyak et al. 2021.

DOI: 10.1107/S2056989021004412
PMCID: PMC8100266
PMID: 34026268