1. Mol Pain. 2021 Jan-Dec;17:17448069211018045. doi: 10.1177/17448069211018045.

NMDA Receptor-Dependent Synaptic Depression in Potentiated Synapses of the 
Anterior Cingulate Cortex of adult Mice.

Xue M(1)(2), Zhou SB(1)(2), Liu RH(1)(2), Chen QY(1)(2), Zhuo M(1)(2)(3), Li 
XH(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuron and Disease, Frontier Institutes of Science and Technology, 
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Institute of Brain Research, Qingdao International Academician Park, Qingdao, 
China.
(3)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Long-term potentiation (LTP) is an important molecular mechanism for chronic 
pain in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a key cortical region for pain 
perception and emotional regulation. Inhibiting ACC LTP via various 
manipulations or pharmacological treatments blocks chronic pain. Long-term 
depression (LTD) is another form of synaptic plasticity in the ACC, which is 
also proved to be involved in the mechanisms of chronic pain. However, less is 
known about the interactive relationship between LTP and LTD in the ACC. Whether 
the synaptic depression could be induced after synaptic LTP in the ACC is not 
clear. In the present study, we used multi-channel field potential recording 
systems to study synaptic depression after LTP in the ACC of adult mice. We 
found that low frequency stimulus (LFS: 1 Hz, 15 min) inhibited theta burst 
stimulation (TBS)-induced LTP at 30 min after the induction of LTP. However, LFS 
failed to induce depression at 90 min after the induction of LTP. Furthermore, 
NMDA receptor antagonist AP-5 blocked the induction of synaptic depression after 
potentiation. The GluN2B-selective antagonist Ro25-6981 also inhibited the 
phenomenon in the ACC, while the GluN2A-selective antagonist NVP-AAM077 and the 
GluN2C/D-selective antagonist PPDA and UBP145 had no any significant effect. 
These results suggest that synaptic LTP can be depressed by LTD in a time 
dependent manner, and GluN2B-containing NMDA receptors play important roles in 
this form of synaptic depression.

DOI: 10.1177/17448069211018045
PMCID: PMC8141994
PMID: 34024172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.