1. BMC Cancer. 2021 May 22;21(1):584. doi: 10.1186/s12885-021-08329-y.

ALDH2 polymorphism rs671 is a predictor of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitor efficacy against 
thoracic malignancies.

Matsumoto A(#)(1), Nakashima C(#)(2), Kimura S(2), Sueoka E(3), Aragane N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social Medicine, Saga University School of Medicine, 5-1-1 
Nabeshima, Saga, 849-8501, Japan. matsumoa@cc.saga-u.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Hematology, Respiratory Medicine and Oncology, Saga University 
School of Medicine, Saga, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Saga University Hospital, Saga, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) plays an important role in the 
endogenous aldehyde detoxification of various types of cells. ALDH2*2, a variant 
allele of the ALDH2 polymorphism rs671, leads to decreased enzymatic activity. 
ALDH2*2 may enhance tumor antigen presentation due to aldehyde-induced DNA 
damage while suppressing peripheral blood T cell counts and T cell activation.
METHODS: On the basis of our hypothesis that rs671 affects the sensitivity of 
immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), we evaluated the effects of rs671 on 
patients with thoracic malignancies who started ICI therapy in 2016-2019. The 
cohort consisted of 105 cases, including 64 cases with adenocarcinoma and 30 
cases with squamous cell carcinoma, 49 of whom were ALDH2*2 carriers. The first 
ICI was PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitor (Nivolumab, Pembrolizumab, or Atezolizumab) in all 
cases.
RESULTS: The best response to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy (partial response/stable 
disease/progressive disease) was 36%/50%/14% in the rs671(-) cases; however, the 
response was relatively poor in the rs671(+) cases (27%/29%/45%, respectively) 
(p = 0.002). The hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) of disease progression 
within the observation period of 6 months for the rs671(+) cases was estimated 
to be 5.0 (2.5-10) after the adjustment for covariates, including sex, Brinkman 
index, treatment line, tumor tissue programmed death-ligand 1 positivity rate, 
tumor tissue EGFR mutation. This association was also maintained in a stratified 
analysis, suggesting that ALDH2*2 is an independent negative predictive factor 
for the short-term prognosis of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy. Thus, the 
progression-free survival (PFS) ratio of the rs671(+) cases decreased rapidly 
after ICI initiation but was eventually higher than that of the rs671(-) cases 
(restricted mean survival time in 12 months from 2 to 3 years afterward was 1.3 
times that of the rs671(-) cases). Moreover, the highest PFS ratio after 2 years 
among sub-groups was found in the first-line treatment sub-group of rs671(+) 
group (40%).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that rs671 may be an accurate and cost-effective 
predictor of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitor treatment, in which optimal case selection is 
an important issue.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-021-08329-y
PMCID: PMC8140463
PMID: 34022841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.