1. Mol Med Rep. 2021 Jul;24(1):526. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12165. Epub 2021 May
26.

LDL‑induced NLRC3 inflammasome activation in cardiac fibroblasts contributes to 
cardiomyocytic dysfunction.

Wang P(1), Zhang W(1), Feng Z(1), Zhang J(2), Sun Y(1), Zhang W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Feicheng Mining Center Hospital, Feicheng, Shandong 
271600, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Feicheng Mining Center Hospital, Feicheng, 
Shandong 271600, P.R. China.

Heart failure (HF) is a progressive myocardial disease that affects pulse rate. 
Notably, chronic inflammation serves a crucial role in cardiac dysfunction and 
HF. Appropriate cardiomyocyte‑fibroblast communication is essential for cardiac 
function. In addition, cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) are the main cellular 
population in the cardiac microenvironment; therefore, determining the role of 
CFs in HF progression and the associated molecular basis is important. In the 
present study, ELISAs were performed to detect inflammatory factors in the sera 
of patients with HF and their association with CF activation was analyzed using 
Pearson's correlation coefficient. The mechanism underlying the proinflammatory 
phenotype of CFs was investigated via western blotting. Notably, the levels of 
IL10 and TNF‑α were significantly increased in the sera of patients with HF. 
Further analysis revealed that CFs were extensively activated in the cardiac 
tissues of patients with HF and released excessive amounts of cytokines, which 
could impair the viability of cardiomyocytes. Moreover, low‑density lipoprotein 
(LDL)‑induced NLRC3 inflammasome was activated in CFs, which gave rise to 
proinflammatory phenotypes. Targeting LDL in CFs significantly improved the 
functioning of cardiomyocytes and inhibited apoptosis. These findings 
highlighted the critical role of LDL in inflammasome activation; to the best of 
our knowledge, the present study is the first to reveal that CF‑induced 
microenvironmental inflammation may suppress cardiomyocyte viability. The 
present study established the cellular basis for CF activation during HF 
progression and provided information on the cellular interactions important for 
HF treatment.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12165
PMCID: PMC8170230
PMID: 34036387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.