1. PLoS One. 2021 May 25;16(5):e0251368. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0251368. 
eCollection 2021.

SARS-CoV-2: Possible recombination and emergence of potentially more virulent 
strains.

Haddad D(1), John SE(1), Mohammad A(2), Hammad MM(2), Hebbar P(1), Channanath 
A(1), Nizam R(1), Al-Qabandi S(3), Al Madhoun A(1), Alshukry A(4), Ali H(1)(5), 
Thanaraj TA(1), Al-Mulla F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Bioinformatics, Dasman Diabetes Institute, Kuwait, 
Kuwait.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dasman Diabetes Institute, 
Kuwait, Kuwait.
(3)Public Health Laboratory, Ministry of Health, Kuwait, Kuwait.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology & Head and Neck Surgery, Jaber Al-Ahmad 
Hospital, Ministry of Health, Kuwait, Kuwait.
(5)Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, 
Health Sciences Center, Kuwait University, Kuwait, Kuwait.

COVID-19 is challenging healthcare preparedness, world economies, and 
livelihoods. The infection and death rates associated with this pandemic are 
strikingly variable in different countries. To elucidate this discrepancy, we 
analyzed 2431 early spread SARS-CoV-2 sequences from GISAID. We estimated 
continental-wise admixture proportions, assessed haplotype block estimation, and 
tested for the presence or absence of strains' recombination. Herein, we 
identified 1010 unique missense mutations and seven different SARS-CoV-2 
clusters. In samples from Asia, a small haplotype block was identified, whereas 
samples from Europe and North America harbored large and different haplotype 
blocks with nonsynonymous variants. Variant frequency and linkage disequilibrium 
varied among continents, especially in North America. Recombination between 
different strains was only observed in North American and European sequences. In 
addition, we structurally modelled the two most common mutations, Spike_D614G 
and Nsp12_P314L, which suggested that these linked mutations may enhance viral 
entry and replication, respectively. Overall, we propose that genomic 
recombination between different strains may contribute to SARS-CoV-2 virulence 
and COVID-19 severity and may present additional challenges for current 
treatment regimens and countermeasures. Furthermore, our study provides a 
possible explanation for the substantial second wave of COVID-19 presented with 
higher infection and death rates in many countries.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0251368
PMCID: PMC8148317
PMID: 34033650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.