1. J Cell Mol Med. 2021 Jul;25(13):5829-5841. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.16578. Epub 2021 
May 25.

Organoid models of the tumor microenvironment and their applications.

Xia T(1)(2), Du WL(1)(2), Chen XY(3), Zhang YN(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal-Pancreatic Surgery, Zhejiang Provincial 
People's Hospital, People's Hospital of Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou, 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Provincial 
People's Hospital, People's Hospital of Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou, 
China.
(3)Clinical Research Institute, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, People's 
Hospital of Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tiantai People's Hospital, Taizhou, China.

A small percentage of data obtained from animal/2D culture models can be 
translated to humans. Therefore, there is a need to using native tumour 
microenvironment mimicking models to improve preclinical screening and reduce 
this attrition rate. For this purpose, currently, the utilization of organoids 
is expanding. Tumour organoids can recapitulate tumour microenvironment that is 
including cancer cells and non-neoplastic host components. Indeed, tumour 
organoids, both phenotypically and genetically, resemble the tumour tissue that 
originated from it. The unique properties of the tumour microenvironment can 
significantly affect drug response and cancer progression. In this review, we 
will discuss about various organoid culture strategies for modelling the tumour 
immune microenvironment, their applications and advantages in cancer research 
such as testing cancer immunotherapeutics, developing novel approaches for 
personalized medicine, testing drug toxicity, drug screening, study cancer 
initiation and progression, and we will also review the limitations of organoid 
culture systems.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by 
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.16578
PMCID: PMC8256354
PMID: 34033245

Conflict of interest statement: The authors confirm that there are no conflicts 
of interest.