1. Front Pediatr. 2021 May 10;9:676616. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.676616.
eCollection  2021.

The Genotype and Phenotype of Proline-Rich Transmembrane Protein 2 Associated 
Disorders in Chinese Children.

Luo HY(1)(2), Xie LL(1)(2), Hong SQ(1)(2), Li XJ(1)(2), Li M(1)(2), Hu Y(1)(2), 
Ma JN(1)(2), Wu P(1)(2), Zhong M(1)(2), Cheng M(1)(2), Li TS(1)(2), Jiang 
L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Ministry of 
Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing, China.
(2)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Chongqing, China.

Objectives: To study the genetic and clinical characteristics of Chinese 
children with pathogenic proline-rich transmembrane protein 2 (PRRT2) 
gene-associated disorders. Methods: Targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) 
was used to identify pathogenic PRRT2 variations in Chinese children with 
epilepsy and/or kinesigenic dyskinesia. Patients with confirmed PRRT2-associated 
disorders were monitored and their clinical data were analyzed. Results: 
Forty-four patients with pathogenic PRRT2 variants were recruited. Thirty-five 
of them (79.5%) had heterozygous mutations, including 30 frameshifts, three 
missenses, one nonsense, and one splice site variant. The c.649dupC was the most 
common variant (56.8%). Eight patients (18.2%) showed whole gene deletions, and 
one patient (2.3%) had 16p11.2 microdeletion. Thirty-four cases (97.1%) were 
inherited and one case (2.9%) was de novo. Forty patients were diagnosed with 
benign familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE), two patients had paroxysmal 
kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD) and two had infantile convulsions and 
choreoathetosis (ICCA). Patients with whole gene deletions had a later remission 
than patients with heterozygous mutations (13.9 vs. 7.1 months, P = 0.001). 
Forty-two patients were treated with antiseizure medications (ASMs). At last 
follow-up, 35 patients, including one who did not receive therapy, were 
asymptomatic, and one patient without ASMs died of status epilepticus at 12 
months of age. One patient developed autism, and one patient showed mild 
developmental delay/intellectual disability. Conclusion: Our data suggested that 
patients with whole gene deletions could have more severe manifestations in 
PRRT2-associated disorders. Conventional ASMs, especially Oxcarbazepine, showed 
a good treatment response.

Copyright Â© 2021 Luo, Xie, Hong, Li, Li, Hu, Ma, Wu, Zhong, Cheng, Li and Jiang.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.676616
PMCID: PMC8141857
PMID: 34041212

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.