1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 May 11;12:628169. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.628169. eCollection 2021.

Effect of LHCGR Gene Polymorphism (rs2293275) on LH Supplementation Protocol 
Outcomes in Second IVF Cycles: A Retrospective Study.

Ga R(1)(2), Cheemakurthi R(1), Kalagara M(1), Prathigudupu K(1), Balabomma 
KL(1), Mahapatro P(1), Thota S(1), Kommaraju AL(2), Muvvala SPR(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Assisted Reproduction, Krishna IVF Clinic, Visakhapatnam, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Science, Gitam (Deemed to be) 
University, Visakhapatnam, India.

Infertility is a major concern for couples wanting to have progeny. Despite 
recent advances in the field of IVF, success rates still need improvement. 
Understanding the patient's variability and addressing it with personalized 
interventions may improve the success rate of fertilization and live births. 
This study examined the impact of a personalized pharmacogenomic approach on LH 
supplementation on the pregnancy and live birth rate outcomes in comparison with 
the traditional approaches. 193 patients undergoing a second IVF cycle in 
Krishna IVF Clinic received LH supplementation either as per the conventional 
methods or based on N312S (rs2293275) LHCGR gene polymorphism. Results showed a 
significant increase in pregnancy rate (P-value: 0.049) and a trend showing 
improvement in live birth rates (P-value: 0.082) when r-hLH supplementation 
protocol was decided as per the genotypes A/A, A/G, and G/G of the N312S variant 
in the respective patients. This stimulation regimen helped in providing optimum 
levels of r-hLH supplementation to patients with impaired hormone-receptor 
interacting activity, to achieve higher success in pregnancy and live birth 
rates.

Copyright Â© 2021 GA, Cheemakurthi, Kalagara, Prathigudupu, Balabomma, Mahapatro, 
Thota, Kommaraju and Muvvala.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.628169
PMCID: PMC8147863
PMID: 34046009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.