1. Acta Biomater. 2021 Jul 15;129:258-268. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2021.05.018.
Epub  2021 May 25.

Nanoparticles for co-delivery of osimertinib and selumetinib to overcome 
osimertinib-acquired resistance in non-small cell lung cancer.

Chen W(1), Yu D(2), Sun SY(3), Li F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Discovery and Development, Harrison School of Pharmacy, 
Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.
(2)Department of Oncology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, PR China; Department of Hematology and Medical 
Oncology, Emory University School of Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, 
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(3)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of 
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic 
address: ssun@emory.edu.
(4)Department of Drug Discovery and Development, Harrison School of Pharmacy, 
Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA. Electronic address: 
FZL0023@auburn.edu.

Osimertinib (OSI) is the first FDA-approved third-generation epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). It can be used for 
treating non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with activating EGFR 
mutation and for patients who are resistant to first-generation EGFR TKIs due to 
T790M resistance mutation. However, patients treated with OSI ultimately develop 
acquired resistance, which prevents its long-term benefit for patients. 
Therefore, the development of effective strategies to overcome OSI resistance 
will address a significant clinical challenge and benefit patients by prolonging 
their survival time. Our previous studies indicated that combination therapy was 
a promising strategy for overcoming OSI resistance. In this study, we developed 
nanoparticle (NP) formulations for co-delivery of osimertinib (OSI) and 
selumetinib (SEL) to treat OSI-resistant NSCLC effectively. We conjugated SEL 
with PEG through a reactive oxygen species (ROS)-responsive linker to generate 
polyethylene glycol (PEG)-SEL conjugate prodrug (PEG-S-SEL). Due to the 
amphiphilic nature of PEG-S-SEL, it can self-assemble in an aqueous solution to 
form micelle NP and serve as a delivery carrier for OSI. The ROS-responsive 
linker can facilitate the release of drugs in the tumor microenvironment with 
elevated ROS levels. OSI and SEL combination NP can overcome OSI resistance by 
simultaneously inhibiting both EGFR and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK), 
thus effectively inducing apoptosis in OSI-resistant NSCLC cells and inhibiting 
OSI-resistant tumors in vivo. In conclusion, the OSI+SEL NP combination therapy 
showed promising anticancer efficacy and demonstrated potential for treating 
NSCLC patients with OSI acquired resistance. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: 
Osimertinib (OSI) is the first FDA-approved third-generation epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor. It has been successfully used 
for treating non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with activating EGFR 
mutation. However, patients treated with OSI ultimately develop acquired 
resistance. This study developed OSI and selumetinib (SEL) co-delivering 
nanoparticles to overcome OSI-acquired resistance in NSCLC. PEG-SEL conjugate 
functions as reactive oxygen species (ROS)-responsive prodrug and forms micelle 
nanoparticles through self-assembly to deliver OSI. The combination NP can 
simultaneously inhibit EGFR and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK), thus 
effectively inducing apoptosis in OSI-resistant NSCLC cells. In summary, the OSI 
and SEL nanoparticle combination therapy showed promising anticancer efficacy 
and demonstrated potential for treating NSCLC patients with OSI acquired 
resistance.

Copyright Â© 2021 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2021.05.018
PMCID: PMC8273131
PMID: 34048974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.