1. Biomed Res Int. 2021 May 15;2021:5596014. doi: 10.1155/2021/5596014.
eCollection  2021.

Factors Associated with Promoted Proliferation of Osteosarcoma by 
Peptidylarginine Deiminase 4.

Guo J(1), Yin L(2), Zhang X(3), Su P(3), Zhai Q(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital of Zibo, Zibo 
255029, China.
(2)Human Resources Department, Zibo Central Hospital, Zibo 255036, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Zibo Central Hospital, Zibo 255036, China.
(4)Center of Translational Medicine, Zibo Central Hospital, Zibo 255036, China.

Osteosarcoma is the most common type of bone malignancy, and the pathogenesis 
has not been entirely elucidated yet. An important deimination modification 
enzyme PADI4 (peptidylarginine deiminase 4) has attracted much attention in 
recent years for its important function in several kinds of human tumors. 
However, the role of PADI4 on osteosarcoma tumorigenesis remains largely 
unrevealed. Here, we first assessed the effect of PADI4 on osteosarcoma 
proliferation by the CCK8 method and colony formation assay. Ectopically 
expressing PADI4 positively regulates the colony formation capacity of both U2OS 
and Saos-2 cells. Furthermore, we explored the related mechanism and showed that 
PADI4 could stimulate Wnt/β-catenin and MEK/ERK signaling in both U2OS and 
Saos-2 cells. Then, we detected expression of PADI4 in human tissues of 
osteosarcoma and revealed that differential expression of PADI4 was associated 
with tumorigenesis of osteosarcoma. Last, we performed the in vivo experiment in 
nude mice and results also showed PADI4 could affect the tumor growth. In 
conclusion, this work revealed that PADI4 could upregulate the proliferation of 
osteosarcoma, mainly via the Wnt/β-catenin and MEK/ERK signaling pathway. This 
study gives us new insight into the regulation mechanism of osteosarcoma 
proliferation and highlights PADI4 as a promising target for osteosarcoma 
diagnosis and treatment.

Copyright © 2021 Jianping Guo et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5596014
PMCID: PMC8147525
PMID: 34055985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Thea authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.