1. Front Physiol. 2021 May 13;12:650449. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.650449. 
eCollection 2021.

Computational Modeling for Antiarrhythmic Drugs for Atrial Fibrillation 
According to Genotype.

Hwang I(1), Jin Z(1), Park JW(1), Kwon OS(1), Lim B(1), Hong M(1), Kim M(1), Yu 
HT(1), Kim TH(1), Uhm JS(1), Joung B(1), Lee MH(1), Pak HN(1).

Author information:
(1)Yonsei University Health System, Seoul, South Korea.

Erratum in
    Front Physiol. 2022 Dec 02;13:991997. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.991997.

Background: The efficacy of antiarrhythmic drugs (AAD) can vary in patients with 
atrial fibrillation (AF), and the PITX2 gene affects the responsiveness of AADs. 
We explored the virtual AAD (V-AAD) responses between wild-type and PITX2 
+/--deficient AF conditions by realistic in silico AF modeling. Methods: We 
tested the V-AADs in AF modeling integrated with patients' 3D-computed 
tomography and 3D-electroanatomical mapping, acquired in 25 patients (68% male, 
59.8 ± 9.8 years old, 32.0% paroxysmal type). The ion currents for the PITX2 +/- 
deficiency and each AAD (amiodarone, sotalol, dronedarone, flecainide, and 
propafenone) were defined based on previous publications. Results: We compared 
the wild-type and PITX2 +/- deficiency in terms of the action potential duration 
(APD90), conduction velocity (CV), maximal slope of restitution (Smax), and 
wave-dynamic parameters, such as the dominant frequency (DF), phase 
singularities (PS), and AF termination rates according to the V-AADs. The PITX2 
+/--deficient model exhibited a shorter APD90 (p < 0.001), a lower Smax (p < 
0.001), mean DF (p = 0.012), PS number (p < 0.001), and a longer AF cycle length 
(AFCL, p = 0.011). Five V-AADs changed the electrophysiology in a dose-dependent 
manner. AAD-induced AFCL lengthening (p < 0.001) and reductions in the CV (p = 
0.033), peak DF (p < 0.001), and PS number (p < 0.001) were more significant in 
PITX2 +/--deficient than wild-type AF. PITX2 +/--deficient AF was easier to 
terminate with class IC AADs than the wild-type AF (p = 0.018). Conclusions: The 
computational modeling-guided AAD test was feasible for evaluating the efficacy 
of multiple AADs in patients with AF. AF wave-dynamic and electrophysiological 
characteristics are different among the PITX2-deficient and the wild-type 
genotype models.

Copyright © 2021 Hwang, Park, Kwon, Lim, Hong, Kim, Yu, Kim, Uhm, Joung, Lee and 
Pak.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.650449
PMCID: PMC8155488
PMID: 34054570

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.