1. Cell Rep Med. 2021 Jun 15;2(6):100312. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2021.100312. Epub 
2021 May 21.

Landscape of epitopes targeted by T cells in 852 individuals recovered from 
COVID-19: Meta-analysis, immunoprevalence, and web platform.

Quadeer AA(1), Ahmed SF(1), McKay MR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University 
of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University 
of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Knowledge of the epitopes of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) targeted by T cells in recovered (convalescent) individuals is 
important for understanding T cell immunity against coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19). This information can aid development and assessment of COVID-19 
vaccines and inform novel diagnostic technologies. Here, we provide a unified 
description and meta-analysis of SARS-CoV-2 T cell epitopes compiled from 18 
studies of cohorts of individuals recovered from COVID-19 (852 individuals in 
total). Our analysis demonstrates the broad diversity of T cell epitopes that 
have been recorded for SARS-CoV-2. A large majority are seemingly unaffected by 
current variants of concern. We identify a set of 20 immunoprevalent epitopes 
that induced T cell responses in multiple cohorts and in a large fraction of 
tested individuals. The landscape of SARS-CoV-2 T cell epitopes we describe can 
help guide immunological studies, including those related to vaccines and 
diagnostics. A web-based platform has been developed to help complement these 
efforts.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2021.100312
PMCID: PMC8139281
PMID: 34056627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.