1. ACS Omega. 2021 Apr 12;6(15):10475-10485. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c01052. 
eCollection 2021 Apr 20.

Lanthanide-Aromatic Iminodiacetate Frameworks with Helical Tubes: Structure, 
Properties, and Low-Temperature Heat Capacity.

Liu ML(1), Shi Q(2), Liu LF(1), Li WB(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Dezhou University, Dezhou 
253023, P. R. China.
(2)Thermochemistry Laboratory, Liaoning Province Key Laboratory of 
Thermochemistry for Energy and Materials, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean 
Energy, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Dalian 116023, P. R. China.

A series of lanthanide coordination polymers [LnL(H2O)2] n [Ln = Pr (1), Nd (2), 
Sm (3), Eu (4), and Gd (5), H3L = N-(4-carboxy-benzyl)iminodiacetic acid] was 
hydrothermally prepared and structurally characterized. All the five compounds 
have been confirmed as 3D Ln-CPs with one-dimensional helical tunnels composed 
of four helical chains, although there are different coordination geometries 
around Ln3+. Enantiomeric helixes in 1-3, and absolute left-handed and 
right-handed helical chains in 4 and 5, respectively, lead to different tunnel 
spaces. Their conformations can also be featured by different space groups and 
unit cell dimensions. Photoluminescence measurement on 3 and 4 show 
characteristic emission peaks of Sm3+ and Eu3+ ions, respectively. The 
low-temperature heat capacity of 1-4 has been investigated in the temperature 
range of 1.9-300 K. Their heat capacity values are nearly equal below 10 K and 
display a crossover with the value order C p,m(2) > C p,m(1) ≈ C p,m(4) > C 
p,m(3) above 10 K. The measured heat capacities have been fitted, and the 
corresponding thermodynamic functions were consequently calculated based on the 
fitting parameters. The standard molar entropies at 298.15 K have been 
determined to be (415.71 ± 4.16), (451.32 ± 4.51), (308.53 ± 3.09), and (407.62 
± 4.08) J·mol-1·K-1 for 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c01052
PMCID: PMC8153764
PMID: 34056200

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.