1. Front Pediatr. 2021 May 7;9:641397. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.641397. eCollection
 2021.

Peripheral Precocious Puberty of Ovarian Origin in a Series of 18 Girls: Exome 
Study Finds Variants in Genes Responsible for Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism.

Brauner R(1), Bignon-Topalovic J(2), Bashamboo A(2), McElreavey K(2).

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Fondation Adolphe de Rothschild and Université Paris Descartes, 
Paris, France.
(2)Human Developmental Genetics Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Background: Peripheral precocious puberty of ovarian origin is a very rare 
condition compared to central form. It may be associated with an isolated 
ovarian cyst (OC). The causes of OC in otherwise healthy prepubertal girls is 
currently unknown. Methods: Exome sequencing was performed on a cohort of 18 
unrelated girls presenting with prenatal and/or prepubertal OC at pelvic 
ultrasonography. The presenting symptom was prenatal OC in 5, breast development 
in 7 (with vaginal bleeding in 3) and isolated vaginal bleeding in 6. All had OC 
≥ 10 mm. The girls had no other anomalies. Four patients had a familial history 
of ovarian anomalies and/or infertility. Results: In 9 girls (50%), candidate or 
known pathogenic variants were identified in genes associated with syndromic and 
non-syndromic forms of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism including PNPLA6, SEMA3A, 
TACR3, PROK2, KDM6A, KMT2D, OFD1, GNRH1, GNRHR, GLI3, INSR, CHD7, CDON, RNF216, 
PROKR2, GLI3, LEPR. Basal plasma concentrations of gonadotropins were 
undetectable and did not increase after gonadotropin-releasing hormone test in 3 
of them whilst 5 had prepubertal values. The plasma estradiol concentrations 
were prepubertal in 6 girls, high (576 pmol/L) in one and not evaluated in 2 of 
them. Conclusions: In the first study reporting exome sequencing in prepubertal 
OC, half of the patients with OC carry either previously reported pathogenic 
variants or potentially pathogenic variants in genes known to be associated with 
isolated or syndromic forms of congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. 
Functional studies and studies of other cohorts are recommended to establish the 
causality of these variants.

Copyright © 2021 Brauner, Bignon-Topalovic, Bashamboo and McElreavey.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.641397
PMCID: PMC8149944
PMID: 34055685

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.