1. Fam Cancer. 2021 Oct;20(4):295-303. doi: 10.1007/s10689-021-00263-z. Epub 2021
 May 31.

Review of guidelines for the identification and clinical care of patients with 
genetic predisposition for hematological malignancies.

Schlegelberger B(1), Mecucci C(2), Wlodarski M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. 
schlegelberger.brigitte@mh-hannover.de.
(2)Institute of Hematology and Center for Hemato-Oncology Research, University 
and Hospital of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Medical Center, Department of 
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.

Since WHO has recognized myeloid neoplasms with germline predisposition as a new 
entity in 2016, it has become increasingly clear that diagnosing familial 
leukemia has critical implications for both the patient and his/her family, and 
that interdisciplinary teams of hematologists and clinical geneticists should 
provide care for this specific patient group. Here, we summarize consensus 
criteria for the identification and screening of patients with genetic 
predisposition for hematologic malignancies, as provided by different working 
groups, e.g. by the Nordic MDS group and the AACR. In addition to typical 
clinical features, results from targeted deep sequencing may point to a genetic 
predisposition. We review strategies to distinguish somatic and germline 
variants and discuss recommendations for genetic analyses aiming to identify the 
underlying genetic variant that should follow established quality criteria to 
detect both SNVs and CNVs and to determine the pathogenicity of genetic 
variants. To enhance the knowledge about hematologic neoplasms with germline 
predisposition we recommend archiving clinical and genetic data and archiving 
them in international registries.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-021-00263-z
PMCID: PMC8484082
PMID: 34057692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.