1. Front Neuroanat. 2021 May 13;15:669631. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2021.669631. 
eCollection 2021.

Developmental Characterization of Schizophrenia-Associated Gene Zswim6 in Mouse 
Forebrain.

Chang CC(1), Kuo HY(2), Chen SY(1), Lin WT(1), Lu KM(1), Saito T(3), Liu FC(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Yang Ming Chiao 
Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Chiba, Japan.

Schizophrenia is a devastating neuropsychiatric disease with a globally 1% 
life-long prevalence. Clinical studies have linked Zswim6 mutations to 
developmental and neurological diseases, including schizophrenia. Zswim6's 
function remains largely unknown. Given the involvement of Zswim6 in 
schizophrenia and schizophrenia as a neurodevelopmental disease, it is important 
to understand the spatiotemporal expression pattern of Zswim6 in the developing 
brain. Here, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the spatiotemporal 
expression pattern of Zswim6 in the mouse forebrain by in situ hybridization 
with radioactive and non-radioactive-labeled riboprobes. Zswim6 mRNA was 
detected as early as E11.5 in the ventral forebrain. At E11.5-E13.5, Zswim6 was 
highly expressed in the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE). The LGE consisted of 
two progenitor populations. Dlx+;Er81+ cells in dorsal LGE comprised progenitors 
of olfactory bulb interneurons, whereas Dlx+;Isl1+ progenitors in ventral LGE 
gave rise to striatal projection neurons. Zswim6 was not colocalized with Er81 
in the dorsal LGE. In the ventral LGE, Zswim6 was colocalized with striatal 
progenitor marker Nolz-1. Zswim6 was highly expressed in the subventricular zone 
(SVZ) of LGE in which progenitors undergo the transition from proliferation to 
differentiation. Double labeling showed that Zswim6 was not colocalized with 
proliferation marker Ki67 but was colocalized with differentiation marker Tuj1 
in the SVZ, suggesting Zswim6 expression in early differentiating neurons. 
Zswim6 was also expressed in the adjacent structures of medial and caudal 
ganglionic eminences (MGE, CGE) that contained progenitors of cortical 
interneurons. At E15.5 and E17.5, Zswim6 was expressed in several key brain 
regions that were involved in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia, including the 
striatum, cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and medial habenular nucleus. Zswim6 was 
persistently expressed in the postnatal brain. Cell type analysis indicated that 
Zswim6 mRNA was colocalized with D1R-expressing striatonigral and D2R-expressing 
striatopallidal neurons of the adult striatum with a higher colocalization in 
striatopallidal neurons. These findings are of particular interest as striatal 
dopamine D2 receptors are known to be involved in the pathophysiology of 
schizophrenia. In summary, the comprehensive analysis provides an anatomical 
framework for the study of Zswim6 function and Zswim6-associated neurological 
disorders.

Copyright Â© 2021 Chang, Kuo, Chen, Lin, Lu, Saito and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2021.669631
PMCID: PMC8161499
PMID: 34054439

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.