1. Molecules. 2021 May 18;26(10):2993. doi: 10.3390/molecules26102993.

G-Protein Coupled Receptors (GPCRs) in Insects-A Potential Target for New 
Insecticide Development.

Liu N(1), Li T(1), Wang Y(1), Liu S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 
36849, USA.
(2)College of Fisheries, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China.

G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) play important roles in cell biology and 
insects' physiological processes, toxicological response and the development of 
insecticide resistance. New information on genome sequences, proteomic and 
transcriptome analysis and expression patterns of GPCRs in organs such as the 
central nervous system in different organisms has shown the importance of these 
signaling regulatory GPCRs and their impact on vital cell functions. Our growing 
understanding of the role played by GPCRs at the cellular, genome, transcriptome 
and tissue levels is now being utilized to develop new targets that will 
sidestep many of the problems currently hindering human disease control and 
insect pest management. This article reviews recent work on the expression and 
function of GPCRs in insects, focusing on the molecular complexes governing the 
insect physiology and development of insecticide resistance and examining the 
genome information for GPCRs in two medically important insects, mosquitoes and 
house flies, and their orthologs in the model insect species Drosophila 
melanogaster. The tissue specific distribution and expression of the insect 
GPCRs is discussed, along with fresh insights into practical aspects of insect 
physiology and toxicology that could be fundamental for efforts to develop new, 
more effective, strategies for pest control and resistance management.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26102993
PMCID: PMC8157829
PMID: 34069969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.