1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 May 15;13(10):2394. doi: 10.3390/cancers13102394.

Combining Radiation Therapy with ALK Inhibitors in Anaplastic Lymphoma 
Kinase-Positive Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC): A Clinical and Preclinical 
Overview.

Antoni D(1)(2), Burckel H(1), Noel G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Paul Strauss Comprehensive Cancer Center, Radiobiology Laboratory, Institut 
de Cancérologie Strasbourg Europe (ICANS), Strasbourg University, UNICANCER, 
67000 Strasbourg, France.
(2)Department of Radiotherapy, ICANS, Institut de Cancérologie Strasbourg 
Europe, 17 rue Albert Calmette, CEDEX, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

Over the past years, the identification of genetic alterations in oncogenic 
drivers in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has significantly and favorably 
transformed the outcome of patients who can benefit from targeted therapies such 
as tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Among these genetic alterations, anaplastic 
lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangements were discovered in 2007 and are present in 
3-5% of patients with NSCLC. In addition, radiotherapy remains one of the 
cornerstones of NSCLC treatment. Moreover, improvements in the field of 
radiotherapy with the use of hypofractionated or ablative stereotactic 
radiotherapy have led to a better outcome for localized or oligometastatic 
NSCLC. To date, the effects of the combination of ALK inhibitors and 
radiotherapy are unclear in terms of safety and efficacy but could potently 
improve treatment. In this manuscript, we provide a clinical and preclinical 
overview of combining radiation therapy with ALK inhibitors in anaplastic 
lymphoma kinase-positive non-small cell lung cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13102394
PMCID: PMC8156706
PMID: 34063424

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.