1. Viruses. 2021 May 20;13(5):945. doi: 10.3390/v13050945.

Prevalence of Neutralizing Antibodies to Canine Distemper Virus and Response to 
Vaccination in Client-Owned Adult Healthy Dogs.

Bergmann M(1), Freisl M(1), Zablotski Y(1), Khan MAA(2), Speck S(2), Truyen 
U(2), Hartmann K(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Small Animal Medicine, LMU Munich, Veterinaerstrasse 13, 80539 
Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute of Animal Hygiene and Veterinary Public Health, University of 
Leipzig, An den Tierkliniken 1, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Re-vaccinations against canine distemper virus (CDV) are commonly performed in 
3-year intervals. The study's aims were to determine anti-CDV antibodies in 
healthy adult dogs within 28 days of vaccination against CDV, and to evaluate 
factors associated with the presence of pre-vaccination antibodies and with the 
antibody response to vaccination. Ninety-seven dogs, not vaccinated within 1 
year before enrollment, were vaccinated with a modified live CDV vaccine. A 
measurement of the antibodies was performed before vaccination (day 0), on day 
7, and 28 after the vaccination by virus neutralization. A response to 
vaccination was defined as a ≥4-fold titer increase by day 28. Fisher's exact 
test was used to determine factors associated with a lack of antibodies and 
vaccination response. In total, 94.8% of the dogs (92/97; CI 95%: 88.2-98.1) had 
antibodies (≥10) prior to vaccination. A response to vaccination was not 
observed in any dog. Five dogs were considered humoral non-responders; these 
dogs neither had detectable antibodies before, nor developed antibodies after 
vaccination. Young age (<2 years) was significantly associated with a lack of 
pre-vaccination antibodies (p = 0.018; OR: 26.825; 95% CI: 1.216-1763.417). In 
conclusion, necessity of re-vaccination in adult healthy dogs should be debated 
and regular vaccinations should be replaced by antibody detection.

DOI: 10.3390/v13050945
PMCID: PMC8160937
PMID: 34065493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article. Although a vaccine of the company MSD was used, MSD played no role in 
this research. Katrin Hartmann has given talks for MSD and participated in other 
research funded by or using products from MSD. However, there is no commercial 
conflict of interest.