1. Genes (Basel). 2021 May 20;12(5):780. doi: 10.3390/genes12050780.

Imprecise Medicine: BRCA2 Variants of Uncertain Significance (VUS), the 
Challenges and Benefits to Integrate a Functional Assay Workflow with Clinical 
Decision Rules.

Jimenez-Sainz J(1), Jensen RB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA.

Pathological mutations in homology-directed repair (HDR) genes impact both 
future cancer risk and therapeutic options for patients. HDR is a high-fidelity 
DNA repair pathway for resolving DNA double-strand breaks throughout the genome. 
BRCA2 is an essential protein that mediates the loading of RAD51 onto resected 
DNA breaks, a key step in HDR. Germline mutations in BRCA2 are associated with 
an increased risk for breast, ovarian, prostate, and pancreatic cancer. Clinical 
findings of germline or somatic BRCA2 mutations in tumors suggest treatment with 
platinum agents or PARP inhibitors. However, when genetic analysis reveals a 
variant of uncertain significance (VUS) in the BRCA2 gene, precision 
medicine-based decisions become complex. VUS are genetic changes with unknown 
pathological impact. Current statistics indicate that between 10-20% of BRCA 
sequencing results are VUS, and of these, more than 50% are missense mutations. 
Functional assays to determine the pathological outcome of VUS are urgently 
needed to provide clinical guidance regarding cancer risk and treatment options. 
In this review, we provide a brief overview of BRCA2 functions in HDR, describe 
how BRCA2 VUS are currently assessed in the clinic, and how genetic and 
biochemical functional assays could be integrated into the clinical decision 
process. We suggest a multi-step workflow composed of robust and accurate 
functional assays to correctly evaluate the potential pathogenic or benign 
nature of BRCA2 VUS. Success in this precision medicine endeavor will offer 
actionable information to patients and their physicians.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12050780
PMCID: PMC8161351
PMID: 34065235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.