1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 May 20;22(10):5401. doi: 10.3390/ijms22105401.

The Structure-Properties-Cytotoxicity Interplay: A Crucial Pathway to 
Determining Graphene Oxide Biocompatibility.

Dziewięcka M(1), Pawlyta M(2), Majchrzycki Ł(3), Balin K(4), Barteczko S(1), 
Czerkawska M(1), Augustyniak M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biology, Biotechnology and Environmental Protection, Faculty of 
Natural Sciences, University of Silesia in Katowice, Bankowa 9, 40-007 Katowice, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Engineering Materials and Biomaterials, Faculty of Mechanical 
Engineering, Silesian University of Technology, Konarskiego 18A, 44-100 Gliwice, 
Poland.
(3)Center for Advanced Technology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Uniwersytetu 
Poznańskiego 10, 61-614 Poznań, Poland.
(4)Institute of Physics, University of Silesia, 75 Pulku Piechoty 1A, 41-500 
Chorzow, Poland.

Interest in graphene oxide nature and potential applications (especially 
nanocarriers) has resulted in numerous studies, but the results do not lead to 
clear conclusions. In this paper, graphene oxide is obtained by multiple 
synthesis methods and generally characterized. The mechanism of GO interaction 
with the organism is hard to summarize due to its high chemical activity and 
variability during the synthesis process and in biological buffers' 
environments. When assessing the biocompatibility of GO, it is necessary to take 
into account many factors derived from nanoparticles (structure, morphology, 
chemical composition) and the organism (species, defense mechanisms, 
adaptation). This research aims to determine and compare the in vivo toxicity 
potential of GO samples from various manufacturers. Each GO sample is analyzed 
in two concentrations and applied with food. The physiological reactions of an 
easy model Acheta domesticus (cell viability, apoptosis, oxidative defense, DNA 
damage) during ten-day lasting exposure were observed. This study emphasizes the 
variability of the GO nature and complements the biocompatibility aspect, 
especially in the context of various GO-based experimental models. Changes in 
the cell biomarkers are discussed in light of detailed physicochemical analysis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22105401
PMCID: PMC8161018
PMID: 34065593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.