1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 May 9;57(5):461. doi: 10.3390/medicina57050461.

Is Glycated Hemoglobin A1c Level Associated with Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes of 
Women Affected by Pre-Gestational Diabetes?

Xodo S(1), Londero AP(1), D'Agostin M(2), Novak A(1), Galasso S(3), Pittini 
C(4), Baccarini G(1), Grimaldi F(3), Driul L(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital of Udine, 33100 
Udine, Italy.
(2)Department Medical Area, School of Medicine, University of Udine, 33100 
Udine, Italy.
(3)Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, University Hospital of Udine, 33100 Udine, 
Italy.
(4)Unit of Neonatology, University Hospital of Udine, 33100 Udine, Italy.

Background and Objectives: This observational study aims to determine the 
correlation between glycemic control with the HbA1c value and adverse obstetric 
outcome in women affected by pre-gestational diabetes. Materials and Methods: A 
retrospective analysis has been performed at the University Hospital of Udine. 
Only patients with a singleton pregnancy, pre-gestational diabetes, and known 
level of Hb A1c throughout pregnancy were included in the study. Results: 
According to the HbA1c level, at the beginning of pregnancy, 49 patients with 
HbA1c ≤ 7.0% were compared with 45 patients with HbA1c > 7.0%. Maternal age at 
diagnosis of the disease was significantly higher in the group with HbA1c ≤ 7% 
than in the group with HbA1c > 7%, 26.00 (18.00-32.00) vs. 20.00 (12.50-27.00). 
Women with HbA1c ≤ 7.0% reached, at term of pregnancy, significantly lower 
levels of HbA1c, 5.8% (5.7-6.0) vs. 6.7% (6.3-7.3). Daily insulin units were 
statistically different between the two groups at the end of pregnancy (47.92 
(39.00-67.30) vs. 64.00 (48.00-82.00)). Proteinuria was significantly higher in 
the group with HbA1c > 7.0%, who delivered at earlier gestational age (37.57 
(35.57-38.00) vs. 38.14 (38.00-38.43). Moreover, women with HbA1c > 7.0% had a 
significantly higher prevalence of an adverse composite outcome. Of note, in 
multivariate logistic regression analysis, pregnancy complications were 
significantly correlated to pre-pregnancy HbA1c > 7.0% (OR 2.95 CI.95 1.16-7.48, 
p < 0.05) independently of age, insulin treatment, and type of diabetes. 
Conclusions: Our data, obtained from a single-center cohort study, suggest that 
starting pregnancy with poor glycemic control might predict more complex 
management of diabetes in the following trimesters.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57050461
PMCID: PMC8151463
PMID: 34065046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.