1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 May 13;22(10):5158. doi: 10.3390/ijms22105158.

Multi-Omics Perspective Reveals the Different Patterns of Tumor Immune 
Microenvironment Based on Programmed Death Ligand 1 (PD-L1) Expression and 
Predictor of Responses to Immune Checkpoint Blockade across Pan-Cancer.

Huang K(1), Hu M(1), Chen J(1), Wei J(1), Qin J(1), Lin S(1), Du H(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biology and Biological Engineering, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China.

Immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapies have shown great promise in cancer 
treatment. However, the intra-heterogeneity is a major barrier to reasonably 
classifying the potential benefited patients. Comprehensive heterogeneity 
analysis is needed to solve these clinical issues. In this study, the samples 
from pan-cancer and independent breast cancer datasets were divided into four 
tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) subtypes based on tumor programmed death 
ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression level and tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) state. 
As the combination of the TIL Z score and PD-L1 expression showed superior 
prediction of response to ICI in multiple data sets compared to other methods, 
we used the TIL Z score and PD-L1 to classify samples. Therefore, samples were 
divided by combined TIL Z score and PD-L1 to identify four TIME subtypes, 
including type I (3.24%), type II (43.24%), type III (6.76%), and type IV 
(46.76%). Type I was associated with favorable prognosis with more T and DC 
cells, while type III had the poorest condition and composed a higher level of 
activated mast cells. Furthermore, TIME subtypes exhibited a distinct genetic 
and transcriptional feature: type III was observed to have the highest mutation 
rate (77.92%), while co-mutations patterns were characteristic in type I, and 
the PD-L1 positive subgroup showed higher carbohydrates, lipids, and xenobiotics 
metabolism compared to others. Overall, we developed a robust method to classify 
TIME and analyze the divergence of prognosis, immune cell composition, genomics, 
and transcriptomics patterns among TIME subtypes, which potentially provides 
insight for classification of TIME and a referrable theoretical basis for the 
screening benefited groups in the ICI immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22105158
PMCID: PMC8153013
PMID: 34068143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.