1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 May 19;22(10):5329. doi: 10.3390/ijms22105329.

Epigenetic DNA Methylation of EBI3 Modulates Human Interleukin-35 Formation via 
NFkB Signaling: A Promising Therapeutic Option in Ulcerative Colitis.

Wetzel A(1), Scholtka B(1), Schumacher F(2), Rawel H(1), Geisendörfer B(1), 
Kleuser B(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Nutritional Science, University of Potsdam, 14558 Nuthetal, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Pharmacy, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Ulcerative colitis (UC), a severe chronic disease with unclear etiology that is 
associated with increased risk for colorectal cancer, is accompanied by 
dysregulation of cytokines. Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 3 (EBI3) encodes a 
subunit in the unique heterodimeric IL-12 cytokine family of either pro- or 
anti-inflammatory function. After having recently demonstrated that upregulation 
of EBI3 by histone acetylation alleviates disease symptoms in a dextran sulfate 
sodium (DSS)-treated mouse model of chronic colitis, we now aimed to examine a 
possible further epigenetic regulation of EBI3 by DNA methylation under 
inflammatory conditions. Treatment with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 
(DNMTi) decitabine (DAC) and TNFα led to synergistic upregulation of EBI3 in 
human colon epithelial cells (HCEC). Use of different signaling pathway 
inhibitors indicated NFκB signaling was necessary and proportional to the 
synergistic EBI3 induction. MALDI-TOF/MS and HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis of 
DAC/TNFα-treated HCEC identified IL-12p35 as the most probable binding partner 
to form a functional protein. EBI3/IL-12p35 heterodimers (IL-35) induce their 
own gene upregulation, something that was indeed observed in HCEC cultured with 
media from previously DAC/TNFα-treated HCEC. These results suggest that under 
inflammatory and demethylating conditions the upregulation of EBI3 results in 
the formation of anti-inflammatory IL-35, which might be considered as a 
therapeutic target in colitis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22105329
PMCID: PMC8158689
PMID: 34069352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.