1. Molecules. 2021 May 5;26(9):2717. doi: 10.3390/molecules26092717.

A Validated LC-MS/MS Assay for the Simultaneous Quantification of the 
FDA-Approved Anticancer Mixture (Encorafenib and Binimetinib): Metabolic 
Stability Estimation.

Attwa MW(1)(2), Darwish HW(1)(3), Al-Shakliah NS(1), Kadi AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, King Saud 
University, P.O. Box 2457, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Students' University Hospital, The Pharmacy, Mansoura University, Mansoura 
35516, Egypt.
(3)Analytical Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Kasr 
El-Aini St., Cairo 11562, Egypt.

The concurrent use of oral encorafenib (Braftovi, ENF) and binimetinib (Mektovi, 
BNB) is a combination anticancer therapy approved by the United States Food and 
Drug Administration (USFDA) for patients with BRAFV600E/V600K mutations 
suffering from metastatic or unresectable melanoma. Metabolism is considered one 
of the main pathways of drug elimination from the body (responsible for 
elimination of about 75% of known drugs), it is important to understand and 
study drug metabolic stability. Metabolically unstable compounds are not good as 
they required repetitive dosages during therapy, while very stable drugs may 
result in increasing the risk of adverse drug reactions. Metabolic stability of 
compounds could be examined using in vitro or in silico experiments. First, in 
silico metabolic vulnerability for ENF and BNB was investigated using the 
StarDrop WhichP450 module to confirm the lability of the drugs under study to 
liver metabolism. Second, we established an LC-MS/MS method for the simultaneous 
quantification of ENF and BNB applied to metabolic stability assessment. Third, 
in silico toxicity assessment of ENF and BNB was performed using the StarDrop 
DEREK module. Chromatographic separation of ENF, BNB, and avitinib (an internal 
standard) was achieved using an isocratic mobile phase on a Hypersil BDS C18 
column. The linear range for ENF and BNB in the human liver microsome (HLM) 
matrix was 5-500 ng/mL (R2 â‰¥ 0.999). The metabolic stabilities were calculated 
using intrinsic clearance and in vitro half-life. Furthermore, ENF and BNB did 
not significantly influence each other's metabolic stability or metabolic 
disposition when used concurrently. These results indicate that ENF and BNB will 
slowly bioaccumulate after multiple doses.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26092717
PMCID: PMC8125647
PMID: 34063139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests 
exist.