1. Cells. 2021 May 10;10(5):1152. doi: 10.3390/cells10051152.

PD-1 and LAG-3 Checkpoint Blockade: Potential Avenues for Therapy in B-Cell 
Lymphoma.

Tobin JWD(1)(2), Bednarska K(1), Campbell A(2), Keane C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Mater Research Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4102, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Haematology, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, QLD 4102, 
Australia.

The dependence of cancer on an immunotolerant tumor microenvironment (TME) is 
well established. Immunotherapies that overcome tumor-induced immune suppression 
have been central to recent advancements in oncology. This is highlighted by the 
success of agents that interrupt PD-1 mediated immune suppression in a range of 
cancers. However, while PD-1 blockade has been paradigm-shifting in many 
malignancies, the majority of cancers show high rates of primary resistance to 
this approach. This has led to a rapid expansion in therapeutic targeting of 
other immune checkpoint molecules to provide combination immune checkpoint 
blockade (ICB), with one such promising approach is blockade of Lymphocyte 
Activation Gene 3 (LAG-3). Clinically, lymphoproliferative disorders show a wide 
spectrum of responses to ICB. Specific subtypes including classical Hodgkin 
lymphoma have demonstrated striking efficacy with anti-PD-1 therapy. Conversely, 
early trials of ICB have been relatively disappointing in common subtypes of 
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. In this review, we describe the TME of common lymphoma 
subtypes with an emphasis on the role of prominent immune checkpoint molecules 
PD-1 and LAG3. We will also discuss current clinical evidence for ICB in 
lymphoma and highlight key areas for further investigation where synergistic 
dual checkpoint blockade of LAG-3 and PD-1 could be used to overcome ICB 
resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10051152
PMCID: PMC8151045
PMID: 34068762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.W.D.T.—Honoraria: Roche, Research grants: 
Gilead; K.B.—None; A.C.—None; C.K.—Consulting: Karyopharm, BMS, MSD, Roche, 
Janssen, and Gilead.