1. Mar Drugs. 2021 May 17;19(5):278. doi: 10.3390/md19050278.

Fish Oil Increases Diet-Induced Thermogenesis in Mice.

Yamazaki T(1), Li D(1)(2), Ikaga R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Metabolism, National Institute of Health and 
Nutrition, National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition, 
1-23-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8636, Japan.
(2)The Graduate School of Humanities and Sciences, Ochanomizu University, 2-1-1 
Otsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan.

Increasing energy expenditure (EE) is beneficial for preventing obesity. 
Diet-induced thermogenesis (DIT) is one of the components of total EE. 
Therefore, increasing DIT is effective against obesity. We examined how much 
fish oil (FO) increased DIT by measuring absolute values of DIT in mice. 
C57BL/6J male mice were given diets of 30 energy% fat consisting of FO or 
safflower oil plus butter as control oil (Con). After administration for 9 days, 
respiration in mice was monitored, and then the data were used to calculate DIT 
and EE. DIT increased significantly by 1.2-fold in the FO-fed mice compared with 
the Con-fed mice. Body weight gain was significantly lower in the FO-fed mice. 
FO increased the levels of uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1) mRNA and UCP1 protein in 
brown adipose tissue (BAT) by 1.5- and 1.2-fold, respectively. In subcutaneous 
white adipose tissue (subWAT), the levels of Ucp1 mRNA and UCP1 protein were 
increased by 6.3- and 2.7-fold, respectively, by FO administration. FO also 
significantly increased the expression of markers of browning in subWAT such as 
fibroblast growth factor 21 and cell death-inducing DNA fragmentation factor 
Î±-like effector a. Thus, dietary FO seems to increase DIT in mice via the 
increased expressions of Ucp1 in BAT and induced browning of subWAT. FO might be 
a promising dietary fat in the prevention of obesity by upregulation of energy 
metabolism.

DOI: 10.3390/md19050278
PMCID: PMC8156710
PMID: 34067796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.