1. Mol Biol Rep. 2021 May;48(5):4397-4404. doi: 10.1007/s11033-021-06455-1. Epub 
2021 Jun 1.

An association between fibrinogen gene polymorphisms and diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy in young patients with type 1 diabetes.

Vojtková J(1), Kolková Z(1)(2), Motyková K(1), Kostková M(1), Suroviaková S(3), 
Grendár M(4), Bánovčin P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine and University 
Hospital, Comenius University in Bratislava, Kollárova 2, 036 01, Martin, 
Slovakia.
(2)Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Biomedical Center Martin, Comenius University 
in Bratislava, Martin, Slovakia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine and University 
Hospital, Comenius University in Bratislava, Kollárova 2, 036 01, Martin, 
Slovakia. departmentofpediatricsmartin@gmail.com.
(4)Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Bioinformatic Center, Biomedical Center 
Martin, Comenius University in Bratislava, Martin, Slovakia.

In complex etiopathogenesis of diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN), hemostatic 
dysfunction and subclinical inflammation play a possible role. Fibrinogen is 
involved in both the hemostatic and inflammatory pathways, so we hypothesize 
that fibrinogen gene polymorphisms might be associated with DPN. A total of 127 
young patients with type 1 diabetes (T1D) (average age, 18.5 ± 4.65 years; 
average diabetes duration, 14.5 ± 2.26 years) and 90 healthy controls were 
enrolled into the study. Basic biochemical and coagulation parameters were 
measured and gene polymorphisms of fibrinogen alpha (rs6050) and beta 
(rs1800790) were established. DPN was diagnosed in 38 diabetic patients by 
neurological examination. AA genotype and A allele of rs1800790 polymorphism of 
fibrinogen beta were associated with increased risk of DPN (odds ratio [OR] 
4.537, 95% confidence interval [95CI] 1.14-19.94, p = 0.019 and OR 1.958, 95CI 
1.038-3.675, p = 0.029, respectively). No association was found between DPN and 
rs6050 gene polymorphisms. Plasma fibrinogen concentration significantly 
correlated with HbA1c (Spearman's correlation coefficient [r] = 0.54) and HDL 
cholesterol (r = - 0.67). A allele and AA genotype of rs1800790 seem to be 
associated with DPN in young patients with T1D. Further studies are appropriate 
to elucidate the role of fibrinogen gene polymorphisms in the complex etiology 
of DPN.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-021-06455-1
PMID: 34061326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]