1. Nutrients. 2021 May 13;13(5):1635. doi: 10.3390/nu13051635.

An Artificial-Intelligence-Discovered Functional Ingredient, NRT_N0G5IJ, Derived 
from Pisum sativum, Decreases HbA1c in a Prediabetic Population.

Chauhan S(1), Kerr A(1), Keogh B(1), Nolan S(1), Casey R(1), Adelfio A(1), 
Murphy N(1), Doherty A(1), Davis H(1), Wall AM(1), Khaldi N(1).

Author information:
(1)Nuritas Ltd., Joshua Dawson House, Dawson St, Dublin 2, Ireland.

The prevalence of prediabetes is rapidly increasing, and this can lead to an 
increased risk for individuals to develop type 2 diabetes and associated 
diseases. Therefore, it is necessary to develop nutritional strategies to 
maintain healthy glucose levels and prevent glucose metabolism dysregulation in 
the general population. Functional ingredients offer great potential for the 
prevention of various health conditions, including blood glucose regulation, in 
a cost-effective manner. Using an artificial intelligence (AI) approach, a 
functional ingredient, NRT_N0G5IJ, was predicted and produced from Pisum sativum 
(pea) protein by hydrolysis and then validated. Treatment of human skeletal 
muscle cells with NRT_N0G5IJ significantly increased glucose uptake, indicating 
efficacy of this ingredient in vitro. When db/db diabetic mice were treated with 
NRT_N0G5IJ, we observed a significant reduction in glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) 
levels and a concomitant benefit on fasting glucose. A pilot double-blinded, 
placebo controlled human trial in a population of healthy individuals with 
elevated HbA1c (5.6% to 6.4%) showed that HbA1c percentage was significantly 
reduced when NRT_N0G5IJ was supplemented in the diet over a 12-week period. 
Here, we provide evidence of an AI approach to discovery and demonstrate that a 
functional ingredient identified using this technology could be used as a 
supplement to maintain healthy glucose regulation.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13051635
PMCID: PMC8152294
PMID: 34068000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are employees of Nuritas Limited. 
The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision 
to publish the results.