1. Entropy (Basel). 2021 May 20;23(5):638. doi: 10.3390/e23050638.

Improvement of Contact Tracing with Citizen's Distributed Risk Maps.

Rebollo M(1)(2), Benito RM(2), Losada JC(2), Galeano J(2).

Author information:
(1)VRAIn-Valencian Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Universitat 
Politècnica de València, 46022 Valencia, Spain.
(2)Complex Systems Group, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, 
Spain.

The rapid spread of COVID-19 has demonstrated the need for accurate information 
to contain its diffusion. Technological solutions are a complement that can help 
citizens to be informed about the risk in their environment. Although measures 
such as contact traceability have been successful in some countries, their use 
raises society's resistance. This paper proposes a variation of the consensus 
processes in directed networks to create a risk map of a determined area. The 
process shares information with trusted contacts: people we would notify in the 
case of being infected. When the process converges, each participant would have 
obtained the risk map for the selected zone. The results are compared with the 
pilot project's impact testing of the Spanish contact tracing app (RadarCOVID). 
The paper also depicts the results combining both strategies: contact tracing to 
detect potential infections and risk maps to avoid movements into conflictive 
areas. Although some works affirm that contact tracing apps need 60% of users to 
control the propagation, our results indicate that a 40% could be enough. On the 
other hand, the elaboration of risk maps could work with only 20% of active 
installations, but the effect is to delay the propagation instead of reducing 
the contagion. With both active strategies, this methodology is able to 
significantly reduce infected people with fewer participants.

DOI: 10.3390/e23050638
PMCID: PMC8160685
PMID: 34065581

Conflict of interest statement: The funders had no role in the design of the 
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of 
the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.