1. Cells. 2021 May 11;10(5):1171. doi: 10.3390/cells10051171.

Membrane Interference Against HIV-1 by Intrinsic Antiviral Factors: The Case of 
IFITMs.

Marziali F(1), Cimarelli A(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie (CIRI), Université de 
Lyon, Inserm U1111, CNRS, UMR5308, ENS de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 
1, 46 Allée d'Italie, 69007 Lyon, France.

HIV-1 is a complex retrovirus that is adapted to replicate in cells of the 
immune system. To do so, HIV-1, like other viruses, developed strategies to use 
several cellular processes to its advantage, but had also to come to terms with 
an arsenal of cellular innate defense proteins, or antiviral factors, that 
target more or less efficiently, virtually every step of the virus replicative 
cycle. Among antiviral restriction factors, the family of interferon-induced 
transmembrane proteins (IFITMs) has emerged as a crucial component of cellular 
innate defenses for their ability to interfere with both early and late phases 
of viral replication by inhibiting cellular and viral membranes fusion. Here, we 
review the enormous advances made since the discovery of IFITMs as 
interferon-regulated genes more than thirty years ago, with a particular focus 
on HIV-1 and on the elements that modulate its susceptibility or resistance 
towards members of this family. Given the recent advances of the field in the 
elucidation of the mechanism of IFITM inhibition and on the mechanism(s) of 
viral resistance, we expect that future years will bring novel insights into the 
definition of the multiple facets of IFITMs and on their possible use for novel 
therapeutical approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10051171
PMCID: PMC8151167
PMID: 34065027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.