1. Viruses. 2021 May 14;13(5):910. doi: 10.3390/v13050910.

Prognostic Markers and Driver Genes and Options for Targeted Therapy in 
Human-Papillomavirus-Positive Tonsillar and Base-of-Tongue Squamous Cell 
Carcinoma.

Näsman A(1), Holzhauser S(1), Kostopoulou ON(1), Zupancic M(1), Ährlund-Richter 
A(1), Du J(2), Dalianis T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Bioclinicum J6:20, 
Karolinska University Hospital, 171 64 Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tumor Biology and Cellular Biology, Karolinska 
Institutet, Biomedicum, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The incidence of Human-papillomavirus-positive (HPV+) tonsillar and 
base-of-tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC and BOTSCC, respectively) is 
increasing epidemically, but they have better prognosis than equivalent 
HPV-negative (HPV-) cancers, with roughly 80% vs. 50% 3-year disease-free 
survival, respectively. The majority of HPV+ TSCC and BOTSCC patients therefore 
most likely do not require the intensified chemoradiotherapy given today to head 
and neck cancer patients and would with de-escalated therapy avoid several 
severe side effects. Moreover, for those with poor prognosis, survival has not 
improved, so better-tailored alternatives are urgently needed. In line with 
refined personalized medicine, recent studies have focused on identifying 
predictive markers and driver cancer genes useful for better stratifying patient 
treatment as well as for targeted therapy. This review presents some of these 
endeavors and briefly describes some recent experimental progress and some 
clinical trials with targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/v13050910
PMCID: PMC8156012
PMID: 34069114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.