1. Nutrients. 2021 May 13;13(5):1655. doi: 10.3390/nu13051655.

Dietary Fibre Modulates the Gut Microbiota.

Cronin P(1)(2), Joyce SA(2)(3), O'Toole PW(2)(4), O'Connor EM(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Limerick, V94 T9PX Limerick, 
Ireland.
(2)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, T12 K8AF Cork, Ireland.
(3)School of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University College Cork, T12 K8AF 
Cork, Ireland.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University College Cork, T12 K8AF Cork, Ireland.
(5)Health Research Institute, University of Limerick, V94 T9PX Limerick, 
Ireland.

Dietary fibre has long been established as a nutritionally important, 
health-promoting food ingredient. Modern dietary practices have seen a 
significant reduction in fibre consumption compared with ancestral habits. This 
is related to the emergence of low-fibre "Western diets" associated with 
industrialised nations, and is linked to an increased prevalence of gut diseases 
such as inflammatory bowel disease, obesity, type II diabetes mellitus and 
metabolic syndrome. The characteristic metabolic parameters of these individuals 
include insulin resistance, high fasting and postprandial glucose, as well as 
high plasma cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and high-density 
lipoprotein (HDL). Gut microbial signatures are also altered significantly in 
these cohorts, suggesting a causative link between diet, microbes and disease. 
Dietary fibre consumption has been hypothesised to reverse these changes through 
microbial fermentation and the subsequent production of short-chain fatty acids 
(SCFA), which improves glucose and lipid parameters in individuals who harbour 
diseases associated with dysfunctional metabolism. This review article examines 
how different types of dietary fibre can differentially alter glucose and lipid 
metabolism through changes in gut microbiota composition and function.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13051655
PMCID: PMC8153313
PMID: 34068353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.