1. Animals (Basel). 2021 May 21;11(6):1489. doi: 10.3390/ani11061489.

Investigation of Early Supplementation of Nucleotides on the Intestinal 
Maturation of Weaned Piglets.

Correa F(1), Luise D(1), Archetti I(2), Bosi P(1), Trevisi P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agricultural and Food Sciences (DISTAL), Alma Mater 
Studiorum-University of Bologna, Viale G. Fanin 46, 40127 Bologna, Italy.
(2)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia Romagna 
(IZSLER), "Bruno Ubertini", Via Bianchi, 9, 25124 Brescia, Italy.

Nucleotides are essential for the development of the gastrointestinal tract and 
immune function, but their intake with milk by piglets could be insufficient. 
The effect of nucleotides on growth and health was tested on 98 piglets divided 
into two groups: NU, orally administrated with 4 mL of a nucleotide-based 
product (SwineMODÂ®) at 10, 15, 18, 21, 27 days, or not (CO). Blood and feces 
were sampled at weaning (26 d, T1), and at 38 d (T2). Per each group and 
time-point, eight piglets were slaughtered and jejunal Peyer's patches (JPPs) 
were collected. NU increased hemoglobin content and hematocrit, but not growth. 
At weaning, the NU fecal microbiota was characterized by the abundance of 
Campylobacteraceae, more typical of the growing phase, compared to CO, with a 
greater abundance of Streptococcaceae. For the blood transcriptome, an initial 
greater inflammatory activation was seen in CO, while at T2, NU enriched gene 
sets related to erythropoiesis. The activation of gene groups ranging from 
epigenetic response to transcriptional regulation evidenced an intense 
proliferative activity in NU JPPs. NU supplementation did not influence the 
growth performance of piglets but could have expressed a positive effect on pig 
microbiota anticipating its maturation at weaning. This immunostimulant activity 
in the JPPs could moderate the inflammation in the immediate pre-weaning.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11061489
PMCID: PMC8223990
PMID: 34064055

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.