1. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2021;145:277-312. doi: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2021.03.005. Epub
2021  Apr 23.

Xenopus as a platform for discovery of genes relevant to human disease.

Kostiuk V(1), Khokha MK(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Genomics Discovery Program, Department of Pediatrics and Genetics, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States.
(2)Pediatric Genomics Discovery Program, Department of Pediatrics and Genetics, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States. Electronic 
address: mustafa.khokha@yale.edu.

Congenital birth defects result from an abnormal development of an embryo and 
have detrimental effects on children's health. Specifically, congenital heart 
malformations are a leading cause of death among pediatric patients and often 
require surgical interventions within the first year of life. Increased efforts 
to navigate the human genome provide an opportunity to discover multiple 
candidate genes in patients suffering from birth defects. These efforts, 
however, fail to provide an explanation regarding the mechanisms of disease 
pathogenesis and emphasize the need for an efficient platform to screen 
candidate genes. Xenopus is a rapid, cost effective, high-throughput vertebrate 
organism to model the mechanisms behind human disease. This review provides 
numerous examples describing the successful use of Xenopus to investigate the 
contribution of patient mutations to complex phenotypes including congenital 
heart disease and heterotaxy. Moreover, we describe a variety of unique methods 
that allow us to rapidly recapitulate patients' phenotypes in frogs: gene 
knockout and knockdown strategies, the use of fate maps for targeted 
manipulations, and novel imaging modalities. The combination of patient genomics 
data and the functional studies in Xenopus will provide necessary answers to the 
patients suffering from birth defects. Furthermore, it will allow for the 
development of better diagnostic methods to ensure early detection and 
intervention. Finally, with better understanding of disease pathogenesis, new 
treatment methods can be tailored specifically to address patient's phenotype 
and genotype.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2021.03.005
PMCID: PMC8734201
PMID: 34074532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author conflict of interest None.