1. J Cell Sci. 2021 Jun 1;134(11):jcs258338. doi: 10.1242/jcs.258338. Epub 2021
Jun  4.

Genome-wide imaging screen uncovers molecular determinants of arsenite-induced 
protein aggregation and toxicity.

Andersson S(1), Romero A(1), Rodrigues JI(1), Hua S(1), Hao X(1)(2), Jacobson 
T(1), Karl V(1), Becker N(1), Ashouri A(1), Rauch S(3), Nyström T(1)(2), Liu 
B(1), Tamás MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, 
Box 462, SE-405 30 Göteborg, Sweden.
(2)Institute of Biomedicine - Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE-405 30, Göteborg, Sweden.
(3)Water Environment Technology, Department of Architecture and Civil 
Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Göteborg, Sweden.

The toxic metalloid arsenic causes widespread misfolding and aggregation of 
cellular proteins. How these protein aggregates are formed in vivo, the 
mechanisms by which they affect cells and how cells prevent their accumulation 
is not fully understood. To find components involved in these processes, we 
performed a genome-wide imaging screen and identified Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
deletion mutants with either enhanced or reduced protein aggregation levels 
during arsenite exposure. We show that many of the identified factors are 
crucial to safeguard protein homeostasis (proteostasis) and to protect cells 
against arsenite toxicity. The hits were enriched for various functions 
including protein biosynthesis and transcription, and dedicated follow-up 
experiments highlight the importance of accurate transcriptional and 
translational control for mitigating protein aggregation and toxicity during 
arsenite stress. Some of the hits are associated with pathological conditions, 
suggesting that arsenite-induced protein aggregation may affect disease 
processes. The broad network of cellular systems that impinge on proteostasis 
during arsenic stress identified in this current study provides a valuable 
resource and a framework for further elucidation of the mechanistic details of 
metalloid toxicity and pathogenesis. This article has an associated First Person 
interview with the first authors of the paper.

© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.258338
PMCID: PMC8214759
PMID: 34085697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.