1. Aging (Albany NY). 2021 Jun 4;13(11):14630-14650. doi: 10.18632/aging.203117. 
Epub 2021 Jun 4.

Different epigenetic signatures of newborn telomere length and telomere 
attrition rate in early life.

Wang C(1), Nawrot TS(1)(2), Van Der Stukken C(1), Tylus D(1), Sleurs H(1), 
Peusens M(1), Alfano R(1), Langie SAS(1)(3), Plusquin M(1), Martens DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Environmental Sciences, Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium.
(2)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Leuven University, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School for Nutrition and 
Translational Research in Metabolism (NUTRIM), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Telomere length (TL) and telomere shortening are biological indicators of aging, 
and epigenetic associates have been found for TL in adults. However, the role of 
epigenetic signatures in setting newborn TL and early life telomere dynamics is 
unknown. In the present study, based on 247 participating newborns from the 
ENVIRONAGE birth cohort, whole-genome DNA methylation, profiled on the Illumina 
MethylationEPIC BeadChip microarray, and TL were measured in cord blood. In a 
follow-up visit at a mean age of 4.58 years, leukocyte TL was evaluated. We 
combined an epigenome-wide association study and a statistical learning method 
with re-sampling to select CpGs and their two-way interactions to model baseline 
(cord blood) TL and early-life telomere attrition rate, where distinct 
epigenetic signatures were identified for the two outcomes. In addition, a 
stronger epigenetic regulation was suggested in setting newborn TL than that of 
telomere dynamics in early life: 47 CpGs and 7 between-CpG interactions 
explained 76% of the variance in baseline TLs, while 72% of the total variance 
in telomere attrition rate was explained by 31 CpGs and 5 interactions. 
Functional enrichment analysis based on the selected CpGs in the two models 
revealed GLUT4 translocation and immune cell signaling pathways, respectively. 
These CpGs and interactions, as well as the cellular pathways, are potential 
novel targets of further investigation of telomere biology and aging.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.203117
PMCID: PMC8221291
PMID: 34086604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.