1. Mol Pain. 2021 Jan-Dec;17:17448069211021698. doi: 10.1177/17448069211021698.

Inhibition of calcium-stimulated adenylyl cyclase subtype 1 (AC1) for the 
treatment of neuropathic and inflammatory pain in adult female mice.

Zhou Z(1), Shi W(1), Fan K(1), Xue M(1), Zhou S(1), Chen QY(1)(2), Lu JS(1)(2), 
Li XH(1)(2), Zhuo M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuron and Disease, Frontier Institutes of Science and Technology, 
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Institute of Brain Research, Qingdao International Academician Park, Qingdao, 
Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Cortical long-term potentiation (LTP) serves as a cellular model for chronic 
pain. As an important subtype of adenylyl cyclases (ACs), adenylyl cyclase 
subtype 1 (AC1) is critical for the induction of cortical LTP in the anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC). Genetic deletion of AC1 or pharmacological inhibition of 
AC1 blocked behavioral allodynia in animal models of neuropathic and 
inflammatory pain. Our previous experiments have identified a lead candidate AC1 
inhibitor, NB001, which is highly selective for AC1 over other AC isoforms, and 
found that NB001 is effective in inhibiting behavioral allodynia in animal 
models of chronic neuropathic and inflammatory pain. However, previous 
experiments were carried out in adult male animals. Considering the potential 
gender difference as an important issue in researches of pain and analgesia, we 
investigated the effect of NB001 in female chronic pain animal models. We found 
that NB001, when administered orally, has an analgesic effect in female animal 
models of neuropathic and inflammatory pain without any observable side effect. 
Genetic deletion of AC1 also reduced allodynia responses in models of 
neuropathic pain and chronic inflammation pain in adult female mice. In brain 
slices of adult female mice, bath application of NB001(20 Î¼M) blocked the 
induction of LTP in ACC. Our results indicate that calcium-stimulated AC1 is 
required for injury-related cortical LTP and behavioral allodynia in both sexes 
of adult animals, and NB001 can be used as a potential therapeutic drug for 
treating neuropathic and inflammatory pain in man and woman.

DOI: 10.1177/17448069211021698
PMCID: PMC8182195
PMID: 34082635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.