1. PLoS Genet. 2021 Jun 4;17(6):e1009601. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009601. 
eCollection 2021 Jun.

Crosstalk between H2A variant-specific modifications impacts vital cell 
functions.

Schmücker A(1), Lei B(1), Lorković ZJ(1), Capella M(2), Braun S(2)(3), Bourguet 
P(1)(4), Mathieu O(4), Mechtler K(1), Berger F(1).

Author information:
(1)Gregor Mendel Institute, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter, 
Vienna, Austria.
(2)Biomedical Center, Department of Physiological Chemistry, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(3)International Max Planck Research School for Molecular and Cellular Life 
Sciences, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(4)CNRS, Université Clermont Auvergne, Inserm, Génétique Reproduction et 
Développement, Clermont-Ferrand, France.

Selection of C-terminal motifs participated in evolution of distinct histone H2A 
variants. Hybrid types of variants combining motifs from distinct H2A classes 
are extremely rare. This suggests that the proximity between the motif cases 
interferes with their function. We studied this question in flowering plants 
that evolved sporadically a hybrid H2A variant combining the SQ motif of H2A.X 
that participates in the DNA damage response with the KSPK motif of H2A.W that 
stabilizes heterochromatin. Our inventory of PTMs of H2A.W variants showed that 
in vivo the cell cycle-dependent kinase CDKA phosphorylates the KSPK motif of 
H2A.W but only in absence of an SQ motif. Phosphomimicry of KSPK prevented DNA 
damage response by the SQ motif of the hybrid H2A.W/X variant. In a synthetic 
yeast expressing the hybrid H2A.W/X variant, phosphorylation of KSPK prevented 
binding of the BRCT-domain protein Mdb1 to phosphorylated SQ and impaired 
response to DNA damage. Our findings illustrate that PTMs mediate interference 
between the function of H2A variant specific C-terminal motifs. Such 
interference could explain the mutual exclusion of motifs that led to evolution 
of H2A variants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009601
PMCID: PMC8208582
PMID: 34086674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.