1. Nat Plants. 2021 Jun;7(6):842-855. doi: 10.1038/s41477-021-00932-y. Epub 2021 
Jun 3.

Synthetic promoter designs enabled by a comprehensive analysis of plant core 
promoters.

Jores T(1), Tonnies J(1)(2), Wrightsman T(3), Buckler ES(3)(4)(5), Cuperus 
JT(6), Fields S(7)(8), Queitsch C(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Graduate Program in Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Section of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(4)Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, 
Ithaca, NY, USA.
(5)Institute for Genomic Diversity, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 
cuperusj@uw.edu.
(7)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 
fields@uw.edu.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 
fields@uw.edu.
(9)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 
queitsch@uw.edu.

Targeted engineering of plant gene expression holds great promise for ensuring 
food security and for producing biopharmaceuticals in plants. However, this 
engineering requires thorough knowledge of cis-regulatory elements to precisely 
control either endogenous or introduced genes. To generate this knowledge, we 
used a massively parallel reporter assay to measure the activity of nearly 
complete sets of promoters from Arabidopsis, maize and sorghum. We demonstrate 
that core promoter elements-notably the TATA box-as well as promoter GC content 
and promoter-proximal transcription factor binding sites influence promoter 
strength. By performing the experiments in two assay systems, leaves of the 
dicot tobacco and protoplasts of the monocot maize, we detect species-specific 
differences in the contributions of GC content and transcription factors to 
promoter strength. Using these observations, we built computational models to 
predict promoter strength in both assay systems, allowing us to design highly 
active promoters comparable in activity to the viral 35S minimal promoter. Our 
results establish a promising experimental approach to optimize native promoter 
elements and generate synthetic ones with desirable features.

DOI: 10.1038/s41477-021-00932-y
PMCID: PMC10246763
PMID: 34083762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.