1. Front Nutr. 2021 May 19;8:690138. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2021.690138. eCollection 
2021.

Allobaculum Involves in the Modulation of Intestinal ANGPTLT4 Expression in Mice 
Treated by High-Fat Diet.

Zheng Z(1)(2), Lyu W(1), Ren Y(2), Li X(1), Zhao S(2), Yang H(1), Xiao Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agro-Products, Institute of Agro-Product Safety and Nutrition, 
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, Wuhan Polytechnic 
University, Wuhan, China.

Increasing studies have shown that obesity is the primary cause of 
cardiovascular diseases, non-alcoholic fatty liver diseases, type 2 diabetes, 
and a variety of cancers. The dysfunction of gut microbiota was proved to result 
in obesity. Recent research indicated ANGPTL4 was a key regulator in lipid 
metabolism and a circulating medium for gut microbiota and fat deposition. The 
present study was conducted to investigate the alteration of gut microbiota and 
ANGPTL4 expression in the gastrointestinal tract of mice treated by the high-fat 
diet. Ten C57BL/6J mice were randomly allocated to two groups and fed with a 
high-fat diet (HFD) containing 60% fat or a normal-fat diet (Control) containing 
10% fat. The segments of ileum and colon were collected for the determination of 
ANGPTL4 expression by RT-qPCR and immunohistochemical analysis while the ileal 
and colonic contents were collected for 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The results 
showed HFD significantly increased mice body weight, epididymal fat weight, 
perirenal fat weight, liver weight, and the lipid content in the liver (P < 
0.05). The relative expression of ANGPTL4 and the ANGPTL4-positive cells in the 
ileum and colon of mice was significantly increased by HFD treatment. 
Furthermore, 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the ileal and colonic microbiota 
suggested that HFD treatment changed the composition of the gut microbiota. The 
ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes and the abundance of Allobaculum was 
significantly higher in the HFD group than in the Control group while the 
abundance of Adlercreutzia, Bifidobacterium, Prevotellaceae UCG-001, and 
Ruminococcus was significantly decreased. Interestingly, the abundance of 
Allobaculum was positively correlated with the expression of ANGPTL4. These 
findings provide a theoretical foundation for the development of strategies to 
control the obesity and related diseases by the regulation of ANGPTL4 and gut 
microbiota.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zheng, Lyu, Ren, Li, Zhao, Yang and Xiao.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2021.690138
PMCID: PMC8171929
PMID: 34095196

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.