1. Front Oncol. 2021 May 20;11:668505. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.668505. eCollection
 2021.

Melanotic Neuroectodermal Tumor of Infancy: A Clinicopathological and BRAF V600E 
Mutation Study of 11 Cases.

Xia RH(1), Zhang CY(1), Wang LZ(1), Hu YH(1), Sun JJ(1), Tian Z(1), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, College of 
Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, National Center 
for Stomatology, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shanghai 
Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Research Unit of Oral and Maxillofacial 
Regenerative Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the clinicopathological features and BRAF V600E mutation 
of melanotic neuroectodermal tumor of infancy (MNTI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eleven cases of MNTI diagnosed at the Department of Oral 
Pathology were collected. Clinicopathological characteristics were obtained from 
the medical records. Immunostaining was performed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). 
Amplification-Refractory Mutation System-qPCR (ARMS-qPCR) and Sanger Sequencing 
were used to detect BRAF V600E mutation.
RESULTS: Of the 11 cases, 3 cases were female and 8 cases were male. The mean 
age of the first symptoms was 3.2 months (range: 1 to 6 months). Ten cases 
(90.9%) located in maxilla but only one (9.1%) in mandible. Most of the cases 
demonstrated well-defined mass with lytic bone destruction and tooth germ 
affecting radiologically. Histologically, MNTI was consisted of large polygonal 
melanin-producing epithelioid cells and small round neuroblast-like cells which 
arranged in irregular alveolar, tubuloglandular and fissured architecture. The 
epithelioid cells expressed Vim, Pan-CK, NSE and HMB45, while the smalls cells 
expressed Syn, NSE and scattered Vim. Most cases showed low Ki-67 index (range: 
<1% to 50%). None of the MNTI cases showed BRAF V600E mutation. Most cases were 
treated with enucleation (45.4%) or curettage (36.4%). Among the 11 cases, 6 
cases had follow-up information, and 2 cases had recurrence lesions after 
surgery.
CONCLUSION: MNTI, an extremely rare tumor, mainly affects male infants with 
strong preference for maxilla. Distinct histopathological features and 
immunohistochemical profile are helpful to distinguish from other 
melanin-containing tumors and small round cell tumors. No BRAF V600E mutation in 
MNTI is detected in the present study and needs further investigations. The 
factors that contribute to the local recurrence of MNTI are controversial, but 
the close follow-up for the patients is recommended.

Copyright Â© 2021 Xia, Zhang, Wang, Hu, Sun, Tian and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.668505
PMCID: PMC8173088
PMID: 34094962

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.