1. Genet Mol Biol. 2021 Jun 4;44(1 Suppl 1):e20200355. doi: 
10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2020-0355. eCollection 2021.

Zoonotic spillover: Understanding basic aspects for better prevention.

Ellwanger JH(1), Chies JAB(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Departamento de Genética, Programa 
de Pós-Graduação em Genética e Biologia Molecular, Laboratório de Imunobiologia 
e Imunogenética, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

The transmission of pathogens from wild animals to humans is called "zoonotic 
spillover". Most human infectious diseases (60-75%) are derived from pathogens 
that originally circulated in non-human animal species. This demonstrates that 
spillover has a fundamental role in the emergence of new human infectious 
diseases. Understanding the factors that facilitate the transmission of 
pathogens from wild animals to humans is essential to establish strategies 
focused on the reduction of the frequency of spillover events. In this context, 
this article describes the basic aspects of zoonotic spillover and the main 
factors involved in spillover events, considering the role of the inter-species 
interactions, phylogenetic distance between host species, environmental drivers, 
and specific characteristics of the pathogens, animals, and humans. As an 
example, the factors involved in the emergence of Severe Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic are discussed, indicating what can 
be learned from this public health emergency, and what can be applied to the 
Brazilian scenario. Finally, this article discusses actions to prevent or reduce 
the frequency of zoonotic spillover events.

DOI: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2020-0355
PMCID: PMC8182890
PMID: 34096963

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No conflicts of interest 
to declare.