1. Hum Mol Genet. 2021 Sep 15;30(19):1851-1862. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab152.

Functional and behavioral effects of de novo mutations in calcium-related genes 
in patients with bipolar disorder.

Nakamura T(1)(2), Nakajima K(2), Kobayashi Y(3), Itohara S(3), Kasahara T(2), 
Tsuboi T(4), Kato T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, Juntendo University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.
(2)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, RIKEN Center for Brain 
Science, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(3)Laboratory for Behavioral Genetics, RIKEN Center for Brain Science, Saitama 
351-0198, Japan.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

Bipolar disorder is a common mental illness occurring in approximately 1% of 
individuals and requires lifelong treatment. Although genetic factors are known 
to contribute to this disorder, the genetic architecture has not yet been 
completely clarified. Our initial trio-based exome sequencing study of bipolar 
disorder showed enrichment of de novo, loss-of-function (LOF) or 
protein-altering mutations in a combined group with bipolar I and 
schizoaffective disorders, and the identified de novo mutations were enriched in 
calcium-related genes. These findings suggested a role for de novo mutations in 
bipolar disorder. The validity of these statistical associations will be 
strengthened if the functional impact of the mutations on cellular function and 
behavior are identified. In this study, we focused on two de novo LOF mutations 
in calcium-related genes, EHD1 and MACF1, found in patients with bipolar 
disorder. We first showed that the EHD1 mutation resulted in a truncated protein 
with diminished effect on neurite outgrowth and inhibited endocytosis. Next, we 
used CRISPR/Cas9 to establish two knock-in mouse lines to model the in vivo 
effects of these mutations. We performed behavioral screening using IntelliCage 
and long-term wheel running analysis. Ehd1 mutant mice showed higher activity in 
the light phase. Macf1 mutant mice showed diminished attention and persistence 
to rewards. These behavioral alterations were similar to the phenotypes in 
previously proposed animal models of bipolar disorder. These findings endorse 
the possible role of de novo mutations as a component of the genetic 
architecture of bipolar disorder, which was suggested by the statistical 
evidence.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddab152
PMCID: PMC8444452
PMID: 34100076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]