1. CEN Case Rep. 2021 Nov;10(4):592-597. doi: 10.1007/s13730-021-00605-x. Epub
2021  Jun 7.

Switching from lipoprotein apheresis to evolocumab in FH siblings on 
hemodialysis: case reports and discussion.

Ishii T(1)(2), Ogura M(3), Nakamori H(4), Hori M(3), Harada-Shiba M(3), Tamura 
K(4), Oyama K(5).

Author information:
(1)Zenjinkai Yokohama Daiichi Hospital, 2-5-15 Takashima Nishi-ku, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa, 220-0011, Japan. takeo.ishii@grp.zenjinkai.or.jp.
(2)Department of Medical Science and Cardiorenal Medicine, Yokohama City 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. 
takeo.ishii@grp.zenjinkai.or.jp.
(3)Department of Molecular Innovation in Lipidology, National Cerebral and 
Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, 6-1 Kishibe-shimmachi, Suita, Osaka, 
564-8565, Japan.
(4)Department of Medical Science and Cardiorenal Medicine, Yokohama City 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(5)Zenjinkai Yokohama Daiichi Hospital, 2-5-15 Takashima Nishi-ku, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa, 220-0011, Japan.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) and chronic kidney disease, especially 
end-stage renal disease (ESRD), are common and put patients at a high risk of 
developing atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD). ESRD concomitant with 
FH may further increase the risk of ASCVD. Achieving target levels of 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) is difficult owing to the 
limitations of statin administration due to its side effects in ESRD. Therefore, 
some FH patients with ESRD require lipoprotein apheresis for the prevention of 
secondary ASCVD events. Although proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin 9 
(PCSK9) inhibitors may offer a safe and effective option for lowering lipid 
levels in such patients, no guidelines are available for their use. Here, we 
report the case of two male siblings with FH in secondary prevention undergoing 
hemodialysis combined with PCSK9 inhibitor treatment. The siblings, who showed a 
heterozygous c.1846-1G>A mutation in the LDLR gene, underwent hemodialysis. In 
combination with the lipoprotein apheresis, siblings were administered 
evolocumab, a PCSK9 inhibitor. Both the siblings had coronary artery disease, 
diabetes, and ESRD, and received hemodialysis. Their LDL-C levels did not reach 
the target values despite administering statin, ezetimibe, and biweekly 
lipoprotein apheresis. On the introduction of evolocumab treatment, their LDL-C 
levels were significantly reduced without any adverse effects, resulting in 
successful withdrawal from lipoprotein apheresis therapy. Although the effects 
of switching from lipoprotein apheresis to PCSK9 inhibitors for cardiovascular 
protection remain unclear in FH patients with and without ESRD, our case report 
will be helpful in guiding future therapeutic decisions.

Â© 2021. Japanese Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1007/s13730-021-00605-x
PMCID: PMC8494873
PMID: 34100221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.