1. J Hum Genet. 2021 Dec;66(12):1177-1180. doi: 10.1038/s10038-021-00941-x. Epub 
2021 Jun 9.

A novel de novo NIPA1 missense mutation associated to hereditary spastic 
paraplegia.

Fabbro D(1), Mio C(2), Fogolari F(3), Damante G(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Genetica Medica, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Friuli Centrale, 
Udine, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Area Medica, Università degli Studi di Udine, Udine, Italy. 
catia.mio@uniud.it.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche, Informatiche e Fisiche, Università degli 
Studi di Udine, Udine, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Area Medica, Università degli Studi di Udine, Udine, Italy.

SPG6 accounts for 1% of autosomal dominant Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (HSP) 
and is caused by pathogenic variants in NIPA1, which encodes a magnesium 
transporter located in plasma membrane and early endosomes, implicated in 
neuronal development and maintenance. Here we report a 39-year-old woman 
affected by progressive gait disturbance associated to absence seizures episodes 
within childhood. Clinical exome sequencing identified a likely pathogenic de 
novo heterozygous variant in NIPA1 (NM_144599.5 c.249 C > G; p.Asn83Lys). 
Molecular modelling was performed to evaluate putative functional consequence of 
the NIPA1 protein. Indeed, the Asn83Lys modification is predicted to induce a 
significant perturbation of the protein structure, altering signal transduction 
or small-molecule transport by modulating the length of the second transmembrane 
domain. This is the first study reporting a SPG6-affected patient harbouring the 
NIPA1 p.Asn83Lys mutation.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Japan Society of Human 
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-021-00941-x
PMID: 34108639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]