1. Int J Surg Pathol. 2021 Oct;29(7):722-725. doi: 10.1177/10668969211019532.
Epub  2021 Jun 9.

Challenging Diagnosis in NUT Carcinoma.

Claudia G(1)(2), Alexandra G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Kepler University Hospital, Linz, Austria.
(2)Institute of Pathology and Molecular Pathology, 27243University Hospital 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Nuclear protein in testis (NUT) carcinoma represents a highly aggressive, poorly 
differentiated carcinoma that is genetically defined by rearrangement of NUT 
gene. The histomorphological appearance ranges from entirely undifferentiated 
carcinoma to carcinoma with prominent squamous differentiation. NUT carcinoma 
can display neuroendocrine features. Although it is typically distributed along 
the midline axis, it may manifest in nonmidline locations. The majority of 
patients develop rapidly disseminated disease. We illustrate 2 cases of NUT 
carcinoma, one located in the lung, which closely resembled a neuroendocrine 
carcinoma, and the other one with assumed lung origin demonstrating metastatic 
dissemination with diffuse bone involvement, which was clinically first 
suspected to be a hematological malignancy. Due to its undifferentiated nature, 
NUT carcinoma may be confused with many entities. NUT immunohistochemistry is 
considered to be sufficient for the diagnosis. Fluorescence in-situ 
hybridization analysis and next-generation sequencing are currently used to 
confirm the diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1177/10668969211019532
PMCID: PMC8411478
PMID: 34106022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.