1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jul;297(1):100868. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100868. Epub 2021
 Jun 10.

DNA polymerase λ promotes error-free replication through Watson-Crick impairing 
N1-methyl-deoxyadenosine adduct in conjunction with DNA polymerase ζ.

Yoon JH(1), Basu D(1), Choudhury JR(1), Prakash S(1), Prakash L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA. Electronic address: loprakas@utmb.edu.

In a previous study, we showed that replication through the 
N1-methyl-deoxyadenosine (1-MeA) adduct in human cells is mediated via three 
different Polι/Polθ, Polη, and Polζ-dependent pathways. Based on biochemical 
studies with these Pols, in the Polι/Polθ pathway, we inferred a role for Polι 
in the insertion of a nucleotide (nt) opposite 1-MeA and of Polθ in extension of 
synthesis from the inserted nt; in the Polη pathway, we inferred that this Pol 
alone would replicate through 1-MeA; in the Polζ pathway, however, the Pol 
required for inserting an nt opposite 1-MeA had remained unidentified. In this 
study, we provide biochemical and genetic evidence for a role for Polλ in 
inserting the correct nt T opposite 1-MeA, from which Polζ would extend 
synthesis. The high proficiency of purified Polλ for inserting a T opposite 
1-MeA implicates a role for Polλ-which normally uses W-C base pairing for DNA 
synthesis-in accommodating 1-MeA in a syn confirmation and forming a Hoogsteen 
base pair with T. The potential of Polλ to replicate through DNA lesions by 
Hoogsteen base pairing adds another novel aspect to Polλ's role in translesion 
synthesis in addition to its role as a scaffolding component of Polζ. We discuss 
how the action mechanisms of Polλ and Polζ could be restrained to inserting a T 
opposite 1-MeA and extending synthesis thereafter, respectively.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100868
PMCID: PMC8260881
PMID: 34119520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.