1. Front Oncol. 2021 May 25;11:635007. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.635007. eCollection
 2021.

Immunotherapy in Treating EGFR-Mutant Lung Cancer: Current Challenges and New 
Strategies.

To KKW(1), Fong W(1), Cho WCS(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Clinical Oncology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong 
Kong.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Immune 
checkpoint inhibitors, including monoclonal antibodies against programmed 
death-1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1), have dramatically improved 
the survival and quality of life of a subset of non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) patients. Multiple predictive biomarkers have been proposed to select 
the patients who may benefit from the immune checkpoint inhibitors. EGFR-mutant 
NSCLC is the most prevalent molecular subtype in Asian lung cancer patients. 
However, patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC show poor response to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 
treatment. While small-molecule EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are the 
preferred initial treatment for EGFR-mutant NSCLC, acquired drug resistance is 
severely limiting the long-term efficacy. However, there is currently no further 
effective treatment option for TKIs-refractory EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients. The 
reasons mediating the poor response of EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients to 
immunotherapy are not clear. Initial investigations revealed that EGFR-mutated 
NSCLC has lower PD-L1 expression and a low tumor mutational burden, thus leading 
to weak immunogenicity. Moreover, the use of PD-1/PD-L1 blockade prior to or 
concurrent with osimertinib has been reported to increase the risk of pulmonary 
toxicity. Furthermore, emerging evidence shows that PD-1/PD-L1 blockade in NSCLC 
patients can lead to hyperprogressive disease associated with dismal prognosis. 
However, it is difficult to predict the treatment toxicity. New biomarkers are 
urgently needed to predict response and toxicity associated with the use of 
PD-1/PD-L1 immunotherapy in EGFR-mutated NSCLC. Recently, promising data have 
emerged to suggest the potentiation of PD-1/PD-L1 blockade therapy by 
anti-angiogenic agents and a few other novel therapeutic agents. This article 
reviews the current investigations about the poor response of EGFR-mutated NSCLC 
to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy, and discusses the new strategies that may be adopted 
in the future.

Copyright Â© 2021 To, Fong and Cho.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.635007
PMCID: PMC8185359
PMID: 34113560

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.