1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 May 28;12:686421. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.686421. 
eCollection 2021.

A V(H)H-Fc Fusion Targeted to the Chloroplast Thylakoid Lumen Assembles and 
Neutralizes Enterohemorrhagic E. coli O157:H7.

Chin-Fatt A(1)(2), Menassa R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, London Research and Development Centre, 
London, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.

Chimeric fusion proteins comprising a single domain antibody (VHH) fused to a 
crystallizable fragment (Fc) of an immunoglobulin are modular glycoproteins that 
are becoming increasingly in demand because of their value as diagnostics, 
research reagents and passive immunization therapeutics. Because ER-associated 
degradation and misfolding may potentially be limiting factors in the oxidative 
folding of VHH-Fc fusion proteins in the ER, we sought to explore oxidative 
folding in an alternative sub-compartment, the chloroplast thylakoid lumen, and 
determine its viability in a molecular farming context. We developed a set of 
in-house expression vectors for transient transformation of Nicotiana 
benthamiana leaves that target a VHH-Fc to the thylakoid lumen via either 
secretory (Sec) or twin-arginine translocation (Tat) import pathways. Compared 
to stromal [6.63 ± 3.41 mg/kg fresh weight (FW)], cytoplasmic (undetectable) and 
Tat-import pathways (5.43 ± 2.41 mg/kg FW), the Sec-targeted VHH-Fc showed 
superior accumulation (30.56 ± 5.19 mg/kg FW), but was less than that of the ER 
(51.16 ± 9.11 mg/kg FW). Additionally, the introduction of a rationally designed 
de novo disulfide bond enhances in planta accumulation when introduced into the 
Sec-targeted Fc fusion protein from 50.24 ± 4.08 mg/kg FW to 110.90 ± 6.46 mg/kg 
FW. In vitro immunofluorescent labeling assays on VHH-Fc purified from Sec, Tat, 
and stromal pathways demonstrate that the antibody still retains VHH 
functionality in binding Escherichia coli O157:H7 and neutralizing its intimate 
adherence to human epithelial type 2 cells. These results overall provide a 
proof of concept that the oxidative folding environment of the thylakoid lumen 
may be a viable compartment for stably folding disulfide-containing recombinant 
VHH-Fc proteins.

Copyright © 2021 Chin-Fatt and Menassa.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.686421
PMCID: PMC8193579
PMID: 34122494

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.