1. J Mol Biol. 2021 Aug 20;433(17):167104. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167104. Epub 
2021 Jun 15.

Mapping Electromechanical Coupling Pathways in Voltage-Gated Ion Channels: 
Challenges and the Way Forward.

Cowgill J(1), Chanda B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, 
United States; Center for Investigations of Membrane Excitability Disorders 
(CIMED), Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, 
United States; Center for Investigations of Membrane Excitability Disorders 
(CIMED), Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States. Electronic 
address: bchanda@wustl.edu.

Inter- and intra-molecular allosteric interactions underpin regulation of 
activity in a variety of biological macromolecules. In the voltage-gated ion 
channel superfamily, the conformational state of the voltage-sensing domain 
regulates the activity of the pore domain via such long-range allosteric 
interactions. Although the overall structure of these channels is conserved, 
allosteric interactions between voltage-sensor and pore varies quite 
dramatically between the members of this superfamily. Despite the progress in 
identifying key residues and structural interfaces involved in mediating 
electromechanical coupling, our understanding of the biophysical mechanisms 
remains limited. Emerging new structures of voltage-gated ion channels in 
various conformational states will provide a better three-dimensional view of 
the process but to conclusively establish a mechanism, we will also need to 
quantitate the energetic contribution of various structural elements to this 
process. Using rigorous unbiased metrics, we want to compare the efficiency of 
electromechanical coupling between various sub-families in order to gain a 
comprehensive understanding. Furthermore, quantitative understanding of the 
process will enable us to correctly parameterize computational approaches which 
will ultimately enable us to predict allosteric activation mechanisms from 
structures. In this review, we will outline the challenges and limitations of 
various experimental approaches to measure electromechanical coupling and 
highlight the best practices in the field.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167104
PMCID: PMC8579740
PMID: 34139217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.