1. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2022 Mar 1;44(2):e557-e560. doi: 
10.1097/MPH.0000000000002233.

A Rare Case of Diffuse-type Tenosynovial Giant Cell Tumor in a Teenager With 
Noonan Syndrome.

Guiffre D(1), Brien E(2), Shon W(2), Geffner ME(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center For Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Children's Hospital Los 
Angeles (CHLA), Keck School of Medicine of USC.
(2)Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Saban Research Institute, Keck School of Medicine of USC.

Noonan syndrome is a common autosomal dominant disorder associated with an 
increased risk of malignancy. We report a 16-year-old female with Noonan 
syndrome (KRAS gene variant, Q22R) and diffuse-type tenosynovial giant cell 
tumor, a proliferative disorder that has been rarely reported in this 
population. These tumors may represent a complication of the dysregulated 
RAS/MAPK signaling pathway that underlies Noonan syndrome. They lack typical 
clinical features, causing misdiagnosis and delays in management, which could 
lead to osseous invasion requiring more complicated surgical procedures. 
Increased awareness of this association will improve the clinical outcomes of 
patients with Noonan syndrome who develop diffuse-type tenosynovial giant cell 
tumors.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000002233
PMID: 34133387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.G. received fellowship support from a generous 
donation from the David and Meredith Kaplan Foundation. M.E.G. has affiliations 
to disclose including grant funding through Novo Nordisk and is an advisor for 
Adrenas, Daiichi-Sankyo, Ferring, Gilead, Neurocrine Biosciences, Novo Nordisk, 
Nutritional Growth Solutions, Pfizer, and QED. He is also on data safety 
monitoring boards for Ascendis, Millendo, and Tolmar, and accrues royalties for 
his work for McGraw-Hill and UpToDate. The remaining authors declare no conflict 
of interest.