1. BMC Endocr Disord. 2021 Jun 16;21(1):124. doi: 10.1186/s12902-021-00788-5.

Impact of triglycerides and waist circumference on insulin resistance and β-cell 
function in non-diabetic first-degree relatives of type 2 diabetes.

Ahmed F(1), Al-Habori M(2), Al-Zabedi E(1), Saif-Ali R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, University of Sana'a, Sana'a, Republic of Yemen.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, University of Sana'a, Sana'a, Republic of Yemen. 
malhabori@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Although there is abundant evidence indicating the relative 
contribution of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and β-cell dysfunction (HOMA-β) 
among first-degree relatives (FDRs) of Type 2 DM patients, few studies reported 
the association between HOMA-IR and HOMA-β with metabolic syndrome. Our 
objective was to evaluate the impact of metabolic syndrome factors on HOMA-IR, 
HOMA-β and glycoproteins in non-diabetic FDRs.
METHODS: In this study, 103 Yemeni male subjects aged 25-42 years, with 
BMI < 25 kg/m2 were examined, 39 of whom were normal subjects with no family 
history of diabetes served as control and 64 subjects were non-diabetic FDRs of 
Type 2 DM patients.
RESULTS: Both glycoproteins, glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) and fructosamine as 
well as insulin, HOMA-IR and HOMA-β were significantly (p = 4.9 × 10-9; 
6.0 × 10-8; 6.6 × 10-12; 1.3 × 10-7; 5.5 × 10-12, respectively) higher in 
non-diabetic FDRs as compared to control group. Fasting plasma glucose, though 
within normal range, were significantly (p = 0.026) higher in non-diabetic FDRs. 
Linear regression analysis showed that both TG and WC are the main metabolic 
syndrome factors that significantly increased HOMA-IR (B = 0.334, 
p = 1.97 × 10-6; B = 0.024, p = 1.05 × 10-5), HOMA-β (B = 16.8, p = 6.8 × 10-5; 
B = 0.95, p = 0.004), insulin (B = 16.5, p = 1.2 × 10-6; B = 1.19, 
p = 8.3 × 10-6) and HbA1c (B = 0.001, p = 0.034; B = 0.007, p = 0.037).
CONCLUSION: Triglyceride and WC are the important metabolic syndrome factors 
associated with insulin resistance, basal β-cell function and insulin levels in 
non-diabetic FDR men of Type 2 DM patients. Moreover, FDRs showed insulin 
resistance with compensatory β-cell function (hyperinsulinaemia) suggesting that 
insulin resistance precede the development of pancreatic β-cell dysfunction in 
individuals at risk of Type 2 DM.

DOI: 10.1186/s12902-021-00788-5
PMCID: PMC8207623
PMID: 34134670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.