1. Front Oncol. 2021 May 31;11:652085. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.652085. eCollection
 2021.

Retinoic Acid Downregulates HSPB8 Gene Expression in Human Breast Cancer Cells 
MCF-7.

Piccolella M(1), Cristofani R(1), Tedesco B(1)(2), Chierichetti M(1), Ferrari 
V(1), Casarotto E(1), Cozzi M(1), Crippa V(1), Rusmini P(1), Galbiati M(1), 
Poletti A(1), Messi E(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari (DiSFeB), Centro di 
Eccellenza sulle Malattie Neurodegenerative, Università degli Studi di Milano, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Unit of Medical Genetics and Neurogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto 
Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.

Breast cancer (BC) is a serious and widespread disease for which different 
treatments have been developed. In addition to the classic therapies, the 
treatment with retinoic acid (RA) is still being clinically investigated. RA 
reduces cancer cells proliferation and migration, but its molecular mechanism of 
action is not clear. In tumor development, autophagy promotes cancer cell 
survival and prevents apoptosis. Small heat shock protein B8 (HSPB8) acts 
together with its co-chaperone BCL-2 associated athanogene 3 (BAG3) stimulating 
BC proliferation and migration. We analyzed whether direct correlations exist 
between RA and HSPB8 or BAG3 and how this may play a role in BC. We measured 
HSPB8 and BAG3 gene expression in MCF-7 BC cells and we analyzed the potential 
correlation between the antiproliferative and antimigratory effect of RA with 
the expression level of HSPB8. We found that in MCF-7 cells RA reduces both 
HSPB8 and BAG3 gene expression and it alters the mitotic spindle organization. 
Notably, the effects of RA on HSPB8 levels are exerted at both transcriptional 
and translational levels. RA effects are possibly mediated by miR-574-5p that 
targets the HSPB8 transcript. Our results suggest that therapeutic doses of RA 
can efficiently counteract the adverse effects of HSPB8 in BC progression.

Copyright © 2021 Piccolella, Cristofani, Tedesco, Chierichetti, Ferrari, 
Casarotto, Cozzi, Crippa, Rusmini, Galbiati, Poletti and Messi.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.652085
PMCID: PMC8201400
PMID: 34136389

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.