1. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2021 Dec 1;31(9):200-206. doi: 
10.1097/FPC.0000000000000441.

Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim-induced liver injury and genetic polymorphisms of 
NAT2 and CYP2C9 in Taiwan.

Huang YS(1), Tseng SY, Chang TE, Perng CL, Huang YH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Taipei 
Veterans General Hospital, and National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University School 
of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (SMX-TMP) is one of the most 
frequently used antibiotics. SMX is metabolized by N-acetyltransferase (NAT) and 
cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) to nontoxic or toxic intermediates. Little is known 
about the association between genetic variations of these enzymes and 
SMX-TMP-induced liver injury (SILI). The aim of this study was to explore the 
genetic polymorphisms of NAT2 and CYP2C9 and the susceptibility to SILI in a Han 
Chinese population.
METHODS: A total of 158 patients with SILI and 145 controls were recruited in 
this study. PCR-based genotyping with matrix-assisted laser desorption 
ionization-time of flight was used to assay the major NAT2 and CYP2C9 genotypes 
including NAT2 rs1495741, rs1041983, rs1801280, CYP2C9 rs1799853, rs1057910 and 
rs4918758.
RESULTS: The SILI group had a higher frequency of the NAT2 rs1495741 variant AA 
genotype and rs1041983 variant TT genotype than the controls (42.4 vs. 25.5%; 
P = 0.008, and 40.5 vs. 25.5%; P = 0.022, respectively). The SILI group had more 
slow acetylators than the controls (43.7 vs. 25.5%; P = 0.001). There were no 
significant differences in the genetic variations of CYP2C9 between the SILI and 
control groups. After adjusting for confounding factors, the NAT2 slow 
acetylators still had an increased risk of SILI (adjusted OR: 2.49; 95% 
confidence interval: 1.46-4.24; P = 0.001), especially in those with 
hepatocellular and mixed type SILI.
CONCLUSIONS: NAT2 slow acetylators are associated with a higher risk of SILI in 
the Han Chinese population. However, CYP2C9 genetic polymorphisms are not 
associated with the susceptibility to SILI.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/FPC.0000000000000441
PMID: 34149005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]