1. Front Genet. 2021 Jun 4;12:643546. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.643546. eCollection
 2021.

High Genetic Heterogeneity in Chinese Patients With Waardenburg Syndrome 
Revealed by Next-Generation Sequencing.

Zhang S(1), Xu H(2)(3), Tian Y(4), Liu D(3), Hou X(1), Zeng B(4), Chen B(5), Liu 
H(2), Li R(2), Li X(5), Zuo B(5), Tang R(6), Tang W(2)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Precision Medicine Center, Academy of Medical Science, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(3)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(4)BGI College, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(5)Department of Otology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(6)Johns Hopkins University, Maryland, MD, United States.
(7)Henan Institute of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to explore the genetic causes of probands who were 
diagnosed with Waardenburg syndrome (WS) or congenital sensorineural hearing 
loss.
METHODS: A detailed physical and audiological examinations were carried out to 
make an accurate diagnosis of 14 patients from seven unrelated families. We 
performed whole-exome sequencing in probands to detect the potential genetic 
causes and further validated them by Sanger sequencing in the probands and their 
family members.
RESULTS: The genetic causes for all 14 patients with WS or congenital 
sensorineural hearing loss were identified. A total of seven heterozygous 
variants including c.1459C > T, c.123del, and c.959-409_1173+3402del of PAX3 
gene (NM_181459.4), c.198_262del and c.529_556del of SOX10 gene (NM_006941.4), 
and c.731G > A and c.970dup of MITF gene (NM_000248.3) were found for the first 
time. Of these mutations, we had confirmed two (c.1459C > T and c.970dup) are de 
novo by Sanger sequencing of variants in the probands and their parents.
CONCLUSION: We revealed a total of seven novel mutations in PAX3, SOX10, and 
MITF, which underlie the pathogenesis of WS. The clinical and genetic 
characterization of these families with WS elucidated high heterogeneity in 
Chinese patients with WS. This study expands the database of PAX3, SOX10, and 
MITF mutations and improves our understanding of the causes of WS.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhang, Xu, Tian, Liu, Hou, Zeng, Chen, Liu, Li, Li, Zuo, Tang 
and Tang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.643546
PMCID: PMC8212959
PMID: 34149797

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.