1. Front Chem. 2021 Jun 1;9:705458. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2021.705458. eCollection 
2021.

The Application of Nucleic Acid Probe-Based Fluorescent Sensing and Imaging in 
Cancer Diagnosis and Therapy.

Huang G(1)(2), Su C(2), Wang L(1)(2), Fei Y(2), Yang J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of South China, Hengyang, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Hunan Cancer Hospital/The 
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Changsha, China.

It is well known that cancer incidence and death rates have been growing, but 
the development of cancer theranostics and therapeutics has been a challenging 
work. Recently, nucleic acid probe-based fluorescent sensing and imaging have 
achieved remarkable improvements in a variety of cancer management techniques, 
credited to their high sensitivity, good tolerance to interference, fast 
detection, and high versatility. Herein, nucleic acid probe-based fluorescent 
sensing and imaging are labeled with advanced fluorophores, which are essential 
for fast and sensitive detection of aberrant nucleic acids and other 
cancer-relevant molecules, consequently performing cancer early diagnosis and 
targeted treatment. In this review, we introduce the characteristics of nucleic 
acid probes, summarize the development of nucleic acid probe-based fluorescent 
sensing and imaging, and prominently elaborate their applications in cancer 
diagnosis and treatment. In discussion, some challenges and perspectives are 
elaborated in the field of nucleic acid probe-based fluorescent sensing and 
imaging.

Copyright Â© 2021 Huang, Su, Wang, Fei and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2021.705458
PMCID: PMC8204288
PMID: 34141699

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.