1. Adv Ther (Weinh). 2020 Dec;3(12):2000122. doi: 10.1002/adtp.202000122. Epub
2020  Oct 1.

An Antigen-Delivery Protein Nanoparticle Combined with Anti-PD-1 Checkpoint 
Inhibitor Has Curative Efficacy in an Aggressive Melanoma Model.

Neek M(1), Tucker JA(2), Butkovich N(1), Nelson EL(2), Wang SW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering University of California 
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine University of California Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Immune checkpoint inhibition is a promising alternative treatment to standard 
chemotherapies; however, it fails to achieve long-term remission in a 
significant portion of patients. A previously developed protein 
nanoparticle-based platform (E2 nanoparticle) delivers cancer antigens to 
increase antigen-specific tumor responses. While prior work has focussed on 
prophylactic conditions, the objectives in this study are therapeutic. It is 
hypothesized that immune checkpoint inhibition, when augmented by antigen 
delivery using E2 nanoparticles containing CpG oligonucleotide 1826 (CpG) and a 
glycoprotein 100 (gp100) melanoma antigen epitope (CpG-gp-E2), would 
synergistically elicit antitumor responses. To identify a regimen primed for 
obtaining effective treatment results, immune benchmarks in the spleen and tumor 
are examined. Conditions that lead to significant immune activation, including 
increases in gp100-specific interferon gamma (IFN-ùú∏), CD8 T cells in the spleen, 
tumor-infiltrating CD8 T cells, and survival time are identified. Based on the 
findings, the resulting combination of CpG-gp-E2 and anti-programmed cell death 
protein 1 (anti-PD-1) treatment in tumor-challenged mice yield significantly 
increased long-term survival; more than 50% of the mice treated with combination 
therapy were tumor-free, compared with 0% and ‚âà5% for CpG-gp-E2 and anti-PD-1 
alone, respectively. Evidence of a durable antitumor response is also observed 
upon tumor rechallenge, pointing to long-lasting immune memory.

DOI: 10.1002/adtp.202000122
PMCID: PMC8205422
PMID: 34141865

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.