1. Theranostics. 2021 Jun 1;11(15):7507-7526. doi: 10.7150/thno.59546.
eCollection  2021.

Circular RNA circRHOBTB3 represses metastasis by regulating the HuR-mediated 
mRNA stability of PTBP1 in colorectal cancer.

Chen J(1)(2), Wu Y(3), Luo X(1)(2), Jin D(1), Zhou W(1)(2), Ju Z(4), Wang 
D(1)(2), Meng Q(1)(2), Wang H(1)(2), Fu X(1)(2), Xu J(1)(2), Song Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, 310058 Hangzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Biological Treatment of Zhejiang Province, 310058 Hangzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, 310058 Hangzhou, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of Education, Institute 
of Aging and Regenerative Medicine, Jinan University, 510632 Guangzhou, China.

Background: Tumor metastasis of colorectal cancer (CRC) is the main cause of 
death in most patients and the major difficulty in comprehensive CRC treatment. 
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) affect many biological functions in solid tumors. 
However, their mechanisms in CRC metastasis remain unclear. Methods: RNA 
sequencing (RNA-seq) and quantitative real-time PCR were performed to screen 
differentially expressed circRNAs between CRC tissues and adjacent normal 
tissues. CCK-8, cell migration and wound healing assays were performed to 
determine the functions of circRHOBTB3 in cell proliferation and metastasis. RNA 
pulldown and RNA immunoprecipitation assays were performed to verify the 
interaction between circRHOBTB3 and the HuR (ELAVL1) protein. Further RNA-seq 
and rescue experiments were applied to search for the downstream target. We also 
conducted a mouse xenograft model to elucidate the effect of circRHOBTB3 on 
cancer metastasis in vivo. Results: We identified circRHOBTB3 which is markedly 
downregulated in CRC tissues and cell lines. Furthermore, lower circRHOBTB3 
levels were significantly associated with advanced clinical stages and greater 
risk of metastases. Overexpression of circRHOBTB3 suppresses tumor metastasis in 
CRC cells. Mechanistically, circRHOBTB3 binds to HuR, which is a ubiquitously 
expressed and functional RNA-binding protein (RBP) in CRC development, and 
promotes β-Trcp1-mediated ubiquitination of HuR. Normally, HuR binds to the 
3'UTR of target mRNAs to facilitate their stabilization, whereas the interaction 
between circRHOBTB3 and HuR degrades HuR to reduce the expression level of the 
downstream target PTBP1. Furthermore, overexpressed circRHOBTB3 suppresses lung 
metastases in vivo, and this effect can be partly reversed by PTBP1 
overexpression. In addition, the transcription of circRHOBTB3 can be improved by 
both FUS and ADARB2 in CRC cells. Conclusions: Our findings indicate that 
circRHOBTB3 exerts suppressive effects on CRC aggressiveness through the 
HuR/PTBP1 axis.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.59546
PMCID: PMC8210600
PMID: 34158864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.