1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2021 Jun;25(6):419-425. doi:
10.1089/gtmb.2020.0343.

Association of SNPs in Lipid Metabolism Gene Single Nucleotide Polymorphism with 
the Risk of Obesity in Children.

Kulaeva ED(1), Volchik VV(1), Bocharova OV(2), Teplakova ED(2), Shkurat MA(1), 
Derevyanchuk EG(3), Mashkina EV(3).

Author information:
(1)Biology of Development and Genome Organization Laboratory, Department of 
Genetics, Southern Federal University Rostov-on-Don, Russia.
(2)Department of Pediatrician, Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, 
Russia.
(3)Animal and Human Genetics Laboratory, Department of Genetics, Southern 
Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia.

Erratum in
    Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2021 Sep;25(9):624. doi: 
10.1089/gtmb.2020.0343.correx.

Background: Obesity is one of the most common metabolic disorders in the world, 
which develops due to an imbalance in energy consumption and expenditure, and 
both genetic and environmental factors are of great importance. We investigated 
the potential interactions of single nucleotide polymorphisms that might 
contribute to the development of polygenic obesity in children. Objective: The 
study involved 367 children and adolescents of both sexes aged from 4 to 18 
years. The control group (normal weight) and the overweight groups included 65 
and 302 children respectively. Methods: DNA for analysis was isolated from 
peripheral blood lymphocytes, then allelic variants rs99305069 of the FTO gene 
(chr16:53786615), Gln192Arg of the PON1 gene (chr7: 95308134), -250G>A of the 
LIPC gene (chr15: 58431740), and Ser447Ter of the LPL gene (chr8:19957678) were 
studied using the SNP-Express reagent kit. The results of allelic interactions 
were analyzed using the multifactor dimensionality reduction method. Results and 
Discussion: Among overweight children, the distribution of genotype and allele 
frequencies for the studied single nucleotide polymorphisms of the four genes 
corresponded to those of the control group (p > 0.05). It was found that in 
obese children SerSer homozygotes at the Ser447Ter polymorphism of the LPL gene, 
had serum triglyceride (TG) levels 2.3 times higher than in children with the 
same genotype from the control group. In overweight Ser447Ter heterozygotes 
(p < 0.0001), the TG level exceeded the control values by only 13% (p = 0.044). 
A two-locus genotype FTO AT/LPL SerTer, was associated with a reduced risk of 
childhood obesity.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2020.0343
PMID: 34152846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]