1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2021 Aug;190:114662. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2021.114662. Epub 
2021 Jun 23.

Sex-specific expression mechanism of hepatic estrogen inactivating enzyme and 
transporters in diabetic women.

Fashe M(1), Yi M(2), Sueyoshi T(2), Negishi M(3).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacogenetics Section, Reproductive and Developmental Biology Laboratory, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. Electronic address: 
muluneh@email.unc.edu.
(2)Pharmacogenetics Section, Reproductive and Developmental Biology Laboratory, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
(3)Pharmacogenetics Section, Reproductive and Developmental Biology Laboratory, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. Electronic address: 
negishi@niehs.nih.gov.

Circulating estrogens levels significantly decrease in menopause and levels off 
in postmenopausal women. Accordingly, the liver represses levels of enzymes and 
membrane transporters, thereby decreasing capability of inactivating and 
excreting estrogens. Women increasingly develop type 2 diabetes during or after 
menopause. Estrogens are known to promote liver diseases in these women. Here, 
we have found that the estrogen inactivating sulfotransferase (SULT1E1) and an 
ATP-binding cassette subfamily G member 2 (ABCG2), a gene encoding breast cancer 
resistance protein that exports sulfated estrogens, increased their expression 
levels in diabetic women but not men. For the sulfotransferase gene, 
phosphorylated nuclear receptors ERα and RORα, at Ser212 and Ser100, 
respectively, bind their response elements to activate the SULT1E1 promoter in 
women. This coordinated increase in estrogen inactivation and excretion, and the 
phosphorylated nuclear receptor-mediated gene activation could be a defense 
mechanism against toxicities of estrogens through inactivation and excretion in 
the livers of women.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2021.114662
PMCID: PMC8344073
PMID: 34157297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Confilicts of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.