1. Hemoglobin. 2021 May;45(3):197-202. doi: 10.1080/03630269.2021.1941081. Epub 
2021 Jun 22.

Upregulation of miR-214 Mediates Oxidative Stress in Hb H Disease via Targeting 
of ATF4.

Saensuwanna A(1), Penglong T(2), Srinoun K(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Prince of Songkla 
University, Songkhla, Thailand.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Prince of Songkla University, 
Songkhla, Thailand.
(3)Faculty of Medical Technology, Prince of Songkla University, Songkhla, 
Thailand.

Thalassemia is a genetic disorder, occurring because of an imbalance in the 
globin chain production. Oxidative stress in erythroid cells of thalassemia is 
mainly generated from excess globin chains, by Fenton reaction, leading to 
hemolysis and ineffective erythropoiesis. Previously, data has shown that 
microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in oxidative stress regulation in red blood 
cells (RBCs). microR-214 has been reported to respond with an external oxidative 
stress in erythroid cells by modulating activating transcription factor 4 
(ATF4). In this study, we illustrated the expressions of miR-214 and ATF4 in Hb 
H (β4) disease, and Hb E (HBB: c.79G>A)/β-thalassemia (β-thal) reticulocyte 
samples. Our results showed miR-214 expression was increased in Hb H disease, 
but not significantly different in Hb E/β-thal reticulocytes. The ATF4 target 
was decreased in both thalassemic groups. Moreover, miR-214 expression level 
positively correlated with the reactive oxygen species (ROS) level, while it was 
negatively correlated with mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular 
hemoglobin (Hb) (MCH) and mean corpuscular Hb concentration (MCHC). We suggested 
that the upregulation of miR-214 correlated with the oxidative stress as well as 
anemia severity of Hb H disease patients, by suppression of ATF4. Understanding 
the oxidative pathways in erythrocyte could be useful to manage and relieve the 
clinical manifestation, such as anemia, in thalassemic patients.

DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2021.1941081
PMID: 34156885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]