1. PLoS One. 2021 Jun 22;16(6):e0253112. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0253112. 
eCollection 2021.

Clinicopathological significance of the EMT-related proteins and their 
interrelationships in prostate cancer. An immunohistochemical study.

Parol-Kulczyk M(1), Gzil A(1), Maciejewska J(1), Bodnar M(1), Grzanka D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pathomorphology, Faculty of Medicine, Collegium 
Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, Toruń, Poland.

The chronic inflammation influences a microenvironment, where as a result of 
losing control over tissue homeostatic mechanisms, the carcinogenesis process 
may be induced. Inflammatory response cells can secrete a number of factors that 
support both initiation and progression of cancer and also they may consequently 
induct an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), the process responsible for 
development of distant metastasis. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) 
acts as a pro-inflammatory cytokine that is considered as a link between chronic 
inflammation and tumor development. MIF can function as a modulator of important 
cancer-related genes expression, as well as an activator of signaling pathways 
that promotes the development of prostate cancer. The study was performed on 
FFPE tissues resected from patients who underwent radical prostatectomy. To 
investigate the relationship of studied proteins with involvement in tumor 
progression and initiation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
process, we selected clinicopathological parameters related to tumor 
progression. Immunohistochemical analyses of MIF, SOX-4, β-catenin and 
E-cadherin were performed on TMA slides. We found a statistically significant 
correlation of overall β-catenin expression with the both lymph node metastasis 
(p<0.001) and presence of angioinvasion (p = 0.012). Membrane β-catenin 
expression was associated with distant metastasis (p = 0.021). In turn, nuclear 
MIF was correlated with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.003). The positive 
protein-protein correlations have been shown between the total β-catenin protein 
expression level with level of nuclear SOX-4 protein expression (r = 0.27; 
p<0.05) as well as negative correlation of β-catenin expression with level of 
nuclear MIF protein expression (r = -0.23; p<0.05). Our results seem promising 
and strongly highlight the potential role of MIF in development of nodal 
metastases as well as may confirm an involvement of β-catenin in disease spread 
in case of prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0253112
PMCID: PMC8219170
PMID: 34157052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.