1. Nat Commun. 2021 Jun 21;12(1):3817. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-23682-z.

Phenotypic manifestation of α-synuclein strains derived from Parkinson's disease 
and multiple system atrophy in human dopaminergic neurons.

Tanudjojo B(#)(1), Shaikh SS(#)(1), Fenyi A(2), Bousset L(2), Agarwal D(3)(4), 
Marsh J(1), Zois C(4), Heman-Ackah S(5), Fischer R(6), Sims D(3)(4), Melki R(2), 
Tofaris GK(7).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(2)CEA, Institut François Jacob (MIRCen) and CNRS, Laboratory of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.
(3)MRC Centre for Computational Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(6)Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(7)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK. george.tofaris@ndcn.ox.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

α-Synuclein is critical in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease and related 
disorders, yet it remains unclear how its aggregation causes degeneration of 
human dopaminergic neurons. In this study, we induced α-synuclein aggregation in 
human iPSC-derived dopaminergic neurons using fibrils generated de novo or 
amplified in the presence of brain homogenates from Parkinson's disease or 
multiple system atrophy. Increased α-synuclein monomer levels promote seeded 
aggregation in a dose and time-dependent manner, which is associated with a 
further increase in α-synuclein gene expression. Progressive neuronal death is 
observed with brain-amplified fibrils and reversed by reduction of intraneuronal 
α-synuclein abundance. We identified 56 proteins differentially interacting with 
aggregates triggered by brain-amplified fibrils, including evasion of 
Parkinson's disease-associated deglycase DJ-1. Knockout of DJ-1 in iPSC-derived 
dopaminergic neurons enhance fibril-induced aggregation and neuronal death. 
Taken together, our results show that the toxicity of α-synuclein strains 
depends on aggregate burden, which is determined by monomer levels and 
conformation which dictates differential interactomes. Our study demonstrates 
how Parkinson's disease-associated genes influence the phenotypic manifestation 
of strains in human neurons.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-23682-z
PMCID: PMC8217249
PMID: 34155194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.