1. Ann Transl Med. 2021 May;9(10):894. doi: 10.21037/atm-21-2133.

A narrative review on the interaction between genes and the treatment of 
hypertension and breast cancer.

Wang W(1), He Q(2), Zhang H(1), Zhuang C(1), Wang Q(1), Li C(1), Sun R(1), Fan 
X(1), Yu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hypertension Center, Lanzhou University Second Hospital, 
Lanzhou, China.
(2)Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Zhoushan Hospital of Zhejiang 
Province, Zhoushan, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim to discuss the close relationship between the common 
biological mechanisms of breast cancer and hypertension, inflammation and 
oxidative stress, breast cancer gene mutations breast cancer susceptibility gene 
(BRCA), G protein-coupled receptor kinase (GRK4), etc. and breast cancer 
treatment includes chemotherapy, Endocrine therapy, Targeted therapy and 
anti-angiogenesis drugs. In anti-angiogenesis drugs focusing on the mechanism of 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) that may activate the rhoa/rock pathway to 
cause hypertension, as well as the relationship between breast cancer and 
antihypertensive drugs includes angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors 
(ACEIs), Calcium channel blockers (CCBs) and Î²-blockers (BBs)will be explored.
BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) and tumors are the two major types of 
diseases with the highest mortality rates, while hypertension accounts for the 
largest proportion of CVDs. A large number of the same or similar risk factors 
are shared between hypertension and tumors, and they influence each other. Many 
patients, particularly elderly patients, often present with the coexistence of 
the two diseases. As medical advances have enabled clinicians to cure tumors, 
many patients with cancer live longer, leading to a gradual increase in the 
incidence of CVDs, including hypertension. With the second highest incidence 
among tumors, breast cancer has gradually attracted widespread attention and has 
been the topic of numerous studies. Studies have confirmed that CVD is one of 
the causes of death in elderly patients with breast cancer.
METHODS: Publications from 1985 to 2020 were retrieved from the Web Of Science, 
Cochrane Library, PubMed, EMBASE and MEDLINE database. We used a mix of MeSH and 
keywords.
CONCLUSIONS: Hypertension and cancer may share a common mechanism. The screening 
and risk assessment of breast cancer in patients with hypertension must be 
strengthened. Breast cancer cardiology is the interdisciplinary study of 
oncology and cardiology, and in-depth research in this field may result in 
long-term improvements in the survival and prognosis of patients with both 
clinical hypertension and breast cancer.

2021 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-21-2133
PMCID: PMC8184430
PMID: 34164528

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-21-2133). The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.