1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Jul 9;49(12):7103-7121. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab533.

Discovery of a pre-mRNA structural scaffold as a contributor to the mammalian 
splicing code.

Saha K(1), Fernandez MM(1), Biswas T(1), Joseph S(1), Ghosh G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California San Diego, 
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0375, USA.

The specific recognition of splice signals at or near exon-intron junctions is 
not explained by their weak conservation and instead is postulated to require a 
multitude of features embedded in the pre-mRNA strand. We explored the 
possibility of 3D structural scaffold of AdML-a model pre-mRNA substrate-guiding 
early spliceosomal components to the splice signal sequences. We find that 
mutations in the non-cognate splice signal sequences impede recruitment of early 
spliceosomal components due to disruption of the global structure of the 
pre-mRNA. We further find that the pre-mRNA segments potentially interacting 
with the early spliceosomal component U1 snRNP are distributed across the 
intron, that there is a spatial proximity of 5' and 3' splice sites within the 
pre-mRNA scaffold, and that an interplay exists between the structural scaffold 
and splicing regulatory elements in recruiting early spliceosomal components. 
These results suggest that early spliceosomal components can recognize a 3D 
structural scaffold beyond the short splice signal sequences, and that in our 
model pre-mRNA, this scaffold is formed across the intron involving the major 
splice signals. This provides a conceptual basis to analyze the contribution of 
recognizable 3D structural scaffolds to the splicing code across the mammalian 
transcriptome.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab533
PMCID: PMC8266590
PMID: 34161584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]