1. Front Chem. 2021 Jun 10;9:679967. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2021.679967. eCollection 
2021.

Eco-Friendly Synthesis, Biological Evaluation, and In Silico Molecular Docking 
Approach of Some New Quinoline Derivatives as Potential Antioxidant and 
Antibacterial Agents.

El-Saghier AM(1), El-Naggar M(2), Hussein AHM(3), El-Adasy AA(3), Olish M(3), 
Abdelmonsef AH(4).

Author information:
(1)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Sohag University, Sohag, Egypt.
(2)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Sciences, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, 
United Arab Emirates.
(3)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar University, Assiut, Egypt.
(4)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, South Valley University, Qena, 
Egypt.

A new series of quinoline derivatives 5-12 were efficiently synthesized via 
one-pot multicomponent reaction (MCR) of resorcinol, aromatic aldehydes, 
β-ketoesters, and aliphatic/aromatic amines under solvent-free conditions. All 
products were obtained in excellent yields, pure at low-cost processing, and 
short time. The structures of all compounds were characterized by means of 
spectral and elemental analyses. In addition, all the synthesized compounds 5-12 
were in vitro screened for their antioxidant and antibacterial activity. 
Moreover, in silico molecular docking studies of the new quinoline derivatives 
with the target enzymes, human NAD (P)H dehydrogenase (quinone 1) and DNA 
gyrase, were achieved to endorse their binding affinities and to understand 
ligand-enzyme possible intermolecular interactions. Compound 9 displayed 
promising antioxidant and antibacterial activity, as well as it was found to 
have the highest negative binding energy of -9.1 and -9.3 kcal/mol for human NAD 
(P)H dehydrogenase (quinone 1) and DNA gyrase, respectively. Further, it 
complied with the Lipinski's rule of five, Veber, and Ghose. Therefore, the 
quinoline analogue 9 could be promising chemical scaffold for the development of 
future drug candidates as antioxidant and antibacterial agents.

Copyright © 2021 El-Saghier, El-Naggar, Hussein, El-Adasy, Olish and 
Abdelmonsef.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2021.679967
PMCID: PMC8222571
PMID: 34178944

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.