1. Poult Sci. 2021 Aug;100(8):101257. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101257. Epub 2021
May  13.

Research Note: Improved feed efficiency in quail with targeted genome editing in 
the myostatin gene.

Lee J(1), Kim DH(2), Brower AM(2), Schlachter I(2), Lee K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA; The Ohio State University Interdisciplinary Human Nutrition Program, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Department of Animal Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA.
(3)Department of Animal Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA; The Ohio State University Interdisciplinary Human Nutrition Program, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic address: 
lee.2626@osu.edu.

Increased growth rate and decreased cost of feed are main focuses to increase 
revenue of poultry farms. Myostatin (MSTN) is a negative regulator of muscle 
growth and mutation on MSTN results in increased muscle growth. Due to the 
antimyogenic function of MSTN, MSTN gains high attention as a potential target 
and genetic selection marker to increase meat yield in the livestock industry. 
In addition, MSTN can affect feed efficiencies and, thus decrease total feed 
requirement as shown in increased feed efficiencies in pigs and cattle with MSTN 
mutations. Although MSTN mutation in various animal species has been previously 
studied, MSTN mutation in avian species has only recently been generated to 
characterize its biological function. However, beneficial effects of MSTN 
mutation on poultry production need to be further investigated. In this study, 
using the MSTN mutant quail, feed efficiency related to interplay of changes in 
body weight gain (WG), feed intake (FI), and fat accretion were investigated. WG 
of mutant quail were significantly higher (P< 0.001) than those of wild-type 
(WT) from all time periods, 10-d interval from post-hatching day (D)10 to 40. 
Feed intake of mutant quail were significantly higher than those of WT from D 10 
to 20 (P< 0.01) and D 20 to 30 (P< 0.001), but not from D 30 to 40, resulting in 
a significantly lower feed conversion ratio (FCR) of mutant quail compared to WT 
quail only from D 30 to 40 (P< 0.001). From those results, overall (D 10 to 40) 
FCR was significantly lower in mutant quail (P< 0.001) indicating improved feed 
efficiency by MSTN mutation. In addition, percentages of leg or abdominal fat 
compared to body weight in mutant quail at 8 wk were significantly lower than WT 
(P< 0.05). In combination to greater WG, less fat accretion might partially 
contribute to improved feed efficiency in MSTN mutant quail. As there is a 
current preference of meat with lower fat as a healthy food, MSTN can be used 
for the potential selection marker for not only bigger and leaner poultry, but 
also better feed efficiency that can satisfy both producers and consumers.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101257
PMCID: PMC8242037
PMID: 34174566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]