1. Transl Anim Sci. 2021 Mar 23;5(2):txab045. doi: 10.1093/tas/txab045.
eCollection  2021 Apr.

The effect of time of feeding on plasma amino acids during exercise and recovery 
in horses.

Graham-Thiers PM(1), Bowen LK(1).

Author information:
(1)Equine Studies Department, Emory & Henry College, Emory, VA 24327, USA.

Feeding management in horses suggests feeding horses in advance of exercise, 
particularly the grain portion of the diet. Plasma amino acids (AA) peak at 3 to 
6 h postfeeding depending on the AA. The timeframe between feeding and exercise 
may affect the availability of AA during and after exercise. The purpose of this 
study was to observe the differences in plasma AA in horses fed prior to 
exercise or after exercise. Eight light type horses were fed a diet with 
adequate protein and AA for horses in light to moderate exercise. After an 
adjustment period, horses completed a standardized exercise test (SET). Relative 
to the SET, horses were fed either 2 h prior (PRE horses) to the SET, 1 h after 
completing the SET (POST horses), or horses remained fasted throughout the 
sampling period (FASTED horses). Plasma was drawn prior to exercise, at the peak 
of exercise as well as at 1, 2, 4, and 7 h postexercise. Plasma was analyzed for 
AA, glucose, lactate, creatinine, creatine kinase, ammonia, urea-N, and 
3-methylhistdine. After completion of the SET and sampling period, horses 
entered a 1-wk recovery period, which was followed by another SET. The protocol 
repeated until horses rotated through all feeding protocols in the study (three 
SETs). The majority of the plasma AA were elevated in PRE horses compared with 
POST horses prior to the SET until 2 h postexercise where POST horses' plasma AA 
concentrations became elevated and remained elevated until the end of the 
sampling period. In that same time frame, plasma AA for the PRE group decreased 
out to the end of the sampling period. The elevation of plasma AA in POST horses 
would be expected as they were fed at 1 h postexercise, whereas PRE horses were 
reaching a 4 h postfeeding time frame at this point. This elevation was not 
observed for plasma concentrations of isoleucine, leucine, methionine, and 
histidine. Concentrations of these AA initially were greater for POST horses in 
the postexercise period; however, they declined more rapidly than the other AA. 
The rapid decrease of some of the plasma AA concentrations may suggest uptake by 
muscle for recovery. This in conjunction with a decrease in plasma creatine 
kinase concentrations for POST horses suggests that feeding postexercise may 
facilitate better muscle protein balance (synthesis vs. breakdown) in the 
recovery period following exercise.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Society of Animal Science.

DOI: 10.1093/tas/txab045
PMCID: PMC8221455
PMID: 34179699