1. Int J Gen Med. 2021 Jun 21;14:2677-2694. doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S313584.
eCollection  2021.

KRT7 Overexpression is Associated with Poor Prognosis and Immune Cell 
Infiltration in Patients with Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma.

Li Y(1), Su Z(1), Wei B(1), Liang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD) is a deadly tumor with a high 
recurrence rate and poor prognosis. Keratin 7 (KRT7) is a member of the keratin 
gene family that is involved in the regulation of cell growth, migration and 
apoptosis in many cancers. However, the role of KRT7 and its biological 
functions in PAAD remain unclear. We systemically analyzed the expression and 
clinical values of KRT7 in PAAD.
METHODS: The Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis (GEPIA), Oncomine 
and Human Protein Atlas (HPA) databases were used to analyze the mRNA and 
protein expression of KRT7 in PAAD. The prognosis and subgroup analysis of KRT7 
in PAAD patients was performed using the GEPIA, PROGgeneV2 and UALCAN databases. 
Later, the correlation between KRT7 expression and tumor immune molecules in 
PAAD was evaluated using the Immune Cell Abundance Identifier (ImmuCellAI) and 
TISIDB databases. Finally, the functional enrichment pathway of KRT7 and its 
coexpressed genes were analyzed by the Database for Annotation, Visualization, 
and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) and Metascape databases and Gene Set Enrichment 
Analysis (GSEA).
RESULTS: The mRNA and protein expression of KRT7 was increased in PAAD tissues 
compared with normal tissues. High KRT7 expression was closely associated with 
tumor grade, TP53 mutations and poor prognosis in PAAD patients. Cox regression 
analysis proved that overexpressed KRT7 was an important and independent risk 
factor for poor overall survival (P = 0.006, HR =1.87) and disease-free survival 
(P = 0.019, HR =1.793) in PAAD. Additionally, KRT7 expression was significantly 
associated with immune infiltration of tumor immune cells and immunomodulators. 
Functional enrichment analyses and GSEA indicated that KRT7 might be involved in 
the regulation of the p53 pathway in PAAD.
CONCLUSION: Overexpressed KRT7 could be a promising prognostic and therapeutic 
target biomarker for PAAD by bioinformatics analysis.

Â© 2021 Li et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJGM.S313584
PMCID: PMC8233003
PMID: 34188523

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflicts of interest 
for this work or regarding the publication of this paper.