1. Genet Epidemiol. 2021 Oct;45(7):710-720. doi: 10.1002/gepi.22423. Epub 2021
Jun  29.

Identifying genetic risk variants associated with brain volumetric phenotypes 
via K-sample Ball Divergence method.

Hu Y(1), Tan H(2), Li C(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Yale University School of Public Health, New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Shantou University Medical College, 
Shantou, Guangdong, China.

Regional human brain volumes including total area, average thickness, and total 
volume are heritable and associated with neurological disorders. However, the 
genetic architecture of brain structure and function is still largely unknown 
and worthy of exploring. The Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition, and Genetics 
(PING) data set provides an excellent resource with genome-wide genetic data and 
related neuroimaging data. In this study, we perform genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS) of 315 brain volumetric phenotypes from the PING data set 
including 1036 samples with 539,865 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We 
introduce a nonparametric test based on K-sample Ball Divergence (KBD) to 
identify genetic risk variants that influence regional brain volumes. We carry 
out simulations to demonstrate that KBD is a powerful test for identifying 
significant SNPs associated with multivariate phenotypes although controlling 
the type I error rate. We successfully identify nine SNPs below a significance 
level of 5 × 10-5 for the PING data. Among the nine identified genetic variants, 
two SNPs rs486179 and rs562110 are located in the ADRA1A gene that is a 
well-known risk factor of mental illness, such as schizophrenia and attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Our study suggests that the nonparametric test 
KBD is an effective method for identifying genetic variants associated with 
complex diseases in large-scale GWAS of multiple phenotypes.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/gepi.22423
PMCID: PMC8434958
PMID: 34184773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.