1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Jun 28;17(6):e1009119. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009119.  eCollection 2021 Jun.

De novo mutational signature discovery in tumor genomes using SparseSignatures.

Lal A(1), Liu K(2), Tibshirani R(2)(3), Sidow A(1)(4), Ramazzotti D(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United 
States of America.
(2)Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United 
States of America.
(3)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, United States of America.
(4)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United 
States of America.
(5)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
United States of America.

Cancer is the result of mutagenic processes that can be inferred from tumor 
genomes by analyzing rate spectra of point mutations, or "mutational 
signatures". Here we present SparseSignatures, a novel framework to extract 
signatures from somatic point mutation data. Our approach incorporates a 
user-specified background signature, employs regularization to reduce noise in 
non-background signatures, uses cross-validation to identify the number of 
signatures, and is scalable to large datasets. We show that SparseSignatures 
outperforms current state-of-the-art methods on simulated data using a variety 
of standard metrics. We then apply SparseSignatures to whole genome sequences of 
pancreatic and breast tumors, discovering well-differentiated signatures that 
are linked to known mutagenic mechanisms and are strongly associated with 
patient clinical features.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009119
PMCID: PMC8270462
PMID: 34181655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journalâ€™s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: A.L is an employee of 
NVIDIA Corporation.