1. Arch Toxicol. 2021 Aug;95(8):2785-2796. doi: 10.1007/s00204-021-03108-x. Epub 
2021 Jun 29.

Pyrrolizidine alkaloid-induced transcriptomic changes in rat lungs in a 28-day 
subacute feeding study.

Buchmueller J(1), Sprenger H(1), Ebmeyer J(1), Rasinger JD(2), Creutzenberg 
O(3), Schaudien D(3), Hengstler JG(4), Guenther G(4), Braeuning A(1), 
Hessel-Pras S(5).

Author information:
(1)German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, Max-Dohrn-Str. 8-10, 10589, 
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institute of Marine Research (IMR), Postboks 1870 Nordnes, 5817, Bergen, 
Norway.
(3)Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine ITEM, 
Nikolai-Fuchs-Straße 1, 30625, Hanover, Germany.
(4)Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors, Technical 
University Dortmund, Ardeystr. 67, 44139, Dortmund, Germany.
(5)German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, Max-Dohrn-Str. 8-10, 10589, 
Berlin, Germany. stefanie.hessel-pras@bfr.bund.de.

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs) are secondary plant metabolites synthesized by a 
wide range of plants as protection against herbivores. These toxins are found 
worldwide and pose a threat to human health. PAs induce acute effects like 
hepatic sinusoidal obstruction syndrome and pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
Moreover, chronic exposure to low doses can induce cancer and liver cirrhosis in 
laboratory animals. The mechanisms causing hepatotoxicity have been investigated 
previously. However, toxic effects in the lung are less well understood, and 
especially data on the correlation effects with individual chemical structures 
of different PAs are lacking. The present study focuses on the identification of 
gene expression changes in vivo in rat lungs after exposure to six structurally 
different PAs (echimidine, heliotrine, lasiocarpine, senecionine, senkirkine, 
and platyphylline). Rats were treated by gavage with daily doses of 3.3 mg PA/kg 
bodyweight for 28 days and transcriptional changes in the lung and kidney were 
investigated by whole-genome microarray analysis. The results were compared with 
recently published data on gene regulation in the liver. Using bioinformatics 
data mining, we identified inflammatory responses as a predominant feature in 
rat lungs. By comparison, in liver, early molecular consequences to PAs were 
characterized by alterations in cell-cycle regulation and DNA damage response. 
Our results provide, for the first time, information about early molecular 
effects in lung tissue after subacute exposure to PAs, and demonstrates 
tissue-specificity of PA-induced molecular effects.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-021-03108-x
PMCID: PMC8298252
PMID: 34185104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.