1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2021 May 30;2021:6613140. doi: 
10.1155/2021/6613140. eCollection 2021.

Proteomic Analysis and In Vivo Studies Reveal the Potential Gastroprotective 
Effects of CHCl(3) and Aqueous Extracts of Ficus palmata.

Ansari SF(1), Khan AU(1), Qazi NG(1), Shah FA(1), Naeem K(1).

Author information:
(1)Riphah Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Riphah International University, 
Islamabad, Pakistan.

Ficus palmata is rich in several phytochemicals such as chromone, isoflavones, 
terpenes, lignans, coumarins, glycosides, and furanocoumarins and have been 
traditionally used for the management of different gastrointestinal disorders. 
This research reveals the effects of Ficus palmata fruit extracts-Ficus palmata 
chloroform (Fp.CHCl3) and Ficus palmata aqueous (Fp.Aq)-on gut activity through 
in vivo and in vitro analyses. Antidiarrheal and enteropooling assays were 
analyzed with castor oil-induced diarrhea and intestinal fluid accumulation. 
Jejunum tissues of rabbits were isolated (antispasmodic) for in vitro 
experiments. Antimotility was carried out by charcoal meal for determining 
transient time, and ethanol-induced ulcer assay was used to measure the 
ulceration of stomach; molecular pathways were assessed through proteomic 
approach. Fp.CHCl3 and Fp.Aq extracts attributed dose-dependently protection 
against diarrhea, and intestinal fluid secretions were inhibited dose 
dependently. Extracts of Fp.CHCl3 and Fp.Aq produced reduction in spontaneous 
and K+ (at 80 Mm)-induced contractions in isolated jejunum tissues, along with 
the decreased length covered by charcoal in charcoal meal transient time 
activity. The extract exhibited gastroprotective outcome in rats and reduced 
tumor necrotic factor (TNF-α) levels and IL-18, measured by proteomic approach. 
Morphological studies' results showed that ethanol induced significant 
gastritis, apoptosis, swelling of mucosa, and hydropic degeneration leading to 
cellular degeneration and necrosis, observed through staining techniques. 
Furthermore, ethanol activated the inflammation pathway in all gastric zones by 
elevating the levels of cyclooxygenase-2, TNF-α, and nuclear factor kappa 
light-chain enhancer of activated B-cells. Overall results expressed the 
antidiarrheal, antispasmodic, enteropooling, antimotility, and antiulcer 
activities of Ficus palmata fruit extract.

Copyright © 2021 Sameen Fatima Ansari et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6613140
PMCID: PMC8184346
PMID: 34194521

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.