1. Front Immunol. 2021 Jun 14;12:629854. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.629854. 
eCollection 2021.

Investigation of a Hypoxia-Immune-Related Microenvironment Gene Signature and 
Prediction Model for Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis.

Li X(1)(2), Cai H(1), Cai Y(3), Zhang Q(1)(2), Ding Y(1)(2), Zhuang Q(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Transplantation Center, The 3rd Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(2)Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(3)School of Life Science, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(4)Research Center of National Health Ministry on Transplantation Medicine, 
Changsha, China.

BACKGROUND: There is growing evidence found that the role of hypoxia and immune 
status in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). However, there are few studies 
about the role of hypoxia and immune status in the lung milieu in the prognosis 
of IPF. This study aimed to develop a hypoxia-immune-related prediction model 
for the prognosis of IPF.
METHODS: Hypoxia and immune status were estimated with microarray data of a 
discovery cohort from the GEO database using UMAP and ESTIMATE algorithms 
respectively. The Cox regression model with the LASSO method was used for 
identifying prognostic genes and developing hypoxia-immune-related genes. 
Cibersort was used to evaluate the difference of 22 kinds of immune cell 
infiltration. Three independent validation cohorts from GEO database were used 
for external validation. Peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) and 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were collected to be tested by Quantitative 
reverse transcriptase-PCR (qRT-PCR) and flow cytometry from 22 clinical samples, 
including 13 healthy controls, six patients with non-fibrotic pneumonia and 
three patients with pulmonary fibrosis.
RESULTS: Hypoxia and immune status were significantly associated with the 
prognosis of IPF patients. High hypoxia and high immune status were identified 
as risk factors for overall survival. CD8+ T cell, activated CD4+ memory T cell, 
NK cell, activated mast cell, M1 and M0 macrophages were identified as key 
immune cells in hypoxia-immune-related microenvironment. A prediction model for 
IPF prognosis was established based on the hypoxia-immune-related one protective 
and nine risk DEGs. In the independent validation cohorts, the prognostic 
prediction model performed the significant applicability in peripheral whole 
blood, peripheral blood mononuclear cell, and lung tissue of IPF patients. The 
preliminary clinical specimen validation suggested the reliability of most 
conclusions.
CONCLUSIONS: The hypoxia-immune-based prediction model for the prognosis of IPF 
provides a new idea for prognosis and treatment.

Copyright Â© 2021 Li, Cai, Cai, Zhang, Ding and Zhuang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.629854
PMCID: PMC8236709
PMID: 34194423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.