1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jun 9;22(12):6241. doi: 10.3390/ijms22126241.

Decellularized Porcine Cartilage Scaffold; Validation of Decellularization and 
Evaluation of Biomarkers of Chondrogenesis.

Stone RN(1)(2), Frahs SM(2)(3)(4), Hardy MJ(2)(3)(4), Fujimoto A(2)(3), Pu 
X(2)(3)(4), Keller-Peck C(2)(3), Oxford JT(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Studies Program, Boise State University, Boise, ID 83725, 
USA.
(2)Biomolecular Research Center, Boise State University, Boise, ID 83725, USA.
(3)Center of Biomedical Research Excellence in Matrix Biology, Boise State 
University, Boise, ID 83725, USA.
(4)Biomolecular Sciences Graduate Programs, Boise State University, Boise, ID 
83725, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Boise State University, Boise, ID 83725, 
USA.

Osteoarthritis is a major concern in the United States and worldwide. Current 
non-surgical and surgical approaches alleviate pain but show little evidence of 
cartilage restoration. Cell-based treatments may hold promise for the 
regeneration of hyaline cartilage-like tissue at the site of injury or wear. 
Cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions have been shown to drive cell 
differentiation pathways. Biomaterials for clinically relevant applications can 
be generated from decellularized porcine auricular cartilage. This material may 
represent a suitable scaffold on which to seed and grow chondrocytes to create 
new cartilage. In this study, we used decellularization techniques to create an 
extracellular matrix scaffold that supports chondrocyte cell attachment and 
growth in tissue culture conditions. Results presented here evaluate the 
decellularization process histologically and molecularly. We identified new and 
novel biomarker profiles that may aid future cartilage decellularization 
efforts. Additionally, the resulting scaffold was characterized using scanning 
electron microscopy, fluorescence microscopy, and proteomics. Cellular response 
to the decellularized scaffold was evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR for 
gene expression analysis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22126241
PMCID: PMC8230108
PMID: 34207917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.