1. Viruses. 2021 Jun 17;13(6):1157. doi: 10.3390/v13061157.

A β-Hairpin Motif in the Envelope Protein E2 Mediates Receptor Binding of Bovine 
Viral Diarrhea Virus.

Merwaiss F(1), Pascual MJ(1), Pomilio MT(1), Lopez MG(2), Taboga OA(2), Alvarez 
DE(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biotecnológicas (IIB), Universidad Nacional de 
San Martín (UNSAM), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas 
(CONICET), Buenos Aires B1650HMR, Argentina.
(2)Instituto de Agrobiotecnología y Biología Molecular (IABIMO), Instituto 
Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria (INTA), CONICET, Buenos Aires B1686IGC, 
Argentina.

Pestivirus envelope protein E2 is crucial to virus infection and accomplishes 
virus-receptor interaction during entry. However, mapping of E2 residues 
mediating these interactions has remained unexplored. In this study, to 
investigate the structure-function relationship for a β-hairpin motif exposed to 
the solvent in the crystal structure of bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) E2, 
we designed two amino acidic substitutions that result in a change of 
electrostatic potential. First, using wild type and mutant E2 expressed as 
soluble recombinant proteins, we found that the mutant protein had reduced 
binding to susceptible cells compared to wild type and diminished ability to 
inhibit BVDV infection, suggesting a lower affinity for BVDV receptors. We then 
analyzed the effect of β-hairpin mutations in the context of recombinant viral 
particles. Mutant viruses recovered from cell culture supernatant after 
transfection of recombinant RNA had almost completely inhibited ability to 
re-infect susceptible cells, indicating an impact of mutations on BVDV 
infectivity. Finally, sequential passaging of the mutant virus resulted in the 
selection of a viral population in which β-hairpin mutations reverted to the 
wild type sequence to restore infectivity. Taken together, our results show that 
this conserved region of the E2 protein is critical for the interaction with 
host cell receptors.

DOI: 10.3390/v13061157
PMCID: PMC8235316
PMID: 34204224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.