1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jun 6;22(11):6118. doi: 10.3390/ijms22116118.

The Emerging Roles of Chromogranins and Derived Polypeptides in Atherosclerosis, 
Diabetes, and Coronary Heart Disease.

Watanabe T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Ushioda General Hospital/Clinic, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa 230-0001, Japan.

Chromogranin A (CgA), B (CgB), and C (CgC), the family members of the granin 
glycoproteins, are associated with diabetes. These proteins are abundantly 
expressed in neurons, endocrine, and neuroendocrine cells. They are also present 
in other areas of the body. Patients with diabetic retinopathy have higher 
levels of CgA, CgB, and CgC in the vitreous humor. In addition, type 1 diabetic 
patients have high CgA and low CgB levels in the circulating blood. Plasma CgA 
levels are increased in patients with hypertension, coronary heart disease, and 
heart failure. CgA is the precursor to several functional peptides, including 
catestatin, vasostatin-1, vasostatin-2, pancreastatin, chromofungin, and many 
others. Catestatin, vasostain-1, and vasostatin-2 suppress the expression of 
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 in human 
vascular endothelial cells. Catestatin and vasostatin-1 suppress oxidized 
low-density lipoprotein-induced foam cell formation in human macrophages. 
Catestatin and vasostatin-2, but not vasostatin-1, suppress the proliferation 
and these three peptides suppress the migration in human vascular smooth 
muscles. Chronic infusion of catestatin, vasostatin-1, or vasostatin-2 
suppresses the development of atherosclerosis of the aorta in apolipoprotein 
E-deficient mice. Catestatin, vasostatin-1, vasostatin-2, and chromofungin 
protect ischemia/reperfusion-induced myocardial dysfunction in rats. Since 
pancreastatin inhibits insulin secretion from pancreatic Î²-cells, and regulates 
glucose metabolism in liver and adipose tissues, pancreastatin inhibitor 
peptide-8 (PSTi8) improves insulin resistance and glucose homeostasis. 
Catestatin stimulates therapeutic angiogenesis in the mouse hind limb ischemia 
model. Gene therapy with secretoneurin, a CgC-derived peptide, stimulates 
postischemic neovascularization in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice and 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice, and improves diabetic neuropathy in db/db 
mice. Therefore, CgA is a biomarker for atherosclerosis, diabetes, hypertension, 
and coronary heart disease. CgA- and CgC--derived polypeptides provide the 
therapeutic target for atherosclerosis and ischemia-induced tissue damages. 
PSTi8 is useful in the treatment of diabetes.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22116118
PMCID: PMC8201018
PMID: 34204153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.