1. Biology (Basel). 2021 Jun 22;10(7):566. doi: 10.3390/biology10070566.

Prognostic Impact of BRCA1 and BRCA2 Mutations on Long-Term Survival Outcomes in 
Egyptian Female Breast Cancer Patients.

AbdelHamid S(1), El-Mesallamy H(1)(2), Aziz HA(3), Zekri AR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams University, Cairo 
11566, Egypt.
(2)Dean of Faculty of Pharmacy, Sinai University, North Sinai 45518, Egypt.
(3)Department of Clinical Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, 
Cairo 11591, Egypt.
(4)Virology and Immunology Unit, Cancer Biology Department, National Cancer 
Institute, Cairo University, Giza 11796, Egypt.

Evidence on the prognostic relevance of BRCA1/2 mutations on breast cancer 
survival is still debatable. To address this ambiguity, we sought to elucidate 
the impact of BRCA1/2 mutation carriership on long-term clinical outcomes for 
the first time in Egyptian female breast cancer patients. This study comprised 
103 Egyptian female breast cancer patients previously tested for BRCA1/2 
mutations. Clinicopathological characteristics and long-term follow-up data were 
retrieved from clinical records until death or loss to follow-up. Overall 
survival (OS), recurrence-free survival (RFS), disease-free survival (DFS), and 
metastasis-free survival (MFS) were compared in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and 
non-carriers. Pathogenic variants (Class 5 according to ACMG/AMP guidelines) 
were observed in 29 cases. The profile of the detected variants was previously 
reported. After median follow-up time of 6.9 years (range, 4.2-24.4 years), 
BRCA1/2 carriers exhibited significantly worse RFS compared to non-carriers (p = 
0.01; HR = 3.00 (95%CI 1.35-6.68)). However, we couldn't demonstrate 
statistically significant difference between carriers of pathogenic mutations 
and non-carriers regarding MFS (p = 0.24; HR = 1.38 (95%CI 0.8-2.4)), DFS (p = 
0.11; HR = 1.23 (95%CI 0.74-2.06)), or OS (p = 0.36; HR = 1.23 (95%CI 
0.58-2.61)). Though no significant impact was observed in OS, yet BRCA1/2 
mutation carriers were at high risk of recurrence, highlighting the importance 
of adopting BRCA screening strategies and prophylactic measures.

DOI: 10.3390/biology10070566
PMCID: PMC8301143
PMID: 34206661

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.