1. Brain Sci. 2021 Jun 7;11(6):754. doi: 10.3390/brainsci11060754.

Differential Epigenetic Signature of Corticospinal Motor Neurons in ALS.

Ozyurt T(1), Gautam M(1).

Author information:
(1)Davee Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurological Sciences, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Corticospinal motor neurons (CSMN) are an indispensable neuron population for 
the motor neuron circuitry. They are excitatory projection neurons, which 
collect information from different regions of the brain and transmit it to 
spinal cord targets, initiating and controlling motor function. CSMN 
degeneration is pronounced cellular event in motor neurons diseases, such as 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Genetic mutations contribute to only about 
ten percent of ALS. Thus understanding the involvement of other factors, such as 
epigenetic controls, is immensely valuable. Here, we investigated epigenomic 
signature of CSMN that become diseased due to misfolded SOD1 toxicity and TDP-43 
pathology, by performing quantitative analysis of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and 
5-hydroxymethycytosine (5hmC) expression profiles during end-stage of the 
disease in hSOD1G93A, and prpTDP-43A315T mice. Our analysis revealed that 
expression of 5mC was specifically reduced in CSMN of both hSOD1G93A and 
prpTDP-43A315T mice. However, 5hmC expression was increased in the CSMN that 
becomes diseased due to misfolded SOD1 and decreased in CSMN that degenerates 
due to TDP-43 pathology. These results suggest the presence of a distinct 
difference between different underlying causes. These differential epigenetic 
events might modulate the expression profiles of select genes, and ultimately 
contribute to the different paths that lead to CSMN vulnerability in ALS.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci11060754
PMCID: PMC8230084
PMID: 34200232

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.