1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2021 Jun 3;10(6):907. doi: 10.3390/antiox10060907.

DHA and Its Elaborated Modulation of Antioxidant Defenses of the Brain: 
Implications in Aging and AD Neurodegeneration.

Díaz M(1)(2)(3), Mesa-Herrera F(1), Marín R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Membrane Physiology and Biophysics, Department of Animal 
Biology, School of Biology, Universidad de La Laguna, 38206 Tenerife, Spain.
(2)Instituto Universitario de Enfermedades Tropicales y Salud Pública de 
Canarias (IUETSP), Universidad de La Laguna, 38206 Tenerife, Spain.
(3)Unidad Asociada ULL-CSIC "Fisiología y Biofísica de la Membrana Celular en 
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas y Tumorales", 38206 Tenerife, Spain.
(4)Laboratory of Cellular Neurobiology, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, 
School of Medicine, Universidad de La Laguna, 38206 Tenerife, Spain.

DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) is perhaps the most pleiotropic molecule in nerve 
cell biology. This long-chain highly unsaturated fatty acid has evolved to 
accomplish essential functions ranging from structural components allowing fast 
events in nerve cell membrane physiology to regulation of neurogenesis and 
synaptic function. Strikingly, the plethora of DHA effects has to take place 
within the hostile pro-oxidant environment of the brain parenchyma, which might 
suggest a molecular suicide. In order to circumvent this paradox, different 
molecular strategies have evolved during the evolution of brain cells to 
preserve DHA and to minimize the deleterious effects of its oxidation. In this 
context, DHA has emerged as a member of the "indirect antioxidants" family, the 
redox effects of which are not due to direct redox interactions with reactive 
species, but to modulation of gene expression within thioredoxin and glutathione 
antioxidant systems and related pathways. Weakening or deregulation of these 
self-protecting defenses orchestrated by DHA is associated with normal aging but 
also, more worryingly, with the development of neurodegenerative diseases. In 
the present review, we elaborate on the essential functions of DHA in the brain, 
including its role as indirect antioxidant, the selenium connection for proper 
antioxidant function and their changes during normal aging and in Alzheimer's 
disease.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox10060907
PMCID: PMC8228037
PMID: 34205196

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.