1. Biophys J. 2021 Jul 20;120(14):2793-2804. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2021.06.016. Epub
 2021 Jun 30.

Small molecule therapeutics to destabilize the ACE2-RBD complex: A molecular 
dynamics study.

Razizadeh M(1), Nikfar M(1), Liu Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania; 
Department of Bioengineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. 
Electronic address: yal310@lehigh.edu.

Update of
    ChemRxiv. 2020 Dec 16. doi: 10.26434/chemrxiv.13377119.

The ongoing coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic has infected millions of 
people, claimed hundreds of thousands of lives, and made a worldwide health 
emergency. Understanding the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) mechanism of infection is crucial in the development of potential 
therapeutics and vaccines. The infection process is triggered by direct binding 
of the SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain (RBD) to the host-cell receptor 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Many efforts have been made to design or 
repurpose therapeutics to deactivate the RBD or ACE2 and prevent the initial 
binding. In addition to direct inhibition strategies, small chemical compounds 
might be able to interfere and destabilize the metastable, prefusion complex of 
ACE2-RBD. This approach can be employed to prevent the further progress of virus 
infection at its early stages. In this study, molecular docking was employed to 
analyze the binding of two chemical compounds, SSAA09E2 and Nilotinib, with the 
druggable pocket of the ACE2-RBD complex. The structural changes as a result of 
the interference with the ACE2-RBD complex were analyzed by molecular dynamics 
simulations. Results show that both Nilotinib and SSAA09E2 can induce 
significant conformational changes in the ACE2-RBD complex, intervene with the 
hydrogen bonds, and influence the flexibility of proteins. Moreover, essential 
dynamics analysis suggests that the presence of small molecules can trigger 
large-scale conformational changes that may destabilize the ACE2-RBD complex.

Copyright Â© 2021 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2021.06.016
PMCID: PMC8241573
PMID: 34214539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]