1. PLoS One. 2021 Jul 2;16(7):e0253771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0253771. 
eCollection 2021.

Real-time UVMS torque distribution algorithm based on weighting matrix.

Moon Y(1), Hong J(1), Jin S(2), Bae J(3), Seo T(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Mechanical Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)School of Mechanical Engineering, Pusan National University, Busan, South 
Korea.
(3)GRASP Lab, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States of 
America.

This study presents a real-time algorithm for even distributing the torque 
burden on the parallel manipulator with an autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) 
through the cooperation of the AUV and manipulator. For the redundant resolution 
of the underwater vehicle manipulator system (UVMS), we used the weighting 
matrix of the weighted pseudo inverse for kinematic and dynamic modeling. We 
made dynamic and kinematic modeling using the force distribution characteristics 
of parallel manipulators. Using the parallel manipulator's model, the weighting 
matrix was changed every second to share the manipulator torque with the AUV. 
The Taguchi method was used to reduce the calculation time for real-time 
calculation and to perform valve rotation operations with as little torque as 
possible even in an underwater environment where it is difficult to determine 
any cause of errors. To demonstrate the effectiveness of this algorithm, we 
experimented with valve rotation in water using the UVMS. Analysis of the 
experimental results revealed that the manipulator torque load was greatly 
reduced due to the AUV load distribution.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0253771
PMCID: PMC8253443
PMID: 34214076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.