1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2021 Sep 10;569:17-22. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.06.079. Epub 2021 Jun 30.

UPR(mt) activation protects against MPP(+)-induced toxicity in a cell culture 
model of Parkinson's disease.

Hu D(1), Liu Z(2), Qi X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University College of Arts and 
Sciences, Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA; Center for Mitochondrial Disease, Case 
Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA. 
Electronic address: xxq38@case.edu.

The pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD) remains elusive, but mitochondrial 
dysfunction is believed to be one crucial step in its pathogenesis. The 
mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt) is an important mitochondrial 
quality control strategy that maintains mitochondrial function in response to 
disturbances of mitochondrial protein homeostasis. Activation of the UPRmt and 
the beneficial effect of rescuing mitochondrial proteostasis have been reported 
in several genetic models of PD. However, the pathogenic relevance of the UPRmt 
in idiopathic PD is unknown. The present study examined the link between the 
UPRmt and mitochondrial dysfunction in 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium 
(MPP+)-treated SH-SY5Y cells. Treatment with MPP + induced activation of the 
UPRmt, reflected by an increase in the expression of UPRmt-related chaperones, 
proteases, and transcription mediators. UPRmt activation that was induced by 
overexpressing mutant ornithine transcarbamylase significantly reduced the 
production of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) and improved cell 
survival in SH-SY5Y cells following MPP+ treatment. Moreover, the overexpression 
of activating transcription factor 5 (mammalian UPRmt transcription factor) 
conferred protection against MPP+-induced ROS production and against cell death 
in SH-SY5Y cells. Overall, our results demonstrate the beneficial effect of 
UPRmt activation in MPP + -treated cells, shedding new light on the mechanism of 
mitochondrial dysfunction in the pathogenesis of PD.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.06.079
PMCID: PMC8364872
PMID: 34216993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.