1. J Immunother Cancer. 2021 Jul;9(7):e002459. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2021-002459.

Systematic review of combinations of targeted or immunotherapy in advanced solid 
tumors.

Tan AC(1)(2), Bagley SJ(3), Wen PY(4), Lim M(5), Platten M(6)(7), Colman H(8), 
Ashley DM(9), Wick W(6), Chang SM(10), Galanis E(11), Mansouri A(12), Khagi 
S(13), Mehta MP(14), Heimberger AB(15), Puduvalli VK(16), Reardon DA(4), 
Sahebjam S(17), Simes J(18), Antonia SJ(9), Berry D(19), Khasraw M(20).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Duke-NUS Medical School, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Abramson Cancer Center and Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Center for Neuro-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)DKTK CCU Neuroimmunology and Brain Tumor Immunology, German Cancer Research 
Centre, Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(9)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(10)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California, USA.
(11)Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(12)Department of Neurosurgery, Penn State Cancer Institute, Hershey, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(13)Division of Medical Oncology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(14)Department of Radiation Oncology, Miami Cancer Institute, Miami, Florida, 
USA.
(15)Department of Neurosurgery, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(16)Department of Neurooncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(17)Department of Neuro-oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(18)NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre, University of Sydney, Camperdown, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(19)Department of Biostatistics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(20)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA 
mustafa.khasraw@duke.edu.

With rapid advances in our understanding of cancer, there is an expanding number 
of potential novel combination therapies, including novel-novel combinations. 
Identifying which combinations are appropriate and in which subpopulations are 
among the most difficult questions in medical research. We conducted a Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)-guided 
systematic review of trials of novel-novel combination therapies involving 
immunotherapies or molecular targeted therapies in advanced solid tumors. A 
MEDLINE search was conducted using a modified Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search 
Strategy for published clinical trials between July 1, 2017, and June 30, 2020, 
in the top-ranked medical and oncology journals. Trials were evaluated according 
to a criterion adapted from previously published Food and Drug Administration 
guidance and other key considerations in designing trials of combinations. This 
included the presence of a strong biological rationale, the use of a new 
established or emerging predictive biomarker prospectively incorporated into the 
clinical trial design, appropriate comparator arms of monotherapy or supportive 
external data sources and a primary endpoint demonstrating a clinically 
meaningful benefit. Of 32 identified trials, there were 11 (34%) trials of the 
novel-novel combination of anti-programmed death 1 (PD-1)/programmed death 
ligand 1 (PD-L1) and anti-cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4) 
therapy, and 10 (31%) trials of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 and anti-vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) combination therapy. 20 (62.5%) trials were phase II 
trials, while 12 (37.5%) were phase III trials. Most (72%) trials lacked 
significant preclinical evidence supporting the development of the combination 
in the given indication. A majority of trials (69%) were conducted in biomarker 
unselected populations or used pre-existing biomarkers within the given 
indication for patient selection. Most studies (66%) were considered to have 
appropriate comparator arms or had supportive external data sources such as 
prior studies of monotherapy. All studies were evaluated as selecting a 
clinically meaningful primary endpoint. In conclusion, designing trials to 
evaluate novel-novel combination therapies presents numerous challenges to 
demonstrate efficacy in a comprehensive manner. A greater understanding of 
biological rationale for combinations and incorporating predictive biomarkers 
may improve effective evaluation of combination therapies. Innovative 
statistical methods and increasing use of external data to support combination 
approaches are potential strategies that may improve the efficiency of trial 
design. Designing trials to evaluate novel-novel combination therapies presents 
numerous challenges to demonstrate efficacy in a comprehensive manner. A greater 
understanding of biological rationale for combinations and incorporating 
predictive biomarkers may improve effective evaluation of combination therapies. 
Innovative statistical methods and increasing use of external data to support 
combination approaches are potential strategies that may improve the efficiency 
of trial design.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2021-002459
PMCID: PMC8256733
PMID: 34215688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: ACT reports consultant or 
advisory roles for Amgen. SJB reports research grants from Incyte, Eli Lilly, 
Novocure, GSK; consultant or advisory roles for Bayer and Novocure; and US 
patent for 'Combination therapies of EGFRvIII chimeric antigen receptors and 
PD-1 inhibitors'. PYW reports consultant or advisory roles for Agios, Astra 
Zeneca, Bayer, Boston Pharmaceuticals, CNS Pharmaceuticals, Elevate Bio 
Immunomic Therapeutics, Imvax, Karyopharm, Merck, Novartis, Nuvation Bio, 
Vascular Biogenics, VBI Vaccines, Voyager and QED; research funding from Agios, 
Astra Zeneca/Medimmune, Beigene, Celgene, Eli Lily, Genentech/Roche, Kazia, 
MediciNova, Merck, Novartis, Nuvation Bio, Oncoceutics, Vascular Biogenics and 
VBI Vaccines; is an editor for UpToDate and Elsevier. ML reports consultant or 
advisory roles for Tocagen, SQZ Technologies, VBI, InCephalo Therapeutics and 
Pyramid Bio; non-research consulting roles for Stryker; research support from 
Arbor, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Accuray, DNAtrix, Tocagen, Biohaven and 
Kyrin-Kyowa; and has patents for focused radiation+checkpoint inhibitors and 
local chemotherapy+checkpoint inhibitors. MP reports consultant or advisory 
roles for non-financial support from Roche, personal fees and non-financial 
support from Bayer, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from Apogenix, 
non-financial support from Pfizer, personal fees from Affiris outside the 
submitted work. In addition, MP has a patent EP2753315B1 licensed to Bayer, a 
patent EP2800580B1 issued, a patent US20180155403A1 pending, a patent 
US20180246118A1 pending, a patent US20170254803A1 pending, a patent 
WO2018146010A1 licensed to Bayer, a patent WO2019101643A1 licensed to Bayer, a 
patent WO2019101647A1 licensed to Bayer, a patent WO2019101641A1 licensed to 
Bayer, and a patent WO2019101642A1 licensed to Bayer. HC reports consultant or 
advisory roles for Best Doctors/Teladoc, Karyopharm Therapeutics, Private 
Health, Orbus, Bayer, Forma Therapeutics and Adastra Pharmaceuticals; research 
funding (Inst) from Newlink Genetics, Plexxikon, Kadmon, Orbus, Merck, DNATrix, 
Abbvie, Beigene, Forma Therapeutics, GCAR, Array BioPharma, Karyopharm, Nuvation 
Bio, Bayer and Bristol Meyer Squibb. DMA reports stock and other ownership 
interests in Diverse Biotech; consulting or advisory roles for Istari Oncology 
and Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine; patents, royalties, other 
intellectual property for 'Methods for predicting tumor response to 
immunotherapy, U.S. Provisional application no. 62/787' and 'Methods for 
predicting tumor response to immunotherapy, U.S. Provisional application no. 
62/620,577'; and expert testimony for Tanoury, Nauts, McKinney & Gabarino, PLLC. 
WW reports consultant or advisory roles (Inst) for Agios, Bayer, MSD, Novartis 
and Roche; research funding (Inst) from Apogenix, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer 
and Roche. SMC reports research funding (Inst) from Agios. EG reports consultant 
or advisory roles (Inst) for MedImmune, Inc., Agios Pharmaceuticals and 
Karyopharm; consultant or advisory roles for Gradalis, Inc. and Kiyatec, Inc.; 
research funding (Inst) from MedImmune, Inc., Tracon, Genentech and 
Bristol-Myers Squibb. MPM reports consultant or advisory roles for Zap, Mevion, 
Karyopharm, Tocagen and Astra-Zeneca; and Board of Directors options from 
Oncoceutics. ABH reports consultant or advisory roles for Caris Life Sciences 
and WCG Oncology; royalties on licensed intellectual property from Celldex 
Therapeutics and DNAtrix; research funding from Celularity, Carthera, Codiak, 
and Moleculin. DAR reports consultant or advisory roles for Abbvie, Advantagene, 
Agenus, Amgen, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celldex, DelMar, EMD Serono, 
Genentech/Roche, Imvax, Inovio, Medicenna Biopharma, Inc., Merck, Merck KGaA, 
Monteris, Novocure, Oncorus, Oxigene, Regeneron, Stemline, Sumitono Dainippon 
Pharma and Taiho Oncology, Inc.; honoraria from Abbvie, Advantagene, Agenus, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celldex, EMD Serono, Genentech/Roche, Imvax, Inovio, 
Medicenna Biopharma, Inc., Merck, Merck KGaA, Monteris, Novocure, Oncorus, 
Oxigene, Regeneron, Stemline, Sumitono Dainippon Pharma and Taiho Oncology, 
Inc.; research funding (Inst) from Acerta Phamaceuticals, Agenus, Celldex, EMD 
Serono, Incyte, Inovio, Omniox and Tragara. SS reports consultant or advisory 
roles for Merck and Boehringer Ingelheim; research funding from Merck, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Brooklyn ImmunoTherapeutics. RJS reports research 
funding (Inst) from Bayer, Astra Zeneca, Pfizer, Astella, Roche, Merck, Abbvie 
and Amgen. SJA reports consultant or advisory roles for Achilles, Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Caris Life Sciences, CBMG, Celsius 
Therapeutics, G1 Therapeutics, GlaxoSmithKline, Memgen, Merck, Nektar, RAPT 
Therapeutics, Venn, Glympse and Samyang; data review committee for EMD Serano. 
DB is co-owner of Berry Consultants, LLC, a company that designs adaptive 
Bayesian clinical trials for pharmaceutical and medical device companies, NIH 
cooperative groups, patient advocacy groups, and international consortia. MK 
reports consultant or advisory roles for Janssen, AbbVie, Ipsen, Pfizer Roche, 
and Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine; research funding from AbbVie, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Specialized Therapeutics. AM, SK and VKP report no 
conflicts of interest.