1. J Oncol. 2021 Jun 15;2021:8836078. doi: 10.1155/2021/8836078. eCollection
2021.

LncRNA MALAT1 Accelerates Cervical Carcinoma Proliferation by Suppressing 
miR-124 Expression in Cervical Tumor Cells.

Liang T(1), Wang Y(2), Jiao Y(2), Cong S(1), Jiang X(1), Dong L(1), Zhang G(1), 
Xiao D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The 1st Affiliated Hospital of 
Harbin Medical University, 150001 Harbin, China.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Qiqihar Medical University, 161006 Qiqihar, China.

Emerging studies have clarified the critical role of LncRNA MALAT1 in various 
pathological progressions. Here, we identified its positive relationship with 
cervical carcinoma proliferation. Cervical carcinoma has been considered as one 
of the most malignant tumors among female. Thus, our study was designed to 
investigate the underlying mechanism of LncRNA MALAT1 on cervical tumor cell 
proliferation. We observed that miR-124 was the potential target of LncRNA 
MALAT1 in cervical tumor cell lines (Hela, C-33A, Caski, and SiHa), the 
expression level of which is negatively correlated with LncRNA MALAT1 in 
cervical tumor cells, tissues of cervical patients, and mice. Gain- or 
loss-of-function analyses in cervical tumor cells have further verified the 
regulatory role of MALAT1 on miR-124. Additionally, the proliferation of 
cervical carcinoma was inhibited by miR-124 overexpression, whereas it was 
blocked by LV-MALAT1 transfection. In vivo assays, overexpression of miR-124, or 
knockdown of MALAT1 exhibited beneficial effects on tumor weight, size, and 
volume, together with elevating the survival rate, tightly related with the 
progression of cervical cancer. In conclusion, LncRNA MALAT1 disabled the 
effects of miR-124 as an inhibitory sponge, accelerating the progression of 
cervical carcinoma.

Copyright Â© 2021 Tian Liang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/8836078
PMCID: PMC8221887
PMID: 34221014

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.