1. Front Oncol. 2021 Jun 17;11:672386. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.672386. eCollection
 2021.

Identifying Potential Neoantigens for Cervical Cancer Immunotherapy Using 
Comprehensive Genomic Variation Profiling of Cervical Intraepithelial Neoplasia 
and Cervical Cancer.

Bao C(1), An N(1), Xie H(2), Xu L(3), Zhou B(2), Luo J(4), Huang W(1), Huang 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai 
Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shenzhen People's Hospital, Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan 
University, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Minhang Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Jiangsu Health Vocational College, 
Nanjing, China.

Cervical cancer (CC) is one of the most common gynecological malignant tumors. 
The 5-year survival rate remains poor for the advanced and metastatic cervical 
cancer for the lack of effective treatments. Immunotherapy plays an important 
role in clinical tumor therapy. Neoantigens derived from tumor-specific somatic 
mutations are prospective targets for immunotherapy. Hence, the identification 
of new targets is of great significance for the treatment of advanced and 
metastatic cervical cancer. In this study, we performed whole-exome sequencing 
in 70 samples, including 25 cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CINs) with 
corresponding blood samples and 10 CCs along with paired adjacent tissues to 
identify genomic variations and to find the potential neoantigens for CC 
immunotherapy. Using systematic bioinformatics pipeline, we found that C>T 
transitions were in both CINs and CCs. In contrast, the number of somatic 
mutations in CCs was significantly higher than those in CINs (t-test, P = 
6.60E-04). Meanwhile, mutational signatures analysis revealed that signature 6 
was detected in CIN2, CIN3, and CC, but not in CIN1, while signature 2 was only 
observed in CCs. Furthermore, PIK3CA, ARHGAP5 and ADGRB1 were identified as 
potential driver genes in this report, of which ADGRB1 was firstly reported in 
CC. Based on the genomic variation profiling of CINs and CCs, we identified 2586 
potential neoantigens in these patients, of which 45 neoantigens were found in 
three neoantigen-related databases (TSNAdb, IEDB, and CTDatabase). Our current 
findings lay a solid foundation for the study of the pathogenesis of CC and the 
development of neoantigen-targeted immunotherapeutic measures.

Copyright Â© 2021 Bao, An, Xie, Xu, Zhou, Luo, Huang and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.672386
PMCID: PMC8249860
PMID: 34221990

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.