1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Jun 18;9:645501. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.645501. 
eCollection 2021.

Whole-Exome Sequencing in a Cohort of High Myopia Patients in Northwest China.

Liu Y(1), Zhang JJ(2), Piao SY(3), Shen RJ(4), Ma Y(4), Xue ZQ(5), Zhang W(3), 
Liu J(1), Jin ZB(4), Zhuang WJ(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Third Clinical Medical College of Ningxia 
Medical University (People's Hospital of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region), 
Yinchuan, China.
(2)Clinical Medical College, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, China.
(3)Ningxia Eye Hospital, People's Hospital of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, 
Third Clinical Medical College of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, China.
(4)Beijing Institute of Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing 
Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing Ophthalmology and Visual 
Science Key Laboratory, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao Binhai 
University, Qingdao, China.

High myopia (HM) is one of the leading causes of visual impairment worldwide. In 
order to expand the myopia gene spectrum in the Chinese population, we 
investigated genetic mutations in a cohort of 27 families with HM from Northwest 
China by using whole-exome sequencing (WES). Genetic variations were filtered 
using bioinformatics tools and cosegregation analysis. A total of 201 candidate 
mutations were detected, and 139 were cosegregated with the disease in the 
families. Multistep analysis revealed four missense variants in four unrelated 
families, including c.904C>T (p.R302C) in CSMD1, c.860G>A (p.R287H) in PARP8, 
c.G848A (p.G283D) in ADAMTSL1, and c.686A>G (p.H229R) in FNDC3B. These mutations 
were rare or absent in the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), 1000 Genomes 
Project, and Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD), indicating that they are new 
candidate disease-causing genes. Our findings not only expand the myopia gene 
spectrum but also provide reference information for further genetic study of 
heritable HM.

Copyright Â© 2021 Liu, Zhang, Piao, Shen, Ma, Xue, Zhang, Liu, Jin and Zhuang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.645501
PMCID: PMC8250434
PMID: 34222226

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.