1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Jun 22;8:682298. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.682298. 
eCollection 2021.

NOTCH Signaling in Aortic Valve Development and Calcific Aortic Valve Disease.

Wang Y(1), Fang Y(1), Lu P(2), Wu B(2), Zhou B(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, School of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 
United States.
(3)Departments of Genetics, Pediatrics (Pediatric Genetic Medicine), and 
Medicine (Cardiology), The Wilf Family Cardiovascular Research Institute, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United States.
(4)The Einstein Institute for Aging Research, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, United States.

NOTCH intercellular signaling mediates the communications between adjacent cells 
involved in multiple biological processes essential for tissue morphogenesis and 
homeostasis. The NOTCH1 mutations are the first identified human genetic 
variants that cause congenital bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) and calcific aortic 
valve disease (CAVD). Genetic variants affecting other genes in the NOTCH 
signaling pathway may also contribute to the development of BAV and the 
pathogenesis of CAVD. While CAVD occurs commonly in the elderly population with 
tri-leaflet aortic valve, patients with BAV have a high risk of developing CAVD 
at a young age. This observation indicates an important role of NOTCH signaling 
in the postnatal homeostasis of the aortic valve, in addition to its prenatal 
functions during aortic valve development. Over the last decade, animal studies, 
especially with the mouse models, have revealed detailed information in the 
developmental etiology of congenital aortic valve defects. In this review, we 
will discuss the molecular and cellular aspects of aortic valve development and 
examine the embryonic pathogenesis of BAV. We will focus our discussions on the 
NOTCH signaling during the endocardial-to-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) and 
the post-EMT remodeling of the aortic valve. We will further examine the 
involvement of the NOTCH mutations in the postnatal development of CAVD. We will 
emphasize the deleterious impact of the embryonic valve defects on the 
homeostatic mechanisms of the adult aortic valve for the purpose of identifying 
the potential therapeutic targets for disease intervention.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wang, Fang, Lu, Wu and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.682298
PMCID: PMC8259786
PMID: 34239905

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.