1. Front Robot AI. 2021 Jun 22;8:612331. doi: 10.3389/frobt.2021.612331. 
eCollection 2021.

Robotic Home-Based Rehabilitation Systems Design: From a Literature Review to a 
Conceptual Framework for Community-Based Remote Therapy During COVID-19 
Pandemic.

Akbari A(1), Haghverd F(1), Behbahani S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology, 
Isfahan, Iran.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the higher susceptibility of post-stroke patients 
to infection calls for extra safety precautions. Despite the imposed 
restrictions, early neurorehabilitation cannot be postponed due to its paramount 
importance for improving motor and functional recovery chances. Utilizing 
accessible state-of-the-art technologies, home-based rehabilitation devices are 
proposed as a sustainable solution in the current crisis. In this paper, a 
comprehensive review on developed home-based rehabilitation technologies of the 
last 10 years (2011-2020), categorizing them into upper and lower limb devices 
and considering both commercialized and state-of-the-art realms. Mechatronic, 
control, and software aspects of the system are discussed to provide a 
classified roadmap for home-based systems development. Subsequently, a 
conceptual framework on the development of smart and intelligent community-based 
home rehabilitation systems based on novel mechatronic technologies is proposed. 
In this framework, each rehabilitation device acts as an agent in the network, 
using the internet of things (IoT) technologies, which facilitates learning from 
the recorded data of the other agents, as well as the tele-supervision of the 
treatment by an expert. The presented design paradigm based on the 
above-mentioned leading technologies could lead to the development of promising 
home rehabilitation systems, which encourage stroke survivors to engage in 
under-supervised or unsupervised therapeutic activities.

Copyright © 2021 Akbari, Haghverd and Behbahani.

DOI: 10.3389/frobt.2021.612331
PMCID: PMC8258116
PMID: 34239898

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.