1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Jun 21;8:677979. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.677979. 
eCollection 2021.

Molecular Associations and Clinical Significance of RAPs in Hepatocellular 
Carcinoma.

Kumari S(1), Arora M(2), Singh J(1), Kadian LK(2), Yadav R(3), Chauhan SS(2), 
Chopra A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Oncology Unit, Dr. BRA-IRCH, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an aggressive gastrointestinal malignancy with 
a high rate of mortality. Multiple studies have individually recognized members 
of RAP gene family as critical regulators of tumor progression in several 
cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma. These studies suffer numerous 
limitations including a small sample size and lack of analysis of various 
clinicopathological and molecular features. In the current study, we utilized 
authoritative multi-omics databases to determine the association of RAP gene 
family expression and detailed molecular and clinicopathological features in 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). All five RAP genes were observed to harbor 
dysregulated expression in HCC compared to normal liver tissues. RAP2A exhibited 
strongest ability to differentiate tumors from the normal tissues. RAP2A 
expression was associated with progressive tumor grade, TP53 and CTNNB1 mutation 
status. Additionally, RAP2A expression was associated with the alteration of its 
copy numbers and DNA methylation. RAP2A also emerged as an independent marker 
for patient prognosis. Further, pathway analysis revealed that RAP2A expression 
is correlated with tumor-infiltrating immune cell composition and oncogenic 
molecular pathways, such as cell cycle and cellular metabolism.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kumari, Arora, Singh, Kadian, Yadav, Chauhan and Chopra.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.677979
PMCID: PMC8255377
PMID: 34235179

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.