1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jun 10;12:661195. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.661195. 
eCollection 2021.

Antimicrobial Peptides Derived From Insects Offer a Novel Therapeutic Option to 
Combat Biofilm: A Review.

Sahoo A(1), Swain SS(2), Behera A(3), Sahoo G(4), Mahapatra PK(4), Panda SK(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Skin & VD, Institute of Medical Sciences, SUM Hospital, Siksha 
O Anusandhan University, Bhubaneswar, India.
(2)Division of Microbiology & NCDs, ICMR-Regional Medical Research Centre, 
Bhubaneswar, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, Maharaja Sriram Chandra Bhanja Deo University, 
Baripada, India.
(4)Department of Zoology, Utkal University, Vani Vihar, Bhubaneswar, India.
(5)Centre of Environment, Climate Change and Public Health, RUSA 2.0, Utkal 
University, Vani Vihar, Bhubaneswar, India.

Biofilms form a complex layer with defined structures, that attach on biotic or 
abiotic surfaces, are tough to eradicate and tend to cause some resistance 
against most antibiotics. Several studies confirmed that biofilm-producing 
bacteria exhibit higher resistance compared to the planktonic form of the same 
species. Antibiotic resistance factors are well understood in planktonic 
bacteria which is not so in case of biofilm producing forms. This may be due to 
the lack of available drugs with known resistance mechanisms for biofilms. 
Existing antibiotics cannot eradicate most biofilms, especially of ESKAPE 
pathogens (Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, 
Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species). 
Insects produce complex and diverse set of chemicals for survival and defense. 
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), produced by most insects, generally have a broad 
spectrum of activity and the potential to bypass the resistance mechanisms of 
classical antibiotics. Besides, AMPs may well act synergistically with classical 
antibiotics for a double-pronged attack on infections. Thus, AMPs could be 
promising alternatives to overcome medically important biofilms, decrease the 
possibility of acquired resistance and treatment of multidrug-resistant 
pathogens including ESKAPE. The present review focuses on insect-derived AMPs 
with special reference to anti-biofilm-based strategies. It covers the AMP 
composition, pathways and mechanisms of action, the formation of biofilms, 
impact of biofilms on human diseases, current strategies as well as therapeutic 
options to combat biofilm with antimicrobial peptides from insects. In addition, 
the review also illustrates the importance of bioinformatics tools and molecular 
docking studies to boost the importance of select bioactive peptides those can 
be developed as drugs, as well as suggestions for further basic and clinical 
research.

Copyright Â© 2021 Sahoo, Swain, Behera, Sahoo, Mahapatra and Panda.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.661195
PMCID: PMC8265172
PMID: 34248873

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.