1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Jun 24;9:664788. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.664788. 
eCollection 2021.

Functions of Oxysterol-Binding Proteins at Membrane Contact Sites and Their 
Control by Phosphoinositide Metabolism.

Nakatsu F(1), Kawasaki A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Niigata University 
School of Medicine and Graduate School of Medical/Dental Sciences, Niigata, 
Japan.

Lipids must be correctly transported within the cell to the right place at the 
right time in order to be fully functional. Non-vesicular lipid transport is 
mediated by so-called lipid transfer proteins (LTPs), which contain a 
hydrophobic cavity that sequesters lipid molecules. Oxysterol-binding protein 
(OSBP)-related proteins (ORPs) are a family of LTPs known to harbor lipid 
ligands, such as cholesterol and phospholipids. ORPs act as a sensor or 
transporter of those lipid ligands at membrane contact sites (MCSs) where two 
different cellular membranes are closely apposed. In particular, a 
characteristic functional property of ORPs is their role as a lipid exchanger. 
ORPs mediate counter-directional transport of two different lipid ligands at 
MCSs. Several, but not all, ORPs transport their lipid ligand from the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in exchange for phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 
(PI4P), the other ligand, on apposed membranes. This ORP-mediated lipid 
"countertransport" is driven by the concentration gradient of PI4P between 
membranes, which is generated by its kinases and phosphatases. In this review, 
we will discuss how ORP function is tightly coupled to metabolism of 
phosphoinositides such as PI4P. Recent progress on the role of ORP-mediated 
lipid transport/countertransport at multiple MCSs in cellular functions will be 
also discussed.

Copyright Â© 2021 Nakatsu and Kawasaki.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.664788
PMCID: PMC8264513
PMID: 34249917

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.