1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jun 23;12:674345. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.674345. 
eCollection 2021.

Structure, Application, and Biochemistry of Microbial Keratinases.

Li Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Engineering Laboratory of Biomass High Value 
Utilization, Institute of Bioengineering, Guangdong Academy of Sciences, 
Guangzhou, China.

Keratinases belong to a class of proteases that are able to degrade keratins 
into amino acids. Microbial keratinases play important roles in turning 
keratin-containing wastes into value-added products by participating in the 
degradation of keratin. Keratin is found in human and animal hard tissues, and 
its complicated structures make it resistant to degradation by common proteases. 
Although breaking disulfide bonds are involved in keratin degradation, 
keratinase is responsible for the cleavage of peptides, making it attractive in 
pharmaceutical and feather industries. Keratinase can serve as an important tool 
to convert keratin-rich wastes such as feathers from poultry industry into 
diverse products applicable to many fields. Despite of some progress made in 
isolating keratinase-producing microorganisms, structural studies of 
keratinases, and biochemical characterization of these enzymes, effort is still 
required to expand the biotechnological application of keratinase in diverse 
fields by identifying more keratinases, understanding the mechanism of action 
and constructing more active enzymes through molecular biology and protein 
engineering. Herein, this review covers structures, applications, biochemistry 
of microbial keratinases, and strategies to improve its efficiency in keratin 
degradation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.674345
PMCID: PMC8260994
PMID: 34248885

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.