1. J Endocr Soc. 2021 Jun 1;5(8):bvab102. doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvab102.
eCollection  2021 Aug 1.

Thyroid Hormone Receptor Beta Inhibits PI3K-Akt-mTOR Signaling Axis in 
Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer via Genomic Mechanisms.

Davidson CD(1)(2), Bolf EL(1)(2), Gillis NE(1)(2), Cozzens LM(1), Tomczak JA(1), 
Carr FE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Larner College of Medicine, Burlington, Vermont 
05405, USA.
(2)University of Vermont Cancer Center, Burlington, Vermont 05401, USA.

Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy, and the global incidence 
has increased rapidly over the past few decades. Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) 
is highly aggressive, dedifferentiated, and patients have a median survival of 
fewer than 6 months. Oncogenic alterations in ATC include aberrant 
phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) signaling through receptor tyrosine kinase 
(RTK) amplification, loss of phosphoinositide phosphatase expression and 
function, and protein kinase B (Akt) amplification. Furthermore, the loss of 
expression of the tumor suppressor thyroid hormone receptor beta (TRβ) is 
strongly associated with ATC. TRβ is known to suppress PI3K in follicular 
thyroid cancer and breast cancer by binding to the PI3K regulatory subunit p85α. 
However, the role of TRβ in suppressing PI3K signaling in ATC is not completely 
delineated. Here we report that TRβ indeed suppresses PI3K signaling in ATC cell 
lines through unreported genomic mechanisms, including a decrease in RTK 
expression and an increase in phosphoinositide and Akt phosphatase expression. 
Furthermore, the reintroduction and activation of TRβ in ATC cell lines enables 
an increase in the efficacy of the competitive PI3K inhibitors LY294002 and 
buparlisib on cell viability, migration, and suppression of PI3K signaling. 
These findings not only uncover additional tumor suppressor mechanisms of TRβ 
but shed light on the implication of TRβ status and activation on inhibitor 
efficacy in ATC tumors.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jendso/bvab102
PMCID: PMC8271203
PMID: 34258492