1. Exp Ther Med. 2021 Aug;22(2):892. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10324. Epub 2021 Jun
18.

LncRNA SNHG11 aggravates cell proliferation and migration in triple-negative 
breast cancer via sponging miR-2355-5p and targeting CBX5.

Yu L(1), Zhang W(2), Wang P(1), Zhang Q(1), Cong A(1), Yang X(1), Sang K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Jiangsu Taizhou People's Hospital, Taizhou, Jiangsu 
225300, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Jiangsu Taizhou People's Hospital, 
Taizhou, Jiangsu 225300, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Breast Surgery, Jiangsu Taizhou People's Hospital, Taizhou, 
Jiangsu 225300, P.R. China.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is one of the most common malignances 
worldwide. Concurrently, the incidence of TNBC has continued to rise in recent 
years. It is reported that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are involved in 
biological processes in numerous cancers including TNBC. Small nucleolar RNA 
host gene 11 (SNHG11) has already been studied and reported in some cancers. 
However, the role of SNHG11 in TNBC remains unknown. RT-qPCR was used to measure 
gene expression in the current study. CCK-8, colony formation, flow cytometry, 
Transwell and western blotting experiments were also performed to determine the 
biological function of SNHG11 in TNBC cells. Luciferase reporter and RIP assays 
were performed to measure relationship between genes. In the present study, the 
results indicated SNHG11 was highly expressed in TNBC tissues and cell lines. 
Moreover, SNHG11 aggravated cell proliferation and migration, and whereas it 
attenuated cell apoptosis in TNBC. Furthermore, SNHG11 sponged microRNA 2355-5p 
(miR-2355-5p) in TNBC. Silencing SNHG11 increased miR-2355-5p expression. In 
addition, chromobox 5 (CBX5) was identified to be targeted by miR-2355-5p in 
TNBC. It was also suggested that CBX5 silencing suppressed cell proliferation 
and migration. Furthermore, overexpressed CBX5 recovered the inhibitive 
influence of SNHG11 silencing on proliferative and migrative abilities of TNBC 
cells. Overall, SNHG11 acted as a tumor promoter in TNBC and regulated TNBC cell 
growth by modulating the miR-2355-5p/CBX5 axis, which indicated that it may be 
used as a biomarker for TNBC treatment.

Copyright: Â© Yu et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.10324
PMCID: PMC8243335
PMID: 34257707

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.