1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Jul 16;100(28):e26640. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000026640.

HIV-1 molecular transmission network among sexually transmitted populations in 
Liaoning Province, China.

Ma N(1), Chen XH(2), Zhao Y(1), Kang X(1), Pan S(1), Yao WQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Liaoning Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenyang, 
Liaoning, China.
(2)The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.

Erratum in
    Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Aug 6;100(31):e26853. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000026853.

INTRODUCTION: In recent years, with the development of molecular epidemiology, 
molecular transmission networks based on evolutionary theory and sequence 
analysis have been widely used in research on human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV)-1 transmission dynamics and precise intervention for high-risk 
populations. The HIV-1 molecular transmission network is a new method to study 
the population's access to the network, the characteristics of clustering, and 
the characteristics of interconnection in the network. Here, we analyzed the 
characteristics of the HIV-1 molecular transmission network of sexually 
transmitted people in Liaoning Province.
METHODS: A study of HIV-infected persons who were sexually transmitted in 
Liaoning Province from 2003 to 2019. HIV-1 RNA was extracted, amplified and 
sequenced, and a phylogenetic tree was constructed to determine the subtype 
using the well matched pol gene region sequence. The gene distance between 
sequences was calculated, the threshold was determined, and the molecular 
transmission network was constructed.
RESULTS: 109 samples of pol gene region were obtained. The main subtype of HIV-1 
was CRF01_AE, followed by B, CRF07_BC, etc. 12.8% of them were resistant to HIV. 
At the threshold of 0.55 gene distance, 60.6% of them entered the HIV-1 
molecular transmission network. Workers, sample source voluntary counseling and 
testing, other testing, subtype B and drug resistance are the factors 
influencing the access to HIV-1 molecular transmission network. The subtype of 
CRF01_AE formed 6 clusters in the molecular transmission network. In the 
network, the difference of connection degree between different subtypes was 
statistically significant.
DISCUSSION: The three subtypes CRF01_AE, CRF07_BC and B that enter the molecular 
transmission network do not have interconnections, and they form clusters with 
each other. It shows that the risk of transmission among the three subtypes is 
less than the risk of transmission within each subtype. The factors affecting 
HIV-1 entry into the molecular transmission network were occupation, sample 
source, genotype and drug resistance. The L33F mutation at the HIV-1 resistance 
mutation site constitutes the interconnection in the largest transmission 
cluster in the network. The epidemiological characteristics of HIV-infected 
persons in each molecular transmission cluster show that 97% of the study 
subjects come from the same area and have a certain spatial aggregation.
CONCLUSION: Constructing a molecular transmission network and conducting 
long-term monitoring, while taking targeted measures to block the spread of HIV 
can achieve precise prevention and control.

Copyright Â© 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000026640
PMCID: PMC8284760
PMID: 34260561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.