1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2021 Jul 12:2021.07.11.451964. doi: 
10.1101/2021.07.11.451964.

Pathogenic and transcriptomic differences of emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants in the 
Syrian golden hamster model.

O'Donnell KL(#)(1), Pinski AN(#)(2), Clancy CS(3), Gourdine T(1), Shifflett 
K(1), Fletcher P(1), Messaoudi I(2), Marzi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT 
59840, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
(3)Rocky Mountain Veterinary Branch, Division of Intramural Research, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Hamilton, MT 59840, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Update in
    EBioMedicine. 2021 Nov;73:103675. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103675.

Following the discovery of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) and its rapid spread throughout the world, new viral variants of 
concern (VOC) have emerged. There is a critical need to understand the impact of 
the emerging variants on host response and disease dynamics to facilitate the 
development of vaccines and therapeutics. Syrian golden hamsters are the leading 
small animal model that recapitulates key aspects of severe coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19). In this study, we show that intranasal inoculation of 
SARS-CoV-2 into hamsters with the ancestral virus (nCoV-WA1-2020) or VOC first 
identified in the United Kingdom (B.1.1.7) and South Africa (B.1.351) led to 
similar gross and histopathologic pulmonary lesions. Although differences in 
viral genomic copy numbers were noted in the lungs and oral swabs of challenged 
animals, infectious titers in the lungs were comparable. Antibody neutralization 
capacities varied, dependent on the original challenge virus and cross-variant 
protective capacity. Transcriptional profiling indicated significant induction 
of antiviral pathways in response to all three challenges with a more robust 
inflammatory signature in response to B.1.1.7. Furthermore, no additional 
mutations in the spike protein were detected at peak disease. In conclusion, the 
emerging VOC showed distinct humoral responses and transcriptional profiles in 
the hamster model compared to the ancestral virus.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.07.11.451964
PMCID: PMC8282094
PMID: 34268506

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.