1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Jun 30;8:709395. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.709395. 
eCollection 2021.

The Role of Indoor Plants in air Purification and Human Health in the Context of 
COVID-19 Pandemic: A Proposal for a Novel Line of Inquiry.

El-Tanbouly R(1), Hassan Z(2), El-Messeiry S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Floriculture, Ornamental Horticulture and Landscape Design, 
Faculty of Agriculture, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt.
(2)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Agriculture, Alexandria University, 
Alexandria, Egypt.

The last two decades have seen the discovery of novel retroviruses that have 
resulted in severe negative consequences for human health. In late 2019, severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) emerged with a high 
transmission rate and severe effects on human health, with 5% infected persons 
requiring hospitalisation and 3.81 million deaths to date globally. Aerosol 
particles containing virions are considered the main source of SARS CoV-2 
transmission in this pandemic, with increased infection rates in confined 
spaces. Consequently, public and private institutions had to institute 
mitigation measures including the use of facial masks and social distancing to 
limit the spread of the virus. Moreover, the role of air purification and 
bio-decontamination is understood as being essential to mitigate viral spread. 
Various techniques can be applied to bio-decontaminate the air such as the use 
of filtration and radiation; however, these methods are expensive and not 
feasible for home use. Another method of air purification is where indoor plants 
can purify the air by the removal of air pollutants and habituated airborne 
microbes. The use of indoor plants could prove to be a cost-efficient way of 
indoor air-purification that could be adapted for a variety of environments with 
no need for special requirements and can also add an aesthetic value that can 
have an indirect impact on human health. In this review, we discuss the 
emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic and the currently used air purification 
methods, and we propose the use of indoor plants as a new possible eco-friendly 
tool for indoor air purification and for reducing the spread of COVID-19 in 
confined places.

Copyright Â© 2021 El-Tanbouly, Hassan and El-Messeiry.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.709395
PMCID: PMC8279815
PMID: 34277711

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.