1. J Neurochem. 2021 Sep;158(6):1394-1411. doi: 10.1111/jnc.15471. Epub 2021 Aug
6.

Basal forebrain cholinergic system in the dementias: Vulnerability, resilience, 
and resistance.

Geula C(1), Dunlop SR(1), Ayala I(1), Kawles AS(1), Flanagan ME(1), Gefen T(1), 
Mesulam MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease, Feinberg 
School of Medicine Chicago, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCN) provide the primary source of 
cholinergic innervation of the human cerebral cortex. They are involved in the 
cognitive processes of learning, memory, and attention. These neurons are 
differentially vulnerable in various neuropathologic entities that cause 
dementia. This review summarizes the relevance to BFCN of neuropathologic 
markers associated with dementias, including the plaques and tangles of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the Lewy bodies of diffuse Lewy body disease, the 
tauopathy of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-TAU) and the TDP-43 
proteinopathy of FTLD-TDP. Each of these proteinopathies has a different 
relationship to BFCN and their corticofugal axons. Available evidence points to 
early and substantial degeneration of the BFCN in AD and diffuse Lewy body 
disease. In AD, the major neurodegenerative correlate is accumulation of 
phosphotau in neurofibrillary tangles. However, these neurons are less 
vulnerable to the tauopathy of FTLD. An intriguing finding is that the 
intracellular tau of AD causes destruction of the BFCN, whereas that of FTLD 
does not. This observation has profound implications for exploring the impact of 
different species of tauopathy on neuronal survival. The proteinopathy of 
FTLD-TDP shows virtually no abnormal inclusions within the BFCN. Thus, the BFCN 
are highly vulnerable to the neurodegenerative effects of tauopathy in AD, 
resilient to the neurodegenerative effect of tauopathy in FTLD and apparently 
resistant to the emergence of proteinopathy in FTLD-TDP and perhaps also in 
Pick's disease. Investigations are beginning to shed light on the potential 
mechanisms of this differential vulnerability and their implications for 
therapeutic intervention.

Â© 2021 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.15471
PMCID: PMC8458251
PMID: 34272732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.