1. Ther Adv Hematol. 2021 Jul 6;12:20406207211027458. doi: 
10.1177/20406207211027458. eCollection 2021.

The use of tafasitamab in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Düll J(1), Topp M(2), Salles G(3).

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik II, Universitätsklinik Würzburg, 
Josef-Schneider-Straße 2, Würzburg, 97080, Germany.
(2)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik II, Universitätsklinik Würzburg, Würzburg, 
Germany.
(3)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.

Patients who relapse or are refractory after first-line therapy for diffuse 
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) frequently have poor prognoses, especially when 
they are not candidates for autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT). Tafasitamab 
is a humanized monoclonal anti-CD19 antibody that has recently been approved by 
the FDA in combination with lenalidomide for the treatment of 
relapsed/refractory (R/R) DLBCL in patients who are not eligible for ASCT. 
Tafasitamab has an Fc region which has been modified to have an increased 
affinity for Fcγ receptors, to potentiate antibody-dependent cellular 
cytotoxicity and antibody-dependent cell-mediated phagocytosis. Here, we review 
the development, mode of action and clinical data for tafasitamab in combination 
with lenalidomide in R/R DLBCL, and discuss the various ways in which this novel 
antibody could be utilized in the treatment sequence to improve clinical 
outcomes for patients with DLBCL.

© The Author(s), 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/20406207211027458
PMCID: PMC8264734
PMID: 34285786

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: GS reports 
non-financial support from MorphoSys, during the conduct of the study; other 
from MorphoSys, other from BMS, other from AbbVieˇ, other from Janssen, other 
from Merck, other from Novartis, other from Gilead/Kite, other from Epizyme, 
other from Celgene/BMS, other from Roche/Genentech, other from Takeda, other 
from Autolus, other from Genmab, other from Velosbio, outside the submitted 
work; in addition, GS has a patent WO2012010561A1 issued. MT has nothing to 
disclose. JD reports non-financial support from MorphoSys, during the conduct of 
the study.