1. Bioengineered. 2021 Dec;12(1):4136-4149. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1953218.

Ephedrine alleviates middle cerebral artery occlusion-induced neurological 
deficits and hippocampal neuronal damage in rats by activating PI3K/AKT 
signaling pathway.

Huang L(1), Zhao B(1), Li Q(1), Wu J, Jiang H(2), Li Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Encephalopathy, Beijing University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Dong Zhi 
Men Hospital, Tongzhou Hospital Area, Beijing, China.
(2)ENT Department, Dong Fang Hospital of Beijing University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.

Inflammation and oxidative stress are crucial in ischemic stroke. Ephedrine 
(EPH) has been proven to have anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative stress 
effects. The present study analyzes whether EPH possessed neuroprotective 
effects and explored the underlying mechanisms of EPH based on an experimental 
model of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). We found that intraperitoneal 
injection with EPH attenuated the neurological deficit, cerebral infarction, and 
cerebral edema induced by MCAO in rats. Besides, EPH treatment alleviated 
MCAO-induced brain tissue damage and morphological abnormality, as well as 
neuronal loss. Moreover, EPH treatment upregulated GPx and CAT activity and 
downregulated MDA and NO content. EPH also evidently decreased the levels of 
IL-6 and TNF-Î± but increased IL-4 and IL-10 levels. Of note, EPH treatment 
promoted the phosphorylation of PI3K and AKT proteins in MCAO rats. Furthermore, 
administration of PI3K/AKT pathway inhibitor LY294002 abolished the beneficial 
effects of EPH. These results confirmed that EPH alleviated brain injury induced 
by MCAO via activating PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1953218
PMCID: PMC8806764
PMID: 34288825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.