1. Sci Rep. 2021 Jul 20;11(1):14821. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-94022-w.

Tumor microenvironment in giant cell tumor of bone: evaluation of PD-L1 
expression and SIRPα infiltration after denosumab treatment.

Toda Y(1), Kohashi K(1), Yamamoto H(1), Ishihara S(1), Ito Y(1), Susuki Y(1), 
Kawaguchi K(1), Kiyozawa D(1), Takamatsu D(1), Kinoshita I(1), Yamada Y(1), 
Maehara J(2), Kimura A(3), Tamiya S(4), Taguchi K(5), Matsunobu T(6), Matsumoto 
Y(3), Nakashima Y(3), Mawatari M(7), Oda Y(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Pathological Sciences, Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Maidashi 3-1-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 
812-8582, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Radiology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Kitakyushu Municipal Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
(5)Department of Pathology, National Hospital Organization Kyushu Cancer Center, 
Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kyushu Rosai Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.
(7)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University, 
Saga, Japan.
(8)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Pathological Sciences, Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Maidashi 3-1-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 
812-8582, Japan. oda@surgpath.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

Giant cell tumor of bone (GCTB) is an intermediate malignant bone tumor that is 
locally aggressive and rarely metastasizes. Denosumab, which is a receptor 
activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) inhibitor, can be used to 
treat GCTB. We focused on potential immunotherapy for GCTB and investigated the 
tumor microenvironment of GCTB. Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) and 
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) expression and signal-regulatory protein 
alpha (SIRPα), forkhead box P3 (FOXP3), and cluster of differentiation 8 (CD8) 
infiltration were assessed by immunohistochemical studies of 137 tumor tissues 
from 96 patients. Of the naive primary specimens, 28% exhibited PD-L1 expression 
and 39% exhibited IDO1 expression. There was significantly more SIRPα+, FOXP3+, 
and CD8+ cell infiltration in PD-L1- and IDO1-positive tumors than in PD-L1- and 
IDO1-negative tumors. The frequency of PD-L1 expression and SIRPα+ cell 
infiltration in recurrent lesions treated with denosumab was significantly 
higher than in primary lesions and recurrent lesions not treated with denosumab. 
PD-L1 expression and higher SIRPα+ cell infiltration were significantly 
correlated with shorter recurrence-free survival. PD-L1 and SIRPα immune 
checkpoint inhibitors may provide clinical benefit in GCTB patients with 
recurrent lesions after denosumab therapy.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-94022-w
PMCID: PMC8292371
PMID: 34285260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.