1. Cell Rep. 2021 Jul 20;36(3):109423. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109423.

RHOX10 drives mouse spermatogonial stem cell establishment through a 
transcription factor signaling cascade.

Tan K(1), Song HW(1), Wilkinson MF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, School of 
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, School of 
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; 
Institute of Genomic Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA. Electronic address: mfwilkinson@health.ucsd.edu.

Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) are essential for male fertility. Here, we 
report that mouse SSC generation is driven by a transcription factor (TF) 
cascade controlled by the homeobox protein, RHOX10, which acts by driving the 
differentiation of SSC precursors called pro-spermatogonia (ProSG). We identify 
genes regulated by RHOX10 in ProSG in vivo and define direct RHOX10-target genes 
using several approaches, including a rapid temporal induction assay: iSLAMseq. 
Together, these approaches identify temporal waves of RHOX10 direct targets, as 
well as RHOX10 secondary-target genes. Many of the RHOX10-regulated genes encode 
proteins with known roles in SSCs. Using an in vitro ProSG differentiation 
assay, we find that RHOX10 promotes mouse ProSG differentiation through a 
conserved transcriptional cascade involving the key germ-cell TFs DMRT1 and 
ZBTB16. Our study gives important insights into germ cell development and 
provides a blueprint for how to define TF cascades.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109423
PMCID: PMC8357189
PMID: 34289349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.