1. Curr Biol. 2021 Sep 27;31(18):3973-3983.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.06.063.
Epub  2021 Jul 22.

Asymmetric nuclear division in neural stem cells generates sibling nuclei that 
differ in size, envelope composition, and chromatin organization.

Roubinet C(1), White IJ(2), Baum B(3).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Biology, University College London, London, UK; 
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Cambridge, UK. Electronic address: 
c.roubinet@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Biology, University College London, London, UK.
(3)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Biology, University College London, London, UK; 
Institute for the Physics of Living Systems, University College London, London, 
UK; MRC Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Cambridge, UK. Electronic address: 
bbaum@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2021 Sep 27;31(18):R1077-R1079. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.08.014.

Although nuclei are the defining features of eukaryotes, we still do not fully 
understand how the nuclear compartment is duplicated and partitioned during 
division. This is especially the case for organisms that do not completely 
disassemble their nuclear envelope upon entry into mitosis. In studying this 
process in Drosophila neural stem cells, which undergo asymmetric divisions, we 
find that the nuclear compartment boundary persists during mitosis thanks to the 
maintenance of a supporting nuclear lamina. This mitotic nuclear envelope is 
then asymmetrically remodeled and partitioned to give rise to two daughter 
nuclei that differ in envelope composition and exhibit a >30-fold difference in 
volume. The striking difference in nuclear size was found to depend on two 
consecutive processes: asymmetric nuclear envelope resealing at mitotic exit at 
sites defined by the central spindle, and differential nuclear growth that 
appears to depend on the available local reservoir of ER/nuclear membranes, 
which is asymmetrically partitioned between the two daughter cells. Importantly, 
these asymmetries in size and composition of the daughter nuclei, and the 
associated asymmetries in chromatin organization, all become apparent long 
before the cortical release and the nuclear import of cell fates determinants. 
Thus, asymmetric nuclear remodeling during stem cell divisions may contribute to 
the generation of cellular diversity by initiating distinct transcriptional 
programs in sibling nuclei that contribute to later changes in daughter cell 
identity and fate.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.06.063
PMCID: PMC8491657
PMID: 34297912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.