1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Jul 9;13(14):3444. doi: 10.3390/cancers13143444.

KYP-2047, an Inhibitor of Prolyl-Oligopeptidase, Reduces GlioBlastoma 
Proliferation through Angiogenesis and Apoptosis Modulation.

Scuderi SA(1), Casili G(1), Ardizzone A(1), Forte S(2), Colarossi L(3), Sava 
S(3), Paterniti I(1), Esposito E(1), Cuzzocrea S(1), Campolo M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical, Biological, Pharmaceutical and Environmental 
Sciences, University of Messina, Viale Ferdinando Stagno D' Alcontres, 31-98166 
Messina, ME, Italy.
(2)IOM Ricerca Srl, Via Penninazzo 11, 95029 Viagrande, CT, Italy.
(3)Istituto Oncologico del Mediterraneo, Via Penninazzo 7, 95029 Viagrande, CT, 
Italy.

Glioblastoma (GB) is the most aggressive tumor of the central nervous system 
(CNS), characterized by excessive proliferation, necrosis and invasiveness. The 
survival rate for patients with GB still remains low. Angiogenesis and apoptosis 
play a key role in the development of GB. Thus, the modulation of angiogenesis 
and apoptosis processes represent a possible strategy to counteract GB 
progression. This study aimed to investigate the potential effect of KYP-2047, 
an inhibitor of the prolyl-oligopeptidase (POP), known to modulate angiogenesis, 
in an in vivo U87-xenograft model and in an in vitro study on human GB cells. 
Our results showed that KYP-2047 at doses of 2.5 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg was able to 
reduce tumor burden in the xenograft-model. Moreover, KYP-2047 significantly 
reduced vascular endothelial-growth-factor (VEGF), angiopoietins (Ang) and 
endothelial-nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) expression. In vitro study revealed 
that KYP-2047 at different concentrations reduced GB cells' viability. 
Additionally, KYP-2047 at the concentrations of 50 µM and 100 µM was able to 
increase the pro-apoptotic protein Bax, p53 and caspase-3 expression whereas 
Bcl-2 expression was reduced. Thus, KYP-2047 could represent a potential 
therapeutic treatment to counteract or reduce GB progression, thanks its 
abilities to modulate angiogenesis and apoptosis pathways.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13143444
PMCID: PMC8306782
PMID: 34298658

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.