1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Jul 8;13(14):3427. doi: 10.3390/cancers13143427.

Curcumin: Modulator of Key Molecular Signaling Pathways in Hormone-Independent 
Breast Cancer.

Farghadani R(1), Naidu R(1).

Author information:
(1)Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University 
Malaysia, Jalan Lagoon Selatan, Bandar Sunway 47500, Selangor, Malaysia.

Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the leading cause of 
cancer death among women worldwide. Despite the overall successes in breast 
cancer therapy, hormone-independent HER2 negative breast cancer, also known as 
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), lacking estrogens and progesterone 
receptors and with an excessive expression of human epidermal growth factor 
receptor 2 (HER2), along with the hormone-independent HER2 positive subtype, 
still remain major challenges in breast cancer treatment. Due to their poor 
prognoses, aggressive phenotype, and highly metastasis features, new alternative 
therapies have become an urgent clinical need. One of the most noteworthy 
phytochemicals, curcumin, has attracted enormous attention as a promising drug 
candidate in breast cancer prevention and treatment due to its multi-targeting 
effect. Curcumin interrupts major stages of tumorigenesis including cell 
proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, and metastasis in hormone-independent 
breast cancer through the modulation of multiple signaling pathways. The current 
review has highlighted the anticancer activity of curcumin in 
hormone-independent breast cancer via focusing on its impact on key signaling 
pathways including the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway, JAK/STAT pathway, MAPK pathway, 
NF-ĸB pathway, p53 pathway, and Wnt/β-catenin, as well as apoptotic and cell 
cycle pathways. Besides, its therapeutic implications in clinical trials are 
here presented.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13143427
PMCID: PMC8307022
PMID: 34298639

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.