1. PLoS One. 2021 Jul 22;16(7):e0255168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0255168. 
eCollection 2021.

FFPE samples from cavitational ultrasonic surgical aspirates are suitable for 
RNA profiling of gliomas.

Alenda C(1)(2), Rojas E(1)(2), Valor LM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de Alicante (ISABIAL), 
Alicante, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Patología, Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, 
Alicante, Spain.
(3)Laboratorio de Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital General Universitario de 
Alicante, Alicante, Spain.

During surgical procedures for gliomas, tissue material obtained from 
cavitational ultrasonic surgical aspirators (CUSAs) is generally discarded but 
can actually exceed the amount and quality of certain tumour core resections 
(TCRs). Despite reports indicating the suitability of CUSA-derived material for 
diagnosis and research, its use is still marginal. We extended these conclusions 
to formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples, the most common format for 
archival tumour tissue in anatomical pathology departments, by conducting for 
the first time RNA-seq analysis in CUSA aspirates. We compared the molecular 
diagnosis of somatic mutations used in the clinical routine and the gene 
expression profiles of fixed solid material from CUSA aspirates and TCRs from 
the same patients in selected gliomas encompassing grades II to IV. Despite the 
characteristic heterogeneity of gliomas, we found substantial similarities 
between the corresponding aspirates and TCRs that included transcriptional 
signatures associated with glioma subtypes. Based on these results, we confirmed 
that CUSA-fixed biomaterials from glioma surgeries are appropriate for 
downstream applications and biomarkers screening.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0255168
PMCID: PMC8297856
PMID: 34293049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.