1. Biomed Res Int. 2021 Jun 30;2021:6618834. doi: 10.1155/2021/6618834.
eCollection  2021.

Prediction of a Potential Mechanism of Intervertebral Disc Degeneration Based on 
a Novel Competitive Endogenous RNA Network.

Huang J(1), Li Y(1), Ye Z(2), Cheng Z(1), Huang J(1), Lu S(1), Su K(1), Liang 
Y(1), Li M(1), Huang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou 510120, China.
(2)Institute of Forensic Medicine, West China School of Basic Medical Science & 
Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China.

Low back pain which resulted from intervertebral disc degeneration (IDD) is a 
common health problem that afflicts people all over the world. Due to the lack 
of an overall understanding of the molecular interactions involved in IDD, we 
hope to better understand the pathogenetic mechanisms that drive the 
degenerative process. The purpose of this study is to obtain mRNAs, miRNAs, 
lncRNAs, and circRNAs associated with IDD gained from public databases and to 
establish an interaction network. According to the results of microarray 
analysis and bioinformatics analysis from the contrast of IDD and normal nucleus 
pulposus tissues, a total of 49 mRNAs, 10 miRNAs, 30 lncRNAs, and 4 circRNAs 
were obtained and a lncRNA/circRNA-miRNA-mRNA interaction network was 
constructed. NEAT1-miR-5100-COL10A1 and 
miR663AHG/HEIH/hsa-circ-0003600-miR-4741-HAS2/HYAL1/LYVE1 might be potential 
interaction axes of the molecular mechanism in IDD. The increased expression of 
NEAT1 might inhibit miR-5100 and subsequently upregulate the expression of 
COL10A1, which leads to IDD, while the increased expression of 
miR663AHG/HEIH/hsa-circ-0003600 might inhibit miR-4741 and indirectly upregulate 
HAS2/HYAL1/LYVE1, and leads to the protection from IDD. More interaction axes 
are to be exploited to provide theoretical bases for further study on IDD.

Copyright Â© 2021 Junshen Huang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6618834
PMCID: PMC8263249
PMID: 34307661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.