1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2021 Jul 8;2021:5517143. doi: 
10.1155/2021/5517143. eCollection 2021.

Berbamine Inhibits Cell Proliferation and Migration and Induces Cell Death of 
Lung Cancer Cells via Regulating c-Maf, PI3K/Akt, and MDM2-P53 Pathways.

Liu L(#)(1), Xu Z(#)(1), Yu B(1), Tao L(1), Cao Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The Affiliated Zhangjiagang Hospital of Soochow 
University, Zhangjiagang, Jiangsu 215600, China.
(2)Zhangjiagang Fourth People's Hospital, Zhangjiagang, Jiangsu 215600, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Berbamine (BBM) is a natural product isolated from Berberis amurensis Rupr. We 
investigated the influence of BBM on the cell viability, proliferation, and 
migration of lung cancer cells and explored the possible mechanisms. The cell 
viability and proliferation of lung cancer cells were evaluated by MTT assay, 
EdU assay, and colony formation assay. Migration and invasion abilities of 
cancer cells were determined through wound scratch assay and Transwell assay. 
Cell death was evaluated by cell death staining assay and ELISA. The expressions 
of proteins were evaluated using western blot assay. A xenograft mouse model 
derived from non-small-cell lung cancer cells was used to detect the effect of 
BBM on tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Both colony formation and EdU assays 
results revealed that BBM (10 μM) significantly inhibited the proliferation of 
A549 cells (P < 0.001). BBM (10 μM) also significantly inhibited the migration 
and invasion ability of cancer cells in wound scratch and Transwell assays. 
Trypan blue assay and ELISA revealed that BBM (20 μM) significantly induced cell 
death of A549 cells. In xenograft mouse models, the tumor volume was 
significantly smaller in mice treated with BBM (20 mg/kg). The western blotting 
assay showed that BBM inhibited the PI3K/Akt and MDM2-p53 signaling pathways, 
and BBM downregulated the expression of c-Maf. Our results show that BBM 
inhibits proliferation and metastasis and induces cell death of lung cancer 
cells in vitro and in vivo. These effects may be achieved by BBM reducing the 
expression of c-Maf and regulating the PI3K/Akt and MDM2-p53 pathways.

Copyright © 2021 Lili Liu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5517143
PMCID: PMC8285168
PMID: 34306137

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.