1. Cancer Discov. 2021 Dec 1;11(12):3008-3027. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-1631.

Genomes for Kids: The Scope of Pathogenic Mutations in Pediatric Cancer Revealed 
by Comprehensive DNA and RNA Sequencing.

Newman S(#)(1), Nakitandwe J(#)(2), Kesserwan CA(#)(3), Azzato EM(#)(2), Wheeler 
DA(#)(1), Rusch M(1), Shurtleff S(2), Hedges DJ(1), Hamilton KV(3), Foy SG(1), 
Edmonson MN(1), Thrasher A(1), Bahrami A(2), Orr BA(2), Klco JM(2), Gu J(2), 
Harrison LW(3), Wang L(2), Clay MR(2), Ouma A(3), Silkov A(1), Liu Y(1), Zhang 
Z(1), Liu Y(1), Brady SW(1), Zhou X(1), Chang TC(1), Pande M(1), Davis E(1), 
Becksfort J(1), Patel A(1), Wilkinson MR(1), Rahbarinia D(1), Kubal M(3), 
Maciaszek JL(2), Pastor V(1), Knight J(1), Gout AM(1), Wang J(1), Gu Z(2), 
Mullighan CG(2), McGee RB(3), Quinn EA(3), Nuccio R(3), Mostafavi R(3), Gerhardt 
EL(3), Taylor LM(3), Valdez JM(3), Hines-Dowell SJ(3), Pappo AS(3), Robinson 
G(3), Johnson LM(3), Pui CH(3), Ellison DW(#)(2), Downing JR(#)(2), Zhang 
J(#)(1), Nichols KE(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee.
(2)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee.
(3)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-12-ITI.

Genomic studies of pediatric cancer have primarily focused on specific tumor 
types or high-risk disease. Here, we used a three-platform sequencing approach, 
including whole-genome sequencing (WGS), whole-exome sequencing (WES), and RNA 
sequencing (RNA-seq), to examine tumor and germline genomes from 309 
prospectively identified children with newly diagnosed (85%) or 
relapsed/refractory (15%) cancers, unselected for tumor type. Eighty-six percent 
of patients harbored diagnostic (53%), prognostic (57%), therapeutically 
relevant (25%), and/or cancer-predisposing (18%) variants. Inclusion of WGS 
enabled detection of activating gene fusions and enhancer hijacks (36% and 8% of 
tumors, respectively), small intragenic deletions (15% of tumors), and 
mutational signatures revealing of pathogenic variant effects. Evaluation of 
paired tumor-normal data revealed relevance to tumor development for 55% of 
pathogenic germline variants. This study demonstrates the power of a 
three-platform approach that incorporates WGS to interrogate and interpret the 
full range of genomic variants across newly diagnosed as well as 
relapsed/refractory pediatric cancers.
SIGNIFICANCE: Pediatric cancers are driven by diverse genomic lesions, and 
sequencing has proven useful in evaluating high-risk and relapsed/refractory 
cases. We show that combined WGS, WES, and RNA-seq of tumor and paired normal 
tissues enables identification and characterization of genetic drivers across 
the full spectrum of pediatric cancers. This article is highlighted in the In 
This Issue feature, p. 2945.

Â©2021 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-1631
PMCID: PMC8783930
PMID: 34301788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]