1. Sci Rep. 2021 Jul 23;11(1):15090. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-93909-y.

Loss of αklotho causes reduced motor ability and short lifespan in zebrafish.

Ogura Y(1), Kaneko R(1), Ujibe K(1), Wakamatsu Y(1), Hirata H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biological Science, College of Science and 
Engineering, Aoyama Gakuin University, Sagamihara, 252-5258, Japan.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biological Science, College of Science and 
Engineering, Aoyama Gakuin University, Sagamihara, 252-5258, Japan. 
hihirata@chem.aoyama.ac.jp.

The klotho gene encodes a transmembrane protein αKlotho that interacts with a 
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor in renal tubular epithelial cells and 
functions as a co-receptor for FGF23, which is an osteocytes-derived hormone. 
This bone-to-kidney signal promotes urinary phosphate excretion. Interestingly, 
αKlotho knockout mice show an accelerated aging and a shortened life span. 
Similarly, C. elegans lacking the αklotho homologue showed a short life span. 
However, the physiological basis of aging-related function of αklotho remain 
unclear. The αklotho-deficient vertebrate animals other than mice have been 
awaited as an alternative model of premature aging. We here employed zebrafish 
in our study and revealed that αklotho mutant zebrafish appeared to be normal at 
3 months postfertilization (mpf) but eventually underwent premature death by 
9 mpf, while normal zebrafish is known to survive for 42 months. We also 
assessed the motor ability of zebrafish in a forced swimming assay and found 
that αklotho mutant zebrafish displayed reduced swimming performance before 
their survival declined. A recent study also reported a similar finding that 
αklotho-deficient zebrafish exhibited a short life span and reduced spontaneous 
movements. Taken together, these results suggest that αKlotho mutant zebrafish 
show premature aging and are useful to investigate aging in vertebrates.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-93909-y
PMCID: PMC8302672
PMID: 34301962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.