1. Eur J Dent. 2021 Oct;15(4):702-706. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1730041. Epub 2021 Jul
 24.

Association between Interleukin-1β Gene Polymorphism and Chronic Periodontitis.

Majeed MM(1), Ahmed I(2), Roome T(3), Fatima T(4), Amin R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Biology, Altamash Institute of Dental Medicine, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(2)Department of Orthodontics, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(3)Section of Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, Dow Diagnostic 
Reference and Research Laboratory, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(4)Dow College of Biotechnology, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, 
Pakistan.

OBJECTIVES: Periodontitis is a pathological condition of the oral cavity, 
originating from multiple factors, including microbial, environmental and 
genetic factors. The vulnerability to several pathologies has been studied with 
the relationship to genetic polymorphisms, and one of the most prominent is the 
single nucleotide polymorphisms throughout the genome. The study aimed to find 
out the association of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of interleukin-1β 
+3954 gene with chronic periodontitis (CP) in Pakistan MATERIALS AND METHODS: 
This case-control study was conducted at Dow University of Health Sciences. DNA 
was extracted from the blood and amplified by using conventional polymerase 
chain reaction of respective genes followed by sequencing. Mann-Whitney test 
accessed the difference of clinical parameters between cases and controls, and 
Fisher's exact test was applied to access the association of alleles between 
subjects. Data entered and analyzed using SPSS 21.
RESULTS: Significant differences were observed in clinical parameters in cases 
and controls (p < 0.001). In the IL-1β +3954 gene, T alleles were significantly 
higher in cases as compared with controls (p < 0.001). Genotype CC was 
significantly dominant in the controls and genotype CT and TT in patients 
(Chi-square = 19.83, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Within the study's limits, IL-1β +3954 gene polymorphism is 
associated with periodontitis and is expected to be among the several causes of 
respective pathology in Pakistan's population.

European Journal of Dentistry. This is an open access article published by 
Thieme under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial-License, permitting copying and 
reproduction so long as the original work is given appropriate credit. Contents 
may not be used for commercial purposes, or adapted, remixed, transformed or 
built upon. (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1730041
PMCID: PMC8630973
PMID: 34303316

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.