1. Autops Case Rep. 2021 May 6;11:e2021269. doi: 10.4322/acr.2021.269.
eCollection  2021.

Non-infectious thrombotic endocarditis associated with chronic rheumatic heart 
disease and disseminated tuberculosis.

Sekar A(1), Naganur S(2).

Author information:
(1)Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Department of 
Histopathology, Chandigarh, India.
(2)Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Department of 
Cardiology, Chandigarh, India.

Rheumatic heart disease is still common in developing countries and requires 
prompt intervention to prevent chronic complications. Vegetations in rheumatic 
heart disease might be due to acute episodes of rheumatic fever itself or due to 
either infective endocarditis (IE) or Non-infectious thrombotic endocarditis 
(NITE). Each form of vegetations has specific pathological characteristics on 
gross and microscopic examination. However, clinically IE and NITE may have 
overlapping signs and symptoms. A chance of misdiagnosis of NITE as 
culture-negative infective endocarditis is higher if the former present with 
infective symptoms like fever. NITE of valves can be due to underlying 
associated malignant neoplasm, particularly mucinous adenocarcinoma, pneumonia, 
cirrhosis, autoimmune disorders, and hypercoagulable state. The coexistence of 
tuberculosis, non-infectious thrombotic endocarditis and rheumatic valvular 
heart disease was rarely documented in medical literature. We describe a case of 
chronic rheumatic heart disease with vegetations in the posterior mitral valve 
leaflet, treated as culture-negative infective endocarditis, which, at autopsy, 
reveals the presence of Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis vegetation over 
calcified, fibrosed mitral valve leaflets and associated disseminated 
tuberculosis along with classic pathological sequela findings of chronic 
rheumatic mitral valvular heart disease in lungs and liver.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.4322/acr.2021.269
PMCID: PMC8214904
PMID: 34307226

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none.