1. Case Rep Ophthalmol Med. 2021 Apr 12;2021:8866837. doi: 10.1155/2021/8866837. 
eCollection 2021.

Macular Changes in a Mucopolysaccharidosis Type I Patient with Earlier Systemic 
Therapies.

Magalhães A(1), Cunha AM(1), Vilares-Morgado R(1), Leão-Teles E(2), Rodrigues 
E(2), Falcão M(1)(3), Carneiro Â(1)(3), Breda J(1), Falcão-Reis F(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, 
Porto, Portugal.
(2)Pediatric Department, Reference Centre of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, 
Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Department of Surgery and Physiology, Faculty of Medicine of University of 
Porto, Porto, Portugal.

PURPOSE: To describe retinal findings in a patient with mucopolysaccharidosis 
type I (MPS I) that underwent an early treatment with hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT) and enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). Case Report. We 
describe a case of a 12-year-old female with a biochemical and genetic diagnosis 
of MPS I. She underwent HSCT and ERT on the first year of life. The visual 
acuity was 5/10 in both eyes and she had bilateral grade 2 corneal haze. 
Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed thickening of the 
external limiting membrane (ELM) at the fovea. In the parafoveal and perifoveal 
regions, SD-OCT displayed a loss of the interdigitation, ellipsoid, and myoid 
zones and of the ELM accompanied by progressive thinning of the outer nuclear 
layer. Fundus infrared imaging revealed a hyperreflective ring centred on the 
fovea and hyporeflective areas in temporal parafoveal regions in both eyes. En 
face OCT imaging revealed two hyperreflective rings on the outer retinal level.
CONCLUSION: This patient developed macular changes with foveal deposition of 
hyperreflective material and parafoveal thinning, despite early systemic 
treatment. Systemic therapies can provide an increase in life expectancy and 
stabilize visual acuity and corneal clouding, although their effect on retinal 
degeneration is unknown.

Copyright © 2021 Augusto Magalhães et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/8866837
PMCID: PMC8267582
PMID: 34306784

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.