1. World J Crit Care Med. 2021 Jul 9;10(4):66-80. doi: 10.5492/wjccm.v10.i4.66. 
eCollection 2021 Jul 9.

Sepsis: Evidence-based pathogenesis and treatment.

Pravda J(1).

Author information:
(1)Inflammatory Disease Research Centre, Therashock LLC, Palm Beach Gardens, FL 
33410, United States. jaypravda1@gmail.com.

Sepsis can develop during the body's response to a critical illness leading to 
multiple organ failure, irreversible shock, and death. Sepsis has been vexing 
health care providers for centuries due to its insidious onset, generalized 
metabolic dysfunction, and lack of specific therapy. A common factor underlying 
sepsis is the characteristic hypermetabolic response as the body ramps up every 
physiological system in its fight against the underlying critical illness. A 
hypermetabolic response requires supraphysiological amounts of energy, which is 
mostly supplied via oxidative phosphorylation generated ATP. A by-product of 
oxidative phosphorylation is hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), a toxic, 
membrane-permeable oxidizing agent that is produced in far greater amounts 
during a hypermetabolic state. Continued production of mitochondrial H2O2 can 
overwhelm cellular reductive (antioxidant) capacity leading to a build-up within 
cells and eventual diffusion into the bloodstream. H2O2 is a metabolic poison 
that can inhibit enzyme systems leading to organ failure, microangiopathic 
dysfunction, and irreversible septic shock. The toxic effects of H2O2 mirror the 
clinical and laboratory abnormalities observed in sepsis, and toxic levels of 
blood H2O2 have been reported in patients with septic shock. This review 
provides evidence to support a causal role for H2O2 in the pathogenesis of 
sepsis, and an evidence-based therapeutic intervention to reduce H2O2 levels in 
the body and restore redox homeostasis, which is necessary for normal organ 
function and vascular responsiveness.

Â©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.5492/wjccm.v10.i4.66
PMCID: PMC8291008
PMID: 34316443

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The author has 
no any conflicts of interest.