1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Sep;297(3):101016. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101016. Epub 2021
 Jul 28.

Theaflavin binds to a druggable pocket of TMEM16A channel and inhibits lung 
adenocarcinoma cell viability.

Shi S(1), Ma B(1), Sun F(2), Qu C(1), An H(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment, 
Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China; Key Laboratory of 
Electromagnetic Field and Electrical Apparatus Reliability of Hebei Province, 
Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China; Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Biophysics, Hebei Province, Institute of Biophysics, School of Science, Hebei 
University of Technology, Tianjin, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, Hebei Province, Institute of 
Biophysics, School of Science, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment, 
Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China; Key Laboratory of 
Electromagnetic Field and Electrical Apparatus Reliability of Hebei Province, 
Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China; Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Biophysics, Hebei Province, Institute of Biophysics, School of Science, Hebei 
University of Technology, Tianjin, China. Electronic address: 
hailong_an@163.com.

As a calcium-activated chloride channel regulated by the intracellular Ca2+ 
concentration and membrane potential, TMEM16A has attracted considerable 
attention and has been proposed as a novel anticancer drug target. We have 
previously reported that the pocket above the ion conductance pore could be a 
nonselective inhibitor-binding pocket. However, whether this pocket is druggable 
remains unexplored. In this study, we performed virtual screening to target the 
presumed inhibitor-binding pocket and identified a highly effective TMEM16A 
inhibitor, theaflavin (TF: a tea polyphenol in black tea). Molecular dynamics 
simulations revealed that theaflavin adopts a "wedge insertion mode" to block 
the ion conduction pore and induces pore closure. Moreover, the binding mode 
showed that the TF pedestal plays an important role in pore blockade, and R515, 
R535, T539, K603, E623, and E633 were determined to be most likely to interact 
directly with the pedestal. Mutagenesis experiment results corroborated the 
mechanism through which TF binds to this pocket. Combined with the quantitative 
calculation results, our data indicated that the three hydroxyl groups on the 
pedestal may be the most crucial pharmacophores for TMEM16A inhibition by TF. 
Finally, antitumor experiments revealed that TF could target TMEM16A to inhibit 
the proliferation and migration of LA795 cells, indicating the potential 
therapeutic effect of TF on the growth of lung adenocarcinoma with high TMEM16A 
expression. The successful application of drug screening strategies based on 
this binding pocket highlights new directions for discovering superior 
modulators and contributes to the development of novel therapeutics for lung 
adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101016
PMCID: PMC8368026
PMID: 34329684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.