1. RNA. 2021 Nov;27(11):1353-1362. doi: 10.1261/rna.078796.121. Epub 2021 Jul 28.

KDM3A regulates alternative splicing of cell-cycle genes following DNA damage.

Baker M(1), Petasny M(1), Taqatqa N(1), Bentata M(1), Kay G(1), Engal E(1), Nevo 
Y(1), Siam A(1), Dahan S(1), Salton M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the Institute for Medical 
Research Israel Canada, Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Changes in the cellular environment result in chromatin structure alteration, 
which in turn regulates gene expression. To learn about the effect of the 
cellular environment on the transcriptome, we studied the H3K9 demethylase 
KDM3A. Using RNA-seq, we found that KDM3A regulates the transcription and 
alternative splicing of genes associated with cell cycle and DNA damage. We 
showed that KDM3A undergoes phosphorylation by PKA at serine 265 following DNA 
damage, and that the phosphorylation is important for proper cell-cycle 
regulation. We demonstrated that SAT1 alternative splicing, regulated by KDM3A, 
plays a role in cell-cycle regulation. Furthermore we found that KDM3A's 
demethylase activity is not needed for SAT1 alternative splicing regulation. In 
addition, we identified KDM3A's protein partner ARID1A, the SWI/SNF subunit, and 
SRSF3 as regulators of SAT1 alternative splicing and showed that KDM3A is 
essential for SRSF3 binding to SAT1 pre-mRNA. These results suggest that KDM3A 
serves as a sensor of the environment and an adaptor for splicing factor 
binding. Our work reveals chromatin sensing of the environment in the regulation 
of alternative splicing.

Â© 2021 Baker et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the 
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.078796.121
PMCID: PMC8522690
PMID: 34321328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]