1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Jul 15;9:704591. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.704591. 
eCollection 2021.

The Second Oncogenic Hit Determines the Cell Fate of ETV6-RUNX1 Positive 
Leukemia.

Rodríguez-Hernández G(1)(2), Casado-García A(1)(2), Isidro-Hernández M(1)(2), 
Picard D(3), Raboso-Gallego J(1)(2), Alemán-Arteaga S(1)(2), Orfao A(2)(4), 
Blanco O(2)(5), Riesco S(2)(6), Prieto-Matos P(2)(6), García Criado FJ(2)(7), 
García Cenador MB(2)(7), Hock H(8), Enver T(9), Sanchez-Garcia I(1)(2), 
Vicente-Dueñas C(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Therapeutics and Translational Oncology Program, Instituto de 
Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas/Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Institute for Biomedical Research of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Medical Faculty, 
Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Servicio de Citometría, Departamento de Medicina, CIBERONC (CB16/12/00400), 
and Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas/Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(5)Departamento de Anatomía Patológica, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, 
Spain.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, 
Spain.
(7)Departamento de Cirugía, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(8)Cancer Center and Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, and Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, MA, 
United States.
(9)Department of Cancer Biology, UCL Cancer Institute, University College 
London, London, United Kingdom.

ETV6-RUNX1 is almost exclusively associated with childhood B-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL), but the consequences of ETV6-RUNX1 expression on 
cell lineage decisions during B-cell leukemogenesis are completely unknown. 
Clinically silent ETV6-RUNX1 preleukemic clones are frequently found in neonatal 
cord blood, but few carriers develop B-ALL as a result of secondary genetic 
alterations. The understanding of the mechanisms underlying the first 
transforming steps could greatly advance the development of non-toxic 
prophylactic interventions. Using genetic lineage tracing, we examined the 
capacity of ETV6-RUNX1 to instruct a malignant phenotype in the hematopoietic 
lineage by cell-specific Cre-mediated activation of ETV6-RUNX1 from the 
endogenous Etv6 gene locus. Here we show that, while ETV6-RUNX1 has the 
propensity to trigger both T- and B-lymphoid malignancies, it is the second hit 
that determines tumor cell identity. To instigate leukemia, both oncogenic hits 
must place early in the development of hematopoietic/precursor cells, not in 
already committed B-cells. Depending on the nature of the second hit, the 
resulting B-ALLs presented distinct entities that were clearly separable based 
on their gene expression profiles. Our findings give a novel mechanistic insight 
into the early steps of ETV6-RUNX1+ B-ALL development and might have major 
implications for the potential development of ETV6-RUNX1+ B-ALL prevention 
strategies.

Copyright © 2021 Rodríguez-Hernández, Casado-García, Isidro-Hernández, Picard, 
Raboso-Gallego, Alemán-Arteaga, Orfao, Blanco, Riesco, Prieto-Matos, García 
Criado, García Cenador, Hock, Enver, Sanchez-Garcia and Vicente-Dueñas.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.704591
PMCID: PMC8320889
PMID: 34336858

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.