1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jul 14;12:664385. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.664385. 
eCollection 2021.

Co-infection by Soil-Borne Fungal Pathogens Alters Disease Responses Among 
Diverse Alfalfa Varieties.

Fang X(1), Zhang C(1), Wang Z(1), Duan T(1), Yu B(1), Jia X(1), Pang J(2), Ma 
L(3), Wang Y(1), Nan Z(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Grassland Agro-ecosystems, Key Laboratory of 
Grassland Livestock Industry Innovation, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, College of Pastoral Agriculture Science and Technology, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou, China.
(2)School of Agriculture and Environment, UWA Institute of Agriculture, The 
University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia.
(3)Division of Plant Science, Research School of Biology, Australian National 
University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.

Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. medicaginis (Fom) and Rhizoctonia solani (Rs) are the 
major soil-borne fungal pathogens that pose severe threats to commercial alfalfa 
production in China. However, the effects of Fom and Rs co-infection on alfalfa 
and whether co-infection alters disease resistance responses among diverse 
varieties remain unknown. A collection of 80 alfalfa varieties (Medicago sativa) 
originated from seven countries were used to study the effects of Fom and Rs 
co-infection on alfalfa and host resistance responses. The co-infection resulted 
in more severe disease and reductions in growth and biomass allocation across 
varieties in comparison with either single infection by Fom or Rs; in addition, 
root morphology was much more strongly altered by the co-infection. Principal 
component analysis based on all plant traits showed that varieties under the 
co-infection were related to the single infection by Rs, being separated from 
Fom, and hierarchical clustering found differential response patterns among 
varieties upon co-infection compared with either single infection, with most 
varieties being highly susceptible to the co-infection. Furthermore, varieties 
that were most resistant to either single infection were not effective to 
co-infection, and there was no individual variety with resistance to both 
pathogens singly and co-infected. This study reveals for the first time that the 
co-infection by Fom and Rs alters disease resistance responses among diverse 
alfalfa varieties and provides useful information for developing alfalfa 
varieties with resistance to the co-occurrence of different soil-borne 
pathogens.

Copyright Â© 2021 Fang, Zhang, Wang, Duan, Yu, Jia, Pang, Ma, Wang and Nan.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.664385
PMCID: PMC8317461
PMID: 34335495

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.