1. Front Immunol. 2021 Jul 16;12:683597. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.683597. 
eCollection 2021.

Human B Lymphomas Reveal Their Secrets Through Genetic Mouse Models.

Mossadegh-Keller N(1), Brisou G(1)(2), Beyou A(1), Nadel B(1), Roulland S(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INSERM, CIML, Marseille, France.
(2)Department of Hematology, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

Lymphomas are cancers deriving from lymphocytes, arising preferentially in 
secondary lymphoid organs, and represent the 6th cancer worldwide and the most 
frequent blood cancer. The majority of B cell Non-Hodgkin lymphomas (B-NHL) 
develop from germinal center (GC) experienced mature B cells. GCs are transient 
structures that form in lymphoid organs in response to antigen exposure of naive 
B cells, and where B cell receptor (BCR) affinity maturation occurs to promote B 
cell differentiation into memory B and plasma cells producing high-affinity 
antibodies. Genomic instability associated with the somatic hypermutation (SHM) 
and class-switch recombination (CSR) processes during GC transit enhance 
susceptibility to malignant transformation. Most B cell differentiation steps in 
the GC are at the origin of frequent B cell malignant entities, namely 
Follicular Lymphoma (FL) and GCB diffuse large B cell lymphomas (GCB-DLBCL). 
Over the past decade, large sequencing efforts have provided a great boost in 
the identification of candidate oncogenes and tumor suppressors involved in FL 
and DLBCL oncogenesis. Mouse models have been instrumental to accurately mimic 
in vivo lymphoma-specific mutations and interrogate their normal function in the 
GC context and their oncogenic function leading to lymphoma onset. The limited 
access of biopsies during the initiating steps of the disease, the cellular and 
(epi)genetic heterogeneity of individual tumors across and within patients 
linked to perturbed dynamics of GC ecosystems make the development of 
genetically engineered mouse models crucial to decipher lymphomagenesis and 
disease progression and eventually to test the effects of novel targeted 
therapies. In this review, we provide an overview of some of the important 
genetically engineered mouse models that have been developed to recapitulate 
lymphoma-associated (epi)genetic alterations of two frequent GC-derived lymphoma 
entities: FL and GCB-DLCBL and describe how those mouse models have improved our 
knowledge of the molecular processes supporting GC B cell transformation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Mossadegh-Keller, Brisou, Beyou, Nadel and Roulland.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.683597
PMCID: PMC8323519
PMID: 34335584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.