1. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2021 Aug;85:106257. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2021.106257.
Epub  2021 Jul 31.

Intravenous leiomyomatosis: Case series and review of the literature.

Mathey MP(1), Duc C(2), Huber D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynaecological Surgery, Hospital de Sion, Avenue du 
Grand-Champsec 80, 1951 Sion, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
mp491@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hospital de Sion, Avenue du Grand-Champsec 80, 1951 
Sion, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Gynaecological Surgery, Hospital de Sion, Avenue du 
Grand-Champsec 80, 1951 Sion, Switzerland; Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève (HUG), Rue Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil 
4, 1205 Genève, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: Intravenous leiomyomatosis (ILV) is a rare pathology, part of 
leiomyoma beyond the uterus (LBU), characterized by benign smooth muscle cell 
tumor outside of the uterus and mainly affecting premenopausal woman with a 
medical history of leiomyoma or gynecologic surgical treatment. The treatment 
depends on the localization of the tumor, age of the patient, initial size, 
symptoms and the suitability for surgery but should always aims in toto surgical 
resection.
CASE PRESENTATION: Retrospective case series and review of literature.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: Symptoms presented by the patient were aspecific and only 
localized in the pelvic area. All cases were fortuitous histopathological 
diagnosis. No relapse was. Two out of 5 patients have pulmonary nodules, only 
one was biopsied and diagnosed with PBML (pulmonary benign metastasizing 
leiomyoma).
CONCLUSION: IVL and BML are rare disease that can co-exist. Because of tumoral 
hormonal receptors, hormonotherapy could be an optional treatment but to date no 
clear efficacy is demonstrated. In case of high recurrence risk such as 
voluminous initial mass, impairment of broad ligament, failure of total surgical 
resection, adjuvant hormonotherapy could be useful. Recurrence rate is about 
16.6-30% and can occur even dozen years later and even after radical surgery, 
justifying a regular follow up.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2021.106257
PMCID: PMC8350006
PMID: 34343794

Conflict of interest statement: There was no personal or professional interest 
by writing about this case. The authors declare any conflict of interest in this 
article.