1. Lab Chip. 2021 Sep 7;21(17):3204-3218. doi: 10.1039/d1lc00506e. Epub 2021 Aug
4.

A technology of a different sort: microraft arrays.

Cort√©s-Llanos B(1), Wang Y, Sims CE, Allbritton NL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 
nlallbr@uw.edu.

A common procedure performed throughout biomedical research is the selection and 
isolation of biological entities such as organelles, cells and organoids from a 
mixed population. In this review, we describe the development and application of 
microraft arrays, an analysis and isolation platform which enables a vast range 
of criteria and strategies to be used when separating biological entities. The 
microraft arrays are comprised of elastomeric microwells with detachable polymer 
bases (microrafts) that act as capture and culture sites as well as supporting 
carriers during cell isolation. The technology is elegant in its simplicity and 
can be implemented for samples possessing tens to millions of objects yielding a 
flexible platform for applications such as single-cell RNA sequencing, 
subcellular organelle capture and assay, high-throughput screening and 
development of CRISPR gene-edited cell lines, and organoid manipulation and 
selection. The transparent arrays are compatible with a multitude of imaging 
modalities enabling selection based on 2D or 3D spatial phenotypes or temporal 
properties. Each microraft can be individually isolated on demand with retention 
of high viability due to the near zero hydrodynamic stress imposed upon the 
cells during microraft release, capture and deposition. The platform has been 
utilized as a simple manual add-on to a standard microscope or incorporated into 
fully automated instruments that implement state-of-the-art imaging algorithms 
and machine learning. The vast array of selection criteria enables separations 
not possible with conventional sorting methods, thus garnering widespread 
interest in the biological and pharmaceutical sciences.

DOI: 10.1039/d1lc00506e
PMCID: PMC8387436
PMID: 34346456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest These authors disclose the 
following: N.L.A., Y.W. and C.E.S have a financial interest in Cell 
Microsystems, Inc. The remaining authors disclose no conflicts.