1. Chem Sci. 2021 Jul 2;12(29):10063-10069. doi: 10.1039/d1sc02995a. eCollection 
2021 Jul 28.

A crosslinked colloidal network of peptide/nucleic base amphiphiles for targeted 
cancer cell encapsulation.

Zhou Y(1), Qiu P(1), Yao D(2), Song Y(1), Zhu Y(1), Pan H(1), Wu J(1), Zhang 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Joint International Research 
Laboratory of Precision Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Feringa Nobel Prize 
Scientist Joint Research Center, School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, 
East China University of Science & Technology 130 Meilong Road Shanghai 200237 
China jcwu@ecust.edu.cn zhangjunji@ecust.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Radiology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine 1665 Kongjiang Road Shanghai 200092 China 
yaodefan@xinhuamed.com.cn.

The use of peptide amphiphiles (PAs) is becoming increasingly popular, not only 
because of their unique self-assembly properties but also due to the versatility 
of designs, allowing biological responsiveness, biocompatibility, and easy 
synthesis, which could potentially contribute to new drug design and disease 
treatment concepts. Oligonucleotides, another major functional bio-macromolecule 
class, have been introduced recently as new functional building blocks into PAs, 
further enriching the tools available for the fabrication of bio-functional PAs. 
Taking advantage of this, in the present work, two nucleic base-linked (adenine, 
A and thymine, T) RGD-rich peptide amphiphiles (NPAs) containing the 
fluorophores naphthalimide and rhodamine (Nph-A and Rh-T) were designed and 
synthesized. The two NPAs exhibit distinctive assembly behaviours with spherical 
(Rh-T) and fibrous (Nph-A) morphologies, and mixing Nph-A with Rh-T leads to a 
densely crosslinked colloidal network (Nph-A/Rh-T) via mutually promoted 
supramolecular polymerization via nucleation-growth assembly. Because of the 
RGD-rich sequences in the crosslinked network, further research on in situ 
targeted cancer cell (MDA-MB-231) encapsulation via RGD-integrin recognition was 
performed, and the modulation of cell behaviours (e.g., cell viability and 
migration) was demonstrated using both confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) 
imaging and a scratch wound healing assay.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d1sc02995a
PMCID: PMC8317620
PMID: 34349970

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.