1. Biology (Basel). 2021 Jul 9;10(7):641. doi: 10.3390/biology10070641.

Effect of Electrical Stimulation on Diabetic Human Skin Fibroblast Growth and 
the Secretion of Cytokines and Growth Factors Involved in Wound Healing.

Abedin-Do A(1)(2), Zhang Z(2), Douville Y(2), Méthot M(2), Rouabhia M(1).

Author information:
(1)Groupe de Recherche en Écologie Buccale, Faculté de Médecine Dentaire, 
Université Laval, Québec, QC G1V 0A6, Canada.
(2)Axe Médecine Régénératrice, Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, Département 
de Chirurgie, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Québec, QC G1V 0A6, Canada.

Diabetic foot ulcers are indicative of an impaired wound healing process. This 
delay may be resolved through electrical stimulation (ES). The goal of the 
present study was to evaluate the effect of ES on diabetic fibroblast adhesion 
and growth, and the secretion of cytokines and growth factors. Diabetic human 
skin fibroblasts (DHSF) were exposed to various intensities of direct current ES 
(100, 80, 40 and 20 mV/mm). The effect of ES on fibroblast adhesion and growth 
was evaluated using Hoechst staining, MTT and trypan blue exclusion assays. The 
secretion of cytokine and growth factor was assessed by cytokine array and ELISA 
assay. The long-term effects of ES on DHSF shape and growth were determined by 
optical microscopy and cell count. We demonstrated that ES at 20 and 40 mV/mm 
promoted cell adhesion, viability and growth. ES also decreased the secretion of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-8 yet promoted growth factor FGF7 
secretion during 48 h post-ES. Finally, the beneficial effect of ES on 
fibroblast growth was maintained up to 5 days post-ES. Overall results suggest 
the possible use of low-intensity direct current ES to promote wound healing in 
diabetic patients.

DOI: 10.3390/biology10070641
PMCID: PMC8301053
PMID: 34356496

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.