1. Ann Nutr Metab. 2021;77(5):299-306. doi: 10.1159/000517500. Epub 2021 Jul 2.

APOA5 Variant rs662799, Role in Cardiovascular Traits and Serum Adipokine Levels 
in Caucasian Obese Subjects.

de Luis DA(1), Izaola O(1), Primo D(1), Aller R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Endocrinology and Nutrition 
Research Center, School of Medicine, Hospital Clinico Universitario, University 
of Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: This ApoA5-1131C allele of rs662799 variant is related with 
a higher serum triglyceride levels, and it contributes to increase risk of 
cardiovascular disease. The aim of the present investigation was to evaluate 
single nucleotide polymorphism rs662799 in APOA5 gene and its associations with 
cardiovascular risk factors, MS, and serum adipokine levels.
METHODS: The study involved a population of 1,002 Caucasian obese subjects. 
Measurements of body weight, waist circumference, fat mass, arterial blood 
pressure, blood glucose, C-reactive protein, insulin levels, insulin resistance 
(HOMA-IR), lipid profile, and adipokines levels were recorded. Genotype of ApoA5 
gene polymorphism (rs662799) and prevalence of metabolic syndrome (MS) were 
evaluated.
RESULTS: The distribution of the rs662799 polymorphism in this adult population 
(n = 1,002) was 88.3% (n = 885) (TT), 11.4% (n = 114) (TC), and 0.3% (n = 3) 
(CC). No significant differences were found between the 2 genotypes in the 
anthropometric data, MS, or blood pressure. Triglyceride levels were higher in 
C-allele carriers (delta total group: 19.7 ± 2.1 mg/dL: p = 0.02) than non 
C-allele carriers. HDL-cholesterol levels were lower in C-allele carriers (delta 
total group: -6.7 ± 1.1 mg/dL: p = 0.02) than non C-allele carriers. Adiponectin 
levels were lower in C-allele carriers (delta total group: -11.6 ± 1.0 mg/dL: p 
= 0.02) too. In C-allele carriers, logistic regression analysis showed an 
increased risk of hypertriglyceridemia (odds ratio [OR] = 2.1, 95% confidence 
interval [CI] = 1.2-3.4, p = 0.001) and percentage of low-HDL-C (OR = 2.2, 95% 
CI = 1.3-3.7, p = 0.002) after adjusting by body mass index and age.
CONCLUSIONS: C-allele carriers of rs662799 of APOA5 gene showed high rates of 
low levels of HDL and hypertriglyceridemia, with differences in triglyceride, 
HDL cholesterol, and adiponectin levels in Caucasian obese subjects.

© 2021 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000517500
PMID: 34350864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]