1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Jul 19;9:681933. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.681933. 
eCollection 2021.

Quantitative Relationships Between Growth, Differentiation, and Shape That 
Control Drosophila Eye Development and Its Variation.

Lobo-Cabrera FJ(1), Navarro T(2), Iannini A(2), Casares F(2), Cuetos A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical, Chemical and Natural Systems, Pablo de Olavide 
University, Sevilla, Spain.
(2)DMC2-GEM Unit, The CABD, CSIC-Pablo de Olavide University-JA, Seville, Spain.

The size of organs is critical for their function and often a defining trait of 
a species. Still, how organs reach a species-specific size or how this size 
varies during evolution are problems not yet solved. Here, we have investigated 
the conditions that ensure growth termination, variation of final size and the 
stability of the process for developmental systems that grow and differentiate 
simultaneously. Specifically, we present a theoretical model for the development 
of the Drosophila eye, a system where a wave of differentiation sweeps across a 
growing primordium. This model, which describes the system in a simplified form, 
predicts universal relationships linking final eye size and developmental time 
to a single parameter which integrates genetically-controlled variables, the 
rates of cell proliferation and differentiation, with geometrical factors. We 
find that the predictions of the theoretical model show good agreement with 
previously published experimental results. We also develop a new computational 
model that recapitulates the process more realistically and find concordance 
between this model and theory as well, but only when the primordium is circular. 
However, when the primordium is elliptical both models show discrepancies. We 
explain this difference by the mechanical interactions between cells, an aspect 
that is not included in the theoretical model. Globally, our work defines the 
quantitative relationships between rates of growth and differentiation and organ 
primordium size that ensure growth termination (and, thereby, specify final eye 
size) and determine the duration of the process; identifies geometrical 
dependencies of both size and developmental time; and uncovers potential 
instabilities of the system which might constraint developmental strategies to 
evolve eyes of different size.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lobo-Cabrera, Navarro, Iannini, Casares and Cuetos.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.681933
PMCID: PMC8326509
PMID: 34350178

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.