1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Jul 12;9(7):774. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9070774.

Bispecific Anti-HIV Immunoadhesins That Bind Gp120 and Gp41 Have Broad and 
Potent HIV-Neutralizing Activity.

Pincus SH(1), Craig RB(2)(3), Weachter L(2), LaBranche CC(4), Nabi R(5), Watt 
C(1), Raymond M(1), Peters T(1), Song K(2), Maresh GA(2), Montefiori DC(4), 
Kozlowski PA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT 59715, USA.
(2)Research Institute for Children, Children's Hospital, New Orleans, LA 70118, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Duke University, Durham, NC 27707, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Parasitology, LSU School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

We have constructed bispecific immunoglobulin-like immunoadhesins that bind to 
both the HIV-envelope glycoproteins: gp120 and gp41. These immunoadhesins have N 
terminal domains of human CD4 engrafted onto the N-terminus of the heavy chain 
of human anti-gp41 mAb 7B2. Binding of these constructs to recombinant Env and 
their antiviral activities were compared to that of the parental mAbs and CD4, 
as well as to control mAbs. The CD4/7B2 constructs bind to both gp41 and gp140, 
as well as to native Env expressed on the surface of infected cells. These 
constructs deliver cytotoxic immunoconjugates to HIV-infected cells, but not as 
well as a mixture of 7B2 and sCD4, and opsonize for antibody-mediated 
phagocytosis. Most surprisingly, given that 7B2 neutralizes weakly, if at all, 
is that the chimeric CD4/7B2 immunoadhesins exhibit broad and potent 
neutralization of HIV, comparable to that of well-known neutralizing mAbs. These 
data add to the growing evidence that enhanced neutralizing activity can be 
obtained with bifunctional mAbs/immunoadhesins. The enhanced neutralization 
activity of the CD4/7B2 chimeras may result from cross-linking of the two Env 
subunits with subsequent inhibition of the pre-fusion conformational events that 
are necessary for entry.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9070774
PMCID: PMC8310024
PMID: 34358190

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.