1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Jul 22;9:695311. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.695311. 
eCollection 2021.

Distinct and Coordinated Regulation of Small Non-coding RNAs by E2f1 and p53 
During Drosophila Development and in Response to DNA Damage.

Li D(1), Ge Y(2), Zhao Z(2), Zhu R(2), Wang X(2), Bi X(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Nantong University, Nantong, China.
(2)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.
(3)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.

Small non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), including microRNAs (miRNAs) and 
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), play a pivotal role in biological processes. A 
comprehensive quantitative reference of small ncRNAs expression during 
development and in DNA damage response (DDR) would significantly advance our 
understanding of their roles. In this study, we systemically analyzed the 
expression profile of miRNAs and piRNAs in wild-type flies, e2f1 mutant, p53 
mutant and e2f1 p53 double mutant during development and after X-ray 
irradiation. By using small RNA sequencing and bioinformatic analysis, we found 
that both miRNAs and piRNAs were expressed in a dynamic mode and formed 4 
distinct clusters during development. Notably, the expression pattern of miRNAs 
and piRNAs was changed in e2f1 mutant at multiple developmental stages, while 
retained in p53 mutant, indicating a critical role of E2f1 played in mediating 
small ncRNAs expression. Moreover, we identified differentially expressed (DE) 
small ncRNAs in e2f1 mutant and p53 mutant after X-ray irradiation. Furthermore, 
we mapped the binding motif of E2f1 and p53 around the small ncRNAs. Our data 
suggested that E2f1 and p53 work differently yet coordinately to regulate small 
ncRNAs expression, and E2f1 may play a major role to regulate miRNAs during 
development and after X-ray irradiation. Collectively, our results provide 
comprehensive characterization of small ncRNAs, as well as the regulatory roles 
of E2f1 and p53 in small ncRNAs expression, during development and in DNA damage 
response, which reveal new insights into the small ncRNAs biology.

Copyright Â© 2021 Li, Ge, Zhao, Zhu, Wang and Bi.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.695311
PMCID: PMC8339594
PMID: 34368144

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.