1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jul 25;22(15):7927. doi: 10.3390/ijms22157927.

Antimicrobial Peptides with Antibacterial Activity against Vancomycin-Resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus Strains: Classification, Structures, and Mechanisms of 
Action.

Hern치ndez-Aristiz치bal I(1), Ocampo-Ib치침ez ID(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Group of Microbiology, Industry and Environment, Faculty of Basic 
Sciences, Universidad Santiago de Cali, Cali 760035, Colombia.

The emergence of bacteria resistant to conventional antibiotics is of great 
concern in modern medicine because it renders ineffectiveness of the current 
empirical antibiotic therapies. Infections caused by vancomycin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (VRSA) and vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus (VISA) 
strains represent a serious threat to global health due to their considerable 
morbidity and mortality rates. Therefore, there is an urgent need of research 
and development of new antimicrobial alternatives against these bacteria. In 
this context, the use of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) is considered a promising 
alternative therapeutic strategy to control resistant strains. Therefore, a wide 
number of natural, artificial, and synthetic AMPs have been evaluated against 
VRSA and VISA strains, with great potential for clinical application. In this 
regard, we aimed to present a comprehensive and systematic review of research 
findings on AMPs that have shown antibacterial activity against 
vancomycin-resistant and vancomycin-intermediate resistant strains and clinical 
isolates of S. aureus, discussing their classification and origin, 
physicochemical and structural characteristics, and possible action mechanisms. 
This is the first review that includes all peptides that have shown 
antibacterial activity against VRSA and VISA strains exclusively.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22157927
PMCID: PMC8347216
PMID: 34360692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.