1. Molecules. 2021 Jul 24;26(15):4477. doi: 10.3390/molecules26154477.

Concerning the Role of σ-Hole in Non-Covalent Interactions: Insights from the 
Study of the Complexes of ArBeO with Simple Ligands.

Borocci S(1)(2), Grandinetti F(1)(2), Sanna N(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento per la Innovazione nei Sistemi Biologici, Agroalimentari e 
Forestali (DIBAF), Università della Tuscia, L.go dell'Università, s.n.c., 01100 
Viterbo, Italy.
(2)Istituto per i Sistemi Biologici del CNR, Via Salaria, Km 29.500, 00015 
Monterotondo, Italy.
(3)Istituto per la Scienza e Tecnologia dei Plasmi del CNR (ISTP), Via Amendola 
122/D, 70126 Bari, Italy.

The structure, stability, and bonding character of some exemplary LAr and 
L-ArBeO (L = He, Ne, Ar, N2, CO, F2, Cl2, ClF, HF, HCl, NH3) were investigated 
by MP2 and coupled-cluster calculations, and by symmetry-adapted perturbation 
theory. The nature of the stabilizing interactions was also assayed by the 
method recently proposed by the authors to classify the chemical bonds in 
noble-gas compounds. The comparative analysis of the LAr and L-ArBeO unraveled 
geometric and bonding effects peculiarly related to the σ-hole at the Ar atom of 
ArBeO, including the major stabilizing/destabilizing role of the electrostatic 
interactionensuing from the negative/positive molecular electrostatic potential 
of L at the contact zone with ArBeO. The role of the inductive and dispersive 
components was also assayed, making it possible to discern the factors governing 
the transition from the (mainly) dispersive domain of the LAr, to the σ-hole 
domain of the L-ArBeO. Our conclusions could be valid for various types of 
non-covalent interactions, especially those involving σ-holes of respectable 
strength such as those occurring in ArBeO.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26154477
PMCID: PMC8348141
PMID: 34361629

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.