1. Hum Immunol. 2021 Dec;82(12):917-922. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2021.07.014. Epub 
2021 Aug 7.

The association of TAP polymorphisms with non-small-cell lung cancer in the Han 
Chinese population.

Liu W(1), Ma Q(2), Li C(1), Li Y(3), Liu S(1), Shi L(4), Yao Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking 
Union Medical College, Kunming 650118, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The 3rd Affiliated Hospital of Kunming 
Medical University, Kunming 650118, China.
(3)Department of Geriatrics, The No. 1 Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical 
University, Kunming 650032, China.
(4)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking 
Union Medical College, Kunming 650118, China. Electronic address: 
shili.imb@gmail.com.
(5)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking 
Union Medical College, Kunming 650118, China. Electronic address: 
leoyyf@gmail.com.

The host immune system plays a crucial role in multiple types of cancer, 
including non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Transporter associated with 
antigen processing (TAP) protein heterodimer complexes might promote 
intracellular antigen peptide binding with class I major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC-I) molecules, and in recent years, TAP1 and TAP2 have been reported 
to be associated with multiple cancer risks. In the current study, we 
investigated the association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TAP1 
and TAP2 with NSCLC in a Han Chinese population. Six and seven TAP1 and TAP2 
SNPs, respectively, were genotyped and analysed in healthy controls and NSCLC 
patients. Based on our data, none of the six SNPs in TAP1 is associated with 
NSCLC risk (P > 0.0038). However, rs2228396 alleles in TAP2 were significantly 
different between NSCLC patients and healthy controls, and the A allele might be 
associated with an increased risk of this cancer (P = 0.001, OR = 1.65, 95%CI: 
1.23 ∼ 2.21). Moreover, the genotype frequencies of rs2228396 were significantly 
different between patients and healthy controls (P = 7 × 10-4). Additionally, 
TAP2 rs241441 alleles exhibited a trend of difference between NSCLC patients and 
healthy controls, with the C allele possibly being associated with increased 
risk of NSCLC (P = 0.013; OR = 1.30, 95%CI: 1.06 ∼ 1.60). Moreover, the 
genotypes of rs241441 in TAP2 showed a significant difference between NSCLC 
patients and healthy controls (P = 1 × 10-4). In haplotype analysis, the TAP2 
SNP haplotype (CAC, TAP2*0102) was significantly associated with increased NSCLC 
risk in the Han Chinese population (P = 0.003; OR = 1.57, 95%CI: 1.17 ∼ 2.10). 
Our results indicate that TAP2 SNPs (rs2228396 and rs241441) have a potential 
role in NSCLC pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2021.07.014
PMID: 34373132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.