1. Sci Rep. 2021 Aug 10;11(1):16243. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-95798-7.

Rab1A promotes cell proliferation and migration by upregulating Gli1 in 
colorectal cancer.

Peng C(1), Li X(1), Ye Z(1), Wu W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Suzhou Wuzhong People's Hospital, No. 61 
Dongwu North Road, Suzhou, 215128, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Suzhou Wuzhong People's Hospital, No. 61 
Dongwu North Road, Suzhou, 215128, Jiangsu, China. wuwenqing2021@163.com.

Rab1A, as a highly conserved small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase), plays 
contentious roles in different types of cancers. The role of Rab1A in colorectal 
cancer (CRC) has been described in previous studies, but the molecular 
mechanisms of Rab1A in CRC remain far from being addressed. In the present 
study, we found that Rab1A expression was significantly upregulated in CRC 
tissues and increased Rab1A expression correlated with tumor size, lymph node 
metastasis (LNM) and tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) stage of CRC patients. We also 
found that Rab1A exerts its promotive effect on CRC cell proliferation, 
migration and EMT progress. Further mechanistic experiments showed that 
glioma-associated oncogene-1 (Gli1), as a key transcriptional factor of the 
Hedgehog pathway, was implicated in Rab1A-mediated regulation of CRC cell 
proliferation and migration. In addition, Rab1A upregulated Gli1 expression 
through Smoothened homolog (SMO)-independent pathway. Finally, Rab1A activated 
mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling in CRC cells. Collectively, our 
results define Rab1A as a novel regulator of Gli1 to promote CRC cell 
proliferation and migration, and suggest that the Rab1A/mTOR/Gli1 axis may serve 
as a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of CRC.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-95798-7
PMCID: PMC8355269
PMID: 34376787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.