1. Dev Reprod. 2021 Jun;25(2):93-104. doi: 10.12717/DR.2021.25.2.93. Epub 2021
Jun  30.

Antitumor Effect of Metformin in Combination with Binimetinib on Melanoma Cells.

Lee E(1), Kwon Y(1), Kim J(1), Park D(2), Lee Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Jeju National University College of Medicine, Jeju 
63243, Korea.
(2)Department of Histology, Jeju National University College of Medicine, Jeju 
63243, Korea.

Cutaneous melanoma is a fatal disease for patients with distant metastasis. 
Metformin is the most widely used anti-diabetic drug, and proved to suppress 
cell proliferation and metastasis in diverse cancers including melanoma. We 
previously reported that MEK inhibitor trametinib increases the expression of 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulators and melanoma cell motility, 
which are suppressed by addition of metformin in A375 melanoma cells. To confirm 
our findings further, we first evaluated the effect of metformin in combination 
with another MEK inhibitor binimetinib on cell viability in G361 melanoma cells. 
We then investigated whether binimetinib affects the expression of EMT 
regulators and cell motility. We finally monitored the effect of metformin on 
binimetinib-induced cell migration. Cell viability assay showed that combination 
index (CI) value at ED50 is 0.80, suggesting synergy for the combination of 
metformin with binimetinib. Our results also revealed that binimetinib increased 
the expression of EMT regulators such as integrin αV, fibronectin and slug, 
which correlate well with the enhanced cell migration in wound healing assay. 
Metformin, on the contrary, suppressed the expression of sparc, integrin αV, 
fibronectin and N-cadherin with the reduced cell motility. The combination 
treatment showed that metformin counteracts the binimetinib-induced increase of 
cell motility. Overall, these results suggest that metformin with binimetinib 
might be useful as a potential therapeutic adjuvant against cell survival and 
metastatic activity in melanoma patients.

© Copyright 2021 The Korean Society of Developmental Biology.

DOI: 10.12717/DR.2021.25.2.93
PMCID: PMC8328479
PMID: 34386644

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflict of 
interest.