1. J Nanobiotechnology. 2021 Aug 11;19(1):236. doi: 10.1186/s12951-021-00972-8.

WRAP-based nanoparticles for siRNA delivery: a SAR study and a comparison with 
lipid-based transfection reagents.

Konate K(1), Josse E(1), Tasic M(1), Redjatti K(1), Aldrian G(2), Deshayes S(1), 
Boisguérin P(1), Vivès E(3).

Author information:
(1)PhyMedExp - Université de Montpellier, INSERM U1046, CNRS UMR 9214, CHU 
Arnaud de Villeneuve, 371 av. doyen Giraud, 34295, Montpellier Cedex 5, France.
(2)Sys2Diag, UMR 9005-CNRS/ALCEDIAG, 1682 Rue de la Valsière, 34184, Montpellier 
CEDEX 4, France.
(3)PhyMedExp - Université de Montpellier, INSERM U1046, CNRS UMR 9214, CHU 
Arnaud de Villeneuve, 371 av. doyen Giraud, 34295, Montpellier Cedex 5, France. 
eric.vives@umontpellier.fr.

Recently, we designed novel amphipathic cell-penetrating peptides, called WRAP, 
able to transfer efficiently siRNA molecules into cells. In order to gain more 
information about the relationship between amino acid composition, nanoparticle 
formation and cellular internalization of these peptides composed of only three 
amino acids (leucine, arginine and tryptophan), we performed a 
structure-activity relationship (SAR) study. First, we compared our WRAP1 and 
WRAP5 peptides with the C6M1 peptide also composed of the same three amino acids 
and showing similar behaviors in siRNA transfection. Afterwards, to further 
define the main determinants in the WRAP activity, we synthesized 13 new WRAP 
analogues harboring different modifications like the number and location of 
leucine and arginine residues, the relative location of tryptophan residues, as 
well as the role of the α-helix formation upon proline insertions within the 
native WRAP sequence. After having compared the ability of these peptides to 
form peptide-based nanoparticles (PBNs) using different biophysical methods and 
to induce a targeted gene silencing in cells, we established the main sequential 
requirements of the amino acid composition of the WRAP peptide. In addition, 
upon measuring the WRAP-based siRNA transfection ability into cells compared to 
several non-peptide transfection agents available on the markets, we confirmed 
that WRAP peptides induced an equivalent level of targeted gene silencing but in 
most of the cases with lower cell toxicity as clearly shown in clonogenic 
assays.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12951-021-00972-8
PMCID: PMC8359084
PMID: 34380479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.