1. Cancer Sci. 2021 Oct;112(10):4335-4345. doi: 10.1111/cas.15109. Epub 2021 Aug 
23.

Identification of a peptide binding to cancer antigen Kita-kyushu lung cancer 
antigen 1 from a phage-display library.

Yu X(1), Yan J(2), Chen X(2), Wei J(2), Yu L(2), Liu F(3), Li L(3), Liu B(2).

Author information:
(1)The Comprehensive Cancer Center, China Pharmaceutical University Nanjing Drum 
Tower Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(2)The Comprehensive Cancer Center of Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, The 
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Pathology of Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, The Affiliated 
Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, China.

Kita-kyushu lung cancer antigen 1 (KK-LC-1) is a kind of cancer-testis antigen 
with anti-tumor potential for clinical application. As a class of small-molecule 
antigen conjugate, tumor-targeting peptides have broad application prospects in 
gastric cancer diagnosis, imaging, and biological treatment. Here, we screened 
specific cyclic nonapeptides from a phage-display library. The targeting peptide 
with the best affinity was selected and further verified in ex vivo tissue 
sections. Finally, enrichment of targeting peptides in tumor tissues was 
observed in vivo, and the dynamic biodistribution process was also observed with 
micro-positron emission tomography (micro-PET)/computed tomography (CT) imaging. 
Studies showed that the specific cyclic nonapeptide had a high binding capacity 
for KK-LC-1 protein. It has a strong affinity and specificity for 
KK-LC-1-expressing positive tumor cells. Targeting peptides were significantly 
enriched at tumor sites in vivo, with very low normal tissue background. These 
findings demonstrated that the KK-LC-1 targeting peptide has high clinical 
potential.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.15109
PMCID: PMC8486176
PMID: 34387029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest.