1. Sci Rep. 2021 Aug 12;11(1):16430. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-95799-6.

A molecular test based on RT-LAMP for rapid, sensitive and inexpensive 
colorimetric detection of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples.

Amaral C(1), Antunes W(2), Moe E(1), Duarte AG(1), Lima LMP(1), Santos C(1), 
Gomes IL(2), Afonso GS(1), Vieira R(2), Teles HSS(3), Reis MS(3), da Silva 
MAR(4), Henriques AM(5), Fevereiro M(5), Ventura MR(1), Serrano M(6), Pimentel 
C(7).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova 
de Lisboa, Av. República, 2780-157, Oeiras, Portugal.
(2)Centro de Investigação da Academia Militar (CINAMIL), Unidade Militar 
Laboratorial de Defesa Biológica e Química (UMLDBQ), Av. Dr. Alfredo Bensaúde, 
1849-012, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Centro de Medicina Naval-Marinha Portuguesa, Alfeite, 2810-001, Almada, 
Portugal.
(4)Hospital das Forças Armadas, Azinhaga dos Ulmeiros, 1649-020, Lisbon, 
Portugal.
(5)Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e Veterinária, I.P., Laboratório 
de Virologia, Av. República, Quinta do Marquês, 2780-157, Oeiras, Portugal.
(6)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova 
de Lisboa, Av. República, 2780-157, Oeiras, Portugal. serrano@itqb.unl.pt.
(7)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova 
de Lisboa, Av. República, 2780-157, Oeiras, Portugal. pimentel@itqb.unl.pt.

Until there is an effective implementation of COVID-19 vaccination program, a 
robust testing strategy, along with prevention measures, will continue to be the 
most viable way to control disease spread. Such a strategy should rely on 
disparate diagnostic tests to prevent a slowdown in testing due to lack of 
materials and reagents imposed by supply chain problems, which happened at the 
beginning of the pandemic. In this study, we have established a single-tube test 
based on RT-LAMP that enables the visual detection of less than 100 viral genome 
copies of SARS-CoV-2 within 30 min. We benchmarked the assay against the gold 
standard test for COVID-19 diagnosis, RT-PCR, using 177 nasopharyngeal RNA 
samples. For viral loads above 100 copies, the RT-LAMP assay had a sensitivity 
of 100% and a specificity of 96.1%. Additionally, we set up a RNA 
extraction-free RT-LAMP test capable of detecting SARS-CoV-2 directly from 
saliva samples, albeit with lower sensitivity. The saliva was self-collected and 
the collection tube remained closed until inactivation, thereby ensuring the 
protection of the testing personnel. As expected, RNA extraction from saliva 
samples increased the sensitivity of the test. To lower the costs associated 
with RNA extraction, we performed this step using an alternative protocol that 
uses plasmid DNA extraction columns. We also produced the enzymes needed for the 
assay and established an in-house-made RT-LAMP test independent of specific 
distribution channels. Finally, we developed a new colorimetric method that 
allowed the detection of LAMP products by the visualization of an evident color 
shift, regardless of the reaction pH.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-95799-6
PMCID: PMC8361189
PMID: 34385527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.