1. Front Oncol. 2021 Jul 26;11:689131. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.689131. eCollection
 2021.

Combinatorial Strategies to Target Molecular and Signaling Pathways to Disarm 
Cancer Stem Cells.

Catara G(1), Colanzi A(1), Spano D(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, National Research Council, 
Naples, Italy.

Erratum in
    Front Oncol. 2021 Aug 16;11:749040. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.749040.

Cancer is an urgent public health issue with a very huge number of cases all 
over the world expected to increase by 2040. Despite improved diagnosis and 
therapeutic protocols, it remains the main leading cause of death in the world. 
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) constitute a tumor subpopulation defined by ability to 
self-renewal and to generate the heterogeneous and differentiated cell lineages 
that form the tumor bulk. These cells represent a major concern in cancer 
treatment due to resistance to conventional protocols of radiotherapy, 
chemotherapy and molecular targeted therapy. In fact, although partial or 
complete tumor regression can be achieved in patients, these responses are often 
followed by cancer relapse due to the expansion of CSCs population. The aberrant 
activation of developmental and oncogenic signaling pathways plays a relevant 
role in promoting CSCs therapy resistance. Although several targeted approaches 
relying on monotherapy have been developed to affect these pathways, they have 
shown limited efficacy. Therefore, an urgent need to design alternative 
combinatorial strategies to replace conventional regimens exists. This review 
summarizes the preclinical studies which provide a proof of concept of 
therapeutic efficacy of combinatorial approaches targeting the CSCs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Catara and Spano.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.689131
PMCID: PMC8352560
PMID: 34381714

Conflict of interest statement: DS is a topic editor of the research topic: 
Combinatorial approaches for cancer treatment: from basic to translational 
research. The remaining author declares that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.