1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Jul 26;12:713178. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.713178. 
eCollection 2021.

Validation of Single Nucleotide Variant Assays for Human Leukocyte Antigen 
Haplotypes HLA-B*15:02 and HLA-A*31:01 Across Diverse Ancestral Backgrounds.

Buchner A(1)(2), Hu X(1), Aitchison KJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
AB, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University 
of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

Erratum in
    Front Pharmacol. 2022 Aug 05;13:971316. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.971316.

The human leukocyte antigen haplotypes HLA-B*15:02 and HLA-A*31:01 have been 
linked to life-threatening adverse drug reactions to the anticonvulsants 
carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine. Identification of these haplotypes via 
pharmacogenetic techniques facilitates implementation of precision medicine to 
prevent such reactions. Using reference samples from diverse ancestral origins, 
we investigated the test analytical validity (i.e., ability to detect whether or 
not the haplotypes were present or absent) of TaqMan assays for single 
nucleotide variants previously identified as potentially being able to "tag" 
these haplotypes. A TaqMan custom assay for rs10484555 and an inventoried assay 
for rs17179220 and were able to identify with 100% sensitivity and 100% 
specificity HLA-B*15:02 and HLA-A*31:01 respectively. A custom assay for 
rs144012689 that takes into account a neighboring single nucleotide variant with 
manual calling was also able to identify HLA-B*15:02 with 100% sensitivity and 
100% specificity. A custom assay for rs106235 identified HLA-A*31:01 with 100% 
sensitivity and 95% specificity. The slight reduction in specificity for the 
latter was owing to another haplotype (HLA-A*33:03) also being detected. While 
any positive call using the rs106235 assay could therefore be further 
investigated, as the presence of the HLA-A*31:01 haplotype confers adverse drug 
reaction risk, the absence of false negatives (indexed by sensitivity) is more 
important than false positives. In summary, we present validated TaqMan assay 
methodology for efficient detection of HLA haplotypes HLA-B*15:02 and 
HLA-A*31:01. Our data are relevant for other genotyping technologies that 
identify, or have the potential to identify, these haplotypes using single 
nucleotide variants.

Copyright Â© 2021 Buchner, Hu and Aitchison.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.713178
PMCID: PMC8350439
PMID: 34381365

Conflict of interest statement: KA is a member of the Pharmacogene Variation 
Consortium (PharmVar), a member of the Genetic Testing Committee of the 
International Society of Psychiatric Genetics, and of the Clinical 
Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.