1. NPJ Precis Oncol. 2021 Aug 12;5(1):76. doi: 10.1038/s41698-021-00211-1.

Circulating tumor cell heterogeneity in neuroendocrine prostate cancer by single 
cell copy number analysis.

Conteduca V(1)(2), Ku SY(1), Fernandez L(3), Dago-Rodriquez A(3), Lee J(3), 
Jendrisak A(3), Slade M(3), Gilbertson C(3), Manohar J(4), Sigouros M(4), Wang 
Y(3), Dittamore R(3), Wenstrup R(3), Mosquera JM(4), Schonhoft JD(3), Beltran 
H(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)IRCCS Istituto Romagnolo per lo Studio dei Tumori (IRST) "Dino Amadori", 
Meldola, Italy.
(3)Epic Sciences, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
himisha_beltran@dfci.harvard.edu.
(6)Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. himisha_beltran@dfci.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    NPJ Precis Oncol. 2021 Sep 13;5(1):84. doi: 10.1038/s41698-021-00227-7.

Neuroendocrine prostate cancer is an aggressive variant of prostate cancer that 
may arise de novo or develop from pre-existing prostate adenocarcinoma as a 
mechanism of treatment resistance. The combined loss of tumor suppressors RB1, 
TP53, and PTEN are frequent in NEPC but also present in a subset of prostate 
adenocarcinomas. Most clinical and preclinical studies support a 
trans-differentiation process, whereby NEPC arises clonally from a prostate 
adenocarcinoma precursor during the course of treatment resistance. Here we 
highlight a case of NEPC with significant intra-patient heterogeneity observed 
across metastases. We further demonstrate how single-cell genomic analysis of 
circulating tumor cells combined with a phenotypic evaluation of cellular 
diversity can be considered as a window into tumor heterogeneity in patients 
with advanced prostate cancer.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41698-021-00211-1
PMCID: PMC8361159
PMID: 34385567

Conflict of interest statement: V.C. has served as consultant/advisory board 
member for Janssen, Astellas, Merck, AstraZeneca, Bayer; has received speaker 
honoraria or travel support from Astellas, Janssen, Ipsen, Bayer, and Sanofi. 
L.F., A.D., A.J., J.L., M.S., Y.W., R.D., C.G., R.W., and J.S. are employed by 
Epic Sciences Inc. R.D. is employed by Decipher Biosciences. H.B. has served as 
consultant/advisory board member for Janssen, Pfizer, Sanofi Genzyme, Astellas, 
Astra Zeneca, Amgen, Merck, Foundation Medicine, Blue Earth Diagnostics, and has 
received research funding from Janssen Oncology (Inst), AbbVie/Stemcentrx, Eli 
Lilly (Inst), Millennium Pharmaceuticals (Inst). No potential conflicts of 
interest were disclosed by the other authors.