1. Oncotarget. 2021 Aug 3;12(16):1587-1599. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.28030. 
eCollection 2021 Aug 3.

MiR-7-5p inhibits thyroid cell proliferation by targeting the EGFR/MAPK and 
IRS2/PI3K signaling pathways.

Augenlicht A(1), Saiselet M(1), Decaussin-Petrucci M(2), Andry G(3), Dumont 
JE(1), Maenhaut C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Interdisciplinary Research, Université libre de Bruxelles, 
Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, 
Université Lyon 1, Pierre Benite Cedex 69495, France.
(3)Surgery Department, J. Bordet Institute, Brussels 1000, Belgium.

The aberrant expression of miRNAs is often correlated to tumor development. 
MiR-7-5p is a recently discovered downregulated miRNA in thyroid papillary 
carcinoma (PTC). The goal of this project was to characterize its functional 
role in thyroid tumorigenesis and to identify the targeted modulated pathways. 
MiR-7-5p overexpression following transfection in TPC1 and HT-ori3 cells 
decreased proliferation of the two thyroid cell lines. Analysis of global 
transcriptome modifications showed that miR-7-5p inhibits thyroid cell 
proliferation by modulating the MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways which are both 
necessary for normal thyroid proliferation and play central roles in PTC 
tumorigenesis. Several effectors of these pathways are indeed targets of 
miR-7-5p, among which EGFR and IRS2, two upstream activators. We confirmed the 
upregulation of IRS2 and EGFR in human PTC and showed the existence of a 
negative correlation between the decreased expression of miR-7-5p and the 
increased expression of IRS2 or EGFR. Our results thus support a 
tumor-suppressor activity of miR-7-5p. The decreased expression of miR-7-5p 
during PTC tumorigenesis might give the cells a proliferative advantage and 
delivery of miR-7-5p may represent an innovative approach for therapy.

Copyright: © 2021 Augenlicht et al.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.28030
PMCID: PMC8351599
PMID: 34381564

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Authors have no conflicts 
of interest to declare.