1. J Hazard Mater. 2022 Jan 15;422:126759. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126759.
Epub  2021 Aug 2.

Molecular mechanisms of environmental toxin cadmium at the feto-maternal 
interface investigated using an organ-on-chip (FMi-OOC) model.

Kim S(1), Richardson L(2), Radnaa E(3), Chen Z(4), Rusyn I(4), Menon R(5), Han 
A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX, USA; Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Division of 
Maternal-Fetal Medicine & Perinatal Research, The University of Texas Medical 
Branch at Galveston, 301 University Blvd., Galveston, TX 77555-1062, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine & 
Perinatal Research, The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, 301 
University Blvd., Galveston, TX 77555-1062, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 
USA.
(5)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine & 
Perinatal Research, The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, 301 
University Blvd., Galveston, TX 77555-1062, USA. Electronic address: 
ram.menon@utmb.edu.
(6)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX, USA. Electronic address: arum.han@ece.tamu.edu.

Human labor is associated with feto-maternal-derived signals that coordinate to 
initiate delivery. Exposure to environmental chemicals can prematurely trigger 
labor-initiating signals at the feto-maternal interface (FMi: decidua, 
amniochorion), leading to spontaneous preterm birth (PTB). Testing the 
association between environmental chemical exposure and PTB is difficult due to 
many limitations in vivo or in vitro. Physiological organ-on-chips (OOCs) are 
potential alternatives for studying mechanisms leading to PTB. The presented 
study tested the effect of maternal exposure to cadmium (Cd), an environmental 
toxin, using the FMi-OOC that incorporates maternal decidua cells and three 
different fetal cells (chorion, amnion mesenchymal, and amnion epithelial 
cells). Cd transport through the FMi and its impact on cell cycle, cell death, 
and inflammation were analyzed. Cd treatment resulted in significant cell death 
and a pro-inflammatory environment in the maternal decidua, but had minimal 
effect on the fetal chorion cells, and no effect in the fetal amnion cells 
compared to controls. The maternal response, but lack of fetal response, 
indicates that Cd-mediated adverse effects originate from maternal 
pathophysiology rather than fetal-derived triggers of preterm labor. This study 
demonstrates that the FMi-OOC can indeed predict the response of FMi upon 
exposure to chemicals, opening the possibility for using OOC models for 
environmental toxin screens.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126759
PMCID: PMC8595660
PMID: 34391970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: A patent 
application has been filed regarding the feto-maternal interface organ-chip 
device. Declaration of interests The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.