1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2021 Nov;190(1):19-38. doi:
10.1007/s10549-021-06356-8.  Epub 2021 Aug 16.

Turning scientific serendipity into discoveries in breast cancer research and 
treatment: a tale of PhD students and a 50-year roaming tamoxifen team.

Jordan VC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Unit 1354, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. 
vcjordan@mdanderson.org.

PURPOSE: This retrospective, about a single "mobile" laboratory in six locations 
on two continents, is intended as a case study in discovery for trainees and 
junior faculty in the medical sciences. Your knowledge of your topic is 
necessary to expect the unexpected.
HISTORICAL METHOD: In 1972, there was no tamoxifen, only ICI 46, 474, a 
non-steroidal anti-estrogen with little chance of clinical development. No one 
would ever be foolish enough to predict that the medicine, 20 years later, would 
achieve legendary status as the first targeted treatment for breast cancer, and 
millions of women would benefit from long-term adjuvant tamoxifen therapy. The 
secret of tamoxifen's success was a translational research strategy proposed in 
the mid 1970's. This strategy was to treat only patients with estrogen receptor 
(ER)-positive breast cancer and deploy 5 or more years of adjuvant tamoxifen 
therapy to prevent recurrence. Additionally, tamoxifen prevented mammary cancer 
in animals. Could the medicine prevent breast cancer in women?
RESULTS: Tamoxifen and the failed breast cancer drug raloxifene became the first 
selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs): a new drug group, discovered at 
the University of Wisconsin, Comprehensive Cancer Center. Serendipity can play a 
fundamental role in discovery, but there must be a rigorous preparation for the 
investigator to appreciate the possibility of a pending discovery. This article 
follows the unanticipated discoveries when PhD students "get the wrong answer." 
The secret of success of my six Tamoxifen Teams was their technical excellence 
to create models, to decipher mechanisms, that drove the development of new 
medicines. Discoveries are listed that either changed women's health or allowed 
an understanding of originally opaque mechanisms of action of potential 
therapies. These advances in women's health were supported entirely by 
government-sponsored peer-reviewed funding and major philanthropy from the Lynn 
Sage Breast Cancer Foundation, the Avon Foundation, and the Susan G. Komen 
Breast Cancer Foundation. The resulting lives saved or extended, families aided 
in a time of crisis and the injection of billions of dollars into national 
economies by drug development, is proof of the value of Federal or philanthropic 
investment into unencumbered research aimed at saving millions of lives.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-021-06356-8
PMCID: PMC8557169
PMID: 34398352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that he has no conflicts of 
interest.