1. mBio. 2021 Aug 31;12(4):e0184921. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01849-21. Epub 2021 Aug
17.

Hofbauer Cells Spread Listeria monocytogenes among Placental Cells and Undergo 
Pro-Inflammatory Reprogramming while Retaining Production of Tolerogenic 
Factors.

Azari S(1)(2)(3), Johnson LJ(1)(2)(3), Webb A(4), Kozlowski SM(2), Zhang X(4), 
Rood K(5), Amer A(1)(2)(3), Seveau S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State Universitygrid.261331.4, Columbus, 
Ohio, USA.
(2)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State 
Universitygrid.261331.4, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(3)Infectious Disease Institute, The Ohio State Universitygrid.261331.4, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State Universitygrid.261331.4, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, 
The Ohio State Universitygrid.261331.4, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Pregnant women are highly susceptible to infection by the bacterial pathogen 
Listeria monocytogenes, leading to miscarriage, premature birth, and neonatal 
infection. L. monocytogenes is thought to breach the placental barrier by 
infecting trophoblasts at the maternal/fetal interface. However, the fate of L. 
monocytogenes within chorionic villi and how infection reaches the fetus are 
unsettled. Hofbauer cells (HBCs) are fetal placental macrophages and the only 
leukocytes residing in healthy chorionic villi, forming a last immune barrier 
protecting fetal blood from infection. Little is known about the HBCs' 
antimicrobial responses to pathogens. Here, we studied L. monocytogenes 
interaction with human primary HBCs. Remarkably, despite their M2 
anti-inflammatory phenotype at basal state, HBCs phagocytose and kill 
non-pathogenic bacteria like Listeria innocua and display low susceptibility to 
infection by L. monocytogenes. However, L. monocytogenes can exploit HBCs to 
spread to surrounding placental cells. Transcriptomic analyses by RNA sequencing 
revealed that HBCs undergo pro-inflammatory reprogramming upon L. monocytogenes 
infection, similarly to macrophages stimulated by the potent M1-polarizing 
agents lipopolysaccharide (LPS)/interferon gamma (IFN-Î³). Infected HBCs also 
express pro-inflammatory chemokines known to promote placental infiltration by 
maternal leukocytes. However, HBCs maintain the expression of a collection of 
tolerogenic genes and secretion of tolerogenic cytokines, consistent with their 
tissue homeostatic role in prevention of fetal rejection. In conclusion, we 
propose a previously unrecognized model in which HBCs promote the spreading of 
L. monocytogenes among placental cells and transition to a pro-inflammatory 
state likely to favor innate immune responses, while maintaining the expression 
of tolerogenic factors known to prevent maternal anti-fetal adaptive immunity. 
IMPORTANCE Infection of the placental/fetal unit by the facultative 
intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes results in severe pregnancy 
complications. Hofbauer cells (HBCs) are fetal macrophages that play homeostatic 
anti-inflammatory functions in healthy placentas. HBCs are located in chorionic 
villi between the two cell barriers that protect fetal blood from infection: 
trophoblast cells at the maternal interface (in contact with maternal blood), 
and fetal endothelial cells at the fetal interface (in contact with fetal 
blood). As the only leukocytes residing in chorionic villi, HBCs form a critical 
immune barrier protecting the fetus from infection. Here, we show that although 
HBCs display low susceptibility to L. monocytogenes, the bacterium still 
replicates intracellularly and can spread to other placental and fetal cells. We 
propose that HBCs are permissive to L. monocytogenes transplacental propagation 
and can repolarize toward a pro-inflammatory phenotype upon infection. However, 
consistent with their placental homeostatic functions, repolarized HBCs maintain 
the expression of tolerogenic factors known to prevent maternal anti-fetal 
adaptive immunity, at least at early stages of infection.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01849-21
PMCID: PMC8406333
PMID: 34399615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]