1. Hemoglobin. 2021 Jul;45(4):225-227. doi: 10.1080/03630269.2021.1965620. Epub 
2021 Aug 16.

IVS-II-16 (G>C) (HBB: c.315+16G>C) or IVS-II-666 (C>T) (HBB: c.316-185C>T) 
Mutations Trigger an Hb S (HBB: c.20A>T)/β(+)-Thalassemia Phenotype in an Hb S 
Trait Patient.

Uçucu S(1), Karabıyık T(2), Azik FM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Muğla Public Health Care Laboratory, 
Muğla, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Bursa City Hospital, Bursa, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Muğla Sıtkı 
Koçman University, Muğla, Turkey.

Sickle cell trait is a medical condition caused by the presence of both mutant 
Hb S (HBB: c.20A>T) and normal Hb A alleles. Although sickle cell trait is 
typically considered to be asymptomatic and benign, genetic modifiers and 
mutations can lead to severe clinical complications. In this study, the possible 
pathogenicity of the IVS-II-16 (G>C) (HBB: c.315+16G>C) and IVS-II-666 (C>T) 
(HBB: c.316-185C>T) mutations, which are considered to be neutral polymorphisms, 
and the association between the Hb S mutation are presented. To the best of our 
knowledge, these polymorphisms have not been previously reported in any sickle 
cell trait patient, and no relevant studies have been conducted. We recently 
studied a 40-year-old woman (proband), diagnosed to be an Hb S/β-thalassemia 
(β-thal) carrier. β-Globin mutations were analyzed using a DNA sequencer based 
on the Sanger method. The HbVar and ClinVar databases show IVS-II-16 and 
IVS-II-666 to be intronic mutations. However, statements in these data banks 
contradict our findings. In the present study, a transfusion-dependent Hb S 
patient, behaving as an Hb S/β-thal case due to these mutations, was reported. 
These mutations have not been previously reported in an Hb S patient. Although 
the IVS-II-16 and IVS-II-666 mutations were previously reported as benign, they 
converted the Hb S phenotype to transfusion-dependent Hb S/β-thal when combined 
with Hb S. In this regard, IVS-II-16 and IVS-II-666 mutations may not be 
innocent, as previously thought.

DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2021.1965620
PMID: 34396882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]