1. Cell Rep. 2021 Aug 17;36(7):109551. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109551.

The histone chaperone Anp32e regulates memory formation, transcription, and 
dendritic morphology by regulating steady-state H2A.Z binding in neurons.

Stefanelli G(1), Makowski CE(2), Brimble MA(3), Hall M(1), Reda A(4), Creighton 
SD(1), Leonetti AM(4), McLean TAB(4), Zakaria JM(1), Baumbach J(1), Greer CB(5), 
Davidoff AM(3), Walters BJ(6), Murphy PJ(7), Zovkic IB(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, ON 
L5L 1C6, Canada.
(2)Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, USA.
(4)Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 
3G3, Canada.
(5)Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, ON L5L 
1C6, Canada.
(7)Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, NY 14642, USA. Electronic address: patrick_murphy@urmc.rochester.edu.
(8)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, ON 
L5L 1C6, Canada; Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5S 3G3, Canada. Electronic address: iva.zovkic@utoronto.ca.

Rapid removal of histone H2A.Z from neuronal chromatin is a key step in 
learning-induced gene expression and memory formation, but mechanisms underlying 
learning-induced H2A.Z removal are unclear. Anp32e was recently identified as an 
H2A.Z-specific histone chaperone that removes H2A.Z from nucleosomes in dividing 
cells, but its role in non-dividing neurons is unclear. Moreover, prior studies 
investigated Anp32e function under steady-state rather than stimulus-induced 
conditions. Here, we show that Anp32e regulates H2A.Z binding in neurons under 
steady-state conditions, with lesser impact on stimulus-induced H2A.Z removal. 
Functionally, Anp32e depletion leads to H2A.Z-dependent impairment in 
transcription and dendritic arborization in cultured hippocampal neurons, as 
well as impaired recall of contextual fear memory and transcriptional 
regulation. Together, these data indicate that Anp32e regulates behavioral and 
morphological outcomes by preventing H2A.Z accumulation in chromatin rather than 
by regulating activity-mediated H2A.Z dynamics.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109551
PMCID: PMC8422973
PMID: 34407406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.