1. Biomaterials. 2021 Sep;276:121033. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.121033.
Epub  2021 Jul 30.

Bioengineered optogenetic model of human neuromuscular junction.

Vila OF(1), Chavez M(2), Ma SP(2), Yeager K(2), Zholudeva LV(3), Colón-Mercado 
JM(4), Qu Y(2), Nash TR(2), Lai C(3), Feliciano CM(5), Carter M(3), Kamm RD(6), 
Judge LM(5), Conklin BR(3), Ward ME(4), McDevitt TC(3), Vunjak-Novakovic G(7).

Author information:
(1)Columbia University, 622 W 168th St, New York, NY, 10032, USA; Gladstone 
Institutes, 1650 Owens St, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA. Electronic address: 
olaia.vila@gladstone.ucsf.edu.
(2)Columbia University, 622 W 168th St, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(3)Gladstone Institutes, 1650 Owens St, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA.
(4)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD, 
20892, USA.
(5)Gladstone Institutes, 1650 Owens St, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA; 
Department of Pediatrics, UCSF, 550 16th St, Floor 5, San Francisco, CA, 94143, 
USA.
(6)Department of Mechanical Engineering and Biological Engineering, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA, 02139, USA.
(7)Columbia University, 622 W 168th St, New York, NY, 10032, USA. Electronic 
address: gv2131@columbia.edu.

Functional human tissues engineered from patient-specific induced pluripotent 
stem cells (hiPSCs) hold great promise for investigating the progression, 
mechanisms, and treatment of musculoskeletal diseases in a controlled and 
systematic manner. For example, bioengineered models of innervated human 
skeletal muscle could be used to identify novel therapeutic targets and 
treatments for patients with complex central and peripheral nervous system 
disorders. There is a need to develop standardized and objective quantitative 
methods for engineering and using these complex tissues, in order increase their 
robustness, reproducibility, and predictiveness across users. Here we describe a 
standardized method for engineering an isogenic, patient specific human 
neuromuscular junction (NMJ) that allows for automated quantification of NMJ 
function to diagnose disease using a small sample of blood serum and evaluate 
new therapeutic modalities. By combining tissue engineering, optogenetics, 
microfabrication, optoelectronics and video processing, we created a novel 
platform for the precise investigation of the development and degeneration of 
human NMJ. We demonstrate the utility of this platform for the detection and 
diagnosis of myasthenia gravis, an antibody-mediated autoimmune disease that 
disrupts the NMJ function.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.121033
PMCID: PMC8439334
PMID: 34403849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest. Declaration of interests The authors declare the following 
financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential 
competing interests: GVN is a co-founder of Tara Biosystems, a Columbia 
University start-up that is commercializing “heart on a chip” platform for drug 
discovery. She holds equity, serves on the Board of Directors, is an inventor on 
licensed by Tara, and has received financial compensation.