1. Front Neurosci. 2021 Aug 2;15:705160. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.705160. 
eCollection 2021.

A Neuroprotective Locus Modulates Ischemic Stroke Infarction Independent of 
Collateral Vessel Anatomy.

Lee HK(1), Wetzel-Strong SE(1), Aylor DL(2), Marchuk DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC, United States.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC, United States.

Although studies with inbred strains of mice have shown that infarct size is 
largely determined by the extent of collateral vessel connections between 
arteries in the brain that enable reperfusion of the ischemic territory, we have 
identified strain pairs that do not vary in this vascular phenotype, but which 
nonetheless exhibit large differences in infarct size. In this study we 
performed quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping in mice from an intercross 
between two such strains, WSB/EiJ (WSB) and C57BL/6J (B6). This QTL mapping 
revealed only one neuroprotective locus on Chromosome 8 (Chr 8) that 
co-localizes with a neuroprotective locus we mapped previously from F2 progeny 
between C3H/HeJ (C3H) and B6. The allele-specific phenotypic effect on infarct 
volume at the genetic region identified by these two independent mappings was in 
the opposite direction of the parental strain phenotype; namely, the B6 allele 
conferred increased susceptibility to ischemic infarction. Through two 
reciprocal congenic mouse lines with either the C3H or B6 background at the Chr 
8 locus, we verified the neuroprotective effects of this genetic region that 
modulates infarct volume without any effect on the collateral vasculature. 
Additionally, we surveyed non-synonymous coding SNPs and performed 
RNA-sequencing analysis to identify potential candidate genes within the genetic 
interval. Through these approaches, we suggest new genes for future mechanistic 
studies of infarction following ischemic stroke, which may represent novel 
gene/protein targets for therapeutic development.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lee, Wetzel-Strong, Aylor and Marchuk.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.705160
PMCID: PMC8366065
PMID: 34408625

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.