1. J Cancer. 2021 Jul 13;12(18):5413-5422. doi: 10.7150/jca.60885. eCollection 
2021.

PSD3 is an oncogene that promotes proliferation, migration, invasion, and G1/S 
transition while inhibits apoptotic in papillary thyroid cancer.

Jin L(1), Zheng D(1), Bhandari A(1), Chen D(1), Xia E(1), Guan Y(1), Wen J(1), 
Wang O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, PR China.

Background: The morbidity of thyroid cancer is gradually increasing, meanwhile, 
the average age of the morbidity population also becomes younger. Mechanisms 
genomic variations serve an important function for the pathogenesis of many 
cancer types. Pleckstrin and sec7 domain-containing 3 (PSD3), also known as 
EFA6R, was shown to be associated with some cancers such as acute myeloid 
leukemia, breast cancer metastasis, and astrocytoma. But it was unknown that 
whether PSD3 took effect and how did it work in thyroid cancer. Methods: We 
guessed that PSD3 might play an important role in thyroid cancer by consulting 
previous literature. Then, we analyzed the level of PSD3 expression in thyroid 
malignancy and the connection with clinical manifestation in The Cancer Genome 
Atlas (TCGA). And RNA extraction, reverse transcription, and real-time 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qRt-PCR) of 40 pairs of local samples 
were done to verify the result of TCGA. Then, PSD3 was knocked down by small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) for flowing functional experiments. Results: 
Bioinformatics and qRt-PCR analysis shown PSD3 was overexpressed in papillary 
thyroid cancer (PTC) and connected with the histological type (P=0.009) and risk 
of lymph node metastasis (P=0.016). In vitro assays, we confirmed that 
down-regulation PSD3 could not only suppress the cell proliferation, colony 
formation, cell migration, cell invasion, and G1/S cell cycle transition but 
also promote apoptosis in PTC cells. Conclusion: PSD3 promotes proliferation, 
migration, invasion, and G1/S transition while inhibits apoptotic in PTC and a 
possible biomarker in PTC.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/jca.60885
PMCID: PMC8364633
PMID: 34405004

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.