1. Int J Oncol. 2021 Oct;59(4):77. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2021.5257. Epub 2021 Aug 20.

Sequestosome 1/p62: A multitasker in the regulation of malignant tumor 
aggression (Review).

Tang J(1), Li Y(2), Xia S(3)(4), Li J(1), Yang Q(1), Ding K(5)(6), Zhang 
H(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and 
Intervention, Ministry of Education, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School 
of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang 310000, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Research 
Unit of Intelligence Classification of Tumor Pathology and Precision Therapy, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, P.R. China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Disease Proteomics of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
310058, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Colorectal Surgery and Oncology, Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Prevention and Intervention, Ministry of Education, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, 
P.R. China
(6)Cancer Center of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, P.R. China

Sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1)/p62 is an adapter protein mainly involved in the 
transportation, degradation and destruction of various proteins that cooperates 
with components of autophagy and the ubiquitin‑proteasome degradation pathway. 
Numerous studies have shown that SQSTM1/p62 functions at multiple levels, 
including involvement in genetic stability or modification, post‑transcriptional 
regulation and protein function. As a result, SQSTM1/p62 is a versatile protein 
that is a critical core regulator of tumor cell genetic stability, autophagy, 
apoptosis and other forms of cell death, malignant growth, proliferation, 
migration, invasion, metastasis and chemoradiotherapeutic response, and an 
indicator of patient prognosis. SQSTM1/p62 regulates these processes via its 
distinct molecular structure, through which it participates in a variety of 
activating or inactivating tumor‑related and tumor microenvironment‑related 
signaling pathways, particularly positive feedback loops and 
epithelial‑mesenchymal transition‑related pathways. Therefore, functioning as a 
proto‑oncogene or tumor suppressor gene in various types of cancer and 
tumor‑associated microenvironments, SQSTM1/p62 is capable of promoting or 
retarding malignant tumor aggression, giving rise to immeasurable effects on 
tumor occurrence and development, and on patient treatment and prognosis.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2021.5257
PMCID: PMC8425587
PMID: 34414460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.