1. Sci Rep. 2021 Aug 19;11(1):16806. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-94708-1.

AZP2006, a new promising treatment for Alzheimer's and related diseases.

Callizot N(1)(2), Estrella C(3), Burlet S(3), Henriques A(4), Brantis C(3), 
Barrier M(3), Campanari ML(4), Verwaerde P(3).

Author information:
(1)Alzprotect, Parc Eurasanté, 85C rue Nelson Mandela, 59120, Loos, France. 
n.callizot@alzprotect.com.
(2)Neuro-Sys, 410 Chemin Départemental 60, 13120, Gardanne, France. 
n.callizot@alzprotect.com.
(3)Alzprotect, Parc Eurasanté, 85C rue Nelson Mandela, 59120, Loos, France.
(4)Neuro-Sys, 410 Chemin Départemental 60, 13120, Gardanne, France.

Progranulin (PGRN) is a protein with multiple functions including the regulation 
of neuroinflammation, neuronal survival, neurite and synapsis growth. Although 
the mechanisms of action of PGRN are currently unknown, its potential 
therapeutic application in treating neurodegenerative diseases is huge. Thus, 
strategies to increase PGRN levels in patients could provide an effective 
treatment. In the present study, we investigated the effects of AZP2006, a 
lysotropic molecule now in phase 2a clinical trial in Progressive Supranuclear 
Palsy patients, for its ability to increase PGRN level and promote 
neuroprotection. We showed for the first time the in vitro and in vivo 
neuroprotective effects of AZP2006 in neurons injured with Aβ1-42 and in two 
different pathological animal models of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and aging. 
Thus, the chronic treatment with AZP2006 was shown to reduce the loss of central 
synapses and neurons but also to dramatically decrease the massive 
neuroinflammation associated with the animal pathology. A deeper investigation 
showed that the beneficial effects of AZP2006 were associated with PGRN 
production. Also, AZP2006 binds to PSAP (the cofactor of PGRN) and inhibits TLR9 
receptors normally responsible for proinflammation when activated. Altogether, 
these results showed the high potential of AZP2006 as a new putative treatment 
for AD and related diseases.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-94708-1
PMCID: PMC8376949
PMID: 34413330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.