1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2021 Aug 20:rs.3.rs-778537. doi:
10.21203/rs.3.rs-778537/v1.

Advances in Purification of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Ectodomain Protein Using 
High-Throughput Screening and Non-Affinity Methods.

Cibelli NL(1), Arias GF(1), Figur ML(1), Khayat SS(1), Leach KM(1), Loukinov 
I(1), Gulla KC(1), Gowetski DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Update in
    Sci Rep. 2022 Mar 15;12(1):4458. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-07485-w.

The spike (S) glycoprotein of the pandemic virus, SARS-CoV-2, is a critically 
important target of vaccine design and therapeutic development. A high-yield, 
scalable, cGMP-compliant downstream process for the stabilized, soluble, 
native-like S protein ectodomain is necessary to meet the extensive material 
requirements for ongoing research and development. As of June 2021, S proteins 
have exclusively been purified using difficult-to-scale, low-yield methodologies 
such as affinity and size-exclusion chromatography. Herein we present the first 
known non-affinity purification method for two S constructs, S_dF_2P and 
HexaPro, expressed in the mammalian cell line, CHO-DG44. A high-throughput resin 
screen on the Tecan Freedom EVO200 automated bioprocess workstation led to 
identification of ion exchange resins as viable purification steps. The 
chromatographic unit operations along with industry-standard methodologies for 
viral clearances, low pH treatment and 20 nm filtration, were assessed for 
feasibility. The developed process was applied to purify HexaPro from a CHO-DG44 
stable pool harvest and yielded the highest yet reported amount of pure S 
protein. Our results demonstrate that commercially available chromatography 
resins are suitable for cGMP manufacturing of SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein 
constructs. We anticipate our results will provide a blueprint for worldwide 
biopharmaceutical production laboratories, as well as a starting point for 
process intensification.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-778537/v1
PMCID: PMC8382130
PMID: 34426807