1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Aug 4;8:659119. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.659119. 
eCollection 2021.

Case Report: A Novel Variant c.2262+3A>T of the SCN5A Gene Results in Intron 
Retention Associated With Incessant Ventricular Tachycardias.

Yin J(1), Zhou J(1), Chen J(1), Xu T(1), Zhang Z(1), Zhang H(1), Yuan C(1), 
Cheng X(1), Qin Y(1), Zheng B(2), Wang C(2), Yang S(1), Jia Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)Nanjing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.

Objective: Voltage-gated sodium channel Nav1.5 encoded by the SCN5A gene plays 
crucial roles in cardiac electrophysiology. Previous genetic studies have shown 
that mutations in SCN5A are associated with multiple inherited cardiac 
arrhythmias. Here, we investigated the molecular defect in a Chinese boy with 
clinical manifestations of arrhythmias. Methods: Gene variations were screened 
using whole-exome sequencing and validated by direct Sanger sequencing. A 
minigene assay and reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) were performed to confirm 
the effects of splice variants in vitro. Western blot analysis was carried out 
to determine whether the c.2262+3A>T variant produced a truncated protein. 
Results: By genetic analysis, we identified a novel splice variant c.2262+3A>T 
in SCN5A gene in a Chinese boy with incessant ventricular tachycardias (VT). 
This variant was predicted to activate a new cryptic splice donor site and was 
identified by in silico analysis. The variant retained 79 bp at the 5' end of 
intron 14 in the mature mRNA. Furthermore, the mutant transcript that created a 
premature stop codon at 818 amino acids [p.(R818*)] could be produced as a 
truncated protein. Conclusion: We verified the pathogenic effect of splicing 
variant c.2262+3A>T, which disturbed the normal mRNA splicing and caused a 
truncated protein, suggesting that splice variants play an important role in the 
molecular basis of early onset incessant ventricular tachycardias, and careful 
molecular profiling of these patients will be essential for future effective 
personalized treatment options.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yin, Zhou, Chen, Xu, Zhang, Zhang, Yuan, Cheng, Qin, Zheng, 
Wang, Yang and Jia.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.659119
PMCID: PMC8371685
PMID: 34422849

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.