1. Trials. 2021 Aug 23;22(1):561. doi: 10.1186/s13063-021-05538-5.

Accelerated first-in-human clinical trial of EIDD-2801/MK-4482 (molnupiravir), a 
ribonucleoside analog with potent antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2.

Holman W(1), Holman W(1), McIntosh S(1), Painter W(2), Painter G(2), Bush J(3), 
Cohen O(4).

Author information:
(1)Ridgeback Biotherapeutics, 3480 Main Highway, Unit 402, Miami, FL, 33133, 
USA.
(2)Emory University School of Medicine, Drug Innovations at Emory (DRIVE) and 
Emory Institute of Drug Development (EIDD), 954 Gatewood Road, Atlanta, GA, 
30329, USA.
(3)Covance Clinical Research Unit Ltd., Springfield House, Hyde Street, Leeds, 
LS2 9LH, UK.
(4)Covance, Inc., 6 Drive, Research Triangle Park, Moore, NC, 27709, USA. 
oren.cohen@covance.com.

A recently published article described the safety, tolerability, and 
pharmacokinetic profile of molnupiravir (Painter et al. 2021), a novel antiviral 
agent with potent activity against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). 
Here, we report an unprecedented collaboration between sponsor, contract 
research organization (CRO), and regulatory authorities that enabled accelerated 
generation of these phase I data, including administration of the first-in-human 
(FIH) dose of molnupiravir within 5 days of receiving regulatory approval in the 
United Kingdom (UK). Single and multiple ascending dose (SAD and MAD, 
respectively) cohorts were dosed in randomized, double-blind, and 
placebo-controlled fashion, with a 6:2 active-to-placebo ratio in each cohort. A 
food-effect (FE) cohort included 10 subjects who were randomized to receive drug 
in the fasted or fed state followed by the fed or fasted state to complete a fed 
and fasted sequence for each subject. Dose escalation decisions were accelerated 
and MAD cohorts were initiated prior to completion of all SAD cohorts with the 
provision that the total daily dose in a MAD cohort would not exceed a dose 
proven to be safe and well-tolerated in a SAD cohort. Dosing in healthy 
volunteers was completed for eight single ascending dose (SAD) cohorts, seven 
multiple ascending dose (MAD) cohorts, and one food-effect (FE) cohort within 
approximately 16 weeks of initial protocol submission to the Research Ethics 
Committee (REC) and Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). 
Working to standard industry timelines, the FIH study would have taken 
approximately 46 weeks to complete and 33 weeks to enable phase 2 dosing. Data 
from this study supported submission of a phase 2/3 clinical trial protocol to 
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) within 8 weeks of initial protocol 
submission, with FDA comments permitting phase 2 study initiation within two 
additional weeks. In the setting of a global pandemic, this model of 
collaboration allows for accelerated generation of clinical data compared to 
standard processes, without compromising safety.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-021-05538-5
PMCID: PMC8380870
PMID: 34425873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Wendy Holman, Wayne Homan, Stacy McIntosh, and 
Wendy Painter are employees of Ridgeback Biotherapeutics, which funded the 
study. George Painter holds a number of patents that are relevant to EIDD-2801 
(molnupiravir)—see separately submitted ICMJE form. Jim Bush and Oren Cohen are 
employees of Covance, the CRO chosen by Ridgeback to assist in the execution of 
the study described.