1. Biomed Res Int. 2021 Aug 13;2021:7588711. doi: 10.1155/2021/7588711.
eCollection  2021.

LC-HRMS Profiling and Antidiabetic, Antioxidant, and Antibacterial Activities of 
Acacia catechu (L.f.) Willd.

Aryal B(1), Adhikari B(1), Aryal N(2), Bhattarai BR(1), Khadayat K(1), Parajuli 
N(1).

Author information:
(1)Biological Chemistry Lab, Central Department of Chemistry, Tribhuvan 
University, Kirtipur, Kathmandu, Nepal.
(2)Pharmaceutical Institute, Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, University of 
Tübingen, Germany.

Acacia catechu (L.f.) Willd is a profoundly used traditional medicinal plant in 
Asia. Previous studies conducted in this plant are more confined to extract 
level. Even though bioassay-based studies indicated the true therapeutic 
potential of this plant, compound annotation was not performed extensively. This 
research is aimed at assessing the bioactivity of different solvent extracts of 
the plant followed by annotation of its phytoconstituents. Liquid chromatography 
equipped with high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) is deployed for the 
identification of secondary metabolites in various crude extracts. On activity 
level, its ethanolic extract showed the highest inhibition towards α-amylase and 
α-glucosidase with an IC50 of 67.8 ± 1 μg/mL and 10.3 ± 0.1 μg/mL respectively, 
inspected through the substrate-based method. On the other hand, the plant 
extract showed an antioxidant activity of 23.76 ± 1.57 μg/mL, measured through 
radical scavenging activity. Similarly, ethyl acetate and aqueous extracts of A. 
catechu showed significant inhibition against Staphylococcus aureus with a zone 
of inhibition (ZoI) of 13 and 14 mm, respectively. With the LC-HRMS-based 
dereplication strategy, we have identified 28 secondary metabolites belonging to 
flavonoid and phenolic categories. Identification of these metabolites from A. 
catechu and its biological implication also support the community-based usage of 
this plant and its medicinal value.

Copyright © 2021 Babita Aryal et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/7588711
PMCID: PMC8380500
PMID: 34435049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest among the 
authors.