1. Biomolecules. 2021 Jul 21;11(8):1067. doi: 10.3390/biom11081067.

Synuclein Family Members Prevent Membrane Damage by Counteracting α-Synuclein 
Aggregation.

Scheibe C(1), Karreman C(2), Schildknecht S(2)(3), Leist M(2), Hauser K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Konstanz, 78457 Konstanz, Germany.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, 78457 Konstanz, Germany.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Albstadt-Sigmaringen University of Applied 
Sciences, 72488 Sigmaringen, Germany.

The 140 amino acid protein α-synuclein (αS) is an intrinsically disordered 
protein (IDP) with various roles and locations in healthy neurons that plays a 
key role in Parkinson's disease (PD). Contact with biomembranes can lead to 
α-helical conformations, but can also act as s seeding event for aggregation and 
a predominant β-sheet conformation. In PD patients, αS is found to aggregate in 
various fibrillary structures, and the shift in aggregation and localization is 
associated with disease progression. Besides full-length αS, several related 
polypeptides are present in neurons. The role of many αS-related proteins in the 
aggregation of αS itself is not fully understood Two of these potential 
aggregation modifiers are the αS splicing variant αS Δexon3 (Δ3) and the paralog 
β-synuclein (βS). Here, polarized ATR-FTIR spectroscopy was used to study the 
membrane interaction of these proteins individually and in various combinations. 
The method allowed a continuous monitoring of both the lipid structure of 
biomimetic membranes and the aggregation state of αS and related proteins. The 
use of polarized light also revealed the orientation of secondary structure 
elements. While αS led to a destruction of the lipid membrane upon 
membrane-catalyzed aggregation, βS and Δ3 aggregated significantly less, and 
they did not harm the membrane. Moreover, the latter proteins reduced the 
membrane damage triggered by αS. There were no major differences in the membrane 
interaction for the different synuclein variants. In combination, these 
observations suggest that the formation of particular protein aggregates is the 
major driving force for αS-driven membrane damage. The misbalance of αS, βS, and 
Δ3 might therefore play a crucial role in neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11081067
PMCID: PMC8392020
PMID: 34439733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.