1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Aug 9;8:676569. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.676569. 
eCollection 2021.

Evolving Perspectives on Innate Immune Mechanisms of IPF.

Ishikawa G(1), Liu A(1), Herzog EL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United 
States.

While epithelial-fibroblast interactions are viewed as the primary drivers of 
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF), evidence gleaned from animal modeling and 
human studies implicates innate immunity as well. To provide perspective on this 
topic, this review synthesizes the available data regarding the complex role of 
innate immunity in IPF. The role of substances present in the fibrotic 
microenvironment including pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) 
derived from invading or commensal microbes, and danger associated molecular 
patterns (DAMPs) derived from injured cells and tissues will be discussed along 
with the proposed contribution of innate immune populations such as macrophages, 
neutrophils, fibrocytes, myeloid suppressor cells, and innate lymphoid cells. 
Each component will be considered in the context of its relationship to 
environmental and genetic factors, disease outcomes, and potential therapies. We 
conclude with discussion of unanswered questions and opportunities for future 
study in this area.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ishikawa, Liu and Herzog.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.676569
PMCID: PMC8381017
PMID: 34434962

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.