1. PeerJ Comput Sci. 2021 Aug 3;7:e658. doi: 10.7717/peerj-cs.658. eCollection 
2021.

Digital security vulnerabilities and threats implications for financial 
institutions deploying digital technology platforms and application: FMEA and 
FTOPSIS analysis.

Edu AS(1), Agoyi M(2), Agozie D(1).

Author information:
(1)Management Information Systems, Cyprus International University, Nicosai, 
Cyprus.
(2)Information Technology, Cyprus International University, Nicosia, Cyprus.

Digital disruptions have led to the integration of applications, platforms, and 
infrastructure. They assist in business operations, promoting open digital 
collaborations, and perhaps even the integration of the Internet of Things 
(IoTs), Big Data Analytics, and Cloud Computing to support data sourcing, data 
analytics, and storage synchronously on a single platform. Notwithstanding the 
benefits derived from digital technology integration (including IoTs, Big Data 
Analytics, and Cloud Computing), digital vulnerabilities and threats have become 
a more significant concern for users. We addressed these challenges from an 
information systems perspective and have noted that more research is needed 
identifying potential vulnerabilities and threats affecting the integration of 
IoTs, BDA and CC for data management. We conducted a step-by-step analysis of 
the potential vulnerabilities and threats affecting the integration of IoTs, Big 
Data Analytics, and Cloud Computing for data management. We combined 
multi-dimensional analysis, Failure Mode Effect Analysis, and Fuzzy Technique 
for Order of Preference by Similarity for Ideal Solution to evaluate and rank 
the potential vulnerabilities and threats. We surveyed 234 security experts from 
the banking industry with adequate knowledge in IoTs, Big Data Analytics, and 
Cloud Computing. Based on the closeness of the coefficients, we determined that 
insufficient use of backup electric generators, firewall protection failures, 
and no information security audits are high-ranking vulnerabilities and threats 
affecting integration. This study is an extension of discussions on the 
integration of digital applications and platforms for data management and the 
pervasive vulnerabilities and threats arising from that. A detailed review and 
classification of these threats and vulnerabilities are vital for sustaining 
businesses' digital integration.

Â©2021 Edu et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.658
PMCID: PMC8356653
PMID: 34435101

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.