1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Aug 23;13(16):4241. doi: 10.3390/cancers13164241.

Helicobacter pylori CagA Induces Cortactin Y-470 Phosphorylation-Dependent 
Gastric Epithelial Cell Scattering via Abl, Vav2 and Rac1 Activation.

Tegtmeyer N(1), Harrer A(1), Rottner K(2)(3), Backert S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Division of Microbiology, Friedrich-Alexander 
University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstr. 5, 91058 Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 38124 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(3)Division of Molecular Cell Biology, Zoological Institute, Technische 
Universit√§t Braunschweig, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany.

The pathogen Helicobacter pylori is the first reported bacterial type-1 
carcinogen playing a role in the development of human malignancies, including 
gastric adenocarcinoma. Cancer cell motility is an important process in this 
scenario, however, the molecular mechanisms are still not fully understood. 
Here, we demonstrate that H. pylori subverts the actin-binding protein cortactin 
through its type-IV secretion system and injected oncoprotein CagA, e.g., by 
inducing tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin at Y-470, which triggers gastric 
epithelial cell scattering and motility. During infection of AGS cells, 
cortactin was discovered to undergo tyrosine dephosphorylation at residues Y-421 
and Y-486, which is mediated through inactivation of Src kinase. However, H. 
pylori also profoundly activates tyrosine kinase Abl, which simultaneously 
phosphorylates cortactin at Y-470. Phosphorylated cortactin interacts with the 
SH2-domain of Vav2, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the Rho-family of 
GTPases. The cortactin/Vav2 complex then stimulates a previously unrecognized 
activation cascade including the small GTPase Rac1, to effect actin 
rearrangements and cell scattering. We hypothesize that injected CagA targets 
cortactin to locally open the gastric epithelium in order to get access to 
certain nutrients. This may disturb the cellular barrier functions, likely 
contributing to the induction of cell motility, which is important in gastric 
cancer development.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13164241
PMCID: PMC8391897
PMID: 34439396

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.