1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Aug 23;12(8):1292. doi: 10.3390/genes12081292.

Expression of Piwi, MMP, TIMP, and Sox during Gut Regeneration in Holothurian 
Eupentacta fraudatrix (Holothuroidea, Dendrochirotida).

Dolmatov IY(1), Kalacheva NV(1), Tkacheva ES(1), Shulga AP(1), Zavalnaya EG(1), 
Shamshurina EV(1), Girich AS(1), Boyko AV(1), Eliseikina MG(1).

Author information:
(1)A.V. Zhirmunsky National Scientific Center of Marine Biology, Far Eastern 
Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences, Palchevsky 17, 690041 Vladivostok, Russia.

Mesodermal cells of holothurian Eupentacta fraudatrix can transdifferentiate 
into enterocytes during the regeneration of the digestive system. In this study, 
we investigated the expression of several genes involved in gut regeneration in 
E. fraudatrix. Moreover, the localization of progenitor cells of coelomocytes, 
juvenile cells, and their participation in the formation of the luminal 
epithelium of the digestive tube were studied. It was shown that Piwi-positive 
cells were not involved in the formation of the luminal epithelium of the 
digestive tube. Ef-72 kDa type IV collagenase and Ef-MMP16 had an individual 
expression profile and possibly different functions. The Ef-tensilin3 gene 
exhibited the highest expression and indicates its potential role in 
regeneration. Ef-Sox9/10 and Ef-Sox17 in E. fraudatrix may participate in the 
mechanism of transdifferentiation of coelomic epithelial cells. Their 
transcripts mark the cells that plunge into the connective tissue of the gut 
anlage and give rise to enterocytes. Ef-Sox9/10 probably controls the switching 
of mesodermal cells to the enterocyte phenotype, while Ef-Sox17 may be involved 
in the regulation of the initial stages of transdifferentiation.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12081292
PMCID: PMC8391186
PMID: 34440466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of the data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to publish the results.