1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Aug 11;12(8):1235. doi: 10.3390/genes12081235.

QTL Genetic Mapping Study for Traits Affecting Meal Quality in Winter Oilseed 
Rape (Brassica Napus L.).

Gacek K(1), Bayer PE(2), Anderson R(2), Severn-Ellis AA(2), Wolko J(1), 
Łopatyńska A(1), Matuszczak M(1), Bocianowski J(3), Edwards D(2), Batley J(2).

Author information:
(1)Poznan Research Centre, Department of Genetics and Breeding of Oilseed Crop, 
Plant Breeding and Acclimatization Institute-National Research Institute, 60-479 
Poznań, Poland.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA 
6009, Australia.
(3)Department of Mathematical and Statistical Methods, Poznań University of Life 
Sciences, 60-637 Poznań, Poland.

Rapeseed (Brassica napus L.) meal is an important source of protein, but the 
presence of anti-nutritional compounds, such as fibre and glucosinolates, still 
limits its use as a livestock feed. Understanding the genetic basis of seed 
fibre biosynthesis would help to manipulate its content in seeds of oilseed 
rape. Here, we applied high-resolution skim genotyping by sequencing (SkimGBS) 
and characterised 187,835 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers across a 
mapping population subsequently used for a genetic mapping study (R/qtl). This 
approach allowed the identification of 11 stable QTL related to seed quality 
traits and led to the identification of potential functional genes underlying 
these traits. Among these, key genes with a known role in carbohydrate metabolic 
process, cell wall, lignin, and flavonoid biosynthesis, including cellulase GH5, 
TT10/LAC15, TT4, and SUC2, were found. This study furthers the understanding of 
the molecular mechanisms underlying seed fibre content and provides new markers 
for molecular breeding in B. napus.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12081235
PMCID: PMC8394057
PMID: 34440409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.