1. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2021 Sep;26(3):221-226. doi: 
10.1007/s10911-021-09498-z. Epub 2021 Aug 26.

Twelfth Annual ENBDC Workshop: Methods in Mammary Gland Biology and Breast 
Cancer.

Charifou E(1), Traustadottir GA(2), Bentires-Alj M(3), Howard B(4), Van 
Keymeulen A(5).

Author information:
(1)Cellular Plasticity and Disease Modeling, Department of Developmental & Stem 
Cell Biology, CNRS UMR3738 - Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75015, Paris, 
France.
(2)Stem Cell Research Unit, Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, School 
of Health Sciences, Biomedical Center, University of Iceland, Reykjavík, 
Iceland.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, University Hospital Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(4)The Breast Cancer Now Toby Robins Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer 
Research, London, UK.
(5)Laboratory of Stem Cells and Cancer, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), 
Brussels, Belgium. Alexandra.van.keymeulen@ulb.be.

The twelfth annual workshop of the European Network for Breast Development and 
Cancer focused on methods in mammary gland biology and breast cancer, was 
scheduled to take place on March 26-28, 2020, in Weggis, Switzerland. Due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic, the meeting was rescheduled twice and eventually happened as 
a virtual meeting on April 22 and 23, 2021. The main topics of the meeting were 
branching and development of the mammary gland, tumor microenvironment, 
circulating tumor cells, tumor dormancy and breast cancer metastasis. Novel and 
unpublished findings related to these topics were presented, with a particular 
focus on the methods used to obtain them. Virtual poster sessions were a 
success, with many constructive and fruitful interactions between researchers 
and covered many areas of mammary gland biology and breast cancer.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10911-021-09498-z
PMCID: PMC8390087
PMID: 34448098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]