1. Foods. 2021 Jul 30;10(8):1769. doi: 10.3390/foods10081769.

Effect of Disclosed Information on Product Liking, Emotional Profile, and 
Purchase Intent: A Case of Chocolate Brownies Containing Edible-Cricket Protein.

Gurdian CE(1), Torrico DD(2), Li B(3), Tuuri G(1), Prinyawiwatkul W(1).

Author information:
(1)Agricultural Center, School of Nutrition and Food Sciences, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.
(2)Department of Wine, Food and Molecular Biosciences, Faculty of Agriculture 
and Life Sciences, Lincoln University, Lincoln 7647, New Zealand.
(3)Agricultural Center, Department of Experimental Statistics, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

Edible insects, a sustainable and nutritious alternative to conventionally 
derived proteins, are unfamiliar to Westerners and often associated with 
negative sentiments. Edible-cricket protein (ECP) added to chocolate brownies 
(CB) [0% ECP = CBWO (without) vs. 6% w/w ECP = CBW (with)], and disclosed 
information [no ECP added = (-) vs. ECP with benefits = (+), ECP- and ECP+, 
respectively] yielded four CB treatments (CBWO-, CBWO+, CBW-, and CBW+). 
Subjects (n = 112 female and n = 98 male) rated liking, selected emotions 
before- and after-tasting, and determined consumption (CI) and purchase intent 
(PI) after tasting. Likings were analyzed with mixed-effects ANOVA and post hoc 
Tukey's HSD test. Emotions were evaluated with Cochran's-Q test and 
correspondence analysis. Emotions driving or inhibiting overall liking (OL) were 
assessed with penalty-lift analyses using two-sample t-tests. A random forest 
algorithm was used to predict PI and estimate variables' importance. Female's 
and male's expected OL were higher for CBWO- than for CBWO+. Females' actual OL 
was higher for CBWO than for CBW regardless of the disclosed information but 
males' actual OL was the same across treatments. Females exhibited 
negative-liking disconfirmation for CBW-. In both tasting conditions, the 
disclosed information affected treatments' emotional profiles more than 
formulation. After-tasting emotions "happy" and "satisfied" were critical 
predictors of PI.

DOI: 10.3390/foods10081769
PMCID: PMC8393427
PMID: 34441546

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.