1. Cells. 2021 Jul 27;10(8):1904. doi: 10.3390/cells10081904.

Melatonin, a Potential Therapeutic Agent for Preeclampsia, Reduces the Extrusion 
of Toxic Extracellular Vesicles from Preeclamptic Placentae.

Tang Y(1)(2), Groom K(3)(4), Chamley L(2)(5), Chen Q(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Planning, The Hospital of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 
Fudan University, Shanghai 200081, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The University of Auckland, 1142 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)National Women's Health, Auckland City Hospital, 1142 Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)Liggins Institute, The University of Auckland, 1142 Auckland, New Zealand.
(5)Hub for Extracellular Vesicle Investigations, The University of Auckland, 
1142 Auckland, New Zealand.

Preeclampsia, characterised by maternal endothelial cell activation, is 
triggered by toxic factors, such as placental extracellular vesicles (EVs) from 
a dysfunctional placenta. The increased oxidative stress seen in the 
preeclamptic placenta links to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The ER 
regulates protein folding and trafficking. When the ER is stressed, proteins are 
misfolded, and misfolded proteins are toxic. Misfolded proteins can be exported 
from cells, via EVs which target to other cells where the misfolded proteins may 
also be toxic. Melatonin is a hormone and antioxidant produced by the pineal 
gland and placenta. Levels of melatonin are reduced in preeclampsia. In this 
study we investigated whether melatonin treatment can change the nature of 
placental EVs that are released from a preeclamptic placenta. EVs were collected 
from preeclamptic (n = 6) and normotensive (n = 6) placental explants cultured 
in the presence or absence of melatonin for 18 h. Misfolded proteins were 
measured using a fluorescent compound, Thioflavin-T (ThT). Endothelial cells 
were exposed to placental EVs overnight. Endothelial cell activation was 
measured by the quantification of cell-surface ICAM-1 using a cell-based ELISA. 
EVs from preeclamptic placentae carried significantly (p < 0.001) more misfolded 
proteins than normotensive controls. Incubating preeclamptic placental explants 
in the presence of melatonin (1 µM and 10 µM) significantly (p < 0.001) reduced 
the misfolded proteins carried by EVs. Culturing endothelial cells in the 
presence of preeclamptic EVs significantly increased the expression of ICAM-1. 
This increased ICAM-1 expression was significantly reduced when the endothelial 
cells were exposed to preeclamptic EVs cultured in the presence of melatonin. 
This study demonstrates that melatonin reduces the amount of misfolded proteins 
carried by EVs from preeclamptic placentae and reduces the ability of these EVs 
to activate endothelial cells. Our study provides further preclinical support 
for the use of melatonin as a treatment for preeclampsia.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10081904
PMCID: PMC8393242
PMID: 34440672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has a conflict of interest 
to declare.