1. Cells. 2021 Jul 23;10(8):1874. doi: 10.3390/cells10081874.

The Parkinson's Disease-Associated Protein DJ-1 Protects Dictyostelium Cells 
from AMPK-Dependent Outcomes of Oxidative Stress.

Chen S(1)(2), Annesley SJ(1), Jasim RAF(1)(3), Fisher PR(1).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Microbiology, Department of Physiology Anatomy and 
Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC 3086, 
Australia.
(2)School of Modern Agriculture and Biotechnology, Ankang University, Ankang 
725000, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory and Clinical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Babylon, Hillah 51002, Iraq.

Mitochondrial dysfunction has been implicated in the pathology of Parkinson's 
disease (PD). In Dictyostelium discoideum, strains with mitochondrial 
dysfunction present consistent, AMPK-dependent phenotypes. This provides an 
opportunity to investigate if the loss of function of specific PD-associated 
genes produces cellular pathology by causing mitochondrial dysfunction with 
AMPK-mediated consequences. DJ-1 is a PD-associated, cytosolic protein with a 
conserved oxidizable cysteine residue that is important for the protein's 
ability to protect cells from the pathological consequences of oxidative stress. 
Dictyostelium DJ-1 (encoded by the gene deeJ) is located in the cytosol from 
where it indirectly inhibits mitochondrial respiration and also exerts a 
positive, nonmitochondrial role in endocytosis (particularly phagocytosis). Its 
loss in unstressed cells impairs endocytosis and causes correspondingly slower 
growth, while also stimulating mitochondrial respiration. We report here that 
oxidative stress in Dictyostelium cells inhibits mitochondrial respiration and 
impairs phagocytosis in an AMPK-dependent manner. This adds to the separate 
impairment of phagocytosis caused by DJ-1 knockdown. Oxidative stress also 
combines with DJ-1 loss in an AMPK-dependent manner to impair or exacerbate 
defects in phototaxis, morphogenesis and growth. It thereby phenocopies 
mitochondrial dysfunction. These results support a model in which the oxidized 
but not the reduced form of DJ-1 inhibits AMPK in the cytosol, thereby 
protecting cells from the adverse consequences of oxidative stress, 
mitochondrial dysfunction and the resulting AMPK hyperactivity.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10081874
PMCID: PMC8392454
PMID: 34440642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare they have no conflict of 
interest in the work.