1. Gels. 2021 Aug 8;7(3):113. doi: 10.3390/gels7030113.

Smart Hydrogels: Preparation, Characterization, and Determination of Transition 
Points of Crosslinked N-Isopropyl Acrylamide/Acrylamide/Carboxylic Acids 
Polymers.

Işıkver Y(1), Saraydın D(1).

Author information:
(1)Chemistry Department, Science Faculty, Sivas Cumhuriyet University, Sivas 
58140, Turkey.

Smart hydrogels (SH) were prepared by thermal free radical polymerization of 
N-isopropyl acrylamide (NIPAAm), acrylamide (AAm) with acrylic acid (A) or 
maleic acid (M), and N,N'-methylene bisacrylamide. Spectroscopic and thermal 
characterizations of SHs were performed using FTIR, TGA, and DSC. To determine 
the effects of SHs on swelling characteristics, swelling studies were performed 
in different solvents, solutions, temperatures, pHs, and ionic strengths. In 
addition, cycle equilibrium swelling studies were carried out at different 
temperatures and pHs. The temperature and pH transition points of SHs are 
calculated using a sigmoidal equation. The pH transition points were calculated 
as 5.2 and 4.2 for SH-M and SH-A, respectively. The NIPAAm/AAm hydrogel exhibits 
a critical solution temperature (LCST) of 28.35 °C, while the SH-A and SH-M 
hydrogels exhibit the LCST of 34.215 °C and 28.798 °C, respectively, and the 
LCST of SH-A is close to the body. temperature. Commercial (CHSA) and blood 
human serum albumin (BHSA) were used to find the adsorption properties of 
biopolymers on SHs. SH-M was the most efficient SH, adsorbing 49% of CHSA while 
absorbing 16% of BHSA. In conclusion, the sigmoidal equation or Gaussian 
approach can be a useful tool for chemists, chemical engineers, polymer and 
plastics scientists to find the transition points of smart hydrogels.

DOI: 10.3390/gels7030113
PMCID: PMC8395758
PMID: 34449617

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.