1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Aug 11;11(8):1448. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics11081448.

Late-Onset Medullary Thyroid Cancer in a Patient with a Germline RET Codon C634R 
Mutation.

Walczyk A(1)(2), Zgubieński K(2), Chmielewski G(2), Hińcza-Nowak K(3), Kowalik 
A(3)(4), Jaskulski J(2), Kowalska A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Clinic, Holycross Cancer Center, S. Artwińskiego St. 3, 25-734 
Kielce, Poland.
(2)Collegium Medicum, Jan Kochanowski University, IX Wieków Kielc Av. 19, 25-319 
Kielce, Poland.
(3)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Holycross Cancer Center, S. Artwińskiego 
St. 3, 25-734 Kielce, Poland.
(4)Division of Medical Biology, Institute of Biology, Jan Kochanowski 
University, Uniwersytecka St. 7, 25-406 Kielce, Poland.

Background: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN2A) is a rare, hereditary 
syndrome resulting from a germline mutation in the RET proto-oncogene and 
characterized primarily by medullary thyroid cancer (MTC), pheochromocytoma 
(PHEO), and hyperparathyroidism. Types of RET mutation have been associated with 
age at onset, clinical outcomes of MTC, and the penetrance of other components. 
Patients classified as 'high-risk' by the American Thyroid Association (ATA), 
based on the aggressiveness of MTC and the penetrance of other components, are 
recommended to undergo early prophylactic thyroidectomy at age ≤ 5 years and to 
be screened for PHEO at age ≥ 11 years. Patients with RET codon C634R mutations 
have been classified as high-risk. Case presentation: The present study 
describes a 71-year-old woman newly diagnosed with hereditary MTC related to a 
RET C634R germline mutation. Her basal serum calcitonin level was high, but 
there was no evidence of distant metastases. Surgery revealed bilateral MTC with 
two metastatic lymph nodes. Because microscopic resection was incomplete and 
extranodal extension was observed, the patient underwent adjuvant external beam 
radiotherapy. Response to therapy was excellent. Follow-up after 1.5 years 
showed no evidence of disease or other manifestations of MEN2A. Conclusion: 
Despite RET C634R carriers being classified as high-risk by the ATA, this 
patient did not present with either distant MTC or PHEO until her seventies. To 
our knowledge, only one other patient has shown a similar late identification of 
a RET C634R mutation, but MTC could not be diagnosed because the patient was 
lost to follow-up. Further research is required to develop optimal protocols 
that could allow patients requiring prophylactic thyroidectomy to be 
differentiated from those who can be monitored closely without early surgery.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11081448
PMCID: PMC8393343
PMID: 34441382

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.