1. Microorganisms. 2021 Aug 9;9(8):1692. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9081692.

The Impact of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) Expression Levels in 
Patients with Comorbidities on COVID-19 Severity: A Comprehensive Review.

Rodrigues R(1), Costa de Oliveira S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Porto, Al. Hernâni Monteiro, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal.
(2)Center for Research in Health Technologies and Information Systems 
(CINTESIS), R. Dr. Plácido da Costa, 4200-450 Porto, Portugal.

Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) has been proved to be the main host cell 
receptor for the binding of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2), the virus responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic. The SARS-CoV-2 
spike (S) protein binds to ACE2 to initiate the process of replication. This 
enzyme is widely present in human organ tissues, such as the heart and lung. The 
pathophysiology of ACE2 in SARS-CoV-2 infection is complex and may be associated 
with several factors and conditions that are more severe in COVID-19 patients, 
such as age, male gender, and comorbidities, namely, cardiovascular diseases, 
chronic respiratory diseases, obesity, and diabetes. Here we present a 
comprehensive review that aims to correlate the levels of expression of the ACE2 
in patients with comorbidities and with a poor outcome in COVID-19 disease. 
Significantly higher levels of expression of ACE2 were observed in myocardial 
and lung tissues in heart failure and COPD patients, respectively. An 
age-dependent increase in SARS2-CoV-2 receptors in the respiratory epithelium 
may be also responsible for the increased severity of COVID-19 lung disease in 
elderly people. Although the role of ACE2 is highlighted regarding the damage 
that can arise upon the SARS-CoV-2 invasion, there was no association observed 
between renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibitors and the severity 
of COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9081692
PMCID: PMC8398209
PMID: 34442770

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.