1. Front Genet. 2021 Aug 10;12:665861. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.665861.
eCollection  2021.

COL12A1 rs970547 Polymorphism Does Not Alter Susceptibility to Anterior Cruciate 
Ligament Rupture: A Meta-Analysis.

Lv ZT(1), Wang W(1), Zhao DM(1), Huang JM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

Objective: Currently available evidence regarding the association between 
collagen type XII α1 (COL12A1) polymorphism and risk of anterior cruciate 
ligament rupture (ACLR) remains elusive. The aim of our present study was to 
assess the association between COL12A1 rs970547 polymorphism and ACLR risk. 
Methods: Five online databases, namely, PubMed, EMBASE, ISI Web of Science, 
CENTRAL, and CNKI, were searched from their inception data up to December 2020 
to identify relative observational studies. The methodological quality of each 
individual study was evaluated using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS). The 
"model-free approach" was employed to estimate the magnitude of effect of 
COL12A1 rs970547 polymorphism on ACLR, and the association was expressed using 
odds ratio (OR) and its associated 95% confidence interval (95% CI). Subgroup 
analysis was performed by ethnicity and sex of included subjects. Results: Eight 
studies involving 1,477 subjects with ACLR and 100,439 healthy controls were 
finally included in our study. The methodological quality of included studies 
was deemed moderate to high based on NOS scores. The "model-free" approach 
suggested no genotype differences between ACLR and healthy control for the 
rs970547 polymorphism, but we still used the allele model to present the 
combined data. Under the random-effect model, there was no significant 
difference in the frequency of effecting allele between ACLR and control (OR: 
0.91, 95% CI 0.77, 1.08; p = 0.28). Stratified analysis by sex and ethnicity 
also showed no difference in allele frequency. Conclusion: The findings of this 
current meta-analysis suggested that rs970547 was not associated with ACLR risk 
in male, female, and the overall population among Asians or Caucasians.

Copyright © 2021 Lv, Wang, Zhao and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.665861
PMCID: PMC8383292
PMID: 34447406

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.