1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Aug 6;22(16):8441. doi: 10.3390/ijms22168441.

Regulatory Mechanisms of Anthocyanin Biosynthesis in Apple and Pear.

Liu H(1), Liu Z(1)(2), Wu Y(1), Zheng L(1), Zhang G(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Gene Resource and Molecular Development, College of 
Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas and College of 
Agronomy, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Xianyang 712100, China.

Anthocyanins contribute to the quality and flavour of fruits. They are produced 
through the phenylpropanoid pathway, which is regulated by specific key genes 
that have been identified in many species. The dominant anthocyanin forms are 
reversibly transformed at different pH states, thus forming different colours in 
aqueous solutions. In plants, anthocyanins are controlled by specific factors of 
the biosynthetic pathway: light, temperature, phytohormones and transcription 
factors. Although great progress in research on anthocyanin structures and the 
regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis has been made, the molecular regulatory 
mechanisms of anthocyanin biosynthesis in different plants remain less clear. In 
addition, the co-regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis is poorly understood. In 
this review, we summarise previous findings on anthocyanin biosynthesis, 
including the biochemical and biological features of anthocyanins; differences 
in anthocyanin biosynthesis among fruit species, i.e., apple, red pear, and the 
model plant Arabidopsis thaliana; and the developmental and environmental 
regulation of anthocyanin accumulation. This review reveals the molecular 
mechanisms underlying anthocyanin biosynthesis in different plant species and 
provides valuable information for the development of anthocyanin-rich 
red-skinned and red-fleshed apple and pear varieties.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22168441
PMCID: PMC8395115
PMID: 34445149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.