1. Exp Ther Med. 2021 Oct;22(4):1082. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10516. Epub 2021 Jul 
29.

Benazepril hydrochloride protects against doxorubicin cardiotoxicity by 
regulating the PI3K/Akt pathway.

Zhan L(1), Wang X(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhu G(1), Ding Y(1), Chen X(1), Jiang W(2), Wu 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Core Facilities, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 
610041, P.R. China.
(2)Molecular Medicine Research Center, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West 
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.

Doxorubicin (DOX) stimulates the generation of reactive oxygen species, thereby 
impairing mitochondrial functions. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors 
(ACEIs) have been identified to exhibit protective effects on cardiovascular 
diseases. The present study aimed to test the hypothesis that an ACEI benazepril 
hydrochloride (HCl) may protect against DOX-induced cardiotoxicity. The DOX 
injury model was established using rat embryonic cardiac myoblast cells (H9c2 
cell line) treated with DOX in vitro. H9c2 cells were treated with 
benazepril-HCl, DOX or a mixture of DOX and benazepril-HCl to measure the 
activities of myocardial enzymes including lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 
superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase, in addition to the 
concentration of malondialdehyde in the culture medium. Cells without any 
treatment were used as a control. DOX treatment increased the levels of activity 
of myocardial enzymes in H9c2 cells compared with those in the untreated control 
cells. Additionally, co-treatment with benazepril-HCl significantly reduced the 
levels of apoptosis occurring due to DOX-mediated cellular damage. The 
mechanistic experiment revealed that pretreatment with benazepril-HCl 
counteracted the DOX-induced oxidative stress and suppressed the activation of 
apoptosis via the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. By contrast, an Akt inhibitor 
(MK2206) inhibited the protective effects of benazepril-HCl against DOX-induced 
H9c2 cell injury, as revealed by increased LDH release in H9c2 cells. These 
results suggested that benazepril-HCl may potentially be administered as an 
adjuvant for DOX in long-term clinical use.

Copyright: Â© Zhan et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.10516
PMCID: PMC8355712
PMID: 34447475

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.