1. Cells. 2021 Aug 3;10(8):1968. doi: 10.3390/cells10081968.

Loosening ER-Mitochondria Coupling by the Expression of the Presenilin 2 Loop 
Domain.

Rossini M(1), García-Casas P(1), Filadi R(1)(2), Pizzo P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, 35131 Padua, Italy.
(2)Neuroscience Institute, National Research Council (CNR), 35131 Padua, Italy.

Presenilin 2 (PS2), one of the three proteins in which mutations are linked to 
familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD), exerts different functions within the cell 
independently of being part of the γ-secretase complex, thus unrelated to toxic 
amyloid peptide formation. In particular, its enrichment in endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) membrane domains close to mitochondria (i.e., 
mitochondria-associated membranes, MAM) enables PS2 to modulate multiple 
processes taking place on these signaling hubs, such as Ca2+ handling and lipid 
synthesis. Importantly, upregulated MAM function appears to be critical in AD 
pathogenesis. We previously showed that FAD-PS2 mutants reinforce 
ER-mitochondria tethering, by interfering with the activity of mitofusin 2, 
favoring their Ca2+ crosstalk. Here, we deepened the molecular mechanism 
underlying PS2 activity on ER-mitochondria tethering, identifying its protein 
loop as an essential domain to mediate the reinforced ER-mitochondria connection 
in FAD-PS2 models. Moreover, we introduced a novel tool, the PS2 loop domain 
targeted to the outer mitochondrial membrane, Mit-PS2-LOOP, that is able to 
counteract the activity of FAD-PS2 on organelle tethering, which possibly helps 
in recovering the FAD-PS2-associated cellular alterations linked to an increased 
organelle coupling.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10081968
PMCID: PMC8394530
PMID: 34440738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.