1. Vaccines (Basel). 2021 Aug 16;9(8):910. doi: 10.3390/vaccines9080910.

Antibody Responses to Natural SARS-CoV-2 Infection or after COVID-19 
Vaccination.

Altawalah H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Safat 
24923, Kuwait.
(2)Virology Unit, Yacoub Behbehani Center, Sabah Hospital, Ministry of Health, 
Safat 24923, Kuwait.

The novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2), is the causative agent of the ongoing pandemic of coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19). The clinical severity of COVID-19 ranges from 
asymptomatic to critical disease and, eventually, death in smaller subsets of 
patients. The first case of COVID-19 was declared at the end of 2019 and it has 
since spread worldwide and remained a challenge in 2021, with the emergence of 
variants of concern. In fact, new concerns were the still unclear situation of 
SARS-CoV-2 immunity during the ongoing pandemic and progress with vaccination. 
If maintained at sufficiently high levels, the immune response could effectively 
block reinfection, which might confer long-lived protection. Understanding the 
protective capacity and the duration of humoral immunity during SARS-CoV-2 
infection or after vaccination is critical for managing the pandemic and would 
also provide more evidence about the efficacy of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, 
the exact features of antibody responses that govern SARS-CoV-2 infection or 
after vaccination remain unclear. This review summarizes the main knowledge that 
we have about the humoral immune response during COVID-19 disease or after 
vaccination. Such knowledge should help to optimize vaccination strategies and 
public health decisions.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines9080910
PMCID: PMC8402626
PMID: 34452035

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.