1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Jul 25;14(8):717. doi: 10.3390/ph14080717.

Current Therapies in Clinical Trials of Parkinson's Disease: A 2021 Update.

Prasad EM(1), Hung SY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Acupuncture Science, China Medical University, Taichung 
40402, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung 
40447, Taiwan.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that 
currently has no cure, but treatments are available to improve PD symptoms and 
maintain quality of life. In 2020, about 10 million people worldwide were living 
with PD. In 1970, the United States Food and Drug Administration approved the 
drug levodopa as a dopamine replacement to manage PD motor symptoms; 
levodopa-carbidopa combination became commercialized in 1975. After over 50 
years of use, levodopa is still the gold standard for PD treatment. 
Unfortunately, levodopa therapy-induced dyskinesia and OFF symptoms remain 
unresolved. Therefore, we urgently need to analyze each current clinical trial's 
status and therapeutic strategy to discover new therapeutic approaches for PD 
treatment. We surveyed 293 registered clinical trials on ClinicalTrials.gov from 
2008 to 16 June 2021. After excluded levodopa/carbidopa derivative add-on 
therapies, we identified 47 trials as PD treatment drugs or therapies. Among 
them, 19 trials are in phase I (41%), 25 trials are in phase II (53%), and 3 
trials are in phase III (6%). The three phase-III trials use embryonic dopamine 
cell implant, 5-HT1A receptor agonist (sarizotan), and adenosine A2A receptor 
antagonist (caffeine). The therapeutic strategy of each trial shows 29, 5, 1, 5, 
5, and 2 trials use small molecules, monoclonal antibodies, plasma therapy, cell 
therapy, gene therapy, and herbal extract, respectively. Additionally, we 
discuss the most potent drug or therapy among these trials. By systematically 
updating the current trial status and analyzing the therapeutic strategies, we 
hope this review can provide new ideas and insights for PD therapy development.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14080717
PMCID: PMC8398928
PMID: 34451813

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial disclosures or 
conflicts of interest to declare.