1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Aug 20;13(8):1306. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13081306.

Effect of Selected Antidepressants on Placental Homeostasis of Serotonin: 
Maternal and Fetal Perspectives.

Horackova H(1), Karahoda R(1), Cerveny L(1), Vachalova V(1), Ebner R(1), Abad 
C(1), Staud F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy in Hradec 
Kralove, Charles University, Akademika Heyrovskeho 1203, 500 05 Hradec Kralove, 
Czech Republic.

Depression is a prevalent condition affecting up to 20% of pregnant women. 
Hence, more than 10% are prescribed antidepressant drugs, mainly serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and selective serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake 
inhibitors (SNRIs). We hypothesize that antidepressants disturb serotonin 
homeostasis in the fetoplacental unit by inhibiting serotonin transporter (SERT) 
and organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3) in the maternal- and fetal-facing 
placental membranes, respectively. Paroxetine, citalopram, fluoxetine, 
fluvoxamine, sertraline, and venlafaxine were tested in situ (rat term placenta 
perfusion) and ex vivo (uptake studies in membrane vesicles isolated from 
healthy human term placenta). All tested antidepressants significantly inhibited 
SERT- and OCT3-mediated serotonin uptake in a dose-dependent manner. Calculated 
half-maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50) were in the range of therapeutic 
plasma concentrations. Using in vitro and in situ models, we further showed that 
the placental efflux transporters did not compromise mother-to-fetus transport 
of antidepressants. Collectively, we suggest that antidepressants have the 
potential to affect serotonin levels in the placenta or fetus when administered 
at therapeutic doses. Interestingly, the effect of antidepressants on serotonin 
homeostasis in rat placenta was sex dependent. As accurate fetal programming 
requires optimal serotonin levels in the fetoplacental unit throughout 
gestation, inhibition of SERT-/OCT3-mediated serotonin uptake may help explain 
the poor outcomes of antidepressant use in pregnancy.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13081306
PMCID: PMC8397948
PMID: 34452265

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.