1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Aug 17;13(8):1283. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13081283.

Structure-Activity Relationships of Benzothiazole-Based Hsp90 C-Terminal-Domain 
Inhibitors.

Dernovšek J(1), Zajec Ž(1), Durcik M(1), Mašič LP(1), Gobec M(1), Zidar N(1), 
Tomašič T(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana, Aškerčeva Cesta 7, 1000 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is a chaperone responsible for the maturation of 
many cancer-related proteins, and is therefore an important target for the 
design of new anticancer agents. Several Hsp90 N-terminal domain inhibitors have 
been evaluated in clinical trials, but none have been approved as cancer 
therapies. This is partly due to induction of the heat shock response, which can 
be avoided using Hsp90 C-terminal-domain (CTD) inhibition. Several structural 
features have been shown to be useful in the design of Hsp90 CTD inhibitors, 
including an aromatic ring, a cationic center and the benzothiazole moiety. This 
study established a previously unknown link between these structural motifs. 
Using ligand-based design methodologies and structure-based pharmacophore 
models, a library of 29 benzothiazole-based Hsp90 CTD inhibitors was prepared, 
and their antiproliferative activities were evaluated in MCF-7 breast cancer 
cells. Several showed low-micromolar IC50, with the most potent being compounds 
5g and 9i (IC50, 2.8 ± 0.1, 3.9 ± 0.1 μM, respectively). Based on these results, 
a ligand-based structure-activity relationship model was built, and molecular 
dynamics simulation was performed to elaborate the binding mode of compound 9i. 
Moreover, compound 9i showed degradation of Hsp90 client proteins and no 
induction of the heat shock response.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13081283
PMCID: PMC8400049
PMID: 34452244

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.