1. Cell Rep. 2021 Aug 31;36(9):109640. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109640.

pre-piRNA trimming and 2'-O-methylation protect piRNAs from 3' tailing and 
degradation in C.Â elegans.

Pastore B(1), Hertz HL(2), Price IF(1), Tang W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; 
Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Ohio 
State Biochemistry Program, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; 
Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; 
Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
Electronic address: tang.542@osu.edu.

The Piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway suppresses transposable elements and 
promotes fertility in diverse organisms. Maturation of piRNAs involves pre-piRNA 
trimming followed by 2'-O-methylation at their 3' termini. Here, we report that 
the 3' termini of Caenorhabditis elegans piRNAs are subject to nontemplated 
nucleotide addition, and piRNAs with 3' addition exhibit extensive base-pairing 
interaction with their target RNAs. Animals deficient for PARN-1 (pre-piRNA 
trimmer) and HENN-1 (2'-O-methyltransferase) accumulate piRNAs with 3' 
nontemplated nucleotides. In henn-1 mutants, piRNAs are shortened prior to 3' 
addition, whereas long isoforms of untrimmed piRNAs are preferentially modified 
in parn-1 mutant animals. Loss of either PARN-1 or HENN-1 results in modest 
reduction in steady-state levels of piRNAs. Deletion of both enzymes leads to 
depletion of piRNAs, desilenced piRNA targets, and impaired fecundity. Together, 
our findings suggest that pre-piRNA trimming and 2'-O-methylation act 
collaboratively to protect piRNAs from tailing and degradation.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109640
PMCID: PMC8459939
PMID: 34469728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.