1. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Aug 24;14:3415-3424. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S320294. 
eCollection 2021.

Emergence and Genetic Characterization of Plasmid-Encoded VIM-2-Producing 
Pseudomonas stutzeri with Novel Integron In1998 Isolated from Cerebrospinal 
Fluid.

Liu S(1)(2), Xu H(2), Guo X(1), Li S(3), Wang Q(1)(2), Li Y(4), Liu R(1)(2), Gou 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, 450052, People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, 
National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The First 
Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310003, 
People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Zhengzhou Central Hospital 
Affiliated to Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450052, People's Republic of 
China.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of ZhengZhou 
University, Zhengzhou, 450052, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the genomic and plasmid characteristics of a newly 
discovered Pseudomonas stutzeri strain with a bla VIM-2-carrying plasmid and 
novel integron In1998 isolated from a cerebrospinal fluid specimen in a teaching 
hospital.
METHODS: Species identification was performed by MALDI-TOF MS, and bla VIM-2 was 
identified by PCR and Sanger sequencing. Whole-genome sequencing analysis was 
conducted using the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 and Oxford Nanopore platforms. 
Integron detection was performed using INTEGRALL. The phylogenetic tree was 
constructed by using kSNP3.0. Plasmid characteristics were assessed by 
S1-pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (S1-PFGE), Southern blotting, conjugation 
experiments, and whole-genome sequencing analysis. Comparative genomics analysis 
of the plasmid and genetic context of bla VIM-2 were conducted by using BLAST 
Ring Image Generator (BRIG) and Easyfig 2.3, respectively.
RESULTS: ZDHY95, an MDR strain of P. stutzeri harboring bla VIM-2, was 
identified. It was sensitive only to amikacin and was resistant to carbapenems, 
β-lactams, aztreonam, fluoroquinolones, and aminoglycosides. Joint S1-PFGE, 
Southern blot, conjugation assay, and whole-genome sequencing experiments 
confirmed that the bla VIM-2 gene was located within class I integron In1722 of 
the plasmid and that the surrounding genetic environment was 5'CS-aacA4'-30-bla 
VIM-2-aacA4'-3'CS. The novel class I integron In1998 was detected on the 
chromosome of P. stutzeri ZDHY95, and the gene cassette array was 
5'CS-aacA3-aadA13-cmlA8-bla OXA-246-arr3-dfrA27-3'CS. Phylogenetic analysis 
showed that antimicrobial resistance gene-carrying P. stutzeri isolates were 
divided into two clusters, mainly containing isolates from the USA and Pakistan.
CONCLUSION: A novel bla VIM-2-carrying conjugative plasmid, pZDHY95-VIM-2, was 
reported for the first time in P. stutzeri, elucidating the genetic environment 
and transfer mechanism. The gene structure of the novel class I integron In1998 
was also clarified. We explored the phylogenetic relationship of P. stutzeri 
with drug resistance genes and suggested that Pseudomonas with 
metallo-β-lactamases (MBLs) in the hospital environment may cause infection in 
patients with long-term intubation or after interventional surgery.

© 2021 Liu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S320294
PMCID: PMC8402987
PMID: 34466007

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.