1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2021 Dec;193(12):4172-4196. doi: 
10.1007/s12010-021-03613-w. Epub 2021 Aug 31.

Relationship Between CASP9 and CASP10 Gene Polymorphisms and Cancer 
Susceptibility: Evidence from an Updated Meta-analysis.

Sargazi S(1), Abghari AZ(2)(3), Sarani H(4), Sheervalilou R(5), Mirinejad S(2), 
Saravani R(2)(3), Eskandari E(6).

Author information:
(1)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Resistant Tuberculosis Institute, 
Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Iran. sgz.biomed@gmail.com.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Resistant Tuberculosis Institute, 
Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Iran.
(3)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Zahedan University 
of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Iran.
(4)Children and Adolescent Health Research Center, Resistant Tuberculosis 
Institute, Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Iran.
(5)Pharmacology Research Center, Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, 
Zahedan, Iran.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada. eeskandari@bccrc.ca.

Erratum in
    Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2022 Feb;194(2):1025. doi: 
10.1007/s12010-021-03647-0.

Caspase-9 (CASP9) and caspase-10 (CASP10) polymorphisms were associated with 
human cancers; however, the results remain controversial. In this meta-analysis, 
we aimed to estimate the relationship among CASP9 (rs1052576, rs1052571, 
rs4645978, rs4645981, rs4645982, rs2308950) and CASP10 (rs13006529, rs13010627, 
rs3900115) polymorphisms and the overall risk of cancers. Relevant studies were 
obtained from Web of Science, MEDLINE, PubMed, Scopus, and Google scholar 
databases (updated January 1, 2021). Odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs) were measured to estimate the strength of association. Our 
meta-analysis included 40 studies. The rs4645981 significantly enhanced the risk 
of cancer under TT vs. CC (OR = 2.42), TC vs. CC (OR = 1.55), TT+ TC vs. CC (OR 
= 1.66), TT vs. TC + CC (OR = 1.91), and T vs. C (OR = 1.57) inheritance models. 
As for the rs1052571 variant, increased risk of cancer was observed under TT vs. 
CC (OR =1.22), TC vs. CC (OR = 1.17), and TT+ TC vs. CC (OR = 1.18) models. The 
stratified analysis showed a significant correlation between rs4645978 or 
rs4645981 polymorphisms and cancer risk, while in Asians rs4645978 conferred an 
increased risk of colorectal, lung, and prostate cancer. Both rs4645981 and 
rs1052576 polymorphisms were correlated with an enhanced risk of lung cancer. In 
conclusion, our meta-analysis suggested that CASP9 rs4645981 and rs1052571 
polymorphisms are associated with overall cancer risk. More studies on larger 
populations are warranted to validate these associations.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-021-03613-w
PMID: 34463927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]