1. J Neurosci. 2021 Oct 27;41(43):9008-9030. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2534-20.2021.
 Epub 2021 Aug 30.

Addiction-Associated Genetic Variants Implicate Brain Cell Type- and 
Region-Specific Cis-Regulatory Elements in Addiction Neurobiology.

Srinivasan C(1), Phan BN(1)(2), Lawler AJ(3), Ramamurthy E(1), Kleyman M(1), 
Brown AR(1), Kaplow IM(1)(4), Wirthlin ME(1)(4), Pfenning AR(5)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Computational Biology Department, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213.
(2)Medical Scientist Training Program, School of Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Mellon College of Science, Carnegie Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213.
(4)Neuroscience Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 
15213.
(5)Computational Biology Department, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213 apfenning@cmu.edu.

Recent large genome-wide association studies have identified multiple confident 
risk loci linked to addiction-associated behavioral traits. Most genetic 
variants linked to addiction-associated traits lie in noncoding regions of the 
genome, likely disrupting cis-regulatory element (CRE) function. CREs tend to be 
highly cell type-specific and may contribute to the functional development of 
the neural circuits underlying addiction. Yet, a systematic approach for 
predicting the impact of risk variants on the CREs of specific cell populations 
is lacking. To dissect the cell types and brain regions underlying 
addiction-associated traits, we applied stratified linkage disequilibrium score 
regression to compare genome-wide association studies to genomic regions 
collected from human and mouse assays for open chromatin, which is associated 
with CRE activity. We found enrichment of addiction-associated variants in 
putative CREs marked by open chromatin in neuronal (NeuN+) nuclei collected from 
multiple prefrontal cortical areas and striatal regions known to play major 
roles in reward and addiction. To further dissect the cell type-specific basis 
of addiction-associated traits, we also identified enrichments in human 
orthologs of open chromatin regions of female and male mouse neuronal subtypes: 
cortical excitatory, D1, D2, and PV. Last, we developed machine learning models 
to predict mouse cell type-specific open chromatin, enabling us to further 
categorize human NeuN+ open chromatin regions into cortical excitatory or 
striatal D1 and D2 neurons and predict the functional impact of 
addiction-associated genetic variants. Our results suggest that different 
neuronal subtypes within the reward system play distinct roles in the variety of 
traits that contribute to addiction.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT We combine 
statistical genetic and machine learning techniques to find that the 
predisposition to for nicotine, alcohol, and cannabis use behaviors can be 
partially explained by genetic variants in conserved regulatory elements within 
specific brain regions and neuronal subtypes of the reward system. Our 
computational framework can flexibly integrate open chromatin data across 
species to screen for putative causal variants in a cell type- and 
tissue-specific manner for numerous complex traits.

Copyright Â© 2021 Srinivasan et al.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2534-20.2021
PMCID: PMC8549541
PMID: 34462306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]