1. J Cancer. 2021 Jul 30;12(19):5760-5771. doi: 10.7150/jca.51855. eCollection 
2021.

S100A1 is a Potential Biomarker for Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma Diagnosis and 
Prognosis.

Wang G(1), Li HN(1), Cui XQ(1), Xu T(1)(2), Dong ML(1), Li SY(1), Li XR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Cancer Biology Research Center, 
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, People's Republic of China.

S100 calcium binding protein A1 (S100A1) is an important member of the S100 
family and known to express in a variety of cancers. However, the biological 
functions of S100A1 in thyroid carcinoma have not been thoroughly studied. In 
this report, bioinformatics analyses and immunohistochemistry assays were 
applied to assess the expression profile of S100A1 as well as its relationship 
with the pathological features and prognosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma 
(PTC). Meanwhile, functions of S100A1 in PTC cells were analyzed with either in 
vitro or in vivo experiments. S100A1 was significantly up-regulated in PTC 
tissues compared with adjacent non-cancerous tissues. S100A1 protein expression 
was significantly associated with tumor size (p=0.0032) or lymph node metastasis 
(p=0.0331). More importantly, an elevated S100A1 expression was significantly 
correlated with a worse recurrence-free survival (RFS) (HR=2.26, p=0.042). 
Further, knockdown of S100A1 dramatically inhibited cell proliferation and 
migration as well as increased apoptosis of PTC cells. S100A1 knockdown 
inhibited tumor progression as seen in in vivo experiments. In terms of 
mechanism, down-regulation of S100A1 induced yes associated protein (YAP) 
phosphorylation in the cytoplasm and diminished Hippo/YAP pathway activation. 
Therefore, S100A1 may serve as a novel oncogene and a promising biomarker for 
PTC diagnosis and prognosis.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/jca.51855
PMCID: PMC8408122
PMID: 34475990

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.