1. Mol Med Rep. 2021 Nov;24(5):761. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12401. Epub 2021 Sep 3.

Ribosomal RNA‑depleted RNA sequencing reveals the pathogenesis of refractory 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae pneumonia in children.

Huang F(#)(1), Fan H(#)(1), Yang D(1), Zhang J(2), Shi T(1), Zhang D(1), Lu 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiration, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510120, P.R. China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

Pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae (M. pneumoniae) is a major cause of 
community‑acquired pneumonia in children. In some cases, M. pneumoniae pneumonia 
(MPP) can develop into refractory MPP (RMPP), which shows no clinical or 
radiological response to macrolides, and can progress to severe and complicated 
pneumonia. However, the pathogenesis of RMPP remains poorly understood. The 
present study aimed to identify target genes that could be used as biomarkers 
for the clinical diagnosis of early‑stage RMPP through high‑throughput 
sequencing technology. The differences in long non‑coding (lnc)RNAs, mRNAs and 
circular (circ)RNAs were examined between whole‑blood samples from two patients 
with non‑refractory MPP (NRMPP), two patients with RMPP and three healthy 
children using ribosomal (r)RNA‑depleted RNA‑sequencing techniques and an 
integrated mRNA/circRNA analysis. A total of 17 lncRNAs (four upregulated and 13 
downregulated), 18 mRNAs (six upregulated and 12 downregulated) and 24 circRNAs 
(12 upregulated and 12 downregulated) were the most significantly differentially 
expressed (P<0.05) between the NRMPP and RMPP groups. Upon functional analysis, 
the significantly differentially expressed genes encoded by the targeting mRNAs 
(prostaglandin‑endoperoxide synthase 2, IL‑8 and fos‑like antigen 1) were 
screened and identified to be enriched in the 'IL‑17 signaling pathway'. 
Furthermore, the key circRNAs in the NRMPP and RMPP comparative groups were 
primarily enriched in 'herpes simplex virus 1 infection', 'viral carcinogenesis' 
and 'RNA transport'. In the present study, a comprehensive analysis of the 
differences between the NRMPP and RMPP cases was performed based on 
rRNA‑depleted RNA‑sequencing techniques, and the selected genes and circRNAs may 
be closely associated with the complex pathogenesis of RMPP.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12401
PMCID: PMC8436218
PMID: 34476502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.