1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Aug 13;12:723488. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.723488. 
eCollection 2021.

Sulfasalazine Sensitizes Polyhematoporphyrin-Mediated Photodynamic Therapy in 
Cholangiocarcinoma by Targeting xCT.

Zheng YW(1), Miao XY(1), Xiong L(1), Chen B(1), Kong FH(1), Zhou JJ(1), Liu 
ZT(1), Wen Y(1), Zhang ZJ(1), Zou H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.

Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), which is highly malignant, shows a relatively poor 
prognosis, due to the insensitivity of the tumour to chemotherapy and 
radiotherapy. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) has become a promising palliative 
therapeutic option for patients with unresectable cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), 
while the functional amount of ROS is limited by intracellular redox systemen. 
Sulfasalazine (SASP), a well-known anti-inflammatory agent, which also acts as 
an inhibitor of the amino acid transport system xc (xCT), decreases the 
intracellular glutathione (GSH) level, thus weakening the antioxidant defence of 
the cell by inhibition of the antiporter. However, the combination of SASP and 
PDT remains unexplored. We have reported that polyhematoporphyrin (PHP)-mediated 
PDT inhibits the cell viability of CCA cells and organoids. Furthermore, in 
PHP-enriched HCCC-9810 and TFK-1CCA cells, SASP enhances the sensitivity to 
PHP-mediated PDT through a GSH-dependent mechanism. We found that PHP-PDT can 
up-regulate xCT expression to promote cells against overloaded ROS, while SASP 
reduces GSH levels. After the combination of SASP and PHP-PDT, cell viability 
and GSH levels were significantly inhibited. xCT was also observed to be 
inhibited by SASP in human organoid samples. Our findings suggest that, in 
combination with PDT, SASP has potential as a promising approach against CCA.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zheng, Miao, Xiong, Chen, Kong, Zhou, Liu, Wen, Zhang and Zou.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.723488
PMCID: PMC8414975
PMID: 34483935

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.