1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Aug 18;8:686774. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.686774. 
eCollection 2021.

Concise Review: Considering Optimal Temperature for Short-Term Storage of 
Epithelial Cells.

Khan AZ(1)(2)(3)(4), Utheim TP(1)(3)(5)(6)(7)(8), Jackson CJ(1)(5)(9), Tønseth 
KA(4)(7), Eidet JR(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Surgery, Sørlandet Hospital Arendal, Arendal, Norway.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Sørlandet Hospital Arendal, Arendal, Norway.
(4)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Oral Biology, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, 
Norway.
(7)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(9)Ifocus Eye Clinic, Haugesund, Norway.

Erratum in
    Front Med (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 05;8:775351. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2021.775351.

Transplantation of novel tissue-engineered products using cultured epithelial 
cells is gaining significant interest. While such treatments can readily be 
provided at centralized medical centers, delivery to patients at geographically 
remote locations requires the establishment of suitable storage protocols. One 
important aspect of storage technology is temperature. This paper reviews 
storage temperature for above-freezing point storage of human epithelial cells 
for regenerative medicine purposes. The literature search uncovered publications 
on epidermal cells, retinal pigment epithelial cells, conjunctival epithelial 
cells, corneal/limbal epithelial cells, oral keratinocytes, and seminiferous 
epithelial cells. The following general patterns were noted: (1) Several studies 
across different cell types inclined toward 4 and 16°C being suitable short-term 
storage temperatures. Correspondingly, almost all studies investigating 37°C 
concluded that this storage temperature was suboptimal. (2) Cell death typically 
escalates rapidly following 7-10 days of storage. (3) The importance of the type 
of storage medium and its composition was highlighted by some of the studies; 
however, the relative importance of storage medium vs. storage temperature has 
not been investigated systematically. Although a direct comparison between the 
included investigations is not reasonable due to differences in cell types, 
storage media, and storage duration, this review provides an overview, 
summarizing the work carried out on each cell type during the past two decades.

Copyright © 2021 Khan, Utheim, Jackson, Tønseth and Eidet.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2021.686774
PMCID: PMC8416270
PMID: 34485330

Conflict of interest statement: JE and TU hold a patent on the use of sericin in 
culture media (European Patent Number EP3317404), filed by Inven2 (the 
technology transfer office of the University of Oslo and Oslo University 
Hospital). The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of 
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest. The reviewer DT declared a past co-authorship with several 
of the authors to the handling editor.