1. World J Gastroenterol. 2021 Aug 14;27(30):5076-5087. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v27.i30.5076.

Association of gene and protein expression and genetic polymorphism of CC 
chemokine ligand 4 in colorectal cancer.

Shamoun L(1), Landerholm K(2), Balboa Ramilo A(1), Andersson RE(2), Dimberg 
J(3), Wågsäter D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala 75123, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Surgery, Region Jönköping County, Jönköping 55305, Sweden.
(3)Department of Natural Science and Biomedicine, School of Health and Welfare, 
Jönköping University, Jönköping 55111, Sweden.
(4)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala 75123, 
Sweden. dick.wagsater@mcb.uu.se.

BACKGROUND: Leukocytes, such as T cells and macrophages, play an important role 
in tumorigenesis. CC chemokine ligand (CCL) 4, which is produced by lymphocytes 
and macrophages, has been found to be expressed in the mucosa of the 
gastrointestinal tract and is a potent chemoattractant for various leukocytes.
AIM: To examine CCL4 expression and its genetic polymorphism rs10491121 in 
patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) and evaluate their prognostic 
significance.
METHODS: Luminex technology was used to determine CCL4 Levels in CRC tissue (n = 
98), compared with paired normal tissue, and in plasma from patients with CRC (n 
= 103), compared with healthy controls (n = 97). Included patients had undergone 
surgical resection for primary colorectal adenocarcinomas between 1996 and 2019 
at the Department of Surgery, Ryhov County Hospital, Jönköping, Sweden. Reverse 
transcription quantitative PCR was used to investigate the CCL4 gene expression 
in CRC tissue (n = 101). Paired normal tissue and TaqMan single nucleotide 
polymorphism assays were used for the CCL4 rs10491121 polymorphism in 610 CRC 
patients and 409 healthy controls.
RESULTS: The CCL4 protein and messenger RNA expression levels were higher in CRC 
tissue than in normal paired tissue (90%, P < 0.001 and 45%, P < 0.05, 
respectively). CRC tissue from patients with localized disease had 2.8-fold 
higher protein expression levels than that from patients with disseminated 
disease. Low CCL4 protein expression levels in CRC tissue were associated with a 
30% lower cancer-specific survival rate in patients (P < 0.01). The level of 
plasma CCL4 was 11% higher in CRC patients than in healthy controls (P < 0.05) 
and was positively correlated (r = 0.56, P < 0.01) with the CCL4 protein level 
in CRC tissue. The analysis of CCL4 gene polymorphism rs10491121 showed a 
difference (P < 0.05) between localized disease and disseminated disease in the 
right colon, with a dominance of allele A in localized disease. Moreover, the 
rate of the A allele was higher among CRC patients with mucinous cancer than 
among those with non-mucinous cancer.
CONCLUSION: The present study indicates that the CRC tissue levels of CCL4 and 
CCL4 gene polymorphism rs10491121, particularly in the right colon, are 
associated with clinical outcome in CRC patients.

©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v27.i30.5076
PMCID: PMC8384737
PMID: 34497436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.