1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Sep 6;18(17):9417. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18179417.

Long-Term Assessment of Surface Water Quality in a Highly Managed Estuary Basin.

Moncada AM(1)(2), Melesse AM(1)(2), Vithanage J(3), Price RM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth and Environment, Florida International University, Miami, 
FL 33199, USA.
(2)Institute of Environment, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, 
USA.
(3)Sea Level Solutions Center, Florida International University, Miami, FL 
33199, USA.

Anthropogenic developments in coastal watersheds cause significant ecological 
changes to estuaries. Since estuaries respond to inputs on relatively long time 
scales, robust analyses of long-term data should be employed to account for 
seasonality, internal cycling, and climatological cycles. This study 
characterizes the water quality of a highly managed coastal basin, the St. Lucie 
Estuary Basin, FL, USA, from 1999 to 2019 to detect spatiotemporal differences 
in the estuary's water quality and its tributaries. The estuary is artificially 
connected to Lake Okeechobee, so it receives fresh water from an external basin. 
Monthly water samples collected from November 1999 to October 2019 were assessed 
using principal component analysis, correlation analysis, and the Seasonal 
Kendall trend test. Nitrogen, phosphorus, color, total suspended solids, and 
turbidity concentrations varied seasonally and spatially. Inflows from Lake 
Okeechobee were characterized by high turbidity, while higher phosphorus 
concentrations characterized inflows from tributaries within the basin. 
Differences among tributaries within the basin may be attributed to flow regimes 
(e.g., significant releases vs. steady flow) and land use (e.g., pasture vs. row 
crops). Decreasing trends for orthophosphate, total phosphorus, and color and 
increasing trends for dissolved oxygen were found over the long term. Decreases 
in nutrient concentrations over time could be due to local mitigation efforts. 
Understanding the differences in water quality between the tributaries of the 
St. Lucie Estuary is essential for the overall water quality management of the 
estuary.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18179417
PMCID: PMC8431535
PMID: 34502000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the studyâ€™s design, in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data, in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.