1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Sep 6;18(17):9409. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18179409.

Empty Zona Pellucida Only Case: A Critical Review of the Literature.

Siristatidis C(1)(2), Tzanakaki D(1), Simopoulou M(1), Vaitsopoulou C(1), 
Tsioulou P(1), Stavros S(3), Papapanou M(2), Drakakis P(3), Bakas P(1)(2), 
Vlahos N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Assisted Reproduction Unit, Second Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Aretaieion Hospital, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, 11528 Athens, Greece.
(2)Second Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Aretaieion Hospital, Medical 
School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11528 Athens, Greece.
(3)Molecular Biology of Reproduction Unit and Recurrent Abortions Unit, Assisted 
Reproduction Unit, First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Alexandra 
Hospital, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11528 
Athens, Greece.

The presence of empty zona pellucida (EZP) in oocytes following oocyte retrieval 
(OR) during an in vitro fertilization (IVF) cycle presents a major clinical and 
laboratory challenge in assisted reproduction. It has been attributed to several 
factors such as the ovarian stimulation protocol employed, the damaging of the 
follicles during oocyte retrieval (OR) mainly through the high aspiration 
pressure, during the denudation technique, and the degeneration of oolemma 
within the zona pellucida (ZP) through apoptosis. The role of ZP is pivotal from 
the early stages of follicular development up to the preimplantation embryo 
development and embryo hatching. Polymorphisms or alterations on the genes that 
encode ZP proteins may contribute to EZP. We present a critical review of the 
published literature hitherto on EZP and available options when encountered with 
the phenomenon of EZP. Concerning the former, we found that there is rare data 
on this phenomenon that merits documentation. The latter includes technical, 
genetic, and pathophysiological perspectives, along with specific treatment 
options. In conclusion, we identify the lack of a definitive management proposal 
for couples presenting with this phenomenon, we underline the need for an 
algorithm, and indicate the questions raised that point towards our goal for a 
strategy when addressing a previous finding of EZP.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18179409
PMCID: PMC8430770
PMID: 34501995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.