1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Aug 17;19:4759-4769. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.08.022. eCollection 2021.

Protein-gene Expression Nexus: Comprehensive characterization of human cancer 
cell lines with proteogenomic analysis.

Hyung D(1), Baek MJ(1), Lee J(1), Cho J(1), Kim HS(1), Park C(1), Cho SY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Cancer Center, 323 Ilsan-ro, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do 10408, Republic 
of Korea.
(2)Department of Molecular and Life Science, Hanyang University, Ansan 15588, 
Republic of Korea.

Researchers have gained new therapeutic insights using multi-omics platform 
approaches to study DNA, RNA, and proteins of comprehensively characterized 
human cancer cell lines. To improve our understanding of the molecular features 
associated with oncogenic modulation in cancer, we proposed a proteogenomic 
database for human cancer cell lines, called Protein-gene Expression Nexus 
(PEN). We have expanded the characterization of cancer cell lines to include 
genetic, mRNA, and protein data of 145 cancer cell lines from various public 
studies. PEN contains proteomic and phosphoproteomic data on 4,129,728 peptides, 
13,862 proteins, 7,138 phosphorylation site-associated genomic variations, 117 
studies, and 12 cancer. We analyzed functional characterizations along with the 
integrated datasets, such as cis/trans association for copy number alteration 
(CNA), single amino acid variation for coding genes, post-translation 
modification site variation for Single Amino Acid Variation, and novel peptide 
expression for noncoding regions and fusion genes. PEN provides a user-friendly 
interface for searching, browsing, and downloading data and also supports the 
visualization of genome-wide association between CNA and expression, novel 
peptide landscape, mRNA-protein abundance, and functional annotation. Together, 
this dataset and PEN data portal provide a resource to accelerate cancer 
research using model cancer cell lines. PEN is freely accessible at 
http://combio.snu.ac.kr/pen.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.08.022
PMCID: PMC8405889
PMID: 34504668

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.