1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Aug 24;13(17):4263. doi: 10.3390/cancers13174263.

Inhibitory Receptors and Immune Checkpoints Regulating Natural Killer Cell 
Responses to Cancer.

Buckle I(1), Guillerey C(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Immunotherapies Laboratory, Mater Research Institute-The University of 
Queensland, Translational Research Institute, 37 Kent Street, Woolloongabba, QLD 
4102, Australia.

The discovery of immune checkpoints provided a breakthrough for cancer therapy. 
Immune checkpoints are inhibitory receptors that are up-regulated on chronically 
stimulated lymphocytes and have been shown to hinder immune responses to cancer. 
Monoclonal antibodies against the checkpoint molecules PD-1 and CTLA-4 have 
shown early clinical success against melanoma and are now approved to treat 
various cancers. Since then, the list of potential candidates for immune 
checkpoint blockade has dramatically increased. The current paradigm stipulates 
that immune checkpoint blockade therapy unleashes pre-existing T cell responses. 
However, there is accumulating evidence that some of these immune checkpoint 
molecules are also expressed on Natural Killer (NK) cells. In this review, we 
summarize our latest knowledge about targetable NK cell inhibitory receptors. We 
discuss the HLA-binding receptors KIRS and NKG2A, receptors binding to nectin 
and nectin-like molecules including TIGIT, CD96, and CD112R, and immune 
checkpoints commonly associated with T cells such as PD-1, TIM-3, and LAG-3. We 
also discuss newly discovered pathways such as IL-1R8 and often overlooked 
receptors such as CD161 and Siglecs. We detail how these inhibitory receptors 
might regulate NK cell responses to cancer, and, where relevant, we discuss 
their implications for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13174263
PMCID: PMC8428224
PMID: 34503073

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.