1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Sep 5;22(17):9617. doi: 10.3390/ijms22179617.

Fungal Biotransformation of 2'-Methylflavanone and 2'-Methylflavone as a Method 
to Obtain Glycosylated Derivatives.

Krawczyk-Łebek A(1), Dymarska M(1), Janeczko T(1), Kostrzewa-Susłow E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Biotechnology and Food Science, Wrocław 
University of Environmental and Life Sciences, 50-375 Wrocław, Poland.

Methylated flavonoids are promising pharmaceutical agents due to their improved 
metabolic stability and increased activity compared to unmethylated forms. The 
biotransformation in cultures of entomopathogenic filamentous fungi is a 
valuable method to obtain glycosylated flavones and flavanones with increased 
aqueous solubility and bioavailability. In the present study, we combined 
chemical synthesis and biotransformation to obtain methylated and glycosylated 
flavonoid derivatives. In the first step, we synthesized 2'-methylflavanone and 
2'-methylflavone. Afterwards, both compounds were biotransformed in the cultures 
of two strains of entomopathogenic filamentous fungi Beauveria bassiana KCH J1.5 
and Isaria fumosorosea KCH J2. We determined the structures of biotransformation 
products based on NMR spectroscopy. Biotransformations of 2'-methyflavanone in 
the culture of B. bassiana KCH J1.5 resulted in three glycosylated flavanones: 
2'-methylflavanone 6-O-β-d-(4″-O-methyl)-glucopyranoside, 
3'-hydroxy-2'-methylflavanone 6-O-β-d-(4″-O-methyl)-glucopyranoside, and 
2-(2'-methylphenyl)-chromane 4-O-β-d-(4″-O-methyl)-glucopyranoside, whereas in 
the culture of I. fumosorosea KCH J2, two other products were obtained: 
2'-methylflavanone 3'-O-β-d-(4″-O-methyl)-glucopyranoside and 2-methylbenzoic 
acid 4-O-β-d-(4'-O-methyl)-glucopyranoside. 2'-Methylflavone was effectively 
biotransformed only by I. fumosorosea KCH J2 into three derivatives: 
2'-methylflavone 3'-O-β-d-(4″-O-methyl)-glucopyranoside, 2'-methylflavone 
4'-O-β-d-(4″-O-methyl)-glucopyranoside, and 2'-methylflavone 
5'-O-β-d-(4″-O-methyl)-glucopyranoside. All obtained glycosylated flavonoids 
have not been described in the literature until now and need further research on 
their biological activity and pharmacological efficacy as potential drugs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22179617
PMCID: PMC8431774
PMID: 34502526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.