1. Exp Ther Med. 2021 Oct;22(4):1155. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10589. Epub 2021 Aug 
10.

circASS1 overexpression inhibits the proliferation, invasion and migration of 
colorectal cancer cells by regulating the miR-1269a/VASH1 axis.

Xiong HL(1), Zhong XH(2), Guo XH(1), Liao HJ(1), Yuan X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Huizhou Municipal Central Hospital of 
Guangdong Province, Huizhou, Guangdong 516000, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Huizhou Municipal Central Hospital 
of Guangdong Province, Huizhou, Guangdong 516000, P.R. China.

Colorectal cancer (CRC), the third most common cancer worldwide, poses a threat 
to human life. However, its underlying mechanism is unclear and no satisfactory 
treatment is available. The present study aimed to investigate the role of 
circular RNA argininosuccinate synthase 1 (circASS1) in CRC cells and tissues to 
identify the potential mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of CRC. The 
expression of circASS1 in CRC cells and tissues was determined by reverse 
transcription-quantitative PCR. Following circASS1 overexpression in HT29 cells, 
cell viability, colony formation and apoptosis were measured using MTT, colony 
formation and TUNEL assays, respectively. Cell invasion and migration were also 
assessed. After confirming the associations among circASS1, microRNA (miR)-1269a 
and vasohibin 1 (VASH1), the characteristics of the HT29 cell line were assessed 
by performing the aforementioned assays. circASS1 expression was decreased in 
CRC cells and tissues, and circASS1 overexpression suppressed CRC cell 
proliferation, invasion and migration. circASS1 adsorbed miR-1269a and regulated 
its expression, and VASH1 was a target protein of miR-1269a. circASS1 
overexpression decreased cell proliferation, invasion and migration, but 
enhanced cell apoptosis in HT29 cells, which was reversed by co-transfection 
with miR-1269a mimic or short hairpin RNA-VASH1. In conclusion, circASS1 
overexpression inhibited CRC cell proliferation, invasion and migration by 
regulating miR-1269a/VASH1, which indicated a potential molecular mechanism 
underlying the pathogenesis of CRC.

Copyright: Â© Xiong et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.10589
PMCID: PMC8393656
PMID: 34504600

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no competing 
interests.