1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Aug 30;22(17):9408. doi: 10.3390/ijms22179408.

Pemafibrate Prevents Retinal Dysfunction in a Mouse Model of Unilateral Common 
Carotid Artery Occlusion.

Lee D(1)(2), Tomita Y(1)(2)(3), Jeong H(1)(2), Miwa Y(1)(2)(4), Tsubota K(5), 
Negishi K(2), Kurihara T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Photobiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 
160-8582, Japan.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 
160-8582, Japan.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Animal Eye Care, Tokyo Animal Eye Clinic, Tokyo 158-0093, Japan.
(5)Tsubota Laboratory, Inc., Tokyo 160-0016, Japan.

Cardiovascular diseases lead to retinal ischemia, one of the leading causes of 
blindness. Retinal ischemia triggers pathological retinal glial responses and 
functional deficits. Therefore, maintaining retinal neuronal activities and 
modulating pathological gliosis may prevent loss of vision. Previously, 
pemafibrate, a selective peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha 
modulator, was nominated as a promising drug in retinal ischemia. However, a 
protective role of pemafibrate remains untouched in cardiovascular 
diseases-mediated retinal ischemia. Therefore, we aimed to unravel systemic and 
retinal alterations by treating pemafibrate in a new murine model of retinal 
ischemia caused by cardiovascular diseases. Adult C57BL/6 mice were orally 
administered pemafibrate (0.5 mg/kg) for 4 days, followed by unilateral common 
carotid artery occlusion (UCCAO). After UCCAO, pemafibrate was continuously 
supplied to mice until the end of experiments. Retinal function (a-and b-waves 
and the oscillatory potentials) was measured using electroretinography on day 5 
and 12 after UCCAO. Moreover, the retina, liver, and serum were subjected to 
qPCR, immunohistochemistry, or ELISA analysis. We found that pemafibrate 
enhanced liver function, elevated serum levels of fibroblast growth factor 21 
(FGF21), one of the neuroprotective molecules in the eye, and protected against 
UCCAO-induced retinal dysfunction, observed with modulation of retinal gliosis 
and preservation of oscillatory potentials. Our current data suggest a promising 
pemafibrate therapy for the suppression of retinal dysfunction in cardiovascular 
diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22179408
PMCID: PMC8431531
PMID: 34502311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Yukihiro Miwa is employed by Tokyo Animal Eye 
Clinic and Kazuo Tsubota is CEO in Tsubota Laboratory, Inc. The remaining 
authors declare no conflict of interest.