1. Front Physiol. 2021 Aug 26;12:725798. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.725798. 
eCollection 2021.

Acute Detubulation of Ventricular Myocytes Amplifies the Inhibitory Effect of 
Cholinergic Agonist on Intracellular Ca(2+) Transients.

Belevych AE(1)(2), Bogdanov V(1)(2), Terentyev DA(1)(2), Gyorke S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, United States.
(2)Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner 
Medical Center, Columbus, OH, United States.

Muscarinic receptors expressed in cardiac myocytes play a critical role in the 
regulation of heart function by the parasympathetic nervous system. How the 
structural organization of cardiac myocytes affects the regulation of Ca2+ 
handling by muscarinic receptors is not well-defined. Using confocal Ca2+ 
imaging, patch-clamp techniques, and immunocytochemistry, the relationship 
between t-tubule density and cholinergic regulation of intracellular Ca2+ in 
normal murine ventricular myocytes and myocytes with acute disruption of the 
t-tubule system caused by formamide treatment was studied. The inhibitory effect 
of muscarinic receptor agonist carbachol (CCh, 10 μM) on the amplitude of Ca2+ 
transients, evoked by field-stimulation in the presence of 100 nM isoproterenol 
(Iso), a β-adrenergic agonist, was directly proportional to the level of myocyte 
detubulation. The timing of the maximal rate of fluorescence increase of fluo-4, 
a Ca2+-sensitive dye, was used to classify image pixels into the regions 
functionally coupled or uncoupled to the sarcolemmal Ca2+ influx (ICa). CCh 
decreased the fraction of coupled regions and suppressed Ca2+ propagation from 
sarcolemma inside the cell. Formamide treatment reduced ICa density and 
decreased sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ content. CCh did not change SR Ca2+ 
content in Iso-stimulated control and formamide-treated myocytes. CCh inhibited 
peak ICa recorded in the presence of Iso by ∼20% in both the control and 
detubulated myocytes. Reducing ICa amplitude up to 40% by changing the voltage 
step levels from 0 to -25 mV decreased Ca2+ transients in formamide-treated but 
not in control myocytes in the presence of Iso. CCh inhibited CaMKII activity, 
whereas CaMKII inhibition with KN93 mimicked the effect of CCh on Ca2+ 
transients in formamide-treated myocytes. It was concluded that the 
downregulation of t-tubules coupled with the diminished efficiency of 
excitation-contraction coupling, increases the sensitivity of Ca2+ release and 
propagation to muscarinic receptor-mediated inhibition of both ICa and CaMKII 
activity.

Copyright © 2021 Belevych, Bogdanov, Terentyev and Gyorke.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.725798
PMCID: PMC8427700
PMID: 34512394

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.