1. Autoimmunity. 2021 Dec;54(8):569-575. doi: 10.1080/08916934.2021.1975680. Epub
 2021 Sep 14.

TGFB1 +869 T > C (rs1800470) variant is independently associated with 
susceptibility, laboratory activity, and TGF-β1 in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Stadtlober NP(1), Flauzino T(1), Santos LFDRF(1), Iriyoda TMV(2), Costa NT(3), 
Lozovoy MAB(4), Reiche EMV(4), Simão ANC(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Research in Applied Immunology, State University of Londrina, 
Londrina, Brazil.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Pontifical Catholic University of Paraná 
(PUC/PR), Londrina, Brazil.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, State University of Londrina, Londrina, Brazil.
(4)Department of Pathology, Clinical Analysis and Toxicology, Laboratory of 
Research in Applied Immunology, State University of Londrina, Londrina, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the association of the +869 T > C 
(rs1800470) and -509 C > T (rs1800469) TGFB1 variants, individually or in 
haplotypes structure, with susceptibility, autoantibodies, disease activity, and 
TGF-β1 plasma levels in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The 
study included 203 patients with SLE and 165 healthy controls. TGFB1 variants 
were determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Plasma levels of 
TGF-β1 were determined using immunofluorimetric assay. The TGFB1 + 869 CC 
genotype was associated with SLE susceptibility (OR: 1.710, 95%CI: 1.020-2.866, 
p = 0.042) and with reduction of C4 (p = 0.040) and TGF-β1 levels (p = 0.044). 
In addition, patients with TGFB1 + 869 TC and CC genotypes and positive 
anti-dsDNA had lower TGF-β1 levels than those with TT (p = 0.004). TGFB1 -509 TT 
genotype was associated with reduced levels of C4 (p = 0.032). There was no 
association between haplotypes and clinical and laboratory parameters. Our data 
demonstrated that the TGFB1 + 869 T > C variant could be used as a genetic 
marker for SLE susceptibility and both variants as predictors of laboratory 
activity. This is the first study to demonstrate that TGF-β1 levels could be 
modulated by the interaction between TGFB1 + 869 C allele, in homozygosity, or 
heterozygosity, and the presence of anti-dsDNA.

DOI: 10.1080/08916934.2021.1975680
PMID: 34519592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]