1. J Oncol. 2021 Sep 3;2021:3569349. doi: 10.1155/2021/3569349. eCollection 2021.

Aminoquinolines as Translational Models for Drug Repurposing: Anticancer 
Adjuvant Properties and Toxicokinetic-Related Features.

Ferreira PMP(1), Ferreira JRO(2), de Sousa RWR(1), Bezerra DP(3), Militão 
GCG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics and Physiology, Laboratory of Experimental 
Cancerology (LabCancer), Federal University of Piauí, Teresina 64049-550, 
Brazil.
(2)Center for Integrative Sciences, State University of Health Sciences of 
Alagoas, Maceió 57010-382, Brazil.
(3)Gonçalo Moniz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (IGM-FIOCRUZ-BA), Salvador 
40296-710, Brazil.
(4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Federal University of Pernambuco, 
Recife 50670-901, Brazil.

The indiscriminate consumption of antimalarials against coronavirus disease-2019 
emphasizes the longstanding clinical weapons of medicines. In this work, we 
conducted a review on the antitumor mechanisms of aminoquinolines, focusing on 
the responses and differences of tumor histological tissues and toxicity related 
to pharmacokinetics. This well-defined analysis shows similar mechanistic forms 
triggered by aminoquinolines in different histological tumor tissues and under 
coexposure conditions, although different pharmacological potencies also occur. 
These molecules are lysosomotropic amines that increase the antiproliferative 
action of chemotherapeutic agents, mainly by cell cycle arrest, histone 
acetylation, physiological changes in tyrosine kinase metabolism, inhibition of 
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways, cyclin D1, E2F1, angiogenesis, ribosome biogenesis, 
triggering of ATM-ATR/p53/p21 signaling, apoptosis, and presentation of tumor 
peptides. Their chemo/radiotherapy sensitization effects may be an adjuvant 
option against solid tumors, since 4-aminoquinolines induce lysosomal-mediated 
programmed cytotoxicity of cancer cells and accumulation of key markers, 
predominantly, LAMP1, p62/SQSTM1, LC3 members, GAPDH, beclin-1/Atg6, 
α-synuclein, and granules of lipofuscin. Adverse effects are dose-dependent, 
though most common with chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, amodiaquine, and other 
aminoquinolines are gastrointestinal changes, blurred vision ventricular 
arrhythmias, cardiac arrest, QTc prolongation, severe hypoglycemia with loss of 
consciousness, and retinopathy, and they are more common with chloroquine than 
with hydroxychloroquine and amodiaquine due to pharmacokinetic features. 
Additionally, psychological/neurological effects were also detected during acute 
or chronic use, but aminoquinolines do not cross the placenta easily and low 
quantity is found in breast milk despite their long mean residence times, which 
depends on the coexistence of hepatic diseases (cancer-related or not), first 
pass metabolism, and comedications. The low cost and availability on the world 
market have converted aminoquinolines into "star drugs" for pharmaceutical 
repurposing, but a continuous pharmacovigilance is necessary because these 
antimalarials have multiple modes of action/unwanted targets, relatively narrow 
therapeutic windows, recurrent adverse effects, and related poisoning 
self-treatment. Therefore, their use must obey strict rules, ethical and medical 
prescriptions, and clinical and laboratory monitoring.

Copyright © 2021 Paulo Michel Pinheiro Ferreira et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/3569349
PMCID: PMC8437624
PMID: 34527050

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of financial interest or personal relationships that could influence this work 
and outcomes reported in this paper.