1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Aug 30;12:727915. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.727915. eCollection 2021.

Upregulation of Mir342 in Diet-Induced Obesity Mouse and the Hypothalamic 
Appetite Control.

Zhang D(1), Yamaguchi S(1), Zhang X(1), Yang B(1), Kurooka N(1), Sugawara R(1), 
Albuayjan HHH(1), Nakatsuka A(1), Eguchi J(1), Hiyama TY(2), Kamiya A(2), Wada 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Rheumatology, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Okayama 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Okayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Cellular Physiology, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.

Erratum in
    Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 26;12:811189. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.811189.
    Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Dec 10;12:811765. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.811765.

In obesity and type 2 diabetes, numerous genes are differentially expressed, and 
microRNAs are involved in transcriptional regulation of target mRNAs, but miRNAs 
critically involved in the appetite control are not known. Here, we identified 
upregulation of miR-342-3p and its host gene Evl in brain and adipose tissues in 
C57BL/6 mice fed with high fat-high sucrose (HFHS) chow by RNA sequencing. 
Mir342 (-/-) mice fed with HFHS chow were protected from obesity and diabetes. 
The hypothalamic arcuate nucleus neurons co-express Mir342 and EVL. The 
percentage of activated NPY+pSTAT3+ neurons were reduced, while POMC+pSTAT3+ 
neurons increased in Mir342 (-/-) mice, and they demonstrated the reduction of 
food intake and amelioration of metabolic phenotypes. Snap25 was identified as a 
major target gene of miR-342-3p and the reduced expression of Snap25 may link to 
functional impairment hypothalamic neurons and excess of food intake. The 
inhibition of miR-342-3p may be a potential candidate for miRNA-based therapy.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhang, Yamaguchi, Zhang, Yang, Kurooka, Sugawara, Albuayjan, 
Nakatsuka, Eguchi, Hiyama, Kamiya and Wada.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.727915
PMCID: PMC8437242
PMID: 34526970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JW receives speaker honoraria from Astra Zeneca, 
Daiichi Sankyo, MSD, Novartis, Tanabe Mitsubishi, Taisho Toyama and receives 
grant support from Baxter, Chugai, Dainippon Sumitomo, Ono, Teijin. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.