1. J Gen Physiol. 2021 Nov 1;153(11):e201711954. doi: 10.1085/jgp.201711954. Epub
 2021 Sep 16.

Protein functional dynamics from the rigorous global analysis of DEER data: 
Conditions, components, and conformations.

Hustedt EJ(1), Stein RA(1), Mchaourab HS(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN.

The potential of spin labeling to reveal the dynamic dimension of macromolecules 
has been recognized since the dawn of the methodology in the 1960s. However, it 
was the development of pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy to 
detect dipolar coupling between spin labels and the availability of turnkey 
instrumentation in the 21st century that realized the full promise of spin 
labeling. Double electron-electron resonance (DEER) spectroscopy has seen 
widespread applications to channels, transporters, and receptors. In these 
studies, distance distributions between pairs of spin labels obtained under 
different biochemical conditions report the conformational states of 
macromolecules, illuminating the key movements underlying biological function. 
These experimental studies have spurred the development of methods for the 
rigorous analysis of DEER spectroscopic data along with methods for integrating 
these distributions into structural models. In this tutorial, we describe a 
model-based approach to obtaining a minimum set of components of the distance 
distribution that correspond to functionally relevant protein conformations with 
a set of fractional amplitudes that define the equilibrium between these 
conformations. Importantly, we review and elaborate on the error analysis 
reflecting the uncertainty in the various parameters, a critical step in 
rigorous structural interpretation of the spectroscopic data.

Â© 2021 Hustedt et al.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.201711954
PMCID: PMC8449309
PMID: 34529007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]