1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2021 Dec 28;31(12):1732-1740. doi: 
10.4014/jmb.2106.06075.

Construction, Investigation and Application of TEV Protease Variants with 
Improved Oxidative Stability.

Bayar E(1), Ren Y(1), Chen Y(1), Hu Y(1), Zhang S(1), Yu X(1), Fan J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei, Anhui 230036, 
P.R. China.

Tobacco etch virus protease (TEVp) is a useful tool for removing fusion tags, 
but wild-type TEVp is less stable under oxidized redox state. In this work, we 
introduced and combined C19S, C110S and C130S into TEVp variants containing 
T17S, L56V, N68D, I77V and S135G to improve protein solubility, and S219V to 
inhibit self-proteolysis. The solubility and cleavage activity of the 
constructed variants in Escherichia coli strains including BL21(DE3), 
BL21(DE3)pLys, Rossetta(DE3) and Origami(DE3) under the same induction 
conditions were analyzed and compared. The desirable soluble amounts, activity, 
and oxidative stability were identified to be reluctantly favored in the TEVp. 
Unlike C19S, C110S and C130S hardly impacted on decreasing protein solubility in 
the BL21(DE3), but they contributed to improved tolerance to the oxidative redox 
state in vivo and in vitro. After two fusion proteins were cleaved by purified 
TEVp protein containing double mutations under the oxidized redox state, the 
refolded disulfide-rich bovine enterokinase catalytic domain or maize peroxidase 
with enhanced yields were released from the regenerated amorphous cellulose via 
affinity absorption of the cellulose-binding module as the affinity tag.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.2106.06075
PMCID: PMC9705859
PMID: 34528919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors have no 
financial conflicts of interest to declare.