1. Sci Rep. 2021 Sep 16;11(1):18449. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-97664-y.

A nationwide study of patients with monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined 
significance with a 10-year follow-up in South Korea.

Kang KW(1), Song JE(2), Lee BH(1), Jeon MJ(1), Yu ES(1), Kim DS(1), Lee SR(1), 
Sung HJ(1), Choi CW(1), Park Y(1), Kim BS(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea 
University College of Medicine, 73, Goryeodae-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 02841, 
South Korea.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(3)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea 
University College of Medicine, 73, Goryeodae-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 02841, 
South Korea. kbs0309@korea.ac.kr.

In clinical practice, most patients with monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined 
significance (MGUS) undergo long-term follow-up without disease progression. 
There is insufficient real-world data about how closely and whether anything 
other than disease progression should be monitored. Herein, we performed a 
nationwide study of 470 patients with MGUS with a 10-year follow-up to determine 
the patterns of disease progression and other comorbidities. During the 
follow-up period, 158 of 470 patients with MGUS (33.62%) progressed to 
symptomatic monoclonal gammopathies. Most of these were multiple myeloma 
(134/470 patients, 28.51%), and those diagnosed within 2 years after diagnosis 
of MGUS was high. Approximately 30-50% of patients with MGUS had hypertension, 
diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and osteoarthritis at the time of diagnosis, and these 
comorbidities were newly developed during the follow-up period in approximately 
50% of the remaining patients with MGUS. Approximately 20-40% of patients with 
MGUS have acute or chronic kidney failure, thyroid disorders, disc disorders, 
peripheral neuropathy, myocardial infarction, stroke, and heart failure during 
the follow-up period. Altogether, when MGUS is diagnosed, close follow-up of the 
possibility of progression to multiple myeloma is required, especially within 
2 years after diagnosis; simultaneously, various comorbidities should be 
considered and monitored during the follow-up of patients with MGUS. Continuous 
research is needed to establish appropriate follow-up guidelines.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-97664-y
PMCID: PMC8445957
PMID: 34531426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.