1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2021 Sep;25(17):5490-5499. doi: 
10.26355/eurrev_202109_26658.

Mechanism of curcumin against myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury based on 
the P13K/Akt/mTOR signalling pathway.

Wu HJ(1), Zhang K, Ma JJ, Wang L, Zhuang Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, China. 
zhuangyanjinan@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the pharmacodynamic mechanism of curcumin against 
myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury by regulating the phosphatidylinositol-3 
kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (AKT)/rapamycin target protein (mTOR) signalling 
pathway.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The left anterior descending coronary artery was ligated 
for 30 min and reperfused for 3 h to establish an ischaemia-reperfusion injury 
model. The electrocardiogram (ECG) detection of rats was performed, and the 
degree of myocardial infarction was determined by 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium 
chloride staining. The expression levels of serum creatine kinase isoenzyme 
(CK), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione 
peroxidase (GSH-Px), malondialdehyde (MDA), nitric oxide (NO) and other related 
indicators were detected. The protein expressions of mTOR, phosphorylated 
(p)-mTOR, AKT and p-AKT were detected by Western blotting, whereas the 
expressions of Bcl-2 and Bax were detected by real-time polymerase chain 
reaction.
RESULTS: The results showed that compared with the model group, curcumin could 
improve the ECG findings, reduce the scope of myocardial infarction, reduce the 
expression levels of CK-MB, LDH, AST, MDA, NO and increase those of SOD and GSH. 
Curcumin can also down-regulate the expression of Bax and up-regulate the 
protein levels of Bcl2, p-mTOR and p-AKT (p < 0.05 or p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that curcumin has a significant protective effect 
on myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion, and its mechanism may be related to the 
activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR signalling pathway and inhibition of inflammation, 
apoptosis and oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202109_26658
PMID: 34533799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]