1. Ann Transl Med. 2021 Aug;9(16):1354. doi: 10.21037/atm-21-3861.

A rapid and durable response to cabozantinib in an osimertinib-resistant lung 
cancer patient with MET D1228N mutation: a case report.

Kuang Y(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Xu P(1)(2), Zheng Y(3), Bai L(1)(2), Sun X(1)(2), 
Li Z(1)(2), Gan R(1)(2), Li H(1)(2), Ke Z(4), Tang K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Institute of Pulmonary Diseases, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.

Osimertinib has efficacy superior to that of standard epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for the first-line treatment 
of patients with EGFR-mutant advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 
However, patients treated with osimertinib eventually acquire drug resistance. 
MET missense mutations have been demonstrated to mediate resistance to MET-TKIs, 
such as crizotinib. But the role of MET missense mutations in mediating EGFR TKI 
resistance is undefined. With the increasing use of next-generation sequencing 
(NGS) at diagnosis, many mechanisms of acquired resistance have been discovered 
in patients with activated tyrosine kinase receptors. Herein, we report the 
first case of MET D1228N mutation mediating acquired resistance to osimertinib 
in a MET TKI-na√Øve NSCLC. The patient with advanced lung adenocarcinoma 
harboring EGFR exon 19 deletion initially responded to osimertinib with 
progression-free survival (PFS) lasting 11 months and then developed resistance 
with an acquired mutation of MET D1228N. Subsequently, combination therapy of 
cabozantinib and osimertinib was administrated to the patient, and her clinical 
symptoms were rapidly relieved within one week with good tolerance. She remained 
on the combined treatment for 10 months. Finally, she achieved an overall 
survival (OS) of 25 months. Based on our findings, patient with MET D1228N 
mutant lung adenocarcinoma clinically benefited from combinatorial therapy of 
cabozantinib and osimertinib after osimertinib resistance.

2021 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-21-3861
PMCID: PMC8422132
PMID: 34532491

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-21-3861). The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.