1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Sep 20;17(9):e1009940. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009940. 
eCollection 2021 Sep.

PCV2 targets cGAS to inhibit type I interferon induction to promote other DNA 
virus infection.

Wang Z(1), Chen J(1), Wu X(1), Ma D(1), Zhang X(1), Li R(1), Han C(1), Liu H(1), 
Yin X(1), Du Q(1), Tong D(1), Huang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, China.

Viruses use diverse strategies to impair the antiviral immunity of host in order 
to promote infection and pathogenesis. Herein, we found that PCV2 infection 
promotes the infection of DNA viruses through inhibiting IFN-β induction in vivo 
and in vitro. In the early phase of infection, PCV2 promotes the phosphorylation 
of cGAS at S278 via activation of PI3K/Akt signaling, which directly silences 
the catalytic activity of cGAS. Subsequently, phosphorylation of cGAS at S278 
can facilitate the K48-linked poly-ubiquitination of cGAS at K389, which can 
been served as a signal for recognizing by the ubiquitin-binding domain of 
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), to promote the translocation of 
K48-ubiquitinated-cGAS from cytosol to autolysosome depending on the deacetylase 
activity of HDAC6, thereby eventually resulting in a markedly increased cGAS 
degradation in PCV2 infection-induced autophagic cells relative to Earle's 
Balanced Salt Solution (EBSS)-induced autophagic cells (a typical starving 
autophagy). Importantly, we found that PCV2 Cap and its binding protein gC1qR 
act as predominant regulators to promote porcine cGAS phosphorylation and HDAC6 
activation through mediating PI3K/AKT signaling and PKCδ signaling activation. 
Based on this finding, gC1qR-binding activity deficient PCV2 mutant (PCV2RmA) 
indeed shows a weakened inhibitory effect on IFN-β induction and a weaker boost 
effect for other DNA viruses infection compared to wild-type PCV2. Collectively, 
our findings illuminate a systematic regulation mechanism by which porcine 
circovirus counteracts the cGAS-STING signaling pathway to inhibit the type I 
interferon induction and promote DNA virus infection, and identify gC1qR as an 
important regulator for the immunosuppression induced by PCV2.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009940
PMCID: PMC8483418
PMID: 34543359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.