1. Sci Rep. 2021 Sep 20;11(1):18630. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-97393-2.

A new approach to produce IgG(4)-like bispecific antibodies.

Zhao C(1)(2), Zhang W(2), Gong G(2), Xie L(2), Wang MW(3)(4), Hu Y(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, Shanghai, 201203, China.
(2)China State Institute of Pharmaceutical Industry, Shanghai, 201203, China.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, Shanghai, 201203, China. 
mwwang@simm.ac.cn.
(4)The National Center for Drug Screening, Shanghai, 201203, China. 
mwwang@simm.ac.cn.
(5)China State Institute of Pharmaceutical Industry, Shanghai, 201203, China. 
huyoujia@sinopharm.com.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2022 Mar 1;12(1):3640. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-07339-5.

While achieving rapid developments in recent years, bispecific antibodies are 
still difficult to design and manufacture, due to mispair of both heavy and 
light chains. Here we report a novel technology to make bispecific molecules. 
The knob-into-hole method was used to pair two distinct heavy chains as a 
heterodimer. IgG4 S228P CH1-CL interface was then partially replaced by T-cell 
receptor α/β constant domain to increase the efficiency of cognate heavy and 
light chain pairing. Following expression and purification, the bispecific 
antibody interface exchange was confirmed by Western blotting and LC-MS/MS. To 
ensure its validity, we combined a monovalent bispecific antibody against PD-1 
(sequence from Pembrolizumab) and LAG3 (sequence from Relatlimab). The results 
showed that the molecule could be assembled correctly at a ratio of 95% in 
cells. In vitro functional assay demonstrated that the purified bispecific 
antibody exhibits an enhanced agonist activity compared to that of the parental 
antibodies. Low immunogenicity was predicted by an open-access software and ADA 
test.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-97393-2
PMCID: PMC8452627
PMID: 34545109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.