1. Genes Dev. 2021 Oct 1;35(19-20):1339-1355. doi: 10.1101/gad.348517.121. Epub 
2021 Sep 23.

Disruption of origin chromatin structure by helicase activation in the absence 
of DNA replication.

Hoffman RA(1), MacAlpine HK(1), MacAlpine DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Prior to initiation of DNA replication, the eukaryotic helicase, Mcm2-7, must be 
activated to unwind DNA at replication start sites in early S phase. To study 
helicase activation within origin chromatin, we constructed a conditional mutant 
of the polymerase α subunit Cdc17 (or Pol1) to prevent priming and block 
replication. Recovery of these cells at permissive conditions resulted in the 
generation of unreplicated gaps at origins, likely due to helicase activation 
prior to replication initiation. We used micrococcal nuclease (MNase)-based 
chromatin occupancy profiling under restrictive conditions to study chromatin 
dynamics associated with helicase activation. Helicase activation in the absence 
of DNA replication resulted in the disruption and disorganization of chromatin, 
which extends up to 1 kb from early, efficient replication origins. The CMG 
holohelicase complex also moves the same distance out from the origin, producing 
single-stranded DNA that activates the intra-S-phase checkpoint. Loss of the 
checkpoint did not regulate the progression and stalling of the CMG complex but 
rather resulted in the disruption of chromatin at both early and late origins. 
Finally, we found that the local sequence context regulates helicase progression 
in the absence of DNA replication, suggesting that the helicase is intrinsically 
less processive when uncoupled from replication.

© 2021 Hoffman et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.348517.121
PMCID: PMC8494203
PMID: 34556529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]