1. Mol Med Rep. 2021 Nov;24(5):814. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12454. Epub 2021 Sep
24.

NF‑κB/IκBα signaling pathways are essential for resistance to heat 
stress‑induced ROS production in pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells.

Xie W(#)(1), Huang W(#)(1), Cai S(#)(1), Chen H(1), Fu W(1), Chen Z(1), Liu 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, P.R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

The results of a previous study demonstrated that heat stress (HS) triggered 
oxidative stress, which in turn induced the apoptosis of epithelial cells. These 
results uncovered a novel mechanism underlying the activation of NF‑κB in 
primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells. The present study aimed to 
further investigate the role of NF‑κB/IκBα signaling pathways in the inhibition 
of HS‑induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and cytotoxicity in 
endothelial cells. The results of the present study demonstrated that HS 
triggered a significant amount of NF‑κB and IκBα nuclear translocation without 
IκBα degradation in a time‑dependent manner. Mutant constructs of IκBα 
phosphorylation sites (Ser32, Ser36) were employed in rat pulmonary 
microvascular endothelial cells (PMVECs). Cell Counting Kit‑8 assays 
demonstrated that both the small interfering (si)RNA‑mediated knockdown of p65 
and IκBα mutant constructs significantly decreased cell viability and aggravated 
ROS accumulation in HS‑induced rat PMVECs compared with the control. 
Additionally, western blot analysis revealed that p65 siRNA attenuated the 
protein expression of IκBα. However, IκBα mutant constructs failed to attenuate 
NF‑κB activation and nuclear translocation, indicating that IκBα‑independent 
pathways contributed to NF‑κB activity and nucleus translocation in a 
time‑dependent manner following HS. Collectively, the results of the present 
study suggested that the NF‑κB/IκBα pathway was essential for resistance to 
HS‑induced ROS production and cytotoxicity in rat PMVECs, and that it could be a 
potential therapeutic target to reduce the mortality and morbidity of heat 
stroke.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12454
PMCID: PMC8477608
PMID: 34558646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.