1. Hum Immunol. 2022 Jan;83(1):47-52. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2021.09.001. Epub
2021  Sep 20.

Association of the 3' untranslated region polymorphisms of HLA-G with 
susceptibility to chronic hepatitis C virus infection in the Chinese population.

Zhou S(1), Liu M(2), Xia Y(1), Zhang L(1), Shao L(1), Wang N(1), Yu W(1), Ding 
N(3), Zhang K(2), Liang X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Blood Group, Dalian Blood Center, Dalian, China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.
(3)Dalian Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated of Dalian Medical University, 
Dalian, China.
(4)Department of Blood Group, Dalian Blood Center, Dalian, China. Electronic 
address: liangxiaohua1968@126.com.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a global health problem. Several previous 
studies have addressed the role of host single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
in HCV infection. SNPs in the regulatory region of the human leukocyte antigen G 
(HLA-G) gene play an important role in several diseases. The objective of this 
study is to determine the association of HLA-G 3'untranslated region (UTR) 
polymorphisms with the susceptibility to chronic hepatitis C infection in the 
Chinese population. HLA-G 3' UTR polymorphisms, which include 14-bp Ins/Del 
(rs371194629), +3003T/C (rs1707), +3010C/G (rs1710), +3027 A/C (rs17179101), 
+3035C/T (rs17179108), +3142 G/C (rs1063320), +3187 A/G (rs9380142) 
and + 3196C/G (rs1610696), were analyzed in 246 patients with chronic hepatitis 
C infection and 294 healthy individuals. The alleles, genotypes, and haplotypes 
were compared between chronic hepatitis C-infected subjects and controls using 
chi-square tests and logistic regression models. After a correction of multiple 
comparisons by the false discovery rate (FDR), the allele frequency of + 3196C, 
genotype frequencies of + 3187 AA and + 3196CC and frequency of the UTR-3 
haplotype were significantly higher in the patients than in the control group 
(P < 0.05), whereas the frequencies of UTR-1 and UTR-2 haplotypes were 
significantly lower in the patients than in the control group (P < 0.05). After 
a correction of multiple comparisons by FDR, UTR-2 and UTR-3 maintained 
significant associations with chronic hepatitis C. This study indicates that 
HLA-G 3'UTR polymorphisms are associated with the susceptibility to chronic 
hepatitis C infection in the Chinese population. HLA-G 3'UTR may play an 
important role in risk modulation toward HCV infection.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2021.09.001
PMID: 34556350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.