1. Pest Manag Sci. 2022 Feb;78(2):541-549. doi: 10.1002/ps.6658. Epub 2021 Oct 8.

Amino acid substitution (Gly-654-Tyr) in acetolactate synthase (ALS) confers 
broad spectrum resistance to ALS-inhibiting herbicides.

Cao Y(1), Zhou X(2), Huang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Institute for the Control of Agrochemicals, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Amaranthus retroflexus L. is a problematic weed in agricultural 
fields. In China, the repeated use of acetolactate synthase (ALS) inhibiting 
herbicides has led to the evolution of many A. retroflexus resistant 
populations. The objective of this research was to investigate the physiological 
and molecular basis for resistance to ALS-inhibiting herbicides in A. 
retroflexus.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of the ALS revealed a Trp to Leu substitution at 
amino acid position 574 (Trp-574-Leu), and a previously unreported substitution 
of Gly to Tyr substitution at 654 (Gly-654-Tyr) in the resistant A. retroflexus 
population. A purified R-Tyr654 subpopulation homozygous for the Gly-654-Tyr 
mutation was generated and characterized in response to five different classes 
of ALS-inhibiting herbicides. Dose-response analysis revealed that the R-Tyr654 
population was highly resistant to two imidazolinones (imazethapyr, >42-fold; 
imazamox, 48.3-fold), one triazolopyrimidine (flumetsulam, 57.4-fold), and one 
sulfonylamino-carbonyltriazolinone (flucarbazone, 17.3-fold). Moreover, it was 
moderately resistant to two sulfonylureas (thifensulfuron-methyl, 4.9-fold; 
nicosulfuron, 9.1-fold), and one pyrimidinylthio-benzoate (bispyribac-sodium, 
3.1-fold). An in vitro ALS activity assay showed that ALS with the Gly-654-Tyr 
substitution was resistant to all the tested ALS-inhibiting herbicides. However, 
the field rate of herbicides binding other sites of action demonstrated 
effective control of the R-Tyr654 population.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the molecular basis of ALS-inhibiting 
herbicide resistance in A. retroflexus was caused by the Trp-574-Leu and 
Gly-654-Tyr substitutions in the ALS. This is the first report of Gly-654-Tyr 
substitution in ALS, and this substitution confers broad spectrum resistance to 
ALS-inhibiting herbicides. © 2021 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2021 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.6658
PMID: 34558160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]