1. Aging (Albany NY). 2021 Sep 22;13(18):22208-22231. doi: 10.18632/aging.203527.
 Epub 2021 Sep 22.

Involvement of c-Myc in low dose radiation-induced senescence enhanced migration 
and invasion of unirradiated cancer cells.

Leu JD(1)(2), Wang CY(3), Lo CC(4), Lin MY(4), Chang CY(4)(5), Hung WC(1), Lin 
ST(4), Wang BS(4), Lee YJ(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience, National Cheng Chi University, Taipei 116, Taiwan.
(3)Radiotherapy, Department of Medical Imaging, Cheng Hsin General Hospital, 
Taipei 112, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Radiological Sciences, National Yang 
Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei 112, Taiwan.
(5)Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 
08903-2681, USA.
(6)Cancer Progression Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, 
Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Ionizing radiation is known to cause cell apoptosis at high dose range, but 
little is known about the cellular response to low dose radiation. In this 
study, we found that conditioned medium harvested from WI-38 lung fibroblasts 
and H1299 lung adenocarcinoma cells exposed to 0.1Gy to 1Gy could enhance the 
migration and invasion of unirradiated H1299 cells in both 2D and 3D culturing 
circumstances. Low dose radiation did not induce apoptosis, but induced 
senescence in irradiated cells. We next examined the expression of immediately 
early genes including c-Myc and K-Ras. Although both genes could be up-regulated 
by low dose radiation, induction of c-Myc was more specific to low dose range 
(0.5Gy) at transcriptional and translational levels. Knockdown of c-Myc by shRNA 
could repress the senescence induced by low dose radiation. The conditioned 
medium of irradiated cells induced migration of unirradiated cells was also 
repressed by knockdown of c-Myc. The c-Myc inhibitor 10058-F4 could suppress low 
dose radiation induced cell senescence, and the conditioned medium harvested 
from irradiated cells pretreated with 10058-F4 also lost the ability to enhance 
the migration of unirradiated cells. The cytokine array analysis revealed that 
immunosuppressive monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 increased by low dose 
radiation could be repressed by 10058-F4. We also showed that 10058-F4 could 
suppress low dose radiation induced tumor progression in a xenograft tumor 
model. Taken together, current data suggest that -Myc is involved in low dose 
radiation induced cell senescence and potent bystander effect to increase the 
motility of unirradiated cells.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.203527
PMCID: PMC8507273
PMID: 34552037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest related to this study.