1. J Mol Graph Model. 2021 Dec;109:108035. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2021.108035. Epub 
2021 Sep 17.

E484K mutation in SARS-CoV-2 RBD enhances binding affinity with hACE2 but 
reduces interactions with neutralizing antibodies and nanobodies: Binding free 
energy calculation studies.

Wang WB(1), Liang Y(2), Jin YQ(2), Zhang J(2), Su JG(3), Li QM(4).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Microstructural Material Physics of Hebei Province, School 
of Science, Yanshan University, Qinhuangdao, 066004, China.
(2)The Sixth Laboratory, National Vaccine and Serum Institute, Beijing, 101111, 
China.
(3)Key Laboratory for Microstructural Material Physics of Hebei Province, School 
of Science, Yanshan University, Qinhuangdao, 066004, China; The Sixth 
Laboratory, National Vaccine and Serum Institute, Beijing, 101111, China. 
Electronic address: jiguosu@ysu.edu.cn.
(4)The Sixth Laboratory, National Vaccine and Serum Institute, Beijing, 101111, 
China. Electronic address: liqiming189@163.com.

The pandemic of the COVID-19 disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 has led to more than 
200 million infections and over 4 million deaths worldwide. The progress in the 
developments of effective vaccines and neutralizing antibody therapeutics brings 
hopes to eliminate the threat of COVID-19. However, SARS-CoV-2 continues to 
mutate, and several new variants have been emerged. Among the various 
naturally-occurring mutations, the E484K mutation shared by many variants 
attracted serious concerns, which may potentially enhance the receptor binding 
affinity and reduce the immune response. In the present study, the molecular 
mechanism behind the impacts of E484K mutation on the binding affinity of the 
receptor-binding domain (RBD) with the receptor human angiotensin-converting 
enzyme 2 (hACE2) was investigated by using the molecular dynamics (MD) 
simulations combined with the molecular mechanics-generalized Born surface area 
(MMGBSA) method. Our results indicate that the E484K mutation results in more 
favorable electrostatic interactions compensating the burial of the charged and 
polar groups upon the binding of RBD with hACE2, which significantly improves 
the RBD-hACE2 binding affinity. Besides that, the E484K mutation also causes the 
conformational rearrangements of the loop region containing the mutant residue, 
which leads to tighter binding interface of RBD with hACE2 and formation of some 
new hydrogen bonds. The tighter binding interface and the new hydrogen bonds 
formation also contribute to the improved binding affinity of RBD to the 
receptor hACE2. In addition, six neutralizing antibodies and nanobodies 
complexed with RBD were selected to explore the effects of E484K mutation on the 
recognition of these antibodies to RBD. The simulation results show that the 
E484K mutation significantly reduces the binding affinities to RBD for most of 
the studied neutralizing antibodies/nanobodies, and the decrease in the binding 
affinities is mainly owing to the unfavorable electrostatic interactions caused 
by the mutation. Our studies revealed that the E484K mutation may improve the 
binding affinity between RBD and the receptor hACE2, implying more 
transmissibility of the E484K-containing variants, and weaken the binding 
affinities between RBD and the studied neutralizing antibodies/nanobodies, 
indicating reduced effectiveness of these antibodies/nanobodies. Our results 
provide valuable information for the effective vaccine development and 
antibody/nanobody drug design.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2021.108035
PMCID: PMC8447841
PMID: 34562851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.