1. J Struct Biol. 2021 Dec;213(4):107799. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2021.107799. Epub
2021  Sep 23.

Molecular dynamics study of enhanced autophosphorylation by S904F mutation of 
the RET kinase domain.

Chen YJ(1), Li PY(2), Yang CN(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Precision Medicine, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, National University of Kaohsiung, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Precision Medicine, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan. Electronic address: cnyang@mail.nsysu.edu.tw.

The aberrant kinase activity of RET (rearranged during transfection), a 
transmembrane tyrosine kinase, is associated with human cancer. A point mutation 
caused by the replacement of solvent-front hydrophilic S904, located on the 
activation loop (A-loop), with a bulky hydrophobic phenylalanine residue can 
induce resistance to the type I kinase inhibitor vandetanib. A possible 
mechanism of this drug resistance is the release of a cis-autoinhibited 
conformation of RET for autophosphorylation, which activates RET kinase. Because 
the association between S904F mutation and enhanced autophosphorylation is 
unclear, we conducted molecular modeling analysis to compare unphosphorylated 
apo wild-type and S904F mutant structures. The structural compactness of the 
A-loop promoted ATP binding. When the A-loop is extended, the αC helix moves 
toward the glycine-rich loop, resulting in the protrusion of F735. The extruded 
F735 connects with E734 and R912 and constrains the ATP pocket entrance. 
Contrarily, a contracted A-loop pulls the αC helix away from the glycine-rich 
loop, burying F734 and making the ATP pocket accessible. The mutated F904 
stabilizes the contracted A-loop and releases the autoinhibited conformation of 
RET, thereby facilitating autophosphorylation. We also simulated two ATP-bound 
systems. The binding free energies of ATP, estimated through the molecular 
mechanics with a generalized Born and surface area solvation approach, revealed 
that the S904F mutant was bound more tightly than was the wild type with the 
ATP. The findings support the premise of autophosphorylation promotion in the 
S904F mutant.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2021.107799
PMID: 34563653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]