1. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5292-5308. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab286.

Somatic Mutation Analysis in Salix suchowensis Reveals Early-Segregated Cell 
Lineages.

Ren Y(1), He Z(1), Liu P(1), Traw B(1), Sun S(2), Tian D(1), Yang S(1), Jia 
Y(3), Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Ecology, School of Life Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

Long-lived plants face the challenge of ever-increasing mutational burden across 
their long lifespan. Early sequestration of meristematic stem cells is supposed 
to efficiently slow down this process, but direct measurement of somatic 
mutations that accompanies segregated cell lineages in plants is still rare. 
Here, we tracked somatic mutations in 33 leaves and 22 adventitious roots from 
22 stem-cuttings across eight major branches of a shrub willow (Salix 
suchowensis). We found that most mutations propagated separately in leaves and 
roots, providing clear evidence for early segregation of underlying cell 
lineages. By combining lineage tracking with allele frequency analysis, our 
results revealed a set of mutations shared by distinct branches, but were 
exclusively present in leaves and not in roots. These mutations were likely 
propagated by rapidly dividing somatic cell lineages which survive several 
iterations of branching, distinct from the slowly dividing axillary stem cell 
lineages. Leaf is thus contributed by both slowly and rapidly dividing cell 
lineages, leading to varied fixation chances of propagated mutations. By 
contrast, each root likely arises from a single founder cell within the 
adventitious stem cell lineages. Our findings give straightforward evidence that 
early segregation of meristems slows down mutation accumulation in axillary 
meristems, implying a plant "germline" paralog to the germline of animals 
through convergent evolution.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab286
PMCID: PMC8662653
PMID: 34562099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]