1. Cell Death Differ. 2022 Feb;29(2):407-419. doi: 10.1038/s41418-021-00864-2.
Epub  2021 Sep 24.

Synergistic apoptotic effect of miR-183-5p and Polo-Like kinase 1 inhibitor 
NMS-P937 in breast cancer cells.

Kudo M(#)(1), Zalles N(#)(1), Distefano R(1), Nigita G(1), Veneziano D(1), 
Gasparini P(2)(3)(4), Croce CM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, The Ohio State University College 
of Medicine, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, The Ohio State University College 
of Medicine, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA. 
pierluigi.gasparini@newcastle.edu.au.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, College of Health, Medicine and 
Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW, Australia. 
pierluigi.gasparini@newcastle.edu.au.
(4)Hunter Medical Research Institute, New Lambton Heights, NSW, Australia. 
pierluigi.gasparini@newcastle.edu.au.
(5)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, The Ohio State University College 
of Medicine, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA. 
carlo.croce@osumc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that act as endogenous regulatory 
molecules targeting specific mRNAs for translational repression. Studies of 
breast cancer genomics indicate that breast cancer subtypes are distinguished 
and regulated by specific sets of miRNAs which affect activities such as tumor 
initiation, progression, and even drug response. Polo-like Kinase 1 (PLK1) is 
widely considered to be a proto-oncogene due to its increased expression in 
multiple tumor types, as well as its crucial role in regulating mitosis. 
Pharmacological inhibition of PLK1 can reduce tumor volume and induce tumor cell 
death in solid and hematologic malignancies. This prompted us to investigate how 
PLK1 inhibition with the target-specific inhibitor NMS-P937 would impact breast 
cancer cells, and how miRNAs may influence the overall response of these cells 
to this inhibition. We found that miR-183-5p targets PLK1 gene, effectively 
reducing its protein expression. Such miRNA-driven regulation of PLK1 expression 
sensitizes breast cancer cells to NMS-P937, resulting in synergistically 
increased apoptosis. We also show that the miRNA-regulated reduction of PLK1 
influences the expression of apoptosis-related key proteins and possibly 
inducing further indirect PLK1 downmodulation through a DNMT1-p53 axis. These 
results suggest a potential biologically significant link between the expression 
of miR-183-5p and the efficacy of PLK1-specific inhibitors in breast cancer 
cells. Our work further elucidates how miR-183-5p regulates PLK1 gene while also 
enhancing NMS-P937 effect in breast cancer. Future studies assessing the role of 
miR-183-5p as a novel biomarker for anti-PLK1 chemotherapy agents are warranted.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41418-021-00864-2
PMCID: PMC8816952
PMID: 34561554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.