1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Sep 10;22(18):9774. doi: 10.3390/ijms22189774.

FAK Shutdown: Consequences on Epithelial Morphogenesis and Biomarker Expression 
Involving an Innovative Biomaterial for Tissue Regeneration.

Wang X(1), Steinberg T(1), Dieterle MP(1), Ramminger I(1)(2), Husari A(3), 
Tomakidi P(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Dental Medicine, Division of Oral Biotechnology, Medical 
Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Hugstetterstr. 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Schaenzlestr. 1, 79104 Freiburg, 
Germany.
(3)Center for Dental Medicine, Department of Orthodontics, Medical 
Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Hugstetterstr. 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

By employing an innovative biohybrid membrane, the present study aimed at 
elucidating the mechanistic role of the focal adhesion kinase (FAK) in 
epithelial morphogenesis in vitro over 4, 7, and 10 days. The consequences of 
siRNA-mediated FAK knockdown on epithelial morphogenesis were monitored by 
quantifying cell layers and detecting the expression of biomarkers of epithelial 
differentiation and homeostasis. Histologic examination of FAK-depleted samples 
showed a significant increase in cell layers resembling epithelial hyperplasia. 
Semiquantitative fluorescence imaging (SQFI) revealed tissue homeostatic 
disturbances by significantly increased involucrin expression over time, 
persistence of yes-associated protein (YAP) and an increase of keratin (K) 1 at 
day 4. The dysbalanced involucrin pattern was underscored by ROCK-IISer1366 
activity at day 7 and 10. SQFI data were confirmed by quantitative PCR and 
Western blot analysis, thereby corroborating the FAK shutdown-related expression 
changes. The artificial FAK shutdown was also associated with a significantly 
higher expression of filaggrin at day 10, sustained keratinocyte proliferation, 
and the dysregulated expression of K19 and vimentin. These siRNA-induced 
consequences indicate the mechanistic role of FAK in epithelial morphogenesis by 
simultaneously considering prospective biomaterial-based epithelial regenerative 
approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22189774
PMCID: PMC8470904
PMID: 34575938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflict of 
interest with respect to the authorship and/or publication of this article.