1. Nanomaterials (Basel). 2021 Sep 17;11(9):2418. doi: 10.3390/nano11092418.

N-Doped Graphene as an Efficient Metal-Free Electrocatalyst for Indirect Nitrate 
Reduction Reaction.

Zhao J(1), Shang B(2), Zhai J(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Environment and Ecology & MOE Key Laboratory of the Three Gorges 
Reservoir Region's Eco-Environment, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400045, 
China.
(2)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering & Chongqing Key Laboratory of 
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, Chongqing University, Chongqing 401331, 
China.

N-doped graphene samples with different N species contents were prepared by a 
two-step synthesis method and evaluated as electrocatalysts for the nitrate 
reduction reaction (NORR) for the first time. In an acidic solution with a 
saturated calomel electrode as reference, the pyridinic-N dominant sample (NGR2) 
had an onset of 0.932 V and a half-wave potential of 0.833 V, showing the 
superior activity towards the NORR compared to the pyrrolic-N dominant N-doped 
graphene (onset potential: 0.850 V, half-wave potential: 0.732 V) and the pure 
graphene (onset potential: 0.698 V, half-wave potential: 0.506 V). N doping 
could significantly boost the NORR performance of N-doped graphene, especially 
the contribution of pyridinic-N. Density functional theory calculation revealed 
the pyridinic-N facilitated the desorption of NO, which was kinetically involved 
in the process of the NORR. The findings of this work would be valuable for the 
development of metal-free NORR electrocatalysts.

DOI: 10.3390/nano11092418
PMCID: PMC8470669
PMID: 34578734

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.