1. Microorganisms. 2021 Sep 15;9(9):1961. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9091961.

Bioavailability of Organic Phosphorus Compounds to the Harmful Dinoflagellate 
Karenia mikimotoi.

Huang K(1), Zhuang Y(1), Wang Z(1), Ou L(1), Cen J(1), Lu S(1), Qi Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Center of Harmful Algae and Marine Biology, Key Laboratory of 
Eutrophication and Red Tide Prevention of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, 
Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.

Karenia mikimotoi is one of the most well-known harmful bloom species in 
temperate coastal waters. The present study investigated the characteristics of 
alkaline phosphatase (APase) and phosphodiesterase (PDEase) activities in 
hydrolysis of two phosphomonoesters (adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and ribulose 
5-phosphate (R5P)) and a phosphodiester (cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)) 
in K. mikimotoi and compared its growth and physiological responses to the 
different forms of phosphorus substrates. K. mikimotoi produced comparable 
quantities of APase and PDEase to hydrolyze the organic phosphorus substrates, 
although hydrolysis of the phosphomonoesters was much faster than that of the 
phosphodiester. The growth of K. mikimotoi on organic phosphorus substrates was 
comparable to or better than that on inorganic phosphate. The difference in 
particulate organic nutrients (carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus) and hemolytic 
activity supported different rates of hydrolysis-assimilation of the various 
organic phosphorus substrates by K. mikimotoi. The hemolytic activities of K. 
mikimotoi in the presence of organic phosphorus substrates were several times 
those in the presence of inorganic phosphate during the exponential phase. This 
suggested the potential important role of organic phosphorus in K. mikimotoi 
blooms.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9091961
PMCID: PMC8469735
PMID: 34576855

Conflict of interest statement: We declare no conflicts of interest.