1. Nutrients. 2021 Sep 15;13(9):3207. doi: 10.3390/nu13093207.

Food Intolerance: The Role of Histamine.

Shulpekova YO(1), Nechaev VM(1), Popova IR(1), Deeva TA(2), Kopylov AT(3), 
Malsagova KA(3), Kaysheva AL(3), Ivashkin VT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Diseases Propedeutics, Sechenov University, 119121 
Moscow, Russia.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry, Sechenov University, 119991 Moscow, 
Russia.
(3)Biobanking Group, Branch of Institute of Biomedical Chemistry "Scientific and 
Education Center", 123098 Moscow, Russia.

Histamine is a natural amine derived from L-histidine. Although it seems that 
our knowledge about this molecule is wide and diverse, the importance of 
histamine in many regulatory processes is still enigmatic. The interplay between 
different types of histamine receptors and the compound may cause ample effects, 
including histamine intoxication and so-called histamine intolerance or 
non-allergic food intolerance, leading to disturbances in immune regulation, 
manifestation of gastroenterological symptoms, and neurological diseases. Most 
cases of clinical manifestations of histamine intolerance are non-specific due 
to tissue-specific distribution of different histamine receptors and the lack of 
reproducible and reliable diagnostic markers. The diagnosis of histamine 
intolerance is fraught with difficulties, in addition to challenges related to 
the selection of a proper treatment strategy, the regular course of recovery, 
and reduced amelioration of chronic symptoms due to inappropriate treatment 
prescription. Here, we reviewed a history of histamine uptake starting from the 
current knowledge about its degradation and the prevalence of histamine 
precursors in daily food, and continuing with the receptor interactions after 
entering and the impacts on the immune, central nervous, and gastrointestinal 
systems. The purpose of this review is to build an extraordinarily specific 
method of histamine cycle assessment in regard to non-allergic intolerance and 
its possible dire consequences that can be suffered.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13093207
PMCID: PMC8469513
PMID: 34579083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.