1. Life (Basel). 2021 Aug 25;11(9):876. doi: 10.3390/life11090876.

Dynamin Inhibitors Prevent the Establishment of the Cytomegalovirus Assembly 
Compartment in the Early Phase of Infection.

Štimac I(1), Jug Vučko N(1), Blagojević Zagorac G(1)(2), Marcelić M(1), 
Mahmutefendić Lučin H(1)(2), Lučin P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Rijeka, 51000 Rijeka, Croatia.
(2)Nursing Department, University North, University Center Varaždin, Jurja 
Križanića 31b, 42000 Varaždin, Croatia.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection initiates massive rearrangement of cytoplasmic 
organelles to generate assembly compartment (AC). The earliest events, the 
establishment of the preAC, are initiated in the early phase as an extensive 
reorganization of early endosomes (EEs), endosomal recycling compartment (ERC), 
trans-Golgi network (TGN), and the Golgi. Here, we demonstrate that dynamin 
inhibitors (Dynasore, Dyngo-4a, MiTMAB, and Dynole-34-2) block the establishment 
of the preAC in murine CMV (MCMV) infected cells. In this study, we extensively 
analyzed the effect of Dynasore on the Golgi reorganization sequence into the 
outer preAC. We also monitored the development of the inner preAC using a set of 
markers that define EEs (Rab5, Vps34, EEA1, and Hrs), the EE-ERC interface 
(Rab10), the ERC (Rab11, Arf6), three layers of the Golgi (GRASP65, GM130, 
Golgin97), and late endosomes (Lamp1). Dynasore inhibited the pericentriolar 
accumulation of all markers that display EE-ERC-TGN interface in the inner preAC 
and prevented Golgi unlinking and dislocation to the outer preAC. Furthermore, 
in pulse-chase experiments, we demonstrated that the presence of dynasore only 
during the early phase of MCMV infection (4-14 hpi) is sufficient to prevent not 
only AC formation but also the synthesis of late-phase proteins and virion 
production. Therefore, our results indicate that dynamin-2 acts as a part of the 
machinery required for AC generation and rearrangement of EE/ERC/Golgi membranes 
in the early phase of CMV infection.

DOI: 10.3390/life11090876
PMCID: PMC8469281
PMID: 34575026

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.