1. Exp Cell Res. 2021 Nov 1;408(1):112844. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2021.112844. Epub
 2021 Sep 25.

CRISPR/Cas correction of muscular dystrophies.

Zhang Y(1), Nishiyama T(1), Olson EN(1), Bassel-Duby R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA; Senator Paul D. Wellstone Muscular Dystrophy 
Specialized Research Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA; Senator Paul D. Wellstone Muscular Dystrophy 
Specialized Research Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. Electronic address: 
Rhonda.Bassel-Duby@UTSouthwestern.edu.

Muscular dystrophies are a heterogeneous group of monogenic neuromuscular 
disorders which lead to progressive muscle loss and degeneration of the 
musculoskeletal system. The genetic causes of muscular dystrophies are well 
characterized, but no effective treatments have been developed so far. The 
discovery and application of the CRISPR/Cas system for genome editing offers a 
new path for disease treatment with the potential to permanently correct genetic 
mutations. The post-mitotic and multinucleated features of skeletal muscle 
provide an ideal target for CRISPR/Cas therapeutic genome editing because 
correction of a subpopulation of nuclei can provide benefit to the whole 
myofiber. In this review, we provide an overview of the CRISPR/Cas system and 
its derivatives in genome editing, proposing potential CRISPR/Cas-based 
therapies to correct diverse muscular dystrophies, and we discuss challenges for 
translating CRISPR/Cas genome editing to a viable therapy for permanent 
correction of muscular dystrophies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2021.112844
PMCID: PMC8530959
PMID: 34571006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]