1. Viruses. 2021 Aug 31;13(9):1740. doi: 10.3390/v13091740.

In Situ Cancer Vaccination and Immunovirotherapy Using Oncolytic HSV.

Jahan N(1), Ghouse SM(1), Martuza RL(1), Rabkin SD(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurosurgery Laboratory and Brain Tumor Research Center, Department 
of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, 185 Cambridge 
St., CPZN-3800, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) can be genetically altered to acquire oncolytic 
properties so that oncolytic HSV (oHSV) preferentially replicates in and kills 
cancer cells, while sparing normal cells, and inducing anti-tumor immune 
responses. Over the last three decades, a better understanding of HSV genes and 
functions, and improved genetic-engineering techniques led to the development of 
oHSV as a novel immunovirotherapy. The concept of in situ cancer vaccination 
(ISCV) was first introduced when oHSV was found to induce a specific systemic 
anti-tumor immune response with an abscopal effect on non-injected tumors, in 
the process of directly killing tumor cells. Thus, the use of oHSV for tumor 
vaccination in situ is antigen-agnostic. The research and development of oHSVs 
have moved rapidly, with the field of oncolytic viruses invigorated by the 
FDA/EMA approval of oHSV talimogene laherparepvec in 2015 for the treatment of 
advanced melanoma. Immunovirotherapy can be enhanced by arming oHSV with 
immunomodulatory transgenes and/or using them in combination with other 
chemotherapeutic and immunotherapeutic agents. This review offers an overview of 
the development of oHSV as an agent for ISCV against solid tumors, describing 
the multitude of different oHSVs and their efficacy in immunocompetent mouse 
models and in clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3390/v13091740
PMCID: PMC8473045
PMID: 34578321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.D.R. and R.L.M. are inventors on patents 
relating to oncolytic herpes simplex viruses, owned and managed by Georgetown 
University and Massachusetts General Hospital, which have received royalties 
from Amgen and ActiVec Inc. S.D.R. has received honoraria from Replimune and 
Greenfire Bio.