1. Foods. 2021 Sep 15;10(9):2186. doi: 10.3390/foods10092186.

Research Advances of d-allulose: An Overview of Physiological Functions, 
Enzymatic Biotransformation Technologies, and Production Processes.

Xia Y(1)(2)(3), Cheng Q(2), Mu W(1), Hu X(4), Sun Z(2), Qiu Y(2), Liu X(2), Wang 
Z(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, 
Wuxi 214122, China.
(2)School of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, 
China.
(3)Collaborative Innovation Center of Food Safety and Quality Control in Jiangsu 
Province, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China.
(4)China Biotech Fermentation Industry Association, Beijing 100833, China.

d-allulose has a significant application value as a sugar substitute, not only 
as a food ingredient and dietary supplement, but also with various physiological 
functions, such as improving insulin resistance, anti-obesity, and regulating 
glucolipid metabolism. Over the decades, the physiological functions of 
d-allulose and the corresponding mechanisms have been studied deeply, and this 
product has been applied to various foods to enhance food quality and prolong 
shelf life. In recent years, biotransformation technologies for the production 
of d-allulose using enzymatic approaches have gained more attention. However, 
there are few comprehensive reviews on this topic. This review focuses on the 
recent research advances of d-allulose, including (1) the physiological 
functions of d-allulose; (2) the major enzyme families used for the 
biotransformation of d-allulose and their microbial origins; (3) phylogenetic 
and structural characterization of d-allulose 3-epimerases, and the directed 
evolution methods for the enzymes; (4) heterologous expression of d-allulose 
ketose 3-epimerases and biotransformation techniques for d-allulose; and (5) 
production processes for biotransformation of d-allulose based on the 
characterized enzymes. Furthermore, the future trends on biosynthesis and 
applications of d-allulose in food and health industries are discussed and 
evaluated in this review.

DOI: 10.3390/foods10092186
PMCID: PMC8467252
PMID: 34574296

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.