1. Microorganisms. 2021 Aug 25;9(9):1808. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9091808.

Escherichia coli Specific Virulence-Gene Markers Analysis for Quality Control of 
Ovine Cheese in Slovakia.

Bujňáková D(1), Karahutová L(1), Kmeť V(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Biosciences of the Slovak Academy of Sciences, Institute of Animal 
Physiology, 04001 Košice, Slovakia.

Shiga toxin-producing and extra-intestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli (E. coli) 
have the potential to spread through faecal waste, resulting in contamination of 
food and causing foodborne disease outbreaks. With the aim of characterizing 
unpasteurized ovine cheese in Slovakia, a total of 92 E. coli strains were 
examined for eleven representative virulence genes typical for 
(extra-)intestinal pathogenic E. coli and phylogenetic grouping. Phylogenetic 
groups B1 (36%) and A (32%) were the most dominant, followed by groups C (14%) 
and D (13%), while the lowest incidence was recorded for F (4%), and E (1%), and 
43 (47%) samples carried at least one virulent gene, i.e., potential pathogens. 
Isolates present in groups E, F and D showed higher presence of virulence genes 
(100%, 75%, and 67%), versus 55%, 39%, and 28% in commensal B1, C, and A, 
respectively. Occurrence of papC and fyuA (both 24%) was highest, followed by 
tsh, iss, stx2, cnf1, kpsII, cvaC, stx1, iutA and eaeA. Nine E. coli strains 
(almost 10% of all tested and around 21% of our virulence-gene-associated 
isolates) harboured stx1, stx2 or eae. Ovine cheeses in Slovakia are highly 
contaminated with E. coli including potentially pathogenic strains capable of 
causing intestinal and/or extra-intestinal diseases, and thus may pose a threat 
to public health while unpasteurized.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9091808
PMCID: PMC8467307
PMID: 34576703

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.