1. Biomolecules. 2021 Sep 12;11(9):1352. doi: 10.3390/biom11091352.

Sphingolipid Profile during Cotton Fiber Growth Revealed That a Phytoceramide 
Containing Hydroxylated and Saturated VLCFA Is Important for Fiber Cell 
Elongation.

Chen Q(1)(2)(3), Xu F(1), Wang L(4)(5), Suo X(1), Wang Q(1), Meng Q(1), Huang 
L(1), Ma C(1), Li G(1), Luo M(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Biotechnology and Crop Quality Improvement, Ministry of 
Agriculture/Biotechnology Research Center, Southwest University, Chongqing 
400716, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Horticulture Science for Southern Mountains Regions of 
Ministry of Education, College of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, 
Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, China.
(3)State Cultivation Base of Crop Stress Biology for Southern Mountainous Land, 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, China.
(4)Zhengzhou Research Base, State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou 450001, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Anyang 455000, China.

Cotton fiber is a single-celled seed trichrome that arises from the epidermis of 
the ovule's outer integument. The fiber cell displays high polar expansion and 
thickens but not is disrupted by cell division. Therefore, it is an ideal model 
for studying the growth and development of plant cells. Sphingolipids are 
important components of membranes and are also active molecules in cells. 
However, the sphingolipid profile during fiber growth and the differences in 
sphingolipid metabolism at different developmental stages are still unclear. In 
this study, we detected that there were 6 classes and 95 molecular species of 
sphingolipids in cotton fibers by ultrahigh performance liquid 
chromatography-MS/MS (UHPLC-MS/MS). Among these, the phytoceramides (PhytoCer) 
contained the most molecular species, and the PhytoCer content was highest, 
while that of sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) was the lowest. The content of 
PhytoCer, phytoceramides with hydroxylated fatty acyls (PhytoCer-OHFA), 
phyto-glucosylceramides (Phyto-GluCer), and glycosyl-inositol-phospho-ceramides 
(GIPC) was higher than that of other classes in fiber cells. With the 
development of fiber cells, phytosphingosine-1-phosphate (t-S1P) and PhytoCer 
changed greatly. The sphingolipid molecular species Ceramide (Cer) d18:1/26:1, 
PhytoCer t18:1/26:0, PhytoCer t18:0/26:0, PhytoCer t18:1/h20:0, PhytoCer 
t18:1/h26:0, PhytoCer t18:0/h26:0, and GIPC t18:0/h16:0 were significantly 
enriched in 10-DPA fiber cells while Cer d18:1/20:0, Cer d18:1/22:0, and GIPC 
t18:0/h18:0 were significantly enriched in 20-DPA fiber cells, indicating that 
unsaturated PhytoCer containing hydroxylated and saturated very long chain fatty 
acids (VLCFA) play some role in fiber cell elongation. Consistent with the 
content analysis results, the related genes involved in long chain base (LCB) 
hydroxylation and unsaturation as well as VLCFA synthesis and hydroxylation were 
highly expressed in rapidly elongating fiber cells. Furthermore, the exogenous 
application of a potent inhibitor of serine palmitoyltransferase, myriocin, 
severely blocked fiber cell elongation, and the exogenous application of 
sphingosine antagonized the inhibition of myriocin for fiber elongation. Taking 
these points together, we concluded that sphingolipids play crucial roles in 
fiber cell elongation and SCW deposition. This provides a new perspective for 
further studies on the regulatory mechanism of the growth and development of 
cotton fiber cells.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11091352
PMCID: PMC8466704
PMID: 34572565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.