1. Biomolecules. 2021 Aug 24;11(9):1258. doi: 10.3390/biom11091258.

Cell-Based Therapies for Trabecular Meshwork Regeneration to Treat Glaucoma.

Mallick S(1), Sharma M(1), Kumar A(1), Du Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, 
USA.
(2)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 
15213, USA.
(3)McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Glaucoma is clinically characterized by elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) that 
leads to retinal ganglion cell (RGC) and optic nerve damage, and eventually 
blindness if left untreated. Even in normal pressure glaucoma patients, a 
reduction of IOP is currently the only effective way to prevent blindness, by 
either increasing aqueous humor outflow or decreasing aqueous humor production. 
The trabecular meshwork (TM) and the adjacent Schlemm's canal inner wall play a 
key role in regulating IOP by providing resistance when aqueous humor drains 
through the tissue. TM dysfunction seen in glaucoma, through reduced 
cellularity, abnormal extracellular matrix accumulation, and increased 
stiffness, contributes to elevated IOP, but current therapies do not target the 
TM tissue. Stem cell transplantation for regeneration and re-functionalization 
of damaged TM has shown promise in providing a more direct and effective therapy 
for glaucoma. In this review, we describe the use of different types of stem 
cells for TM regeneration in glaucoma models, the mechanisms of regeneration, 
and the potential for glaucoma treatment using autologous stem cell 
transplantation.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11091258
PMCID: PMC8465897
PMID: 34572471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The University of Pittsburgh has a competing 
interest with a patent “trabecular meshwork stem cells” with Y.D. as the 
inventor. The University of Pittsburgh has filed a patent “compositions and 
methods for treating ocular disorders” with Y.D. and A.K. as inventors. All 
other authors declare no competing interest.