1. Open Biol. 2021 Sep;11(9):210104. doi: 10.1098/rsob.210104. Epub 2021 Sep 29.

High degree of conservation of the enzymes synthesizing the laminin-binding 
glycoepitope of α-dystroglycan.

Bigotti MG(1)(2), Brancaccio A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Translational Health Sciences, Research Floor Level 7, Bristol 
Royal Infirmary, Upper Maudlin Street, Bristol BS2 8HW, UK.
(2)School of Biochemistry, University Walk, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 
1TD, UK.
(3)Institute of Chemical Sciences and Technologies 'Giulio Natta' (SCITEC) - 
CNR, Largo F.Vito 1, 00168, Rome, Italy.

The dystroglycan (DG) complex plays a pivotal role for the stabilization of 
muscles in Metazoa. It is formed by two subunits, extracellular α-DG and 
transmembrane β-DG, originating from a unique precursor via a complex 
post-translational maturation process. The α-DG subunit is extensively 
glycosylated in sequential steps by several specific enzymes and employs such 
glycan scaffold to tightly bind basement membrane molecules. Mutations of 
several of these enzymes cause an alteration of the carbohydrate structure of 
α-DG, resulting in severe neuromuscular disorders collectively named 
dystroglycanopathies. Given the fundamental role played by DG in muscle 
stability, it is biochemically and clinically relevant to investigate these 
post-translational modifying enzymes from an evolutionary perspective. A first 
phylogenetic history of the thirteen enzymes involved in the fabrication of the 
so-called 'M3 core' laminin-binding epitope has been traced by an overall 
sequence comparison approach, and interesting details on the primordial enzyme 
set have emerged, as well as substantial conservation in Metazoa. The 
optimization along with the evolution of a well-conserved enzymatic set 
responsible for the glycosylation of α-DG indicate the importance of the 
glycosylation shell in modulating the connection between sarcolemma and 
surrounding basement membranes to increase skeletal muscle stability, and 
eventually support movement and locomotion.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.210104
PMCID: PMC8478517
PMID: 34582712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.