1. Sci Rep. 2021 Sep 27;11(1):19151. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-97694-6.

Discovery, optimization and biodistribution of an Affibody molecule for imaging 
of CD69.

Persson J(#)(1), Puuvuori E(#)(2), Zhang B(2), Velikyan I(2), Åberg O(2), Müller 
M(3), Nygren PÅ(1), Ståhl S(1), Korsgren O(3), Eriksson O(4), Löfblom J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Protein Science, Division of Protein Engineering, KTH Royal 
Institute of Technology, Roslagstullsbacken 21, 10691, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Uppsala 
University, Dag Hammarskjölds väg 14C, 3tr, 75183, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Uppsala 
University, Dag Hammarskjölds väg 14C, 3tr, 75183, Uppsala, Sweden. 
olof.eriksson@ilk.uu.se.
(5)Department of Protein Science, Division of Protein Engineering, KTH Royal 
Institute of Technology, Roslagstullsbacken 21, 10691, Stockholm, Sweden. 
lofblom@kth.se.
(#)Contributed equally

Due to the wide scale of inflammatory processes in different types of disease, 
more sensitive and specific biomarkers are required to improve prevention and 
treatment. Cluster of differentiation 69 (CD69) is one of the earliest cell 
surface proteins expressed by activated leukocytes. Here we characterize and 
optimize potential new imaging probes, Affibody molecules targeting CD69 for 
imaging of activated immune cells. Analysis of candidates isolated in a 
previously performed selection from a Z variant E. coli library to the 
recombinant extracellular domain of human CD69, identified one cross-reactive Z 
variant with affinity to murine and human CD69. Affinity maturation was 
performed by randomization of the primary Z variant, followed by selections from 
the library. The resulting Z variants were evaluated for affinity towards human 
and murine CD69 and thermal stability. The in vivo biodistribution was assessed 
by SPECT/CT in rats following conjugation of the Z variants by a DOTA chelator 
and radiolabeling with Indium-111. A primary Z variant with a Kd of 
approximately 50 nM affinity to human and murine CD69 was identified. Affinity 
maturation generated 5 additional Z variants with improved or similar affinity. 
All clones exhibited suitable stability. Radiolabeling and in vivo 
biodistribution in rat demonstrated rapid renal clearance for all variants, 
while the background uptake and washout varied. The variant ZCD69:4 had the 
highest affinity for human and murine CD69 (34 nM) as well as the lowest in vivo 
background binding. In summary, we describe the discovery, optimization and 
evaluation of novel Affibody molecules with affinity for CD69. Affibody molecule 
ZCD69:4 is suitable for further development for imaging of activated immune 
cells.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-97694-6
PMCID: PMC8476556
PMID: 34580321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.P. holds intellectual property (IP) relating 
to the CD69 targeting Affibody molecules. E.P. have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose. B.Z. have no conflicts of interest to disclose. I.V. have no conflicts 
of interest to disclose. O.Å. have no conflicts of interest to disclose. M.M. 
have no conflicts of interest to disclose. PÅ.N. have no conflicts of interest 
to disclose. S.S. holds intellectual property (IP) relating to the CD69 
targeting Affibody molecules. O.K. holds intellectual property (IP) relating to 
the CD69 targeting Affibody molecules and is a co-founder of Antaros Tracer AB. 
O.E. holds intellectual property (IP) relating to the CD69 targeting Affibody 
molecules, is an employee of Antaros Medical AB and is a co-founder of Antaros 
Tracer AB. J.L. holds intellectual property (IP) relating to the CD69 targeting 
Affibody molecules.