1. Sci Rep. 2021 Sep 29;11(1):19392. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-98317-w.

CuATSM improves motor function and extends survival but is not tolerated at a 
high dose in SOD1(G93A) mice with a C57BL/6 background.

Lum JS(1)(2), Brown ML(1)(2), Farrawell NE(1)(2), McAlary L(1)(2), Ly D(1)(2), 
Chisholm CG(1)(2), Snow J(2), Vine KL(1)(2), Karl T(3), Kreilaus F(3), McInnes 
LE(4), Nikseresht S(5), Donnelly PS(4), Crouch PJ(5), Yerbury JJ(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute, Wollongong, NSW, Australia.
(2)School of Chemistry and Molecular Bioscience, Molecular Horizons, Faculty of 
Science, Medicine and Health, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, 2522, 
Australia.
(3)School of Medicine, Western Sydney University, Campbelltown, NSW, 2560, 
Australia.
(4)School of Chemistry and Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia.
(6)Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute, Wollongong, NSW, Australia. 
jyerbury@uow.edu.au.
(7)School of Chemistry and Molecular Bioscience, Molecular Horizons, Faculty of 
Science, Medicine and Health, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, 2522, 
Australia. jyerbury@uow.edu.au.

The synthetic copper-containing compound, CuATSM, has emerged as one of the most 
promising drug candidates developed for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS). Multiple studies have reported CuATSM treatment provides 
therapeutic efficacy in various mouse models of ALS without any observable 
adverse effects. Moreover, recent results from an open label clinical study 
suggested that daily oral dosing with CuATSM slows disease progression in 
patients with both sporadic and familial ALS, providing encouraging support for 
CuATSM in the treatment of ALS. Here, we assessed CuATSM in high copy SOD1G93A 
mice on the congenic C57BL/6 background, treating at 100 mg/kg/day by gavage, 
starting at 70 days of age. This dose in this specific model has not been 
assessed previously. Unexpectedly, we report a subset of mice initially 
administered CuATSM exhibited signs of clinical toxicity, that necessitated 
euthanasia in extremis after 3-51 days of treatment. Following a 1-week washout 
period, the remaining mice resumed treatment at the reduced dose of 
60 mg/kg/day. At this revised dose, treatment with CuATSM slowed disease 
progression and increased survival relative to vehicle-treated littermates. This 
work provides the first evidence that CuATSM produces positive disease-modifying 
outcomes in high copy SOD1G93A mice on a congenic C57BL/6 background. 
Furthermore, results from the 100 mg/kg/day phase of the study support dose 
escalation determination of tolerability as a prudent step when assessing 
treatments in previously unassessed models or genetic backgrounds.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-98317-w
PMCID: PMC8481268
PMID: 34588483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Collaborative Medicinal Development LLC has 
licensed intellectual property related to this subject from the University of 
Melbourne where the inventors include PSD. PJC is an unpaid consultant for 
Collaborative Medicinal Development LLC. JSL, MLB, NEF, LM, DL, CGC, JS, KLV, 
TK, FK, LEM, SN, JJY declare no conflicts of interest.