1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2021 Dec 1;34(6):868-874. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000994.

Cancer stem cells in gliomas: evolving concepts and therapeutic implications.

Alcantara Llaguno S(1), Parada LF.

Author information:
(1)Brain Tumor Center, Cancer Biology & Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been implicated in the 
hierarchical heterogeneity and treatment resistance of hematologic and solid 
tumor malignancies, including gliomas, for several decades now but their 
therapeutic targeting has not been fully realized. Recent studies have uncovered 
deeper layers of CSC complexity, related to developmental origins, plasticity, 
cellular states, and interface with the microenvironment.
RECENT FINDINGS: Sequencing and in-vivo lineage-tracing studies in mouse and 
patient-derived models show evidence of stem and progenitor origin of glioma, at 
the same time that genomic studies show a relatedness of glioma CSCs with radial 
glia. The spate of single-cell sequencing analyses demonstrates the diversity of 
transcriptional cellular states, which are susceptible to transitions, 
indicating the plasticity of glioma CSCs. The evolution of glioma CSCs and their 
interactions with niche cells play important roles in CSC treatment resistance 
and immune evasion, with epigenetic modulation as one of the emerging 
mechanisms.
SUMMARY: To harness the potential of CSCs for clinical application, there is 
urgent need to investigate their complex nature and myriad interactions, to 
better understand the contribution of these self-renewing, stem-like cancer 
cells in the pathogenesis and therapy resistance of malignant brain tumors.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000994
PMCID: PMC9746696
PMID: 34581301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Conflicts of Interest The authors 
report no potential conflicts of interest.