1. Acta Crystallogr E Crystallogr Commun. 2021 Aug 17;77(Pt 9):935-938. doi: 
10.1107/S2056989021008148. eCollection 2021 Sep 1.

Synthesis and crystal structure of a heterobimetallic cadmium-sodium complex of 
1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-trione, [CdNa(2)(C(3)H(2)N(3)O(3))(4)(H(2)O)(8)].

Divya R(1), Bijini BR(1), Dhanya VS(1), Babu KR(1), Sithambaresan M(2).

Author information:
(1)PG Department and Research Centre in Physics, M.G. College, University of 
Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram 695004, India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Eastern University, Sri Lanka, 
Chenkalady, Sri Lanka.

Heterobimetallic crystals of a cadmium-sodium complex of 
1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-trione, namely, μ-aqua-1:2κ2 O:O-hepta-aqua-1κ3 O,2κ2 O,3κ2 
O-bis-(μ-4,6-dioxo-1,4,5,6-tetra-hydro-1,3,5-triazin-2-olato)-1:2κ2 O 2:N 
1;2:3κ2 N 1:O 2-bis-(4,6-dioxo-1,4,5,6-tetra-hydro-1,3,5-triazin-2-olato)-1κO 
2,3κO 2-2-cadmium-1,3-disodium, [CdNa2(C3H2N3O3)4(H2O)8], were grown by the 
single gel diffusion technique. The asymmetric unit of the title compound 
comprises four 1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-trione ligands, two sodium atoms and one 
cadmium atom. Of the four ligands, two are monodentately coordinated to two Na 
atoms. The third ligand is coordinated bidentately to one Na and the Cd atom and 
the fourth is also coordinated bidentately to the Cd atom and the other Na atom. 
All the metal atoms are six-coordinate with a distorted octa-hedral geometry. 
The water mol-ecules bridge the Na atoms, constructing coordination polymer 
chains along the a axis and hence are linked by two Cd and one Na coordinations 
through the cyanuric acid ligands present in the coordination polymer chains, 
generating a two-dimensional coordination polymer in the (110) plane. The 
polymer formation is further assisted by means of many inter-molecular and 
intra-molecular N-H⋯O, O-H⋯O and O-H⋯N hydrogen bonds between the water 
mol-ecules and the ligands.

© Divya et al. 2021.

DOI: 10.1107/S2056989021008148
PMCID: PMC8423008
PMID: 34584765