1. Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2021 Sep 18;2021:5548706. doi: 10.1155/2021/5548706. 
eCollection 2021.

Curcumin Alleviates Oxygen-Glucose-Deprivation/Reperfusion-Induced Oxidative 
Damage by Regulating miR-1287-5p/LONP2 Axis in SH-SY5Y Cells.

Zhang T(1)(2), Chen X(1)(2), Qu Y(1)(2), Ding Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine Encephalopathy, Hubei Provincial 
Hospital Traditional Chinese Medicine, Wuhan 430074, China.
(2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine Encephalopathy, Hubei Province 
Traditional Chinese Medicine Research Institute, Wuhan 430074, China.

Oxidative stress-induced neuronal damage is a main cause of ischemia/reperfusion 
injury. Curcumin (Cur), the principal constituent extracted from dried rhizomes 
of Curcuma longa L. (turmeric), exhibits excellent antioxidant effects. Previous 
studies have indicated that miR-1287-5p was downregulated in patients with 
ischemic stroke. Additionally, we predicted that Lon Peptidase 2, Peroxisomal 
(LONP2), which is involved in oxidative stress regulation, is targeted by 
miR-1287-5p. The aim of the current study is to investigate the effect of Cur on 
ischemia/reperfusion damage and its underlying mechanism. To mimic 
ischemia/reperfusion damage environment, SH-SY5Y cells were subjected to 
oxygen-glucose-deprivation/reperfusion (OGD/R). OGD/R treatment downregulated 
miR-1287-5p and upregulated LONP2 in SH-SY5Y cells, but Cur alleviated 
OGD/R-induced oxidative damage and reversed the effect of OGD/R on the 
expression of miR-1287-5p and LONP2. Furthermore, we confirmed the interactive 
relationship between miR-1287-5p and LONP2 (negative regulation). We revealed 
that miR-1287-5p overexpression alleviated OGD/R-induced oxidative damage 
alleviation, similar to the effect of Cur. MiR-1287-5p inhibition accentuated 
OGD/R-induced oxidative damage in SH-SY5Y cells, which was reversed by Cur. The 
expression of LONP2 in OGD/R-treated SH-SY5Y cells was decreased by miR-1287-5p 
overexpression and increased by miR-1287-5p inhibition, and Cur counteracted the 
increase in LONP2 expression induced by miR-1287-5p inhibition. In conclusion, 
we suggest that Cur alleviates OGD/R-induced oxidative damage in SH-SY5Y cells 
by regulating the miR-1287-5p/LONP2 axis. The findings provide a theoretical 
basis for the clinical application of curcumin.

Copyright Â© 2021 Teng Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5548706
PMCID: PMC8476263
PMID: 34589382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.