1. J Nat Prod. 2021 Oct 22;84(10):2683-2691. doi: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.1c00514. 
Epub 2021 Oct 1.

A Bifunctional Leader Peptidase/ABC Transporter Protein Is Involved in the 
Maturation of the Lasso Peptide Cochonodin I from Streptococcus suis.

Hegemann JD(1), Jeanne Dit Fouque K(2), Santos-Fernandez M(2), Fernandez-Lima 
F(2).

Author information:
(1)Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz 
Centre for Infection Research (HZI), Saarland University Campus, 66123 
Saarbr√ºcken, Germany.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Florida International University, 
Miami, Florida 33199, United States.

Lasso peptides are members of the natural product superfamily of ribosomally 
synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides (RiPPs). Here, we 
describe the first lasso peptide originating from a biosynthetic gene cluster 
belonging to a unique lasso peptide subclade defined by the presence of a 
bifunctional protein harboring both a leader peptidase (B2) and an ABC 
transporter (D) domain. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that these clusters also 
encode homologues of the NisR/NisK regulatory system and the NisF/NisE/NisG 
immunity factors, which are usually associated with the clusters of 
antimicrobial class I lanthipeptides, such as nisin, another distinct RiPP 
subfamily. The cluster enabling the heterologous production of the lasso peptide 
cochonodin I in E. coli originated from Streptococcus suis LSS65, and the 
threaded structure of cochonodin I was evidenced through extensive MS/MS 
analysis and stability assays. It was shown that the ABC transporter domain from 
SsuB2/D is not essential for lasso peptide maturation. By extensive genome 
mining dedicated exclusively to other lasso peptide biosynthetic gene clusters 
featuring bifunctional B2/D proteins, it was furthermore revealed that many 
bacteria associated with human or animal microbiota hold the biosynthetic 
potential to produce cochonodin-like lasso peptides, implying that these natural 
products might play roles in human and animal health.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.1c00514
PMCID: PMC9390802
PMID: 34597519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.