1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Oct 1;100(39):e27061. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000027061.

Synchronous double primary lymphoma and thyroid cancer: A single-institution 
retrospective study.

Li Q(1), Zhu F, Xiao Y, Liu T, Liu X, Zhang L, Wu G.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Synchronous double primary malignancies of lymphoma and thyroid cancer are rare. 
In this retrospective study, we investigated the pathology, clinical 
characteristics, and treatment outcomes of patients with synchronous lymphoma 
and thyroid cancer.Of the 1156 newly diagnosed lymphoma patients treated in our 
hospital between January 1, 2016 and February 1, 2021, 8 cases had lymphoma 
complicated with thyroid cancer. The clinical data and treatment strategies of 8 
cases with synchronous lymphoma and thyroid cancer were retrospectively 
analyzed.The median age of patients was 56 (25-64) years. All the 8 patients 
were female and papillary thyroid cancer. Only 1 patient had peripheral T-cell 
lymphoma, and the other 7 were B-cell lymphoma. Seven of 8 patients had normal 
free triiodothyronine and free thyroxine at the time of diagnosis. Seven thyroid 
cancer patients received total thyroidectomy and levothyroxine and the remaining 
1 patient has a plan for surgery. At the last follow-up, 7 patients with B-cell 
lymphoma are alive; the patient with peripheral T-cell lymphoma complicated with 
thyroid cancer died due to lymphoma progression.Synchronous lymphoma and thyroid 
cancer are more predominant in women. Histologically, B-cell lymphomas and 
papillary thyroid cancer subtypes are more common. Attention should be paid to 
the presence of thyroid nodules in the diagnosis of lymphoma. Biopsy or 
ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of the suspicious thyroid nodule should 
be performed to exclude thyroid malignancy.

Copyright Â© 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027061
PMCID: PMC8483851
PMID: 34596109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.