1. PLoS One. 2021 Sep 30;16(9):e0257718. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257718. 
eCollection 2021.

Targeting anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene alterations in neuroblastoma by 
using alkylating pyrrole-imidazole polyamides.

Ota Y(1)(2), Yoda H(1)(3), Inoue T(2)(3), Watanabe T(1), Shinozaki Y(3), 
Takatori A(1), Nagase H(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Innovative Cancer Therapeutics, Chiba Cancer Center Research 
Institute, Chiba, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 
Chiba, Japan.
(3)Division of Cancer Genetics, Chiba Cancer Center Research Institute, Chiba, 
Japan.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) aberration is related to high-risk 
neuroblastomas and is an important therapeutic target. As acquired resistance to 
ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors is inevitable, novel anti-ALK drug development is 
necessary in order to overcome potential drug resistance against ATP-competitive 
kinase inhibitors. In this study, to overcome ALK inhibitor resistance, we 
examined the growth inhibition effects of newly developed ALK-targeting 
pyrrole-imidazole polyamide CCC-003, which was designed to directly bind and 
alkylate DNA within the F1174L-mutated ALK gene. CCC-003 suppressed cell 
proliferation in ALK-mutated neuroblastoma cells. The expression of total and 
phosphorylated ALK was downregulated by CCC-003 treatment but not by treatment 
with a mismatch polyamide without any binding motif within the ALK gene region. 
CCC-003 preferentially bound to the DNA sequence with the F1174L mutation and 
significantly suppressed tumor progression in a human neuroblastoma xenograft 
mouse model. Our data suggest that the specific binding of CCC-003 to mutated 
DNA within the ALK gene exerts its anti-tumor activity through a mode of action 
that is distinct from those of other ALK inhibitors. In summary, our current 
study provides evidence for the potential of pyrrole-imidazole polyamide ALK 
inhibitor CCC-003 for the treatment of neuroblastoma thus offering a possible 
solution to the problem of tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0257718
PMCID: PMC8483358
PMID: 34591871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.