1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2022 Feb;43(2):285-294. doi: 10.1038/s41401-021-00778-2. 
Epub 2021 Sep 30.

HACE1 negatively regulates neuroinflammation through ubiquitylating and 
degrading Rac1 in Parkinson's disease models.

Zang CX(1), Wang L(1), Yang HY(1), Shang JM(1), Liu H(1), Zhang ZH(1), Ju C(1), 
Yuan FY(1), Li FY(1), Bao XQ(1), Zhang D(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of Natural 
Medicines, Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100050, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of Natural 
Medicines, Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100050, 
China. danzhang@imm.ac.cn.

Neuroinflammation plays an important role in neurodegenerative diseases, such as 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease. HACE1 (HECT domain and Ankyrin 
repeat Containing E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase 1) is a tumor suppressor. Recent 
evidence suggests that HACE1 may be involved in oxidative stress responses. Due 
to the critical role of ROS in neuroinflammation, we speculated that HACE1 might 
participate in neuroinflammation and related neurodegenerative diseases, such as 
PD. In this study, we investigated the role of HACE1 in neuroinflammation of PD 
models. We showed that HACE1 knockdown exacerbated LPS-induced neuroinflammation 
in BV2 microglial cells in vitro through suppressing ubiquitination and 
degradation of activated Rac1, an NADPH oxidase subunit. Furthermore, we showed 
that HACE1 exerted vital neuronal protection through increasing Rac1 activity 
and stability in LPS-treated SH-SY5Y cells, as HACE1 knockdown leading to lower 
tolerance to LPS challenge. In MPTP-induced acute PD mouse model, HACE1 
knockdown exacerbated motor deficits by activating Rac1. Finally, mutant 
α-synuclein (A53T)-overexpressing mice, a chronic PD mouse model, exhibited 
age-dependent reduction of HACE1 levels in the midbrain and striatum, 
implicating that HACE1 participated in PD pathological progression. This study 
for the first time demonstrates that HACE1 is a negative regulator of 
neuroinflammation and involved in the PD pathogenesis by regulating Rac1 
activity. The data support HACE1 as a potential target for PD and other 
neurodegenerative diseases.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to CPS and SIMM.

DOI: 10.1038/s41401-021-00778-2
PMCID: PMC8792019
PMID: 34593974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.