1. Biochemistry. 2021 Oct 19;60(41):3071-3085. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.1c00400. 
Epub 2021 Oct 4.

Denatured State Conformational Biases in Three-Helix Bundles Containing 
Divergent Sequences Localize near Turns and Helix Capping Residues.

Leavens MJ(1)(2), Spang LE(1)(2), Cherney MM(1)(2), Bowler BE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Montana, Missoula, 
Montana 59812, United States.
(2)Center for Biomolecular Structure & Dynamics, University of Montana, 
Missoula, Montana 59812, United States.

Rhodopseudomonas palustris cytochrome c', a four-helix bundle, and the second 
ubiquitin-associated domain, UBA(2), a three-helix bundle from the human 
homologue of yeast Rad23, HHR23A, deviate from random coil behavior under 
denaturing conditions in a fold-specific manner. The random coil deviations in 
each of these folds occur near interhelical turns and loops in their tertiary 
structures. Here, we examine an additional three-helix bundle with an identical 
fold to UBA(2), but a highly divergent sequence, the first ubiquitin-associated 
domain, UBA(1), of HHR23A. We use histidine-heme loop formation methods, 
employing eight single histidine variants, to probe for denatured state 
conformational bias of a UBA(1) domain fused to the N-terminus of 
iso-1-cytochrome c (iso-1-Cytc). Guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) denaturation 
shows that the iso-1-Cytc domain unfolds first, followed by the UBA(1) domain. 
Denatured state (4 and 6 M GuHCl) histidine-heme loop formation studies show 
that as the size of the histidine-heme loop increases, loop stability decreases, 
as expected for the Jacobson-Stockmayer relationship. However, loops formed with 
His35, His31, and His15, of UBA(1), are 0.6-1.1 kcal/mol more stable than 
expected from the Jacobson-Stockmayer relationship, confirming the importance of 
deviations of the denatured state from random coil behavior near interhelical 
turns of helical domains for facilitating folding to the correct topology. For 
UBA(1) and UBA(2), hydrophobic clusters on either side of the turns partially 
explain deviations from random coil behavior; however, helix capping also 
appears to be important.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.1c00400
PMCID: PMC8751257
PMID: 34606713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.