1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 15;431:115730. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2021.115730.  Epub 2021 Sep 30.

Disruption of pulmonary resolution mediators contribute to exacerbated silver 
nanoparticle-induced acute inflammation in a metabolic syndrome mouse model.

Alqahtani S(1), Xia L(2), Jannasch A(3), Ferreira C(3), Franco J(4), Shannahan 
JH(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Health Sciences, College of Health and Human Sciences, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, IN, United States; National Center for 
Pharmaceuticals, Life Science and Environment Research Institute, King Abdulaziz 
City for Science and Technology (KACST), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)School of Health Sciences, College of Health and Human Sciences, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, IN, United States.
(3)Purdue Metabolite Profiling Facility, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 
United States.
(4)Department of Comparative Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, United States.
(5)School of Health Sciences, College of Health and Human Sciences, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, IN, United States. Electronic address: 
jshannah@purdue.edu.

Pre-existing conditions modulate sensitivity to numerous xenobiotic exposures 
such as air pollution. Specifically, individuals suffering from metabolic 
syndrome (MetS) demonstrate enhanced acute inflammatory responses following 
particulate matter inhalation. The mechanisms associated with these exacerbated 
inflammatory responses are unknown, impairing interventional strategies and our 
understanding of susceptible populations. We hypothesize MetS-associated lipid 
dysregulation influences mediators of inflammatory resolution signaling 
contributing to increased acute pulmonary toxicity. To evaluate this hypothesis, 
healthy and MetS mouse models were treated with either 18-hydroxy 
eicosapentaenoic acid (18-HEPE), 14-hydroxy docosahexaenoic acid (14-HDHA), 
17-hydroxy docosahexaenoic acid (17-HDHA), or saline (control) via 
intraperitoneal injection prior to oropharyngeal aspiration of silver 
nanoparticles (AgNP). In mice receiving saline treatment, AgNP exposure resulted 
in an acute pulmonary inflammatory response that was exacerbated in MetS mice. A 
targeted lipid assessment demonstrated 18-HEPE, 14-HDHA, and 17-HDHA treatments 
altered lung levels of specialized pro-resolving lipid mediators (SPMs). 14-HDHA 
and 17-HDHA treatments more efficiently reduced the exacerbated acute 
inflammatory response in AgNP exposed MetS mice as compared to 18-HEPE. This 
included decreased neutrophilic influx, diminished induction of inflammatory 
cytokines/chemokines, and reduced alterations in SPMs. Examination of SPM 
receptors determined baseline reductions in MetS mice compared to healthy as 
well as decreases due to AgNP exposure. Overall, these results demonstrate AgNP 
exposure disrupts inflammatory resolution, specifically 14-HDHA and 17-HDHA 
derived SPMs, in MetS contributing to exacerbated acute inflammatory responses. 
Our findings identify a potential mechanism responsible for enhanced 
susceptibility in MetS that can be targeted for interventional therapeutic 
approaches.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2021.115730
PMCID: PMC8545917
PMID: 34601004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare 
that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships 
that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.