1. Chem Sci. 2021 Aug 10;12(37):12353-12364. doi: 10.1039/d1sc02695j. eCollection
 2021 Sep 29.

Rational generation of lasso peptides based on biosynthetic gene mutations and 
site-selective chemical modifications.

Liu T(1), Ma X(1), Yu J(1), Yang W(2), Wang G(1), Wang Z(1), Ge Y(1), Song J(1), 
Han H(2), Zhang W(2), Yang D(1), Liu X(3), Ma M(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University 38 Xueyuan Road, Haidian District 
Beijing 100191 China mma@bjmu.edu.cn.
(2)School of Medicine, Tongji University 1239 Siping Road Shanghai 200092 China.
(3)CAS Research Platform for Protein Sciences, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences 15 Datun Road, Chao-yang District Beijing 100101 China 
xhliu@ibp.ac.cn.

Lasso peptides are a unique family of natural products whose structures feature 
a specific threaded fold, which confers these peptides the resistance to thermal 
and proteolytic degradation. This stability gives lasso peptides excellent 
pharmacokinetic properties, which together with their diverse reported 
bioactivities have garnered extensive attention because of their drug 
development potential. Notably, the threaded fold has proven quite inaccessible 
by chemical synthesis, which has hindered efficient generation of structurally 
diverse lasso peptides. We herein report the discovery of a new lasso peptide 
stlassin (1) by gene activation based on a Streptomyces heterologous expression 
system. Site-directed mutagenesis on the precursor peptide-encoding gene is 
carried out systematically, generating 17 stlassin derivatives (2-17 and 21) 
with residue-replacements at specific positions of 1. The solution NMR 
structures of 1, 3, 4, 14 and 16 are determined, supporting structural 
comparisons that ultimately enabled the rational production of disulfide 
bond-containing derivatives 18 and 19, whose structures do not belong to any of 
the four classes currently used to classify lasso peptides. Several 
site-selective chemical modifications are first applied on 16 and 21, 
efficiently generating new derivatives (20, 22-27) whose structures bear various 
decorations beyond the peptidyl monotonicity. The high production yields of 
these stlassin derivatives facilitate biological assays, which show that 1, 4, 
16, 20, 21 and 24 possess antagonistic activities against the binding of 
lipopolysaccharides to toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). These results demonstrate 
proof-of-concept for the combined mutational/chemical generation of lasso 
peptide libraries to support drug lead development.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d1sc02695j
PMCID: PMC8480316
PMID: 34603665

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.