1. Acta Biomater. 2021 Dec;136:327-342. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2021.09.050. Epub 
2021 Oct 2.

Strength, deformability and toughness of uncrosslinked fibrin fibers from 
theoretical reconstruction of stress-strain curves.

Maksudov F(1), Daraei A(2), Sesha A(1), Marx KA(1), Guthold M(3), Barsegov V(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts, Lowell, MA 01854, 
United States.
(2)Department of Physics, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC 27109, 
United States.
(3)Department of Physics, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC 27109, 
United States. Electronic address: gutholdm@wfu.edu.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts, Lowell, MA 01854, 
United States. Electronic address: Valeri_Barsegov@uml.edu.

Structural mechanisms underlying the mechanical properties of fibrin fibers are 
elusive. We combined tensile testing of uncrosslinked fibrin polymers in vitro 
and in silico to explore their material properties. The experimental stress (σ) 
- strain (ε) curves for fibrin fibers are characterized by elastic deformations 
with a weaker elastic response for ε<160% due to unraveling of αC tethers and 
straightening of fibrin protofibrils, and a stronger response for ε>160% owing 
to unfolding of the coiled coils and γ nodules in fibrin monomers. Fiber rupture 
for strains ε>212% is due to dissociation of the knob-hole bonds and rupture of 
D:D interfaces. We developed the Fluctuating Bilinear Spring model to interpret 
the σ-ε profiles in terms of the free energy for protofibril alignment 
ΔG0 = 10.1-11.5 kBT, Young's moduli for protofibril alignment Yu = 1.9-3.2 MPa 
and stretching Ya = 5.7-9.7 MPa, strain scale ε˜≈ 12-40% for fiber rupture, and 
protofibril cooperativity m= 3.6-8. We applied the model to characterize the 
fiber strength σcr≈ 12-13 MPa, deformability εcr≈ 222%, and rupture toughness U≈ 
9 MJ/m3, and to resolve thermodynamic state functions, 96.9 GJ/mol entropy 
change for protofibril alignment (at room temperature) and 113.6 GJ/mol enthalpy 
change for protofibril stretching, which add up to 210.5 GJ/mol free-energy 
change. Fiber elongation is associated with protofibril dehydration and sliding 
mechanism to create an ordered protofibril array. Fibrin fibers behave like a 
hydrogel; protofibril dehydration and water expulsion account for ∼94-98% of the 
total free-energy changes for fiber elongation and rupture. STATEMENT OF 
SIGNIFICANCE: Structural mechanisms underlying the mechanical properties of 
fibrin fibers, major components of blood clots and obstructive thrombi, are 
elusive. We performed tensile testing of uncrosslinked fibrin polymers in vitro 
and in silico to explore their material properties. Fluctuating Bilinear Spring 
theory was developed to interpret the stress-strain profiles in terms of the 
energy for protofibril alignment, elastic moduli for protofibril alignment and 
stretching, and strain scale for fiber rupture, and to probe the limits of fiber 
strength, extensibility and toughness. Fibrin fibers behave like a hydrogel. 
Fiber elongation is defined by the protofibril dehydration and sliding. 
Structural rearrangements in water matrix control fiber elasticity. These 
results contribute to fundamental understanding of blood clot breakage that 
underlies thrombotic embolization.

Copyright © 2021 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2021.09.050
PMCID: PMC8627496
PMID: 34606991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.