1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Nov;297(5):101277. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101277. Epub 2021
 Oct 5.

Modulation of SF3B1 in the pre-mRNA spliceosome induces a RIG-I-dependent type I 
IFN response.

Chang AY(1), Zhou YJ(1), Iyengar S(2), Pobiarzyn PW(1), Tishchenko P(1), Shah 
KM(1), Wheeler H(3), Wang YM(3), Loria PM(3), Loganzo F(1), Woo SR(4).

Author information:
(1)Oncology Research & Development, Pfizer Inc, Pearl River, New York, USA.
(2)Emerging Science & Innovation, Pfizer Inc, Pearl River, New York, USA.
(3)Medicine Design, Worldwide Research & Development, Pfizer Inc, Groton, 
Connecticut, USA.
(4)Oncology Research & Development, Pfizer Inc, Pearl River, New York, USA. 
Electronic address: realwoomir@gmail.com.

Nucleic acid-sensing pathways play critical roles in innate immune activation 
through the production of type I interferon (IFN-I) and proinflammatory 
cytokines. These factors are required for effective antitumor immune responses. 
Pharmacological modulators of the pre-mRNA spliceosome splicing factor 3b 
subunit 1 (SF3B1) are under clinical investigation as cancer cytotoxic agents. 
However, potential roles of these agents in aberrant RNA generation and 
subsequent RNA-sensing pathway activation have not been studied. In this study, 
we observed that SF3B1 pharmacological modulation using pladienolide B (Plad B) 
induces production of aberrant RNA species and robust IFN-I responses via 
engagement of the dsRNA sensor retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and 
downstream interferon regulatory factor 3. We found that Plad B synergized with 
canonical RIG-I agonism to induce the IFN-I response. In addition, Plad B 
induced NF-κB responses and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and 
chemokines. Finally, we showed that cancer cells bearing the hotspot SF3B1K700E 
mutation, which leads to global aberrant splicing, had enhanced IFN-I response 
to canonical RIG-I agonism. Together, these results demonstrate that 
pharmacological modulation of SF3B1 in cancer cells can induce an enhanced IFN-I 
response dependent on RIG-I expression. The study suggests that spliceosome 
modulation may not only induce direct cancer cell cytotoxicity but also initiate 
an innate immune response via activation of RNA-sensing pathways.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101277
PMCID: PMC8559577
PMID: 34619148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest All authors were employees 
of Pfizer, Inc during the duration of this work.