1. Cell Rep. 2021 Oct 5;37(1):109786. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109786.

β-Amyloid disruption of LTP/LTD balance is mediated by AKAP150-anchored PKA and 
Calcineurin regulation of Ca(2+)-permeable AMPA receptors.

Sanderson JL(1), Freund RK(1), Gorski JA(1), Dell'Acqua ML(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA; University of Colorado 
Alzheimer's and Cognition Center, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, 
USA; Linda Crnic Institute for Down Syndrome, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, 
CO 80045, USA. Electronic address: mark.dellacqua@cuanschutz.edu.

Regulated insertion and removal of postsynaptic AMPA glutamate receptors 
(AMPARs) mediates hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term 
depression (LTD) synaptic plasticity underlying learning and memory. In 
Alzheimer's disease β-amyloid (Aβ) oligomers may impair learning and memory by 
altering AMPAR trafficking and LTP/LTD balance. Importantly, Ca2+-permeable 
AMPARs (CP-AMPARs) assembled from GluA1 subunits are excluded from hippocampal 
synapses basally but can be recruited rapidly during LTP and LTD to modify 
synaptic strength and signaling. By employing mouse knockin mutations that 
disrupt anchoring of the kinase PKA or phosphatase Calcineurin (CaN) to the 
postsynaptic scaffold protein AKAP150, we find that local AKAP-PKA signaling is 
required for CP-AMPAR recruitment, which can facilitate LTP but also, 
paradoxically, prime synapses for Aβ impairment of LTP mediated by local 
AKAP-CaN LTD signaling that promotes subsequent CP-AMPAR removal. These findings 
highlight the importance of PKA/CaN signaling balance and CP-AMPARs in normal 
plasticity and aberrant plasticity linked to disease.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109786
PMCID: PMC8530450
PMID: 34610314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.