1. Case Rep Gastroenterol. 2021 Jul 6;15(2):603-609. doi: 10.1159/000516314. 
eCollection 2021 May-Aug.

Advanced Colon Cancer after Curative Resection of Intramucosal Adenocarcinoma 
with Endoscopic Submucosal Dissection.

Sasaki A(1), Ichita C(1), Sumida C(1), Kimura K(1), Nishino T(1), Tasaki J(1), 
Masuda S(1), Kawachi J(2), Kudo M(3), Teshima S(3), Koizumi K(1), Kako M(1).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology Medicine Center, Shonan Kamakura General Hospital, Kamakura, 
Japan.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Shonan Kamakura General Hospital, Kamakura, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Shonan Kamakura General Hospital, 
Kamakura, Japan.

Endoscopic resection, particularly endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD), for 
colorectal cancers enables a precise pathological diagnosis and safe R0 
resection. The recurrence rate after ESD is generally extremely low, with annual 
surveillance colonoscopy recommended. However, surveillance may not be 
considered for super-elderly patients owing to their condition. This is a case 
report of an 85-year-old man in whom curative resection was achieved for an 
intramucosal adenocarcinoma with ESD. The patient presented with a hypoechoic 
mass located in his lower right abdomen, diagnosed via surveillance abdominal 
ultrasound. He had undergone curative ESD for intramucosal cecal cancer 2 years 
prior. Colonoscopy revealed a type 2 epithelial tumor at the proximal aspect of 
the ESD scar. Ileocolic resection with lymph node dissection was performed. An 
epithelial tumor and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma but not a submucosal 
tumor was detected in the mucosal layer. The lesion was diagnosed not as a local 
recurrence after ESD but as a newly emerged original advanced cancer. After ESD 
for colorectal cancer, a newly developed advanced cancer may occur at the site 
of the ESD scar in a shorter term than usual. Surveillance colonoscopy after ESD 
is necessary even for super-elderly patients.

Copyright Â© 2021 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000516314
PMCID: PMC8454252
PMID: 34616263

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.