1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Sep 20;9:729402. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.729402. 
eCollection 2021.

Characterization of a Novel Glutamine Synthetase From Trichinella spiralis and 
Its Participation in Larval Acid Resistance, Molting, and Development.

Zhuo TX(1), Wang Z(1), Song YY(1), Yan SW(1), Liu RD(1), Zhang X(1), Wang ZQ(1), 
Cui J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Medical College, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 
China.

Trichinella spiralis is a major foodborne parasite worldwide. After the 
encapsulated muscle larvae (ML) in meat are ingested, the ML are liberated in 
the stomach of the host and activated into intestinal infectious larvae (IIL), 
which develop into adult worm after molting four times. A novel glutamine 
synthetase (TsGS) was identified from T. spiralis IIL at 10 h post-infection, 
but its biological role in T. spiralis life cycle is not clear. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the biological characteristics of TsGS and its 
functions in larval acid resistance, molting, and development. TsGS has a 
glutamine synthetase (GS) catalytic domain. Complete TsGS sequence was cloned 
and expressed in Escherichia coli BL21. rTsGS has good immunogenicity. qPCR and 
Western blotting showed that TsGS was highly expressed at IIL stage, and 
immunofluorescence revealed that TsGS was principally localized at the cuticle 
and intrauterine embryos of this nematode. rTsGS has enzymatic activity of 
natural GS to hydrolyze the substrate (Glu, ATP, and NH4 +). Silencing of TsGS 
gene significantly reduced the IIL survival at pH 2.5, decreased the IIL burden, 
and impeded larval molting and development. The results demonstrated that TsGS 
participates in T. spiralis larval acid resistance, molting and development, and 
it might be a candidate vaccine target against Trichinella molting and 
development.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhuo, Wang, Song, Yan, Liu, Zhang, Wang and Cui.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.729402
PMCID: PMC8488193
PMID: 34616735

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.