1. Biopsychosoc Med. 2021 Oct 7;15(1):17. doi: 10.1186/s13030-021-00216-z.

Health-related benefits and adverse events associated with yoga classes among 
participants that are healthy, in poor health, or with chronic diseases.

Oka T(1)(2), Lkhagvasuren B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. 
okatakakazu@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, International University of Health and 
Welfare Narita hospital, 852 Hatakeda, Narita, Chiba, 286-8520, Japan. 
okatakakazu@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, International University of Health and 
Welfare Narita hospital, 852 Hatakeda, Narita, Chiba, 286-8520, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Our previous study demonstrated that 42% of yoga class participants 
in Japan had chronic diseases requiring medication. This raises the question as 
to whether those with chronic diseases would benefit from practicing yoga or if 
they are at higher risk for specific adverse events compared to healthy 
individuals receiving the same instruction.
METHODS: To address these questions, 328 adults who started practicing yoga for 
the first time were asked to complete the Profile of Mood States (POMS), 
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), and Medical Outcomes Study Short Form 8, standard 
version (SF-8™) and to record any adverse events on the first day of the yoga 
class and again three months later. The participants consisted of three groups: 
a healthy (H) group (n = 70), a poor health (PH) group (n = 117), and a chronic 
disease (CD) group (n = 141). The degree of subjective symptoms was also 
compared between the pre- and post-intervention period in the PH and CD groups.
RESULTS: Typically, yoga classes were held once a week for 60-90 min. The 
programs included asanas, pranayamas, meditation, isometric yoga, and sukshma 
vyayama. In the PH and CD groups, the POMS tension-anxiety and fatigue scores 
decreased and the vigor score increased significantly after the first class. 
Furthermore, PSS scores decreased and the SF-8™ scores increased significantly 
three months later. The degree of subjective symptoms such as easy fatigability, 
shoulder stiffness, and insomnia also decreased over three months. Individuals 
in these groups experienced more frequent adverse events than those in the H 
group. The PH and CD groups also experienced a greater variety of symptoms, 
including psychological ones, not reported by the H group. Adverse events were 
not so serious that participants stopped practicing yoga during the class. About 
60% of all participants were highly satisfied with participating in yoga 
classes.
CONCLUSIONS: If yoga classes are conducted with attention to possible adverse 
events, yoga practice in a yoga studio may have beneficial effects for people 
with functional somatic symptoms and chronic diseases, as well as healthy 
participants. These benefits include reductions in perceived stress and 
uncomfortable symptoms as well as improved mood and quality of life.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13030-021-00216-z
PMCID: PMC8499562
PMID: 34620198

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that he has no competing 
interests in relation to this article.