1. Gene. 2022 Jan 15;808:146000. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.146000. Epub 2021 Oct
6.

Novel heterozygous mutations in the otogelin-like (OTOGL) gene in a child with 
bilateral mild nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss.

Pan C(1), Li J(1), Wang S(1), Shi C(1), Zhang Y(1), Yu Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou 215006, China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou 215006, China. Electronic address: yfyu1024@163.com.

Hearing loss is a common disease, of which genetic factors are the main cause. 
The incidence of mild or moderate postlingual deafness in children is not high, 
and the impact on life and learning is not as severe as that of prelingual 
deafness. This leads to insufficient attention to the disorder in the clinic. To 
date, only a few disease-causing genes have been reported. This report describe 
a case of novel heterozygous mutations in OTOGL that causes nonsyndromic mild 
sensorineural hearing loss. Basic information, imaging examinations, 
audiological examination, and vestibular function tests of the proband were 
collected. Blood samples of the proband's family were collected and analyzed by 
whole exome sequencing and Sanger sequencing. A pedigree diagram was drawn and 
the genetic patterns were analyzed. The proband is a 16-year-old female student 
with mild sensorineural hearing loss. High-resolution CT of the inner ear and 
vestibular function tests showed no abnormalities. The age of onset was 
approximately 4 years old. Except for hearing loss, no lesions were seen in 
other organs. The parents of the proband were not close relatives and had normal 
hearing. Two novel heterozygous mutations were found in the OTOGL gene. The 
c.5038del (p.D1680Ifs*6) variant was inherited from the father, and the 
c.2770C > T (p.R924X) variant from the mother. They enriched the mutation 
spectrum of OTOGL, which provides the basis for gene function research and 
genetic consultation.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.146000
PMID: 34626719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]