1. Oral Oncol. 2021 Nov;122:105553. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2021.105553. Epub
 2021 Oct 6.

A case of Maffucci syndrome with a buccal hemangioma harboring a mutation in 
IDH1.

Ichimura N(1), Yamamoto N(2), Toyama N(3), Hibi H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nagoya University Hospital, 
Nagoya, Japan. Electronic address: norihisa@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Kariya Toyota General Hospital, 
Kariya, Japan.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nagoya University Hospital, 
Nagoya, Japan.
(4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nagoya University Hospital, 
Nagoya, Japan; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nagoya University 
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Maffucci syndrome, first described in 1881, is a rare, non-hereditary skeletal 
disorder characterized by multiple enchondromas in combination with soft tissue 
hemangiomas. Recent studies have implicated somatic mutations in IDH1/2 
contributing to the pathogenesis of Maffucci syndrome. This study describes the 
first case of Maffucci syndrome harboring a mutation in IDH1, which was 
associated with a hemangioma in the oral mucosa. A 32-year-old man, who was 
diagnosed with Maffucci syndrome during childhood, was referred to our 
department in April 2020 due to a mass in the left buccal mucosa. The mass was 
soft, dome-shaped, had dark red protrusions and well-defined borders, and the 
dimensions were approximately 15 × 10 mm. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 
mass with a dimension of 13 × 10 mm, which appeared hyperintense on T2-weighted 
images. The vascular lesion was surgically resected under local anesthesia owing 
to hemangioma diagnosis. We then analyzed the IDH1/2 sequences using DNA 
extracted from the excised tumor tissue and peripheral blood. The analysis 
revealed the presence of a heterozygous mutation in IDH1 in the tumor tissue, 
corresponding to an R132C substitution. The mutation was not present in 
peripheral blood DNA. After over one year of resection, the patient is presently 
free from tumor recurrence and is under follow-up for the early detection of 
recurrent hemangioma.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2021.105553
PMID: 34624834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]