1. Genes Environ. 2021 Oct 9;43(1):45. doi: 10.1186/s41021-021-00218-x.

Genetic interaction between RLM1 and F-box motif encoding gene SAF1 contributes 
to stress response in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Sharma M(1), Verma V(1), Bairwa NK(2).

Author information:
(1)Genome Stability Regulation Lab, School of Biotechnology, Shri Mata Vaishno 
Devi University, Katra, Jammu & Kashmir, 182320, India.
(2)Genome Stability Regulation Lab, School of Biotechnology, Shri Mata Vaishno 
Devi University, Katra, Jammu & Kashmir, 182320, India. 
narendra.bairwa@smvdu.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: Stress response is mediated by the transcription of 
stress-responsive genes. The F-box motif protein Saf1p is involved in SCF-E3 
ligase mediated degradation of the adenine deaminase, Aah1p upon nutrient 
stress. The four transcription regulators, BUR6, MED6, SPT10, SUA7, are listed 
for SAF1 in the genome database of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Here in this study, 
we carried out an in-silico analysis of gene expression and transcription factor 
databases to understand the regulation of SAF1 expression during stress for 
hypothesis and experimental analysis.
RESULT: An analysis of the GEO profile database indicated an increase in SAF1 
expression when cells were treated with stress agents such as Clioquinol, 
Pterostilbene, Gentamicin, Hypoxia, Genotoxic, desiccation, and heat. The 
increase in expression of SAF1 during stress conditions correlated positively 
with the expression of RLM1, encoding the Rlm1p transcription factor. The 
expression of AAH1 encoding Aah1p, a Saf1p substrate for ubiquitination, 
appeared to be negatively correlated with the expression of RLM1 as revealed by 
an analysis of the Yeastract expression database. Based on analysis of 
expression profile and regulatory association of SAF1 and RLM1, we hypothesized 
that inactivation of both the genes together may contribute to stress tolerance. 
The experimental analysis of cellular growth response of cells lacking both SAF1 
and RLM1 to selected stress agents such as cell wall and osmo-stressors, by spot 
assay indicated stress tolerance phenotype similar to parental strain however 
sensitivity to genotoxic and microtubule depolymerizing stress agents.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on in-silico and experimental data we suggest that SAF1 and 
RLM1 both interact genetically in differential response to genotoxic and general 
stressors.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s41021-021-00218-x
PMCID: PMC8501602
PMID: 34627408

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the content of this article.