1. Virus Genes. 2021 Dec;57(6):541-555. doi: 10.1007/s11262-021-01873-6. Epub
2021  Oct 8.

Deciphering transmission dynamics and spillover of avian influenza viruses from 
avian species to swine populations globally.

Chauhan RP(1), Gordon ML(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Laboratory Medicine and Medical Sciences, University of 
KwaZulu-Natal, 719 Umbilo Road, Durban, 4001, South Africa.
(2)School of Laboratory Medicine and Medical Sciences, University of 
KwaZulu-Natal, 719 Umbilo Road, Durban, 4001, South Africa. Tarinm@ukzn.ac.za.

Genome sequences of eleven avian influenza virus (AIV) subtypes have been 
reported in swine populations from seven countries until August 2020. To unravel 
the transmission dynamics and spillover events of AIVs from avian reservoirs to 
swine, full-length hemagglutinin (HA) sequences of AIV subtypes (n = 11) 
reported from various avian species and swine were retrieved from the 'Influenza 
Research Database'. Phylogenetic analysis identified closely related avian and 
swine AIV sequences suggesting potential spillover events from multiple domestic 
and wild avian species, including chicken, duck, pigeon, goose, quail, and 
aquatic birds to swine. Furthermore, N-linked glycosylation analysis of these 
closely related AIV sequences supported the possibility of multiple spillover 
events of highly pathogenic H5N1 and low pathogenic H9N2 viruses from various 
avian species to swine. The principal coordinate analysis further validated 
these findings for H5N1 and H9N2 viruses; however, spillover events of the other 
nine AIV subtypes were limited. Interestingly, the presence of potential 
mammalian adaptation markers, particularly in some of the swine H5N1, H7N9, and 
H9N2 viruses, suggested that these viruses may have already adapted in swine. 
The occurrence and circulation of these AIVs in swine, especially the H5N1 and 
H9N2 viruses with numerous spillover events from the avian reservoirs to swine, 
pose a significant threat in terms of their reassortment with endemic swine 
viruses or circulating human influenza viruses within the swine which may 
facilitate the emergence of a novel influenza virus strain with pandemic 
potential.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-021-01873-6
PMCID: PMC8500266
PMID: 34625868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.