1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Sep 28;13(19):4836. doi: 10.3390/cancers13194836.

Metabolic Plasticity and Combinatorial Radiosensitisation Strategies in Human 
Papillomavirus-Positive Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Head and Neck Cell Lines.

Wilkie MD(1)(2), Anaam EA(1), Lau AS(1)(2), Rubbi CP(1), Vlatkovic N(1), Jones 
TM(1)(2), Boyd MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Centre, Department of Molecular & Clinical Cancer Medicine, 
The University of Liverpool, 200 London Road, Liverpool L3 9TA, UK.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Aintree, Lower Lane, Liverpool L9 7AL, UK.

BACKGROUND: A major objective in the management of human papillomavirus 
(HPV)-positive squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) is to reduce 
long-term functional ramifications while maintaining oncological outcomes. This 
study examined the metabolic profile of HPV-positive SCCHN and the potential 
role of anti-metabolic therapeutics to achieve radiosensitisation as a potential 
means to de-escalate radiation therapy.
METHODS: Three established HPV-positive SCCHN cell lines were studied 
(UM-SCC-104, UPCI:SCC154, and VU-SCC-147), together with a typical TP53 mutant 
HPV-negative SCCHN cell line (UM-SCC-81B) for comparison. Metabolic profiling 
was performed using extracellular flux analysis during specifically designed 
mitochondrial and glycolytic stress tests. Sensitivity to ionising radiation 
(IR) was evaluated using clonogenic assays following no treatment, or treatment 
with: 25 mM 2-deoxy-D-glucose (glycolytic inhibitor) alone; 20 mM metformin 
(electron transport chain inhibitor) alone; or 25 mM 2-deoxy-D-glucose and 20 mM 
metformin combined. Expression levels of p53 and reporters of p53 function 
(MDM2, p53, Phospho-p53 [Ser15], TIGAR and p21 [CDKN1A]) were examined by 
western blotting.
RESULTS: HPV-positive SCCHN cell lines exhibited a diverse metabolic phenotype, 
displaying robust mitochondrial and glycolytic reserve capacities. This 
metabolic profile, in turn, correlated with IR response following administration 
of anti-metabolic agents, in that both 2-deoxy-D-glucose and metformin were 
required to significantly potentiate the effects of IR in these cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to our recently published data on HPV-negative SCCHN 
cells, which display relative glycolytic dependence, HPV-positive SCCHN cells 
can only be sensitised to IR using a complex anti-metabolic approach targeting 
both mitochondrial respiration and glycolysis, reflecting their metabolically 
diverse phenotype. Notionally, this may provide an attractive platform for 
treatment de-intensification in the clinical setting by facilitating IR dose 
reduction to minimise the impact of treatment on long-term function.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13194836
PMCID: PMC8507998
PMID: 34638320

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.