1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2021 Dec;9(12):1451-1464. doi: 
10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-21-0031. Epub 2021 Oct 11.

Conditional PD-1/PD-L1 Probody Therapeutics Induce Comparable Antitumor Immunity 
but Reduced Systemic Toxicity Compared with Traditional Anti-PD-1/PD-L1 Agents.

Assi HH(1), Wong C(1), Tipton KA(1), Mei L(1), Wong K(1), Razo J(1), Chan C(1), 
Howng B(1), Sagert J(1), Krimm M(1), Diep L(1), Jang A(1), Nguyen MT(1), 
Lapuyade N(1), Singson V(1), Villanueva R(1), Paidhungat M(1), Liu S(1), Rangan 
V(1), Vasiljeva O(1), West JW(1), Richardson JH(1), Irving B(1), Daniel D(1), 
Belvin M(1), Kavanaugh WM(2).

Author information:
(1)CytomX Therapeutics, Inc., South San Francisco, California.
(2)CytomX Therapeutics, Inc., South San Francisco, California. 
mkavanaugh@cytomx.com.

Immune-checkpoint blockade has revolutionized cancer treatment. However, most 
patients do not respond to single-agent therapy. Combining checkpoint inhibitors 
with other immune-stimulating agents increases both efficacy and toxicity due to 
systemic T-cell activation. Protease-activatable antibody prodrugs, known as 
Probody therapeutics (Pb-Tx), localize antibody activity by attenuating capacity 
to bind antigen until protease activation in the tumor microenvironment. Herein, 
we show that systemic administration of anti-programmed cell death ligand 1 
(anti-PD-L1) and anti-programmed cell death protein 1 (anti-PD-1) Pb-Tx to 
tumor-bearing mice elicited antitumor activity similar to that of traditional 
PD-1/PD-L1-targeted antibodies. Pb-Tx exhibited reduced systemic activity and an 
improved nonclinical safety profile, with markedly reduced target occupancy on 
peripheral T cells and reduced incidence of early-onset autoimmune diabetes in 
nonobese diabetic mice. Our results confirm that localized PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition 
by Pb-Tx can elicit robust antitumor immunity and minimize systemic 
immune-mediated toxicity. These data provide further preclinical rationale to 
support the ongoing development of the anti-PD-L1 Pb-Tx CX-072, which is 
currently in clinical trials.

Â©2021 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-21-0031
PMCID: PMC9414278
PMID: 34635485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]