1. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2021 Jan-Dec;20:15330338211046432. doi: 
10.1177/15330338211046432.

Effect of Programmed Death-Ligand 1 in Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts on Advanced 
Laryngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Yang Z(1)(2), Wang J(1), Chen C(1), Sun P(1), Yu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, 74566The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou, China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Suzhou Ninth Hospital affiliated to Soochow 
University, Suzhou, China.

This study aimed to explore the effect of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) in 
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) on advanced laryngeal squamous cell 
carcinoma (LSCC). The expression of PD-L1 in advanced LSCC tumor tissues was 
observed in 83 patients with LSCC by immunofluorescence microscopy and compared 
with that in normal laryngeal mucosa. The CAFs of LSCC and normal fibroblasts 
(NFs) were isolated, cultured, purified, and examined by fluorescence. The 
expression of PD-L1 in purified CAFs and NFs was measured by flow cytometry. The 
expression of PD-L1 in CAFs was downregulated through small interferring RNA 
(siRNA) transfection. The proliferation and migration capacities of CAFs were 
observed using proliferation and scratch tests, respectively. The proliferation 
of HEP-2 cells and T cells was measured after cocultured with CAFs. The 
secretion of interleukins IL-2 and IL-10 was detected using enzyme-linked immuno 
sorbent assay (ELISA). PD-L1 was expressed in 62 of 83 cases of the advanced 
LSCC tumor tissues. Also, CAFs expressed more PD-L1 compared with NFs. The 
proliferation and migration capacities of CAFs were significantly lower after 
transfection with PD-L1-siRNA. The proliferation rate of HEP-2 cells cocultured 
with CAFs decreased in PD-L1-siRNA-transfected cells. However, the proliferation 
rate of T cells increased in transfected cells. The ELISA results showed that 
the secretion of IL-2 increased and that of IL-10 decreased in 
PD-L1-siRNA-transfected cells. The expression of PD-L1 in CAFs of advanced LSCC 
was higher than that in NFs. The downregulation of PD-L1 reduced the 
proliferation and migration of CAFs and HEP-2 cells but enhanced the 
proliferation and pro-inflammatory function of T cells in the coculture 
experiment.

DOI: 10.1177/15330338211046432
PMCID: PMC8504221
PMID: 34632870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests.