1. Front Physiol. 2021 Sep 24;12:738665. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.738665. 
eCollection 2021.

The Consequences of Training and Competition to the Musculoskeletal System in 
Ultramarathon Runners: A Narrative Review.

Partyka A(1), Waśkiewicz Z(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan΄, Poland.
(2)Institute of Sport Science, Jerzy Kukuczka Academy of Physical Education, 
Katowice, Poland.
(3)Department of Sports Medicine and Medical Rehabilitation, Sechenov First 
Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.

Ultramarathons are becoming increasingly popular every year, leading to more and 
more publications focusing on athletes of these endurance events. This paper 
summarizes the current state of knowledge on the effects of ultramarathons on 
the motor system. Various studies have attempted to answer questions about 
negative and positive effects on the musculoskeletal system, common injuries, 
optimal strategies, and regeneration. Considering the increasing number of 
ultramarathon athletes, the discoveries may have practical applications for a 
multitude of experts in the field of sports medicine, as well as for the 
athletes themselves. Acute locomotor system changes in runners as assessed by 
locomotor biomarkers are reversible and may be asymptomatic or painful. Injuries 
suffered by runners largely allow them to finish the competition and are usually 
overlooked. Regeneration, including regular massage and the use of supporting 
techniques, allows for faster convalescence. This publication is meant to be a 
source of knowledge for people associated with this discipline.

Copyright © 2021 Partyka and Waśkiewicz.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.738665
PMCID: PMC8497806
PMID: 34630159

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.