1. Front Oncol. 2021 Sep 23;11:641187. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.641187. eCollection
 2021.

A Zebrafish Model of Metastatic Colonization Pinpoints Cellular Mechanisms of 
Circulating Tumor Cell Extravasation.

Allen TA(1), Cullen MM(1), Hawkey N(1), Mochizuki H(2), Nguyen L(1), Schechter 
E(1), Borst L(3), Yoder JA(2), Freedman JA(1)(4), Patierno SR(1)(4), Cheng 
K(2)(5), Eward WC(6), Somarelli JA(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United 
States.
(2)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences and Comparative Medicine 
Institute, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, United States.
(3)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, United States.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC, United States.
(5)Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(6)Department of Orthopedics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United 
States.

Metastasis is a multistep process in which cells must detach, migrate/invade 
local structures, intravasate, circulate, extravasate, and colonize. A full 
understanding of the complexity of this process has been limited by the lack of 
ability to study these steps in isolation with detailed molecular analyses. 
Leveraging a comparative oncology approach, we injected canine osteosarcoma 
cells into the circulation of transgenic zebrafish with fluorescent blood 
vessels in a biologically dynamic metastasis extravasation model. Circulating 
tumor cell clusters that successfully extravasated the vasculature as 
multicellular units were isolated under intravital imaging (n = 6). These 
extravasation-positive tumor cell clusters sublines were then molecularly 
profiled by RNA-Seq. Using a systems-level analysis, we pinpointed the 
downregulation of KRAS signaling, immune pathways, and extracellular matrix 
(ECM) organization as enriched in extravasated cells (p < 0.05). Within the 
extracellular matrix remodeling pathway, we identified versican (VCAN) as 
consistently upregulated and central to the ECM gene regulatory network (p < 
0.05). Versican expression is prognostic for a poorer metastasis-free and 
overall survival in patients with osteosarcoma. Together, our results provide a 
novel experimental framework to study discrete steps in the metastatic process. 
Using this system, we identify the versican/ECM network dysregulation as a 
potential contributor to osteosarcoma circulating tumor cell metastasis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Allen, Cullen, Hawkey, Mochizuki, Nguyen, Schechter, Borst, 
Yoder, Freedman, Patierno, Cheng, Eward and Somarelli.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.641187
PMCID: PMC8495265
PMID: 34631514

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.