1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Sep 24;13(19):4794. doi: 10.3390/cancers13194794.

Thymic Lymphoepithelial Carcinoma Associated with Epstein-Barr Virus: 
Experiences and Literature Review.

Ose N(1), Kawagishi S(2), Funaki S(1), Kanou T(1), Fukui E(1), Kimura K(1), 
Minami M(1), Shintani Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Suita-shi 565-0871, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Osaka International Cancer Institute, 
Chuo-ku, Osaka-shi 541-8567, Osaka, Japan.

Thymic lymphoepithelial carcinoma (TLEC) is a primary thymic carcinoma that 
accounts for about 14% of all thymic epithelial tumors and is classified into 14 
types. The histological morphology is similar to lymphoepithelioma, a type of 
undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma. It has been reported that squamous 
carcinoma accounts for approximately 80% of thymic carcinoma, followed by TLEC, 
which accounts for 6%. TLEC has been reported to be associated with Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV), with EBV infection in TLEC tumor cells first noted by Lyvraz et al. 
in 1985. Tumors shown to be EBV-positive are classified as TLEC if 
lymphoplasmacytic infiltration is lacking. However, only about 50% of the cases 
are positive for EBV, which is lower compared to nasopharyngeal 
lymphoepithelioma. Instances of EBV infection in other types of thymic 
epithelial tumor have been reported at lower rates, which suggests that EBV 
infection may have an important influence on the carcinogenesis of TLEC, though 
the etiology is unknown. TLEC is a highly malignant tumor with poor prognosis, 
as affected patients have a median survival time of 22 months, according to 58 
cases from the literature, while the 5-year survival rate is 34.4%. Presently, 
prognosis is not considered to be affected by the presence or absence of EBV 
positivity.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13194794
PMCID: PMC8507618
PMID: 34638279

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.