1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Oct 1;13(19):4960. doi: 10.3390/cancers13194960.

Glutamine and Cholesterol Plasma Levels and Clinical Outcomes of Patients with 
Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer Treated with Taxanes.

Marín-Aguilera M(1), Pereira MV(1)(2)(3)(4), Jiménez N(1)(4), Reig Ò(1)(2), 
Cuartero A(2), Victoria I(1)(2)(4), Aversa C(2)(4), Ferrer-Mileo L(2)(4), Prat 
A(1)(2)(4)(5), Mellado B(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Translational Genomics and Targeted Therapeutics in Solid Tumors Group, 
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 08036 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clínic, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Rosell Cancer Institute, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomèdica, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

Altered metabolism is a hallmark of cancer. Malignant cells metabolise glutamine 
to fulfil their metabolic needs. In prostate cancer, androgen receptor 
signalling promotes glutamine metabolism, which is also involved in cholesterol 
homeostasis. We aimed to determine whether the plasma glutamine levels correlate 
with the blood lipid profile, clinical characteristics and outcomes in patients 
with metastatic castration resistance prostate cancer (mCRPC) undergoing 
taxanes. We retrospectively assessed the glutamine and glutamate levels in 
plasma samples by a bioluminescent assay. Pre-treatment glutamine, glutamate, 
cholesterol and triglycerides levels were correlated with patients' clinical 
characteristics, taxanes response and clinical outcomes. Seventy-five patients 
with mCRPC treated with taxanes were included. The plasma glutamine levels were 
significantly higher in patients that received abiraterone or enzalutamide prior 
to taxanes (p = 0.003). Besides, patients with low glutamine levels were more 
likely to present a PSA response to taxanes (p = 0.048). Higher glutamine levels 
were significantly correlated with shorter biochemical/clinical progression-free 
survival (PSA/RX-PFS) (median 2.5 vs. 4.2 months; p = 0.048) and overall 
survival (OS) (median 12.6 vs. 20.3; p = 0.008). High cholesterol levels 
independently predicted early PSA/RX-PFS (p = 0.034). High glutamine and 
cholesterol in the plasma from patients with mCRPC were associated with adverse 
clinical outcomes, supporting the relevance of further research on metabolism in 
prostate cancer progression.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13194960
PMCID: PMC8507765
PMID: 34638444

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses or 
interpretation of the data; in the writing of the manuscript or in the decision 
to publish the results.