1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Sep 30;22(19):10626. doi: 10.3390/ijms221910626.

Translational Applications of Linear and Circular Long Noncoding RNAs in 
Endometriosis.

Wang X(1)(2), Parodi L(3), Hawkins SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(2)Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(3)Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, Istituto Clinico Sant'Anna, 25127 
Brescia, Italy.

Endometriosis is a chronic gynecologic disease that negatively affects the 
quality of life of many women. Unfortunately, endometriosis does not have a 
cure. The current medical treatments involve hormonal manipulation with unwanted 
side effects and high recurrence rates after stopping the medication. Sadly, a 
definitive diagnosis for endometriosis requires invasive surgical procedures, 
with the risk of complications, additional surgeries in the future, and a high 
rate of recurrence. Both improved therapies and noninvasive diagnostic tests are 
needed. The unique molecular features of endometriosis have been studied at the 
coding gene level. While the molecular components of endometriosis at the small 
RNA level have been studied extensively, other noncoding RNAs, such as long 
intergenic noncoding RNAs and the more recently discovered subset of long 
noncoding RNAs called circular RNAs, have been studied more limitedly. This 
review describes the molecular formation of long noncoding and the unique 
circumstances of the formation of circular long noncoding RNAs, their expression 
and function in endometriosis, and promising preclinical studies. Continued 
translational research on long noncoding RNAs, including the more stable 
circular long noncoding RNAs, may lead to improved therapeutic and diagnostic 
opportunities.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms221910626
PMCID: PMC8508676
PMID: 34638965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.