1. Cereal Res Commun. 2022;50(4):573-601. doi: 10.1007/s42976-021-00214-5. Epub 
2021 Oct 8.

Challenges and opportunities in productivity and sustainability of rice 
cultivation system: a critical review in Indian perspective.

Kumar N(1), Chhokar RS(1), Meena RP(1), Kharub AS(1), Gill SC(1), Tripathi 
SC(1), Gupta OP(1), Mangrauthia SK(2), Sundaram RM(2), Sawant CP(3), Gupta A(3), 
Naorem A(4), Kumar M(5), Singh GP(1).

Author information:
(1)ICAR- Indian Institute of Wheat and Barley Research, Karnal, Haryana 132001 
India.
(2)ICAR-Indian Institute of Rice Research, Hyderabad, Telangana 500030 India.
(3)ICAR- Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh 
462038 India.
(4)ICAR- Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Regional Research Station-Kukma, 
Bhuj, Gujarat 370105 India.
(5)Indian Institute of Soil and Water Conservation, Regional Centre, Chandigarh, 
160019 India.

ABSTRACT: Rice-wheat cropping system, intensively followed in Indo-Gangetic 
plains (IGP), played a prominent role in fulfilling the food grains demand of 
the increasing population of South Asia. In northern Indian plains, some 
practices such as intensive rice cultivation with traditional method for 
long-term have been associated with severe deterioration of natural resources, 
declining factor productivity, multiple nutrients deficiencies, depleting 
groundwater, labour scarcity and higher cost of cultivation, putting the 
agricultural sustainability in question. Varietal development, soil and water 
management, and adoption of resource conservation technologies in rice 
cultivation are the key interventions areas to address these challenges. The 
cultivation of lesser water requiring crops, replacing rice in light-textured 
soil and rainfed condition, should be encouraged through policy interventions. 
Direct seeding of short duration, high-yielding and stress tolerant rice 
varieties with water conservation technologies can be a successful approach to 
improve the input use efficiency in rice cultivation under medium-heavy-textured 
soils. Moreover, integrated approach of suitable cultivars for conservation 
agriculture, mechanized transplanting on zero-tilled/unpuddled field and 
need-based application of water, fertilizer and chemicals might be a successful 
approach for sustainable rice production system in the current scenario. In this 
review study, various challenges in productivity and sustainability of rice 
cultivation system and possible alternatives and solutions to overcome such 
challenges are discussed in details.

© Akadémiai Kiadó Zrt. 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s42976-021-00214-5
PMCID: PMC8498983
PMID: 34642509

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interest.