1. Cell Rep. 2021 Oct 12;37(2):109815. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109815.

Shift in MSL1 alternative polyadenylation in response to DNA damage protects 
cancer cells from chemotherapeutic agent-induced apoptosis.

Kunisky AK(1), Anyaeche VI(1), Herron RS(1), Park CY(2), Hwang HW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, 3550 
Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
(2)Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation, 162 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, 3550 
Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. Electronic address: 
Hunway.Hwang@pitt.edu.

DNA damage reshapes the cellular transcriptome by modulating RNA transcription 
and processing. In cancer cells, these changes can alter the expression of genes 
in the immune surveillance and cell death pathways. Here, we investigate how DNA 
damage impacts alternative polyadenylation (APA) using the PAPERCLIP technique. 
We find that APA shifts are a coordinated response for hundreds of genes to DNA 
damage, and we identify PCF11 as an important contributor of DNA damage-induced 
APA shifts. One of these APA shifts results in upregulation of the full-length 
MSL1 mRNA isoform, which protects cells from DNA damage-induced apoptosis and 
promotes cell survival from DNA-damaging agents. Importantly, blocking MSL1 
upregulation enhances cytotoxicity of chemotherapeutic agents even in the 
absence of p53 and overcomes chemoresistance. Our study demonstrates that 
characterizing adaptive APA shifts to DNA damage has therapeutic implications 
and reveals a link between PCF11, the MSL complex, and DNA damage-induced 
apoptosis.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109815
PMCID: PMC8580136
PMID: 34644577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.