1. Neuronal Signal. 2021 Oct 6;5(4):NS20210005. doi: 10.1042/NS20210005. 
eCollection 2021 Dec.

A sticky situation: regulation and function of protein palmitoylation with a 
spotlight on the axon and axon initial segment.

Petropavlovskiy AA(#)(1), Kogut JA(#)(1), Leekha A(#)(1), Townsend CA(#)(1), 
Sanders SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, 50 Stone 
Rd E, Guelph N1G 2W1, Ontario, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

In neurons, the axon and axon initial segment (AIS) are critical structures for 
action potential initiation and propagation. Their formation and function rely 
on tight compartmentalisation, a process where specific proteins are trafficked 
to and retained at distinct subcellular locations. One mechanism which regulates 
protein trafficking and association with lipid membranes is the modification of 
protein cysteine residues with the 16-carbon palmitic acid, known as S-acylation 
or palmitoylation. Palmitoylation, akin to phosphorylation, is reversible, with 
palmitate cycling being mediated by substrate-specific enzymes. Palmitoylation 
is well-known to be highly prevalent among neuronal proteins and is well studied 
in the context of the synapse. Comparatively, how palmitoylation regulates 
trafficking and clustering of axonal and AIS proteins remains less understood. 
This review provides an overview of the current understanding of the biochemical 
regulation of palmitoylation, its involvement in various neurological diseases, 
and the most up-to-date perspective on axonal palmitoylation. Through a 
palmitoylation analysis of the AIS proteome, we also report that an overwhelming 
proportion of AIS proteins are likely palmitoylated. Overall, our review and 
analysis confirm a central role for palmitoylation in the formation and function 
of the axon and AIS and provide a resource for further exploration of 
palmitoylation-dependent protein targeting to and function at the AIS.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/NS20210005
PMCID: PMC8495546
PMID: 34659801

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.