1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Oct 15;17(10):e1010007. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010007. 
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Hantaviruses use the endogenous host factor P58IPK to combat the PKR antiviral 
response.

Wang Z(1), Ren S(2), Li Q(1), Royster AD(2), Lin L(1), Liu S(1), Ganaie SS(3), 
Qiu J(3), Mir S(2), Mir MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Joint National Laboratory for Antibody Drug Engineering, School of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng, China.
(2)Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, California, United States of 
America.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, United States of America.

Hantavirus nucleocapsid protein (NP) inhibits protein kinase R (PKR) 
dimerization by an unknown mechanism to counteract its antiviral responses 
during virus infection. Here we demonstrate that NP exploits an endogenous PKR 
inhibitor P58IPK to inhibit PKR. The activity of P58IPK is normally restricted 
in cells by the formation of an inactive complex with its negative regulator 
Hsp40. On the other hand, PKR remains associated with the 40S ribosomal subunit, 
a unique strategic location that facilitates its free access to the downstream 
target eIF2Î±. Although both NP and Hsp40 bind to P58IPK, the binding affinity of 
NP is much stronger compared to Hsp40. P58IPK harbors an NP binding site, 
spanning to N-terminal TPR subdomains I and II. The Hsp40 binding site on P58IPK 
was mapped to the TPR subdomain II. The high affinity binding of NP to P58IPK 
and the overlap between NP and Hsp40 binding sites releases the P58IPK from its 
negative regulator by competitive inhibition. The NP-P58IPK complex is 
selectively recruited to the 40S ribosomal subunit by direct interaction between 
NP and the ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19), a structural component of the 40S 
ribosomal subunit. NP has distinct binding sites for P58IPK and RPS19, enabling 
it to serve as bridge between P58IPK and the 40S ribosomal subunit. NP mutants 
deficient in binding to either P58IPK or RPS19 fail to inhibit PKR, 
demonstrating that selective engagement of P58IPK to the 40S ribosomal subunit 
is required for PKR inhibition. Cells deficient in P58IPK mount a rapid PKR 
antiviral response and establish an antiviral state, observed by global 
translational shutdown and rapid decline in viral load. These studies reveal a 
novel viral strategy in which NP releases P58IPK from its negative regulator and 
selectively engages it on the 40S ribosomal subunit to promptly combat the PKR 
antiviral responses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010007
PMCID: PMC8550428
PMID: 34653226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.