1. J Cancer. 2021 Sep 3;12(21):6363-6371. doi: 10.7150/jca.51338. eCollection
2021.

RUNX1 regulates the proliferation and chemoresistance of colorectal cancer 
through the Hedgehog signaling pathway.

Li Q(1), Lai Q(1), He C(1), Zhang H(1), Pan X(2), Li H(2), Yan Q(1), Fang Y(1), 
Liu S(1), Li A(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of 
Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong, China.
(2)The First School of Clinical Medicine, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

Background: Chemoresistance is one of the main causes of recurrence in 
colorectal cancer (CRC) patients and leads to a poor prognosis. To characterize 
RUNX1 expression in colorectal cancer (CRC) and elucidate its mechanistic 
involvement in the tumor biology of this disease. Methods: The expression of 
RUNX1 in CRC and normal tissues was detected by bioinformatics analysis. Cell 
proliferation was measured by CCK-8 and clonogenic assays. In vivo tumor 
progression was assessed with a xenograft mouse model. Cell drug sensitivity 
tests and flow cytometry were performed to analyze CRC cell chemoresistance. 
RUNX1, key molecules of the Hedgehog signaling pathway, and ABCG2 were detected 
by qRT-PCR and Western blotting. Results: RUNX1 expression is upregulated in CRC 
tissues. RUNX1 enhanced CRC cell resistance to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), promoted 
proliferation, and inhibited 5-FU-induced apoptosis. Mechanistically, RUNX1 can 
activate the Hedgehog signaling pathway and promote the expression of ABCG2 in 
CRC cells. Conclusions: Our study demonstrated that RUNX1 promotes CRC 
proliferation and chemoresistance by activating the Hedgehog signaling pathway 
and ABCG2 expression.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/jca.51338
PMCID: PMC8489138
PMID: 34659526

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.