1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2021 Nov;31(11):1169-1178. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2021.07.016.
 Epub 2021 Jul 28.

Muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathy in a family of Labrador retrievers with a 
LARGE1 mutation.

Shelton GD(1), Minor KM(2), Guo LT(3), Friedenberg SG(4), Cullen JN(4), Hord 
JM(5), Venzke D(5), Anderson ME(5), Devereaux M(5), Prouty SJ(5), Handelman 
C(6), Campbell KP(5), Mickelson JR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0709 United States. Electronic address: 
gshelton@ucsd.edu.
(2)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, MN 55108 United States.
(3)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0709 United States.
(4)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, MN 55108 United States.
(5)Senator Paul D. Wellstone Muscular Dystrophy Specialized Research Center, 
Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics and Department of Neurology, 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Roy J and Lucille A. Carver College of 
Medicine, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242 United States.
(6)Veterinary Housecalls of Long Island, Commack, NY 11725 United States.

Alpha-dystroglycan (αDG) is a highly glycosylated cell surface protein with a 
significant role in cell-to-extracellular matrix interactions in muscle. αDG 
interaction with extracellular ligands relies on the activity of the LARGE1 
glycosyltransferase that synthesizes and extends the heteropolysaccharide 
matriglycan. Abnormalities in αDG glycosylation and formation of matriglycan are 
the pathogenic mechanisms for the dystroglycanopathies, a group of congenital 
muscular dystrophies. Muscle biopsies were evaluated from related 6-week-old 
Labrador retriever puppies with poor suckling, small stature compared to normal 
litter mates, bow-legged stance and markedly elevated creatine kinase 
activities. A dystrophic phenotype with marked degeneration and regeneration, 
multifocal mononuclear cell infiltration and endomysial fibrosis was identified 
on muscle cryosections. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array genotyping 
data on the family members identified three regions of homozygosity in 4 cases 
relative to 8 controls. Analysis of whole genome sequence data from one of the 
cases identified a stop codon mutation in the LARGE1 gene that truncates 40% of 
the protein. Immunofluorescent staining and western blotting demonstrated the 
absence of matriglycan in skeletal muscle and heart from affected dogs. Compared 
to control, LARGE enzyme activity was not detected. This is the first report of 
a dystroglycanopathy in dogs.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2021.07.016
PMCID: PMC8963908
PMID: 34654610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.