1. Cell Death Dis. 2021 Oct 15;12(10):951. doi: 10.1038/s41419-021-04241-2.

p27kip1 expression and phosphorylation dictate Palbociclib sensitivity in 
KRAS-mutated colorectal cancer.

Rampioni Vinciguerra GL(1)(2), Dall'Acqua A(1), Segatto I(1), Mattevi MC(1), 
Russo F(1), Favero A(1), Cirombella R(2), Mungo G(1), Viotto D(1), Karimbayli 
J(1), Pesce M(2), Vecchione A(2), Belletti B(#)(1), Baldassarre G(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico di Aviano 
(CRO), IRCCS, National Cancer Institute, Aviano, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Department of Clinical and Molecular 
Medicine, University of Rome "Sapienza", Santo Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(3)Division of Molecular Oncology, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico di Aviano 
(CRO), IRCCS, National Cancer Institute, Aviano, Italy. gbaldassarre@cro.it.
(#)Contributed equally

In colorectal cancer, mutation of KRAS (RASMUT) reduces therapeutic options, 
negatively affecting prognosis of the patients. In this setting, administration 
of CDK4/6-inhibitors, alone or in combination with other drugs, is being tested 
as promising therapeutic strategy. Identifying sensitive patients and overcoming 
intrinsic and acquired resistance to CDK4/6 inhibition represent still open 
challenges, to obtain better clinical responses. Here, we investigated the role 
of the CDK inhibitor p27kip1 in the response to the selective CDK4/6-inhibitor 
Palbociclib, in colorectal cancer. Our results show that p27kip1 expression 
inversely correlated with Palbociclib response, both in vitro and in vivo. 
Generating a model of Palbociclib-resistant RASMUT colorectal cancer cells, we 
observed an increased expression of p27kip1, cyclin D, CDK4 and CDK6, coupled 
with an increased association between p27kip1 and CDK4. Furthermore, 
Palbociclib-resistant cells showed increased Src-mediated phosphorylation of 
p27kip1 on tyrosine residues and low doses of Src inhibitors re-sensitized 
resistant cells to Palbociclib. Since p27kip1 showed variable expression in 
RASMUT colorectal cancer samples, our study supports the possibility that 
p27kip1 could serve as biomarker to stratify patients who might benefit from 
CDK4/6 inhibition, alone or in combination with Src inhibitors.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-021-04241-2
PMCID: PMC8519959
PMID: 34654798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.