1. Reprod Sci. 2022 Apr;29(4):1357-1367. doi: 10.1007/s43032-021-00700-5. Epub
2021  Oct 15.

Aberrant H19 Expression Disrupts Ovarian Cyp17 and Testosterone Production and 
Is Associated with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome in Women.

Chen Z(1), Liu L(2), Xi X(3), Burn M(4), Karakaya C(5), Kallen AN(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology, Beijing Haidian Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, 
Women's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale 
University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar St, PO Box 208063, New Haven, CT, 
06512, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Gazi University School of Medicine, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale 
University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar St, PO Box 208063, New Haven, CT, 
06512, USA. amanda.kallen@yale.edu.

As one of the most common endocrine disorders affecting women, polycystic ovary 
syndrome (PCOS) is associated with serious conditions including anovulation, 
endometrial cancer, infertility, hyperandrogenemia, and an increased risk for 
obesity and metabolic derangements. One contributing etiology to the 
pathophysiology of hyperandrogenemia associated with PCOS is an intrinsic 
alteration in ovarian steroidogenesis, leading to enhanced synthesis of 
androgens including testosterone. Studies have suggested that the increased 
testosterone synthesis seen in PCOS is driven in part by increased activity of 
CYP17A1, the rate-limiting enzyme for the formation of androgens in the gonads 
and adrenal cortex, which represents a critical factor driving enhanced 
testosterone secretion in PCOS. In this work, we evaluated the hypothesis that 
dysregulation of the noncoding RNA H19 results in aberrant CYP17 and 
testosterone production. To achieve this, we measured Cyp17 in ovarian tissues 
of H19 knockout mice, and quantified serum testosterone levels, in comparison 
with wild-type controls. We also evaluated circulating and ovarian H19 
expression and correlated results with the presence or absence of PCOS in a 
group of women undergoing evaluation and treatment for infertility. We found 
that the loss of H19 in a mouse model results in decreased ovarian Cyp17, along 
with decreased serum testosterone in female mice. Moreover, utilizing serum 
samples and cumulus cells from women with PCOS, we showed that circulating and 
ovarian levels of H19 are increased in women with PCOS compared to controls. 
Findings from our multimodal experimental strategy, involving both a mouse model 
of dysregulated H19 expression and clinical serum and ovarian cellular samples 
from women with PCOS, suggest that the loss of H19 may disrupt androgen 
production via a Cyp17-mediated mechanism. Conversely, excess H19 may play a 
role in the pathogenesis of PCOS-associated hyperandrogenemia.

Â© 2021. Society for Reproductive Investigation.

DOI: 10.1007/s43032-021-00700-5
PMCID: PMC9120868
PMID: 34655046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
competing interests.