1. Nat Commun. 2021 Oct 15;12(1):6021. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-26310-y.

A metabolome atlas of the aging mouse brain.

Ding J(1)(2), Ji J(3), Rabow Z(1), Shen T(1), Folz J(1), Brydges CR(1), Fan 
S(1), Lu X(1), Mehta S(1), Showalter MR(1), Zhang Y(1), Araiza R(4), Bower 
LR(4), Lloyd KCK(4), Fiehn O(5).

Author information:
(1)West Coast Metabolomics Center, UC Davis Genome Center, University of 
California, Davis, 451 Health Sciences Drive, Davis, CA, 95616, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, 430072, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China.
(3)School of Food Science, State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, 
National Engineering Research Center for Functional Foods, Synergetic Innovation 
Center of Food Safety and Nutrition, Jiangnan University, 214122, Wuxi, Jiangsu, 
P.R. China.
(4)Mouse Biology Program, and Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, 
University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, 95618, USA.
(5)West Coast Metabolomics Center, UC Davis Genome Center, University of 
California, Davis, 451 Health Sciences Drive, Davis, CA, 95616, USA. 
ofiehn@ucdavis.edu.

The mammalian brain relies on neurochemistry to fulfill its functions. Yet, the 
complexity of the brain metabolome and its changes during diseases or aging 
remain poorly understood. Here, we generate a metabolome atlas of the aging 
wildtype mouse brain from 10 anatomical regions spanning from adolescence to old 
age. We combine data from three assays and structurally annotate 1,547 
metabolites. Almost all metabolites significantly differ between brain regions 
or age groups, but not by sex. A shift in sphingolipid patterns during aging 
related to myelin remodeling is accompanied by large changes in other metabolic 
pathways. Functionally related brain regions (brain stem, cerebrum and 
cerebellum) are also metabolically similar. In cerebrum, metabolic correlations 
markedly weaken between adolescence and adulthood, whereas at old age, 
cross-region correlation patterns reflect decreased brain segregation. We show 
that metabolic changes can be mapped to existing gene and protein brain atlases. 
The brain metabolome atlas is publicly available ( 
https://mouse.atlas.metabolomics.us/ ) and serves as a foundation dataset for 
future metabolomic studies.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-26310-y
PMCID: PMC8519999
PMID: 34654818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.