1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 1;12:705484. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.705484.
eCollection  2021.

XBP-1s Promotes B Cell Pathogenicity in Chronic GVHD by Restraining the Activity 
of Regulated IRE-1α-Dependent Decay.

Choi HJ(1), Tang CA(2), Tian L(1), Wu Y(1), Sofi MH(1), Ticer T(1), Schutt 
SD(1), Hu CA(2), Yu XZ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology & Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
SC, United States.
(2)Center for Translational Research in Hematologic Malignancies, Houston 
Methodist Cancer Center, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX, 
United States.
(3)Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, 
United States.

Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (allo-HCT) is an effective 
therapeutic procedure to treat hematological malignancies. However, the benefit 
of allo-HCT is limited by a major complication, chronic graft-versus-host 
disease (cGVHD). Since transmembrane and secretory proteins are generated and 
modified in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the ER stress response is of great 
importance to secretory cells including B cells. By using conditional knock-out 
(KO) of XBP-1, IRE-1α or both specifically on B cells, we demonstrated that the 
IRE-1α/XBP-1 pathway, one of the major ER stress response mediators, plays a 
critical role in B cell pathogenicity on the induction of cGVHD in murine models 
of allo-HCT. Endoribonuclease activity of IRE-1α activates XBP-1 signaling by 
converting unspliced XBP-1 (XBP-1u) mRNA into spliced XBP-1 (XBP-1s) mRNA but 
also cleaves other ER-associated mRNAs through regulated IRE-1α-dependent decay 
(RIDD). Further, ablation of XBP-1s production leads to unleashed activation of 
RIDD. Therefore, we hypothesized that RIDD plays an important role in B cells 
during cGVHD development. In this study, we found that the reduced pathogenicity 
of XBP-1 deficient B cells in cGVHD was reversed by RIDD restriction in IRE-1α 
kinase domain KO mice. Restraining RIDD activity per se in B cells resulted in 
an increased severity of cGVHD. Besides, inhibition of RIDD activity compromised 
B cell differentiation and led to dysregulated expression of MHC II and 
costimulatory molecules such as CD86, CD40, and ICOSL in B cells. Furthermore, 
restraining the RIDD activity without affecting XBP-1 splicing increased B cell 
ability to induce cGVHD after allo-HCT. These results suggest that RIDD is an 
important mediator for reducing cGVHD pathogenesis through targeting XBP-1s.

Copyright © 2021 Choi, Tang, Tian, Wu, Sofi, Ticer, Schutt, Hu and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.705484
PMCID: PMC8517405
PMID: 34659198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.