1. J Cancer. 2021 Aug 28;12(21):6330-6343. doi: 10.7150/jca.63128. eCollection 
2021.

Role of long intergenic non-protein coding RNA 00152 in pancreatic cancer 
glycolysis via the manipulation of the microRNA-185-5p/Krüppel-like factor 7 
axis.

Li H(1), Shen H(1), Xie P(1), Zhang Z(1), Wang L(2), Yang Y(2), Yu Z(2), Cheng 
Z(2), Zhou J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepato-Pancreatico-Biliary Surgery, Zhongda Hospital, Medical 
School, Southeast University, 87 Dingjiaqiao Road, Nanjing, 210009, Jiangsu 
Province, China.
(2)Department of Hepato-Pancreatico-Biliary Surgery, Zhongda Hospital Southeast 
University, Nanjing, 210009, Jiangsu Province, China.

The current study set out to investigate the role of long intergenic non-protein 
coding RNA (LINC) 00152 in pancreatic cancer (PC) cell glycolysis with the 
microRNA (miR)-185-5p/Krüppel-like factor 7 (KLF7) axis. Firstly, PC tissues and 
cells as well as the control ones were collected from 53 PC patients, and 
assessed for LINC00152 expression patterns. Besides, PC cells with the most 
differentially expressed LINC00152 were selected for further experiments. When 
LINC00152 was silenced or overexpressed, PC cell glucose consumption, lactic 
acid production, adenosine triphosphate and levels of glycolysis-associated 
enzymes were detected. In addition, the binding relation between LINC00152 and 
miR-185-5p as well as the target relation between miR-185-5p and KLF7 was 
clarified and validated. Additionally, xenograft transplantation was performed 
to confirm the in vitro experiments. It was found that LINC00152 was 
over-expressed in PC, and it predicted a poor prognosis. Besides, LINC00152 
knockdown inhibited PC cell glycolysis. Moreover, LINC00152 could specifically 
targeted miR-185-5p. Meanwhile, LINC00152 exhaustion blocked PC cell glycolysis 
through the up-regulation of miR-185-5p. Lastly, LINC00152 inhibition targeted 
miR-185-5p to quench KLF7, therefore suppressing PC cell tumorigenesis and 
glycolysis. Collectively, our findings indicated that silencing LINC00152 
restricted PC cell glycolysis via promoting miR-185-5p and reducing KLF7.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/jca.63128
PMCID: PMC8489139
PMID: 34659523

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.