1. Exp Ther Med. 2021 Dec;22(6):1392. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.10828. Epub 2021 Sep 
30.

Melatonin attenuates low shear stress-induced pyroptosis and endothelial cell 
dysfunction via the RORα/miR-223/STAT-3 signalling pathway.

Yi S(1), Yang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)The Intensive Care Unit Department, Second Hospital of Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, Liaoning 116027, P.R. China.
(2)The Neurology Department, Fourth Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110032, P.R. China.

Endothelial cells sense changes in blood flow shear stress and affect the 
progression of atherosclerotic plaques. Pyroptosis is an inflammatory form of 
cell death and has been implicated in cardiovascular diseases. Melatonin and its 
nuclear receptor retinoid-related orphan receptor α (RORα) have protective 
effects on the development of atherosclerosis. To date, whether melatonin can 
prevent endothelial cell pyroptosis and dysfunction in pathological shear stress 
remains unclear. In the present study, human umbilical vein endothelial cells 
(ECs) were cultured under low shear stress conditions (5 dyne/cm2) for 24 h and 
treated with or without melatonin (2 µmol/l). The binding sites of the microRNA 
(miR)-223 promoter and RORα were predicted using the JASPAR website. Expression 
of pyroptosis-related proteins, including cleaved N-terminal gasdermin D, 
caspase-1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) and nitric oxide (NO) were 
assessed. The results indicated that low shear stress increased pyroptosis and 
ICAM-1 expression, whereas it decreased NO levels. Melatonin alleviated 
pyroptosis and ICAM-1 expression and increased the production of NO in ECs. 
Further assessment revealed that low-level shear stress decreased RORα protein 
and mRNA expression, whereas melatonin would bind to RORα and thereby promoted 
miR-223 transcription in ECs. The present study also identified signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT-3) as a potential target gene 
of miR-223-3p. When transfected with miR-223 inhibitor, ECs up-regulated the 
expression of pyroptosis-related proteins and ICAM-1, and down-regulated NO 
levels. By contrast, silencing STAT-3 expression diminished the protective 
effect of miR-223. These results indicated that melatonin prevented ECs from 
undergoing pyroptosis and alleviated dysfunction via the RORα/miR-223/STAT-3 
signalling pathway. This information could aid in the development of novel 
therapeutic approaches and provide new insights into atherosclerosis.

Copyright: © Yi et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.10828
PMCID: PMC8506941
PMID: 34650640

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.