1. Front Oncol. 2021 Sep 30;11:736104. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.736104. eCollection
 2021.

Retrospective Comparative Analysis of KRAS G12C vs. Other KRAS Mutations in mCRC 
Patients Treated With First-Line Chemotherapy Doublet + Bevacizumab.

Giampieri R(1)(2), Lupi A(1), Ziranu P(3), Bittoni A(2), Pretta A(3)(4), Pecci 
F(1), Persano M(3), Giglio E(1), Copparoni C(1), Crocetti S(1), Mandolesi A(5), 
Faa G(6), Coni P(6), Scartozzi M(3), Berardi R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinica Oncologica-Dipartimento Scienze Cliniche e Molecolari-Università 
Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy.
(2)Clinica Oncologica-Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Ospedali Riuniti di 
Ancona, Ancona, Italy.
(3)Oncologia, Università ed Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria di Cagliari, 
Cagliari, Italy.
(4)Oncologia Medica, Università "la Sapienza" di Roma, Rome, Italy.
(5)Anatomia Patologica-Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Ospedali Riuniti di 
Ancona, Ancona, Italy.
(6)Anatomia Patologica-Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Sanità 
Pubblica-Università di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: KRAS mutations in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) define a 
subset of tumors that have primary resistance to anti-EGFR-based therapy. Data 
concerning whether different KRAS mutations may also have a prognostic value are 
lacking. Furthermore, novel KRAS G12C inhibitors are currently in development. 
The aim of our analysis was to compare response rates in patients treated with 
first-line chemotherapy doublet + Bevacizumab among different KRAS variants. 
Secondary end-points were progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival 
(OS).
METHODS: Patients with KRAS mutated mCRC treated with either 
FOLFIRI/FOLFOX/XELOX + Bevacizumab were eligible for enrollment. Patients whose 
tumor harbored NRAS mutations or that coexpressed also BRAF mutations were 
excluded from this retrospective analysis. Patients' individual data were 
collected from patients' records. Propensity score matching (nearest method, 1:2 
ratio) was used to define the two different groups of patients for comparison 
(KRAS G12C mutated vs other KRAS variants). Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group 
Performance Status (ECOG PS), sex, metastatic site of involvement, synchronous 
vs metachronous metastatic disease, tumor sidedness, mucinous histology, primary 
tumor surgery, more than two lines of treatment for metastatic disease, and 
radical surgery of metastases were used as matching factors. Response rate (RR) 
was calculated by RECIST 1.1 criteria. Both progression free-survival and 
overall survival were calculated by Kaplan-Meier method. Categorical variables 
were compared by Fisher exact test for binomial variables and by chi-square test 
for all other instances. The level of statistical significance p was set at 0.05 
for all tests.
RESULTS: A total of 120 patients were assessed in the final analysis. Out of the 
120 patients, 15 (12%) were KRAS G12C mutated. In the whole cohort of patients, 
59/120 (49%) had partial response (PR), 42/120 (35%) had stable disease (SD), 
and 19/120 (16%) had progressive disease (PD) as the best response. In KRAS G12C 
patients, 4/15 (27%) had PR, 6/15 (40%) had SD, and the remaining 5/15 (33%) had 
PD as the best response. In patients with other KRAS mutations, 55/105 (52%) had 
PR, 37/105 (35%) had SD, and the remaining 13/105 (12%) had PD as the best 
response. The difference in RR between the two groups of patients was 
statistically significant (p=0.017). On the other hand, no difference in PFS 
(p=0.76) and OS (p=0.56) was observed. After matching procedures, the difference 
in response rates between KRAS G12C mutated patients vs the matched cohort of 
patients with other KRAS mutations remained statistically significant (p=0.016). 
KRAS G12C mutations were not associated with differences in sites of metastatic 
involvement, sex, and ECOG PS. On the other hand, synchronous vs metachronous 
metastatic disease (p=0.039), age > 75 years (p=0.043), and mucinous histology 
(p=0.008) were more frequent in G12C mutated tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: In our cohort of patients, it was observed that KRAS G12C mutations 
are associated with worse response rates compared to other KRAS variants when 
treated with standard chemotherapy doublet + Bevacizumab. On the other hand, 
both PFS and OS were not significantly different. Based on these findings, we 
believe that new treatment options focused on KRAS G12C inhibition should be 
tested mainly in first-line setting and in addition to standard chemotherapy 
doublet + Bevacizumab for mCRC patients, as they might "fill the gap" in 
response rates that was seen in our study.

Copyright © 2021 Giampieri, Lupi, Ziranu, Bittoni, Pretta, Pecci, Persano, 
Giglio, Copparoni, Crocetti, Mandolesi, Faa, Coni, Scartozzi and Berardi.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.736104
PMCID: PMC8514824
PMID: 34660299

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.