1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Oct 20;22:e933528. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933528.

A 46-Year-Old Woman with Primary Infertility and a Diagnosis of Microcystic 
Stromal Tumor of the Ovary Confirmed by Histology and Gene Sequencing: A Case 
Report and Review of the Literature.

Arafah MA(1), AlBreacan L(2), Akkour K(3), Alomar S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND Microcystic stromal tumor (MCST) of the ovary is a rare entity with 
distinct pathological and molecular features. However, a lack of awareness of 
ovarian MCST can lead to delayed diagnosis or misdiagnosis. We present a case of 
ovarian MCST and review all previously reported cases and discuss their clinical 
and pathological characteristics. CASE REPORT A 46-year-old woman with primary 
infertility due to polycystic ovary syndrome presented with bleeding and pain. 
Radiological images showed a complex solid and cystic adnexal mass. 
Microscopically, the tumor was lobulated with cellular regions separated by 
fibrous plaques and small anastomosing cysts, consistent with an ovarian MCST. 
The tumor cells showed positive staining for vimentin, CAM 5.2, CD10, ÃŸ-Catenin, 
CD99, and cyclin D1. Genetic sequencing showed a point mutation in the CTNNB1 
gene, with no mutations in the APC, BRCA1, and BRCA2 genes. The patient 
underwent surgery and was disease-free at 24 months after her initial diagnosis. 
CONCLUSIONS The diagnosis of ovarian MCST should consider the differential 
diagnosis of cystic tumors of the ovary. Further research is encouraged to 
elucidate the various molecular pathways involved in the pathogenesis of this 
tumor and to determine its optimal treatment and long-term prognosis.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933528
PMCID: PMC8544167
PMID: 34667141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared