1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Oct 1;9:747722. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.747722. 
eCollection 2021.

Effects of Diluent pH on Enrichment and Performance of Dairy Goat X/Y Sperm.

He Q(1)(2)(3), Wu S(1)(2)(3), Huang M(1)(2)(3), Wang Y(1)(2)(3), Zhang 
K(1)(2)(3), Kang J(1)(2)(3), Zhang Y(1)(2)(3), Quan F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Yangling, 
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang, 
China.

In this paper, on the basis of the differences in the hydrogen ion concentration 
(pH) of the diluent dairy goat semen on X/Y sperm motility, an X/Y sperm 
enrichment study was conducted to establish a simple and effective method for 
gender control in dairy goats. Dairy goat semen was diluted using different pH 
dilutions and was incubated. Then, the X/Y sperm ratio in the isolated upper 
sperm was determined using the double TaqMan qPCR method. The internal pH change 
pattern of sperm cells at different pH dilutions was measured using BCECF-AM 
probe, and the functional parameters of the isolated sperm were tested with the 
corresponding kit. Next, an in vitro fertilization test was conducted using 
isolated spermatozoa and oocytes to determine their fertilization rates, the 
percentages of female embryos, and the expression of genes related to developing 
potentially fertilized embryos. Results showed that the percentages of the X 
sperm cells in the upper sperm layer were 67.24% ± 2.61% at sperm dilution pH of 
6.2 and 30.45% ± 1.03% at sperm dilution pH of 7.4, which was significantly 
different from 52.35% ± 1.72% of the control group (pH 6.8) (P < 0.01). Results 
also showed that there is a relationship between the external pHo and internal 
pHi of sperm cells. Furthermore, the percentages of female embryos after the in 
vitro fertilization of the isolated upper sperm with mature oocytes at pH 6.2 
and 7.4 were 66.67% ± 0.05 and 29.73% ± 0.04%, respectively, compared with 
48.57% ± 0.02% in the control group (pH 6.8). Highly significant differences 
occurred between groups (P < 0.01). Additionally, no significant difference was 
observed during the expression of genes related to embryonic development between 
the blastocysts formed from sperm isolated by changing the pH of the diluent and 
the control sperm (P > 0.05). Therefore, this study successfully established a 
simple and effective method for enriched X/Y sperms from dairy goats, which is 
important for regulating the desired sex progeny during dairy goat breeding and 
for guiding dairy goat production.

Copyright © 2021 He, Wu, Huang, Wang, Zhang, Kang, Zhang and Quan.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.747722
PMCID: PMC8517142
PMID: 34660605

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.