1. Autophagy. 2022 May;18(5):1187-1201. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1969634. Epub 
2021 Oct 21.

Monitoring basal autophagy in the retina utilizing CAG-mRFP-EGFP-MAP1LC3B 
reporter mouse: technical and biological considerations.

Ramachandra Rao S(1)(2), Fliesler SJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Biochemistry and Neuroscience Graduate 
Program, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, State University of 
New York- University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)Research Service, VA Western Ny Healthcare System, Buffalo, NY, USA.

We describe the utility of a tandem-tagged autophagy reporter mouse model 
(CAG-RFP-EGFP-MAP1LC3B) in investigating basal macroautophagic/autophagic flux 
in the neural retina. Western blot, in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, 
and confocal microscopy showed that CAG promoter-driven expression of 
RFP-EGFP-MAP1LC3B increased "cytosolic" RFP-EGFP-LC3B-I levels, whereas 
RFP-EGFP-LC3B-II decorates true phagosomes. We verified that the 
electroretinographic (ERG) responses of tandem-tagged LC3B mice were comparable 
to those of age-matched controls. Optimized microscope settings detected 
lipofuscin autofluorescence in retinas of abca4-/- mice. The majority of retinal 
phagosomes in the reporter mice exhibited only RFP (not EGFP) fluorescence, 
suggesting rapid maturation of phagosomes. Only ~1.5% of the total phagosome 
population was EGFP-labeled; RFP-labeled (mature) phagosomes colocalized with 
lysosomal markers LAMP2 and CTSD. In the outer retina, phagosome sizes were as 
follows (in µm2, ave ± SEM): RPE, 0.309 ± 0.015; photoreceptor inner 
segment-myoid, 0.544 ± 0.031; and outer nuclear layer, 0.429 ± 0.011. Detection 
of RPE phagosomes by fluorescence microscopy is challenging, due to the presence 
of melanin. Increased lipofuscin autofluorescence, such as observed in the 
abca4-/- mouse model of Stargardt disease, is a strong confounding factor when 
attempting to study autophagy in the RPE. In addition to RPE and photoreceptor 
cells, phagosomes were detected in inner retinal cell types, microglia, 
astrocytes, and endothelial cells. We conclude that the tandem-tagged LC3B mouse 
model serves as a useful system for studying autophagy in the retina. This 
utility, however, is dependent upon several technical and biological factors, 
including microscope settings, transgene expression, choice of fluorophores, and 
lipofuscin autofluorescence.Abbreviations: ACTB: actin, beta; AIF1: allograft 
inflammatory factor 1; ATG: autophagy related; CTSD: cathepsin D; DAPI: 
(4',6-diamido-2-phenylindole); DIC: differential interference contrast; EGFP: 
enhanced green fluorescent protein; ELM: external limiting membrane; ERG: 
electroretinography; GCL: ganglion cell layer; GLUL: glutamine-ammonia ligase 
(glutamine synthetase); INL: inner nuclear layer; IS-E/M: inner segment - 
ellipsoid/myoid; ISH: in situ hybridization; LAMP2: lysosomal-associated 
membrane protein 2; L.I.: laser Intensity; MAP1LC3B: microtubule-associated 
protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; 
O.C.T.: optimal cutting temperature; OS: outer segment; ONL: outer nuclear 
layer; PE: phosphatidylethanolamine; RFP: red fluorescent protein; R.O.I.: 
region of interest; RPE: retinal pigment epithelium.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1969634
PMCID: PMC9196719
PMID: 34674604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).