1. Front Neurosci. 2021 Oct 5;15:741214. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.741214. 
eCollection 2021.

Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors 1 Regulates Rat Carotid Body Response to Acute 
Hypoxia via Presynaptic Mechanism.

Li C(1), Zhao B(2), Zhao C(1), Huang L(1), Liu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Henan Key Laboratory of Neural Regeneration and Repairment, Life Science 
Research Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang Medical University, 
Weihui, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang 
Medical University, Weihui, China.

Background: The carotid body (CB) plays a critical role in oxygen sensing; 
however, the role of glutamatergic signaling in the CB response to hypoxia 
remains uncertain. We previously found that functional multiple glutamate 
transporters and inotropic glutamate receptors (iGluRs) are expressed in the CB. 
The aim of this present research is to investigate the expression of group I 
metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) (mGluR1 and 5) in the CB and its 
physiological function in rat CB response to acute hypoxia. Methods: RT-PCR and 
immunostaining were conducted to examine the mRNA and protein expression of 
group I mGluRs in the human and rat CB. Immunofluorescence staining was 
performed to examine the cellular localization of mGluR1 in the rat CB. In vitro 
carotid sinus nerve (CSN) discharge recording was performed to detect the 
physiological function of mGluR1 in CB response to acute hypoxia. Results: We 
found that (1) mRNAs of mGluR1 and 5 were both expressed in the human and rat 
CB. (2) mGluR1 protein rather than mGluR5 protein was present in rat CB. (3) 
mGluR1 was distributed in type I cells of rat CB. (4) Activation of mGluR1 
inhibited the hypoxia-induced enhancement of CSN activity (CSNA), as well as 
prolonged the latency time of CB response to hypoxia. (5) The inhibitory effect 
of mGluR1 activation on rat CB response to hypoxia could be blocked by GABA B 
receptor antagonist. Conclusion: Our findings reveal that mGluR1 in CB plays a 
presynaptic feedback inhibition on rat CB response to hypoxia.

Copyright Â© 2021 Li, Zhao, Zhao, Huang and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.741214
PMCID: PMC8524001
PMID: 34675769

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.