1. Int J Gen Med. 2021 Oct 5;14:6401-6408. doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S332911. eCollection
 2021.

Association of the ENPP1/ENTPD1 Polymorphisms in Hemodialysis Patients.

Zhang X(1), Wan Z(1), Cheng S(2), Gan H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.

INTRODUCTION: ENPP1 and ENTPD1 are two main enzymes involved in 
ATP-AMP-ADP-adenosine axis, which is associated with lipid metabolism, diabetes 
mellitus (DM) and renal fibrosis. The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 
ENPP1 and ENTPD1, rs1044498 and rs6584026, are associated with these factors. 
This retrospective study aimed to address the two SNPs variants in hemodialysis 
(HD) patients and analyzes their relations with clinical characteristics.
METHODS: This study included 543 regular HD patients over 3 months at our 
center. Overnight fasting peripheral blood sample was taken from each subject to 
extract the DNA. The genotypes of rs1044498 and rs6584026 were detected by 
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) 
method. The basic clinical data were noted such as sex, age, and HD-age, and the 
main causes of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and the clinical characteristics 
were collected on average at least three times in half a year. T-test and 
Chi-test were performed for the statistical analyses. Binary logistic regression 
was applied for the significant parameters by excluding the confounders, gender, 
age and HD-age. All statistical tests were considered significant for P<0.05.
RESULTS: The rs1044498 genotypes showed in two types, A/A and A/C without C/C. 
The rs6584026 genotypes were C/C and C/T without T/T. The genotype frequency of 
rs1044498 (A/C) was 0.238, and the genotype frequency of rs6584026 (C/T) was 
0.328. The age and the level of lipoprotein α showed statistical significance 
with rs1044498 variant (A/C, P<0.05). The rs6584026 variant (C/T) was frequently 
found in patients with nephritis (P<0.05). The albumin, alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP), lipoprotein α, cholesterol, apolipoprotein B (Apo B), Apo B/A1 and 
nephritis were independently associated with rs6584026 variant (C/T, P<0.05) in 
binary logistic regression model by controlling the confounders of gender, age 
and HD-age. High level of triglyceride and low level of urine nitrogen were 
related to rs6584026 variant (C/T, P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The rs1044498 and rs6584026 SNPs were related to several high levels 
of lipids, and rs6584026 variant was related to nephritis and autoimmune 
disease. The rs6584026 SNP may contribute to the increased risks of cholesterol 
and ApoB/A1 in HD patients.

© 2021 Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJGM.S332911
PMCID: PMC8502030
PMID: 34675608

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the study design, the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data, manuscript writing, or in the decision to publish the 
results.