1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2021 Dec 1;192:1178-1184. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.10.058. Epub 2021 Oct 18.

Calsyntenin-3 interacts with the sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter-2 to 
regulate vitamin C uptake.

Subramanian VS(1), Teafatiller T(2), Vidal J(3), Gunaratne GS(4), 
Rodriguez-Ortiz CJ(3), Kitazawa M(3), Marchant JS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, United 
States of America. Electronic address: vsubrama@uci.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, United 
States of America.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, United 
States of America; Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, 
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, United States of America.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, United States of America.

Ascorbic acid (AA) uptake in neurons occurs via a Na+-dependent carrier-mediated 
process mediated by the sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter-2 (SVCT2). 
Relatively little information is available concerning the network of interacting 
proteins that support human (h)SVCT2 trafficking and cell surface expression in 
neuronal cells. Here we identified the synaptogenic adhesion protein, 
calsyntenin-3 (CLSTN3) as an hSVCT2 interacting protein from yeast two-hybrid 
(Y2H) screening of a human adult brain cDNA library. This interaction was 
confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation, mammalian two-hybrid (M2H), and 
co-localization in human cell lines. Co-expression of hCLSTN3 with hSVCT2 in 
SH-SY5Y cells led to a marked increase in AA uptake. Reciprocally, siRNA 
targeting hCLSTN3 inhibited AA uptake. In the J20 mouse model of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), mouse (m)SVCT2 and mCLSTN3 expression levels in hippocampus were 
decreased. Similarly, expression levels of hSVCT2 and hCLSTN3 were markedly 
decreased in hippocampal samples from AD patients. These findings establish 
CLSTN3 as a novel hSVCT2 interactor in neuronal cells with potential 
pathophysiological significance.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.10.058
PMCID: PMC9842108
PMID: 34673103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that there are no competing interests associated with the manuscript.