1. Front Genet. 2021 Oct 5;12:724533. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.724533. eCollection
 2021.

Identification of SNPs and Candidate Genes for Milk Production Ability in 
Yorkshire Pigs.

Shi L(1), Li Y(1), Liu Q(1), Zhang L(1), Wang L(1), Liu X(1), Gao H(1), Hou 
X(1), Zhao F(1), Yan H(1), Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China.

Sow milk production ability is an important limiting factor impacting suboptimal 
growth and the survival of piglets. Through pig genetic improvement, litter 
sizes have been increased. Larger litters need more suckling mammary glands, 
which results in increased milk from the lactating sow. Hence, there is much 
significance to exploring sow lactation performance. For milk production 
ability, it is not practical to directly measure the milk yield, we used litter 
weight gain (LWG) throughout sow lactation as an indicator. In this study, we 
estimated the heritability of LWG, namely, 0.18 ± 0.07. We then performed a 
GWAS, and detected seven significant SNPs, namely, Sus scrofa Chromosome (SSC) 
2: ASGA0010040 (p = 7.73E-11); SSC2:MARC0029355 (p = 1.30E-08), SSC6: 
WU_10.2_6_65751151 (p = 1.32E-10), SSC7: MARC0058875 (p = 4.99E-09), SSC10: 
WU_10.2_10_49571394 (p = 6.79E-08), SSC11: M1GA0014659 (p = 1.19E-07), and 
SSC15: MARC0042106 (p = 1.16E-07). We performed the distribution of phenotypes 
corresponding to the genotypes of seven significant SNPs and showed that 
ASGA0010040, MARC0029355, MARC0058875, WU_10.2_10_49571394, M1GA0014659, and 
MARC0042106 had extreme phenotypic values that corresponded to the homozygous 
genotypes, while the intermediate values corresponded to the heterozygous 
genotypes. We screened for flanking regions ± 200 kb nearby the seven 
significant SNPs, and identified 38 genes in total. Among them, 28 of the 
candidates were involved in lactose metabolism, colostrum immunity, milk 
protein, and milk fat by functional enrichment analysis. Through the combined 
analysis between 28 candidate genes and transcriptome data of the sow mammary 
gland, we found nine commons (ANO3, MUC15, DISP3, FBXO6, CLCN6, HLA-DRA, 
SLA-DRB1, SLA-DQB1, and SLA-DQA1). Furthermore, by comparing the chromosome 
positions of the candidate genes with the quantitative trait locus (QTLs) as 
previously reported, a total of 17 genes were found to be within 0.86-94.02 Mb 
of the reported QTLs for sow milk production ability, in which, NAV2 was found 
to be located with 0.86 Mb of the QTL region ssc2: 40936355. In conclusion, we 
identified seven significant SNPs located on SSC2, 6, 7, 10, 11, and 15, and 
propose 28 candidate genes for the ability to produce milk in Yorkshire pigs, 10 
of which were key candidates.

Copyright © 2021 Shi, Li, Liu, Zhang, Wang, Liu, Gao, Hou, Zhao, Yan and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.724533
PMCID: PMC8523896
PMID: 34675963

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.