1. Chembiochem. 2022 Jan 5;23(1):e202100465. doi: 10.1002/cbic.202100465. Epub
2021  Nov 5.

Engineering of a Plant Isoprenyl Diphosphate Synthase for Development of 
Irregular Coupling Activity.

Gerasymenko I(1)(2), Sheludko YV(1)(2)(3), Navarro Fuertes I(4), Schmidts V(3), 
Steinel L(1)(2), Haumann E(1)(2), Warzecha H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Technische Universität Darmstadt, Plant Biotechnology and Metabolic 
Engineering, Schnittspahnstraße 4, 64287, Darmstadt, Germany.
(2)Centre for Synthetic Biology, Technical University of Darmstadt, 64287, 
Darmstadt, Germany.
(3)Clemens-Schöpf-Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Technische 
Universität Darmstadt, Alarich-Weiss-Str. 4, 64287, Darmstadt, Germany.
(4)Ecología y Protección Agrícola SL, Pol. Ind. Ciutat de Carlet, 46240, Carlet, 
Valencia, Spain.

We performed mutagenesis on a regular isoprenyl diphosphate synthase (IDS), 
neryl diphosphate synthase from Solanum lycopersicum (SlNPPS), that has a 
structurally related analogue performing non-head-to-tail coupling of two 
dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) units, lavandulyl diphosphate synthase from 
Lavandula x intermedia (LiLPPS). Wild-type SlNPPS catalyses regular coupling of 
isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and DMAPP in cis-orientation resulting in the 
formation of neryl diphosphate. However, if the enzyme is fed with DMAPP only, 
it is able to catalyse the coupling of two DMAPP units and synthesizes two 
irregular monoterpene diphosphates; their structures were elucidated by the NMR 
analysis of their dephosphorylation products. One of the alcohols is lavandulol. 
The second compound is the trans-isomer of planococcol, the first example of an 
irregular cyclobutane monoterpene with this stereochemical configuration. The 
irregular activity of SlNPPS constitutes 0.4 % of its regular activity and is 
revealed only if the enzyme is supplied with DMAPP in the absence of IPP. The 
exchange of asparagine 88 for histidine considerably enhanced the 
non-head-to-tail coupling. While still only observed in the absence of IPP, 
irregular activity of the mutant reaches 13.1 % of its regular activity. The 
obtained results prove that regular IDS are promising starting points for 
protein engineering aiming at the development of irregular activities and 
leading to novel monoterpene structures.

© 2021 The Authors. ChemBioChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.202100465
PMCID: PMC9297866
PMID: 34672410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.