1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2021 Oct 4;15:759571. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.759571. 
eCollection 2021.

Functions of Intracellular Alpha-Synuclein in Microglia: Implications for 
Parkinson's Disease Risk.

Booms A(1), Coetzee GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Coetzee Laboratory, Department of Neurodegenerative Science, Van Andel 
Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, United States.

Alpha-synuclein accumulation in dopaminergic neurons is one of the primary 
features of Parkinson's disease (PD). Despite its toxic properties during PD, 
alpha-synuclein has some important physiological functions. Although the 
activity of the protein has been extensively studied in neurons, the protein is 
also expressed in other cell types including immune cells and glia. Genetic 
studies show that mutations in synuclein alpha (SNCA), the gene that encodes 
alpha-synuclein, and alterations in its expression levels are a significant risk 
factor for PD, which likely impact the functions of a broad range of cell types. 
The consequences of altered SNCA expression in other cell types is beginning to 
be explored. Microglia, the primary macrophage population in the Central Nervous 
System (CNS), for example, are affected by variations in alpha-synuclein levels 
and functions. Studies suggest that deviations of alpha-synuclein's normal 
activity influence hematopoiesis, the process that gives rise to microglia, and 
microglia's immune functions. Alpha-synuclein levels also dictate the efficiency 
of SNARE-mediated vesicle formation, which could influence autophagy and 
cytokine release in microglia. Starting from the time of conception, these 
effects could impact one's risk for developing PD. Further studies are needed to 
determine the physiological role of alpha-synuclein and how the protein is 
affected during PD in non-neuronal cells such as microglia. In this review we 
will discuss the known roles of alpha-synuclein in differentiation, immune 
responses, and vesicle formation, with insights into how abnormal 
alpha-synuclein expression and activity are linked to altered functions of 
microglia during PD.

Copyright Â© 2021 Booms and Coetzee.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2021.759571
PMCID: PMC8521067
PMID: 34671245

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.