1. Sci Adv. 2021 Oct 22;7(43):eabi5811. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abi5811. Epub 2021
Oct  22.

Osteocalcin attenuates oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination via GPR37 
signaling in the mouse brain.

Qian Z(1), Li H(1), Yang H(1)(2), Yang Q(1), Lu Z(1), Wang L(1), Chen Y(3), Li 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain Connectome and Behavior, CAS 
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Brain 
Cognition and Brain Disease Institute (BCBDI), Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of 
Brain Science-Shenzhen Fundamental Research Institutions, Shenzhen Institute of 
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, 
Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China.

The bone-derived hormone osteocalcin (OCN) is crucial for brain development and 
neural cognitive functions, yet the exact roles of OCN in central nervous system 
(CNS) remain elusive. Here, we find that genetic deletion of OCN facilitates 
oligodendrocyte (OL) differentiation and hypermyelination in the CNS. Although 
dispensable for the proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs), OCN 
is critical for the myelination of OLs, which affects myelin production and 
remyelination after demyelinating injury. Genome-wide RNA sequencing analyses 
reveal that OCN regulates a number of G proteinâ€“coupled receptors and 
myelination-associated transcription factors, of which Myrf might be a key 
downstream effector in OLs. GPR37 is identified as a previously unknown receptor 
for OCN, thus regulating OL differentiation and CNS myelination. Overall, these 
findings suggest that OCN orchestrates the transition between OPCs and 
myelinating OLs via GPR37 signaling, and hence, the OCN/GPR37 pathway regulates 
myelin homeostasis in the CNS.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abi5811
PMCID: PMC8535816
PMID: 34678058