1. Front Genet. 2021 Oct 5;12:719215. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.719215. eCollection
 2021.

Assessing Genomic Diversity and Productivity Signatures in Dianzhong Cattle by 
Whole-Genome Scanning.

Zhang X(1), Qu K(2), Jia P(3), Zhang J(2), Liu J(2), Lei C(3), Huang B(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Applied Technology on Green-Eco-Healthy Animal Husbandry of 
Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Provincial Engineering Laboratory for Animal Health 
Inspection and Internet Technology, College of Animal Science and Technology, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Zhejiang A&F University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Yunnan Academy of Grassland and Animal Science, Kunming, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi 
Province, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 
Xianyang, China.

Dianzhong cattle is a classic Chinese indigenous cattle breed with historical 
records dating back to 200 BC. But with its genomic differences having not been 
clearly elucidated, the quest for genomic characterization will be an essential 
step towards understanding the genomic basis of productivity and adaptation to 
survival under Chinese farming systems. Here we compared 10 Dianzhong cattle 
(four newly sequenced and six downloaded) with 29 published genomes of three 
underlying ancestral populations (Chinese zebu, Indian zebu, and Yanbian cattle) 
to characterize the genomic variations of Dianzhong cattle. Dianzhong cattle has 
a high nucleotide diversity (0.0034), second only to Chinese zebu. Together with 
analyses of linkage disequilibrium decay and runs of homozygosity, Dianzhong 
cattle displayed higher genomic diversity and weaker artificial selection 
compared with Yanbian cattle. From a selective sweep analysis by four methods 
(Fst, π-ratio, XP-CLR, and XP-EHH), the positive selective signals were mainly 
manifested in candidate genes and pathways related to heat resistance, growth 
and development, fat deposition, and male reproduction. Missense mutations were 
detected in candidate genes, SDS (c.944C > A and p.Ala315Glu), PDGFD (c.473A > G 
and p.Lys158Arg), and DDX4 (rs460251486, rs722912933, and rs517668236), which 
related to heat resistance, fat deposition, and spermatogenesis, respectively. 
Our findings unravel, at the genome-wide level, the unique diversity of 
Dianzhong cattle while emphasizing the opportunities for improvement of 
livestock productivity in further breeding programs.

Copyright © 2021 Zhang, Qu, Jia, Zhang, Liu, Lei and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.719215
PMCID: PMC8523829
PMID: 34675962

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.