1. Nat Sci Sleep. 2021 Oct 8;13:1771-1782. doi: 10.2147/NSS.S327478. eCollection 
2021.

The Association of Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Nocturnal Hypoxemia with Lipid 
Profiles in a Population-Based Study of Community-Dwelling Australian Men.

Guscoth LB(1), Appleton SL(2), Martin SA(1), Adams RJ(2), Melaku YA(2), Wittert 
GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Freemasons Centre for Male Health and Well-Being, South Australian Health and 
Medical Research Institute and Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, 5000, Australia.
(2)Flinders Health and Medical Research Institute (Sleep Health, Formerly the 
Adelaide Institute for Sleep Health) A Flinders Centre of Research Excellence, 
Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia, 5042, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the association of obstructive sleep apnea and nocturnal 
hypoxemia with serum lipid profiles in unselected community-dwelling men.
METHODS: Cross-sectional data from participants of the Men Androgen Inflammation 
Lifestyle Environment and Stress (MAILES) study (n=753) who underwent full 
in-home polysomnography (Embletta X100) was used. Triglycerides, high- (HDL), 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and total cholesterol were assessed on a fasting 
morning blood sample. Multivariable linear regression analyses assessed 
associations between lipids and continuous measures of nocturnal hypoxemia 
(oxygen desaturation index (3%) (ODI), apnea-hypopnea index (AHI), and rapid eye 
movement sleep apnea-hypopnea index (REM-AHI)), adjusted for chronic conditions, 
risk behavior and sociodemographic factors. Sensitivity analyses examined the 
effect of lipid lowering therapies on reported estimates. Effect modification 
was examined through stratification by waist circumference groups.
RESULTS: In 753 participants with mean (SD) age of 60.8 (10.9) years and waist 
circumference: 99.3 (11.6) cm, the prevalence of OSA (AHI≥10) was 52.6%. 
Overall, no significant associations between OSA metrics and lipid measures were 
found. Similarly, sensitivity analysis excluding lipid lowering therapies showed 
no significant associations. In analysis stratified by waist circumference 
(<95cm, 95-100cm, >100cm), ODI (3%, unstandardized B: 0.027, 95% CI: 
0.015-0.040), AHI (0.023, 0.012-0.033) and AHIREM (0.012, 0.001-0.022) were 
positively associated with serum triglycerides in participants with a normal 
waist circumference (<95cm).
CONCLUSION: Obstructive sleep apnea metrics were positively associated with 
serum triglyceride levels in men with a normal waist circumference. Healthy 
weight individuals with OSA require clinical attention to improve 
cardiometabolic risk profiles.

© 2021 Guscoth et al.

DOI: 10.2147/NSS.S327478
PMCID: PMC8517637
PMID: 34675725

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Sarah L Appleton reports grants from NH&MRC 
of Australia and The Hospital Research Foundation Group, during the conduct of 
the study; personal fees from Dove Press, outside the submitted work. Professor 
Robert J Adams reports grants from National Health and Medical Research Council, 
The Hospital Research Foundation, ResMed Foundation, and National Heart 
Foundation, during the conduct of the study; grants from Philips, outside the 
submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.