1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 21;11(1):20842. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00356-w.

Point mutations in Candida glabrata 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A 
reductase (CgHMGR) decrease enzymatic activity and substrate/inhibitor affinity.

Andrade-Pavón D(1), Fernández-Muñoz V(1), González-Ibarra W(2), 
Hernández-Rodríguez C(1), Ibarra JA(2), Villa-Tanaca L(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular de Bacterias y Levaduras, Departamento de 
Microbiología, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico 
Nacional, CDMX, Prol. de Carpio y Plan de Ayala. Col. Sto. Tomás, CP 11340, 
Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Genética Microbiana, Departamento de Microbiología, Escuela 
Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, CDMX, Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(3)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular de Bacterias y Levaduras, Departamento de 
Microbiología, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico 
Nacional, CDMX, Prol. de Carpio y Plan de Ayala. Col. Sto. Tomás, CP 11340, 
Mexico City, Mexico. mvillat@ipn.mx.

3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGR) is a crucial enzyme in 
the ergosterol biosynthesis pathway. The aim of this study was to obtain, 
purify, characterize, and overexpress five point mutations in highly conserved 
regions of the catalytic domain of Candida glabrata HMGR (CgHMGR) to explore the 
function of key amino acid residues in enzymatic activity. Glutamic acid (Glu) 
was substituted by glutamine in the E680Q mutant (at the dimerization site), Glu 
by glutamine in E711Q (at the substrate binding site), aspartic acid by alanine 
in D805A, and methionine by arginine in M807R (the latter two at the cofactor 
binding site). A double mutation, E680Q-M807R, was included. Regarding 
recombinant and wild-type CgHMGR, in vitro enzymatic activity was significantly 
lower for the former, as was the in silico binding energy of simvastatin, 
alpha-asarone and the HMG-CoA substrate. E711Q displayed the lowest enzymatic 
activity and binding energy, suggesting the importance of Glu711 (in the 
substrate binding site). The double mutant CgHMGR E680Q-M807R exhibited the 
second lowest enzymatic activity. Based on the values of the kinetic parameters 
KM and Vmax, the mutated amino acids appear to participate in binding. The 
current findings provide insights into the role of residues in the catalytic 
site of CgHMGR.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00356-w
PMCID: PMC8531335
PMID: 34675283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.