1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2021 Sep 25;10(10):1164. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics10101164.

Pseudomonas aeruginosaÂ mexR and mexEF Antibiotic Efflux Pump Variants Exhibit 
Increased Virulence.

Vaillancourt M(1), Limsuwannarot SP(1), Bresee C(2), Poopalarajah R(3), Jorth 
P(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
(2)Biostatistics Core, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 
1N4, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, 
USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
CA 90048, USA.

Antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections are the primary cause of 
mortality in people with cystic fibrosis (CF). Yet, it has only recently become 
appreciated that resistance mutations can also increase P. aeruginosa virulence, 
even in the absence of antibiotics. Moreover, the mechanisms by which resistance 
mutations increase virulence are poorly understood. In this study we tested the 
hypothesis that mutations affecting efflux pumps can directly increase P. 
aeruginosa virulence. Using genetics, physiological assays, and model 
infections, we show that efflux pump mutations can increase virulence. Mutations 
of the mexEF efflux pump system increased swarming, rhamnolipid production, and 
lethality in a mouse infection model, while mutations in mexR that increased 
expression of the mexAB-oprM efflux system increased virulence during an acute 
murine lung infection without affecting swarming or rhamnolipid gene expression. 
Finally, we show that an efflux pump inhibitor, which represents a proposed 
novel treatment approach for P. aeruginosa, increased rhamnolipid gene 
expression in a dose-dependent manner. This finding is important because 
rhamnolipids are key virulence factors involved in dissemination through 
epithelial barriers and cause neutrophil necrosis. Together, these data show how 
current and proposed future anti-Pseudomonal treatments may unintentionally make 
infections worse by increasing virulence. Therefore, treatments that target 
efflux should be pursued with caution.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics10101164
PMCID: PMC8532662
PMID: 34680745

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.