1. J Pers Med. 2021 Sep 27;11(10):967. doi: 10.3390/jpm11100967.

Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing for the Identification of Genetic Predictors 
of Radiation-Induced Late Skin Toxicity in Breast Cancer Patients: A Preliminary 
Study.

Cargnin S(1), Barizzone N(2), Basagni C(2), Pisani C(3), Ferrara E(3), Masini 
L(3), D'Alfonso S(2), Krengli M(3)(4), Terrazzino S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Piemonte Orientale, 
28100 Novara, Italy.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, University of Piemonte Orientale, 28100 
Novara, Italy.
(3)Radiation Oncology, University Hospital Maggiore della Carit√†, 28100 Novara, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Piemonte Orientale, 28100 
Novara, Italy.

Normal tissue radiosensitivity is thought to be influenced by an individual's 
genetic background. However, the specific genetic variants underlying the risk 
of late skin reactions following radiotherapy for breast cancer remain elusive. 
To unravel the genetic basis for radiation-induced late skin toxicity, we 
carried out targeted next-generation sequencing of germline DNA samples from 48 
breast cancer patients with extreme late skin toxicity phenotypes, consisting of 
24 cases with grade 2-3 subcutaneous fibrosis and/or grade 2-3 telangiectasia 
(LENT-SOMA scales) and 24 controls with grade 0 fibrosis and grade 0 
telangiectasia. In this exploratory study, a total of five single-nucleotide 
variants (SNVs) located in three genes (TP53, ERCC2, and LIG1) reached nominal 
levels of statistical significance (p < 0.05). In the replication study, which 
consisted of an additional 45 cases and 192 controls, none of the SNVs 
identified by targeted NGS achieved nominal replication. Nevertheless, TP53 
rs1042522 (G > C, Pro72Arg) in the replication cohort had an effect (OR per C 
allele: 1.52, 95%CI: 0.82-2.83, p = 0.186) in the same direction as in the 
exploratory cohort (OR per C allele: 4.70, 95%CI: 1.51-14.6, p = 0.007) and was 
found be nominally associated to the risk of radiation-induced late skin 
toxicity in the overall combined cohort (OR per C allele: 1.79, 95%CI: 
1.06-3.02, p = 0.028). These results raise the possibility of an association 
between TP53 rs1042522 and risk of radiation-induced late skin toxicity in 
breast cancer patients; however, large replication studies are warranted for 
conclusive evidence.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm11100967
PMCID: PMC8540941
PMID: 34683108

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.