1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 10;22(20):10931. doi: 10.3390/ijms222010931.

Cancer Therapy Guided by Mutation Tests: Current Status and Perspectives.

Aleksakhina SN(1)(2), Imyanitov EN(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Growth Biology, N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, 197758 
Saint-Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, St.-Petersburg Pediatric Medical University, 
194100 Saint-Petersburg, Russia.

The administration of many cancer drugs is tailored to genetic tests. Some 
genomic events, e.g., alterations of EGFR or BRAF oncogenes, result in the 
conformational change of the corresponding proteins and call for the use of 
mutation-specific compounds. Other genetic perturbations, e.g., HER2 
amplifications, ALK translocations or MET exon 14 skipping mutations, cause 
overproduction of the entire protein or its kinase domain. There are multilocus 
assays that provide integrative characteristics of the tumor genome, such as the 
analysis of tumor mutation burden or deficiency of DNA repair. Treatment 
planning for non-small cell lung cancer requires testing for EGFR, ALK, ROS1, 
BRAF, MET, RET and KRAS gene alterations. Colorectal cancer patients need to 
undergo KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, HER2 and microsatellite instability analysis. The 
genomic examination of breast cancer includes testing for HER2 amplification and 
PIK3CA activation. Melanomas are currently subjected to BRAF and, in some 
instances, KIT genetic analysis. Predictive DNA assays have also been developed 
for thyroid cancers, cholangiocarcinomas and urinary bladder tumors. There is an 
increasing utilization of agnostic testing which involves the analysis of all 
potentially actionable genes across all tumor types. The invention of 
genomically tailored treatment has resulted in a spectacular improvement in 
disease outcomes for a significant portion of cancer patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222010931
PMCID: PMC8536080
PMID: 34681592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.