1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Oct 13;12(10):1607. doi: 10.3390/genes12101607.

An Investigation of the Role of Common and Rare Variants in a Large Italian 
Multiplex Family of Multiple Sclerosis Patients.

Barizzone N(1), Cagliani R(2), Basagni C(1), Clarelli F(3), Mendozzi L(4), 
Agliardi C(4), Forni D(2), Tosi M(1), Mascia E(3), Favero F(5), Corà D(5), 
Corrado L(1), Sorosina M(3), Esposito F(3), Zuccalà M(1), Vecchio D(6), Liguori 
M(7), Comi C(6), Comi G(8), Martinelli V(9), Filippi M(8)(9)(10)(11)(12), Leone 
M(13), Martinelli-Boneschi F(14)(15), Caputo D(4), Sironi M(2), Guerini FR(4), 
D'Alfonso S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, CAAD (Center for Translational Research on 
Autoimmune and Allergic Diseases), University of Eastern Piedmont, 28100 Novara, 
Italy.
(2)Bioinformatics, Scientific Institute IRCCS E.MEDEA, 23842 Bosisio Parini, 
Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Genetics of Neurological Complex Disorders, Division of 
Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi ONLUS, 20148 Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Translational Medicine, CAAD (Center for Translational Research 
on Autoimmune and Allergic Diseases), University of Eastern Piedmont, 28100 
Novara, Italy.
(6)Department of Translational Medicine, IRCAD (Interdisciplinary Research 
Center of Autoimmune Diseases), University of Eastern Piedmont, 28100 Novara, 
Italy.
(7)Institute of Biomedical Technologies, Bari Unit, National Research Council, 
70126 Bari, Italy.
(8)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(9)Neurology Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(10)Neurorehabilitation Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 
Milan, Italy.
(11)Neurophysiology Service, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 
Milan, Italy.
(12)Neuroimaging Research Unit, Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(13)Dipartimento di Emergenza e Area Critica, UO Neurologia, Fondazione IRCCS 
Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, 71013 Foggia, Italy.
(14)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation (DEPT), Dino Ferrari 
Centre, Neuroscience Section, University of Milan, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(15)Neurology Unit and MS Centre, Foundation IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, 20122 Milan, Italy.

Known multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility variants can only explain half of 
the disease's estimated heritability, whereas low-frequency and rare variants 
may partly account for the missing heritability. Thus, here we sought to 
determine the occurrence of rare functional variants in a large Italian MS 
multiplex family with five affected members. For this purpose, we combined 
linkage analysis and next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based whole exome and 
whole genome sequencing (WES and WGS, respectively). The genetic burden 
attributable to known common MS variants was also assessed by weighted genetic 
risk score (wGRS). We found a significantly higher burden of common variants in 
the affected family members compared to that observed among sporadic MS patients 
and healthy controls (HCs). We also identified 34 genes containing at least one 
low-frequency functional variant shared among all affected family members, 
showing a significant enrichment in genes involved in specific biological 
processes-particularly mRNA transport-or neurodegenerative diseases. Altogether, 
our findings point to a possible pathogenic role of different low-frequency 
functional MS variants belonging to shared pathways. We propose that these rare 
variants, together with other known common MS variants, may account for the high 
number of affected family members within this MS multiplex family.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12101607
PMCID: PMC8535321
PMID: 34681001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Sandra D’Alfonso and Nadia Barizzone are guest 
editors for the Genes special issue: “Beyond GWAS: Deciphering Multiple 
Sclerosis through the Multiple Facets of Genetics”. Filippi is Editor-in-Chief 
of the Journal of Neurology, Associate Editor of Human Brain Mapping, Associate 
Editor of Radiology, and Associate Editor of Neurological Sciences; received 
compensation for consulting services and/or speaking activities from Alexion, 
Almirall, Bayer, Biogen, Celgene, Eli Lilly, Genzyme, Merck-Serono, Novartis, 
Roche, Sanofi, Takeda, and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries; and receives research 
support from Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Teva Pharmaceutical 
Industries, Italian Ministry of Health, Fondazione Italiana Sclerosi Multipla, 
and ARiSLA (Fondazione Italiana di Ricerca per la SLA). Vittorio Martinelli 
received compensation for speaking and/or for consultancy and support for travel 
expenses and participation in Congresses from Biogen, Merck-Serono, Novartis, 
Roche, Genzyme and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. Filippo Martinelli Boneschi 
has received compensation for consulting services and/or speaking activities 
from Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, Sanofi Genzyme, Merck-Serono, Biogen Idec, 
Roche, Medday, Excemed, and received research support from Merck, Teva 
Pharmaceutical Industries, Italian Ministry of Health, Fondazione Italiana 
Sclerosi Multipla and Fondazione Cariplo.