1. Oncogene. 2022 Jan;41(2):147-158. doi: 10.1038/s41388-021-02069-w. Epub 2021
Oct  23.

The emerging roles of Gα12/13 proteins on the hallmarks of cancer in solid 
tumors.

Rasheed SAK(1), Subramanyan LV(1), Lim WK(1), Udayappan UK(1), Wang M(1), Casey 
PJ(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Program in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 
169857, Singapore.
(2)Program in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 
169857, Singapore. patrick.casey@duke.edu.
(3)Dept. of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke Univ. Medical Center, Durham, 
NC, 27710, USA. patrick.casey@duke.edu.

G12 proteins comprise a subfamily of G-alpha subunits of heterotrimeric 
GTP-binding proteins (G proteins) that link specific cell surface G 
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) to downstream signaling molecules and play 
important roles in human physiology. The G12 subfamily contains two family 
members: Gα12 and Gα13 (encoded by the GNA12 and GNA13 genes, respectively) and, 
as with all G proteins, their activity is regulated by their ability to bind to 
guanine nucleotides. Increased expression of both Gα12 and Gα13, and their 
enhanced signaling, has been associated with tumorigenesis and tumor progression 
of multiple cancer types over the past decade. Despite these strong 
associations, Gα12/13 proteins are underappreciated in the field of cancer. As 
our understanding of G protein involvement in oncogenic signaling has evolved, 
it has become clear that Gα12/13 signaling is pleotropic and activates specific 
downstream effectors in different tumor types. Further, the expression of 
Gα12/13 proteins is regulated through a series of transcriptional and 
post-transcriptional mechanisms, several of which are frequently deregulated in 
cancer. With the ever-increasing understanding of tumorigenic processes driven 
by Gα12/13 proteins, it is becoming clear that targeting Gα12/13 signaling in a 
context-specific manner could provide a new strategy to improve therapeutic 
outcomes in a number of solid tumors. In this review, we detail how Gα12/13 
proteins, which were first discovered as proto-oncogenes, are now known to drive 
several "classical" hallmarks, and also play important roles in the "emerging" 
hallmarks, of cancer.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-021-02069-w
PMCID: PMC8732267
PMID: 34689178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.