1. Mol Syst Biol. 2021 Oct;17(10):e10141. doi: 10.15252/msb.202010141.

Metabolic memory underlying minimal residual disease in breast cancer.

Radic Shechter K(1), Kafkia E(1)(2), Zirngibl K(1)(2), Gawrzak S(1), Alladin 
A(1), Machado D(1), Lüchtenborg C(3), Sévin DC(4), Brügger B(3), Patil KR(1)(2), 
Jechlinger M(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)The Medical Research Council Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK.
(3)Biochemie-Zentrum der Universität Heidelberg (BZH), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Cellzome GmbH, Functional Genomics, GlaxoSmithKline, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)MOLIT Institute gGmbH, Heilbronn, Germany.

Tumor relapse from treatment-resistant cells (minimal residual disease, MRD) 
underlies most breast cancer-related deaths. Yet, the molecular characteristics 
defining their malignancy have largely remained elusive. Here, we integrated 
multi-omics data from a tractable organoid system with a metabolic modeling 
approach to uncover the metabolic and regulatory idiosyncrasies of the MRD. We 
find that the resistant cells, despite their non-proliferative phenotype and the 
absence of oncogenic signaling, feature increased glycolysis and activity of 
certain urea cycle enzyme reminiscent of the tumor. This metabolic 
distinctiveness was also evident in a mouse model and in transcriptomic data 
from patients following neo-adjuvant therapy. We further identified a marked 
similarity in DNA methylation profiles between tumor and residual cells. Taken 
together, our data reveal a metabolic and epigenetic memory of the 
treatment-resistant cells. We further demonstrate that the memorized elevated 
glycolysis in MRD is crucial for their survival and can be targeted using a 
small-molecule inhibitor without impacting normal cells. The metabolic 
aberrances of MRD thus offer new therapeutic opportunities for post-treatment 
care to prevent breast tumor recurrence.

© 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/msb.202010141
PMCID: PMC8543468
PMID: 34694069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.