1. Sci Signal. 2021 Oct 26;14(706):eabg4747. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.abg4747. Epub
 2021 Oct 26.

Activation of PPARα enhances astroglial uptake and degradation of β-amyloid.

Raha S(1), Ghosh A(1), Dutta D(1), Patel DR(1), Pahan K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL 60612, USA.
(2)Division of Research and Development, Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Astrocytes are a type of glial cell that are activated in the brain tissue of 
patients with Alzheimer’s disease to induce the accumulation of amyloid (Aβ). We 
previously found that a combination of low-dose gemfibrozil (GFB; a drug 
approved to treat high cholesterol) and retinoic acid (RA; a vitamin A 
derivative) induces lysosomal bio-genesis through peroxisome 
proliferator–activated receptor α (PPARα)–mediated transcription of the gene 
encoding transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal 
biogenesis and autophagy. Here, we found that the same combination (GFB-RA) 
enhanced the uptake of Aβ from the extracellular space and its subsequent 
degradation in astrocytes through a PPARα-dependent pathway. GFB-RA stimulated 
the abundance of both low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and TFEB in 
astrocytes through PPARα. LDLR was critical for Aβ uptake, whereas TFEB was 
critical for its degradation. GFB-RA treatment also increased autophagic flux 
and lysosomal activity in astrocytes. Consistent with these effects and in a 
manner dependent on astroglial PPARα, oral administration of GFB-RA switched 
astroglial activation to a neuroprotective state, lowered Aβ burden in the 
brain, and improved spatial learning and memory in the 5XFAD mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. These findings uncover a new function of PPARα in 
stimulating astroglial uptake and degradation of Aβ and suggest possible 
repurposing of GFB-RA combination therapy for AD.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.abg4747
PMCID: PMC8793854
PMID: 34699252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: KP and AG are inventors on 
patent application (20200297657) held/submitted by Rush University Medical 
Center that covers the stimulation of astroglial plaque clearance. The other 
authors declare that they have no competing interests.