1. Jpn J Radiol. 2022 Mar;40(3):245-261. doi: 10.1007/s11604-021-01206-5. Epub
2021  Oct 25.

A primer on skeletal dysplasias.

Handa A(1)(2), Nishimura G(3), Zhan MX(4), Bennett DL(4)(5), El-Khoury GY(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, 
IA, USA. atsuhiko.handa@childrens.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Radiology, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, 300 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. 
atsuhiko.handa@childrens.harvard.edu.
(3)Center for Intractable Diseases, Saitama Medical University Hospital, 
Saitama, Japan.
(4)Department of Radiology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, 
IA, USA.
(5)University of Iowa Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, IA, USA.

Skeletal dysplasia encompasses a heterogeneous group of over 400 genetic 
disorders. They are individually rare, but collectively rather common with an 
approximate incidence of 1/5000. Thus, radiologists occasionally encounter 
skeletal dysplasias in their daily practices, and the topic is commonly brought 
up in radiology board examinations across the world. However, many radiologists 
and trainees struggle with this issue because of the lack of proper resources. 
The radiological diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias primarily rests on pattern 
recognition-a method that is often called the "Aunt Minnie" approach. Most 
skeletal dysplasias have an identifiable pattern of skeletal changes composed of 
unique findings and even pathognomonic findings. Thus, skeletal dysplasias are 
the best example to which the Aunt Minnie approach is readily applicable.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11604-021-01206-5
PMCID: PMC8891206
PMID: 34693503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.