1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Oct 8;12:705827. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.705827. eCollection 2021.

Maternal High-Fat Diet Disturbs the DNA Methylation Profile in the Brown Adipose 
Tissue of Offspring Mice.

Zhang Q(1), Xiao X(1), Zheng J(1), Li M(1), Yu M(1), Ping F(1), Wang T(1), Wang 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, Ministry of Health, Department of 
Endocrinology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical 
College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

The prevalence of obesity has become a threatening global public health issue. 
The consequence of obesity is abnormal energy metabolism. Unlike white adipose 
tissue (WAT), brown adipose tissue (BAT) has a unique role in nonshivering 
thermogenesis. Lipids and glucose are consumed to maintain energy and metabolic 
homeostasis in BAT. Recently, accumulating evidence has indicated that exposure 
to excess maternal energy intake affects energy metabolism in offspring 
throughout their life. However, whether excess intrauterine energy intake 
influences BAT metabolism in adulthood is not clear. In this study, mouse dams 
were exposed to excess energy intake by feeding a high-fat diet (HFD) before and 
during pregnancy and lactation. The histology of BAT was assessed by hematoxylin 
and eosin staining. The genome-wide methylation profile of BAT was determined by 
a DNA methylation array, and specific site DNA methylation was quantitatively 
analyzed by methylated DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) qPCR. We found that 
intrauterine exposure to a high-energy diet resulted in blood lipid panel 
disorders and impaired the BAT structure. Higher methylation levels of genes 
involved in thermogenesis and fatty acid oxidation (FAO) in BAT, such as Acaa2, 
Acsl1, and Cox7a1, were found in 16-week-old offspring from mothers fed with 
HFD. Furthermore, the expression of Acaa2, Acsl1, and Cox7a1 was down-regulated 
by intrauterine exposure to excess energy intake. In summary, our results reveal 
that excess maternal energy leads to a long-term disorder of BAT in offspring 
that involves the activation of DNA methylation of BAT-specific genes involved 
in fatty acid oxidation and thermogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhang, Xiao, Zheng, Li, Yu, Ping, Wang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.705827
PMCID: PMC8531551
PMID: 34690924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.