1. J Mol Biol. 2021 Dec 3;433(24):167323. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167323. Epub
2021  Oct 22.

A Downsized and Optimised Intracellular Library-Derived Peptide Prevents 
Alpha-Synuclein Primary Nucleation and Toxicity Without Impacting Upon Lipid 
Binding.

Meade RM(1), Watt KJC(1), Williams RJ(1), Mason JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down 
BA2 7AY, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down 
BA2 7AY, United Kingdom. Electronic address: j.mason@bath.ac.uk.

Misfolding and aggregation of alpha-synuclein (αS) within dopaminergic neurons 
is a key factor in the development and progression of a group of age-related 
neurodegenerative diseases, termed synucleinopathies, that include Parkinson's 
disease (PD). We previously derived a peptide inhibitor from a 209,952-member 
intracellular library screen by employing the preNAC region (45-54) as a design 
template. At least six single-point mutations firmly linked to early-onset 
Parkinson's disease (E46K, H50Q, G51D, A53T/E/V) are located within this region, 
strongly implicating a pathogenic role within αS that leads to increased 
cytotoxicity. A library-derived ten residue peptide, 4554W, was consequently 
shown to block αS aggregation at the point of primary nucleation via lipid 
induction, inhibiting its conversion into downstream cytotoxic species. Here we 
couple truncation with a full alanine scan analysis, to establish the effect 
upon the αS aggregation pathway relative to 4554W. This revealed the precise 
residues responsible for eliciting inhibitory interaction and function, as well 
as those potentially amenable to modification or functionalisation. We find that 
modification N6A combined with N-terminal truncation results in a peptide of 
significantly increased efficacy. Importantly, our data demonstrate that the 
peptide does not directly disrupt αS lipid-binding, a desirable trait since 
antagonists of αS aggregation and toxicity should not impede association with 
small synaptic neurotransmitter vesicles, and thus not disrupt dopaminergic 
vesicle fusion and recycling. This work paves the way toward the major aim of 
deriving a highly potent peptide antagonist of αS pathogenicity without 
impacting on native αS function.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167323
PMID: 34695381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest JMM is an 
advisor to Sapience Therapeutics. There are no other financial or commercial 
conflicts to declare.