1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Oct 6;12:712305. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.712305. 
eCollection 2021.

Prophylactic Heme Arginate Infusion for Acute Intermittent Porphyria.

Kuo HC(1), Lin CN(2)(3), Tang YF(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Linkou Medical Center, 
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and College of Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, College of 
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Objectives: This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of long-term weekly 
prophylactic heme arginate (HA) infusions in reducing attack frequency and 
severity in female AIP patients. Methods: We report the results of five female 
AIP patients with frequent recurrent attacks (>9/year) before and after 
institution of weekly prophylaxis with heme arginate (3 mg/kg body weight). All 
five cases had confirmed disease-associated mutations in the porphobilinogen 
deaminase gene, and all had received genetic and clinical counseling about AIP. 
Results: In the five included patients, average annual attack rate (AAR) in the 
year prior to HA prophylaxis was 11.82 (range 9.03-17.06), and average total HA 
usage was 32.60 doses (range: 13.71-53.13). After 2.58-14.64 years of HA 
prophylaxis, average AAR was reduced to 2.23 (range 0.00-5.58), and attack 
severity (i.e., doses required per attack) was reduced from 2.81 to 1.39 
doses/attack. Liver and renal function remained stable during weekly 
administration of HA prophylaxis. The most common complications were port-A 
catheter-related events. No other complications or safety concerns occurred with 
long-term use of HA prophylaxis. Conclusion: Our study demonstrated women with 
AIP receiving weekly prophylactic HA infusions resulted in fewer episodes that 
required acute HA treatment while maintaining stable renal and liver function. 
Weekly prophylactic HA infusions effectively prevent frequent porphyric attacks 
and reduce attack severity.

Copyright © 2021 Kuo, Lin and Tang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.712305
PMCID: PMC8526969
PMID: 34690757

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.