1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 26;11(1):21089. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00106-y.

Fronto-striatal dopamine D2 receptor availability is associated with cognitive 
variability in older individuals with low dopamine integrity.

Korkki SM(1), Papenberg G(2), Karalija N(3)(4), Garrett DD(5)(6), Riklund 
K(3)(4), Lövdén M(7), Lindenberger U(5)(6), Nyberg L(3)(4)(8), Bäckman L(2).

Author information:
(1)Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institute and Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden. saana.korkki@ki.se.
(2)Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institute and Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Radiation Sciences, Diagnostic Radiology, Umeå University, 
Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Umeå Center for Functional Brain Imaging, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(5)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Berlin, Germany.
(6)Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, 
Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of Psychology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(8)Department of Integrative Medical Biology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

Within-person, moment-to-moment, variability in behavior increases with 
advancing adult age, potentially reflecting the influence of reduced structural 
and neurochemical brain integrity, especially that of the dopaminergic system. 
We examined the role of dopamine D2 receptor (D2DR) availability, grey-, and 
white-matter integrity, for between-person differences in cognitive variability 
in a large sample of healthy older adults (n = 181; 64-68 years) from the 
Cognition, Brain, and Aging (COBRA) study. Intra-individual variability (IIV) in 
cognition was measured as across-trial variability in participants' response 
times for tasks assessing perceptual speed and working memory, as well as for a 
control task of motor speed. Across the whole sample, no associations of D2DR 
availability, or grey- and white-matter integrity, to IIV were observed. 
However, within-person variability in cognition was increased in two subgroups 
of individuals displaying low mean-level cognitive performance, one of which was 
characterized by low subcortical and cortical D2DR availability. In this latter 
group, fronto-striatal D2DR availability correlated negatively with 
within-person variability in cognition. This finding suggests that the influence 
of D2DR availability on cognitive variability may be more easily disclosed among 
individuals with low dopamine-system integrity, highlighting the benefits of 
large-scale studies for delineating heterogeneity in brain-behavior associations 
in older age.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00106-y
PMCID: PMC8548594
PMID: 34702857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.