1. PLoS Genet. 2021 Oct 29;17(10):e1009871. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009871. 
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Metabolic flux from the Krebs cycle to glutamate transmission tunes a neural 
brake on seizure onset.

Jeong J(1), Lee J(1), Kim JH(1), Lim C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Ulsan National Institute of Science and 
Technology, Ulsan, Republic of Korea.

Kohlschütter-Tönz syndrome (KTS) manifests as neurological dysfunctions, 
including early-onset seizures. Mutations in the citrate transporter SLC13A5 are 
associated with KTS, yet their underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here, we 
report that a Drosophila SLC13A5 homolog, I'm not dead yet (Indy), constitutes a 
neurometabolic pathway that suppresses seizure. Loss of Indy function in 
glutamatergic neurons caused "bang-induced" seizure-like behaviors. In fact, 
glutamate biosynthesis from the citric acid cycle was limiting in Indy mutants 
for seizure-suppressing glutamate transmission. Oral administration of the 
rate-limiting α-ketoglutarate in the metabolic pathway rescued low glutamate 
levels in Indy mutants and ameliorated their seizure-like behaviors. This 
metabolic control of the seizure susceptibility was mapped to a pair of 
glutamatergic neurons, reversible by optogenetic controls of their activity, and 
further relayed onto fan-shaped body neurons via the ionotropic glutamate 
receptors. Accordingly, our findings reveal a micro-circuit that links neural 
metabolism to seizure, providing important clues to KTS-associated 
neurodevelopmental deficits.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009871
PMCID: PMC8555787
PMID: 34714823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.