1. Front Oncol. 2021 Oct 15;11:725484. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.725484. eCollection
 2021.

Case Report: Response to Regional Melphalan via Limb Infusion and Systemic PD1 
Blockade in Recurrent Myxofibrosarcoma: A Report of 2 Cases.

Bartlett EK(1)(2), D'Angelo SP(3)(4), Kelly CM(3)(4), Siegelbaum RH(5)(6), 
Fisher C(7), Antonescu CR(8), Ariyan CE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
United States.
(2)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, United 
States.
(3)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
United States.
(4)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, United 
States.
(5)Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, United States.
(6)Department of Radiology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, United 
States.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, United States.
(8)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, United States.

Treatment options for patients with advanced sarcoma remain limited. Promising 
responses to checkpoint inhibition have been observed, but responses to 
single-agent PD-1 inhibition are rare. We report on two patients with multiply 
recurrent myxofibrosarcoma treated with the combination of regionally 
administered melphalan (via isolated limb infusion) and pembrolizumab. Both 
patients had recurrent disease after multiple surgical resections and radiation. 
Analysis of primary tumors demonstrated microsatellite stable tumors with few 
mutations. After combination treatment, one patient had a significant partial 
response of 6 months duration, the second patient had a complete response of 2 
years duration. Post treatment biopsies demonstrated immune infiltration into 
the tumor. These promising responses in patients with multiply recurrent 
myxofibrosarcoma have prompted the development of an investigator-initiated 
clinical trial to formally study the combination of regional melphalan and 
pembrolizumab in a systematic fashion (NCT04332874).

Copyright © 2021 Bartlett, D’Angelo, Kelly, Siegelbaum, Fisher, Antonescu and 
Ariyan.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.725484
PMCID: PMC8554327
PMID: 34722269

Conflict of interest statement: CK reports receiving research funding from 
Merck, Amgen, and Agios; SD’A reports research funding from Amgen, EMD Serono, 
Incyte, Merck & Co., Nektar, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Deciphera; consultancy 
for Amgen, EMD Serono, GlaxoSmithKline, Immune Design, Incyte, Merck & Co., 
Nektar, and Immunocore; reimbursement for travel expenses from EMD Serono, Merck 
& Co., Adaptimmune, and Immunocore. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.