1. ACS Synth Biol. 2021 Nov 19;10(11):3177-3189. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00461. 
Epub 2021 Nov 2.

Regulating Expression of Mistranslating tRNAs by Readthrough RNA Polymerase II 
Transcription.

Berg MD(1)(2), Isaacson JR(3), Cozma E(1), Genereaux J(1), Lajoie P(4), Vill√©n 
J(2), Brandl CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, 
Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.
(2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 
98195, United States.
(3)Department of Biology, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 
5C1, Canada.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

Transfer RNA (tRNA) variants that alter the genetic code increase protein 
diversity and have many applications in synthetic biology. Since the tRNA 
variants can cause a loss of proteostasis, regulating their expression is 
necessary to achieve high levels of novel protein. Mechanisms to positively 
regulate transcription with exogenous activator proteins like those often used 
to regulate RNA polymerase II (RNAP II)-transcribed genes are not applicable to 
tRNAs as their expression by RNA polymerase III requires elements internal to 
the tRNA. Here, we show that tRNA expression is repressed by overlapping 
transcription from an adjacent RNAP II promoter. Regulating the expression of 
the RNAP II promoter allows inverse regulation of the tRNA. Placing either Gal4- 
or TetR-VP16-activated promoters downstream of a mistranslating tRNASer variant 
that misincorporates serine at proline codons in Saccharomyces cerevisiae allows 
mistranslation at a level not otherwise possible because of the toxicity of the 
unregulated tRNA. Using this inducible tRNA system, we explore the proteotoxic 
effects of mistranslation on yeast cells. High levels of mistranslation cause 
cells to arrest in the G1 phase. These cells are impermeable to propidium 
iodide, yet growth is not restored upon repressing tRNA expression. High levels 
of mistranslation increase cell size and alter cell morphology. This regulatable 
tRNA expression system can be applied to study how native tRNAs and tRNA 
variants affect the proteome and other biological processes. Variations of this 
inducible tRNA system should be applicable to other eukaryotic cell types.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00461
PMCID: PMC8765249
PMID: 34726901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.