1. Pain. 2022 Aug 1;163(8):1479-1488. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002529. Epub 
2021 Oct 28.

Capsaicin-induced depolymerization of axonal microtubules mediates analgesia for 
trigeminal neuropathic pain.

Arora V(1), Li T, Kumari S, Wang S, Asgar J, Chung MK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neural and Pain Sciences, School of Dentistry, Program in 
Neuroscience, Center to Advance Chronic Pain Research, the University of 
Maryland Baltimore, Baltimore, MD, United States.

Capsaicin is a specific agonist of transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 
(TRPV1), which is enriched in nociceptors. Capsaicin not only produces acute 
pain but also leads to long-lasting analgesia in patients with chronic pain. 
Although capsaicin-induced TRPV1 and Ca 2+ /calpain-dependent ablation of axonal 
terminals is necessary for long-lasting analgesia, the mechanisms underlying 
capsaicin-induced ablation of axonal terminals and its association with 
analgesia are not fully understood. Microtubules are composed of tubulin 
polymers and serve as a main axonal cytoskeleton maintaining axonal integrity. 
In this study, we hypothesized that capsaicin would increase the 
depolymerization of microtubules and lead to axonal ablation and analgesia for 
trigeminal neuropathic pain. Paclitaxel, a microtubule stabilizer, decreased 
capsaicin-induced ablation of axonal terminals in time-lapsed imaging in vitro. 
Capsaicin increases free tubulin in dissociated sensory neurons, which was 
inhibited by paclitaxel. Consistently, subcutaneous injection of paclitaxel 
prevented capsaicin-induced axonal ablation in the hind paw skin. Capsaicin 
administration to the facial skin produced analgesia for mechanical hyperalgesia 
in mice with chronic constriction injury of the infraorbital nerve, which was 
prevented by the coadministration of paclitaxel and capsaicin. Whole-mount 
staining of facial skin showed that paclitaxel reduced capsaicin-induced 
ablation of peptidergic afferent terminals. Despite the suggested involvement of 
TRPV1 Ser801 phosphorylation on microtubule integrity, capsaicin-induced 
analgesia was not affected in TRPV1 S801A knock-in mice. In conclusion, 
capsaicin-induced depolymerization of axonal microtubules determined 
capsaicin-induced ablation of nociceptive terminals and the extent of analgesia. 
Further understanding of TRPV1/Ca 2+ -dependent mechanisms of capsaicin-induced 
ablation and analgesia may help to improve the management of chronic pain.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the International Association for the Study of Pain.

DOI: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002529
PMCID: PMC9046530
PMID: 34724681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare. Sponsorships or competing interests that may be relevant to content are 
disclosed at the end of this article.