1. Curr Biol. 2021 Dec 20;31(24):5633-5641.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.10.022.
Epub  2021 Nov 4.

Polarized Dishevelled dissolution and reassembly drives embryonic axis 
specification in sea star oocytes.

Swartz SZ(1), Tan TH(2), Perillo M(3), Fakhri N(2), Wessel GM(3), Wikramanayake 
AH(4), Cheeseman IM(5).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; 
Embryology Course: Concepts and Techniques in Modern Developmental Biology, 
Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA. Electronic address: 
szs@wi.mit.edu.
(2)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Physics, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(3)MCB Department, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33134, USA; 
Embryology Course: Concepts and Techniques in Modern Developmental Biology, 
Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA.
(5)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 
Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2021 Dec 20;31(24):R1582-R1585. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.10.060.

The organismal body axes that are formed during embryogenesis are intimately 
linked to intrinsic asymmetries established at the cellular scale in oocytes.1 
However, the mechanisms that generate cellular asymmetries within the oocyte and 
then transduce that polarity to organismal scale body axes are poorly understood 
outside of select model organisms. Here, we report an axis-defining event in 
meiotic oocytes of the sea star Patiria miniata. Dishevelled (Dvl) is a 
cytoplasmic Wnt pathway effector required for axis development in diverse 
species,2-4 but the mechanisms governing its function and distribution remain 
poorly defined. Using time-lapse imaging, we find that Dvl localizes uniformly 
to puncta throughout the cell cortex in Prophase I-arrested oocytes but becomes 
enriched at the vegetal pole following meiotic resumption through a 
dissolution-reassembly mechanism. This process is driven by an initial 
disassembly phase of Dvl puncta, followed by selective reformation of Dvl 
assemblies at the vegetal pole. Rather than being driven by Wnt signaling, this 
localization behavior is coupled to meiotic cell cycle progression and 
influenced by Lamp1+ endosome association and Frizzled receptors pre-localized 
within the oocyte cortex. Our results reveal a cell cycle-linked mechanism by 
which maternal cellular polarity is transduced to the embryo through spatially 
regulated Dvl dynamics.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.10.022
PMCID: PMC8692449
PMID: 34739818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests I.M.C. is a member of 
the Editorial Advisory Board for Current Biology.