1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2021 Dec 17;583:121-127. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.10.056. Epub 2021 Oct 29.

Cardiomyocyte protein O-GlcNAcylation is regulated by GFAT1 not GFAT2.

Nabeebaccus AA(1), Verma S(2), Zoccarato A(2), Emanuelli G(2), Santos CX(2), 
Streckfuss-Bömeke K(3), Shah AM(2).

Author information:
(1)BHF Centre of Excellence King's College London, The James Black Centre, 125 
Coldharbour Lane, London, SE5 9NU, UK. Electronic address: 
adam.a.nabeebaccus@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)BHF Centre of Excellence King's College London, The James Black Centre, 125 
Coldharbour Lane, London, SE5 9NU, UK.
(3)German Centre for Cardiovascular Research, 10785 Berlin, partnersite 
Göttingen, Germany; Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of 
Würzburg, 97078 Würzburg, Germany.

In response to cardiac injury, increased activity of the hexosamine biosynthesis 
pathway (HBP) is linked with cytoprotective as well as adverse effects depending 
on the type and duration of injury. Glutamine-fructose amidotransferase (GFAT; 
gene name gfpt) is the rate-limiting enzyme that controls flux through HBP. Two 
protein isoforms exist in the heart called GFAT1 and GFAT2. There are 
conflicting data on the relative importance of GFAT1 and GFAT2 during 
stress-induced HBP responses in the heart. Using neonatal rat cardiac cell 
preparations, targeted knockdown of GFPT1 and GFPT2 were performed and HBP 
activity measured. Immunostaining with specific GFAT1 and GFAT2 antibodies was 
undertaken in neonatal rat cardiac preparations and murine cardiac tissues to 
characterise cell-specific expression. Publicly available human heart single 
cell sequencing data was interrogated to determine cell-type expression. Western 
blots for GFAT isoform protein expression were performed in human cardiomyocytes 
derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). GFPT1 but not GFPT2 
knockdown resulted in a loss of stress-induced protein O-GlcNAcylation in 
neonatal cardiac cell preparations indicating reduced HBP activity. In rodent 
cells and tissue, immunostaining for GFAT1 identified expression in both cardiac 
myocytes and fibroblasts whereas immunostaining for GFAT2 was only identified in 
fibroblasts. Further corroboration of findings in human heart cells identified 
an enrichment of GFPT2 gene expression in cardiac fibroblasts but not 
ventricular myocytes whereas GFPT1 was expressed in both myocytes and 
fibroblasts. In human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes, only GFAT1 protein was 
expressed with an absence of GFAT2. In conclusion, these results indicate that 
GFAT1 is the primary cardiomyocyte isoform and GFAT2 is only present in cardiac 
fibroblasts. Cell-specific isoform expression may have differing effects on cell 
function and should be considered when studying HBP and GFAT functions in the 
heart.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2021.10.056
PMCID: PMC8606754
PMID: 34735873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.