1. J Oncol. 2021 Oct 28;2021:3658196. doi: 10.1155/2021/3658196. eCollection
2021.

Ferroptosis-Associated Classifier and Indicator for Prognostic Prediction in 
Cutaneous Melanoma.

Zeng H(1), You C(2), Zhao L(3), Wang J(3), Ye X(2), Yang T(2), Wan C(2), Deng 
L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Burn and Plastic Surgery, Ganzhou People's Hospital, The 
Affiliated Ganzhou Hospital of Nanchang University, Ganzhou, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Candidate Branch of National 
Clinical Research Centre for Skin and Immune Diseases, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Gannan Medical University, Ganzhou, China.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, The General Hospital of Tianjin 
Medical University, Tianjin, China.
(4)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Gannan Medical University, Ganzhou, China.

Ferroptosis plays a critical role in different types of cancers, but the 
prognostic impact of ferroptosis in cutaneous melanoma remains lacking. 
Therefore, ferroptosis-related genes (FRGs) were firstly obtained from the 
FerrDb database and the differentially expressed FRGs were identified by the 
"limma" algorithm. Next, the prognostic differentially expressed FRGs were 
screened out by univariate Cox regression, which were subsequently used to 
cluster melanomas into two subtypes (clusters A and B). Besides, the Boruta 
algorithm and principal component analysis (PCA) were performed to build a 
15-FRGs indicator, which can robustly predict patients' overall survival (OS) 
and be considered as an independent prognostic factor in melanoma. The melanoma 
patients were further divided into high- and low-FRGs score groups. The high 
score group have a good prognosis, with higher T cell immune infiltrating and 
lower mutation frequencies in NRAS, KRAS, and NF1. Finally, we discovered that 
many immune processes and several chemotherapy drugs were closely associated 
with FRGs score. Thus, our study provides a novel ferroptosis-associated 
classifier and indicator to predict the prognosis of melanoma. Besides, we 
identified several potential chemotherapy drugs to induce ferroptosis and could 
supply additional effective treatments.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hao Zeng et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/3658196
PMCID: PMC8568558
PMID: 34745259

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they had no conflicts 
of interest.