1. Genome Med. 2021 Nov 9;13(1):174. doi: 10.1186/s13073-021-00976-x.

Functional pre-therapeutic evaluation by genome editing of variants of uncertain 
significance of essential tumor suppressor genes.

Billaud A(1)(2), Chevalier LM(1)(2), Augereau P(2), Frenel JS(2)(3), Passot 
C(2), Campone M(2)(3), Morel A(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Université d'Angers, Inserm, CRCINA, SFR ICAT, F-49000, Angers, France.
(2)Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest Nantes-Angers, F-49000, Angers, France.
(3)Université de Nantes, Inserm, CRCINA, F-44000, Nantes, France.
(4)Université d'Angers, Inserm, CRCINA, SFR ICAT, F-49000, Angers, France. 
alain.morel@ico.unicancer.fr.
(5)Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest Nantes-Angers, F-49000, Angers, France. 
alain.morel@ico.unicancer.fr.

BACKGROUND: Targeted therapies in oncology are promising but variants of 
uncertain significance (VUS) limit their use for clinical management and 
necessitate functional testing in vitro. Using BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants, which 
have consequences on PARP inhibitor sensitivity, and POLE variants, potential 
biomarkers of immunotherapy response, we developed a rapid functional assay 
based on CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing to determine the functional consequences of 
these variants having potentially direct implications on patients' access to 
targeted therapies.
METHODS: We first evaluated the functional impact of 26 BRCA1 and 7 BRCA2 
variants by editing and comparing NGS results between the variant of interest 
and a silent control variant. Ten of these variants had already been classified 
as benign or pathogenic and were used as controls. Finally, we extended this 
method to the characterization of POLE VUS.
RESULTS: For the 23 variants that were unclassified or for which conflicting 
interpretations had been reported, 15 were classified as functionally normal and 
6 as functionally abnormal. Another two variants were found to have intermediate 
consequences, both with potential impacts on splicing. We then compared these 
scores to the patients' responses to PARP inhibitors when possible. Finally, to 
prove the application of our method to the classification of variants from other 
tumor suppressor genes, we exemplified with three POLE VUS. Among them, two were 
classified with an intermediate functional impact and one was functionally 
abnormal. Eventually, four POLE variants previously classified in databases were 
also evaluated. However, we found evidence of a discordance with the 
classification, variant p.Leu424Val being found here functionally normal.
CONCLUSIONS: Our new rapid functional assay can be used to characterize the 
functional implication of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants, giving patients whose 
variants were evaluated as functionally abnormal access to PARP inhibitor 
treatment. Retrospective analysis of patients' responses to PARP inhibitors, 
where accessible, was consistent with our functional score evaluation and 
confirmed the accuracy of our protocol. This method could potentially be 
extended to the classification of VUS from all essential tumor suppressor genes 
and can be performed within a timeframe compatible with clinical applications, 
thereby having a direct theranostic impact.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-021-00976-x
PMCID: PMC8576946
PMID: 34749799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interest.