1. Cell Struct Funct. 2021 Dec 22;46(2):103-111. doi: 10.1247/csf.21052. Epub
2021  Nov 6.

A Dual Promoter System to Monitor IFN-γ Signaling in vivo at Single-cell 
Resolution.

Tanaka T(1), Konishi Y(2), Ichise H(3), Tsukiji S(4), Matsuda M(1)(5)(6), Terai 
K(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Bioimaging and Cell Signaling, Research Center for Dynamic 
Living Systems, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University.
(2)Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School.
(3)Lymphocyte Biology Section, Laboratory of Immune System Biology, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health.
(4)Department of Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya Institute of Technology.
(5)Department of Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University.
(6)Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences, Kyoto University.

IFN-γ secreted from immune cells exerts pleiotropic effects on tumor cells, 
including induction of immune checkpoint and antigen presentation, growth 
inhibition, and apoptosis induction. We combined a dual promoter system with an 
IFN-γ signaling responsive promoter to generate a reporter named the interferon 
sensing probe (ISP), which quantitates the response to IFN-γ by means of 
fluorescence and bioluminescence. The integration site effect of the transgene 
is compensated for by the PGK promoter-driven expression of a fluorescent 
protein. Among five potential IFN-γ-responsive elements, we found that the 
interferon γ-activated sequence (GAS) exhibited the best performance. When 
ISP-GAS was introduced into four cell lines and subjected to IFN-γ stimulation, 
dose-dependency was observed with an EC50 ranging from 0.2 to 0.9 ng/mL, 
indicating that ISP-GAS can be generally used as a sensitive biosensor of IFN-γ 
response. In a syngeneic transplantation model, the ISP-GAS-expressing cancer 
cells exhibited bioluminescence and fluorescence signals in an IFN-γ 
receptor-dependent manner. Thus, ISP-GAS could be used to quantitatively monitor 
the IFN-γ response both in vitro and in vivo.Key words: in vivo imaging, tumor 
microenvironment, interferon-gamma, dual promoter system.

DOI: 10.1247/csf.21052
PMCID: PMC10511040
PMID: 34744115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]