1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2022 Feb;216:106010. doi: 
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2021.106010. Epub 2021 Oct 30.

A review of (18)O labelling Studies to probe the mechanism of aromatase 
(CYP191A).

Akhtar M(1), Wright JN(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, New Campus, Lahore 
54590, Pakistan; School of Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, 
Building 85, SO17 1BJ, UK. Electronic address: ma3@soton.ac.uk.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Building 85, SO17 
1BJ, UK.

Our previous studies, using precursors for two classes of estrogens, estrone and 
estriol, have highlighted the following facets of aromatase. The overall 
reaction, converting androgens into estrogens, occurs in three steps, each 
requiring NADPH and O2. In Step 1, a 19-hydroxy intermediate is produced, which 
in Step 2, is converted into a 19-oxo derivative via a gem -diol intermediate 
with the stereospecific loss of HRe. In Step 3, a scission of the C-10-C-19 bond 
occurs releasing C-19 as formic acid (HCOOH) and incorporating an atom of oxygen 
from O2, The other oxygen atom of formic acid is derived from the hydroxyl group 
introduced in Step 1. These experiments were performed using the classical 
placental microsomal system. Our findings were confirmed and extended by (the 
late) Caspi's group. However, incorporation of oxygen in Step 3, has been 
challenged in a subsequent study using a soluble reconstituted system. The 
latter authors have implied the superiority of their system over the microsomal 
preparation. However, several assumptions under pinning their own work were 
derived from the use of placental microsomes. Furthermore, the authors have not 
considered that when a previous work is challenged it needs to be repeated under 
the conditions described in the original publication.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2021.106010
PMID: 34757095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]