1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 9;11(1):21970. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01507-9.

Pheromones that correlate with reproductive success in competitive conditions.

Luzynski KC(1), Nicolakis D(2), Marconi MA(2), Zala SM(2), Kwak J(3)(4), Penn 
DJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Life Sciences, Konrad Lorenz Institute of 
Ethology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Savoyenstraße 1, Vienna, 
Austria. luzyn1kl@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Interdisciplinary Life Sciences, Konrad Lorenz Institute of 
Ethology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Savoyenstraße 1, Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Department of Interdisciplinary Life Sciences, Research Institute of Wildlife 
Ecology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Savoyenstraße 1, Vienna, 
Austria.
(4)International Flavors & Fragrances Inc., 1515 State Route 36, Union Beach, 
NJ, USA.
(5)Department of Interdisciplinary Life Sciences, Konrad Lorenz Institute of 
Ethology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Savoyenstraße 1, Vienna, 
Austria. Dustin.Penn@vetmeduni.ac.at.

The major urinary proteins (MUPs) of house mice (Mus musculus) bind and 
stabilize the release of pheromones and other volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 
from urinary scent marks, which mediate chemical communication. Social status 
influences MUP and VOC excretion, and the urinary scent of dominant males is 
attractive to females. Urinary pheromones influence the sexual behavior and 
physiology of conspecifics, and yet it is not known whether they also affect 
reproductive success. We monitored the excretion of urinary protein and VOCs of 
wild-derived house mice living in large seminatural enclosures to compare the 
sexes and to test how these compounds correlate with reproductive success. Among 
males, urinary protein concentration and VOC expression correlated with 
reproductive success and social status. Territorial dominance also correlated 
with reproductive success in both sexes; but among females, no urinary compounds 
were found to correlate with social status or reproductive success. We found 
several differences in the urinary protein and volatile pheromones of mice in 
standard cages versus seminatural enclosures, which raises caveats for 
conventional laboratory studies. These findings provide novel evidence for 
chemical signals that correlate with male reproductive success of house mice 
living in competitive conditions.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01507-9
PMCID: PMC8578420
PMID: 34754031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.