1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Oct 25;12:756434. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.756434. 
eCollection 2021.

Comparative Dynamic Transcriptome Reveals the Delayed Secondary-Cell-Wall 
Thickening Results in Altered Lint Percentage and Fiber Elongation in a 
Chromosomal Segment Substitution Line of Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.).

Gao Y(1)(2), Chen Y(2), Song Z(2), Zhang J(2), Lv W(2)(3), Zhao H(2)(3), Huo 
X(2)(3), Zheng L(3), Wang F(2)(3), Zhang J(2)(3), Zhang T(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Cotton Breeding and Cultivation in Huang-Huai-Hai Plain, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Cotton Research Center, Shandong 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Jinan, China.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Shandong Normal University, Jinan, China.
(4)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Resources, Institute of 
Crop Science, College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Plant Precision Breeding 
Academy, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Erratum in
    Front Plant Sci. 2022 Jan 26;13:837797. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.837797.

Lint percentage (LP) is an important yield component in cotton that is usually 
affected by initial fiber number and cell wall thickness. To explore how fiber 
cell wall development affects LP, phenotypic identification and dynamic 
transcriptome analysis were conducted using a single segment substitution line 
of chromosome 15 (SL15) that harbors a major quantitative trait locus (QTL) for 
LP. Compared to its recurrent parent LMY22, SL15 did not differ in initial fiber 
number, but the fiber cell wall thickness and single-fiber weight decreased 
significantly, altering LP. The comparative transcriptome profiles revealed that 
the secondary cell wall (SCW) development phase of SL15 was relatively delayed. 
Meanwhile, the expression of genes related to cell expansion decreased more 
slightly in SL15 with fiber development, resulting in relatively higher 
expression at SL15_25D than at LMY22_25D. SCW development-related genes, such as 
GhNACs and GhMYBs, in the putative NAC-MYB-CESA network differentially expressed 
at SL15_25D, along with the lower expression of CESA6, CSLC12, and CSLA2. The 
substituted chromosomal interval was further investigated, and found 6 of 146 
candidate genes were differentially expressed in all four cell development 
periods including 10, 15, 20 and 25 DPA. Genetic variation and co-expression 
analysis showed that GH_D01G0052, GH_D01G0099, GH_D01G0100, and GH_D01G0140 may 
be important candidate genes associated with qLP-C15-1. Our results provide 
novel insights into cell wall development and its relationship with LP, which is 
beneficial for lint yield and fiber quality improvement.

Copyright Â© 2021 Gao, Chen, Song, Zhang, Lv, Zhao, Huo, Zheng, Wang, Zhang and 
Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.756434
PMCID: PMC8573213
PMID: 34759948

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.