1. Mol Psychiatry. 2022 Mar;27(3):1742-1753. doi: 10.1038/s41380-021-01370-0.
Epub  2021 Nov 10.

Strong and weak cross-inheritance of substance use disorders in a nationally 
representative sample.

Zhang H(1), Grant BF(2), Hodgkinson CA(3), Ruan WJ(2), Kerridge BT(2), Huang 
B(2), Saha TD(2), Fan AZ(2), Wilson V(2), Jung J(4), Parsian A(5), Goldman 
D(#)(3)(6), Chou SP(#)(2).

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology and Biometry Branch, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20817, USA. 
haitao.zhang@nih.gov.
(2)Epidemiology and Biometry Branch, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20817, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20817, USA.
(4)Section on Clinical Genomics and Experimental Therapeutics, National 
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, 20817, USA.
(5)Division of Neuroscience and Behavior, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20817, USA.
(6)Office of the Clinical Director, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20817, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Substance use disorders (SUDs) are moderately to highly heritable and are in 
part cross-transmitted genetically, as observed in twin and family studies. We 
performed exome-focused genotyping to examine the cross-transmission of four 
SUDs: alcohol use disorder (AUD, n = 4487); nicotine use disorder (NUD, 
n = 4394); cannabis use disorder (CUD, n = 954); and nonmedical prescription 
opioid use disorder (NMPOUD, n = 346) within a large nationally representative 
sample (n = 36,309), the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related 
Conditions-III (NESARC-III). All diagnoses were based on in-person structured 
psychiatric interview (AUDADIS-5). SUD cases were compared alone and together to 
3959 "super controls" who had neither a SUD nor a psychiatric disorder using an 
exome-focused array assaying 363,496 SNPs, yielding a representative view of 
within-disorder and cross-disorder genetic influences on SUDs. The 29 top 
susceptibility genes for one or more SUDs overlapped highly with genes 
previously implicated by GWAS of SUD. Polygenic scores (PGS) were computed 
within the European ancestry (EA) component of the sample (n = 12,505) using 
summary statistics from each of four clinically distinct SUDs compared to the 
3959 "super controls" but then used for two distinctly different purposes: to 
predict SUD severity (mild, moderate, or severe) and to predict each of the 
other 3 SUDs. Our findings based on PGS highlight shared and unshared genetic 
contributions to the pathogenesis of SUDs, confirming the strong 
cross-inheritance of AUD and NUD as well as the distinctiveness of inheritance 
of opioid use disorder.

© 2021. This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the 
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-021-01370-0
PMCID: PMC9085976
PMID: 34759357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
competing interests.