1. Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 8;11(1):21811. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01379-z.

A separation-of-function ZIP4 wheat mutant allows crossover between related 
chromosomes and is meiotically stable.

Martín AC(1), Alabdullah AK(2), Moore G(2).

Author information:
(1)Crop Genetics Department, John Innes Centre, Colney, Norwich, NR4 7UH, UK. 
Azahara-c.martin@jic.ac.uk.
(2)Crop Genetics Department, John Innes Centre, Colney, Norwich, NR4 7UH, UK.

Many species, including most flowering plants, are polyploid, possessing 
multiple genomes. During polyploidisation, fertility is preserved via the 
evolution of mechanisms to control the behaviour of these multiple genomes 
during meiosis. On the polyploidisation of wheat, the major meiotic gene ZIP4 
duplicated and diverged, with the resulting new gene TaZIP4-B2 being inserted 
into chromosome 5B. Previous studies showed that this TaZIP4-B2 promotes pairing 
and synapsis between wheat homologous chromosomes, whilst suppressing crossover 
between related (homoeologous) chromosomes. Moreover, in wheat, the presence of 
TaZIP4-B2 preserves up to 50% of grain number. The present study exploits a 
'separation-of-function' wheat Tazip4-B2 mutant named zip4-ph1d, in which the 
Tazip4-B2 copy still promotes correct pairing and synapsis between homologues 
(resulting in the same pollen profile and fertility normally found in wild type 
wheat), but which also allows crossover between the related chromosomes in wheat 
haploids of this mutant. This suggests an improved utility for the new zip4-ph1d 
mutant line during wheat breeding, compared to the previously described CRISPR 
Tazip4-B2 and ph1 mutant lines. The results also reveal that loss of suppression 
of homoeologous crossover between wheat chromosomes does not in itself reduce 
wheat fertility when promotion of homologous pairing and synapsis by TaZIP4-B2 
is preserved.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-01379-z
PMCID: PMC8575954
PMID: 34750469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.