1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 31;22(21):11839. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111839.

Development of In Vitro and In Vivo Evaluation Systems for Vitamin D Derivatives 
and Their Application to Drug Discovery.

Yasuda K(1), Nishikawa M(2), Mano H(1), Takano M(3), Kittaka A(3), Ikushiro 
S(2), Sakaki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Toyama 
Prefectural University, 5180 Kurokawa, Imizu 939-0398, Toyama, Japan.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Engineering, Toyama Prefectural 
University, 5180 Kurokawa, Imizu 939-0398, Toyama, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Teikyo University, Tokyo 173-8605, Japan.

We have developed an in vitro system to easily examine the affinity for vitamin 
D receptor (VDR) and CYP24A1-mediated metabolism as two methods of assessing 
vitamin D derivatives. Vitamin D derivatives with high VDR affinity and 
resistance to CYP24A1-mediated metabolism could be good therapeutic agents. This 
system can effectively select vitamin D derivatives with these useful 
properties. We have also developed an in vivo system including a 
Cyp27b1-gene-deficient rat (a type I rickets model), a Vdr-gene-deficient rat (a 
type II rickets model), and a rat with a mutant Vdr (R270L) (another type II 
rickets model) using a genome editing method. For Cyp27b1-gene-deficient and Vdr 
mutant (R270L) rats, amelioration of rickets symptoms can be used as an index of 
the efficacy of vitamin D derivatives. Vdr-gene-deficient rats can be used to 
assess the activities of vitamin D derivatives specialized for actions not 
mediated by VDR. One of our original vitamin D derivatives, which displays high 
affinity VDR binding and resistance to CYP24A1-dependent metabolism, has shown 
good therapeutic effects in Vdr (R270L) rats, although further analysis is 
needed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111839
PMCID: PMC8584323
PMID: 34769269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.