1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 5;22(21):11987. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111987.

Effect of Central Administration of Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) on 
Behavior and Brain Monoamine Metabolism in New Recombinant Mouse Lines Differing 
by 5-HT(1A) Receptor Functionality.

Bazovkina D(1), Naumenko V(1), Bazhenova E(1), Kondaurova E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Division of the Russian Academy 
of Science, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia.

Experiments were carried out on recombinant B6.CBA-D13Mit76C (B6-M76C) and 
B6.CBA-D13Mit76B (B6-M76B) mouse lines created by transferring a 102.73-118.83 
Mbp fragment of chromosome 13, containing the 5-HT1A receptor gene, from CBA or 
C57BL/6 strains to a C57BL/6 genetic background, correspondingly. We have 
recently shown different levels of 5-HT1A receptor functionality in these mouse 
lines. The administration of BDNF (300 ng/mouse, i.c.v.) increased the levels of 
exploratory activity and intermale aggression only in B6-M76B mice, without 
affecting depressive-like behavior in both lines. In B6-M76B mice the behavioral 
alterations were accompanied by a decrease in the 5-HT2A receptor functional 
activity and the augmentation of levels of serotonin and its main metabolite, 
5-HIAA (5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid), in the midbrain. Moreover, the levels of 
dopamine and its main metabolites, HVA (homovanillic acid) and DOPAC 
(3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid), were also elevated in the striatum of B6-M76B 
mice after BDNF treatment. In B6-M76C mice, central BDNF administration led only 
to a reduction in the functional activity of the 5-HT1A receptor and a rise in 
DOPAC levels in the midbrain. The obtained data suggest the importance of the 
102.73-118.83 Mbp fragment of mouse chromosome 13, which contains the 5-HT1A 
receptor gene, for BDNF-induced alterations in behavior and the brain monoamine 
system.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111987
PMCID: PMC8584822
PMID: 34769417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interest.