1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 26;22(21):11522. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111522.

Subnormal GM1 in PBMCs: Promise for Early Diagnosis of Parkinson's Disease?

Alselehdar SK(1), Chakraborty M(1), Chowdhury S(1), Alcalay RN(2), Surface M(2), 
Ledeen R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology, and Neuroscience, Rutgers, The State 
University of NJ, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, 
NY 10032, USA.

The fact that Parkinson's disease (PD) pathologies are well advanced in most PD 
patients by the time of clinical elucidation attests to the importance of early 
diagnosis. Our attempt to achieve this has capitalized on our previous finding 
that GM1 ganglioside is expressed at subnormal levels in virtually all tissues 
of sporadic PD (sPD) patients including blood cells. GM1 is present in most 
vertebrate cells, is especially abundant in neurons where it was shown essential 
for their effective functioning and long term viability. We have utilized 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) which, despite their low GM1, we 
found to be significantly lower in sPD patients compared to age-matched healthy 
controls. To quantify GM1 (and GD1a) we used high performance thin-layer 
chromatography combined with cholera toxin B linked to horseradish peroxidase, 
followed by densitometric quantification. GM1 was also deficient in PBMCs from 
PD patients with mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene (PD-GBA), apparently 
even lower than in sPD. Reasons are given why we believe these results obtained 
with patients manifesting fully developed PD will apply as well to PD patients 
in preclinical stages-a topic for future study. We also suggest that these 
findings point to a potential disease altering therapy for PD once the early 
diagnosis is established.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111522
PMCID: PMC8583888
PMID: 34768952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.