1. Ecol Evol. 2021 Oct 9;11(21):15085-15097. doi: 10.1002/ece3.8191. eCollection 
2021 Nov.

Competition dynamics in long-term propagations of Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
strain communities.

Durão P(1), Amicone M(1), Perfeito L(1)(2), Gordo I(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência Oeiras Portugal.
(2)Present address: Laboratório de Instrumentação e Física Experimental de 
Partículas Lisboa Portugal.

Experimental evolution studies with microorganisms such as bacteria and yeast 
have been an increasingly important and powerful tool to draw long-term 
inferences of how microbes interact. However, while several strains of the same 
species often exist in natural environments, many ecology and evolution studies 
in microbes are typically performed with isogenic populations of bacteria or 
yeast. In the present study, we firstly perform a genotypic and phenotypic 
characterization of two laboratory and eight natural strains of the yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. We then propagated, in a rich resource environment, 
yeast communities of 2, 3, 4, and 5 strains for hundreds of generations and 
asked which fitness-related phenotypes-maximum growth rate or relative 
competitive fitness-would better predict the outcome of a focal strain during 
the propagations. While the strain's growth rates would wrongly predict 
long-term coexistence, pairwise competitive fitness with a focal strain 
qualitatively predicted the success or extinction of the focal strain by a 
simple multigenotype population genetics model, given the initial community 
composition. Interestingly, we have also measured the competitive fitness of the 
ancestral and evolved communities by the end of the experiment 
(≈370 generations) and observed frequent maladaptation to the abiotic 
environment in communities with more than three members. Overall, our results 
aid establishing pairwise competitive fitness as good qualitative measurement of 
long-term community composition but also reveal a complex adaptive scenario when 
trying to predict the evolutionary outcome of those communities.

© 2021 The Authors. Ecology and Evolution published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.8191
PMCID: PMC8571606
PMID: 34765162

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.