1. Dent Res J (Isfahan). 2021 Sep 25;18:72. doi: 10.4103/1735-3327.326645. 
eCollection 2021.

Effect of total-etch and self-etch adhesives on the bond strength of composite 
to glass-ionomer cement/resin-modified glass-ionomer cement in the sandwich 
technique - A systematic review.

Manihani AKDS(1), Mulay S(1), Beri L(1), Shetty R(1), Gulati S(1), Dalsania 
R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics, Dr. D. Y. Patil Dental 
College, Dr. D. Y. Patil Vidyapeeth, Pune, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Department of Pediatric and Preventive Dentistry, Pacific Dental College, 
Udaipur, Rajasthan, India.

The success of the sandwich technique depends on the bond strength of composite 
to glass-ionomer cement (GIC)/resin-modified glass-ionomer cement (RMGIC). 
Currently used adhesives employ the total-etch and the self-etch techniques. The 
total-etch system is technique sensitive, whereas the self-etch system is 
popular for its ease of use. The aim of this systematic review is to compare the 
effect of total-etch and self-etch adhesives (SEAs) on the bond strength of 
composite to GIC/(RMGIC) in the sandwich technique. A literature search was 
conducted using electronic databases (PubMed, Web of Science, Ebscohost, and 
Scopus) limiting the year of publications from January 1, 2000, to September 30, 
2018, to identify the relevant studies. All the cross-references of the selected 
studies were also screened. In vitro studies on extracted human teeth were 
selected. A total of 10 articles were included in this review. A conclusion was 
drawn that SEAs when used in the sandwich technique resulted in greater bond 
strength in comparison to total-etch adhesives. Moreover, increased bond 
strength was achieved when the primer was employed on unset GIC as compared to 
set GIC. Furthermore, the application of SEAs over uncured RMGIC (co-curing 
technique) resulted in better bond strengths as compared to their application 
over cured RMGIC.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Dental Research Journal.

DOI: 10.4103/1735-3327.326645
PMCID: PMC8543098
PMID: 34760063

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this manuscript declare that they 
have no conflicts of interest, real or perceived or financial or nonfinancial in 
this article.