1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 3;22(21):11931. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111931.

Alzheimer's Disease and Diabetes Mellitus in Comparison: The Therapeutic 
Efficacy of the Vanadium Compound.

He Z(1), You G(1), Liu Q(1)(2), Li N(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 
518055, China.
(2)Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of Brain Science-Shenzhen Fundamental Research 
Institutions, Shenzhen 518055, China.
(3)Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an intractable neurodegenerative disease that leads 
to dementia, primarily in elderly people. The neurotoxicity of amyloid-beta (Aβ) 
and tau protein has been demonstrated over the last two decades. In line with 
these findings, several etiological hypotheses of AD have been proposed, 
including the amyloid cascade hypothesis, the oxidative stress hypothesis, the 
inflammatory hypothesis, the cholinergic hypothesis, et al. In the meantime, 
great efforts had been made in developing effective drugs for AD. However, the 
clinical efficacy of the drugs that were approved by the US Food and Drug 
Association (FDA) to date were determined only mild/moderate. We recently 
adopted a vanadium compound bis(ethylmaltolato)-oxidovanadium (IV) (BEOV), which 
was originally used for curing diabetes mellitus (DM), to treat AD in a mouse 
model. It was shown that BEOV effectively reduced the Aβ level, ameliorated the 
inflammation in brains of the AD mice, and improved the spatial learning and 
memory activities of the AD mice. These finding encouraged us to further examine 
the mechanisms underlying the therapeutic effects of BEOV in AD. In this review, 
we summarized the achievement of vanadium compounds in medical studies and 
investigated the prospect of BEOV in AD and DM treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111931
PMCID: PMC8584792
PMID: 34769364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.