1. Neurotherapeutics. 2021 Oct;18(4):2484-2503. doi: 10.1007/s13311-021-01151-1. 
Epub 2021 Nov 11.

E2F4-Based Gene Therapy Mitigates the Phenotype of the Alzheimer's Disease Mouse 
Model 5xFAD.

López-Sánchez N(1), Garrido-García A(1), Ramón-Landreau M(1), Cano-Daganzo V(1), 
Frade JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Neurobiology, Cajal 
Institute, 28002, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Neurobiology, Cajal 
Institute, 28002, Madrid, Spain. frade@cajal.csic.es.

After decades of unfruitful work, no effective therapies are available for 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), likely due to its complex etiology that requires a 
multifactorial therapeutic approach. We have recently shown using transgenic 
mice that E2 factor 4 (E2F4), a transcription factor that regulates cell 
quiescence and tissue homeostasis, and controls gene networks affected in AD, 
represents a good candidate for a multifactorial targeting of AD. Here we show 
that the expression of a dominant negative form of human E2F4 (hE2F4DN), unable 
to become phosphorylated in a Thr-conserved motif known to modulate E2F4 
activity, is an effective and safe AD multifactorial therapeutic agent. Neuronal 
expression of hE2F4DN in homozygous 5xFAD (h5xFAD) mice after systemic 
administration of an AAV.PHP.B-hSyn1.hE2F4DN vector reduced the production and 
accumulation of Aβ in the hippocampus, attenuated reactive astrocytosis and 
microgliosis, abolished neuronal tetraploidization, and prevented cognitive 
impairment evaluated by Y-maze and Morris water maze, without triggering side 
effects. This treatment also reversed other alterations observed in h5xFAD mice 
such as paw-clasping behavior and body weight loss. Our results indicate that 
E2F4DN-based gene therapy is a promising therapeutic approach against AD.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-021-01151-1
PMCID: PMC8804140
PMID: 34766258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]