1. Dis Markers. 2021 Nov 5;2021:9916881. doi: 10.1155/2021/9916881. eCollection 
2021.

Construction of the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA Regulatory Network of an Abdominal Aortic 
Aneurysm to Explore Its Potential Pathogenesis.

Zhang H(1), Bian C(2), Tu S(1), Yin F(1), Guo P(1), Zhang J(3), Wu Y(1), Yin 
Y(1), Guo J(1), Han Y(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian, China.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, The General Hospital of the PLA Rocket 
Force, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department for Vascular Surgery, First Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China.

BACKGROUND: Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a progressive cardiovascular 
disease, which is a permanent and localized dilatation of the abdominal aorta 
with potentially fatal consequence of aortic rupture. Dysregulation of circRNAs 
is correlated with the development of various pathological events in 
cardiovascular diseases. However, the function of circRNAs in abdominal aortic 
aneurysm (AAA) is unknown and remains to be explored. This study is aimed at 
determining the regulatory mechanisms of circRNAs in AAAs. This study was aimed 
at exploring the underlying molecular mechanisms of abdominal aortic aneurysms 
based on the competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) regulatory hypothesis of circRNA, 
miRNA, and mRNA.
METHODS: The expression profiles of circRNAs (GSE144431), miRNAs (GSE62179), and 
mRNAs (GSE7084, GSE57691, and GSE47472) in human tissue sample from the aneurysm 
group and normal group were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus database, 
respectively. The circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network was constructed by using Cytoscape 
3.7.2 software; then, the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was 
constructed by using the STRING database, and the hub genes were identified by 
using the cytoHubba plug-in. The circRNA-miRNA-hub gene regulatory subnetwork 
was formed to understand the regulatory axis of hub genes in AAAs.
RESULTS: The present study identified 40 differentially expressed circRNAs 
(DECs) in the GSE144431, 90 differentially expressed miRNAs (DEmiRs) in the 
GSE62179, and 168 differentially expressed mRNAs (DEGs) with the same direction 
regulation (130 downregulated and 38 upregulated) in the GSE7084, GSE57691, and 
GSE47472 datasets identified regarding AAAs. The miRNA response elements (MREs) 
of three DECs were then predicted. Four overlapping miRNAs were obtained by 
intersecting the predicted miRNA and DEmiRs. Then, 17 overlapping mRNAs were 
obtained by intersecting the predicted target mRNAs of 4 miRNAs with 168 DEGs. 
Furthermore, the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network was constructed through 3 circRNAs, 
4 miRNAs, and 17 mRNAs, and three hub genes (SOD2, CCR7, and PGRMC1) were 
identified. Simultaneously, functional enrichment and pathway analysis were 
performed within genes in the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network. Three of them (SOD2, 
CCR7, and PGRMC1) were suggested to be crucial based on functional enrichment, 
protein-protein interaction, and ceRNA network analysis. Furthermore, the 
expression of SOD2 and CCR7 may be regulated by 
hsa_circ_0011449/hsa_circ_0081968/hsa-let-7f-5p; the expression of PGRMC1 may be 
regulated by hsa_circ_0011449/hsa_circ_0081968-hsa-let-7f-5p/hsa-let-7e-5p.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, the ceRNA interaction axis we identified may be an 
important target for the treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysms. This study 
provided further understanding of the potential pathogenesis from the 
perspective of the circRNA-related competitive endogenous RNA network in AAAs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hao Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9916881
PMCID: PMC8589483
PMID: 34777635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.