1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2021 Oct 29;14:739016. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.739016. 
eCollection 2021.

Extracellular Vesicles in Serum and Central Nervous System Tissues Contain 
microRNA Signatures in Sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.

Lo TW(1), Figueroa-Romero C(2), Hur J(3), Pacut C(2), Stoll E(1), Spring C(1), 
Lewis R(2), Nair A(2), Goutman SA(2), Sakowski SA(2), Nagrath S(1)(4)(5), 
Feldman EL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
United States.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United 
States.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND, United States.
(4)Binterface Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States.
(5)Rogel Cancer Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a terminalneurodegenerative disease. 
Clinical and molecular observations suggest that ALS pathology originates at a 
single site and spreads in an organized and prion-like manner, possibly driven 
by extracellular vesicles. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) transfer cargo molecules 
associated with ALS pathogenesis, such as misfolded and aggregated proteins and 
dysregulated microRNAs (miRNAs). However, it is poorly understood whether 
altered levels of circulating extracellular vesicles or their cargo components 
reflect pathological signatures of the disease. In this study, we used 
immuno-affinity-based microfluidic technology, electron microscopy, and 
NanoString miRNA profiling to isolate and characterize extracellular vesicles 
and their miRNA cargo from frontal cortex, spinal cord, and serum of sporadic 
ALS (n = 15) and healthy control (n = 16) participants. We found larger 
extracellular vesicles in ALS spinal cord versus controls and smaller sized 
vesicles in ALS serum. However, there were no changes in the number of 
extracellular vesicles between cases and controls across any tissues. 
Characterization of extracellular vesicle-derived miRNA cargo in ALS compared to 
controls identified significantly altered miRNA levels in all tissues; miRNAs 
were reduced in ALS frontal cortex and spinal cord and increased in serum. Two 
miRNAs were dysregulated in all three tissues: miR-342-3p was increased in ALS, 
and miR-1254 was reduced in ALS. Additional miRNAs overlapping across two 
tissues included miR-587, miR-298, miR-4443, and miR-450a-2-3p. Predicted 
targets and pathways associated with the dysregulated miRNAs across the ALS 
tissues were associated with common biological pathways altered in 
neurodegeneration, including axon guidance and long-term potentiation. A 
predicted target of one identified miRNA (N-deacetylase and N-sulfotransferase 
4; NDST4) was likewise dysregulated in an in vitro model of ALS, verifying 
potential biological relevance. Together, these findings demonstrate that 
circulating extracellular vesicle miRNA cargo mirror those of the central 
nervous system disease state in ALS, and thereby offer insight into possible 
pathogenic factors and diagnostic opportunities.

Copyright Â© 2021 Lo, Figueroa-Romero, Hur, Pacut, Stoll, Spring, Lewis, Nair, 
Goutman, Sakowski, Nagrath and Feldman.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.739016
PMCID: PMC8586523
PMID: 34776863

Conflict of interest statement: SG sat on an advisory board for Biogen and IFT 
Pharma and serves on a Data Safety Monitoring Board. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.