1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Nov 3;13(21):5526. doi: 10.3390/cancers13215526.

Proteomic Profiling Differentiates Lymphoma Patients with and without Concurrent 
Myeloproliferative Neoplasia.

Holst JM(1)(2), Enemark MB(1)(2), Pedersen MB(1), Lauridsen KL(3), Hybel 
TE(1)(2), Clausen MR(4), Frederiksen H(5), Møller MB(6), Nørgaard P(7), Plesner 
TL(8), Hamilton-Dutoit SJ(2)(3), d'Amore F(1)(2), Honoré B(9), Ludvigsen 
M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Aarhus University Hospital, 8200 Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Pathology, Aarhus University Hospital, 8200 Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Department of Hematology, Vejle Hospital, 7100 Vejle, Denmark.
(5)Department of Hematology, Odense University Hospital, 5000 Odense, Denmark.
(6)Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, 5000 Odense, Denmark.
(7)Department of Pathology, Herlev Hospital, 2730 Herlev, Denmark.
(8)Department of Pathology, Rigshospitalet, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark.

Myeloproliferative neoplasia (MPN) and lymphoma are regarded as distinct 
diseases with different pathogeneses. However, patients that are diagnosed with 
both malignancies occur more frequently in the population than expected. This 
has led to the hypothesis that the two malignancies may, in some cases, be 
pathogenetically related. Using a mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach, we 
show that pre-treatment lymphoma samples from patients with both MPN and 
lymphoma, either angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (MPN-AITL) or diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma (MPN-DLBCL), show differences in protein expression compared 
with reference AITL or DLBCL samples from patients without MPN. A distinct 
clustering of samples from patients with and without MPN was evident for both 
AITL and DLBCL. Regarding MPN-AITL, a pathway analysis revealed disturbances of 
cellular respiration as well as oxidative metabolism, and an immunohistochemical 
evaluation further demonstrated the differential expression of citrate synthase 
and DNAJA2 protein (p = 0.007 and p = 0.015). Interestingly, IDH2 protein also 
showed differential expression in the MPN-AITL patients, which contributes to 
the growing evidence of this protein's role in both myeloid neoplasia and AITL. 
In MPN-DLBCL, the disturbed pathways included a significant downregulation of 
protein synthesis as well as a perturbation of signal transduction. These 
results imply an underlying disturbance of tumor molecular biology, and in turn 
an alternative pathogenesis for tumors in these patients with both myeloid and 
lymphoid malignancies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13215526
PMCID: PMC8583469
PMID: 34771688

Conflict of interest statement: B.H. holds shares from Novo Nordisk A/S and 
Genmab. Novo Nordisk A/S and Genmab A/S had no influence on the study design, 
analyses and reporting of the results. All other authors declare no conflict of 
interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the 
decision to publish the results.