1. Poult Sci. 2022 Jan;101(1):101537. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101537. Epub 2021
Oct  13.

Fiber characteristics and meat quality of different muscular tissues from slow- 
and fast-growing broilers.

Weng K(1), Huo W(1), Li Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Chen G(2), Xu Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Animal Genetic, Breeding and Molecular Design, 
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Animal Genetic, Breeding and Molecular Design, 
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, China; Joint International Research 
Laboratory of Agriculture and Agri-Product Safety, the Ministry of Education of 
China, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Animal Genetic, Breeding and Molecular Design, 
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: 
xuqi@yzu.edu.cn.

Chicken meat is an important source of high-quality animal protein. Its 
consumption continues to grow in both developed and developing countries. Muscle 
fiber characteristics are key determinants of meat quality and quantity. 
Skeletal muscle is a highly plastic tissue that is affected by breed differences 
and muscular tissues. However, studies regarding the effects of different breeds 
and muscular tissues on the fibers and meat quality traits in broilers are 
lacking. In this study, Ross 308 chickens (fast-growing [FG] broilers) and 
Xueshan chickens (slow-growing [SG] broilers) were selected, and their fiber and 
meat quality traits were characterized. The results showed that the breast 
muscle primarily comprised glycolytic fibers, whereas the leg muscle comprised 
glycolytic and a few oxidative fibers, regardless of the breed. The highest 
percentage of oxidative fibers (26.51%) appeared in the soleus muscle (SOL) of 
SG broilers. In addition, higher shear force, lower pressing loss, and thicker 
muscle fibers with less extracellular space were observed for SG meat than for 
FG meat. When comparing the different muscular tissues, a higher oxidative fiber 
percentage, ultimate pH, redness, and intramuscular fat (IMF) content were 
detected in the leg muscle than in the breast muscle in the 2 breeds. In 
summary, these data indicated that SG broilers had thicker muscle fibers than 
the FG broilers and that the leg muscle had more oxidative fibers than the 
breast muscle. Thicker fibers may contribute to increased firmness and more 
oxidative fibers lead to higher redness value and IMF content.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101537
PMCID: PMC8591497
PMID: 34788716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]