1. Behav Brain Res. 2022 Feb 10;418:113675. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2021.113675. Epub 
2021 Nov 16.

Methylation of the serotonin transporter gene moderates the depressive 
subjective effect of cocaine.

Longtain RB(1), Graham DP(2), Harding MJ(1), De La Garza Ii R(3), Nielsen DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Menninger Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of 
Medicine and Michael E. DeBakey V.A. Medical Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Menninger Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of 
Medicine and Michael E. DeBakey V.A. Medical Center, Houston, TX, USA; South 
Central Mental Illness, Research, Education and Clinical Center (MIRECC), 
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: david.graham@va.gov.
(3)University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Genetic variation in the serotonin transporter (SLC6A4) has been shown to 
moderate the acute subjective effects of cocaine. Methylation of the SLC6A4 gene 
is associated with decreased transcription of the serotonin transporter, leading 
to increased serotonin in the synapse. In this study, methylation of the SLC6A4 
gene was investigated in the moderation of the subjective effects of cocaine. 
Non-treatment-seeking cocaine-dependent individuals (N = 53) were intravenously 
administered cocaine (40 mg) and saline in a randomized order. The subjective 
effects of cocaine were self-reported using a visual analog scale starting prior 
to the administration of cocaine (-15 min) or saline and up to 20 min after 
infusion. Participants were evaluated for methylation of the SLC6A4 promoter 
region and 5-HTTLPR genotype. A series of ANCOVAs for SLC6A4 methylation 
(high/low) were run for each of ten subjective and three cardiovascular effects 
controlling for age, sex [utilizing the sex-determining region Y protein (SRY)], 
and population structure (determined from ancestry informative markers and 
STRUCTURE software). Participants with SLC6A4 hypermethylation reported greater 
subjective response to cocaine for 'depressed' relative to participants with 
SLC6A4 hypomethylation (experiment-wise p = 0.002). These findings indicate that 
SLC6A4 methylation moderates the 'depressed' subjective effect of cocaine in 
non-treatment-seeking cocaine-dependent participants.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2021.113675
PMCID: PMC8671356
PMID: 34798166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None.