1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2021 Nov 2;14:757278. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.757278. 
eCollection 2021.

SUMOylation of the Kv4.2 Ternary Complex Increases Surface Expression and 
Current Amplitude by Reducing Internalization in HEK 293 Cells.

Welch MA(1), Jansen LR(1), Baro DJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, United States.
(2)Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, United States.

Kv4 α-subunits exist as ternary complexes (TC) with potassium channel 
interacting proteins (KChIP) and dipeptidyl peptidase-like proteins (DPLP); 
multiple ancillary proteins also interact with the α-subunits throughout the 
channel's lifetime. Dynamic regulation of Kv4.2 protein interactions adapts the 
transient potassium current, IA, mediated by Kv4 α-subunits. Small 
ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) is an 11 kD peptide post-translationally added to 
lysine (K) residues to regulate protein-protein interactions. We previously 
demonstrated that when expressed in human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells, Kv4.2 
can be SUMOylated at two K residues, K437 and K579. SUMOylation at K437 
increased surface expression of electrically silent channels while SUMOylation 
at K579 reduced IA maximal conductance (Gmax) without altering surface 
expression. KChIP and DPLP subunits are known to modify the pattern of Kv4.2 
post-translational decorations and/or their effects. In this study, 
co-expressing Kv4.2 with KChIP2a and DPP10c altered the effects of enhanced 
Kv4.2 SUMOylation. First, the effect of enhanced SUMOylation was the same for a 
TC containing either the wild-type Kv4.2 or the mutant K437R Kv4.2, suggesting 
that either the experimental manipulation no longer enhanced K437 SUMOylation or 
K437 SUMOylation no longer influenced Kv4.2 surface expression. Second, instead 
of decreasing IA Gmax, enhanced SUMOylation at K579 now produced a significant 
∼37-70% increase in IA maximum conductance (Gmax) and a significant ∼30-50% 
increase in Kv4.2g surface expression that was accompanied by a 65% reduction in 
TC internalization. Blocking clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) in HEK cells 
expressing the Kv4.2 TC mimicked and occluded the effect of SUMO on IA Gmax; 
however, the amount of Kv4.2 associated with the major adaptor for constitutive 
CME, adaptor protein 2 (AP2), was not SUMO dependent. Thus, SUMOylation reduced 
Kv4.2 internalization by acting downstream of Kv4.2 recruitment into 
clathrin-coated pits. In sum, the two major findings of this study are: 
SUMOylation of Kv4.2 at K579 regulates TC internalization most likely by 
promoting channel recycling. Additionally, there is a reciprocity between Kv4.2 
SUMOylation and the Kv4.2 interactome such that SUMOylation regulates the 
interactome and the interactome influences the pattern and effect of 
SUMOylation.

Copyright © 2021 Welch, Jansen and Baro.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.757278
PMCID: PMC8593141
PMID: 34795560

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.