1. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2021 Dec;81(8):670-678. doi: 
10.1080/00365513.2021.2004218. Epub 2021 Nov 18.

Hemoglobinopathy gone astray-three novel forms of α-thalassemia in Norwegian 
patients characterized by quantitative real-time PCR and DNA sequencing.

Grimholt RM(1)(2)(3), Fjeld B(1)(2), Klingenberg O(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevaal, Oslo, 
Norway.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Life Sciences and Health, Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, 
Norway.

α-thalassemia is one of the most common monogenic diseases worldwide and is 
caused by reduced or absent synthesis of α-globin chains, most commonly due to 
deletions of one or more of the α-globin genes. α-thalassemia occurs with high 
frequency in tropical and subtropical regions of the world and are very rarely 
found in the indigenous Scandinavian population. Here, we describe four rare 
forms of α-thalassemia out of which three are novel, found in together 20 
patients of Norwegian origin. The study patients were diagnosed during routine 
hemoglobinopathy evaluation carried out at the Department of Medical 
Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Norway. The patients were selected for 
their thalassemic phenotype, despite Norway as country of origin. All samples 
went through standard hemoglobinopathy evaluation. DNA sequencing and copy 
number variation (CNV) analysis using quantitative real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (qPCR) was applied to detect sequence variants and uncommon deletions 
in the α-globin gene cluster, respectively. Deletion breakpoints were 
characterized using gap-PCR and DNA sequencing. DNA sequencing revealed a single 
nucleotide deletion in exon 3 of the HBA2 gene (NM_000517.4(HBA2):c.345del) and 
a novel deletion of 20 nucleotides in exon 2 of the HBA2 gene 
(NM_000517.4(HBA2):c.142_161del). qPCR CNV analysis detected two novel large 
deletions in the α-globin gene cluster, -(NOR) deletion covering both α-globin 
genes and (αα)Aurora Borealis affecting the regulatory region, leaving the 
downstream α-globin genes intact. Even though inherited globin gene disorders 
are extremely rare in indigenous Scandinavians, the possibility of a carrier 
state should not be ignored.

DOI: 10.1080/00365513.2021.2004218
PMID: 34791962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]