1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Dec 7;10(23):e022560. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.022560.
Epub  2021 Nov 19.

Causal Effect of Obstructive Sleep Apnea on Atrial Fibrillation: A Mendelian 
Randomization Study.

Chen W(1)(2), Cai X(3), Yan H(1)(2), Pan Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology Beijing Tiantan HospitalCapital Medical University 
Beijing China.
(2)China National Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases Beijing 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology Lishui Hospital Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine Lishui China.

Background Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) has shown to be associated with an 
increased risk of atrial fibrillation in observational studies. Whether this 
association reflect causal effect is still unclear. The aim of this study was to 
evaluate the causal effect of OSA on atrial fibrillation. Methods and Results We 
used a 2-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) method to evaluate the causal 
effect of OSA on atrial fibrillation. Summary data on genetic variant-OSA 
association were obtained from a recently published genome-wide association 
studies with up to 217 955 individuals and data on variant-atrial fibrillation 
association from another genome-wide association study with up to 1 030 836 
individuals. Effect estimates were evaluated using inverse-variance weighted 
method. Other MR analyses, including penalized inverse-variance weighted, 
penalized robust inverse-variance weighted, MR-Egger, simple median, weighted 
median, weighted mode-based estimate and Mendelian Randomization Pleiotropy 
Residual Sum and Outlier methods were performed in sensitivity analyses. The MR 
analyses in both the fixed-effect and random-effect inverse-variance weighted 
models showed that genetically predicted OSA was associated with an increased 
risk of atrial fibrillation (odds ratio [OR], 1.21; 95% CI, 1.12-1.31, P<0.001; 
OR, 1.21; 95% CI, 1.11-1.32, P<0.001) using 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms as 
the instruments. MR-Egger indicated no evidence of genetic pleiotropy 
(intercept, -0.014; 95% CI, -0.033 to 0.005, P=0.14). Results were robust using 
other MR methods in sensitivity analyses. Conclusions This MR analysis found 
that genetically predicted OSA had causal effect on an increased risk of atrial 
fibrillation.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.121.022560
PMCID: PMC9075405
PMID: 34796736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]