1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 4;12:735530. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.735530. 
eCollection 2021.

Paeoniflorin Suppresses TBHP-Induced Oxidative Stress and Apoptosis in Human 
Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells via the Nrf2/HO-1 Signaling Pathway and 
Improves Skin Flap Survival.

Jiang J(1)(2)(3), Dong C(1)(2)(3), Zhai L(4), Lou J(1)(2)(3), Jin J(1)(2)(3), 
Cheng S(1)(2)(3), Chen Z(1)(2)(3), Guo X(1)(2), Lin D(1)(2), Ding J(1)(2), Gao 
W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying 
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Orthopaedics, Wenzhou, China.
(3)The Second Clinical Medical College of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 
China.
(4)Department of Medical Cosmetology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Medical College, Xi'an, China.

Random-pattern skin flap is a vital technique frequently applied in 
reconstruction surgeries for its convenience and effectiveness in solving skin 
defects. However, ischemic necrosis, especially in the distal areas of the flap, 
still needs extra attention after surgery. Earlier evidence has suggested that 
paeoniflorin (PF) could stimulate angiogenesis and suppress ischemic 
cardiovascular disease. However, few studies have focused on the role of PF in 
flap survival. In this study, we have demonstrated that the human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells (HUVECs) treated with PF can alleviate tert-butyl 
hydroperoxide (TBHP)-stimulated cellular dysfunction and apoptosis. To better 
evaluate, HUVECs' physiology, cell tube formation, migration, and adhesion were 
assessed. Mechanistically, PF protects HUVECs against apoptosis via stimulating 
the nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2)/heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) 
pathway. PF also downregulates mitochondrial ROS production to reduce excessive 
intracellular ROS production induced by TBHP and restore TBHP-induced 
mitochondrial depolarization. As a result, silencing Nrf2 partially abolishes 
the protective effect of PF exposure on HUVECs. In in vivo experiments, the oral 
administration of PF was shown to have enhanced the vascularization of 
regenerated tissues and promote flap survival. However, the PF-mediated 
protection was partially lost after co-treatment with ML385, a selective Nrf2 
inhibitor, suggesting that PF is a crucial modulator regulating the Nrf2/HO-1 
signaling pathway. In summary, our data have provided a new insight into PF as a 
potential therapy for enhancing random-pattern flap viability.

Copyright Â© 2021 Jiang, Dong, Zhai, Lou, Jin, Cheng, Chen, Guo, Lin, Ding and 
Gao.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.735530
PMCID: PMC8600365
PMID: 34803685

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.