1. Ann Transl Med. 2021 Oct;9(19):1508. doi: 10.21037/atm-21-4625.

Treatment of MGMT promoter unmethylated glioblastoma with PD-1 inhibitor 
combined with anti-angiogenesis and epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor: a case report.

Wang Z(#)(1), Du F(#)(1), Ren Y(1), Jiang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Tianjin Huanhu Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary central nervous system (CNS) 
malignancy in adults and is associated with poor prognosis, especially even 
worse in those with unmethylated MGMT promoter. Currently, maximal safe 
resection combined with temozolomide (TMZ) concurrent chemoradiotherapy and TMZ 
adjuvant chemotherapy has been considered the standard treatment for newly 
diagnosed GBM. The efficacy of drugs other than TMZ is currently undefined. With 
increasing understanding of the biological characteristics of GBM, more and more 
studies are being conducted on drug targets, such as specific signaling pathways 
and microenvironment. Herein, we report the case of a GBM patient with 
unmethylated MGMT promoter who was intolerant to TMZ, and underwent treatment 
with the combination of carelizumab, anlotinib, and oxitinib during radiotherapy 
according to results of whole-exome sequencing (WES) and the patient's 
condition. The progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) for 
this case were respectively nearly 11 and 18 months, significantly exceeding the 
historical data and the tolerance of the treatment for this case without sever 
adverse effects was favorable. Our case provides clinical evidence supporting 
the efficacy of the above three drugs and radiotherapy, which may translate into 
novel individualized treatment strategies for GBM patients who are intolerant to 
TMZ.

2021 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-21-4625
PMCID: PMC8573431
PMID: 34805370

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-21-4625). The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.