1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 8;12:760338. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.760338. 
eCollection 2021.

The Potential Protective Effect of Iridoid Glycosides Isolated From Osmanthus 
fragrans Seeds Against the Development of Immune Liver Injury in Mice.

Zhang Y(1), Xiao F(1), Zhou Q(1), Diao T(2), Zhang M(1), Liu D(1), Wang Z(1), 
Huang T(1), Wu Y(1), Bai Y(1), Min Q(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmcy, Hubei University of Science and Technology, Xianning, 
China.
(2)School of Biological and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Xinyang Agricultural and 
Forestry University, Xinyang, China.

Objective: The iridoid glycosides were extracted and separated from Osmanthus 
fragrans seeds, and the potential protective effect of Osmanthus fragrans seed 
extract on concanavalin A-induced immune liver injury in mice was studied. 
Methods: Osmanthus fragrans seeds were extracted by 95% ethanol reflux. Then, 
the iridoid glycosides were enriched by extraction refined through petroleum 
ether (60°C-90°C), ethyl acetate, and water-saturated n-butanol in sequence, so 
as to purify the n-butanol part (Osmanthus fragrans seed's n-butanol extraction, 
OFSN) by macroporous resin. Specnuezhenide and Nuezhenoside G13 were used as the 
reference substances to determine the concentration of iridoid glycosides by 
HPLC. On this basis, a mouse immune liver injury model was established by tail 
intravenous concanavalin A (20 mg/kg); the contents of serum ALT, AST, IFN-γ, 
and TNF-α and the contents of liver tissue MDA and SOD were determined; the 
pathological changes of the liver by HE staining were observed; and the 
expression levels of p38MAPK and p-p38mapk in liver tissue were detected by WB. 
Results: The linearity, precision, repeatability, recovery, and stability of 
HPLC all met the requirements by validating with the methodology. The contents 
of Specnuezhenide and Nuezhenoside G13 in the n-butanol extracts were 39.20% and 
39.88%, respectively. Actually, their contents can reach up to 82.56% and 87.9% 
after being purified by macroporous resin. The results of animal experiments 
show that OFSN could significantly reduce the liver and spleen index, reduce the 
ALT and AST contents in plasma and the MDA content in liver tissue, and then 
increase the SOD content. Besides, OFSN could also reduce the plasma IFN-γ and 
TNF-α levels. The HE staining result indicates that the pathological changes in 
the liver tissues of mice treated with OFSN are alleviated to different degrees 
while the WB result suggests that OFSN could significantly inhibit the 
expression of p-p38mapk. Conclusion: Osmanthus fragrans seeds are rich in 
iridoid glycosides, which has a good protective effect on mouse immune liver 
injury caused by concanavalin A. The mechanism may be related to inhibiting the 
phosphorylation of p38MAPK, inhibiting the release of inflammatory mediators, 
improving the antioxidant capacity of liver cells, and weakening the occurrence 
of lipid peroxidation.

Copyright © 2021 Zhang, Xiao, Zhou, Diao, Zhang, Liu, Wang, Huang, Wu, Bai and 
Min.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.760338
PMCID: PMC8606819
PMID: 34819861

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.