1. iScience. 2021 Oct 30;24(11):103376. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103376. 
eCollection 2021 Nov 19.

Central synaptopathy is the most conserved feature of motor circuit pathology 
across spinal muscular atrophy mouse models.

Buettner JM(1), Sime Longang JK(1), Gerstner F(1), Apel KS(1), Blanco-Redondo 
B(2), Sowoidnich L(1), Janzen E(3), Langenhan T(2), Wirth B(3)(4), Simon CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Carl-Ludwig-Institute for Physiology, Leipzig University, Leipzig 04103, 
Germany.
(2)Rudolf Schönheimer Institute of Biochemistry, Division of General 
Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, Leipzig University, Leipzig 04103, Germany.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Institute 
for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Center for Rare Diseases Cologne, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neurodegenerative disease caused by reduced 
survival motor neuron (SMN) protein. Recently, SMN dysfunction has been linked 
to individual aspects of motor circuit pathology in a severe SMA mouse model. To 
determine whether these disease mechanisms are conserved, we directly compared 
the motor circuit pathology of three SMA mouse models. The severe SMNΔ7 model 
exhibits vast motor circuit defects, including degeneration of motor neurons, 
spinal excitatory synapses, and neuromuscular junctions (NMJs). In contrast, the 
Taiwanese model shows very mild motor neuron pathology, but early central 
synaptic loss. In the intermediate Smn 2B/- model, strong pathology of central 
excitatory synapses and NMJs precedes the late onset of p53-dependent motor 
neuron death. These pathological events correlate with SMN-dependent splicing 
dysregulation of specific mRNAs. Our study provides a knowledge base for 
properly tailoring future studies and identifies central excitatory synaptopathy 
as a key feature of motor circuit pathology in SMA.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103376
PMCID: PMC8605199
PMID: 34825141

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.