1. J Immunother Cancer. 2021 Nov;9(11):e003536. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2021-003536.

Low peripheral blood derived neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (dNLR) is associated 
with increased tumor T-cell infiltration and favorable outcomes to first-line 
pembrolizumab in non-small cell lung cancer.

Alessi JV(1), Ricciuti B(1), Alden SL(2), Bertram AA(1), Lin JJ(3), Sakhi M(3), 
Nishino M(4), Vaz VR(1), Lindsay J(5), Turner MM(6), Pfaff K(6), Sharma B(6), 
Felt KD(6), Rodig SJ(7)(8), Gainor JF(3), Awad MM(9).

Author information:
(1)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Knowledge Systems Group, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(6)ImmunoProfile, Brigham & Women's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(8)Center for Immuno-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA mark_awad@dfci.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: An elevated peripheral blood derived neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio 
(dNLR) is a negative prognostic marker for patients with non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) receiving chemotherapy and immune checkpoint inhibitors. Whether 
dNLR is also associated with clinical outcomes to first-line pembrolizumab among 
patients with NSCLC and a programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) Tumor 
Proportion Score (TPS) of ≥50% is uncertain. How dNLR relates to the tumor 
immune microenvironment is also unclear.
METHODS: In two participating academic centers, we retrospectively analyzed the 
dNLR (defined as the absolute neutrophil count/white cell count - absolute 
neutrophil count) prior to initiation of first-line pembrolizumab in patients 
with metastatic NSCLC and a PD-L1 TPS ≥50% and lacking genomic alterations in 
EGFR and ALK. An unbiased recursive partitioning algorithm was used to 
investigate an optimal dNLR cut-off with respect to objective response rate 
(ORR). Multiplexed immunofluorescence for CD8+, FOXP3+, PD-1+, and PD-L1 was 
performed on a separate cohort of NSCLCs to determine the immunophenotype 
associated with dNLR.
RESULTS: A total of 221 patients treated with first-line pembrolizumab were 
included in this study. The optimal dNLR cut-off to differentiate treatment 
responders from non-responders was 2.6. Compared with patients with a dNLR ≥2.6 
(n=97), patients with dNLR <2.6 (n=124) had a significantly higher ORR (52.4% vs 
24.7%, p<0.001), a significantly longer median progression-free survival (mPFS 
10.4 vs 3.4 months, HR 0.48, 95% CI 0.35 to 0.66, p<0.001), and a significantly 
longer median overall survival (mOS 36.6 vs 9.8 months, HR 0.34, 95% CI 0.23 to 
0.49, p<0.001). After adjusting for age, sex, tobacco use, performance status, 
histology, serum albumin level, oncogenic driver status, and PD-L1 distribution 
(50%-89% vs ≥90%), a dNLR <2.6 was confirmed to be an independent predictor of 
longer mPFS (HR 0.47, 95% CI 0.33 to 0.67, p<0.001) and mOS (HR 0.32, 95% CI 
0.21 to 0.49, p<0.001). Among advanced NSCLC samples with a PD-L1 TPS of ≥50%, 
those with a dNLR <2.6 had significantly higher numbers of tumor-associated 
CD8+, FOXP3+, PD-1 +immune cells, and PD-1 +CD8+T cells than those with a dNLR 
≥2.6.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with NSCLC and a PD-L1 TPS ≥50%, a low dNLR has a 
distinct immune tumor microenvironment and more favorable outcomes to first-line 
pembrolizumab.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2021-003536
PMCID: PMC8627393
PMID: 34824161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MMA serves as a consultant 
to Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Genentech, AstraZeneca, Nektar, Maverick, 
Blueprint Medicine, Syndax, Abbvie, Gritstone, ArcherDX, Mirati, NextCure, and 
EMD Serono. Research Funding: Bristol-Myers Squibb, Lilly, Genentech and 
AstraZeneca. JFG has served as a compensated consultant or received honoraria 
from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Genentech, Ariad/Takeda, Loxo, Pfizer, Incyte, 
Novartis, Merck, Agios, Amgen, Jounce, Karyopharm, GlydeBio, Regeneron, Oncorus, 
Helsinn, Jounce, Array, and Clovis Oncology, has an immediate family member who 
is an employee with equity in Ironwood Pharmaceuticals, has received research 
funding from Novartis, Genentech/Roche, and Ariad/Takeda, and institutional 
research support from Tesaro, Moderna, Blueprint, BMS, Jounce, Array, 
Adaptimmune, Novartis, Genentech/Roche, Alexo and Merck. JJL has served as a 
compensated consultant for Genentech, C4 Therapeutics, Blueprint 2 Medicines, 
Nuvalent, Turning Point Therapeutics, and Elevation Oncology; received 
honorarium 3 and travel support from Pfizer; received institutional research 
funds from Hengrui Therapeutics, 4 Turning Point Therapeutics, Neon 
Therapeutics, Relay Therapeutics, Bayer, Elevation 5 Oncology, Roche, and 
Novartis; received CME funding from OncLive, MedStar Health, and 6 Northwell 
Health. MN Consultant to Daiichi Sankyo, AstraZeneca; Research grant from Merck, 
Canon Medical Systems, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo; Honorarium from Roche. MN is 
also supported by R01CA203636 and U01CA209414 (NCI)). JVA, BR, SLA, AAB, MS, 
VRV, JL, MMT, KP, BS, KDF, and SJR: nothing to disclose.