1. Brain Sci. 2021 Oct 26;11(11):1412. doi: 10.3390/brainsci11111412.

Cold-Blooded and on Purpose: A Review of the Biology of Proactive Aggression.

Belfry KD(1), Kolla NJ(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Waypoint Research Institute, Waypoint Centre for Mental Health Care, 
Penetanguishene, ON L9M 1G3, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada.
(3)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH), Toronto, ON M5T 1R8, Canada.
(4)Violence Prevention Neurobiological Research Unit, CAMH, Toronto, ON M5T 1R8, 
Canada.
(5)Waypoint/University of Toronto Research Chair in Forensic Mental Health 
Science, Penetanguishene, ON L9M 1G3, Canada.

Proactive aggression (PA) is a planned and unprovoked form of aggression that is 
most often enacted for personal gain or in anticipation of a reward. Frequently 
described as "cold-blooded" or goal oriented, PA is thought to be associated 
with low autonomic arousal. With this view in mind, we performed a scoping 
review of the biological correlates of PA and identified 74 relevant articles. 
Physiological findings indicated a robust association between PA and reduced 
resting heart rate, and to a lesser extent a relationship between PA and 
decreased heart rate and skin conductance reactivity, perhaps indicating 
dampened sympathetic function. The twin literature identified PA as a heritable 
trait, but little evidence implicates specific genes in the pathogenesis of PA. 
Neuroimaging studies of PA pinpoint impaired amygdala function in the assessment 
and conditioning of aversive stimuli, which may influence the establishment of 
behavioral patterns. Nodes of the default mode network were identified as 
possible neural correlates of PA, suggesting that altered function of this 
network may be involved in the genesis of PA. Given the overlap of PA with 
reactive aggression and the overall behavioral complexity of PA, it is clear 
that multiple endophenotypes of PA exist. This comprehensive review surveys the 
most salient neurobiologically informed research on PA.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci11111412
PMCID: PMC8615983
PMID: 34827411

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.