1. J Mycol Med. 2022 Mar;32(1):101228. doi: 10.1016/j.mycmed.2021.101228. Epub
2021  Nov 18.

Pulmonary mucormycosis in the aftermath of critical COVID-19 in an 
immunocompromised patient: Mind the diagnostic gap.

Crone CG(1), Helweg-Larsen J(2), Steensen M(3), Arendrup MC(4), Helleberg M(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Excellence for Health, Immunity and Infections (CHIP), 
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, Copenhagen 2100, Denmark. Electronic address: 
cornelia.geisler.crone@regionh.dk.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen 2100, Denmark.
(3)Department of Department of Intensive Care, 2100 Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(4)Unit of Mycology, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen 2300, Denmark; 
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen 2100, Denmark; 
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 2100, 
Denmark.
(5)Centre of Excellence for Health, Immunity and Infections (CHIP), 
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, Copenhagen 2100, Denmark; Department of 
Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen 2100, Denmark.

Mucormycosis has recently been recognized as a severe complication of COVID-19 
with high fatality rates. We report a fatal case of COVID-19 associated 
mucormycosis (CAM) in a non-diabetic immunocompromised patient, who was first 
misdiagnosed and treated for COVID-19 associated aspergillosis (CAPA). The risk 
factors and initial clinical presentation of CAPA and CAM are similar, but CAM 
has a more aggressive course and CAPA and CAM are treated differently. Dedicated 
diagnostic workup is essential to ensure early treatment of CAM with surgical 
debridement and targeted antifungal therapy.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mycmed.2021.101228
PMCID: PMC8600800
PMID: 34826672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
CGC and JHL have no conflicts of interest. The author MS has the following 
conflict of interest: Outside the current work, MS has received speaker 
honoraria (personal fees) from Gilead and MSD. The author MCA has the following 
conflict of interest: MCA has, over the past 5 years, received research 
grants/contract work (paid to the SSI) from Amplyx, Basilea, Cidara, F2G, 
Gilead, Novabiotics, Scynexis and T2Biosystems and speaker honoraria (personal 
fees) from Astellas, Gilead, Novartis, MSD, and SEGES. She is the current 
chairman of the EUCAST-AFST. The author MH has the following conflict of 
interest: MH has received travel grants from Gilead and GSK, speaker's 
honorarium from GSK, MSD and Gilead, research grant from Takeda, and has 
participated in advisory boards for GSK, Gilead, MSD, AstraZenica and Sobi.