1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Nov 22;10(11):2542. doi: 10.3390/plants10112542.

Construction of Multiple Guide RNAs in CRISPR/Cas9 Vector Using Stepwise or 
Simultaneous Golden Gate Cloning: Case Study for Targeting the FAD2 and FATB 
Multigene in Soybean.

Kim WN(1), Kim HJ(2), Chung YS(2), Kim HU(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioindustry and Bioresource Engineering, Plant Engineering 
Research Institute, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, Korea.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, College of Natural Resources and Life 
Science, Dong-A University, Busan 49315, Korea.

CRISPR/Cas9 is a commonly used technique in reverse-genetics research to knock 
out a gene of interest. However, when targeting a multigene family or multiple 
genes, it is necessary to construct a vector with multiple single guide RNAs 
(sgRNAs) that can navigate the Cas9 protein to the target site. In this 
protocol, the Golden Gate cloning method was used to generate multiple sgRNAs in 
the Cas9 vector. The vectors used were pHEE401E_UBQ_Bar and pBAtC_tRNA, which 
employ a one-promoter/one-sgRNA and a polycistronic-tRNA-gRNA strategy, 
respectively. Golden Gate cloning was performed with type IIS restriction 
enzymes to generate gRNA polymers for vector inserts. Four sgRNAs containing the 
pHEE401E_UBQ_Bar vector and four to six sgRNAs containing the pBAtC_tRNA vector 
were constructed. In practice, we constructed multiple sgRNAs targeting multiple 
genes of FAD2 and FATB in soybean using this protocol. These three vectors were 
transformed into soybeans using the Agrobacterium-mediated method. Using deep 
sequencing, we confirmed that the T0 generation transgenic soybean was edited at 
various indel ratios in the predicted target regions of the FAD2 and FATB 
multigenes. This protocol is a specific guide that allows researchers to easily 
follow the cloning of multiple sgRNAs into commonly used CRISPR/Cas9 vectors for 
plants.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112542
PMCID: PMC8622832
PMID: 34834905

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.