1. Plants (Basel). 2021 Oct 28;10(11):2330. doi: 10.3390/plants10112330.

Bioactive's Characterization, Biological Activities, and In Silico Studies of 
Red Onion (Allium cepa L.) Skin Extracts.

Stoica F(1), Aprodu I(1), Enachi E(1), Stănciuc N(1), Condurache NN(1), Duță 
DE(2), Bahrim GE(1), Râpeanu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Food Science and Engineering, Dunarea de Jos University of Galati, 
111 Domneasca Street, 800201 Galati, Romania.
(2)National Institute of Research & Development for Food Bioresources-IBA 
Bucharest, 6 Dinu Vintila Street, 021102 Bucharest, Romania.

This study aimed to investigate the thermal stability and biological activities 
of the phytochemicals from the red onion skins extract, which are a rich source 
of anthocyanins. Eight anthocyanins were identified in the extract by 
high-performance liquid chromatography, the most abundant ones being cyanidin 
3-O-laminaribioside and cyanidin 3-O-(6″-malonoyl-laminaribioside). The study 
also involved the assessment of the thermal degradation kinetics of anthocyanins 
and antioxidant activity in the 75-155 °C temperature range. The thermal 
degradation kinetics was described using the first-order kinetics model. In 
terms of thermal stability, increasing the temperature resulted in lower 
half-life values (t1/2) and higher degradation rate constant values (k) for both 
anthocyanins and antioxidant activity. The thermodynamic parameters revealed 
that the phytochemicals' degradation is a non-spontaneous and endothermic 
reaction. Furthermore, the inhibitory effect of the extract was investigated 
against the enzymes affiliated with metabolic syndrome, oxidative stress, and 
inflammatory process diseases. Thus, we also demonstrated that the red onion 
skins extract exerted inhibitory activity on α-glucosidase, α-amylase, lipase, 
and lipoxygenase. Considering the high content of bioactives and various 
biological properties, the red onion skins extract is suitable for multiple 
applications.

DOI: 10.3390/plants10112330
PMCID: PMC8625382
PMID: 34834693

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.