1. Cells. 2021 Oct 26;10(11):2889. doi: 10.3390/cells10112889.

Taste Receptors: The Gatekeepers of the Airway Epithelium.

Martens K(1)(2), Steelant B(1), Bullens DMA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Allergy and Clinical Immunology Research Group, Department of Microbiology, 
Immunology and Transplantation, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Bioscience Engineering, University of Antwerp, 2020 Antwerp, 
Belgium.
(3)Clinical Division of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium.

Taste receptors are well known for their role in the sensation of taste. 
Surprisingly, the expression and involvement of taste receptors in chemosensory 
processes outside the tongue have been recently identified in many organs 
including the airways. Currently, a clear understanding of the airway-specific 
function of these receptors and the endogenous activating/inhibitory ligands is 
lagging. The focus of this review is on recent physiological and clinical data 
describing the taste receptors in the airways and their activation by secreted 
bacterial compounds. Taste receptors in the airways are potentially involved in 
three different immune pathways (i.e., the production of nitric oxide and 
antimicrobial peptides secretion, modulation of ciliary beat frequency, and 
bronchial smooth muscle cell relaxation). Moreover, genetic polymorphisms in 
these receptors may alter the patients' susceptibility to certain types of 
respiratory infections as well as to differential outcomes in patients with 
chronic inflammatory airway diseases such as chronic rhinosinusitis and asthma. 
A better understanding of the function of taste receptors in the airways may 
lead to the development of a novel class of therapeutic molecules that can 
stimulate airway mucosal immune responses and could treat patients with chronic 
airway diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10112889
PMCID: PMC8616034
PMID: 34831117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests with regard to this work.