1. Life (Basel). 2021 Nov 17;11(11):1256. doi: 10.3390/life11111256.

The Pleiotropic Potential of BDNF beyond Neurons: Implication for a Healthy Mind 
in a Healthy Body.

Di Rosa MC(1)(2), Zimbone S(2), Saab MW(1), Tomasello MF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences, University of 
Catania, Via S. Sofia 64, 95123 Catania, Italy.
(2)Institute of Crystallography, CNR, Via P. Gaifami 18, 95126 Catania, Italy.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) represents one of the most widely 
studied neurotrophins because of the many mechanisms in which it is involved. 
Among these, a growing body of evidence indicates BDNF as a pleiotropic 
signaling molecule and unveils non-negligible implications in the regulation of 
energy balance. BDNF and its receptor are extensively expressed in the 
hypothalamus, regions where peripheral signals, associated with feeding control 
and metabolism activation, and are integrated to elaborate anorexigenic and 
orexigenic effects. Thus, BDNF coordinates adaptive responses to fluctuations in 
energy intake and expenditure, connecting the central nervous system with 
peripheral tissues, including muscle, liver, and the adipose tissue in a complex 
operational network. This review discusses the latest literature dealing with 
the involvement of BDNF in the maintenance of energy balance. We have focused on 
the physiological and molecular mechanisms by which BDNF: (I) controls the 
mitochondrial function and dynamics; (II) influences thermogenesis and tissue 
differentiation; (III) mediates the effects of exercise on cognitive functions; 
and (IV) modulates insulin sensitivity and glucose transport at the cellular 
level. Deepening the understanding of the mechanisms exploited to maintain 
energy homeostasis will lay the groundwork for the development of novel 
therapeutical approaches to help people to maintain a healthy mind in a healthy 
body.

DOI: 10.3390/life11111256
PMCID: PMC8625665
PMID: 34833132

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.