1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 Dec 1;17(12):e1009630. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009630.  eCollection 2021 Dec.

RNA editing regulates lncRNA splicing in human early embryo development.

Qiu J(1)(2), Ma X(3), Zeng F(1)(2), Yan J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Children's Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Medical Genetics, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Medical Embryogenesis and Developmental Molecular 
Biology & Shanghai Key Laboratory of Embryo and Reproduction Engineering, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Group of Signal Transduction, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.

RNA editing is a co- or post-transcriptional modification through which some 
cells can make discrete changes to specific nucleotide sequences within an RNA 
molecule after transcription. Previous studies found that RNA editing may be 
critically involved in cancer and aging. However, the function of RNA editing in 
human early embryo development is still unclear. In this study, through 
analyzing single cell RNA sequencing data, 36.7% RNA editing sites were found to 
have a have differential editing ratio among early embryo developmental stages, 
and there was a great reprogramming of RNA editing rates at the 8-cell stage, at 
which most of the differentially edited RNA editing sites (99.2%) had a 
decreased RNA editing rate. In addition, RNA editing was more likely to occur on 
RNA splicing sites during human early embryo development. Furthermore, long 
non-coding RNA (lncRNA) editing sites were found more likely to be on RNA 
splicing sites (odds ratio = 2.19, P = 1.37×10-8), while mRNA editing sites were 
less likely (odds ratio = 0.22, P = 8.38×10-46). Besides, we found that the RNA 
editing rate on lncRNA had a significantly higher correlation coefficient with 
the percentage spliced index (PSI) of lncRNA exons (R = 0.75, P = 4.90×10-16), 
which indicated that RNA editing may regulate lncRNA splicing during human early 
embryo development. Finally, functional analysis revealed that those RNA 
editing-regulated lncRNAs were enriched in signal transduction, the regulation 
of transcript expression, and the transmembrane transport of mitochondrial 
calcium ion. Overall, our study might provide a new insight into the mechanism 
of RNA editing on lncRNAs in human developmental biology and common birth 
defects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009630
PMCID: PMC8668112
PMID: 34851956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.