1. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2022 Aug;25(3):437-446. doi: 10.1111/ocr.12554. Epub
2021  Dec 10.

Genetic effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms in growth hormone receptor 
gene on the risk of non-syndromic mandibular prognathism in the Korean 
population.

Park HJ(1), Ahn SJ(2), Jang J(2), Kim SJ(3), Park YG(3), Kim KA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, 
Korea.
(2)Department of Dentistry, Graduate School, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Orthodontics, School of Dentistry, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, 
Korea.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the association of three single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) of growth hormone receptor (GHR) gene with mandibular prognathism (MP) 
and relationships between mandibular morphology and GHR gene SNPs in the Korean 
population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 325 subjects were divided into two groups 
based on sagittal maxillomandibular relationship by the lateral cephalography: 
the MP and control groups. From the SNPs in the GHR gene, three SNPs (rs6180, 
rs6182 and rs6184) were selected. SNP genotyping was performed using direct 
sequencing. The craniofacial measurements of lateral cephalography were 
analysed.
RESULTS: We found a lack of association between GHR and MP. However, in the 
analysis according to the values of cephalometric measurements, rs6180 was 
significantly associated with ANB, SNB, effective mandibular length and SNMP in 
females. Additionally, rs6182 and rs6184 were significantly associated with 
ramal height in males.
CONCLUSION: Growth hormone receptor SNPs may affect not only the sagittal 
development of mandible but also the vertical development of ramal height, and 
GHR SNPs may gender-differently influence mandibular morphology. This finding 
supports that the GHR might be susceptible on mandibular morphogenesis in the 
Korean population.

Â© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ocr.12554
PMID: 34863024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]