1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Jan;298(1):101457. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101457. Epub 2021
 Nov 30.

The two paralogous copies of the YoeB-YefM toxin-antitoxin module in 
Staphylococcus aureus differ in DNA binding and recognition patterns.

Xue L(1), Khan MH(1), Yue J(1), Zhu Z(2), Niu L(3).

Author information:
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, Division 
of Molecular and Cellular Biophysics, University of Science and Technology of 
China, Hefei, Anhui, China; Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, School of 
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 
China.
(2)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, Division 
of Molecular and Cellular Biophysics, University of Science and Technology of 
China, Hefei, Anhui, China; Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, School of 
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 
China. Electronic address: zlzhu63@ustc.edu.cn.
(3)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, Division 
of Molecular and Cellular Biophysics, University of Science and Technology of 
China, Hefei, Anhui, China; Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, School of 
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 
China. Electronic address: lwniu@ustc.edu.cn.

Toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems are ubiquitous regulatory modules for bacterial 
growth and cell survival following stress. YefM-YoeB, the most prevalent type II 
TA system, is present in a variety of bacterial species. In Staphylococcus 
aureus, the YefM-YoeB system exists as two independent paralogous copies. Our 
previous research resolved crystal structures of the two oligomeric states 
(heterotetramer and heterohexamer-DNA ternary complex) of the first paralog as 
well as the molecular mechanism of transcriptional autoregulation of this 
module. However, structural details reflecting molecular diversity in both 
paralogs have been relatively unexplored. To understand the molecular mechanism 
of how Sa2YoeB and Sa2YefM regulate their own transcription and how each paralog 
functions independently, we solved a series of crystal structures of the 
Sa2YoeB-Sa2YefM. Our structural and biochemical data demonstrated that both 
paralogous copies adopt similar mechanisms of transcriptional autoregulation. In 
addition, structural analysis suggested that molecular diversity between the two 
paralogs might be reflected in the interaction profile of YefM and YoeB and the 
recognition pattern of promoter DNA by YefM. Interaction analysis revealed 
unique conformational and activating force effected by the interface between 
Sa2YoeB and Sa2YefM. In addition, the recognition pattern analysis demonstrated 
that residues Thr7 and Tyr14 of Sa2YefM specifically recognizes the flanking 
sequences (G and C) of the promoter DNA. Together, these results provide the 
structural insights into the molecular diversity and independent function of the 
paralogous copies of the YoeB-YefM TA system.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101457
PMCID: PMC8717551
PMID: 34861238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.