1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2021 Nov 19;14:762916. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.762916. 
eCollection 2021.

Rab11a Regulates the Development of Cilia and Establishment of Planar Cell 
Polarity in Mammalian Vestibular Hair Cells.

Chen BJ(1)(2)(3), Qian XQ(1)(2)(3), Yang XY(1)(2)(3), Jiang T(1)(2)(3), Wang 
YM(1)(2)(3), Lyu JH(1)(2)(3), Chi FL(1)(2)(3), Chen P(4)(5), Ren DD(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, ENT Institute, Eye and ENT Hospital, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Hearing Medicine, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Shanghai Auditory Medical Center, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States.

Vestibular organs have unique planar cell polarity (Figure 1A), and their normal 
development and function are dependent on the regular polarity of cilia (Figure 
1B) requires. Rab11a is a small G protein that participates in the 
transportation of intracellular and extracellular materials required for 
polarity formation; however, our understanding of the mechanisms of the actions 
of Rab11a in vestibular organs is limited. Here, we showed that the general 
shape of the utricle was abnormal in Rab11a CKO/CKO mice. These mice also showed 
abnormal morphology of the stereocilia bundles, which were reduced in both 
length and number, as well as disturbed tissue-level polarity. Rab11a affected 
the distribution of polarity proteins in the vestibular organs, indicating that 
the normal development of cilia requires Rab11a and intraflagellar 
transportation. Furthermore, small G protein migration works together with 
intraflagellar transportation in the normal development of cilia. FIGURE 
1Morphological changes of stereocilia in the extrastriolar hair cells from 
Rab11a single or Rab11a/IFT88 double-mutant utricles. (A) Medial view of a mouse 
left inner ear with its five vestibular sensory organs (gray). Enlarged are the 
utricle showing their subdivisions, LPR (yellow line), and striola (blue). LES, 
lateral extrastriola; MES, medial extrastriola; LPR, line of polarity reversal. 
(B) Schematic view of vestibular hair cell. Kinocilium is marked with 
ace-tubulin. Basal body is marked with γ-tubulin. (C,C1,D,D1) Normal appearance 
of the stereocilia of extrastriolar hair cells of wild-type controls. 
(E,E1,F,F1) Altered morphology in Rab11a CKO/CKO animals. (G,G1,H,H1) The 
changes in the stereocilia morphology were more severe in Rab11a CKO/CKO /IFT 88 
CKO/+ mice. (I-L) Higher magnification of confocal images of hair cells. (M-P) 
Scanning electron microscopy images of hair cells from wild-type controls and 
Rab11a mutants. (I,M) Morphology of normal. hair cells of wild-type controls. 
(J,N) The number of stereocilia on a single hair cell was deceased in the Rab11a 
mutant. (K,O) Stereocilia were shorter in mutants compared to the wild-type 
controls. (L,P) The staircase-like hair bundle architecture of hair cells was 
lost in Rab11a mutant mice. (Q) The percentage of hair cells with abnormal 
development of static cilia bundles in the extrastriola region was counted as a 
percentage of the total (n = 5). The percentage of abnormal hair cells was 
higher in Rab11a CKO/CKO , IFT88 CKO/+ mice compared to Rab11a CKO/CKO . The 
abnormal ratios of single and double knockout hair cells were 42.1 ± 5.7 and 
71.5 ± 10.4, respectively. In (A-J), for all primary panels, hair cell 
stereociliary bundles were marked with phalloidin (green), the actin-rich 
cuticular plate of hair cells was labeled with β-spectrin (red), while the basal 
body of the hair cell was labeled with γ-tubulin (blue). Scale bars: 10 μm 
(C-H1), 5 μm (J-N). *P < 0.05.

Copyright © 2021 Chen, Qian, Yang, Jiang, Wang, Lyu, Chi, Chen and Ren.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.762916
PMCID: PMC8640494
PMID: 34867187

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.