1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 16;12:783022. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.783022. 
eCollection 2021.

Reversion Mosaicism in Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases.

Miyazawa H(1), Wada T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Institute of Medical, 
Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.

Reversion mosaicism has been reported in an increasing number of genetic 
disorders including primary immunodeficiency diseases. Several mechanisms can 
mediate somatic reversion of inherited mutations. Back mutations restore 
wild-type sequences, whereas second-site mutations result in compensatory 
changes. In addition, intragenic recombination, chromosomal deletions, and 
copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity have been demonstrated in mosaic 
individuals. Revertant cells that have regained wild-type function may be 
associated with milder disease phenotypes in some immunodeficient patients with 
reversion mosaicism. Revertant cells can also be responsible for immune 
dysregulation. Studies identifying a large variety of genetic changes in the 
same individual further support a frequent occurrence of reversion mosaicism in 
primary immunodeficiency diseases. This phenomenon also provides unique 
opportunities to evaluate the biological effects of restored gene expression in 
different cell lineages. In this paper, we review the recent findings of 
reversion mosaicism in primary immunodeficiency diseases and discuss its 
clinical implications.

Copyright Â© 2021 Miyazawa and Wada.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.783022
PMCID: PMC8635092
PMID: 34868061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
past collaboration with one of the authors, TW.