1. Sci Rep. 2021 Dec 6;11(1):23507. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02806-x.

Molecular drivers of tumor progression in microsatellite stable APC 
mutation-negative colorectal cancers.

Grant A(1), Xicola RM(2), Nguyen V(1), Lim J(3), Thorne C(4), Salhia B(5), Llor 
X(2), Ellis N(4), Padi M(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, 1515 N. Campbell 
Avenue, Tucson, AZ, 85724, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine and Cancer Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA.
(5)Department of Translational Genomics, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)University of Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, 1515 N. Campbell 
Avenue, Tucson, AZ, 85724, USA. mpadi@arizona.edu.

The tumor suppressor gene adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is the initiating 
mutation in approximately 80% of all colorectal cancers (CRC), underscoring the 
importance of aberrant regulation of intracellular WNT signaling in CRC 
development. Recent studies have found that early-onset CRC exhibits an 
increased proportion of tumors lacking an APC mutation. We set out to identify 
mechanisms underlying APC mutation-negative (APCmut-) CRCs. We analyzed data 
from The Cancer Genome Atlas to compare clinical phenotypes, somatic mutations, 
copy number variations, gene fusions, RNA expression, and DNA methylation 
profiles between APCmut- and APC mutation-positive (APCmut+) microsatellite 
stable CRCs. Transcriptionally, APCmut- CRCs clustered into two approximately 
equal groups. Cluster One was associated with enhanced mitochondrial activation. 
Cluster Two was strikingly associated with genetic inactivation or decreased RNA 
expression of the WNT antagonist RNF43, increased expression of the WNT agonist 
RSPO3, activating mutation of BRAF, or increased methylation and decreased 
expression of AXIN2. APCmut- CRCs exhibited evidence of increased immune cell 
infiltration, with significant correlation between M2 macrophages and RSPO3. 
APCmut- CRCs comprise two groups of tumors characterized by enhanced 
mitochondrial activation or increased sensitivity to extracellular WNT, 
suggesting that they could be respectively susceptible to inhibition of these 
pathways.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-02806-x
PMCID: PMC8648784
PMID: 34873211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.