1. J Psychopharmacol. 2021 Dec;35(12):1536-1541. doi: 10.1177/02698811211058975.

Habitual caffeine consumption moderates the antidepressant effect of dorsomedial 
intermittent theta-burst transcranial magnetic stimulation.

Frick A(1), Persson J(2), Bodén R(2).

Author information:
(1)The Beijer Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience, Psychiatry, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Psychiatry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Potentiating current antidepressant treatment is much needed. Based 
on animal studies, caffeine may augment the effects of currently available 
antidepressants.
OBJECTIVE: Here, we tested whether habitual caffeine consumption moderates the 
antidepressant effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) 
using intermittent theta-burst stimulation (iTBS).
METHODS: Forty patients with current depressive episodes were randomized to 
active iTBS (n = 19) or sham treatment (n = 21; shielded side of the coil and 
weak transcutaneous electrical stimulation) delivered two times per day for 
10-15 weekdays. Neuronavigated stimulation was applied to the dorsomedial 
prefrontal cortex. Symptom improvement was measured using change in 
self-reported Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) scores. 
Pretreatment habitual caffeine consumption was quantified using self-reports of 
number of cups of coffee and energy drinks consumed the 2 days before the 
treatment starts.
RESULTS: Habitual caffeine consumption was associated with symptom improvement 
following active iTBS (r = 0.51, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.08-0.78, 
p = 0.025) but not following sham treatment (r = -0.02, 95% CI: -0.45 to 0.42, 
p = 0.938). A multiple regression analysis corroborated the findings by showing 
a significant caffeine consumption × treatment group interaction (β = 0.62, 
p = 0.043), but no main effects of treatment group (β = 0.22, p = 0.140) or 
caffeine consumption (β = -0.01, p = 0.948). No group differences in 
pretreatment symptom scores or caffeine consumption were detected (p 
values > 0.86).
CONCLUSION: Habitual caffeine consumption moderated the antidepressant effect of 
dorsomedial iTBS, consistent with caffeine improving antidepressant 
pharmacological treatments in animals. Caffeine is an antagonist of adenosine 
receptors and may enhance antidepressant effects through downstream dopaminergic 
targets.

DOI: 10.1177/02698811211058975
PMCID: PMC8652363
PMID: 34872405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.