1. Adv Pharm Bull. 2021 Sep;11(4):755-764. doi: 10.34172/apb.2021.085. Epub 2020 
Sep 8.

miR-146a-5p and miR-193a-5p Synergistically Inhibited the Proliferation of Human 
Colorectal Cancer Cells (HT-29 cell line) through ERK Signaling Pathway.

Noorolyai S(1), Baghbani E(1)(2), Shanehbandi D(1), Khaze Shahgoli V(1), 
Baghbanzadeh Kojabad A(1), Mansoori B(1), Hajiasgharzadeh K(1)(2), Mokhtarzadeh 
A(1), Baradaran B(3).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(3)Pharmaceutical Analysis Research Center,Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

Purpose: The expression of miR-146a-5p and miR-193a-5p in colorectal cancer 
(CRC) is associated with cancer development, metastasis, and reduced survival 
rate of the tumor-suffered subjects. This examination aimed to assess the impact 
of these microRNAs (miRNAs) in CRC and their mechanisms in the proliferation and 
migration of cancer cells. Methods: miR-146a-5p and -193a-5p were transfected 
into the HT-29 cell line and assessed their impact on metastasis-related genes. 
The synergistic effects of these miRNAs on migration were evaluated by wound 
healing approach. To assess the influence of these miRNAs on the proliferation 
of and apoptosis of cells, the MTT test, annexin V staining test, and DAPI 
staining test were done. Then, the protein expression of 
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and phosphorylated ERK (p-ERK) were 
investigated. Results: miR-146a-5p and-193a-5p could inhibit the CRC cells 
proliferation, and could synergistically induce apoptosis in CRC cells, and also 
repressed cell migration, and could reduce p-ERK expression. Conclusion: 
miR-146a-5p and-193a-5p have an important role in cell viability and 
proliferation via ERK signaling pathway. Thus, the simultaneous use of these 
miRNAs may be suggested as a probable therapeutic strategy in this cancer 
therapy.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.34172/apb.2021.085
PMCID: PMC8642791
PMID: 34888223