1. Materials (Basel). 2021 Nov 28;14(23):7281. doi: 10.3390/ma14237281.

Influence of the Size of the Fiber Filler of Corn Stalks in the Polylactide 
Matrix Composite on the Mechanical and Thermomechanical Properties.

Łączny D(1), Macko M(1), Moraczewski K(2), Szczepański Z(1), Trafarski A(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Mechatronics, Kazimierz Wielki University, Chodkiewicza 30, 85-064 
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(2)Institute of Material Engineering, Kazimierz Wielki University, Chodkiewicza 
30, 85-064 Bydgoszcz, Poland.

This paper presents results of a study on the effect of filler size in the form 
of 15 wt% corn stalk (CS) fibers on the mechanical and thermomechanical 
properties of polylactide (PLA) matrix composites. In the test, polylactidic 
acid (PLA) is filled with four types of length of corn stalk fibers with a 
diameter of 1 mm, 1.6 mm, 2 mm and 4 mm. The composites were composed by single 
screw extrusion and then samples were prepared by injection molding. The 
mechanical properties of the composites were determined by static tensile test, 
static bending test and Charpy impact test while the thermo-mechanical 
properties were determined by dynamic mechanical thermal analysis (DMTA). The 
composite structures were also observed using X-ray microcomputed tomography and 
scanning electron microscopy. In the PLA/CS composites, as the filler fiber 
diameter increased, the degradation of mechanical properties relative to the 
matrix was observed including tensile strength (decrease 22.9-51.1%), bending 
strength (decrease 18.9-36.6%) and impact energy absorption (decrease 
58.8-69.8%). On the basis of 3D images of the composite structures for the 
filler particles larger than 2 mm a weak dispersion with the filler was 
observed, which is reflected in a significant deterioration of the mechanical 
and thermomechanical properties of the composite. The best mechanical and 
thermomechanical properties were found in the composite with filler fiber of 1 
mm diameter. Processing resulted in a more than 6-fold decrease in filler fiber 
length from 719 ± 190 µm, 893 ± 291 µm, 1073 ± 219 µm, and 1698 ± 636 µm for 
CS1, CS1.6, CS2, and CS4 fractions, respectively, to 104 ± 43 µm, 123 ± 60 µm, 
173 ± 60 µm, and 227 ± 89 µm. The fabricated green composites with 1 to 2 mm 
corn stalk fiber filler are an alternative to traditional plastic based 
materials in some applications.

DOI: 10.3390/ma14237281
PMCID: PMC8658329
PMID: 34885438

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.