1. Molecules. 2021 Dec 4;26(23):7360. doi: 10.3390/molecules26237360.

[(18)F]Nifene PET/CT Imaging in Mice: Improved Methods and Preliminary Studies 
of α4β2* Nicotinic Acetylcholinergic Receptors in Transgenic A53T Mouse Model of 
α-Synucleinopathy and Post-Mortem Human Parkinson's Disease.

Campoy AT(1), Liang C(1), Ladwa RM(1), Patel KK(1), Patel IH(1), Mukherjee J(1).

Author information:
(1)Preclinical Imaging, Department of Radiological Sciences, University of 
California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

We report [18F]nifene binding to α4β2* nicotinic acetylcholinergic receptors 
(nAChRs) in Parkinson's disease (PD). The study used transgenic 
Hualpha-Syn(A53T) PD mouse model of α-synucleinopathy for PET/CT studies in vivo 
and autoradiography in vitro. Additionally, postmortem human PD brain sections 
comprising of anterior cingulate were used in vitro to assess translation to 
human studies. Because the small size of mice brain poses challenges for PET 
imaging, improved methods for radiosynthesis of [18F]nifene and simplified 
PET/CT procedures in mice were developed by comparing intravenous (IV) and 
intraperitoneal (IP) administered [18F]nifene. An optimal PET/CT imaging time of 
30-60 min post injection of [18F]nifene was established to provide thalamus to 
cerebellum ratio of 2.5 (with IV) and 2 (with IP). Transgenic Hualpha-Syn(A53T) 
mice brain slices exhibited 20-35% decrease while in vivo a 20-30% decrease of 
[18F]nifene was observed. Lewy bodies and α-synuclein aggregates were confirmed 
in human PD brain sections which lowered the [18F]nifene binding by more than 
50% in anterior cingulate. Thus [18F]nifene offers a valuable tool for PET 
imaging studies of PD.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26237360
PMCID: PMC8659100
PMID: 34885943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.