1. Sci Rep. 2021 Dec 8;11(1):23665. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-03076-3.

Characterization of a recently synthesized microtubule-targeting compound that 
disrupts mitotic spindle poles in human cells.

Jaunky DB(#)(1), Larocque K(#)(1), Husser MC(1), Liu JT(2), Forgione P(2), 
Piekny A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Biology, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada. 
alisa.piekny@concordia.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

We reveal the effects of a new microtubule-destabilizing compound in human 
cells. C75 has a core thienoisoquinoline scaffold with several functional groups 
amenable to modification. Previously we found that sub micromolar concentrations 
of C75 caused cytotoxicity. We also found that C75 inhibited microtubule 
polymerization and competed with colchicine for tubulin-binding in vitro. 
However, here we found that the two compounds synergized suggesting differences 
in their mechanism of action. Indeed, live imaging revealed that C75 causes 
different spindle phenotypes compared to colchicine. Spindles remained bipolar 
and collapsed after colchicine treatment, while C75 caused bipolar spindles to 
become multipolar. Importantly, microtubules rapidly disappeared after 
C75-treatment, but then grew back unevenly and from multiple poles. The C75 
spindle phenotype is reminiscent of phenotypes caused by depletion of ch-TOG, a 
microtubule polymerase, suggesting that C75 blocks microtubule polymerization in 
metaphase cells. C75 also caused an increase in the number of spindle poles in 
paclitaxel-treated cells, and combining low amounts of C75 and paclitaxel caused 
greater regression of multicellular tumour spheroids compared to each compound 
on their own. These findings warrant further exploration of C75's anti-cancer 
potential.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-03076-3
PMCID: PMC8655040
PMID: 34880347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.