1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Nov 23;12:752825. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.752825. 
eCollection 2021.

The Disulfiram/Copper Complex Induces Autophagic Cell Death in Colorectal Cancer 
by Targeting ULK1.

Hu Y(1), Qian Y(1), Wei J(1), Jin T(1), Kong X(1), Cao H(1), Ding K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery and Oncology, Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Prevention and Intervention, Ministry of Education, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Zhejiang University Cancer Center, Hangzhou, China.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is highly prevalent worldwide, but there has been 
limited development of efficient and affordable treatment. Induced autophagy has 
recently been recognized as a novel therapeutic strategy in cancer treatment, 
and disulfiram (DSF), a well-known antialcohol drug, is also found to inhibit 
tumor growth in various malignancies. Recently, DSF has been reported to induce 
excessive autophagy in oral squamous cells; however, little is known about 
whether it can induce autophagy and suppress proliferation in CRC. In this 
study, we investigate the effect of DSF with copper (DSF/Cu) on CRC both in 
vitro and in vivo and find that the combination significantly inhibits CRC cell 
viability and mainly induces autophagy instead of apoptosis. Furthermore, we use 
whole genome CRISPR library screening and identify a new mechanism by which DSF 
triggers autophagy by ULK1. Overall, these findings provide a potential CRC 
treatment.

Copyright Â© 2021 Hu, Qian, Wei, Jin, Kong, Cao and Ding.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.752825
PMCID: PMC8650091
PMID: 34887757

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.