1. Neuropharmacology. 2022 Mar 1;205:108912. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2021.108912.  Epub 2021 Dec 6.

Medial prefrontal cortex-basolateral amygdala circuit dysfunction in chronic 
alcohol-exposed male rats.

Crofton EJ(1), Zhu M(2), Curtis KN(3), Nolan GW(3), O'Buckley TK(4), Morrow 
AL(5), Herman MA(6).

Author information:
(1)Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Department of Psychiatry, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, 
NC, USA; Department of Pharmacology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Department of Psychology and 
Neuroscience, Emmanuel College, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Department of Pharmacology, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, 
NC, USA; Neuroscience Curriculum, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Emmanuel College, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(5)Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Department of Psychiatry, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, 
NC, USA; Department of Pharmacology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; Department of Pharmacology, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, 
NC, USA. Electronic address: melissa_herman@unc.edu.

Alcohol is a commonly used drug that can produce alcohol use disorders (AUDs). 
Few individuals with AUDs receive treatment and treatment options are 
complicated by issues with effectiveness and compliance. Alcohol has been shown 
to differentially affect specific brain regions and an improved understanding of 
circuit-specific dysregulation caused by alcohol is warranted. Previous work has 
implicated both the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and basolateral amygdala 
(BLA) in alcohol-associated plasticity, however studies directly examining the 
impact of alcohol exposure on this circuit are lacking. The current study 
employed an optogenetic strategy to investigate the prelimbic mPFC to BLA 
circuit and changes in circuit activity following chronic intragastric ethanol 
exposure in male Sprague Dawley rats. We observed monosynaptic connections with 
light-evoked stimulation of mPFC terminals in the BLA with efficacy and short 
latency. We also found that mPFC-BLA projections are primarily glutamatergic 
under basal inhibitory control, with a lesser population of GABAergic 
projections. We examined optically-evoked glutamate currents in the BLA using 
repeated trains of stimulation that displayed accommodation, or a reduction in 
evoked current amplitude over repeated stimulations. We found that following 
chronic ethanol exposure mPFC-BLA glutamatergic connections were dysregulated 
such that there were decreases in overall function, notably in synaptic strength 
and accommodation, with no change in probability of evoked glutamate release. 
The lesser GABAergic component of the mPFC-BLA circuit was not altered by 
chronic ethanol exposure. Collectively these data indicate that mPFC-BLA 
circuitry is a significant target of alcohol-associated plasticity, which may 
contribute to pathological behavior associated with AUDs.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2021.108912
PMCID: PMC8800149
PMID: 34883134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors declare no competing 
interests.