1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Dec 6;13(23):6147. doi: 10.3390/cancers13236147.

Essential Thrombocythemia in Children and Adolescents.

Putti MC(1), Bertozzi I(2), Randi ML(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Department of Women's and Children's 
Health, University of Padua, 35128 Padua, Italy.
(2)First Medical Clinic, Department of Medicine-DIMED, University of Padua, 
35128 Padua, Italy.

This paper reviews the features of pediatric essential thrombocythemia (ET). ET 
is a rare disease in children, challenging pediatric and adult hematologists 
alike. The current WHO classification acknowledges classical 
Philadelphia-negative MPNs and defines diagnostic criteria, mainly encompassing 
adult cases. The presence of one of three driver mutations (JAK2V617F, CALR, and 
MPL mutations) represent the proof of clonality typical of ET. Pediatric ET 
cases are thus usually confronted by adult approaches. These can fit only some 
patients, because only 25-40% of cases present one of the driver mutations. The 
diagnosis of hereditary, familial thrombocytosis and the exclusion of 
reactive/secondary thrombocytosis must be part of the diagnostic process in 
children and can clarify most of the negative cases. Still, many children 
present a clinical, histological picture of ET, with a molecular triple 
wild-type status. Moreover, prognosis seems more benign, at least within the 
first few decades of follow-up. Thrombotic events are rare, and only minor 
hemorrhages are ordinarily observed. As per the management, the need to control 
symptoms must be balanced with the collateral effects of lifelong drug therapy. 
We conclude that these differences concert a compelling case for a very careful 
therapeutic approach and advocate for the importance of further cooperative 
studies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13236147
PMCID: PMC8656963
PMID: 34885256

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.