1. Microb Genom. 2021 Dec;7(12):000723. doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.000723.

Epidemiology and population structure of Haemophilus influenzae causing invasive 
disease.

Carrera-Salinas A(1), González-Díaz A(1)(2), Calatayud L(1)(2), Mercado-Maza 
J(1), Puig C(1), Berbel D(1)(2), Càmara J(1)(2), Tubau F(1)(2), Grau I(2)(3), 
Domínguez MÁ(1)(4)(5), Ardanuy C(1)(2)(5), Martí S(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, IDIBELL-UB, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Research Network for Respiratory Diseases (CIBERES), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Infectious Diseases Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, IDIBELL-UB, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Spanish Network for Research in Infectious Diseases (REIPI), ISCIII, Madrid, 
Spain.
(5)Department of Pathology and Experimental Therapeutics, School of Medicine, 
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.

This study provides an update on invasive Haemophilus influenzae disease in 
Bellvitge University Hospital (2014-2019), reporting its evolution from a 
previous period (2008-2013) and analysing the non-typeable H. influenzae (NTHi) 
population structure using a clade-related classification. Clinical data, 
antimicrobial susceptibility and serotyping were studied and compared with those 
of the previous period. Population structure was assessed by multilocus sequence 
typing (MLST), SNP-based phylogenetic analysis and clade-related classification. 
The incidence of invasive H. influenzae disease remained constant between the 
two periods (average 2.07 cases per 100 000 population), while the 30 day 
mortality rate decreased (20.7-14.7 %, respectively). Immunosuppressive therapy 
(40 %) and malignancy (36 %) were the most frequent comorbidities. Ampicillin 
and fluoroquinolone resistance rates had increased between the two periods 
(10-17.6 % and 0-4.4 %, respectively). NTHi was the main cause of invasive 
disease in both periods (84.3 and 85.3 %), followed by serotype f (12.9 and 
8.8 %). NTHi displayed high genetic diversity. However, two clusters of 13 
(n=20) and 5 sequence types (STs) (n=10) associated with clade V included NTHi 
strains of the most prevalent STs (ST3 and ST103), many of which showed 
increased frequency over time. Moreover, ST103 and ST160 from clade V were 
associated with β-lactam resistance. Invasive H. influenzae disease is uncommon, 
but can be severe, especially in the elderly with comorbidities. NTHi remains 
the main cause of invasive disease, with ST103 and ST160 (clade V) responsible 
for increasing β-lactam resistance over time.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.000723
PMCID: PMC8767337
PMID: 34898424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.