1. Bioengineered. 2021 Dec;12(2):11898-11908. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1999552.

Simvastatin regulates the proliferation, apoptosis, migration and invasion of 
human acute myeloid leukemia cells via miR-19a-3p/HIF-1α axis.

Tian H(1), Qiang T(2), Wang J(3), Ji L(3), Li B(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Blood Transfusion, Baoji People's Hospital, Baoji City, Shanxi 
Province, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory, Yanan University Hospital, Yanan City, Shanxi 
Province, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory, Baoji People's Hospital, Baoji City, Shanxi 
Province, China.
(4)Department of Blood Transfusion, Hanzhong People's Hospital, Hanzhong City, 
Shanxi Province, China.

Statins are mainly used to lower plasma cholesterol level. In addition, the 
anti-leukemia effect of statins has been reported, but the mechanism remains 
unclear.This study aimed to explore the bioregulation of simvastatin and its 
mechanism in acute leukemia cell lines. Cell viability was detected by CCK-8 
analysis. Apoptosis was detected through flow cytometry. Cell invasion and 
migration both were observed by transwell and wound healing separately. RT-qPCR 
and Western blot were used for determination of genes and proteins. We found 
that that simvastatin could regulate the biological functions of acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML) cells, including its proliferation, migration, invasion and 
apoptosis, which may be carried out by down-regulating miR-19a-3p. 
Overexpression of miR-19a-3p had the opposite effect in AML cells, suggesting 
simvastatin-inhibited AML by reducing miR-19a-3p expression. Following 
researches showed that HIF-1α was directly regulated by the target of 
miR-19a-3p. Simvastatin could reverse the adverse effects caused by miR-19a-3p 
mimics. Conversely, the increased expression of Mcl-1, the inhibition of 
caspase-3 could promote the growth of AML cells. In conclusion, simvastatin 
could inhibit the proliferation, migration, invasion and promote apoptosis in 
AML cells through miR-19a-3p/HIF-1α axis.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1999552
PMCID: PMC8809937
PMID: 34895042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.