1. Life Sci Alliance. 2021 Dec 10;5(3):e202101140. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202101140. 
Print 2022 Mar.

Loss of SET1/COMPASS methyltransferase activity reduces lifespan and fertility 
in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Caron M(1), Gely L(1), Garvis S(1), Adrait A(2), Couté Y(2), Palladino F(3), 
Fabrizio P(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biology and Modelling of the Cell, Ecole Normale Supérieure de 
Lyon, CNRS UMR5239, INSERM U1210, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(2)University of Grenoble Alpes, INSERM, CEA, UMR BioSanté U1292, CNRS, CEA, 
FR2048, Grenoble, France.
(3)Laboratory of Biology and Modelling of the Cell, Ecole Normale Supérieure de 
Lyon, CNRS UMR5239, INSERM U1210, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France 
francesca.palladino@ens-lyon.fr.
(4)Laboratory of Biology and Modelling of the Cell, Ecole Normale Supérieure de 
Lyon, CNRS UMR5239, INSERM U1210, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France 
paola.fabrizio@ens-lyon.fr.

Changes in histone post-translational modifications are associated with aging 
through poorly defined mechanisms. Histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methylation at 
promoters is deposited by SET1 family methyltransferases acting within conserved 
multiprotein complexes known as COMPASS. Previous work yielded conflicting 
results about the requirement for H3K4 methylation during aging. Here, we 
reassessed the role of SET1/COMPASS-dependent H3K4 methylation in Caenorhabditis 
elegans lifespan and fertility by generating set-2(syb2085) mutant animals that 
express a catalytically inactive form of SET-2, the C. elegans SET1 homolog. We 
show that set-2(syb2085) animals retain the ability to form COMPASS, but have a 
marked global loss of H3K4 di- and trimethylation (H3K4me2/3). Reduced H3K4 
methylation was accompanied by loss of fertility, as expected; however, in 
contrast to earlier studies, set-2(syb2085) mutants displayed a significantly 
shortened, not extended, lifespan and had normal intestinal fat stores. Other 
commonly used set-2 mutants were also short-lived, as was a cfp-1 mutant that 
lacks the SET1/COMPASS chromatin-targeting component. These results challenge 
previously held views and establish that WT H3K4me2/3 levels are essential for 
normal lifespan in C. elegans.

© 2021 Caron et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202101140
PMCID: PMC8675910
PMID: 34893559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.