1. Front Chem. 2021 Nov 25;9:779976. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2021.779976. eCollection 
2021.

Ferritin Conjugates With Multiple Clickable Amino Acids Encoded by C-Terminal 
Engineered Pyrrolysyl-tRNA Synthetase.

Wang YH(1), Jian ML(1)(2), Chen PJ(1)(2), Tsou JC(1)(2), Truong LP(1), Wang 
YS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biochemical Sciences, College of Life Science, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

This study reports the application of expanding genetic codes in developing 
protein cage-based delivery systems. The evolved Methanosarcina mazei 
pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase (PylRS)•tRNAPyl pairs derived from directed evolution 
are examined to probe their recognition for para-substituted phenylalanine 
analogs. The evolved MmPylRS, AzFRS, harboring a wide range of substrates, is 
further engineered at the C-terminal region into another variant, AzFRS-MS. 
AzFRS-MS shows suppression of the elevated sfGFP protein amount up to 10 TAG 
stop codons when charging p-azido-l-phenylalanine (AzF, 4), which allows the 
occurrence of click chemistry. Since protein nanocages used as drug delivery 
systems that encompass multiple drugs through a site-specific loading approach 
remain largely unexplored, as a proof of concept, the application of AzFRS-MS 
for the site-specific incorporation of AzF on human heavy chain ferritin (Ftn) 
is developed. The Ftn-4 conjugate is shown to be able to load multiple 
fluorescence dyes or a therapeutic agent, doxorubicin (Dox), through the 
strain-promoted azide-alkyne cycloaddition (SPAAC) click reaction. Aiming to 
selectively target Her2+ breast cancer cells, Ftn-4-DOX conjugates fused with a 
HER2 receptor recognition peptide, anti-Her2/neu peptide (AHNP), is developed 
and demonstrated to be able to deliver Dox into the cell and to prolong the drug 
release. This work presents another application of evolved MmPylRS systems, 
whose potential in developing a variety of protein conjugates is noteworthy.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Jian, Chen, Tsou, Truong and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2021.779976
PMCID: PMC8655692
PMID: 34900939

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.