1. Front Public Health. 2021 Nov 26;9:740946. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.740946. 
eCollection 2021.

Diabetes Prevention and Care Capacity at Urban Indian Health Organizations.

Fort MP(1)(2), Reid M(2), Russell J(1), Santos CJ(3), Running Bear U(4), Begay 
RL(1), Smith SL(1), Morrato EH(2)(5), Manson SM(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health, Colorado School of 
Public Health, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, 
United States.
(2)Department of Health Systems, Management and Policy, Colorado School of 
Public Health, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, 
United States.
(3)Environmental Studies-Indigenous Sustainability Studies Program, Bemidji 
State University, Bemidji, MN, United States.
(4)Department of Population Health, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND, United States.
(5)Parkinson School of Health Sciences and Public Health, Loyola University 
Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.
(6)Department of Community and Behavioral Health, Colorado School of Public 
Health, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United 
States.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States.

American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) people suffer a disproportionate 
burden of diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Urban Indian Health Organizations 
(UIHOs) are an important source of diabetes services for urban AI/AN people. Two 
evidence-based interventions-diabetes prevention (DP) and healthy heart 
(HH)-have been implemented and evaluated primarily in rural, reservation 
settings. This work examines the capacity, challenges and strengths of UIHOs in 
implementing diabetes programs. Methods: We applied an original survey, 
supplemented with publicly-available data, to assess eight organizational 
capacity domains, strengths and challenges of UIHOs with respect to diabetes 
prevention and care. We summarized and compared (Fisher's and Kruskal-Wallis 
exact tests) items in each organizational capacity domain for DP and HH 
implementers vs. non-implementers and conducted a thematic analysis of strengths 
and challenges. Results: Of the 33 UIHOs providing services in 2017, individuals 
from 30 sites (91% of UIHOs) replied to the survey. Eight UIHOs (27%) had 
participated in either DP (n = 6) or HH (n = 2). Implementers reported having 
more staff than non-implementers (117.0 vs. 53.5; p = 0.02). Implementers had 
larger budgets, ~$10 million of total revenue compared to $2.5 million for 
non-implementers (p = 0.01). UIHO strengths included: physical infrastructure, 
dedicated leadership and staff, and community relationships. Areas to strengthen 
included: staff training and retention, ensuring sufficient and consistent 
funding, and data infrastructure. Conclusions: Strengthening UIHOs across 
organizational capacity domains will be important for implementing 
evidence-based diabetes interventions, increasing their uptake, and sustaining 
these interventions for AI/AN people living in urban areas of the U.S.

Copyright Â© 2021 Fort, Reid, Russell, Santos, Running Bear, Begay, Smith, 
Morrato and Manson.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.740946
PMCID: PMC8661087
PMID: 34900897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SLS is employed by the company JSI Research & 
Training Institute, Inc. and was employed by the Centers for American Indian and 
Alaska Native Health, Colorado School of Public Health, during the time that the 
work presented in this article was conducted. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.