1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jan 11;50(1):281-292. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1229.

The telomeric 5' end nucleotide is regulated in the budding yeast Naumovozyma 
castellii.

Itriago H(1), Jaiswal RK(1), Philipp S(1), Cohn M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Genetics group, Lund University, SE-223 62 Lund, 
Sweden.

The junction between the double-stranded and single-stranded telomeric DNA 
(ds-ss junction) is fundamental in the maintenance of the telomeric chromatin, 
as it directs the assembly of the telomere binding proteins. In budding yeast, 
multiple Rap1 proteins bind the telomeric dsDNA, while ssDNA repeats are bound 
by the Cdc13 protein. Here, we aimed to determine, for the first time, the 
telomeric 5' end nucleotide in a budding yeast. To this end, we developed a 
permutation-specific PCR-based method directed towards the regular 8-mer 
telomeric repeats in Naumovozyma castellii. We find that, in logarithmically 
growing cells, the 320 ± 30 bp long telomeres mainly terminate in either of two 
specific 5' end permutations of the repeat, both corresponding to a terminal 
adenine nucleotide. Strikingly, two permutations are completely absent at the 5' 
end, indicating that not all ds-ss junction structures would allow the 
establishment of the protective telomere chromatin cap structure. Using in vitro 
DNA end protection assays, we determined that binding of Rap1 and Cdc13 around 
the most abundant ds-ss junction ensures the protection of both 5' ends and 3' 
overhangs from exonucleolytic degradation. Our results provide mechanistic 
insights into telomere protection, and reveal that Rap1 and Cdc13 have 
complementary roles.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1229
PMCID: PMC8754665
PMID: 34908133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]