1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Nov 25;9:789587. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.789587. 
eCollection 2021.

Colon Cancer-Related Genes Identification and Function Study Based on 
Single-Cell Multi-Omics Integration.

Sun X(1), Guo Y(2), Zhang Y(3), Zhao P(4), Wang Z(4), Wei Z(1), Qiao H(1).

Author information:
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
(2)School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, 
Harbin, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, General Hospital of Heilongjiang Province Land 
Reclamation Bureau, Harbin, China.
(4)School of Life Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, 
Harbin, China.

Transcriptomes and DNA methylation of colon cancer at the single-cell level are 
used to identify marker genes and improve diagnoses and therapies. Seven colon 
cancer subtypes are recognized based on the single-cell RNA sequence, and the 
differentially expressed genes regulated by dysregulated methylation are 
identified as marker genes for different types of colon cancer. Compared with 
normal colon cells, marker genes of different types show very obvious 
specificity, especially upregulated genes in tumors. Functional enrichment 
analysis for marker genes indicates a possible relation between colon cancer and 
nervous system disease, moreover, the weak immune system is verified in colon 
cancer. The heightened expression of markers and the reduction of methylation in 
colon cancer promote tumor development in an extensive mechanism so that there 
is no biological process that can be enriched in different types.

Copyright Â© 2021 Sun, Guo, Zhang, Zhao, Wang, Wei and Qiao.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.789587
PMCID: PMC8657154
PMID: 34901030

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
shared affiliation with the authors XS, ZW, and HQ at the time of the review.