1. Front Neurol. 2021 Nov 29;12:782599. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.782599.
eCollection  2021.

Synaptic Loss in Multiple Sclerosis: A Systematic Review of Human Post-mortem 
Studies.

Möck EEA(1)(2), Honkonen E(1)(2), Airas L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Neurosciences, Turku University Hospital and University 
of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(2)Turku PET Centre, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, Turku, 
Finland.

Background: Gray matter pathology plays a central role in the progression of 
multiple sclerosis (MS). The occurrence of synaptic loss appears to be important 
but, to date, still poorly investigated aspect of MS pathology. In this 
systematic review, we drew from the recent knowledge about synaptic loss in 
human post-mortem studies. Methods: We conducted a systematic search with PubMed 
to identify relevant publications. Publications available from15 June 2021 were 
taken into account. We selected human post-mortem studies that quantitatively 
assessed the synapse number in MS tissue. Results: We identified 14 relevant 
publications out of which 9 reported synaptic loss in at least one investigated 
subregion. The most commonly used synaptic marker was synaptophysin; 
non-etheless, we found substantial differences in the methodology and the 
selection of reference tissue. Investigated regions included the cortex, the 
hippocampus, the cerebellum, the thalamus, and the spinal cord. Conclusion: 
Synaptic loss seems to take place throughout the entire central nervous system. 
However, the results are inconsistent, probably due to differences in the 
methodology. Moreover, synaptic loss appears to be a dynamic process, and thus 
the nature of this pathology might be captured using in vivo synaptic density 
measurements.

Copyright © 2021 Möck, Honkonen and Airas.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.782599
PMCID: PMC8666414
PMID: 34912290

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.