1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Nov 29;12:749902. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.749902. 
eCollection 2021.

Integrated Bioinformatics Analyses of PIN1, CKX, and Yield-Related Genes Reveals 
the Molecular Mechanisms for the Difference of Seed Number Per Pod Between 
Soybean and Cowpea.

Liu LM(1), Zhang HQ(1), Cheng K(1), Zhang YM(1).

Author information:
(1)Crop Information Center, College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong 
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.

There is limited advancement on seed number per pod (SNPP) in soybean breeding, 
resulting in low yield in China. To address this issue, we identified PIN1 and 
CKX gene families that regulate SNPP in Arabidopsis, analyzed the differences of 
auxin and cytokinin pathways, and constructed interaction networks on PIN1, CKX, 
and yield-related genes in soybean and cowpea. First, the relative expression 
level (REL) of PIN1 and the plasma membrane localization and phosphorylation 
levels of PIN1 protein were less in soybean than in cowpea, which make auxin 
transport efficiency lower in soybean, and its two interacted proteins might be 
involved in serine hydrolysis, so soybean has lower SNPP than cowpea. Then, the 
CKX gene family, along with its positive regulatory factor ROCK1, had higher REL 
and less miRNA regulation in soybean flowers than in cowpea ones. These lead to 
higher cytokinin degradation level, which further reduces the REL of PIN1 and 
decreases soybean SNPP. We found that VuACX4 had much higher REL than GmACX4, 
although the two genes essential in embryo development interact with the CKX 
gene family. Next, a tandem duplication experienced by legumes led to the 
differentiation of CKX3 into CKX3a and CKX3b, in which CKX3a is a key gene 
affecting ovule number. Finally, in the yield-related gene networks, three 
cowpea CBP genes had higher RELs than two soybean CBP genes, low RELs of three 
soybean-specific IPT genes might lead to a decrease in cytokinin synthesis, and 
some negative and positive SNPP regulation were found, respectively, in soybean 
and cowpea. These networks may explain the SNPP difference in the two crops. We 
deduced that ckx3a or ckx3a ckx6 ckx7 mutants, interfering CYP88A, and 
over-expressed DELLA increase SNPP in soybean. This study reveals the molecular 
mechanism for the SNPP difference in the two crops, and provides an important 
idea for increasing soybean yield.

Copyright Â© 2021 Liu, Zhang, Cheng and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.749902
PMCID: PMC8667476
PMID: 34912354

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.