1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2021 Dec 2;15:786234. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2021.786234. 
eCollection 2021.

Glia-Driven Brain Circuit Refinement Is Altered by Early-Life Adversity: 
Behavioral Outcomes.

Milbocker KA(1), Campbell TS(1), Collins N(1), Kim S(1), Smith IF(1), Roth 
TL(1), Klintsova AY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, DE, United States.

Early-life adversity (ELA), often clinically referred to as "adverse childhood 
experiences (ACE)," is the exposure to stress-inducing events in childhood that 
can result in poor health outcomes. ELA negatively affects neurodevelopment in 
children and adolescents resulting in several behavioral deficits and increasing 
the risk of developing a myriad of neuropsychiatric disorders later in life. The 
neurobiological mechanisms by which ELA alters neurodevelopment in childhood 
have been the focus of numerous reviews. However, a comprehensive review of the 
mechanisms affecting adolescent neurodevelopment (i.e., synaptic pruning and 
myelination) is lacking. Synaptic pruning and myelination are glia-driven 
processes that are imperative for brain circuit refinement during the transition 
from adolescence to adulthood. Failure to optimize brain circuitry between key 
brain structures involved in learning and memory, such as the hippocampus and 
prefrontal cortex, leads to the emergence of maladaptive behaviors including 
increased anxiety or reduced executive function. As such, we review preclinical 
and clinical literature to explore the immediate and lasting effects of ELA on 
brain circuit development and refinement. Finally, we describe a number of 
therapeutic interventions best-suited to support adolescent neurodevelopment in 
children with a history of ELA.

Copyright Â© 2021 Milbocker, Campbell, Collins, Kim, Smith, Roth and Klintsova.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2021.786234
PMCID: PMC8678604
PMID: 34924972

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.