1. Ann Hum Genet. 2022 May;86(3):109-118. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12455. Epub 2021 Dec
20.

Hereditary spastic paraplegia associated with a novel homozygous intronic 
noncanonical splice site variant in the AP4B1 gene.

Gómez-González C(1), Pizarro-Sánchez C(1), Rodríguez-Antolín C(2)(3), 
Pascual-Pascual I(4), Garcia-Romero M(4), Rodriguez-Jiménez C(5), de 
Sancho-Martín R(1), Del Pozo-Mate Á(6), Solís-López M(6), Prior-de Castro C(1), 
Torres RJ(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, INGEMM, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, INGEMM, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)Biomarkers and Experimental Therapeutics in Cancer, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Paediatric Neurology, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.
(5)Department of Next Generation Sequencing, INGEMM, La Paz University Hospital, 
Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Bioinformatics, INGEMM, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.
(7)Biochemistry Laboratory, La Paz University Hospital Health Research Institute 
(FIBHULP), IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, 
Spain.

Pathogenic variants in the AP4B1 gene lead to a rare form of hereditary spastic 
paraplegia (HSP) known as SPG47. We report on a patient with a clinical 
suspicion of complicated HSP of the lower limbs with intellectual disability, as 
well as a novel homozygous noncanonical splice site variant in the AP4B1 gene, 
in which the effect on splicing was validated by RNA analysis. We sequenced 152 
genes associated with HSP using Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS). We isolated 
total RNA from peripheral blood and generated cDNA using reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). A region of AP4B1 mRNA was 
amplified by PCR and the fragments obtained were purified from the agarose gel 
and sequenced. We found a homozygous variant of uncertain significance in the 
AP4B1 gene NM_006594.4: c.1511-6C>G in the proband. Two different AP4B1 mRNA 
fragments were obtained in the patient and his carrier parents. The shorter 
fragment was the predominant fragment in the patient and revealed a deletion 
with skipping of the AP4B1 exon 10. The patient's longer fragment corresponded 
to an insertion of the last five nucleotides of AP4B1 intron 9. We confirmed 
that this variant affects the normal splicing of RNA, sustaining the molecular 
diagnosis of SPG47 in the patient.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd/University College London.

DOI: 10.1111/ahg.12455
PMID: 34927723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]