1. Cell Div. 2021 Dec 18;16(1):8. doi: 10.1186/s13008-021-00075-8.

Heat shock factor 1 suppression induces spindle abnormalities and sensitizes 
cells to antimitotic drugs.

Kuo HH(1), Su ZR(1)(2), Chuang JY(2), Yih LH(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 115, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, China Medical 
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 115, 
Taiwan. lhyih@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the master regulator of the heat shock 
response and supports malignant cell transformation. Recent work has shown that 
HSF1 can access the promoters of heat shock proteins (HSPs) and allow HSP 
expression during mitosis. It also acts as a mitotic regulator, controlling 
chromosome segregation. In this study, we investigated whether the 
transactivation activity of HSF1 is required for the assembly of mitotic 
spindles.
RESULTS: Our results showed that phosphorylation of HSF1 at serine 326 (S326) 
and its transactivation activity were increased during mitosis. Inhibition of 
the transactivation activity of HSF1 by KRIBB11 or CCT251263 during mitosis 
significantly increased the proportion of mitotic cells with abnormal spindles. 
It also hampered the reassembly of spindle microtubules after nocodazole 
treatment and washout by impeding the formation of chromosomal microtubule 
asters. Depletion of HSF1 led to defects in mitotic spindle assembly, 
subsequently attenuating cell proliferation and anchorage-independent cell 
growth (AIG). These HSF1 depletion-induced effects could be rescued by 
ectopically expressing wild-type HSF1 or a constitutively active mutant 
(∆202-316, caHSF1) but not the S326A or dominant negative (∆361-529, dnHSF1) 
mutants. In addition, overexpression of HSP70 partially reduced HSF1 
depletion-induced spindle abnormalities. These results indicate that HSF1 may 
support cell proliferation and AIG by maintaining spindle integrity through its 
transactivation activity. Furthermore, inhibition of HSF1 transactivation 
activity by KRIBB11 or CCT251236 can enhance diverse anti-mitosis drug-induced 
spindle defects and cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: The increased transactivation activity of HSF1 during mitosis 
appears to be required for accurate assembly of mitotic spindles, thereby 
supporting cell viability and probably AIG. In addition, inhibition of the 
transactivation activity of HSF1 may enhance the mitotic errors and cell death 
induced by anti-mitosis drugs.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13008-021-00075-8
PMCID: PMC8684068
PMID: 34922589

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.