1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Dec 22;9(3):e0217321. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.02173-21. 
Epub 2021 Dec 22.

YLMY Tyrosine Residue within the Cytoplasmic Tail of Newcastle Disease Virus 
Fusion Protein Regulates Its Surface Expression to Modulate Viral Budding and 
Pathogenicity.

Bu Y(1), Teng Q(1), Feng D(1), Sun L(1), Xue J(1), Zhang G(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

Newcastle disease virus (NDV) fusion protein mediates the virus's fusion 
activity, which is a determinant of NDV pathogenicity. The ectodomain of the F 
protein is known to have a major impact on fusion, and several reports have also 
indicated the role of the cytoplasmic tail (CT) in viral entry, F protein 
cleavage, and fusion, which are regulated by specific motifs. We found a highly 
conserved tyrosine residue located in the YLMY motif. The tyrosine residues at 
positions 524 and 527 have different roles in viral replication and 
pathogenicity and are associated with F protein intracellular processing. 
Tyrosine residues mutants affect the transportation of the F protein from the 
endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus, resulting in different cleavage 
efficiencies. F protein is subsequently transported to the cell surface where it 
participates in viral budding, a process closely related to the distinctions in 
pathogenicity caused by the tyrosine residues. In addition, the different 
mutations all led to a hypofusogenic phenotype. We believe that the highly 
conserved tyrosine residue of the YLMY motif uses a similar mechanism to the 
tyrosine-based motif (YXXÎ¦) to regulate F protein transport and thus affect 
viral replication and pathogenicity. IMPORTANCE The amino-terminal cytoplasmic 
domains of paramyxovirus fusion glycoproteins include trafficking signals that 
influence protein processing and cell surface expression. This study clarified 
that tyrosine residues at different positions in the YLMY motif in the 
cytoplasmic region of the F protein regulate F protein transportation, thereby 
affecting viral replication and pathogenicity. This study has increased our 
understanding of how NDV virulence is mediated by the F protein and provides a 
fresh perspective on the role of CT in the virus's life cycle. This information 
may be useful in the development of NDV as an effective vaccine vector and 
oncolytic agent.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.02173-21
PMCID: PMC8694109
PMID: 34937182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.