1. Hum Mol Genet. 2022 Jun 4;31(11):1844-1859. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab367.

Modeling gain-of-function and loss-of-function components of SPAST-based 
hereditary spastic paraplegia using transgenic mice.

Piermarini E(1), Akarsu S(1)(2), Connors T(1), Kneussel M(3), Lane MA(1), 
Morfini G(4), Karabay A(2), Baas PW(1), Qiang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Drexel University College of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19129, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul Technical University, 
Istanbul 34469, Turkey.
(3)Department of Molecular Neurogenetics, Center for Molecular Neurobiology, 
ZMNH, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 20251, Germany.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a disease in which dieback degeneration 
of corticospinal tracts, accompanied by axonal swellings, leads to gait 
deficiencies. SPG4-HSP, the most common form of the disease, results from 
mutations of human spastin gene (SPAST), which is the gene that encodes spastin, 
a microtubule-severing protein. The lack of a vertebrate model that 
recapitulates both the etiology and symptoms of SPG4-HSP has stymied the 
development of effective therapies for the disease. hSPAST-C448Y mice, which 
express human mutant spastin at the ROSA26 locus, display corticospinal dieback 
and gait deficiencies but not axonal swellings. On the other hand, mouse spastin 
gene (Spast)-knockout (KO) mice display axonal swellings but not corticospinal 
dieback or gait deficiencies. One possibility is that reduced spastin function, 
resulting in axonal swellings, is not the cause of the disease but exacerbates 
the toxic effects of the mutant protein. To explore this idea, Spast-KO and 
hSPAST-C448Y mice were crossbred, and the offspring were compared with the 
parental lines via histological and behavioral analyses. The crossbred animals 
displayed axonal swellings as well as earlier onset, worsened gait deficiencies 
and corticospinal dieback compared with the hSPAST-C448Y mouse. These results, 
together with observations on changes in histone deacetylases 6 and tubulin 
modifications in the axon, indicate that each of these three transgenic mouse 
lines is valuable for investigating a different component of the disease 
pathology. Moreover, the crossbred mice are the best vertebrate model to date 
for testing potential therapies for SPG4-HSP.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddab367
PMCID: PMC9169457
PMID: 34935948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]