1. Anal Chem. 2022 Feb 1;94(4):2180-2188. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c04700. Epub
 2021 Dec 23.

A Miniature Multilevel Structures for Lossless Ion Manipulations Ion Mobility 
Spectrometer with Wide Mobility Range Separation Capabilities.

Hollerbach AL(1), Norheim RV(1), Kwantwi-Barima P(1), Smith RD(1), Ibrahim 
YM(1).

Author information:
(1)Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, P.O. Box 
999, Richland, Washington 99354, United States.

Ion mobility spectrometry employing structures for lossless ion manipulations 
(SLIM-IMS) is an attractive gas-phase separation technique due to its ability to 
achieve unprecedented effective ion path lengths (>1 km) and IMS resolving 
powers in a small footprint. The emergence of multilevel SLIM technology, where 
ions are transferred between vertically stacked SLIM electrode surfaces, has 
subsequently allowed for ultralong single-pass path lengths (>40 m) to be 
achieved, enabling ultrahigh resolution IMS measurements to be performed over 
the entire mobility range in a single experiment. Here, we report on the 
development of a 1 m path length miniature SLIM module (miniSLIM) based on 
multilevel SLIM technology. Ion trajectory simulations were used to optimize 
SLIM board spacings and SLIM board thicknesses, and a new method of efficiently 
transferring ions between SLIM levels using asymmetric traveling waves (TWs) was 
demonstrated. We experimentally characterized the performance of the miniSLIM 
IMS-MS relative to a drift tube IMS-MS using Agilent tuning mixture cations and 
tetraalkylammonium cations. The miniSLIM achieved a resolving power of up to 131 
(CCS/ΔCCS), which is ∼1.5× higher than achievable with a 78 cm path length drift 
tube IMS. Additionally, the entire ion mobility range was successfully 
transmitted in a single separation. We also demonstrated the miniSLIM's 
performance as a standalone IMS system (i.e., without MS), which showed baseline 
separation between all AgTM cations and a clear differentiation between 
different charge states of a standard peptide mixture. Overall, the miniSLIM 
provides a compact alternative to high performance IMS instruments possessing 
similar path lengths.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c04700
PMCID: PMC9048586
PMID: 34939415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Notes The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.