1. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2022 Apr 1;54(4):566-581. doi: 
10.1249/MSS.0000000000002841.

Regular Aerobic Exercise Attenuates Pain and Anxiety in Mice by Restoring 
Serotonin-Modulated Synaptic Plasticity in the Anterior Cingulate Cortex.

Zhou YS, Meng FC, Cui Y, Xiong YL(1), Li XY(2), Meng FB(2), Niu ZX(2), Zheng 
JX(2), Quan YQ(2), Wu SX(2), Han Y, Xu H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, CHINA.
(2)Department of Neurobiology and Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain 
Science, School of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, 
CHINA.

PURPOSE: Clinical studies found that regular aerobic exercise has analgesic and 
antianxiety effects; however, the underlying neural mechanisms remain unclear. 
Multiple studies have suggested that regular aerobic exercise may exert 
brain-protective effects by promoting the release of serotonin, which may be a 
pain modulator. Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is a key brain area for pain 
information processing, receiving dense serotonergic innervation. As a result, 
we hypothesized that exercise may increase the release of serotonin in the ACC, 
thus improving pain and anxiety behaviors.
METHODS: Integrative methods were used, including behavioral, 
electrophysiological, pharmacological, biochemical, and genetic approaches, to 
explore the effects of regular aerobic exercise and the underlying neural 
mechanisms.
RESULTS: Regular aerobic exercise in the form of voluntary wheel running for 30 
min daily for 15 d showed significant effectiveness in relieving pain and 
concomitant anxiety in complete Freund's adjuvant-induced chronic inflammation 
pain models. c-Fos staining and multielectrode array recordings revealed 
alterations in neuronal activities and synaptic plasticity in the ACC. Moreover, 
systemic pharmacological treatment with 4-chloro-dl-phenylalanine (PCPA) to 
deplete endogenous serotonin and local delivery of serotonin to the ACC revealed 
that exercise-related serotonin release in the ACC bidirectionally modulates 
pain sensitization and anxiety behaviors by modulating synaptic plasticity in 
the ACC. Furthermore, we found that 5-HT1A and 5-HT7 receptors mediated the 
serotonin modulation effects under conditions of regular aerobic exercise 
through local infusion of a selective antagonist and shRNA in the ACC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal that regular aerobic exercise can increase 
serotonin release and modulate synaptic plasticity in the ACC, ultimately 
improving pain and concomitant anxiety behaviors through the functions of the 
5-HT1A and 5-HT7 receptors.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American College of Sports Medicine.

DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000002841
PMCID: PMC8920021
PMID: 34935710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]