1. J Transl Med. 2021 Dec 20;19(1):517. doi: 10.1186/s12967-021-03189-3.

Development of an ultra-sensitive human IL-33 biomarker assay for age-related 
macular degeneration and asthma drug development.

Mai E(1), Chan J(1), Goon L(1)(2), Ego BK(1)(3), Bevers J(4), Wong T(5), Wong 
M(5), Corpuz R(5), Xi H(4)(6), Wu J(4), Schneider K(4), Seshasayee D(4), 
Grimbaldeston M(7), Nakamura G(4), Indjeian VB(7), van Lookeren Campagne 
M(6)(8), Loyet KM(1), Comps-Agrar L(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical and Cellular Pharmacology, Genentech Inc., South 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology and Compound Repository, Exelixis, Alameda, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Antibody Engineering, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(5)Department of Structural Biology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(6)Department of Immunology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Department of OMNI-Biomarker Development, Genentech Inc., South San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Inflammation and Oncology, Amgen Research, Amgen Inc., South 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Biochemical and Cellular Pharmacology, Genentech Inc., South 
San Francisco, CA, USA. compsagl@gene.com.

BACKGROUND: Over the past decade, human Interleukin 33 (hIL-33) has emerged as a 
key contributor to the pathogenesis of numerous inflammatory diseases. Despite 
the existence of several commercial hIL-33 assays spanning multiple platform 
technologies, their ability to provide accurate hIL-33 concentration 
measurements and to differentiate between active (reduced) and inactive 
(oxidized) hIL-33 in various matrices remains uncertain. This is especially true 
for lower sample volumes, matrices with low hIL-33 concentrations, and matrices 
with elevated levels of soluble Interleukin 1 Receptor-Like 1 (sST2), an 
inactive form of ST2 that competes with membrane bound ST2 for hIL-33 binding.
RESULTS: We tested the performance of several commercially available hIL-33 
detection assays in various human matrices and found that most of these assays 
lacked the sensitivity to accurately detect reduced hIL-33 at biologically 
relevant levels (sub-to-low pg/mL), especially in the presence of human sST2 
(hsST2), and/or lacked sufficient target specificity. To address this, we 
developed and validated a sensitive and specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA) capable of detecting reduced and total hIL-33 levels even in the 
presence of high concentrations of sST2. By incorporating the immuno-polymerase 
chain reaction (iPCR) platform, we further increased the sensitivity of this 
assay for the reduced form of hIL-33 by ~ 52-fold. Using this hIL-33 iPCR assay, 
we detected hIL-33 in postmortem human vitreous humor (VH) samples from donors 
with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and found significantly increased 
hIL-33 levels when compared to control individuals. No statistically significant 
difference was observed in aqueous humor (AH) from AMD donors nor in plasma and 
nasosorption fluid (NF) from asthma patients compared to control individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike existing commercial hIL-33 assays, our hIL-33 bioassays are 
highly sensitive and specific and can accurately quantify hIL-33 in various 
human clinical matrices, including those with high levels of hsST2. Our results 
provide a proof of concept of the utility of these assays in clinical trials 
targeting the hIL-33/hST2 pathway.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-021-03189-3
PMCID: PMC8686655
PMID: 34930320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors were employees of Genentech, 
Inc./Hoffmann La-Roche at the time of this study. MvLC and LG are currently 
employees of Amgen Inc. and Exelixis, respectively.