1. Biomacromolecules. 2022 Jan 10;23(1):443-453. doi: 10.1021/acs.biomac.1c01398.
 Epub 2021 Dec 22.

Adding Humic Acids to Gelatin Hydrogels: A Way to Tune Gelation.

Venezia V(1), Avallone PR(1), Vitiello G(1), Silvestri B(1), Grizzuti N(1), 
Pasquino R(1), Luciani G(1).

Author information:
(1)DICMaPI, Universit√† degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, P.le Tecchio 80, 80125 
Napoli, Italy.

Exploring the chance to convert biowaste into a valuable resource, this study 
tests the potential role of humic acids (HA), a class of multifunctional 
compounds obtained by oxidative decomposition of biomass, as physical agents to 
improve gelatin's mechanical and thermal properties. To this purpose, gelatin-HA 
aqueous samples were prepared at increasing HA content. HA/gelatin 
concentrations changed in the range 2.67-26.67 (wt/wt)%. Multiple techniques 
were employed to assess the influence of HA content on the gel properties and to 
unveil the underlying mechanisms. HAs increased gel strength up to a 
concentration of 13.33 (wt/wt)% and led to a weaker gel at higher 
concentrations. FT-IR and DSC results proved that HAs can establish noncovalent 
interactions through H-bonding with gelatin. Coagulation phenomena occur because 
of HA-gelatin interactions, and at concentrations greater than 13.33 (wt/wt)%, 
HAs established preferential bonds with water molecules, preventing them from 
coordinating with gelatin chains. These features were accompanied by a change in 
the secondary structure of gelatin, which lost the triple helix structure and 
exhibited an increase in the random coil conformation. Besides, higher HA weight 
content caused swelling phenomena due to HA water absorption, contributing to a 
weaker gel. The current findings may be useful to enable a better control of 
gelatin structures modified with composted biowaste, extending their 
exploitation for a large set of technological applications.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biomac.1c01398
PMCID: PMC8753605
PMID: 34936338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.