1. Front Mol Biosci. 2021 Dec 6;8:785445. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.785445. 
eCollection 2021.

The Variants at APOA1 and APOA4 Contribute to the Susceptibility of 
Schizophrenia With Inhibiting mRNA Expression in Peripheral Blood Leukocytes.

Fan Y(1)(2), Gao J(3), Li Y(4), Chen X(5), Zhang T(2), You W(3), Xue Y(5), Shen 
C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Jiangsu Province Geriatric Institute, 
Geriatric Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Medical Psychology, Huai'an Third Hospital, Huai'an, China.
(5)Department of Medical Laboratory, Huai'an Third Hospital, Huai'an, China.

Objective: Abnormal lipid metabolism has a close link to the pathophysiology of 
schizophrenia (SZ). This study mainly aimed to evaluate the association of 
variants at apolipoprotein A1 (APOA1) and APOA4 with SZ in a Chinese Han 
population. Methods: The rs5072 of APOA1 and rs1268354 of APOA4 were examined in 
a case-control study involving 2,680 patients with SZ from the hospital and 
2,223 healthy controls screened by physical examination from the community 
population. The association was estimated with the odds ratio (OR) and 95% 
confidence intervals (95% CIs) by logistic regression. The APOA1 and APOA4 
messenger RNA (mRNA) in peripheral blood leukocytes were measured by real-time 
PCR and compared between SZ cases and controls. Serum apoA1 levels were detected 
by turbidimetric inhibition immunoassay and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(HDL-C) levels were detected by the homogeneous method. Results: Both of the 
rs5072 of APOA1 and rs1268354 of APOA4 had statistically significant 
associations with SZ. After adjustment for age and sex, ORs (95% CIs) of the 
additive model of rs5072 and rs1268354 were 0.82 (0.75-0.90) and 1.120 
(1.03-1.23), and p-values were 3.22 × 10-5 and 0.011, respectively. The 
association of rs5072 with SZ still presented statistical significance even 
after Bonferroni correction (p-value×6). SZ patients during the episode 
presented lower levels of apoA1, HDL-C, mRNA of APOA1 common variants and 
transcript variant 4, and APOA4 mRNA than controls (p < 0.01) while SZ patients 
in remission showed a significantly decreased APOA1 transcript variant 3 
expression level and increased APOA4 mRNA expression level (p < 0.01). mRNA 
expression levels of APOA1 transcript variant 4 significantly increased with the 
variations of rs5072 in SZ during the episode (p trend = 0.017). After the SZ 
patients received an average of 27.50 ± 9.90 days of antipsychotic treatment, 
the median (interquartile) of serum apoA1 in the SZ episode significantly 
increased from 1.03 (1.00.1.20) g/L to 1.08 (1.00.1.22) g/L with the p-value of 
0.044. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that the genetic variations of APOA1 
rs5072 and APOA4 rs1268354 contribute to the susceptibility of SZ, and the 
expression levels of APOA1 and APOA4 mRNA of peripheral blood leukocytes 
decreased in SZ patients during the episode while APOA4 increased after 
antipsychotic treatment.

Copyright © 2021 Fan, Gao, Li, Chen, Zhang, You, Xue and Shen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.785445
PMCID: PMC8685515
PMID: 34938775

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.