1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Dec 10;11(12):2324. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics11122324.

Kidney Involvement in Acute Hepatic Porphyrias: Pathophysiology and Diagnostic 
Implications.

Ricci A(1), Guida CC(2), Manzini P(3), Cuoghi C(1), Ventura P(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Science for 
Children and Adults, Regional Reference Centre for Diagnosing and Management of 
Porphyrias, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Azienda 
Ospedaliero-Universitaria Policlinico of Modena, Largo del Pozzo 71, 41124 
Modena, Italy.
(2)Interregional Reference Center for the Prevention, Surveillance, Diagnosis 
and Treatment of Porphyria, Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Scientific Institute 
for Research and Health Care, Viale Cappuccini, San Giovanni Rotondo, 71013 
Foggia, Italy.
(3)Transfusion Medicine and Blood Establishment, Regional Reference Centre for 
Diagnosis and Management of Porphyrias, University Hospital City of Science and 
Health of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy.

Porphyrias are a group of rare disorders originating from an enzyme dysfunction 
in the pathway of heme biosynthesis. Depending on the specific enzyme involved, 
porphyrias manifest under drastically different clinical pictures. The most 
dramatic presentation of the four congenital acute hepatic porphyrias (AHPs: 
acute intermittent porphyria-AIP, ALAD deficiency, hereditary 
coproporphyria-HCP, and porphyria variegata-VP) consists of potentially 
life-threatening neurovisceral attacks, for which givosiran, a novel and 
effective siRNA-based therapeutic, has recently been licensed. Nonetheless, the 
clinical manifestations of acute porphyrias are multifaceted and do not limit 
themselves to acute attacks. In particular, porphyria-associated kidney disease 
(PAKD) is a distinct, long-term degenerating condition with specific 
pathological and clinical features, for which a satisfactory treatment is not 
available yet. In PAKD, chronic tubule-interstitial damage has been most 
commonly reported, though other pathologic features (e.g., chronic fibrous 
intimal hyperplasia) are consistent findings. Given the relevant role of the 
kidney in porphyrin metabolism, the mechanisms possibly intervening in causing 
renal damage in AHPs are different: among others, Î´-aminolevulinic acid 
(ALA)-induced oxidative damage on mitochondria, intracellular toxic aggregation 
of porphyrins in proximal tubular cells, and derangements in the delicate 
microcirculatory balances of the kidney might be implicated. The presence of a 
variant of the human peptide transporter 2 (PEPT2), with a greater affinity to 
its substrates (including ALA), might confer a greater susceptibility to kidney 
damage in patients with AHPs. Furthermore, a possible effect of givosiran in 
worsening kidney function has been observed. In sum, the diagnostic workup of 
AHPs should always include a baseline evaluation of renal function, and periodic 
monitoring of the progression of kidney disease in patients with AHPs is 
strongly recommended. This review outlines the role of the kidney in porphyrin 
metabolism, the available evidence in support of the current etiologic and 
pathogenetic hypotheses, and the known clinical features of renal involvement in 
acute hepatic porphyrias.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11122324
PMCID: PMC8700387
PMID: 34943561

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.