1. Biomedicines. 2021 Dec 17;9(12):1938. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9121938.

Discovery, Development, Inventions, and Patent Trends on Mobocertinib Succinate: 
The First-in-Class Oral Treatment for NSCLC with EGFR Exon 20 Insertions.

Imran M(1), Khan SA(2), Alshammari MK(3), Alreshidi MA(4), Alreshidi AA(4), 
Alghonaim RS(5), Alanazi FA(6), Alshehri S(7), Ghoneim MM(8), Shakeel F(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Northern Border 
University, Rafha 91911, Saudi Arabia.
(2)College of Pharmacy, National University of Science and Technology, Muscat 
130, Oman.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Care, Rafha Central Hospital, Rafha 91911, Saudi 
Arabia.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Care, King Khaled Hospital, Hail 81411, Saudi 
Arabia.
(5)Department of Supply, Qassim Armed Forces Hospital, Qassim 51922, Saudi 
Arabia.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Care, Al Yamamah Hospital, Riyadh 14814, Saudi 
Arabia.
(7)Department of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, 
Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy, AlMaarefa University, 
Ad Diriyah 13713, Saudi Arabia.

The majority of lung cancers are non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) having a low 
survival rate. Recent studies have indicated the involvement of epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) oncogene mutations like EGFR exon 20 insertions 
(EGFRex20ins) mutation among NSCLC patients. The response of patients of NSCLC 
with the EGFRex20ins mutation to the currently available EGFR inhibitor is 
negligible. Mobocertinib is the first oral treatment that has been approved by 
the USFDA, on 15 September 2021, to treat NSCLC with the EGFRex20ins mutation. 
This patent review discusses the inventions and patent literature of 
mobocertinib that will help the scientific community to develop additional and 
improved inventions related to mobocertinib. The structure of mobocertinib was 
first reported in 2015. Therefore, this article covered the patents/patent 
applications related to mobocertinib from 2015 to 25 October 2021. The patent 
search revealed 27 patents/patent applications related to compound, method of 
treatment, salt, polymorph, process, composition, and drug combinations of 
mobocertinib. The authors foresee an exciting prospect for developing a 
treatment for NSCLC with EGFRex20ins mutation, and other cancers employing a 
combination of mobocertinib with other approved anticancer agents. The 
inventions related to novel dosage forms, processes, and intermediates used in 
the synthesis of mobocertinib are also anticipated.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9121938
PMCID: PMC8698942
PMID: 34944754

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.