1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Dec 8;13(24):6184. doi: 10.3390/cancers13246184.

Current Landscape of Sonodynamic Therapy for Treating Cancer.

Yamaguchi T(1), Kitahara S(1), Kusuda K(1), Okamoto J(1), Horise Y(1), Masamune 
K(1), Muragaki Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Advanced Techno Surgery (FATS), Institute of Advanced Biomedical 
Engineering and Science, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Shinjuku, Tokyo 
162-8666, Japan.

Recent advancements have tangibly changed the cancer treatment landscape. 
However, curative therapy for this dreadful disease remains an unmet need. 
Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) is a minimally invasive anti-cancer therapy involving 
a chemical sonosensitizer and focused ultrasound. A high-intensity focused 
ultrasound (HIFU) beam is used to destroy or denature targeted cancer tissues. 
Some SDTs are based on unfocused ultrasound (US). In some SDTs, HIFU is combined 
with a drug, known as a chemical sonosensitizer, to amplify the drug's ability 
to damage cancer cells preferentially. The mechanism by which US interferes with 
cancer cell function is further amplified by applying acoustic sensitizers. 
Combining multiple chemical sonosensitizers with US creates a substantial 
synergistic effect that could effectively disrupt tumorigenic growth, induce 
cell death, and elicit an immune response. Therefore, the minimally invasive SDT 
treatment is currently attracting attention. It can be combined with targeted 
therapy (double-targeting cancer therapy) and immunotherapy in the future and is 
expected to be a boon for treating previously incurable cancers. In this paper, 
we will consider the current state of this therapy and discuss parts of our 
research.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13246184
PMCID: PMC8699567
PMID: 34944804

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.