1. Biomedicines. 2021 Dec 14;9(12):1908. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9121908.

Epigenome-Wide Histone Acetylation Changes in Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells 
in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Atherosclerotic Disease.

Bompada P(1), Goncalves I(2)(3), Wu C(1)(4)(5), Gao R(4), Sun J(2), Mir BA(1), 
Luan C(1), Renström E(1), Groop L(1)(6), Weng J(7)(8), Hansson O(1)(9), Edsfeldt 
A(2)(3)(10), De Marinis Y(1)(4)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 20502 Malmö, Sweden.
(2)Cardiovascular Research-Translational Studies, Institution of Clinical 
Science Malmö, Lund University, 20502 Malmö, Sweden.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Skåne University Hospital, 20502 Malmö, Sweden.
(4)School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan 250061, 
China.
(5)School of Intelligent Engineering, Shandong Management University, Jinan 
250100, China.
(6)Finnish Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of Helsinki, 00290 
Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Clinical Research Hospital, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230001, China.
(8)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Division of Life Sciences of 
Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230001, China.
(9)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki University, 00290 
Helsinki, Finland.
(10)Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine, Lund University, 20502 Malmö, 
Sweden.

There is emerging evidence of an association between epigenetic modifications, 
glycemic control and atherosclerosis risk. In this study, we mapped genome-wide 
epigenetic changes in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and advanced 
atherosclerotic disease. We performed chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing 
(ChIP-seq) using a histone 3 lysine 9 acetylation (H3K9ac) mark in peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells from patients with atherosclerosis with T2D (n = 8) or 
without T2D (ND, n = 10). We mapped epigenome changes and identified 23,394 and 
13,133 peaks in ND and T2D individuals, respectively. Out of all the peaks, 753 
domains near the transcription start site (TSS) were unique to T2D. We found 
that T2D in atherosclerosis leads to an H3K9ac increase in 118, and loss in 63 
genomic regions. Furthermore, we discovered an association between the genomic 
locations of significant H3K9ac changes with genetic variants identified in 
previous T2D GWAS. The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) rs7903146, 
together with several human leukocyte antigen (HLA) variants, were among the 
domains with the most dramatic changes of H3K9ac enrichments. Pathway analysis 
revealed multiple activated pathways involved in immunity, including type 1 
diabetes. Our results present novel evidence on the interaction between genetics 
and epigenetics, as well as epigenetic changes related to immunity in patients 
with T2D and advanced atherosclerotic disease.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9121908
PMCID: PMC8698994
PMID: 34944721

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.