1. Microorganisms. 2021 Nov 24;9(12):2423. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9122423.

Genomic Insights into Denitrifying Methane-Oxidizing Bacteria Gemmobacter fulva 
sp. Nov., Isolated from an Anabaena Culture.

Jin L(1), Jin CZ(2), Lee HG(2), Lee CS(3).

Author information:
(1)Co-Innovation Centre for Sustainable Forestry in Southern China, College of 
Biology and the Environment, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, China.
(2)Cell Factory Research Centre, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience & 
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 34141, Korea.
(3)Protist Research Team, Microbial Research Department, Nakdonggang National 
Institute of Biological Resources, Sangju 37242, Korea.

The genus Gemmobacter grows phototrophically, aerobically, or anaerobically, and 
utilizes methylated amine. Here, we present two high-quality complete genomes of 
the strains con4 and con5T isolated from a culture of Anabaena. The strains 
possess sMMO (soluble methane monooxygenase)-oxidizing alkanes to carbon 
dioxide. Functional genes for methane-oxidation (prmAC, mimBD, adh, gfa, fdh) 
were identified. The genome of strain con5T contains nirB, nirK, nirQ, norB, 
norC, and norG genes involved in dissimilatory nitrate reduction. The presence 
of nitrite reductase gene (nirK) and the nitric-oxide reductase gene (norB) 
indicates that it could potentially use nitrite as an electron acceptor in 
anoxic environments. Taxonomic investigations were also performed on two strains 
through polyphasic methods, proposing two isolates as a novel species of the 
genus Gemmobacter. The findings obtained through the whole genome analyses 
provide genome-based evidence of complete oxidation of methane to carbon 
dioxide. This study provides a genetic blueprint of Gemmobacter&nbsp;fulva con5T 
and its biochemical characteristics, which help us to understand the 
evolutionary biology of the genus Gemmobacter.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9122423
PMCID: PMC8709402
PMID: 34946025

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.