1. Children (Basel). 2021 Dec 3;8(12):1122. doi: 10.3390/children8121122.

Reducing the Burden of Care: Multidisciplinary Management of Late-Manifested 
Crouzon Syndrome-A Case Report.

Achterrath S(1)(2), Kruse T(1)(2), Neuschulz J(1)(2), Graf I(1)(2), ZÃ¶ller 
J(2)(3), Braumann B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, North Rhine Westphalia, Germany.
(2)Center for Rare Orofacial and Craniofacial Malformations, Faculty of Medicine 
and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, North 
Rhine Westphalia, Germany.
(3)Department of Oral and Craniomaxillofacial and Plastic Surgery, Faculty of 
Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, 
North Rhine Westphalia, Germany.

The therapy of patients with Crouzon syndrome involves a multidisciplinary team. 
In most cases, this therapy is extensive, time-consuming, and exhausting for the 
patient. This case report illustrates a temporally coordinated therapy plan that 
succeeds in reducing the burden of care. Showing typical extraoral 
characteristics of Crouzon syndrome, the patient had a frontal and left-sided 
crossbite, and impaction of the maxillary canines. Multidisciplinary therapy 
included the extraction of multiple teeth, midface distraction at Le Fort III 
level, and alignment of the impacted teeth. Before starting, during, and after 
completion of the treatment, the patient's oral health-related quality of life 
was assessed using COHIP-19. The combination of different treatment steps 
significantly reduced the duration of therapy. The therapy improved not only the 
patient's oro- and craniofacial function, but also the patient's facial 
appearance in a short treatment period. The patient's quality of life improved 
considerably during this time. In the treatment of severe craniofacial 
anomalies, the highest priority should be given to keeping the burden of care 
low. All measures should encourage young patients' appropriate psychosocial 
development despite extensive therapies, ensuring at the same time medically 
satisfactory treatment results.

DOI: 10.3390/children8121122
PMCID: PMC8700770
PMID: 34943318

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.