1. J Pers Med. 2021 Dec 6;11(12):1309. doi: 10.3390/jpm11121309.

Huntingtin Ubiquitination Mechanisms and Novel Possible Therapies to Decrease 
the Toxic Effects of Mutated Huntingtin.

Fiorillo A(1), Morea V(2), Colotti G(2), Ilari A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Sciences "A. Rossi Fanelli", "Sapienza" University 
of Rome, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology of The National Research Council 
of Italy (CNR), P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.

Huntington Disease (HD) is a dominant, lethal neurodegenerative disorder caused 
by the abnormal expansion (>35 copies) of a CAG triplet located in exon 1 of the 
HTT gene encoding the huntingtin protein (Htt). Mutated Htt (mHtt) easily 
aggregates, thereby inducing ER stress that in turn leads to neuronal injury and 
apoptosis. Therefore, both the inhibition of mHtt aggregate formation and the 
acceleration of mHtt degradation represent attractive strategies to delay HD 
progression, and even for HD treatment. Here, we describe the mechanism 
underlying mHtt degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), which has 
been shown to play a more important role than the autophagy-lysosomal pathway. 
In particular, we focus on E3 ligase proteins involved in the UPS and detail 
their structure-function relationships. In this framework, we discuss the 
possible exploitation of PROteolysis TArgeting Chimeras (PROTACs) for HD 
therapy. PROTACs are heterobifunctional small molecules that comprise two 
different ligands joined by an appropriate linker; one of the ligands is 
specific for a selected E3 ubiquitin ligase, the other ligand is able to recruit 
a target protein of interest, in this case mHtt. As a consequence of PROTAC 
binding, mHtt and the E3 ubiquitin ligase can be brought to a relative position 
that allows mHtt to be ubiquitinated and, ultimately, allows a reduction in the 
amount of mHtt in the cell.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm11121309
PMCID: PMC8709430
PMID: 34945781

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.