1. Front Oncol. 2021 Dec 9;11:796774. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.796774. eCollection 
2021.

The Association of MEG3 Gene rs7158663 Polymorphism With Cancer Susceptibility.

Gao X(1), Li X(1), Zhang S(2), Wang X(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Yancheng Teachers' University, Yancheng, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Xuhui District Central Hospital, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Physical Examination Centre, Xuhui District Central Hospital, Shanghai, 
China.

Although the association of MEG3 gene rs7158663 polymorphism with cancer 
susceptibility has been investigated, the findings are inconsistent. The aim of 
this study was to analyze the association between the rs7158663 polymorphism and 
cancer susceptibility through a case-control study and meta-analysis. In a 
case-control study with 430 colorectal cancer (CRC) cases and 445 healthy 
controls, the rs7158663 polymorphism was genotyped by direct sequencing. STATA 
software was used to calculate the pooled odds ratio and 95% confidence interval 
in a meta-analysis including 4,649 cancer cases and 5,590 controls. Both the 
case-control study and meta-analysis showed that the rs7158663 polymorphism was 
associated with increased susceptibility to CRC. Individuals carrying the AA or 
GA genotype were more likely to develop CRC than those carrying the rs7158663 GG 
genotype. Interestingly, MEG3 expression was significantly lower in colorectal 
tissues of the AA or GA genotype compared to those of the rs7158663 GG genotype. 
In addition, the meta-analysis suggested that the rs7158663 polymorphism was 
also associated with increased susceptibility to breast cancer and gastric 
cancer. Bioinformatics analysis showed that the rs7158663 A allele contributed 
to the binding of hsa-miR-4307 and hsa-miR-1265 to MEG3. In conclusion, the 
current findings suggest that the MEG3 gene rs7158663 polymorphism may serve as 
a genetic marker for predicting the risk of cancers, such as breast cancer, 
gastric cancer and CRC. However, the sample size of the current study is still 
insufficient, especially in the subgroup analysis. Therefore large and 
well-designed studies are needed to validate our findings.

Copyright Â© 2021 Gao, Li, Zhang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.796774
PMCID: PMC8695896
PMID: 34956908

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.