1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Feb;298(2):101526. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101526. Epub 2021
 Dec 24.

Structure and function of the ecto-nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 
(ENPP) family: Tidying up diversity.

Borza R(1), Salgado-Polo F(1), Moolenaar WH(2), Perrakis A(3).

Author information:
(1)Oncode Institute, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands; Division of Biochemistry, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Division of Biochemistry, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Oncode Institute, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands; Division of Biochemistry, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: a.perrakis@nki.nl.

Ecto-nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase (ENPP) family members 
(ENPP1-7) have been implicated in key biological and pathophysiological 
processes, including nucleotide and phospholipid signaling, bone mineralization, 
fibrotic diseases, and tumor-associated immune cell infiltration. ENPPs are 
single-pass transmembrane ecto-enzymes, with notable exceptions of ENPP2 
(Autotaxin) and ENNP6, which are secreted and glycosylphosphatidylinositol 
(GPI)-anchored, respectively. ENNP1 and ENNP2 are the best characterized and 
functionally the most interesting members. Here, we review the structural 
features of ENPP1-7 to understand how they evolved to accommodate specific 
substrates and mediate different biological activities. ENPPs are defined by a 
conserved phosphodiesterase (PDE) domain. In ENPP1-3, the PDE domain is flanked 
by two N-terminal somatomedin B-like domains and a C-terminal inactive nuclease 
domain that confers structural stability, whereas ENPP4-7 only possess the PDE 
domain. Structural differences in the substrate-binding site endow each protein 
with unique characteristics. Thus, ENPP1, ENPP3, ENPP4, and ENPP5 hydrolyze 
nucleotides, whereas ENPP2, ENPP6, and ENNP7 evolved as phospholipases through 
adaptions in the catalytic domain. These adaptations explain the different 
biological and pathophysiological functions of individual members. Understanding 
the ENPP members as a whole advances our insights into common mechanisms, 
highlights their functional diversity, and helps to explore new biological 
roles.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101526
PMCID: PMC8808174
PMID: 34958798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.