1. Eur J Neurol. 2022 Apr;29(4):1209-1217. doi: 10.1111/ene.15236. Epub 2022 Jan 
21.

Clinic and genetic predictors in response to erenumab.

Zecca C(1)(2), Cargnin S(3), Schankin C(4), Giannantoni NM(1), Viana M(1), 
Maraffi I(1), Riccitelli GC(1)(2), Sihabdeen S(1), Terrazzino S(3), Gobbi 
C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Neurocenter of Southern Switzerland, Ospedale 
Regionale di Lugano, EOC, Lugano, Switzerland.
(2)Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Università della Svizzera Italiana, Lugano, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Interdepartmental Research Center 
of Pharmacogenetics and Pharmacogenomics (CRIFF), University of Piemonte 
Orientale "A. Avogadro", Novara, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Erenumab (ERE) is the first anticalcitonin gene-related 
peptide receptor monoclonal antibody approved for migraine prevention. A 
proportion of patients do not adequately respond to ERE.
METHODS: Prospective multicenter study involving 110 migraine patients starting 
ERE 70 mg monthly. Baseline socio-demographics and migraine characteristics, 
including mean monthly migraine days (MMDs), migraine-related burden (MIDAS 
[Migraine Disability Assessment scale] and Headache Impact Test-6), and use of 
abortive medications, during 3 months before and after ERE start were collected. 
Real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to determine polymorphic variants 
of calcitonin receptor-like receptor and receptor activity-modifying protein-1 
genes. Logistic regression models were used to identify independent predictors 
for 50% responder patients (50-RESP) and 75% responder patients (75-RESP).
RESULTS: At month 3, MMDs decreased from 17.2 to 9.2 (p < 0.0001), 59/110 
(53.6%) patients were 50-RESP, and 30/110 (27.3%) were 75-RESP. Age at migraine 
onset (odds ratio [OR] [95% confidence interval (95% CI)]: 1.062 [1.008-1.120], 
p = 0.024), number of failed preventive medications (0.753 [0.600-0.946], 
p = 0.015), and MIDAS score (1.011 [1.002-1.020], p = 0.017) were associated 
with 75-RESP. Among the genetic variants investigated, RAMP1 rs7590387 was found 
associated with a lower probability of being 75-RESP (per G allele OR [95% CI]: 
0.53 [0.29-0.99], p = 0.048]), but this association did not survive adjustment 
for confounding clinical variables (per G allele, 0.55 [0.28-1.10], p = 0.09]).
CONCLUSIONS: In this real-word study, treatment with ERE significantly reduced 
MMDs. The number of failed preventive medications, migraine burden, and age at 
migraine onset predicted response to ERE. Larger studies are required to confirm 
a possible role of RAMP1 rs7590387 as genetic predictor of ERE efficacy.

© 2021 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.15236
PMCID: PMC9306465
PMID: 34965002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared the following potential 
conflicts of interest with the respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article: the employer of C.Z. receives support for advisor 
activities, speaking, or grants from Celgene, Genzyme, Lilly, Merck, Novartis, 
Roche, and grants from Abbvie, Almirall, Biogen Idec, Celgene, Genzyme, Lilly, 
Merck, Novartis, Roche, Teva Pharma. C.S. reports scientific support, travel 
support, and/or honoraria from Novartis, Eli Lilly, TEVA Pharmaceuticals, 
Lundbeck, Allergan, Almirall, Amgen, MindMed, Grünenthal. C.S. is a part‐time 
employee at Zynnon. C.S. received research grants from German Migraine and 
Headache Society, Eye on Vision Foundation, and Baasch Medicus Foundation. The 
employer of C.G. receives support for advisor activities, speaking or grants 
from Celgene, Genzyme, Lilly, Merck, Novartis, Roche, and grants from Abbvie, 
Almirall, Biogen Idec, Celgene, Genzyme, Lilly, Merck, Novartis, Roche, Teva 
Pharma. S.C., G.C.R., S.T., M.V., N.M.G., I.M., and S.S. have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.