1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Dec 10;21(24):8275. doi: 10.3390/s21248275.

A Novel Mobile Device-Based Approach to Quantitative Mobility Measurements for 
Power Wheelchair Users.

Fu J(1), Zhang S(1), Wang H(2), Zhao YD(3), Qian G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, OK 
73034, USA.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Science, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

This study is motivated by the fact that there are currently no widely used 
applications available to quantitatively measure a power wheelchair user's 
mobility, which is an important indicator of quality of life. To address this 
issue, we propose an approach that allows power wheelchair users to use their 
own mobile devices, e.g., a smartphone or smartwatch, to non-intrusively collect 
mobility data in their daily life. However, the convenience of data collection 
brings substantial challenges in data analysis because the data patterns 
associated with wheelchair maneuvers are not as strong as other activities, 
e.g., walking, running, etc. In addition, the built-in sensors in different 
mobile devices create significant heterogeneity in terms of sensitivity, noise 
patterns, sampling settings, etc. To address the aforementioned challenges, we 
developed a novel approach composed of algorithms that work collaboratively to 
reduce noise, identify patterns intrinsic to wheelchair maneuvers, and finalize 
mobility analysis by removing spikes and dips caused by abrupt maneuver changes. 
We conducted a series of experiments to evaluate the proposed approach. 
Experimental results showed that our approach could accurately determine 
wheelchair maneuvers regardless of the models and placements of the mobile 
devices.

DOI: 10.3390/s21248275
PMCID: PMC8705856
PMID: 34960371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.