1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2022 Mar;45(2):203-214. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12471. Epub
2022  Jan 14.

Neonatal GALT gene replacement offers metabolic and phenotypic correction 
through early adulthood in a rat model of classic galactosemia.

Daenzer JMI(1), Rasmussen SA(1), Patel S(2), McKenna J 3rd(1), Fridovich-Keil 
JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(2)Emory College, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Classic galactosemia (CG) results from profound deficiency of galactose-1-P 
uridylyltransferase (GALT). Despite early detection by newborn screening and 
lifelong dietary restriction of galactose, most patients grow to experience a 
range of long-term complications. Recently, we developed and characterized a 
GALT-null rat model of CG and demonstrated that AAV9-hGALT, administered by tail 
vein injection to neonatal pups, dramatically improved plasma, liver, and brain 
galactose metabolites at 2 weeks posttreatment. Here we report a time-course 
study of GALT restoration in rats treated as neonates with scAAV9-hGALT and 
harvested at 8, 14, 30, and 60 days. Cohorts of rats in the two older groups 
were weaned to diets containing either 1% or 3% of calories from galactose. As 
expected, GALT activity in all treated animals peaked early and then diminished 
over time, most notably in liver, ostensibly due to dilution of the 
nonreplicating episomal vector as transduced cells divided. All treated rats 
showed dramatic metabolic rescue through 1 month, and those weaned to the lower 
galactose diet showed continued strong metabolic rescue into adulthood 
(2 months). Prepubertal growth delay and cataracts were both partially rescued 
by treatment. Finally, we found that UDP glucose pyrophosphorylase (UGP), which 
offers a metabolic bypass around missing GALT, was 3-fold more active in brain 
samples from adult rats than from young pups, offering a possible explanation 
for the improved ability of older GALT-null rats to metabolize galactose. 
Combined, these results document promising metabolic and phenotypic efficacy of 
neonatal GALT gene replacement in a rat model of classic galactosemia.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12471
PMCID: PMC8930472
PMID: 34964137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.