1. Viruses. 2021 Dec 5;13(12):2438. doi: 10.3390/v13122438.

ATM-Dependent Phosphorylation of Hepatitis B Core Protein in Response to 
Genotoxic Stress.

Lubyova B(1), Tikalova E(1), Krulova K(1), Hodek J(1), Zabransky A(1), Hirsch 
I(1)(2), Weber J(1).

Author information:
(1)IOCB Gilead Research Center, Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry 
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, 160 00 Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Charles 
University, BIOCEV, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic.

Chronic hepatitis caused by infection with the Hepatitis B virus is a 
life-threatening condition. In fact, 1 million people die annually due to liver 
cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma. Recently, several studies demonstrated a 
molecular connection between the host DNA damage response (DDR) pathway and HBV 
replication and reactivation. Here, we investigated the role of 
Ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) and Ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related 
(ATR) PI3-kinases in phosphorylation of the HBV core protein (HBc). We 
determined that treatment of HBc-expressing hepatocytes with genotoxic agents, 
e.g., etoposide or hydrogen peroxide, activated the host ATM-Chk2 pathway, as 
determined by increased phosphorylation of ATM at Ser1981 and Chk2 at Thr68. The 
activation of ATM led, in turn, to increased phosphorylation of cytoplasmic HBc 
at serine-glutamine (SQ) motifs located in its C-terminal domain. Conversely, 
down-regulation of ATM using ATM-specific siRNAs or inhibitor effectively 
reduced etoposide-induced HBc phosphorylation. Detailed mutation analysis of 
S-to-A HBc mutants revealed that S170 (S168 in a 183-aa HBc variant) is the 
primary site targeted by ATM-regulated phosphorylation. Interestingly, mutation 
of two major phosphorylation sites involving serines at positions 157 and 164 
(S155 and S162 in a 183-aa HBc variant) resulted in decreased etoposide-induced 
phosphorylation, suggesting that the priming phosphorylation at these 
serine-proline (SP) sites is vital for efficient phosphorylation of SQ motifs. 
Notably, the mutation of S172 (S170 in a 183-aa HBc variant) had the opposite 
effect and resulted in massively up-regulated phosphorylation of HBc, 
particularly at S170. Etoposide treatment of HBV infected HepG2-NTCP cells led 
to increased levels of secreted HBe antigen and intracellular HBc protein. 
Together, our studies identified HBc as a substrate for ATM-mediated 
phosphorylation and mapped the phosphorylation sites. The increased expression 
of HBc and HBe antigens in response to genotoxic stress supports the idea that 
the ATM pathway may provide growth advantage to the replicating virus.

DOI: 10.3390/v13122438
PMCID: PMC8705010
PMID: 34960710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.