1. EBioMedicine. 2022 Jan;75:103783. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103783. Epub 2021 
Dec 28.

Genomic insights in ascending aortic size and distensibility.

Benjamins JW(1), Yeung MW(2), van de Vegte YJ(3), Said MA(3), van der Linden 
T(3), Ties D(3), Juarez-Orozco LE(2), Verweij N(3), van der Harst P(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Cardiology, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
j.w.benjamins@umcg.nl.
(2)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Cardiology, Groningen, the Netherlands; Department of Heart and Lungs, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherland.
(3)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Cardiology, Groningen, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Alterations in the anatomic and biomechanical properties of the 
ascending aorta (AAo) can give rise to various vascular pathologies. The aim of 
the current study is to gain additional insights in the biology of the AAo size 
and function.
METHODS: We developed an AI based analysis pipeline for the segmentation of the 
AAo, and the extraction of AAO parameters. We then performed genome-wide 
association studies of AAo maximum area, AAo minimum area and AAo distensibility 
in up to 37,910 individuals from the UK Biobank. Variants that were 
significantly associated with AAo phenotypes were used as instrumental variables 
in Mendelian randomization analyses to investigate potential causal 
relationships with coronary artery disease, myocardial infarction, stroke and 
aneurysms.
FINDINGS: Genome-wide association studies revealed a total of 107 SNPs in 78 
loci. We annotated 101 candidate genes involved in various biological processes, 
including connective tissue development (THSD4 and COL6A3). Mendelian 
randomization analyses showed a causal association with aneurysm development, 
but not with other vascular diseases.
INTERPRETATION: We identified 78 loci that provide insights into mechanisms 
underlying AAo size and function in the general population and provide genetic 
evidence for their role in aortic aneurysm development.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103783
PMCID: PMC8718733
PMID: 34968759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests Niek Verweij was 
employed by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. Jan Walter Benjamins, Ming Wai Yeung, 
Yordi J. van de Vegte, M. Abdullah Said, Thijs van der Linden, Daan Ties, Luis 
E. Juarez-Orozco and Pim van der Harst declare that they have no competing 
interests.