1. J Neuroimaging. 2022 Mar;32(2):285-291. doi: 10.1111/jon.12956. Epub 2021 Dec 
29.

Vagus nerve ultrasound in transthyretin familial amyloid polyneuropathy: A pilot 
study.

Du K(1), Xu K(1), Chu X(1), Tang Y(1), Lv H(1), Zhang W(1), Wang Z(1)(2), Yuan 
Y(1)(2), Meng L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Neurovascular Disease Discovery, Peking University 
First Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Autonomic dysfunction is common in transthyretin 
familial amyloid polyneuropathy (TTR-FAP). Because ultrasonography is a powerful 
tool to study peripheral neuropathy, vagus nerve (VN) ultrasonography was used 
in our study to investigate the possible changes of the dimension of VN in 
TTR-FAP.
METHODS: Eighteen patients with TTR-FAP and 17 age- and gender-matched 
individuals without any neuropathies were enrolled in a pilot study. The 
cross-sectional areas (CSAs) were measured bilaterally on transverse scans of 
vagus, median, and ulnar nerves. Clinical data were collected to explore the 
correlations with CSAs of VN.
RESULTS: The median CSAs of VN in TTR-FAP were 3.5 (2.0-6.0) mm2 on the right 
side and 2.5 (1.0-6.0) mm2 on the left side, compared with 2.0 (1.0-3.0) mm2 and 
1.0 (1.0-2.0) mm2 for healthy controls (HCs). There was a significant difference 
between the two groups on both sides (p < .001). The mean VN CSAs were 
correlated positively with the course of disease (r = .7203, p = .0016)（not 
including the patient with the longest disease course), the Composite Autonomic 
Symptom Score 31 (r = .5252, p = .0252), the left ventricular posterior wall 
thickness (r = .5426, p = .0200), and the interventricular septum thickness (r = 
.5103, p = .0305). The cutoff values of right and left VN CSAs to identify 
TTR-FAP from HCs were 2.5 and 1.5 mm2 and the areas under the curve were .9395 
and .8856, with a high sensitivity (.889 and .889) and specificity (.941 and 
.765), respectively.
CONCLUSION: VN enlargement is prevalent among TTR-FAP patients. VN 
ultrasonography may be an important clinical tool for assessing the severity of 
autonomic dysfunction in TTR-FAP.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Neuroimaging published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of American Society of Neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.1111/jon.12956
PMCID: PMC9306858
PMID: 34964197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]