1. Bioengineered. 2022 Jan;13(1):531-543. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.2009975.

Magnolol attenuates the locomotor impairment, cognitive deficit, and 
neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's disease mice with brain insulin resistance via 
up-regulating miR-200c.

Chen T(1), Shou L(2), Guo X(3), Wei M(3), Zheng H(3), Tao T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ultrasonography, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
Chinese Medical University (Zhejiang Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine).
(2)Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated Hospital of Hangzhou Normal 
University.
(3)Department of Anesthesia, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang Chinese 
Medical University (Zhejiang Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine).

In this study, we aimed to investigate the effect of Magnolol on Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). After the model of streptozotocin-induced AD mice with brain 
insulin resistance was established, the mice were treated with Magnolol or 
miR-200c antagomiR. The abilities of ambulations, rearings, discrimination, 
spatial learning, and memory were evaluated by open-field test (OFT), novel 
object recognition (NOR), and morris water maze (MWM) tests. The levels of 
malondialdehyde (MDA), glutathione (GSH), superoxide dismutase (SOD), tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6), C-reactive protein (CRP), and 
miR-200c in the mice hippocampus were evaluated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay, Western blot, or Quantitative real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction. In AD 
mice model, streptozotocin induced the locomotor impairment and cognitive 
deficit, up-regulated levels of MDA, TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP, while down-regulated 
levels of GSH, SOD, and miR-200c. Magnolol increased the rearings numbers and 
discrimination index of AD mice in OFT and NOR tests. Magnolol increased the 
number of entries in the target quadrant and time spent in the target quadrant 
and decreased the escape latency of AD mice in the MWM test. Magnolol also 
down-regulated the levels of MDA, TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP, and up-regulated the 
levels of GSH, SOD, and miR-200c in the hippocampus tissues of AD mice. However, 
miR-200c antagomiR did the opposite and further offset the effects of the 
Magnolol on AD mice. Magnolol attenuated the locomotor impairment, cognitive 
deficit, and neuroinflammatory in AD mice with brain insulin resistance via 
up-regulating miR-200c.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.2009975
PMCID: PMC8805894
PMID: 34968163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).