1. Anim Biotechnol. 2023 Nov;34(4):1324-1330. doi: 10.1080/10495398.2021.2021215.
 Epub 2021 Dec 31.

Polymorphism of sheep PRKAA2 gene and its association with growth traits.

Li W(1), Wang X(1), Zhang X(1), Li F(2)(3), Zhang D(2), Li X(1), Zhang Y(1), 
Zhao Y(1), Zhao L(1), Xu D(1), Cheng J(1), Wang J(1), Zhou B(1), Lin C(1), Wang 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural University, 
Lanzhou, China.
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Grassland Agro-Ecosystems, College of Pastoral 
Agriculture Science and Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(3)Engineering Laboratory of Sheep Breeding and Reproduction Biotechnology in 
Gansu Province, Minqin, China.

Small ruminants farming plays an important role in the livelihood of a large 
part of the population. Herein we aimed to analyze the effects of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in PRKAA2 gene on the growth-related traits of Hu sheep 
and Dorper sheep. The body weight and body type of 1254 sheep were measured at 
80, 100, 120, 140, 160 and 180d, and 37620 phenotypic data were collected. 
RT-qPCR analysis was performed to test PRKAA2 gene expressed in different 
tissues of sheep, with the highest expression level in spleen, followed by 
kidney. In the present study, the PRKAA2 gene sequencing revealed one 
polymorphism located on Chr1 (Oar_rambouillet_v1.0), termed as 
chr1:32832382 G > A, and were significantly associated with growth traits of 
sheep (p < 0.05). The body weight, body length, chest circumference, and cannon 
circumference of individuals with AA genotype were significantly higher than 
those with the GG and GA genotypes (p < 0.05). Our findings reveal that PRKAA2 
gene could be used as a marker-assisted selection to improve the growth-related 
traits of sheep.

DOI: 10.1080/10495398.2021.2021215
PMID: 34971343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]