1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Dec 11;20:117-127. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.12.007. eCollection 2022.

Enhanced interpretation of 935 hotspot and non-hotspot RAS variants using 
evidence-based structural bioinformatics.

Tripathi S(1)(2), Dsouza NR(1), Mathison AJ(3)(4), Leverence E(3), Urrutia 
R(3)(4)(5), Zimmermann MT(1)(6)(5).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Research and Development Laboratory, Genomic Sciences and 
Precision Medicine Center (GSPMC), Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 
53226, USA.
(2)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA.
(3)Genomic Sciences and Precision Medicine Center (GSPMC), Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.
(4)Division of Research, Department of Surgery, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 
53226, USA.
(6)Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

In the current study, we report computational scores for advancing genomic 
interpretation of disease-associated genomic variation in members of the RAS 
family of genes. For this purpose, we applied 31 sequence- and 3D 
structure-based computational scores, chosen by their breadth of biophysical 
properties. We parametrized our data by assembling a numerically homogenized 
experimentally-derived dataset, which when use in our calculations reveal that 
computational scores using 3D structure highly correlate with experimental 
measures (e.g., GAP-mediated hydrolysis RSpearman = 0.80 and RAF affinity 
Rspearman = 0.82), while sequence-based scores are discordant with this data. 
Performing all-against-all comparisons, we applied this parametrized modeling 
approach to the study of 935 RAS variants from 7 RAS genes, which led us to 
identify 4 groups of mutations according to distinct biochemical scores within 
each group. Each group was comprised of hotspot and non-hotspot KRAS variants, 
indicating that poorly characterized variants could functionally behave like 
pathogenic mutations. Combining computational scores using dimensionality 
reduction indicated that changes to local unfolding propensity associate with 
changes in enzyme activity by genomic variants. Hence, our systematic approach, 
combining methodologies from both clinical genomics and 3D structural 
bioinformatics, represents an expansion for interpreting genomic data, provides 
information of mechanistic value, and that is transferable to other proteins.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.12.007
PMCID: PMC8688876
PMID: 34976316

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.