1. Transl Pediatr. 2021 Nov;10(11):3082-3090. doi: 10.21037/tp-21-340.

Cerebral oximetry-guided pulmonary artery banding for end-stage heart failure in 
a child with left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy: a case report.

Asano M(1), Doi K(1), Nomura M(1), Nagasaka Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Pulmonary artery banding (PAB) may reduce the need for left ventricular assist 
devices and heart transplantation in children with end-stage heart failure. 
However, excessive banding may increase the right ventricular afterload, leading 
to worsening of heart failure. The estimated right ventricular pressure and the 
shifting of the interventricular septum by transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE), pulmonary artery pressure, right atrial and ventricular pressure, 
percutaneous oxygen saturation, and mixed venous oxygen saturation are utilized 
to determine the optimal circumference for PAB. Here, we report the case of a 
5-month-old patient with end-stage heart failure due to left ventricular 
noncompaction cardiomyopathy (LVNC), with a gene mutation of MYH7, who underwent 
successful PAB. The exact PAB placement was additionally guided by using 
cerebral regional oxygen saturation (rSO2) measurement to achieve a tolerable 
and optimal PAB effect. We monitored rSO2 and other hemodynamic parameters while 
surgeons banded the pulmonary artery to achieve both highest rSO2 levels and 
stable hemodynamics. rSO2 was 68% before banding, and increased and remained at 
over 90% after the banding at same FiO2. Patient's heart failure improved 
gradually, and the child was discharged home at 6 months after PAB. The rSO2 is 
a simple and non-invasive monitor for the measurement of oxygen delivery to the 
brain tissue. rSO2 alone would not be able to guide PAB placement in the 
vulnerable DCM patients, but it may be of one further monitoring value for the 
optimal pulmonary artery circumference while patients are undergoing PAB.

2021 Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-21-340
PMCID: PMC8649599
PMID: 34976774

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tp-21-340). The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.