1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2021 Dec 2;27:241-255. doi:
10.1016/j.omtn.2021.11.026.  eCollection 2022 Mar 8.

RNA-binding protein MEX3A controls G1/S transition via regulating the RB/E2F 
pathway in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Qiu Y(1), Meng M(1), Cao C(2), Zhang J(1), Cheng X(1), Huang Y(1), Cao H(1), Li 
Y(1), Tian D(1), Huang Y(1), Peng L(1), Hu K(1), Zhang Y(1), Liao J(1), He J(1), 
Wang X(3), Lu D(1), Lin L(1), Bi X(2), Yin D(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene 
Regulation, Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for RNA Medicine, Medical 
Research Center, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, 
Guangzhou 510120, China.
(2)Department of Urology, National Cancer Center, National Clinical Research 
Center for Cancer, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China.
(3)ShiLong Hospital (Research Center for Pneumoconiosis Prevention and 
Treatment), National Center For Occupational Safety and Health, NHC, Beijing 
100021, China.

MEX3A is an RNA-binding protein that mediates mRNA decay through binding to 3' 
untranslated regions. However, its role and mechanism in clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma remain unknown. In this study, we found that MEX3A expression was 
transcriptionally activated by ETS1 and upregulated in clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma. Silencing MEX3A markedly reduced clear cell renal cell carcinoma cell 
proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Inhibiting MEX3A induced G1/S cell-cycle 
arrest. Gene set enrichment analysis revealed that E2F targets are the central 
downstream pathways of MEX3A. To identify MEX3A targets, systematic screening 
using enhanced cross-linking and immunoprecipitation sequencing, and 
RNA-immunoprecipitation sequencing assays were performed. A network of 4,000 
genes was identified as potential targets of MEX3A. Gene ontology analysis of 
upregulated genes bound by MEX3A indicated that negative regulation of the cell 
proliferation pathway was highly enriched. Further assays indicated that MEX3A 
bound to the CDKN2B 3' untranslated region, promoting its mRNA degradation. This 
leads to decreased levels of CDKN2B and an uncontrolled cell cycle in clear cell 
renal cell carcinoma, which was confirmed by rescue experiments. Our findings 
revealed that MEX3A acts as a post-transcriptional regulator of abnormal 
cell-cycle progression in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2021.11.026
PMCID: PMC8703191
PMID: 34976441

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.