1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2021 Dec 14;14:705023. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.705023. 
eCollection 2021.

Kampo Formulae for the Treatment of Neuropathic Pain ∼ Especially the Mechanism 
of Action of Yokukansan ∼.

Sunagawa M(1), Takayama Y(1), Kato M(1), Tanaka M(1)(2), Fukuoka S(1)(3), Okumo 
T(1), Tsukada M(1), Yamaguchi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Showa University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, School of Medicine, Showa University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, Showa University, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Kampo medicine has been practiced as traditional medicine (TM) in Japan. Kampo 
medicine uses Kampo formulae that are composed of multiple crude drugs to make 
Kampo formulae. In Japan, Kampo formulae are commonly used instead of or 
combined with Western medicines. If drug therapy that follows the guidelines for 
neuropathic pain does not work or cannot be taken due to side effects, various 
Kampo formulae are considered as the next line of treatment. Since Kampo 
formulae are composed of two or more kinds of natural crude drugs, and their 
extracts contain many ingredients with pharmacological effects, one Kampo 
formula usually has multiple effects. Therefore, when selecting a formula, we 
consider symptoms other than pain. This review outlines the Kampo formulae that 
are frequently used for pain treatment and their crude drugs and the basic usage 
of each component. In recent years, Yokukansan (YKS) has become one of the most 
used Kampo formulae for pain treatment with an increasing body of baseline 
research available. We outline the known and possible mechanisms by which YKS 
exerts its pharmacologic benefits as an example of Kampo formulae's potency and 
holistic healing properties.

Copyright © 2021 Sunagawa, Takayama, Kato, Tanaka, Fukuoka, Okumo, Tsukada and 
Yamaguchi.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.705023
PMCID: PMC8712661
PMID: 34970116

Conflict of interest statement: MS received a research grant from Tsumura & Co. 
(Tokyo, Japan). The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.