1. Front Psychol. 2021 Dec 14;12:749315. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.749315. 
eCollection 2021.

Empathy, Altruism, and Group Identification.

Miyazono K(1)(2), Inarimori K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Humanities and Human Sciences, Hokkaido University, 
Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Center for Human Nature, Artificial Intelligence, and Neuroscience, Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, Japan.

This paper investigates the role of group identification in empathic emotion and 
its behavioral consequences. Our central idea is that group identification is 
the key to understanding the process in which empathic emotion causes helping 
behavior. Empathic emotion causes helping behavior because it involves group 
identification, which motivates helping behavior toward other members. This 
paper focuses on a hypothesis, which we call "self-other merging hypothesis 
(SMH)," according to which empathy-induced helping behavior is due to the 
"merging" between the helping agent and the helped agent. We argue that SMH 
should be interpreted in terms of group identification. The group identification 
interpretation of SMH is both behaviorally adequate (i.e., successfully predicts 
and explains the helping behavior in the experimental settings) and 
psychologically plausible (i.e., does not posit psychologically unrealistic 
beliefs, desires, etc.). Empathy-induced helping behavior, according to the 
group identification interpretation of the SMH, does not fit comfortably into 
the traditional egoism/altruism dichotomy. We thus propose a new taxonomy 
according to which empathy-induced helping behavior is both altruistic at the 
individual level and egoistic at the group level.

Copyright Â© 2021 Miyazono and Inarimori.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.749315
PMCID: PMC8712484
PMID: 34970188

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling Editor declared a 
past co-authorship with one of the author KM.