1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2022 Mar;18(3):133-145. doi: 10.1038/s41584-021-00726-8.
Epub  2022 Jan 5.

Janus kinase-targeting therapies in rheumatology: a mechanisms-based approach.

Tanaka Y(1), Luo Y(2), O'Shea JJ(3), Nakayamada S(4).

Author information:
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of 
Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan. 
tanaka@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp.
(2)Vasculitis Translational Research Program Systemic Autoimmunity Branch, 
National Institute of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal, and Skin Diseases NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Molecular Immunology & Inflammation Branch, and Translational Immunology 
Section, National Institute of Arthritis & Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)The First Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of 
Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.

The four Janus kinase (JAK) proteins and seven signal transducer and activator 
of transcription (STAT) transcription factors mediate intracellular signal 
transduction downstream of cytokine receptors, which are implicated in the 
pathology of autoimmune, allergic and inflammatory diseases. Development of 
targeted small-molecule therapies such as JAK inhibitors, which have varied 
selective inhibitory profiles, has enabled a paradigm shift in the treatment of 
diverse disorders. JAK inhibitors suppress intracellular signalling mediated by 
multiple cytokines involved in the pathological processes of rheumatoid 
arthritis and many other immune and inflammatory diseases, and therefore have 
the capacity to target multiple aspects of those diseases. In addition to 
rheumatoid arthritis, JAK inhibition has potential for treatment of autoimmune 
diseases including systemic lupus erythematosus, spondyloarthritis, inflammatory 
bowel disease and alopecia areata, in which stimulation of innate immunity 
activates adaptive immunity, leading to generation of autoreactive T cells and 
activation and differentiation of B cells. JAK inhibitors are also effective in 
the treatment of allergic disorders, such as atopic dermatitis, and can even be 
used for the COVID-19-related cytokine storm. Mechanism-based treatments 
targeting JAK-STAT pathways have the potential to provide positive outcomes by 
minimizing the use of glucocorticoids and/or non-specific immunosuppressants in 
the treatment of systemic immune-mediated inflammatory diseases.

Â© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41584-021-00726-8
PMCID: PMC8730299
PMID: 34987201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Y.T. has received speaking fees and/or honoraria 
from AbbVie, Amgen, Astellas, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers, 
Chugai, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Gilead, Mitsubishi-Tanabe and YL Biologics, and 
received research grants from Abbvie, Asahi-Kasei, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai, 
Corrona, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai, Kowa, Mitsubishi-Tanabe and Takeda, and 
consultant fees from AbbVie, Ayumi, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Sanofi and Taisho. S.N. has received speaking fees and/or honoraria from 
Asahi-kasei, Astellas, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Pfizer and Sanofi, and has received research grants from Mitsubishi-Tanabe and 
Novartis. J.J.O. declares receipt of US patent royalties related to JAK 
inhibitors and NIH Cooperative Research and Development Agreement with Pfizer. 
Y.M.L. declares no competing interests.