1. Ther Adv Ophthalmol. 2021 Dec 19;13:25158414211059246. doi: 
10.1177/25158414211059246. eCollection 2021 Jan-Dec.

Light and myopia: from epidemiological studies to neurobiological mechanisms.

Muralidharan AR(1), Lança C(1), Biswas S(1), Barathi VA(1), Wan Yu Shermaine 
L(1), Seang-Mei S(1), Milea D(1), Najjar RP(2).

Author information:
(1)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore.
(2)Visual Neurosciences Group, Singapore Eye Research Institute, The Academia, 
20 College Road, Discovery Tower Level 6, Singapore 169856.

Myopia is far beyond its inconvenience and represents a true, highly prevalent, 
sight-threatening ocular condition, especially in Asia. Without adequate 
interventions, the current epidemic of myopia is projected to affect 50% of the 
world population by 2050, becoming the leading cause of irreversible blindness. 
Although blurred vision, the predominant symptom of myopia, can be improved by 
contact lenses, glasses or refractive surgery, corrected myopia, particularly 
high myopia, still carries the risk of secondary blinding complications such as 
glaucoma, myopic maculopathy and retinal detachment, prompting the need for 
prevention. Epidemiological studies have reported an association between outdoor 
time and myopia prevention in children. The protective effect of time spent 
outdoors could be due to the unique characteristics (intensity, spectral 
distribution, temporal pattern, etc.) of sunlight that are lacking in artificial 
lighting. Concomitantly, studies in animal models have highlighted the efficacy 
of light and its components in delaying or even stopping the development of 
myopia and endeavoured to elucidate possible mechanisms involved in this 
process. In this narrative review, we (1) summarize the current knowledge 
concerning light modulation of ocular growth and refractive error development 
based on studies in human and animal models, (2) summarize potential 
neurobiological mechanisms involved in the effects of light on ocular growth and 
emmetropization and (3) highlight a potential pathway for the translational 
development of noninvasive light-therapy strategies for myopia prevention in 
children.

© The Author(s), 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/25158414211059246
PMCID: PMC8721425
PMID: 34988370

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.