1. Microbiol Spectr. 2022 Feb 23;10(1):e0143821. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01438-21. 
Epub 2022 Jan 5.

Developing an Amplification Refractory Mutation System-Quantitative Reverse 
Transcription-PCR Assay for Rapid and Sensitive Screening of SARS-CoV-2 Variants 
of Concern.

Xiong D(#)(1)(2), Zhang X(#)(1), Shi M(1)(2), Wang N(1), He P(1)(2), Dong Z(3), 
Zhong J(3), Luo J(3), Wang Y(3), Yu J(1)(2), Wei H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Center for Biosafety 
Mega-Science, Wuhan Institute of Virologygrid.439104.b, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Hubei International Travel Healthcare Center, Wuhan Customs Port Outpatient 
Department, Wuhan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

With the emergence and wide spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants of concern (VOCs), such as the Delta variant 
(B.1.617.2 lineage and AY sublineage), it is important to track VOCs for 
sourcing of transmission. Currently, whole-genome sequencing is commonly used 
for detecting VOCs, but this is limited by the high costs of reagents and 
sophisticated sequencers. In this study, common mutations in the genomes of 
SARS-CoV-2 VOCs were identified by analyzing more than 1 million SARS-CoV-2 
genomes from public data. Among them, mutations C1709A (a change of C to A at 
position 1709) and C56G, respectively, were found in more than 99% of the 
genomes of Alpha and Delta variants and were specific to them. Then, a method 
using the amplification refractory mutation system combined with quantitative 
reverse transcription-PCR (ARMS-RT-qPCR) based on the two mutations was 
developed for identifying both VOCs. The assay can detect as little as 1 copy/μL 
of the VOCs, and the results for identifying Alpha and Delta variants in 
clinical samples by the ARMS-RT-qPCR assay showed 100% agreement with the 
results using sequencing-based methods. The whole assay can be completed in 
2.5 h using commercial fluorescent PCR instruments. Therefore, the ARMS-RT-qPCR 
assay could be used for screening the two highly concerning variants Alpha and 
Delta by normal PCR laboratories in airports and in hospitals and other 
health-related organizations. Additionally, based on the unique mutations 
identified by the genomic analysis, similar molecular assays can be developed 
for rapid identification of other VOCs. IMPORTANCE The current stage of the 
pandemic, led by SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOCs), underscores the 
necessity to develop a cost-effective and rapid molecular diagnosis assay to 
differentiate the VOCs. In this study, over 1 million SARS-CoV-2 genomic 
sequences of high quality from GISAID were analyzed and a network of the common 
mutations of the lineages was constructed. The conserved unique mutations 
specific for SARS-CoV-2 VOCs were found. Then, ARMS-RT-qPCR assays based on the 
two unique mutations of the Alpha and Delta variants were developed for the 
detection of the two VOCs. Application of the assay in clinical samples 
demonstrated that the current method is a convenient, cost-effective, and rapid 
way to screen the target SARS-CoV-2 VOCs.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01438-21
PMCID: PMC8729772
PMID: 34985323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.