1. Mol Clin Oncol. 2022 Feb;16(2):30. doi: 10.3892/mco.2021.2463. Epub 2021 Dec
10.

Role of the EGFR-KDD mutation as a possible mechanism of acquired resistance of 
non-small cell lung cancer to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors: A case report.

He C(1)(2), Wang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Anhui Provincial Cancer Hospital, Hefei, 
Anhui 230000, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of University 
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230000, P.R. China.

Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) are 
currently considered as the standard therapy for patients with advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who have EGFR-activating mutations. However, 
despite an initially profound response to these drugs, these patients ultimately 
develop drug resistance. The most common resistance mechanism is the development 
of a secondary mutation in EGFR (T790M), although activation of the MNNG/HOS 
transforming gene (MET), amplification of the Erb-B2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 
gene and histological transformation to small cell lung cancer may also lead to 
resistance. In addition, there may be additional, rare mechanisms leading to 
resistance that remain unidentified. Mutations in the EGFR kinase domain 
duplication (EGFR-KDD) are rare, although they act as oncogenic drivers in 
NSCLC. To the best of our knowledge, all studies to date have reported EGFR-KDD 
as the primary mutation in NSCLC. The aim of the present study was to report the 
case of an EGFR-KDD mutation in a patient with NSCLC who developed acquired 
resistance to gefitinib, but responded well to afatinib. Therefore, EGFR-KDD 
mutation is an additional potential mechanism underlying the development of 
acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs.

Copyright: Â© He et al.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2021.2463
PMCID: PMC8719261
PMID: 34987800

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.