1. Biosci Rep. 2022 Jan 28;42(1):BSR20211558. doi: 10.1042/BSR20211558.

Unconventional metabolites in chromatin regulation.

Gapa L(1), Alfardus H(1), Fischle W(1).

Author information:
(1)Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah 
University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955, Saudi Arabia.

Chromatin, the complex of DNA and histone proteins, serves as a main integrator 
of cellular signals. Increasing evidence links cellular functional to chromatin 
state. Indeed, different metabolites are emerging as modulators of chromatin 
function and structure. Alterations in chromatin state are decisive for 
regulating all aspects of genome function and ultimately have the potential to 
produce phenotypic changes. Several metabolites such as acetyl-CoA, 
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) or adenosine triphosphate (ATP) have now been well 
characterized as main substrates or cofactors of chromatin-modifying enzymes. 
However, there are other metabolites that can directly interact with chromatin 
influencing its state or that modulate the properties of chromatin regulatory 
factors. Also, there is a growing list of atypical enzymatic and nonenzymatic 
chromatin modifications that originate from different cellular pathways that 
have not been in the limelight of chromatin research. Here, we summarize 
different properties and functions of uncommon regulatory molecules originating 
from intermediate metabolism of lipids, carbohydrates and amino acids. Based on 
the various modes of action on chromatin and the plethora of putative, so far 
not described chromatin-regulating metabolites, we propose that there are more 
links between cellular functional state and chromatin regulation to be 
discovered. We hypothesize that these connections could provide interesting 
starting points for interfering with cellular epigenetic states at a molecular 
level.

Â© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20211558
PMCID: PMC8777195
PMID: 34988581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.