1. Environ Res. 2022 May 15;208:112603. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112603. Epub 
2022 Jan 4.

Residential green space is associated with a buffering effect on stress 
responses during the COVID-19 pandemic in mothers of young children, a 
prospective study.

Vos S(1), Bijnens EM(2), Renaers E(1), Croons H(1), Van Der Stukken C(1), 
Martens DS(1), Plusquin M(1), Nawrot TS(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Environmental Sciences, Hasselt University, Agoralaan Building D, 
3590, Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(2)Centre for Environmental Sciences, Hasselt University, Agoralaan Building D, 
3590, Diepenbeek, Belgium; Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University Hospital, Corneel Heymanslaan 10, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Centre for Environmental Sciences, Hasselt University, Agoralaan Building D, 
3590, Diepenbeek, Belgium; Department of Public Health, Leuven University (KU 
Leuven), Kapucijnenvoer 35, 3000, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
tim.nawrot@uhasselt.be.

Green spaces are associated with increased well-being and reduced risk of 
developing psychiatric disorders. In this study, we aimed to investigate how 
residential proximity to green spaces was associated with stress response 
buffering during the COVID-19 pandemic in a prospective cohort of young mothers. 
We collected information on stress in 766 mothers (mean age: 36.6 years) from 
the ENVIRONAGE birth cohort at baseline of the study (from 2010 onwards), and 
during the COVID-19 pandemic (from December 2020 until May 2021). Self-reported 
stress responses due to the COVID-19 pandemic were the outcome measure. Green 
space was quantified in several radiuses around the residence based on 
high-resolution (1 m2) data. Using ordinal logistic regression, we estimated the 
odds of better resistance to reported stress, while controlling for age, 
socio-economic status, stress related to care for children, urbanicity, and 
household change in income during the pandemic. In sensitivity analyses we 
corrected for pre-pandemic stress levels, BMI, physical activity, and changes in 
health-related habits during the pandemic. We found that for an inter-quartile 
range contrast in residential green space 300 m and 500 m around the residence, 
participants were respectively 24% (OR = 1.24, 95%CI: 1.03 to 1.51) and 29% 
(OR = 1.29, 95%CI: 1.04 to 1.60) more likely to be in a more resistant category, 
independent of the aforementioned factors. These results remained robust after 
additionally controlling for pre-pandemic stress levels, BMI, physical activity, 
smoking status, urbanicity, psychological disorders, and changes in 
health-related habits during the pandemic. This prospective study in young 
mothers highlights the importance of proximity to green spaces, especially 
during challenging times.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112603
PMCID: PMC8730780
PMID: 34995548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.