1. Sci Rep. 2022 Jan 7;12(1):194. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-03863-y.

Corticosterone-mediated regulation and functions of miR-218-5p in rat brain.

Yoshino Y(1), Roy B(1), Dwivedi Y(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35294, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35294, USA. yogeshdwivedi@uabmc.edu.
(3)UAB Mood Disorder Program, Division of Behavioral Neurobiology, Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurobiology, UAB Depression and Suicide Center, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, SC711 Sparks Center, 1720 7th Avenue South, 
Birmingham, AL, USA. yogeshdwivedi@uabmc.edu.

Chronic stress is one of the key precipitating factors in major depressive 
disorder (MDD). Stress associated studies have underscored the mechanistic role 
of epigenetic master players like microRNAs (miRNAs) in depression 
pathophysiology at both preclinical and clinical levels. Previously, we had 
reported changes in miR-218-5p expression in response to corticosterone (CORT) 
induced chronic stress. MiR-218-5p was one of the most significantly induced 
miRNAs in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of rats under chronic stress. In the 
present report, we have investigated how chronic CORT exposure mechanistically 
affected miR-218-5p expression in the rat brain and how miR-218 could trigger 
molecular changes on its downstream regulatory pathways. Elevated expression of 
miR-218-5p was found in the PFC of CORT-treated rats. A glucocorticoid receptor 
(GR) targeted Chromatin-Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed high GR 
occupancy on the promoter region of Slit3 gene hosting miR-218-2 in its 3rd 
intron. RNA-sequencing data based on RNA Induced silencing Complex 
Immunoprecipitation (RISC-IP) with AGO2 in SH-SY5Y cells detected six consistent 
target genes of miR-218-5p (APOL4, DTWD1, BNIP1, METTL22, SNAPC1, and HDAC6). 
The expression of all five genes, except APOL4, was successfully validated with 
qPCR in CORT-treated rat PFC. Further, Hdac6-based ChIP-seq experiment helped in 
mapping major genomic loci enriched for intergenic regions in the PFC of 
CORT-treated rat. A proximity-based gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed a 
majority of the intergenic sites to be part of key genes implicated in central 
nervous system functions, notably synapse organization, neuron projection 
morphogenesis, and axonogenesis. Our results suggest that the upregulation of 
miR-218-5p in PFC of CORT-treated rats possibly resulted from GR biding in the 
promoter region of Slit3 gene. Interestingly, Hdac6 was one of the consistent 
target genes potentially found to regulate CNS related genes by chromatin 
modification. Collectively, these findings establish the role of miR-218-5p in 
chronic stress and the epigenetic function it plays to induce chromatin-based 
transcriptional changes of several CNS genes in triggering stress-induced 
disorders, including depression. This also opens up the scope to understand the 
role of miR-218-5p as a potential target for noncoding RNA therapeutics in 
clinical depression.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-03863-y
PMCID: PMC8742130
PMID: 34996981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.