1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Dec 23;23(1):143. doi: 10.3390/ijms23010143.

The Molecular Biodiversity of Protein Targeting and Protein Transport Related to 
the Endoplasmic Reticulum.

Tirincsi A(1), Sicking M(1), Hadzibeganovic D(1), Ha√üdenteufel S(2), Lang S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland 
University, 66421 Homburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
7610001, Israel.

Looking at the variety of the thousands of different polypeptides that have been 
focused on in the research on the endoplasmic reticulum from the last five 
decades taught us one humble lesson: no one size fits all. Cells use an 
impressive array of components to enable the safe transport of protein cargo 
from the cytosolic ribosomes to the endoplasmic reticulum. Safety during the 
transit is warranted by the interplay of cytosolic chaperones, membrane 
receptors, and protein translocases that together form functional networks and 
serve as protein targeting and translocation routes. While two targeting routes 
to the endoplasmic reticulum, SRP (signal recognition particle) and GET (guided 
entry of tail-anchored proteins), prefer targeting determinants at the N- and 
C-terminus of the cargo polypeptide, respectively, the recently discovered SND 
(SRP-independent) route seems to preferentially cater for cargos with 
non-generic targeting signals that are less hydrophobic or more distant from the 
termini. With an emphasis on targeting routes and protein translocases, we will 
discuss those functional networks that drive efficient protein topogenesis and 
shed light on their redundant and dynamic nature in health and disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23010143
PMCID: PMC8745461
PMID: 35008565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.