1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Dec 22;11:765266. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2021.765266. eCollection 2021.

Mapping the Substrate-Binding Sites in the Phosphatidylserine Synthase in 
Candida albicans.

Zhou Y(1), Cassilly CD(1), Reynolds TB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee Knoxville, Knoxville, TN, 
United States.

The fungal phosphatidylserine (PS) synthase, a membrane protein encoded by the 
CHO1 gene, is a potential drug target for pathogenic fungi, such as Candida 
albicans. However, both substrate-binding sites of C. albicans Cho1 have not 
been characterized. Cho1 has two substrates: cytidyldiphosphate-diacylglycerol 
(CDP-DAG) and serine. Previous studies identified a conserved CDP-alcohol 
phosphotransferase (CAPT) binding motif, which is present within Cho1. We tested 
the CAPT motif for its role in PS synthesis by mutating conserved residues using 
alanine substitution mutagenesis. PS synthase assays revealed that mutations in 
all but one conserved amino acid within the CAPT motif resulted in decreased 
Cho1 function. In contrast, there were no clear motifs in Cho1 for binding 
serine. Therefore, to identify the serine binding site, PS synthase sequences 
from three fungi were aligned with sequences of a similar enzyme, 
phosphatidylinositol (PI) synthase, from the same fungi. This revealed a motif 
that was unique to PS synthases. Using alanine substitution mutagenesis, we 
found that some of the residues in this motif are required for Cho1 function. 
Two alanine substitution mutants, L184A and R189A, exhibited contrasting impacts 
on PS synthase activity, and were characterized for their Michaelis-Menten 
kinetics. The L184A mutant displayed enhanced PS synthase activity and showed an 
increased Vmax. In contrast, R189A showed decreased PS synthase activity and 
increased Km for serine, suggesting that residue R189 is involved in serine 
binding. These results help to characterize PS synthase substrate binding, and 
should direct rational approaches for finding Cho1 inhibitors that may lead to 
better antifungals.

Copyright Â© 2021 Zhou, Cassilly and Reynolds.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.765266
PMCID: PMC8727905
PMID: 35004345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.