1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Dec 24;23(1):198. doi: 10.3390/ijms23010198.

The Effects of Separate and Combined Treatment of Male Rats with Type 2 Diabetes 
with Metformin and Orthosteric and Allosteric Agonists of Luteinizing Hormone 
Receptor on Steroidogenesis and Spermatogenesis.

Bakhtyukov AA(1), Derkach KV(1), Sorokoumov VN(1)(2), Stepochkina AM(1), 
Romanova IV(1), Morina IY(1), Zakharova IO(1), Bayunova LV(1), Shpakov AO(1).

Author information:
(1)Sechenov Institute of Evolutionary Physiology and Biochemistry of Russian 
Academy of Sciences, 194223 St. Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Institute of Chemistry, Saint Petersburg State University, 198504 St. 
Petersburg, Russia.

In men with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), steroidogenesis and spermatogenesis 
are impaired. Metformin and the agonists of luteinizing hormone/human chorionic 
gonadotropin(hCG)-receptor (LH/hCG-R) (hCG, low-molecular-weight allosteric 
LH/hCG-R-agonists) can be used to restore them. The aim was to study 
effectiveness of separate and combined administration of metformin, hCG and 
5-amino-N-tert-butyl-2-(methylsulfanyl)-4-(3-(nicotinamido)phenyl)thieno[2,3-d]pyrimidine-6-carboxamide 
(TP3) on steroidogenesis and spermatogenesis in male rats with T2DM. hCG (15 
IU/rat/day) and TP3 (15 mg/kg/day) were injected in the last five days of 
five-week metformin treatment (120 mg/kg/day). Metformin improved testicular 
steroidogenesis and spermatogenesis and restored LH/hCG-R-expression. Compared 
to control, in T2DM, hCG stimulated steroidogenesis and StAR-gene expression 
less effectively and, after five-day administration, reduced 
LH/hCG-R-expression, while TP3 effects changed weaker. In co-administration of 
metformin and LH/hCG-R-agonists, on the first day, stimulating effects of 
LH/hCG-R-agonists on testosterone levels and hCG-stimulated expression of StAR- 
and CYP17A1-genes were increased, but on the 3-5th day, they disappeared. This 
was due to reduced LH/hCG-R-gene expression and increased aromatase-catalyzed 
estradiol production. With co-administration, LH/hCG-R-agonists did not 
contribute to improving spermatogenesis, induced by metformin. Thus, in T2DM, 
metformin and LH/hCG-R-agonists restore steroidogenesis and spermatogenesis, 
with metformin being more effective in restoring spermatogenesis, and their 
co-administration improves LH/hCG-R-agonist-stimulating testicular 
steroidogenesis in acute but not chronic administration.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23010198
PMCID: PMC8745465
PMID: 35008624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.