1. Foods. 2021 Dec 29;11(1):85. doi: 10.3390/foods11010085.

Lactiplantibacillus plantarum 1201 Inhibits Intestinal Infection of Salmonella 
enterica subsp. enterica Serovar Typhimurium Strain ATCC 13311 in Mice with 
High-Fat Diet.

Ren Z(1)(2), Peng L(1)(2), Chen S(1)(2), Pu Y(1)(2), Lv H(1)(2), Wei H(1)(2)(3), 
Wan C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Nanchang University, 
Nanchang 330047, China.
(2)School of Food Science and Technology, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330047, 
China.
(3)Sino-German Joint Research Institute, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330047, 
China.

Salmonella Typhimurium is widely distributed in food. It can colonise the 
gastrointestinal tract after ingestion, causing lamina propria edema, 
inflammatory cell infiltration, and mucosal epithelial decomposition. A high-fat 
diet (HFD) can induce an inflammatory response, but whether HFD can increase the 
infection level of S. Typhimurium is unknown. We established a model of 
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium strain ATCC 13311 ATCC 
13311 infection in healthy adult mice with a maintenance diet (MD) or HFD to 
explore the effect of Lactiplantibacillus plantarum 1201 intervention on S. 
Typhimurium ATCC 13311 colonization and its protective effects on mice. HFD 
exacerbated the infection of S. Typhimurium ATCC 13311, while the intervention 
of L. plantarum 1201 effectively mitigated this process. L. plantarum 1201 can 
reduce the colonies of S. ATCC 13311 in the intestines and tissues; and reduce 
intestinal inflammation by down-regulating the level of TLR4/NF-ÎºB pathway 
related proteins in serum and the expression of related inflammatory factors in 
the colon and jejunum. Since L. plantarum 1201 can inhibit the colonization of 
S. Typhimurium ATCC 13311 and relieve inflammation in HFD, current research may 
support the use of L. plantarum 1201 to prevent S. Typhimurium infection.

DOI: 10.3390/foods11010085
PMCID: PMC8750823
PMID: 35010211

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.