1. Cells. 2022 Jan 4;11(1):157. doi: 10.3390/cells11010157.

Recognition and Chaperoning by Pex19, Followed by Trafficking and Membrane 
Insertion of the Peroxisome Proliferation Protein, Pex11.

Zientara-Rytter KM(1), Mahalingam SS(1), Farré JC(1), Carolino K(1), Subramani 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of 
California, San Diego, CA 92093-0322, USA.

Pex11, an abundant peroxisomal membrane protein (PMP), is required for division 
of peroxisomes and is robustly imported to peroxisomal membranes. We present a 
comprehensive analysis of how the Pichia pastoris Pex11 is recognized and 
chaperoned by Pex19, targeted to peroxisome membranes and inserted therein. We 
demonstrate that Pex11 contains one Pex19-binding site (Pex19-BS) that is 
required for Pex11 insertion into peroxisomal membranes by Pex19, but is 
non-essential for peroxisomal trafficking. We provide extensive mutational 
analyses regarding the recognition of Pex19-BS in Pex11 by Pex19. Pex11 also has 
a second, Pex19-independent membrane peroxisome-targeting signal (mPTS) that is 
preserved among Pex11-family proteins and anchors the human HsPex11γ to the 
outer leaflet of the peroxisomal membrane. Thus, unlike most PMPs, Pex11 can use 
two mechanisms of transport to peroxisomes, where only one of them depends on 
its direct interaction with Pex19, but the other does not. However, Pex19 is 
necessary for membrane insertion of Pex11. We show that Pex11 can self-interact, 
using both homo- and/or heterotypic interactions involving its N-terminal 
helical domains. We demonstrate that Pex19 acts as a chaperone by interacting 
with the Pex19-BS in Pex11, thereby protecting Pex11 from spontaneous 
oligomerization that would otherwise cause its aggregation and subsequent 
degradation.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11010157
PMCID: PMC8750153
PMID: 35011719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.