1. Biol Psychiatry. 2022 Apr 15;91(8):753-768. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2021.11.002.  Epub 2021 Nov 10.

Mapping Complex Brain Torque Components and Their Genetic Architecture and 
Phenomic Associations in 24,112 Individuals.

Zhao L(1), Matloff W(1), Shi Y(1), Cabeen RP(1), Toga AW(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, USC Mark and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging and 
Informatics Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California.
(2)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, USC Mark and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging and 
Informatics Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California. Electronic address: toga@loni.usc.edu.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2022 Apr 15;91(8):697-698. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2022.01.013.

BACKGROUND: The functional significance and mechanisms determining the 
development and individual variability of structural brain asymmetry remain 
unclear. Here, we systematically analyzed all relevant components of the most 
prominent structural asymmetry, brain torque (BT), and their relationships with 
potential genetic and nongenetic modifiers in a sample comprising 24,112 
individuals from six cohorts.
METHODS: BT features, including petalia, bending, dorsoventral shift, brain 
tissue distribution asymmetries, and cortical surface positional asymmetries, 
were directly modeled using a set of automatic three-dimensional brain shape 
analysis approaches. Age-, sex-, and handedness-related effects on BT were 
assessed. The genetic architecture and phenomic associations of BT were 
investigated using genome- and phenome-wide association scans.
RESULTS: Our results confirmed the population-level predominance of the typical 
counterclockwise torque and suggested a first attenuating, then enlarging 
dynamic across the life span (3-81 years) primarily for frontal, occipital, and 
perisylvian BT features. Sex/handedness, BT, and cognitive function of 
verbal-numerical reasoning were found to be interrelated statistically. We 
observed differential heritability of up to 56% for BT, especially in temporal 
language areas. Individual variations of BT were also associated with various 
phenotypic variables of neuroanatomy, cognition, lifestyle, sociodemographics, 
anthropometry, physical health, and adult and child mental health. Our genomic 
analyses identified a number of genetic associations at lenient significance 
levels, which need to be further validated using larger samples in the future.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a comprehensive description of BT and insights 
into biological and other factors that may contribute to the development and 
individual variations of BT.

Copyright Â© 2021 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2021.11.002
PMCID: PMC8957509
PMID: 35027165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures All authors report no biomedical 
financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.