1. Sci Adv. 2022 Jan 14;8(2):eabj4010. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abj4010. Epub 2022 Jan
 12.

Secondary loss of miR-3607 reduced cortical progenitor amplification during 
rodent evolution.

Chinnappa K(1), Cárdenas A(1), Prieto-Colomina A(1), Villalba A(1), 
Márquez-Galera Á(1), Soler R(1), Nomura Y(1), Llorens E(1), Tomasello U(1), 
López-Atalaya JP(1), Borrell V(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Agencia Estatal Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad Miguel Hernández, Sant Joan 
d'Alacant 03550, Spain.

The evolutionary expansion and folding of the mammalian cerebral cortex resulted 
from amplification of progenitor cells during embryonic development. This 
process was reversed in the rodent lineage after splitting from primates, 
leading to smaller and smooth brains. Genetic mechanisms underlying this 
secondary loss in rodent evolution remain unknown. We show that microRNA 
miR-3607 is expressed embryonically in the large cortex of primates and ferret, 
distant from the primate-rodent lineage, but not in mouse. Experimental 
expression of miR-3607 in embryonic mouse cortex led to increased Wnt/β-catenin 
signaling, amplification of radial glia cells (RGCs), and expansion of the 
ventricular zone (VZ), via blocking the β-catenin inhibitor APC (adenomatous 
polyposis coli). Accordingly, loss of endogenous miR-3607 in ferret reduced RGC 
proliferation, while overexpression in human cerebral organoids promoted VZ 
expansion. Our results identify a gene selected for secondary loss during 
mammalian evolution to limit RGC amplification and, potentially, cortex size in 
rodents.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abj4010
PMCID: PMC8754304
PMID: 35020425