1. mBio. 2022 Feb 22;13(1):e0338421. doi: 10.1128/mbio.03384-21. Epub 2022 Jan
18.

A Toxin-Conjugated Recombinant Protein Targeting gp120 and gp41 for Inactivating 
HIV-1 Virions and Killing Latency-Reversing Agent-Reactivated Latent Cells.

Wang X(1), Xu W(1), Liu Z(1), Wu Y(1), Wang Q(1), Cao M(1), Ying T(1), He N(1), 
Lu L(1), Jiang S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular 
Virology (MOE/NHC/CAMS), School of Public Health and The Key Laboratory of 
Public Health Safety of Ministry of Education, School of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Shanghai Institute of Infectious Disease and Biosecurity, Fudan 
Universitygrid.8547.e, Shanghai, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Reproduction Regulation of National Population and Family 
Planning Commission, The Shanghai Institute of Planned Parenthood Research, 
Institute of Reproduction and Development, Fudan Universitygrid.8547.e, 
Shanghai, China.

Application of the combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) has reduced AIDS to 
a manageable chronic infectious disease. However, HIV/AIDS cannot be cured 
because of the presence of latent reservoirs, thus calling for the development 
of antiretroviral drugs that can eliminate latency-reversing agent 
(LRA)-activated HIV-1 virions and latent cells. In this study, we conjugated a 
small-molecule toxin, DM1, to a gp120-binding protein, mD1.22, a mutated CD4 
domain I, and found that mD1.22-DM1 could inactivate HIV-1 virions. However, it 
could not kill LRA-activated latent cells. We then designed and constructed a 
dual-targeting protein, DL35D, by linking mD1.22 and the single-chain variable 
fragment (scFv) of a gp41 NHR-specific antibody, D5, with a 35-mer linker. 
Subsequently, we conjugated DM1 to DL35D and found that DL35D-DM1 could inhibit 
HIV-1 infection, inactivate HIV-1 virions, kill HIV-1-infected cells and 
LRA-reactivated latent cells, suggesting that this toxin-conjugated 
dual-targeting recombinant protein is a promising candidate for further 
development as a novel antiviral drug with potential for HIV functional cure. 
IMPORTANCE Although HIV-1 replication was successfully controlled by 
antiretroviral drugs, cure strategy for HIV-1/AIDS is still lacking. The 
long-lived HIV reservoir is considered one of the major obstacles to an HIV/AIDS 
cure. CD4-PE40 was the first drug that designed to kill HIV-1 infected cells; 
however, lower efficiency and high immunogenicity have limited its further 
development. In this study, we designed several dual-targeting recombinant 
proteins DLDs by linking gp120-binding protein mD1.22 and gp41-binding antibody 
D5 scFv with different length of linkers. Among them, DL35D with 35-mer linker 
showed the best anti-HIV-1 activity. We further conjugated the DM1 toxin to 
DL35D to produce DL35D-DM1, which maintained DL35D's inhibitory and inactivation 
activity against cell-free HIV-1 strains. Most importantly, DL35D-DM1 could 
specifically kill HIV-1-infected cells and LRA-reactivated-latent infected 
cells, suggesting that it is a proper candidate for development as a novel 
antiviral drug for use in combination with an LRA for HIV functional cure.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.03384-21
PMCID: PMC8764533
PMID: 35038908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.