1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2022 Apr;165:115-129. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2022.01.004.
Epub  2022 Jan 15.

RBM20(S639G) mutation is a high genetic risk factor for premature death through 
RNA-protein condensates.

Wang C(1), Zhang Y(1), Methawasin M(2), Braz CU(1), Gao-Hu J(1), Yang B(1), 
Strom J(2), Gohlke J(2), Hacker T(3), Khatib H(1), Granzier H(2), Guo W(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal and Dairy Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 
53706, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ 85724, USA.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(4)Department of Animal and Dairy Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 
53706, USA. Electronic address: wguo2@wisc.edu.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a heritable and genetically heterogenous disease 
often idiopathic and a leading cause of heart failure with high morbidity and 
mortality. DCM caused by RNA binding motif protein 20 (RBM20) mutations is 
diverse and needs a more complete mechanistic understanding. RBM20 mutation 
S637G (S639G in mice) is linked to severe DCM and early death in human patients. 
In this study, we generated a RBM20 S639G mutation knock-in (KI) mouse model to 
validate the function of S639G mutation and examine the underlying mechanisms. 
KI mice exhibited severe DCM and premature death with a ~ 50% mortality in two 
months old homozygous (HM) mice. KI mice had enlarged atria and increased ANP 
and BNP biomarkers. The S639G mutation promoted RBM20 trafficking and 
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) granules in the sarcoplasm. RNA Seq data revealed 
differentially expressed and spliced genes were associated with arrhythmia, 
cardiomyopathy, and sudden death. KI mice also showed a reduction of diastolic 
stiffness and impaired contractility at both the left ventricular (LV) chamber 
and cardiomyocyte levels. Our results indicate that the RBM20 S639G mutation 
leads to RNP granules causing severe heart failure and early death and this 
finding strengthens the novel concept that RBM20 cardiomyopathy is a RNP granule 
disease.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2022.01.004
PMCID: PMC8940686
PMID: 35041844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None