1. HGG Adv. 2021 Aug 20;3(1):100053. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2021.100053. eCollection
 2022 Jan 13.

Neural network classifiers for images of genetic conditions with cutaneous 
manifestations.

Duong D(1), Waikel RL(1), Hu P(1), Tekendo-Ngongang C(1), Solomon BD(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genomics Unit, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome 
Research Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Neural networks have shown strong potential in research and in healthcare. 
Mainly due to the need for large datasets, these applications have focused on 
common medical conditions, where more data are typically available. Leveraging 
publicly available data, we trained a neural network classifier on images of 
rare genetic conditions with skin findings. We used approximately 100 images per 
condition to classify 6 different genetic conditions. We analyzed both 
preprocessed images that were cropped to show only the skin lesions as well as 
more complex images showing features such as the entire body segment, the 
person, and/or the background. The classifier construction process included 
attribution methods to visualize which pixels were most important for 
computer-based classification. Our classifier was significantly more accurate 
than pediatricians or medical geneticists for both types of images and suggests 
steps for further research involving clinical scenarios and other applications.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2021.100053
PMCID: PMC8756521
PMID: 35047844

Conflict of interest statement: B.D.S.: Editor-in-Chief of the American Journal 
of Medical Genetics; previously (until 2019) employee of GeneDx, Inc., a 
genetic/genomic testing laboratory that is a subsidiary of Opko Health, and 
previous holder of Opko Health stock options; previously (until 2019) member of 
Scientific Advisory Board for FDNA. All other authors declare no competing 
interests.