1. Matrix Biol. 2022 Feb;106:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2022.01.003. Epub 2022
Jan  16.

CCN2 participates in overload-induced skeletal muscle hypertrophy.

Petrosino JM(1), Longenecker JZ(1), Angell CD(1), Hinger SA(1), Martens CR(1), 
Accornero F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung 
Research Institute, The Ohio State University, 473 W 12th Ave, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung 
Research Institute, The Ohio State University, 473 W 12th Ave, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA. Electronic address: federica.accornero@osumc.edu.

The regulation of skeletal muscle growth following pro-hypertrophic stimuli 
requires a coordinated response by different cell types that leads to 
extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and increases in muscle cross-sectional 
area. Indeed, matricellular proteins serve a key role as communication vehicles 
that facilitate the propagation of signaling stimuli required for muscle 
adaptation to environmental challenges. We found that the matricellular protein 
cellular communication network factor 2 (CCN2), also known as connective tissue 
growth factor (CTGF), is induced during a time course of overload-driven 
skeletal muscle hypertrophy in mice. To elucidate the role of CCN2 in mediating 
the hypertrophic response, we utilized genetically engineered mouse models for 
myofiber-specific CCN2 gain- and loss-of-function and then examined their 
response to mechanical stimuli through muscle overload. Interestingly, 
myofiber-specific deletion of CCN2 blunted muscle's hypertrophic response to 
overload without interfering with ECM deposition. On the other hand, when in 
excess through transgenic CCN2 overexpression, CCN2 was efficient in promoting 
overload-induced aberrant ECM accumulation without affecting myofiber growth. 
Altogether, our genetic approaches highlighted independent ECM and myofiber 
stress adaptation responses, and positioned CCN2 as a central mediator of both. 
Mechanistically, CCN2 acts by regulating focal adhesion kinase (FAK) mediated 
transduction of overload-induced extracellular signals, including interleukin 6 
(IL6), and their regulatory impact on global protein synthesis in skeletal 
muscle. Overall, our study highlights the contribution of muscle-derived 
extracellular matrix factor CCN2 for proper hypertrophic muscle growth.

Copyright Â© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2022.01.003
PMCID: PMC8854352
PMID: 35045313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interests The authors 
have declared no conflict of interest exists.