1. Foods. 2022 Jan 7;11(2):153. doi: 10.3390/foods11020153.

Valorization of By-Products from Biofuel Biorefineries: Extraction and 
Purification of Bioactive Molecules from Post-Fermentation Corn Oil.

Cairone F(1), Cesa S(1), Ciogli A(1), Fabrizi G(1), Goggiamani A(1), Iazzetti 
A(1)(2), Di Lena G(3), Sanchez Del Pulgar J(3), Lucarini M(3), Cantò L(4), 
Zengin G(5), Ondrejíčková P(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Chemistry and Technology, Sapienza, University of Roma, 
P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Biotecnologiche di Base, Cliniche Intensivologiche e 
Perioperatorie, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, L.go Francesco Vito 1, 
00168 Rome, Italy.
(3)CREA Research Centre for Food and Nutrition, Via Ardeatina 546, 00178 Rome, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti-Pescara, 66100 
Chieti, Italy.
(5)Department of Biology, Science Faculty, Selcuk University, 42130 Konya, 
Turkey.
(6)ENVIRAL a.s., Trnavská Cesta, 920 41 Leopoldov, Slovakia.

The aim of this work was to develop innovative and sustainable extraction, 
concentration, and purification technologies aimed to recover target substances 
from corn oil, obtained as side stream product of biomass refineries. Residues 
of bioactive compounds such as carotenoids, phytosterols, tocopherols, and 
polyphenols could be extracted from this matrix and applied as ingredients for 
food and feeds, nutraceuticals, pharmaceuticals, and cosmetic products. These 
molecules are well known for their antioxidant and antiradical capacity, besides 
other specific biological activities, generically involved in the prevention of 
chronic and degenerative diseases. The project involved the development of 
methods for the selective extraction of these minor components, using as 
suitable extraction technique solid phase extraction. All the extracted and 
purified fractions were evaluated by NMR spectroscopic analyses and UV-Vis 
spectrophotometric techniques and characterized by quali-quantitative HPLC 
analyses. TPC (total phenolic content) and TFC (total flavonoid content) were 
also determined. DPPH and ABTS radical were used to evaluate radical quenching 
abilities. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), amylase, glucosidase, and tyrosinase 
were selected as enzymes in the enzyme inhibitory assays. The obtained results 
showed the presence of a complex group of interesting molecules with strong 
potential in market applications according to circular economy principles.

DOI: 10.3390/foods11020153
PMCID: PMC8774612
PMID: 35053885

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.