1. Metabolites. 2021 Dec 23;12(1):11. doi: 10.3390/metabo12010011.

Knockout of Arabidopsis thaliana&nbsp;VEP1, Encoding a PRISE (Progesterone 
5β-Reductase/Iridoid Synthase-Like Enzyme), Leads to Metabolic Changes in 
Response to Exogenous Methyl Vinyl Ketone (MVK).

Klein J(1), Ernst M(2), Christmann A(3), Tropper M(2), Leykauf T(2), Kreis W(2), 
Munkert J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Physiology, Matthias-Schleiden-Institute for Genetics, 
Bioinformatics and Molecular Botany, University of Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91058 Erlangen, 
Germany.
(3)Chair of Botany, TUM School of Life Sciences Weihenstephan, Technical 
University of Munich, 85354 Freising, Germany.

Small or specialized natural products (SNAPs) produced by plants vary greatly in 
structure and function, leading to selective advantages during evolution. With a 
limited number of genes available, a high promiscuity of the enzymes involved 
allows the generation of a broad range of SNAPs in complex metabolic networks. 
Comparative metabolic studies may help to understand why-or why not-certain 
SNAPs are produced in plants. Here, we used the wound-induced, vein patterning 
regulating VEP1 (AtStR1, At4g24220) and its paralogue gene on locus At5g58750 
(AtStR2) from Arabidopsis to study this issue. The enzymes encoded by VEP1-like 
genes were clustered under the term PRISEs (progesterone 5β-reductase/iridoid 
synthase-like enzymes) as it was previously demonstrated that they are involved 
in cardenolide and/or iridoid biosynthesis in other plants. In order to further 
understand the general role of PRISEs and to detect additional more "accidental" 
roles we herein characterized A. thaliana steroid reductase 1 (AtStR1) and 
compared it to A. thaliana steroid reductase 2 (AtStR2). We used A. thaliana 
Col-0 wildtype plants as well as VEP1 knockout mutants and VEP1 knockout mutants 
overexpressing either AtStR1 or AtStR2 to investigate the effects on vein 
patterning and on the stress response after treatment with methyl vinyl ketone 
(MVK). Our results added evidence to the assumption that AtStR1 and AtStR2, as 
well as PRISEs in general, play specific roles in stress and defense situations 
and may be responsible for sudden metabolic shifts.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo12010011
PMCID: PMC8778713
PMID: 35050133

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.