1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 14;23(2):914. doi: 10.3390/ijms23020914.

OCTN1: A Widely Studied but Still Enigmatic Organic Cation Transporter Linked to 
Human Pathology and Drug Interactions.

Pochini L(1), Galluccio M(1), Scalise M(1), Console L(1), Pappacoda G(1), 
Indiveri C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Biochemistry, Molecular Biotechnology and Molecular Biology, 
Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences (DiBEST), University of 
Calabria, Via P. Bucci 4c, Arcavacata di Rende, 87036 Cosenza, Italy.
(2)Institute of Biomembranes, Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnology (IBIOM), 
National Research Council-CNR, Via Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy.

The Novel Organic Cation Transporter, OCTN1, is the first member of the OCTN 
subfamily; it belongs to the wider Solute Carrier family SLC22, which counts 
many members including cation and anion organic transporters. The tertiary 
structure has not been resolved for any cation organic transporter. The 
functional role of OCNT1 is still not well assessed despite the many functional 
studies so far conducted. The lack of a definitive identification of OCTN1 
function can be attributed to the different experimental systems and 
methodologies adopted for studying each of the proposed ligands. Apart from the 
contradictory data, the international scientific community agrees on a role of 
OCTN1 in protecting cells and tissues from oxidative and/or inflammatory damage. 
Moreover, the involvement of this transporter in drug interactions and delivery 
has been well clarified, even though the exact profile of the 
transported/interacting molecules is still somehow confusing. Therefore, OCTN1 
continues to be a hot topic in terms of its functional role and structure. This 
review focuses on the most recent advances on OCTN1 in terms of functional 
aspects, physiological roles, substrate specificity, drug interactions, tissue 
expression, and relationships with pathology.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23020914
PMCID: PMC8776198
PMID: 35055100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.