1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2021 Dec 29;11(1):79. doi: 10.3390/antiox11010079.

"Obesity and Insulin Resistance" Is the Component of the Metabolic Syndrome Most 
Strongly Associated with Oxidative Stress.

Jakubiak GK(1)(2), Osadnik K(1), Lejawa M(1), Osadnik T(1), Go≈Çawski M(3), 
Lewandowski P(3), Pawlas N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical Sciences in Zabrze, Medical 
University of Silesia, Jordana 38 Street, 41-808 Zabrze, Poland.
(2)Department and Clinic of Internal Medicine, Angiology, and Physical Medicine, 
Faculty of Medical Sciences in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, Batorego 
15 Street, 41-902 Bytom, Poland.
(3)Student Research Group, Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical 
Sciences in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, Jordana 38 Street, 41-808 
Zabrze, Poland.

Metabolic syndrome (MS) is not a homogeneous entity, but this term refers to the 
coexistence of factors that increase the risk for the development of type 2 
diabetes and cardiovascular disease. There are different versions of the 
criteria for the diagnosis of MS, which makes the population of patients 
diagnosed with MS heterogeneous. Research to date shows that MS is associated 
with oxidative stress (OS), but it is unclear which MS component is most 
strongly associated with OS. The purpose of the study was to investigate the 
relationship between the parameters of OS and the presence of individual 
elements of MS in young adults, as well as to identify the components of MS by 
means of principal components analysis (PCA) and to investigate how the 
parameters of OS correlate with the presence of individual components. The study 
included 724 young adults with or without a family history of coronary heart 
disease (population of the MAGNETIC study). Blood samples were taken from the 
participants of the study to determine peripheral blood counts, biochemical 
parameters, and selected parameters of OS. In addition, blood pressure and 
anthropometric parameters were measured. In subjects with MS, significantly 
lower activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD), copper- and zinc-containing SOD 
(CuZnSOD), and manganese-containing SOD (MnSOD) were found, along with 
significantly higher total antioxidant capacity (TAC) and significantly lower 
concentration of thiol groups per gram of protein (PSH). We identified three 
components of MS by means of PCA: "Obesity and insulin resistance", 
"Dyslipidemia", and "Blood pressure", and showed the component "Obesity and 
insulin resistance" to have the strongest relationship with OS. In conclusion, 
we documented significant differences in some parameters of OS between young 
adults with and without MS. We showed that "Obesity and insulin resistance" is 
the most important component of MS in terms of relationship with OS.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox11010079
PMCID: PMC8773170
PMID: 35052583

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.