1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 9;23(2):697. doi: 10.3390/ijms23020697.

The Periplasmic Oxidoreductase DsbA Is Required for Virulence of the 
Phytopathogen Dickeya solani.

Przepiora T(1), Figaj D(1), Bogucka A(2), Fikowicz-Krosko J(3), Czajkowski R(3), 
Hugouvieux-Cotte-Pattat N(4), Skorko-Glonek J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General and Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology, 
University of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 59, 80-308 Gdansk, Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, 
University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk, Abrahama 58, 80-807 
Gdansk, Poland.
(3)Laboratory of Biologically Active Compounds, Intercollegiate Faculty of 
Biotechnology, University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk, Abrahama 
58, 80-807 Gdansk, Poland.
(4)Microbiologie Adaptation et Pathogénie, Université Lyon, CNRS, INSA Lyon, 
Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Campus LyonTech-la Doua Bâtiment André Lwoff 
10 rue Raphaël Dubois 69622, F69622 Villeurbanne, France.

In bacteria, the DsbA oxidoreductase is a crucial factor responsible for the 
introduction of disulfide bonds to extracytoplasmic proteins, which include 
important virulence factors. A lack of proper disulfide bonds frequently leads 
to instability and/or loss of protein function; therefore, improper disulfide 
bonding may lead to avirulent phenotypes. The importance of the DsbA function in 
phytopathogens has not been extensively studied yet. Dickeya solani is a 
bacterium from the Soft Rot Pectobacteriaceae family which is responsible for 
very high economic losses mainly in potato. In this work, we constructed a D. 
solani dsbA mutant and demonstrated that a lack of DsbA caused a loss of 
virulence. The mutant bacteria showed lower activities of secreted virulence 
determinants and were unable to develop disease symptoms in a potato plant. The 
SWATH-MS-based proteomic analysis revealed that the dsbA mutation led to 
multifaceted effects in the D. solani cells, including not only lower levels of 
secreted virulence factors, but also the induction of stress responses. Finally, 
the outer membrane barrier seemed to be disturbed by the mutation. Our results 
clearly demonstrate that the function played by the DsbA oxidoreductase is 
crucial for D. solani virulence, and a lack of DsbA significantly disturbs 
cellular physiology.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23020697
PMCID: PMC8775594
PMID: 35054882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.