1. Biomedicines. 2022 Jan 11;10(1):147. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10010147.

Distinctive Roles of YAP and TAZ in Human Endothelial Progenitor Cells Growth 
and Functions.

Klaihmon P(1), Lorthongpanich C(1), Kheolamai P(2), Luanpitpong S(1), 
Issaragrisil S(1).

Author information:
(1)Siriraj Center of Excellence for Stem Cell Research, Faculty of Medicine 
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence in Stem Cell Research and Innovation, Faculty of 
Medicine, Thammasat University, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand.

The hippo signaling pathway plays an essential role in controlling organ size 
and balancing tissue homeostasis. Its two main effectors, yes-associated protein 
(YAP) and WW domain-containing transcription regulator 1, WWTR1 or TAZ, have 
also been shown to regulate endothelial cell functions and angiogenesis. In this 
study, the functions of YAP and TAZ in human endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) 
were investigated by a loss-of-function study using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene 
knockdown (KD). Depletion of either YAP or TAZ reduced EPC survival and impaired 
many of their critical functions, including migration, invasion, 
vessel-formation, and expression of pro-angiogenic genes. Notably, TAZ-KD EPCs 
exhibited more severe phenotypes in comparison to YAP-KD EPCs. Moreover, the 
conditioned medium derived from TAZ-KD EPCs reduced the survivability of human 
lung cancer cells and increased their sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents. 
The overexpression of either wild-type or constitutively active TAZ rescued the 
impaired phenotypes of TAZ-KD EPCs and restored the expression of pro-angiogenic 
genes in those EPCs. In summary, we demonstrate the crucial role of Hippo 
signaling components, YAP and TAZ, in controlling several aspects of EPC 
functions that can potentially be used as a drug target to enhance EPC functions 
in patients.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10010147
PMCID: PMC8773510
PMID: 35052826

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest.