1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Jan 1;13(1):102. doi: 10.3390/genes13010102.

Tracing the Origin of the RSPO2 Long-Hair Allele and Epistatic Interaction 
between FGF5 and RSPO2 in Sapsaree Dog.

Kang M(1), Ahn B(1), Youk S(1), Lee YM(2), Kim JJ(2), Ha JH(3), Park C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biotechnology, Konkuk University, 
Seoul 05029, Korea.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan 36461, Korea.
(3)Korean Sapsaree Foundation, Gyeongsan 38412, Korea.

Genetic analysis of the hair-length of Sapsaree dogs, a Korean native dog breed, 
showed a dominant mode of inheritance for long hair. Genome-Wide Association 
Study (GWAS) analysis and subsequent Mendelian segregation analysis revealed an 
association between OXR1, RSPO2, and PKHD1L1 on chromosome 13 (CFA13). We 
identified the previously reported 167 bp insertion in RSPO2 3' untranslated 
region as a causative mutation for hair length variations. The analysis of 118 
dog breeds and wolves revealed the selection signature on CFA13 in long-haired 
breeds. Haplotype analysis showed the association of only a few specific 
haplotypes to the breeds carrying the 167 bp insertion. The genetic diversity in 
the neighboring region linked to the insertion was higher in Sapsarees than in 
other Asian and European dog breeds carrying the same variation, suggesting an 
older history of its insertion in the Sapsaree genome than in that of the other 
breeds analyzed in this study. Our results show that the RSPO2 3' UTR insertion 
is responsible for not only the furnishing phenotype but also determining the 
hair length of the entire body depending on the genetic background, suggesting 
an epistatic interaction between FGF5 and RSPO2 influencing the hair-length 
phenotype in dogs.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13010102
PMCID: PMC8775186
PMID: 35052442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.