1. Front Oncol. 2022 Jan 4;11:787814. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.787814. eCollection 
2021.

Integrated Transcriptomic Analysis Reveals a Distinctive Role of YAP1 in 
Extramedullary Invasion and Therapeutic Sensitivity of Multiple Myeloma.

Zheng B(1), Sun W(1), Yi K(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang L(1), Lan H(1), Zhang C(1), Xian 
H(1), Li R(1).

Author information:
(1)Nuclear Radiation Injury Protection and Treatment Department, Navy Medical 
Center of People Liberation Army (PLA), Naval Medical University, Shanghai, 
China.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematologic malignancy. There 
are no standard therapeutic guidelines for extramedullary invasion (EM). We 
performed a retrospective integrated transcriptomic analysis based on GEO, TCGA, 
and Oncomine datasets with a total of over 2,500 cases enrolled. GSVA analysis 
was performed on GSE24080. The external validation cohorts include GSE9782, 
GSE2658, MMRF-COMPASS, and Oncomine. The data of MGUS to relapsed MM were 
acquired from GSE6477, GSE5900, and Oncomine. The data of EM were acquired from 
GSE39683 and GSE66291. Single-cell level transcriptome data of MM and EM were 
acquired from GSE106218. GSVA analysis revealed that 559 cases could be divided 
into 2 groups based on the expression of oncogenic pathways with prognostic 
significances. Group 1 with a specific phenotype of YAP1-MYC+ exhibited an 
unpromising prognosis. The univariate analysis revealed YAP1 as a tumor 
suppressor in MM. The activity of DNA repair, glycolysis, and oxidative 
phosphorylation was significantly higher in YAP1-MYC+ MM, which is in 
concordance with EM myeloma cells based on single-cell analysis. Furthermore, we 
discovered that YAP1-MYC+ MM patients exhibited an improved response for IMiD 
treatment. Collectively, YAP1-MYC+MM patients might suffer a worse prognosis and 
stronger propensity for EM progression.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zheng, Sun, Yi, Zhang, Wang, Lan, Zhang, Xian and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.787814
PMCID: PMC8763979
PMID: 35059315

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.