1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2021 Dec 30;11(1):96. doi: 10.3390/antiox11010096.

Concentration of Antioxidant Compounds from Calendula officinalis through 
Sustainable Supercritical Technologies, and Computational Study of Their 
Permeability in Skin for Cosmetic Use.

Mur R(1), Langa E(2), Pino-Otín MR(2), Urieta JS(1), Mainar AM(1).

Author information:
(1)GATHERS Group, Aragón Institute of Engineering Research (I3A), Universidad de 
Zaragoza, c/. Mariano Esquillor s/n, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Campus Universitario Villanueva de Gállego, Universidad San Jorge, Autovía 
A-23 Zaragoza-Huesca Km. 299, 50830 Villanueva de Gallego, Spain.

The growing interest in the cosmetic industry in using compounds of natural and 
sustainable origin that are safe for humans is encouraging the development of 
processes that can satisfy these needs. Chlorogenic acid (CHA), caffeic acid 
(CAF) and ferulic acid (FA) are three compounds widely used within the cosmetic 
industry due to their functionalities as antioxidants, collagen modifiers or 
even as radiation protectors. In this work, two advanced separation techniques 
with supercritical CO2 are used to obtain these three compounds from Calendula 
officinalis, and these are then evaluated using a computational skin 
permeability model. This model is encompassed by the COSMO-RS model, the 
calculations of which make it possible to study the behaviour of the compounds 
in the epidermis. The results show that both CAF and FA are retained in the 
stratum corneum, while CHA manages to penetrate to the stratum spinosum. These 
compounds were concentrated by antisolvent fractionation with super-critical CO2 
using a Response Surface Methodology to study the effect of pressure and CO2 
flow rate. CHA, CAF and FA were completely retained in the precipitation vessel, 
with concentrations between 40% and 70% greater than in the original extract. 
The conditions predicted that the optimal overall yield and enrichment achieved 
would be 153 bar and 42 g/min.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox11010096
PMCID: PMC8773024
PMID: 35052598

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.