1. Exp Ther Med. 2022 Feb;23(2):172. doi: 10.3892/etm.2021.11095. Epub 2021 Dec
27.

Effect of Src tyrosine kinase on a rat model of asthma.

Wu M(1), Yang J(1), Liu T(1), Xuan P(1), Bu B(1), Xu X(1), Wu R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Medicine, The Third Affiliated 
Hospital of Baotou Medical College, Baotou, Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region 
14010, P.R. China.

Src tyrosine kinase is a protein encoded by the Src gene. The present study 
aimed to determine the role of Src protein kinase in asthma using small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) technology. Several Src siRNAs were designed and the 
most effective siRNA pair was selected. A rat model of asthma was established 
using ovalbumin, and the rats were treated with Src siRNA, empty vector or 
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). A non-asthmatic control group was also 
established. The rats were clinically observed and Src mRNA and protein levels 
were measured by reverse transcription-quantitative PCR and western blot 
analysis, respectively. Pathological observation of the lung tissue, counting of 
white blood cells (WBCs) and eosinophils (EOSs) and analysis of the 
concentrations of IL-5, IL-33 and IFN-γ in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were 
performed. The expression levels of Src mRNA in the control, PBS, empty vector 
and siRNA groups were 110±30.7x103, 253±55.4x103, 254±41.3x103 and 180±50.9x103, 
respectively. Histochemical analysis of the lung tissue of rats in the siRNA 
group exhibited a relatively complete lung structure and little damage to the 
alveolar cavity. Src protein expression and IL-5, IL-33 levels, WBC and EOS 
levels were positively correlated with Src mRNA expression, while the IFN-γ 
concentration was negatively correlated with Src mRNA expression. These results 
indicate that Src knockdown inhibits the release of tracheal inflammatory 
factors and significantly alleviates asthma in rats. In conclusion, the present 
study utilized a gene transfer technique to interfere with the expression of Src 
in rats, which decreased the levels of IL-5, IL-33, WBCs and EOSs and increased 
the level of IFN-γ; these changes effectively ameliorated the condition of the 
trachea in asthmatic rats.

Copyright: © Wu et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2021.11095
PMCID: PMC8764580
PMID: 35069853

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.