1. PLoS One. 2022 Jan 21;17(1):e0262369. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0262369. 
eCollection 2022.

Fructose and methylglyoxal-induced glycation alters structural and functional 
properties of salivary proteins, albumin and lysozyme.

Muraoka MY(1), Justino AB(1), Caixeta DC(1)(2), Queiroz JS(1), Sabino-Silva 
R(2), Salmen Espindola F(1).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Institute of Biotechnology, 
Federal University of Uberlandia, Uberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Innovation Center in Salivary Diagnostic and Nanotheranostics, Institute of 
Biomedical Sciences, Federal University of Uberlandia, Uberlandia, Minas Gerais, 
Brazil.

Glycation process refers to reactions between reduction sugars and amino acids 
that can lead to formation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs) which are 
related to changes in chemical and functional properties of biological 
structures that accumulate during aging and diseases. The aim of this study was 
to perform and analyze in vitro glycation by fructose and methylglyoxal (MGO) 
using salivary fluid, albumin, lysozyme, and salivary Î±-amylase (sAA). Glycation 
effect was analyzed by biochemical and spectroscopic methods. The results were 
obtained by fluorescence analysis, infrared spectroscopy (total attenuated 
reflection-Fourier transform, ATR-FTIR) followed by multivariate analysis of 
principal components (PCA), protein profile, immunodetection, enzymatic activity 
and oxidative damage to proteins. Fluorescence increased in all glycated 
samples, except in saliva with fructose. The ATR-FTIR spectra and PCA analysis 
showed structural changes related to the vibrational mode of glycation of 
albumin, lysozyme, and salivary proteins. Glycation increased the relative 
molecular mass (Mr) in protein profile of albumin and lysozyme. Saliva showed a 
decrease in band intensity when glycated. The analysis of sAA immunoblotting 
indicated a relative reduction in intensity of its correspondent Mr after sAA 
glycation; and a decrease in its enzymatic activity was observed. Carbonylation 
levels increased in all glycated samples, except for saliva with fructose. Thiol 
content decreased only for glycated lysozyme and saliva with MGO. Therefore, 
glycation of salivary fluid and sAA may have the potential to identify products 
derived by glycation process. This opens perspectives for further studies on the 
use of saliva, an easy and non-invasive collection fluid, to monitor glycated 
proteins in the aging process and evolution of diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0262369
PMCID: PMC8782344
PMID: 35061788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.