1. Viruses. 2021 Dec 21;14(1):1. doi: 10.3390/v14010001.

RBD Double Mutations of SARS-CoV-2 Strains Increase Transmissibility through 
Enhanced Interaction between RBD and ACE2 Receptor.

Sinha S(1), Tam B(1), Wang SM(1).

Author information:
(1)MOE Frontiers Science Center for Precision Oncology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau 999087, China.

The COVID-19 pandemic, caused by SARS-CoV-2, has led to catastrophic damage for 
global human health. The initial step of SARS-CoV-2 infection is the binding of 
the receptor-binding domain (RBD) in its spike protein to the ACE2 receptor in 
the host cell membrane. Constant evolution of SARS-CoV-2 generates new mutations 
across its genome including the coding region for the RBD in the spike protein. 
In addition to the well-known single mutation in the RBD, the recent new 
mutation strains with an RBD "double mutation" are causing new outbreaks 
globally, as represented by the delta strain containing RBD L452R/T478K. 
Although it is considered that the increased transmissibility of double-mutated 
strains could be attributed to the altered interaction between the RBD and ACE2 
receptor, the molecular details remain to be elucidated. Using the methods of 
molecular dynamics simulation, superimposed structural comparison, free binding 
energy estimation, and antibody escaping, we investigated the relationship 
between the ACE2 receptor and the RBD double mutants of L452R/T478K (delta), 
L452R/E484Q (kappa), and E484K/N501Y (beta, gamma). The results demonstrated 
that each of the three RBD double mutants altered the RBD structure and enhanced 
the binding of the mutated RBD to ACE2 receptor. Together with the mutations in 
other parts of the virus genome, the double mutations increase the 
transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 to host cells.

DOI: 10.3390/v14010001
PMCID: PMC8781274
PMID: 35062205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.