1. Sci Rep. 2022 Jan 24;12(1):1261. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-05284-x.

High glucose concentrations induce oxidative stress by inhibiting Nrf2 
expression in rat Müller retinal cells in vitro.

Albert-Garay JS(1), Riesgo-Escovar JR(2), Salceda R(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Neurodesarrollo y Fisiología, Instituto de Fisiología 
Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 04510, CDMX, Mexico. 
silvestre.alb@gmail.com.
(2)Instituto de Neurobiología, Campus UNAM Juriquilla, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México, 76226, Querétaro, Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Neurodesarrollo y Fisiología, Instituto de Fisiología 
Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 04510, CDMX, Mexico.

Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is a complication of diabetes. Several studies have 
implicated oxidative stress as a fundamental factor in the progression of the 
disease. The nuclear factor erythroid-2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is one of the 
main regulators of redox homeostasis. Glia Müller cells (MC) maintain the 
structural and functional stability of the retina. The objective of this study 
was to evaluate the effect of high glucose concentrations on reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) production and Nrf2 expression levels in rat MC. MC were incubated 
with normal (NG; 5 mM) or high glucose (HG; 25 mM) for different times. 
Incubation with HG increased ROS levels from 12 to 48 h but did not affect cell 
viability. However, exposure to 3 h of HG caused a transient decrease Nrf2 
levels. At that time, we also observed a decrease in the mRNA expression of Nrf2 
target genes, glutathione levels, and catalase activity, all of which increased 
significantly beyond initial levels after 48 h of incubation. HG exposure leads 
to an increase in the p65 subunit of nuclear factor-κB (NF-kB) levels, and its 
target genes. These results suggest that high glucose concentrations lead to 
alteration of the redox regulatory capacity of Nrf2 mediated by NF-kB 
regulation.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-05284-x
PMCID: PMC8975969
PMID: 35075205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.