1. Cureus. 2021 Dec 18;13(12):e20503. doi: 10.7759/cureus.20503. eCollection 2021
 Dec.

Management of Cervical Kyphotic Deformity Associated With Loeys-Dietz 
Vasculopathy and Cardiac Transplantation: Case Report, Literature Review, and 
Strategies for Complex Skeletal Dysplasias.

Donoho DA(1), Singer TG(2), Lazaro T(3), Bauer DF(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurosurgery, Children's National Hospital, Washington, USA.
(2)Surgery, University of California Los Angeles David Geffen School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles, USA.
(3)Pediatric Neurosurgery, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, USA.

Seventy-six percent of pediatric patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS), a 
connective tissue disorder driven by a transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-B) 
pathway mutation, manifest cervical spine malformations. A prior series showed 
that 16% required surgical stabilization. Spine surgery in LDS is associated 
with an 88% complication rate due to poor bone quality and cerebrovascular 
ectasia. Of 77 patients with LDS, one patient who required spine surgery was 
identified in an institutional database from 2010 to 2020. A 15-year-old with 
LDS presented with symptomatic cervical myelopathy from a rapidly progressive 
and unstable cervical deformity. We performed a C5-6 corpectomy and an O-T2 
posterior spinal fusion with recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 
(rhBMP-2). We achieved correction of her kyphosis and normalization of her 
neurologic status. She is neurologically well one year postoperatively with bony 
fusion. The management of a pediatric patient with LDS, orthotopic heart 
transplantation (OHT), and craniocervical deformity with instability is a novel 
challenge. Long-segment constructs are beneficial, rather than sparing the 
occiput or cervicothoracic junction. Off-label BMP may aid an LDS patient with 
TGF-B mutation and sternotomy. Surgeons should continue immunomodulatory and 
antiplatelet medications when required for OHT.

Copyright Â© 2021, Donoho et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.20503
PMCID: PMC8763335
PMID: 35070541

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.