1. Sci Rep. 2022 Jan 24;12(1):1275. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-05391-9.

An oncogenic splice variant of PDGFRα in adult glioblastoma as a therapeutic 
target for selective CDK4/6 inhibitors.

Hamada T(1), Akahane T(1)(2), Yokoyama S(1), Higa N(3), Kirishima M(1), Matsuo 
K(1), Shimokawa M(1), Yoshimoto K(3), Tanimoto A(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima, 890-8544, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical 
and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan.
(3)Center for Human Genome and Gene Analysis, Kagoshima University Hospital, 
Kagoshima, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima, 890-8544, Japan. 
akit09@m3.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical 
and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan. akit09@m3.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.

Understanding human genome alterations is necessary to optimize genome-based 
cancer therapeutics. However, some newly discovered mutations remain as variants 
of unknown significance (VUS). Here, the mutation c.1403A > G in exon 10 of the 
platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha (PDGFRA) gene, a VUS found in 
adult glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), was introduced in human embryonal kidney 
293 T (HEK293T) cells using genome editing to investigate its potential 
oncogenic functions. Genome editing was performed using CRISPR/Cas9; the 
proliferation, drug sensitivity, and carcinogenic potential of genome-edited 
cells were investigated. We also investigated the mechanism underlying the 
observed phenotypes. Three GBM patients carrying the c.1403A > G mutation were 
studied to validate the in vitro results. The c.1403A > G mutation led to a 
splice variant (p.K455_N468delinsN) because of the generation of a 3'-acceptor 
splice site in exon 10. PDGFRA-mutated HEK293T cells exhibited a higher 
proliferative activity via PDGFRα and the cyclin-dependent kinase 
(CDK)4/CDK6-cyclin D1 signaling pathway in a ligand-independent manner. They 
showed higher sensitivity to multi-kinase, receptor tyrosine kinase, and 
CDK4/CDK6 inhibitors. Of the three GBM patients studied, two harbored the 
p.K455_N468delinsN splice variant. The splicing mutation c.1403A > G in PDGFRA 
is oncogenic in nature. Kinase inhibitors targeting PDGFRα and CDK4/CDK6 
signaling should be evaluated for treating GBM patients harboring this mutation.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-05391-9
PMCID: PMC8786844
PMID: 35075231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.