1. Front Oncol. 2022 Jan 5;11:790589. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.790589. eCollection 
2021.

The Role of Circular RNAs in the Drug Resistance of Cancers.

Liu XY(1), Zhang Q(1), Guo J(1), Zhang P(1), Liu H(1), Tian ZB(1), Zhang CP(1), 
Li XY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao 
University, Qingdao, China.

Cancer is a major threat to human health and longevity. Chemotherapy is an 
effective approach to inhibit cancer cell proliferation, but a growing number of 
cancer patients are prone to develop resistance to various chemotherapeutics, 
including platinum, paclitaxel, adriamycin, and 5-fluorouracil, among others. 
Significant progress has been made in the research and development of 
chemotherapeutic drugs over the last few decades, including targeted therapy 
drugs and immune checkpoint inhibitors; however, drug resistance still severely 
limits the application and efficacy of these drugs in cancer treatment. 
Recently, emerging studies have emphasized the role of circular RNAs (circRNAs) 
in the proliferation, migration, invasion, and especially chemoresistance of 
cancer cells by regulating the expression of related miRNAs and targeted genes. 
In this review, we comprehensively summarized the potential roles and mechanisms 
of circRNAs in cancer drug resistance including the efflux of drugs, apoptosis, 
intervention with the TME (tumor microenvironment), autophagy, and dysfunction 
of DNA damage repair, among others. Furthermore, we highlighted the potential 
value of circRNAs as new therapeutic targets and prognostic biomarkers for 
cancer.

Copyright Â© 2022 Liu, Zhang, Guo, Zhang, Liu, Tian, Zhang and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.790589
PMCID: PMC8766647
PMID: 35070998

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.