1. Am J Hum Genet. 2022 Feb 3;109(2):311-327. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.12.009.
Epub  2022 Jan 24.

Midbrain organoids mimic early embryonic neurodevelopment and recapitulate 
LRRK2-p.Gly2019Ser-associated gene expression.

Zagare A(1), Barmpa K(1), Smajic S(1), Smits LM(1), Grzyb K(1), Grünewald A(1), 
Skupin A(1), Nickels SL(2), Schwamborn JC(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, 6, 
Avenue du Swing, L-4367 Belvaux, Luxembourg.
(2)University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, 6, 
Avenue du Swing, L-4367 Belvaux, Luxembourg. Electronic address: 
sarah.nickels@uni.lu.
(3)University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, 6, 
Avenue du Swing, L-4367 Belvaux, Luxembourg. Electronic address: 
jens.schwamborn@uni.lu.

Human brain organoid models that recapitulate the physiology and complexity of 
the human brain have a great potential for in vitro disease modeling, in 
particular for neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson disease. In the 
present study, we compare single-cell RNA-sequencing data of human midbrain 
organoids to the developing human embryonic midbrain. We demonstrate that the 
in vitro model is comparable to its in vivo equivalents in terms of 
developmental path and cellular composition. Moreover, we investigate the 
potential of midbrain organoids for modeling early developmental changes in 
Parkinson disease. Therefore, we compare the single-cell RNA-sequencing data of 
healthy-individual-derived midbrain organoids to their isogenic 
LRRK2-p.Gly2019Ser-mutant counterparts. We show that the LRRK2 p.Gly2019Ser 
variant alters neurodevelopment, resulting in an untimely and incomplete 
differentiation with reduced cellular variability. Finally, we present four 
candidate genes, APP, DNAJC6, GATA3, and PTN, that might contribute to the 
LRRK2-p.Gly2019Ser-associated transcriptome changes that occur during early 
neurodevelopment.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.12.009
PMCID: PMC8874228
PMID: 35077669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests J.C.S. is co-inventor 
on a patent covering the generation of the here-described midbrain organoids 
(WO2017060884A1). Furthermore, J.C.S. is co-founder and shareholder of the 
company OrganoTherapeutics, which makes use of the midbrain organoid technology. 
The other authors declare no competing interests.