1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Jan 13;12:820998. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.820998. 
eCollection 2021.

First National Genomic Epidemiological Study of Neisseria gonorrhoeae Strains 
Spreading Across Sweden in 2016.

Hadad R(1), Golparian D(1), Velicko I(2), Ohlsson AK(3), Lindroth Y(4), Ericson 
EL(3), Fredlund H(1), Engstrand L(5), Unemo M(1).

Author information:
(1)World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Gonorrhoea and Other 
Sexually Transmitted Infections, National Reference Laboratory for Sexually 
Transmitted Infections, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine 
and Health, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.
(2)Public Health Agency of Sweden, Solna, Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Huddinge, Sweden.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical Microbiology, Lund University, 
Skåne Laboratory Medicine, Lund, Sweden.
(5)Center for Translational Microbiome Research, Department of Microbiology, 
Tumor and Cell Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, 
Solna, Sweden.

The increasing transmission and antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae is a global health concern with worrying trends of decreasing 
susceptibility to also the last-line extended-spectrum cephalosporin (ESC) 
ceftriaxone. A dramatic increase of reported gonorrhea cases has been observed 
in Sweden from 2016 and onward. The aim of the present study was to 
comprehensively investigate the genomic epidemiology of all cultured N. 
gonorrhoeae isolates in Sweden during 2016, in conjunction with phenotypic AMR 
and clinical and epidemiological data of patients. In total, 1279 isolates were 
examined. Etest and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) were performed, and 
epidemiological data obtained from the Public Health Agency of Sweden. Overall, 
51.1%, 1.7%, and 1.3% resistance to ciprofloxacin, cefixime, and azithromycin, 
respectively, was found. No isolates were resistant to ceftriaxone, however, 
9.3% of isolates showed a decreased susceptibility to ceftriaxone and 10.5% to 
cefixime. In total, 44 penA alleles were found of which six were mosaic (n = 
92). Using the typing schemes of MLST, NG-MAST, and NG-STAR; 133, 422, and 280 
sequence types, respectively, and 93 NG-STAR clonal complexes were found. The 
phylogenomic analysis revealed two main lineages (A and B) with lineage A 
divided into two main sublineages (A1 and A2). Resistance and decreased 
susceptibility to ESCs and azithromycin and associated AMR determinants, such as 
mosaic penA and mosaic mtrD, were predominantly found in sublineage A2. 
Resistance to cefixime and azithromycin was more prevalent among heterosexuals 
and MSM, respectively, and both were predominantly spread through domestic 
transmission. Continuous surveillance of the spread and evolution of N. 
gonorrhoeae, including phenotypic AMR testing and WGS, is essential for enhanced 
knowledge regarding the dynamic evolution of N. gonorrhoeae and gonorrhea 
epidemiology.

Copyright © 2022 Hadad, Golparian, Velicko, Ohlsson, Lindroth, Ericson, 
Fredlund, Engstrand and Unemo.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.820998
PMCID: PMC8794790
PMID: 35095823

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.