1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Jan 14;11:798246. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2021.798246. eCollection 2021.

The FUT2 Variant c.461G>A (p.Trp154*) Is Associated With Differentially 
Expressed Genes and Nasopharyngeal Microbiota Shifts in Patients With Otitis 
Media.

Elling CL(1)(2), Scholes MA(1)(3), Streubel SO(1)(3), Larson ED(1), Wine 
TM(1)(3), Bootpetch TC(1), Yoon PJ(1)(3), Kofonow JM(4), Gubbels SP(1), Cass 
SP(1), Robertson CE(4), Jenkins HA(1), Prager JD(1)(3), Frank DN(4), Chan 
KH(1)(3), Friedman NR(1)(3), Ryan AF(5), Santos-Cortez RLP(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States.
(2)Human Medical Genetics and Genomics Program, University of Colorado Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, 
CO, United States.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States.
(5)Division of Otolaryngology, Department of Surgery, San Diego School of 
Medicine and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of California, La 
Jolla, CA, United States.
(6)Center for Children's Surgery, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, 
United States.

Otitis media (OM) is a leading cause of childhood hearing loss. Variants in 
FUT2, which encodes alpha-(1,2)-fucosyltransferase, were identified to increase 
susceptibility to OM, potentially through shifts in the middle ear (ME) or 
nasopharyngeal (NP) microbiotas as mediated by transcriptional changes. Greater 
knowledge of differences in relative abundance of otopathogens in carriers of 
pathogenic variants can help determine risk for OM in patients. In order to 
determine the downstream effects of FUT2 variation, we examined gene expression 
in relation to carriage of a common pathogenic FUT2 c.461G>A (p.Trp154*) variant 
using RNA-sequence data from saliva samples from 28 patients with OM. 
Differential gene expression was also examined in bulk mRNA and single-cell 
RNA-sequence data from wildtype mouse ME mucosa after inoculation with 
non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi). In addition, microbiotas were 
profiled from ME and NP samples of 65 OM patients using 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing. In human carriers of the FUT2 variant, FN1, KMT2D, MUC16 and NBPF20 
were downregulated while MTAP was upregulated. Post-infectious expression in the 
mouse ME recapitulated these transcriptional differences, with the exception of 
Fn1 upregulation after NTHi-inoculation. In the NP, Candidate Division TM7 was 
associated with wildtype genotype (FDR-adj-p=0.009). Overall, the FUT2 c.461G>A 
variant was associated with transcriptional changes in processes related to 
response to infection and with increased load of potential otopathogens in the 
ME and decreased commensals in the NP. These findings provide increased 
understanding of how FUT2 variants influence gene transcription and the mucosal 
microbiota, and thus contribute to the pathology of OM.

Copyright Â© 2022 Elling, Scholes, Streubel, Larson, Wine, Bootpetch, Yoon, 
Kofonow, Gubbels, Cass, Robertson, Jenkins, Prager, Frank, Chan, Friedman, Ryan 
and Santos-Cortez.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.798246
PMCID: PMC8798324
PMID: 35096646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AR is a cofounder of Otonomy, Inc., serves as a 
consultant and member of the Scientific Advisory Board, and holds an equity 
position in the company. The UCSD and San Diego VA Committees on Conflict of 
Interest have approved this relationship. Otonomy, Inc. had no role in the 
conduct of this study and the writing of the manuscript. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.