1. AAPS J. 2022 Jan 31;24(1):31. doi: 10.1208/s12248-021-00678-7.

The Perspective of DMPK on Recombinant Adeno-Associated Virus-Based Gene 
Therapy: Past Learning, Current Support, and Future Contribution.

Chen N(1), Sun K(2), Chemuturi NV(2), Cho H(2), Xia CQ(2).

Author information:
(1)Takeda Development Center Americas, Inc. (TDCA), 35 Landsdowne Street, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02139, USA. nancy.chen@takeda.com.
(2)Takeda Development Center Americas, Inc. (TDCA), 35 Landsdowne Street, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02139, USA.

Given the recent success of gene therapy modalities and the growing number of 
cell and gene-based therapies in clinical development across many different 
therapeutic areas, it is evident that this evolving field holds great promise 
for the unmet medical needs of patients. The recent approvals of Luxturna® and 
Zolgensma® prove that recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV)-based gene 
therapy is a transformative modality that enables curative treatment for genetic 
disorders. Over the last decade, Takeda has accumulated significant experience 
with rAAV-based gene therapies, especially in the early stage of development. In 
this review, based on the learnings from Takeda and publicly available 
information, we aim to provide a guiding perspective on Drug Metabolism and 
Pharmacokinetics (DMPK) substantial role in advancing therapeutic gene therapy 
modalities from nonclinical research to clinical development, in particular the 
characterization of gene therapy product biodistribution, elimination 
(shedding), immunogenicity assessment, multiple platform bioanalytical assays, 
and first-in-human (FIH) dose projection strategies. Graphical abstract.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1208/s12248-021-00678-7
PMCID: PMC8817103
PMID: 35102450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None. NC, KS, and NVC are employees of Takeda 
Development Center Americas, Inc. CQX and HC were former employees of Takeda 
Development Center Americas, Inc.