1. Curr Microbiol. 2022 Feb 1;79(3):81. doi: 10.1007/s00284-022-02772-1.

The Q225P Mutation in SigB Promotes Membrane Vesicle Formation in Staphylococcus 
aureus.

Qiao L(1), Yang Y(2), Zhu K(1), Rao Y(1), Li G(2), Rao X(2), Li M(3), Zhou R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University, 
83 Xinqiao Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing, 400037, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Army Medical 
University, 30 Gaotanyan Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing, 400038, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Army Medical 
University, 30 Gaotanyan Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing, 400038, People's 
Republic of China. sotx7080@163.com.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University, 
83 Xinqiao Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing, 400037, People's Republic of 
China. zhou_rj@aliyun.com.

Both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria release nano-sized lipid bilayered 
particles, known as membrane vesicles (MVs), into external environments. 
Although MVs play a variety of roles in bacterial physiology and pathogenesis, 
the mechanisms underlying MV formation in Gram-positive microorganisms such as 
Staphylococcus aureus remain obscure. Bacterial MV production can be induced in 
response to stress conditions, and the alternative sigma factor B (SigB) 
functions as a central regulator of the stress response in Gram-positive 
bacteria. In a previous study, we demonstrated that the SigB(Q225P) substitution 
mutation in S. aureus promotes biofilm formation. Here, we report that the 
SigB(Q225P) mutation also increases MV production in this important pathogen. 
LacZ reporter assays and electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that the 
Q225P substitution reduces SigB binding to the promoter region of the 
thermonuclease gene (nuc), resulting in a significant reduction in Nuc 
expression. Deletion of nuc markedly enhances S. aureus MV generation, possibly 
due to the accumulation of nucleic acids. These results are not only important 
for understanding MV biogenesis in S. aureus, but also useful for the 
development of a S. aureus MV-based platform for MV application.

Â© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-022-02772-1
PMCID: PMC8804369
PMID: 35103842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.