1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 Mar;25(3):107. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12623. Epub 2022 Feb 1.

Overexpression of Foxc1 ameliorates sepsis‑associated encephalopathy by 
inhibiting microglial migration and neuroinflammation through the IκBα/NF‑κB 
pathway.

Wang H(1), Wang H(2), Song Y(3), Liu C(4), Qian X(3), Zhang D(3), Jiang X(3), 
Zhang S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, The Second School of Clinical Medicine, 
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510280, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200092, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, People's Hospital of Henan University of 
Chinese Medicine/Zhengzhou People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan 450003, P.R. 
China.
(4)Department of Critical Care Medicine, The Fifth Clinical Medical College of 
Henan University of Chinese Medicine, Zhengzhou, Henan 450003, P.R. China.

Sepsis‑associated encephalopathy (SAE) is a common and severe complication of 
sepsis. The cognitive dysfunction that ensues during SAE has been reported to be 
caused by impairments of the hippocampus. Microglia serves a key role in 
neuroinflammation during SAE through migration. Forkhead box C1 (Foxc1) is a 
member of the forkhead transcription factor family that has been found to 
regulate in cell migration. However, the role of Foxc1 in neuroinflammation 
during SAE remains unknown. In the present study, the mechanistic role of Foxc1 
on microglial migration, neuroinflammation and neuronal apoptosis during the 
occurrence of cognitive dysfunction in SAE was investigated. A 
microglia‑mediated inflammation model was induced by LPS in BV‑2 microglial 
cells in vitro, whilst a SAE‑related cognitive impairment model was established 
in mice using cecal ligation and perforation (CLP) surgery. Cognitive function 
in mice was evaluated using the Morris Water Maze (MWM) trial. 
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment was found to trigger BV‑2 cell migration, 
inflammation and neuronal apoptosis. In addition, CLP surgery induced cognitive 
injury, which was indicated by longer latencies and shorter dwell times in the 
goal quadrant compared with those in the Sham group in the MWM trial. LPS 
treatment or CLP induction decreased the expression of Foxc1 and inhibitor of 
NF‑κB (IκΒα) whilst increasing that of p65, IL‑1β and TNF‑α. After Foxc1 was 
overexpressed, the cognitive dysfunction of mice that underwent CLP surgery was 
improved, with the expression of IκBα also increased, microglial cell migration, 
the expression of p65, IL‑1β and TNF‑α and neuronal apoptosis were all decreased 
in vivo and in vitro, which were in turn reversed by the inhibition of IκBα 
in vitro. Overall, these results suggest that the overexpression of Foxc1 
inhibited microglial migration whilst suppressing the inflammatory response and 
neuronal apoptosis by regulating the IκBα/NF‑κB pathway, thereby improving 
cognitive dysfunction during SAE.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12623
PMCID: PMC8822881
PMID: 35103290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interests.