1. BMC Oral Health. 2022 Feb 2;22(1):26. doi: 10.1186/s12903-022-02060-1.

Congenital anomalies-associated Riga-Fede disease as an early manifestation of 
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome: rare entities in the same pediatric patient-a case report.

Eita AAB(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, Oral Medicine, Periodontology, Diagnosis and Radiology 
Department, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt. aliaa_bedeir@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Riga-Fede disease is a rare begnin disorder of the oral tissues, it 
can be associated with congenital anomalies and neurological disturbances. 
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is a rare X-linked recessive disorder characterized by 
neurological and behavioral manifestations. A patient can rarely be diagnosed 
with both diseases in a lifetime. Therefore, reporting manifestations from such 
disorders is important to avoid misdiagnosis and help in timely intervention.
CASE PRESENTATION: This case report presents an 8-months-old male infant with 
traumatic oral ulcers from deciduous teeth. A diagnosis of Riga-Fede disease was 
made. Teeth grinding was performed and the oral lesions were healed. At the age 
of 2.5 years, the patient presented with neurological manifestations as well as 
facial tissue and premature teeth loss from self mutilation. Genetic sequencing 
revealed a variant of uncertain significance in the Hypoxanthine 
Phosphoribosyltransferase 1 gene. He was diagnosed with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. 
Cleft palate, ventricular septal defect, congenitally undescended testis and 
ectopic left iliac kidney were also reported. The patient was scheduled on 
psychiatric treatment and after about six months of follow-up, both the 
behavioral and neurological symptoms were improved.
CONCLUSIONS: Riga-Fede disease can be an early manifestation of Lesch-Nyhan 
syndrome. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case with the 
incidence of all the mentioned entities in one pediatric patient.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-022-02060-1
PMCID: PMC8808768
PMID: 35109856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no competing interests.