1. PLoS Med. 2022 Feb 1;19(2):e1003679. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003679. 
eCollection 2022 Feb.

Obesity and risk of female reproductive conditions: A Mendelian randomisation 
study.

Venkatesh SS(1)(2), Ferreira T(1)(3), Benonisdottir S(1), Rahmioglu N(2)(3), 
Becker CM(3), Granne I(3), Zondervan KT(2)(3), Holmes MV(4)(5), Lindgren 
CM(1)(2)(3)(4)(6), Wittemans LBL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Information and Discovery, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Nuffield Department of Women's and Reproductive Health, Medical Sciences 
Division, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(5)Medical Research Council Population Health Research Unit, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States 
of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Med. 2022 Sep 2;19(9):e1004095. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1004095.

BACKGROUND: Obesity is observationally associated with altered risk of many 
female reproductive conditions. These include polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), 
abnormal uterine bleeding, endometriosis, infertility, and pregnancy-related 
disorders. However, the roles and mechanisms of obesity in the aetiology of 
reproductive disorders remain unclear. Thus, we aimed to estimate observational 
and genetically predicted causal associations between obesity, metabolic 
hormones, and female reproductive disorders.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Logistic regression, generalised additive models, and 
Mendelian randomisation (MR) (2-sample, non-linear, and multivariable) were 
applied to obesity and reproductive disease data on up to 257,193 women of 
European ancestry in UK Biobank and publicly available genome-wide association 
studies (GWASs). Body mass index (BMI), waist-to-hip ratio (WHR), and WHR 
adjusted for BMI were observationally (odds ratios [ORs] = 1.02-1.87 per 1-SD 
increase in obesity trait) and genetically (ORs = 1.06-2.09) associated with 
uterine fibroids (UF), PCOS, heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB), and pre-eclampsia. 
Genetically predicted visceral adipose tissue (VAT) mass was associated with the 
development of HMB (OR [95% CI] per 1-kg increase in predicted VAT mass = 1.32 
[1.06-1.64], P = 0.0130), PCOS (OR [95% CI] = 1.15 [1.08-1.23], P = 3.24 × 
10-05), and pre-eclampsia (OR [95% CI] = 3.08 [1.98-4.79], P = 6.65 × 10-07). 
Increased waist circumference posed a higher genetic risk (ORs = 1.16-1.93) for 
the development of these disorders and UF than did increased hip circumference 
(ORs = 1.06-1.10). Leptin, fasting insulin, and insulin resistance each mediated 
between 20% and 50% of the total genetically predicted association of obesity 
with pre-eclampsia. Reproductive conditions clustered based on shared genetic 
components of their aetiological relationships with obesity. This study was 
limited in power by the low prevalence of female reproductive conditions among 
women in the UK Biobank, with little information on pre-diagnostic 
anthropometric traits, and by the susceptibility of MR estimates to genetic 
pleiotropy.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that common indices of overall and central obesity were 
associated with increased risks of reproductive disorders to heterogenous 
extents in a systematic, large-scale genetics-based analysis of the aetiological 
relationships between obesity and female reproductive conditions. Our results 
suggest the utility of exploring the mechanisms mediating the causal 
associations of overweight and obesity with gynaecological health to identify 
targets for disease prevention and treatment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003679
PMCID: PMC8806071
PMID: 35104295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: C.M.B. reports grants 
from Bayer AG, AbbVie Inc, Volition Rx, MDNA Life Sciences, Roche Diagnostics 
Inc., and consultancy for Myovant. He is a member of the independent data 
monitoring board at ObsEva; I.G. reports grants from Bayer AG; K.T.Z. reports 
grants from Bayer AG, AbbVie Inc, Volition Rx, MDNA Life Sciences, Roche 
Diagnostics Inc, and non-financial scientific collaboration with Population 
Diagnostics Ltd, outside the submitted work; M.V.H. has consulted for Boehringer 
Ingelheim, and in adherence to the University of Oxford’s Clinical Trial Service 
Unit & Epidemiological Studies Unit (CSTU) staff policy, did not accept personal 
honoraria or other payments from pharmaceutical companies; C.M.L. reports grants 
from Bayer AG and Novo Nordisk and has a partner who works at Vertex; no other 
relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted 
work. All disclosed competing interests are outside the submitted work.