1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2022 Feb 8;119(6):e2122308119. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2122308119.

Time-resolved DEER EPR and solid-state NMR afford kinetic and structural 
elucidation of substrate binding to Ca(2+)-ligated calmodulin.

Schmidt T(1), Jeon J(1), Yau WM(1), Schwieters CD(1), Tycko R(2), Clore GM(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-0520.
(2)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-0520 mariusc@mail.nih.gov 
robertty@mail.nih.gov.

Recent advances in rapid mixing and freeze quenching have opened the path for 
time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)-based double 
electron-electron resonance (DEER) and solid-state NMR of protein-substrate 
interactions. DEER, in conjunction with phase memory time filtering to 
quantitatively extract species populations, permits monitoring time-dependent 
probability distance distributions between pairs of spin labels, while 
solid-state NMR provides quantitative residue-specific information on the 
appearance of structural order and the development of intermolecular contacts 
between substrate and protein. Here, we demonstrate the power of these combined 
approaches to unravel the kinetic and structural pathways in the binding of the 
intrinsically disordered peptide substrate (M13) derived from myosin light-chain 
kinase to the universal eukaryotic calcium regulator, calmodulin. Global kinetic 
analysis of the data reveals coupled folding and binding of the peptide 
associated with large spatial rearrangements of the two domains of calmodulin. 
The initial binding events involve a bifurcating pathway in which the M13 
peptide associates via either its N- or C-terminal regions with the C- or 
N-terminal domains, respectively, of calmodulin/4Ca2+ to yield two extended 
"encounter" complexes, states A and A*, without conformational ordering of M13. 
State A is immediately converted to the final compact complex, state C, on a 
timescale τ ≤ 600 μs. State A*, however, only reaches the final complex via a 
collapsed intermediate B (τ ∼ 1.5 to 2.5 ms), in which the peptide is only 
partially ordered and not all intermolecular contacts are formed. State B then 
undergoes a relatively slow (τ ∼ 7 to 18 ms) conformational rearrangement to 
state C.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2122308119
PMCID: PMC8833187
PMID: 35105816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.