1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jan 18;12:814155. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.814155. 
eCollection 2021.

Impact of Antigen Presentation Mechanisms on Immune Response in Autoimmune 
Hepatitis.

Fasano R(1)(2), Malerba E(1), Prete M(1), Solimando AG(1)(2), Buonavoglia A(1), 
Silvestris N(1)(2), Leone P(1), Racanelli V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, "Aldo Moro" University 
of Bari Medical School, Bari, Italy.
(2)Medical Oncology Unit, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico 
(IRCCS) Istituto Tumori Giovanni Paolo II, Bari, Italy.

The liver is a very tolerogenic organ. It is continually exposed to a multitude 
of antigens and is able to promote an effective immune response against 
pathogens and simultaneously immune tolerance against self-antigens. In spite of 
strong peripheral and central tolerogenic mechanisms, loss of tolerance can 
occur in autoimmune liver diseases, such as autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) through a 
combination of genetic predisposition, environmental factors, and an imbalance 
in immunological regulatory mechanisms. The liver hosts several types of 
conventional resident antigen presenting cells (APCs) such as dendritic cells, B 
cells and macrophages (Kupffer cells), and unconventional APCs including liver 
sinusoidal endothelial cells, hepatic stellate cells and hepatocytes. By 
standard (direct presentation and cross-presentation) and alternative mechanisms 
(cross-dressing and MHC class II-dressing), liver APCs presents self-antigen to 
naive T cells in the presence of costimulation leading to an altered immune 
response that results in liver injury and inflammation. Additionally, the 
transport of antigens and antigen:MHC complexes by trogocytosis and 
extracellular vesicles between different cells in the liver contributes to 
enhance antigen presentation and amplify autoimmune response. Here, we focus on 
the impact of antigen presentation on the immune response in the liver and on 
the functional role of the immune cells in the induction of liver inflammation. 
A better understanding of these key pathogenic aspects could facilitate the 
establishment of novel therapeutic strategies in AIH.

Copyright Â© 2022 Fasano, Malerba, Prete, Solimando, Buonavoglia, Silvestris, 
Leone and Racanelli.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.814155
PMCID: PMC8804214
PMID: 35116039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.