1. Integr Environ Assess Manag. 2022 Nov;18(6):1639-1654. doi: 10.1002/ieam.4588.
 Epub 2022 Feb 28.

Human health risk assessment of pharmaceuticals in the European Vecht River.

Duarte DJ(1), Oldenkamp R(2), Ragas AMJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Institute for Water & Wetland Research, 
Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Global Health-Amsterdam, Institute for Global Health and 
Development, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, Open University, 
Heerlen, The Netherlands.

Active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) can reach surface waters used for 
drinking water extraction and recreational activities, such as swimming and 
fishing. The aim of the present study was to systematically assess the lifetime 
human health risks posed by 15 individual APIs and their mixtures occurring in 
the German-Dutch transboundary Vecht River. An exposure model was developed and 
used to assess the combined risks of oral and dermal exposure under a variety of 
exposure conditions. A total of 4500 API uptake values and 165 lifetime risk 
values were estimated for 15 and 11 APIs, respectively. Overall, the lifetime 
human health risks posed by the APIs and their mixtures based on modeling 
results were deemed acceptable under typical exposure conditions. Under very 
extreme environmental conditions and human behavior, API mixture risks were of 
potential concern while the risks of individual APIs were negligible, with a few 
exceptions. The antibiotic doxycycline and analgesic phenazone showed the 
highest and lowest risks, respectively. The study did not evaluate the potential 
risks caused by metabolite compounds. Recommendations for water managers are 
provided to help improve the accuracy and utility of human health risk 
assessments of pharmaceuticals. Integr Environ Assess Manag 2022;18:1639-1654. © 
2022 The Authors. Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management published 
by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society of Environmental Toxicology & 
Chemistry (SETAC).

© 2022 The Authors. Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management published 
by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Society of Environmental Toxicology & 
Chemistry (SETAC).

DOI: 10.1002/ieam.4588
PMCID: PMC9790459
PMID: 35112470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.