1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2022 Jan 17;15:819194. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.819194. 
eCollection 2021.

Connexin30-Deficiency Causes Mild Hearing Loss With the Reduction of 
Endocochlear Potential and ATP Release.

Chen J(1)(2)(3), Chen P(1)(2)(3), He B(1)(2)(3), Gong T(1)(2)(3), Li Y(1)(2)(3), 
Zhang J(1)(2)(3), Lv J(1)(2)(3), Mammano F(4)(5), Hou S(1)(2)(3), Yang 
J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Xinhua Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Ear Institute, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine on Ear and Nose Diseases, 
Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Physics and Astronomy "G. Galilei", University of Padua, Padua, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Cell Biology and 
Neurobiology, Italian National Research Council, Monterotondo, Italy.

GJB2 and GJB6 are adjacent genes encoding connexin 26 (Cx26) and connexin 30 
(Cx30), respectively, with overlapping expressions in the inner ear. Both genes 
are associated with the commonest monogenic hearing disorder, recessive isolated 
deafness DFNB1. Cx26 plays an important role in auditory development, while the 
role of Cx30 in hearing remains controversial. Previous studies found that Cx30 
knockout mice had severe hearing loss along with a 90% reduction in Cx26, while 
another Cx30 knockout mouse model showed normal hearing with nearly half of Cx26 
preserved. In this study, we used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to establish a new Cx30 
knockout mouse model (Cx30-/-), which preserves approximately 70% of Cx26. We 
found that the 1, 3, and 6-month-old Cx30-/- mice showed mild hearing loss at 
full frequency. Immunofluorescence and HE staining suggested no significant 
differences in microstructure of the cochlea between Cx30-/- mice and wild-type 
mice. However, transmission electron microscopy showed slight cavity-like damage 
in the stria vascularis of Cx30-/- mice. And Cx30 deficiency reduced the 
production of endocochlear potential (EP) and the release of ATP, which may have 
induced hearing loss. Taken together, this study showed that lack of Cx30 can 
lead to hearing loss with an approximately 30% reduction of Cx26 in the present 
Cx30 knockout model. Hence, Cx30 may play an important rather than redundant 
role in hearing development.

Copyright Â© 2022 Chen, Chen, He, Gong, Li, Zhang, Lv, Mammano, Hou and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2021.819194
PMCID: PMC8802669
PMID: 35110999

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.