1. Alzheimers Dement. 2022 Dec;18(12):2481-2492. doi: 10.1002/alz.12581. Epub
2022  Feb 9.

Trans-seeding of Alzheimer-related tau protein by a yeast prion.

Flach M(1)(2), Leu C(3), Martinisi A(1)(2), Skachokova Z(1), Frank S(1), Tolnay 
M(1), Stahlberg H(3), Winkler DT(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University Hospital Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Center for Cellular Imaging and NanoAnalytics (C-CINA), Biozentrum, 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Neurology, Medical University Clinic, Kantonsspital Baselland, Liestal, 
Switzerland.

Abnormal tau protein aggregates constitute a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease. 
The mechanisms underlying the initiation of tau aggregation in sporadic 
neurodegeneration remain unclear. Here we investigate whether a non-human prion 
can seed tau aggregation. Due to their structural similarity with tau 
aggregates, we chose Sup35NM yeast prion domain fibrils for explorative tau 
seedings. Upon in vitro incubation with tau monomers, Sup35NM fibrils promoted 
the formation of morphologically distinct tau fibril strains. In vivo, 
intrahippocampal inoculation of Sup35NM fibrils accentuated tau pathology in 
P301S tau transgenic mice. Thus, our results provide first in vivo evidence for 
heterotypic cross-species seeding of a neurodegenerative human prion-like 
protein by a yeast prion. This opens up the conceptual perspective that 
non-mammalian prions present in the human microbiome could be involved in the 
initiation of protein misfolding in neurodegenerative disorders, a mechanism for 
which we propose the term "trans-seeding."

Â© 2022 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.12581
PMCID: PMC10078693
PMID: 35142027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.