1. Front Physiol. 2022 Jan 26;12:816058. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.816058. 
eCollection 2021.

Rapid Assessment of Insect Steroid Hormone Entry Into Cultured Cells.

Masterson M(1), Bittar R(1)(2), Chu H(2), Yamanaka N(2), Haga-Yamanaka S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, University of California, 
Riverside, Riverside, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Entomology, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA, 
United States.

Steroid hormones control development and homeostasis in a wide variety of 
animals by interacting with intracellular nuclear receptors. Recent discoveries 
in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster revealed that insect steroid hormones 
or ecdysteroids are incorporated into cells through a membrane transporter named 
Ecdysone Importer (EcI), which may become a novel target for manipulating 
steroid hormone signaling in insects. In this study, we established an assay 
system that can rapidly assess EcI-mediated ecdysteroid entry into cultured 
cells. Using NanoLuc Binary Technology (NanoBiT), we first developed an assay to 
detect ligand-dependent heterodimerization of the ecdysone receptor (EcR) and 
retinoid X receptor (RXR) in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells. We also 
developed HEK293 cells that stably express EcI. By combining these tools, we can 
monitor ecdysteroid entry into the cells in real time, making it a reliable 
system to assess EcI-mediated steroid hormone incorporation into animal cells.

Copyright Â© 2022 Masterson, Bittar, Chu, Yamanaka and Haga-Yamanaka.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.816058
PMCID: PMC8824665
PMID: 35145429

Conflict of interest statement: RB, SH-Y, and NY have a patent (U.S. Patent No. 
10,228,380) relevant to this work. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.