1. Cell Syst. 2022 Apr 20;13(4):304-320.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2022.01.005. Epub
 2022 Feb 10.

Dynamics of huntingtin protein interactions in the striatum identifies candidate 
modifiers of Huntington disease.

Greco TM(1), Secker C(2), Ramos ES(2), Federspiel JD(1), Liu JP(3), Perez AM(4), 
Al-Ramahi I(4), Cantle JP(5), Carroll JB(5), Botas J(4), Zeitlin SO(3), Wanker 
EE(2), Cristea IM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Washington Road, 
Princeton, NJ, USA.
(2)Neuroproteomics, Max Delbrück Centre for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(4)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Houston, TX, USA; 
Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, Western Washington University, Bellingham, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Washington Road, 
Princeton, NJ, USA. Electronic address: icristea@princeton.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Syst. 2022 Apr 20;13(4):268-270. doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2022.03.003.

Huntington disease (HD) is a monogenic neurodegenerative disorder with one 
causative gene, huntingtin (HTT). Yet, HD pathobiology is multifactorial, 
suggesting that cellular factors influence disease progression. Here, we define 
HTT protein-protein interactions (PPIs) perturbed by the mutant protein with 
expanded polyglutamine in the mouse striatum, a brain region with selective HD 
vulnerability. Using metabolically labeled tissues and immunoaffinity 
purification-mass spectrometry, we establish that polyglutamine-dependent 
modulation of HTT PPI abundances and relative stability starts at an early stage 
of pathogenesis in a Q140 HD mouse model. We identify direct and indirect PPIs 
that are also genetic disease modifiers using in-cell two-hybrid and behavioral 
assays in HD human cell and Drosophila models, respectively. Validated, 
disease-relevant mHTT-dependent interactions encompass mediators of synaptic 
neurotransmission (SNAREs and glutamate receptors) and lysosomal acidification 
(V-ATPase). Our study provides a resource for understanding mHTT-dependent 
dysfunction in cortico-striatal cellular networks, partly through impaired 
synaptic communication and endosomal-lysosomal system. A record of this paper's 
Transparent Peer Review process is included in the supplemental information.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cels.2022.01.005
PMCID: PMC9317655
PMID: 35148841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.