1. Cancer Treat Res Commun. 2022;31:100527. doi: 10.1016/j.ctarc.2022.100527.
Epub  2022 Feb 2.

Current approach to Waldenström Macroglobulinemia.

Ravi G(1), Kapoor P(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of America.
(2)Division of Hematology Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of America. 
Electronic address: kapoor.prashant@mayo.edu.

Waldenström Macroglobulinemia (WM) is a unique, low grade, IgM lymphoplasmacytic 
lymphoma with a heterogeneous clinical course. A paucity of high-grade evidence 
from large phase 3 trials remains a major issue in the field despite a rapidly 
expanding therapeutic armamentarium against WM. Prior knowledge of the patients' 
MYD88L265P and CXCR4 mutation status aids in treatment decision making if 
Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor therapy is being considered. Head-to 
head comparative data to inform optimal approach are lacking, and a particularly 
vexing issue for the clinicians is choosing between fixed-duration 
bendamustine-rituximab (BR) therapy and an indefinite BTK inhibitor-based 
regimen, given that both approaches are well tolerated and effective, 
particularly for the patient population harboring MYD88L265P mutation. For the 
patients with MYD88WT genotype, chemo-immunotherapy such as BR is preferred, 
although zanubrutinib, a potent second generation BTK inhibitor, with its 
reduced off target effects and greater BTK occupancy compared to its 
predecessor, ibrutinib, has also recently shown activity in MYD88WT WM. This 
review summarizes the current literature pertaining to the diagnosis, prognosis, 
and the treatment of WM.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctarc.2022.100527
PMID: 35149375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]