1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Jan 24;12:834129. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.834129. 
eCollection 2021.

Genetic Factors Associated With Tardive Dyskinesia: From Pre-clinical Models to 
Clinical Studies.

Tsermpini EE(1), Redenšek S(1), Dolžan V(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Tardive dyskinesia is a severe motor adverse event of antipsychotic medication, 
characterized by involuntary athetoid movements of the trunk, limbs, and/or 
orofacial areas. It affects two to ten patients under long-term administration 
of antipsychotics that do not subside for years even after the drug is stopped. 
Dopamine, serotonin, cannabinoid receptors, oxidative stress, plasticity 
factors, signaling cascades, as well as CYP isoenzymes and transporters have 
been associated with tardive dyskinesia (TD) occurrence in terms of genetic 
variability and metabolic capacity. Besides the factors related to the drug and 
the dose and patients' clinical characteristics, a very crucial variable of TD 
development is individual susceptibility and genetic predisposition. This review 
summarizes the studies in experimental animal models and clinical studies 
focusing on the impact of genetic variations on TD occurrence. We identified 
eight genes emerging from preclinical findings that also reached statistical 
significance in at least one clinical study. The results of clinical studies are 
often conflicting and non-conclusive enough to support implementation in 
clinical practice.

Copyright © 2022 Tsermpini, Redenšek and Dolžan.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.834129
PMCID: PMC8819690
PMID: 35140610

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.