1. Front Oncol. 2022 Jan 25;11:801320. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.801320. eCollection
 2021.

Vemurafenib Combined With Trametinib Significantly Benefits the Survival of a 
Patient With Stage IV Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma With BRAF V600E Mutation: 
A Case Report.

Wang Z(1), He D(2), Chen C(3), Liu X(1), Ke N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pancreatic Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(3)Department of Radiology, The First People's Hospital of Chengdu, Chengdu, 
China.

Vemurafenib and trametinib have a lot of successful experiences in the treatment 
of unresectable or metastatic melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. However, they 
have not been reported in the treatment of advanced pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). We report here a 66-year-old male who was diagnosed as 
PDAC with multiple metastases of the abdominal cavity and liver according to 
pathological examination. After three cycles of gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel 
(GA) regimen chemotherapy, the liver metastasis of the patient progressed, and 
the patient could not continue to receive chemotherapy because of poor physical 
condition. BRAF V600E mutation was found by genetic detection in this patient, 
so targeted therapy with vemurafenib combined with trametinib was performed and 
the follow-up period was up to 24 months. To the best of our knowledge, this is 
a rare report that patients with stage IV PDAC with BRAF V600E mutation can 
receive significantly survival benefits from targeted therapy with vemurafenib 
combined with trametinib. This report provides experience for the use of these 
two drugs in patients with advanced PDAC.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wang, He, Chen, Liu and Ke.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.801320
PMCID: PMC8821913
PMID: 35145907

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.