1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2022 May;23(5):634-648. doi: 10.1111/mpp.13184. Epub 2022
Feb  11.

Suppression of XopQ-XopX-induced immune responses of rice by the type III 
effector XopG.

Deb S(1)(2), Gokulan CG(1), Nathawat R(1), Patel HK(1), Sonti RV(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)CSIR - Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CSIR-CCMB), Hyderabad, 
India.
(2)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 
Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(3)Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Tirupati, 
Tirupati, India.

Effectors that suppress effector-triggered immunity (ETI) are an essential part 
of the arms race in the co-evolution of bacterial pathogens and their host 
plants. Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae uses multiple type III secretion system 
(T3SS) secreted effectors such as XopU, XopV, XopP, XopG, and AvrBs2 to suppress 
rice immune responses that are induced by the interaction of two other 
effectors, XopQ and XopX. Here we show that each of these five suppressors can 
interact individually with both XopQ and XopX. One of the suppressors, XopG, is 
a predicted metallopeptidase that appears to have been introduced into X. oryzae 
pv. oryzae by horizontal gene transfer. XopQ and XopX interact with each other 
in the nucleus while interaction with XopG sequesters them in the cytoplasm. The 
XopG E76A and XopG E85A mutants are defective in interaction with XopQ and XopX, 
and are also defective in suppression of XopQ-XopX-mediated immune responses. 
Both mutations individually affect the virulence-promoting ability of XopG. 
These results indicate that XopG is important for X. oryzae pv. oryzae virulence 
and provide insights into the mechanisms by which this protein suppresses ETI in 
rice.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology published by British Society for 
Plant Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.13184
PMCID: PMC8995061
PMID: 35150038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no conflict of interest 
exists.