1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Mar;298(3):101715. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101715. Epub 2022
 Feb 11.

Antibodies binding diverse pertactin epitopes protect mice from Bordetella 
pertussis infection.

Silva RP(1), DiVenere AM(2), Amengor D(1), Maynard JA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas, Austin, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Texas, Austin, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas, Austin, Texas, USA; 
LaMontagne Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Texas, Austin, Texas, 
USA. Electronic address: maynard@che.utexas.edu.

Infection by the bacterium Bordetella pertussis continues to cause considerable 
morbidity and mortality worldwide. Many current acellular pertussis vaccines 
include the antigen pertactin, which has presumptive adhesive and 
immunomodulatory activities, but is rapidly lost from clinical isolates after 
the introduction of these vaccines. To better understand the contributions of 
pertactin antibodies to protection and pertactin's role in pathogenesis, we 
isolated and characterized recombinant antibodies binding four distinct epitopes 
on pertactin. We demonstrate that four of these antibodies bind epitopes that 
are conserved across all three classical Bordetella strains, and competition 
assays further showed that antibodies binding these epitopes are also elicited 
by B. pertussis infection of baboons. Surprisingly, we found that representative 
antibodies binding each epitope protected mice against experimental B. pertussis 
infection. A cocktail of antibodies from each epitope group protected mice 
against a subsequent lethal dose of B. pertussis and greatly reduced lung 
colonization levels after sublethal challenge. Each antibody reduced B. 
pertussis lung colonization levels up to 100-fold when administered 
individually, which was significantly reduced when antibody effector functions 
were impaired, with no antibody mediating antibody-dependent complement-induced 
lysis. These data suggest that antibodies binding multiple pertactin epitopes 
protect primarily by the same bactericidal mechanism, which overshadows 
contributions from blockade of other pertactin functions. These antibodies 
expand the available tools to further dissect pertactin's role in infection and 
understand the impact of antipertactin antibodies on bacterial fitness.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101715
PMCID: PMC8931430
PMID: 35151691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.