1. Front Nutr. 2022 Jan 27;9:779967. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2022.779967. eCollection 
2022.

Association Between Dietary Patterns and Different Metabolic Phenotypes in 
Japanese Adults: WASEDA'S Health Study.

Tanisawa K(1), Ito T(2)(3), Kawakami R(1), Usui C(1), Kawamura T(2)(4), Suzuki 
K(1), Sakamoto S(5), Ishii K(1), Muraoka I(1), Oka K(1), Higuchi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Sport Sciences, Waseda University, Tokorozawa, Japan.
(2)Waseda Institute for Sport Sciences, Tokorozawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Food and Nutrition, Tokyo Kasei University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Research Center for Molecular Exercise Science, University of Physical 
Education, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Faculty of Sport Science, Surugadai University, Saitama, Japan.

Although many studies have reported that a posteriori dietary pattern is 
associated with metabolic health, there is little evidence of an association 
between dietary patterns and different metabolic phenotypes. The present study 
aimed to examine the association between major dietary patterns and different 
metabolic phenotypes (metabolically healthy non-obese [MHNO], metabolically 
unhealthy non-obese [MUNO], metabolically healthy obese [MHO], and metabolically 
unhealthy obese [MUO]) in middle-aged and elderly Japanese adults. This 
cross-sectional study enrolled 2,170 Japanese adults aged ≥40 years. The four 
different metabolic phenotypes were determined based on the presence of obesity, 
abdominal obesity, hypertension, hyperglycemia, and dyslipidemia. The major 
dietary patterns were determined using principal component analysis based on 
energy-adjusted food intake. Two dietary patterns were identified: the healthy 
dietary pattern, which was characterized by a high intake of vegetables, fruits, 
potatoes, soy products, mushrooms, seaweeds, and fish; and the alcohol dietary 
pattern, which was characterized by a high intake of alcoholic beverages, liver, 
chicken, and fish. The healthy dietary pattern was associated with the MHNO and 
MHO phenotypes (MUNO and MUO as reference groups, respectively), and the 
multivariate-adjusted odds ratios (ORs) (95% confidence intervals [CIs]) in the 
highest quartile of healthy dietary pattern score with the lowest quartile as 
the reference category were 2.10 (1.40-3.15) and 1.86 (1.06-3.25), respectively. 
Conversely, the alcohol dietary pattern was inversely associated with the MHNO 
and MHO phenotypes, while the multivariate-adjusted ORs (95% CIs) in the highest 
quartile of the alcohol dietary pattern score with the lowest quartile as the 
reference category were 0.63 (0.42-0.94) and 0.45 (0.26-0.76), respectively. 
There were no significant interactions between sex and healthy/alcohol dietary 
patterns in the prevalence of the MHNO and MHO phenotypes. In conclusion, the 
present study's findings suggest that major dietary patterns are associated with 
different metabolic phenotypes in middle-aged and elderly Japanese adults. These 
findings provide useful evidence for maintaining metabolic health through diet 
regardless of obesity status.

Copyright © 2022 Tanisawa, Ito, Kawakami, Usui, Kawamura, Suzuki, Sakamoto, 
Ishii, Muraoka, Oka and Higuchi.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2022.779967
PMCID: PMC8829333
PMID: 35155537

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.