1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jan 26;13:811210. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.811210. 
eCollection 2021.

Endothelial Progenitor Cells and Vascular Alterations in Alzheimer's Disease.

Custodia A(1), Ouro A(1), Romaus-Sanjurjo D(1), Pías-Peleteiro JM(1), de Vries 
HE(2), Castillo J(3), Sobrino T(1).

Author information:
(1)NeuroAging Group (NEURAL), Clinical Neurosciences Research Laboratory (LINC), 
Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela (IDIS), Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain.
(2)Neuroimmunology Research Group, Department of Molecular Cell Biology and 
Immunology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Neuroimaging and Biotechnology Laboratory (NOBEL), Clinical Neurosciences 
Research Laboratory (LINC), Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela 
(IDIS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease representing the most 
common type of dementia worldwide. The early diagnosis of AD is very difficult 
to achieve due to its complexity and the practically unknown etiology. 
Therefore, this is one of the greatest challenges in the field in order to 
develop an accurate therapy. Within the different etiological hypotheses 
proposed for AD, we will focus on the two-hit vascular hypothesis and vascular 
alterations occurring in the disease. According to this hypothesis, the 
accumulation of β-amyloid protein in the brain starts as a consequence of damage 
in the cerebral vasculature. Given that there are several vascular and 
angiogenic alterations in AD, and that endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) play 
a key role in endothelial repair processes, the study of EPCs in AD may be 
relevant to the disease etiology and perhaps a biomarker and/or therapeutic 
target. This review focuses on the involvement of endothelial dysfunction in the 
onset and progression of AD with special emphasis on EPCs as a biomarker and 
potential therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2022 Custodia, Ouro, Romaus-Sanjurjo, Pías-Peleteiro, de Vries, 
Castillo and Sobrino.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.811210
PMCID: PMC8825416
PMID: 35153724

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.