1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 19;23(3):1082. doi: 10.3390/ijms23031082.

CRISPR Editing Enables Consequential Tag-Activated MicroRNA-Mediated Endogene 
Deactivation.

Papasavva PL(1)(2), Patsali P(1)(2), Loucari CC(1)(2), Kurita R(3), Nakamura 
Y(4), Kleanthous M(1)(2), Lederer CW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics Thalassemia, The Cyprus Institute of 
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia 2371, Cyprus.
(2)Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, Nicosia 2371, Cyprus.
(3)Research and Development Department, Central Blood Institute, Blood Service 
Headquarters, Japanese Red Cross Society, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8521, Japan.
(4)Cell Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Research Center, Tsukuba 
305-0074, Japan.

Molecular therapies and functional studies greatly benefit from spatial and 
temporal precision of genetic intervention. We therefore conceived and explored 
tag-activated microRNA (miRNA)-mediated endogene deactivation (TAMED) as a 
research tool and potential lineage-specific therapy. For proof of principle, we 
aimed to deactivate γ-globin repressor BCL11A in erythroid cells by tagging the 
3' untranslated region (UTR) of BCL11A with miRNA recognition sites (MRSs) for 
the abundant erythromiR miR-451a. To this end, we employed nucleofection of 
CRISPR/Cas9 ribonucleoprotein (RNP) particles alongside double- or 
single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides for, respectively, 
non-homologous-end-joining (NHEJ)- or homology-directed-repair (HDR)-mediated 
MRS insertion. NHEJ-based tagging was imprecise and inefficient (≤6%) and 
uniformly produced knock-in- and indel-containing MRS tags, whereas HDR-based 
tagging was more efficient (≤18%), but toxic for longer donors encoding 
concatenated and thus potentially more efficient MRS tags. Isolation of clones 
for robust HEK293T cells tagged with a homozygous quadruple MRS resulted in 25% 
spontaneous reduction in BCL11A and up to 36% reduction after transfection with 
an miR-451a mimic. Isolation of clones for human umbilical cord blood-derived 
erythroid progenitor-2 (HUDEP-2) cells tagged with single or double MRS allowed 
detection of albeit weak γ-globin induction. Our study demonstrates suitability 
of TAMED for physiologically relevant modulation of gene expression and its 
unsuitability for therapeutic application in its current form.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23031082
PMCID: PMC8834719
PMID: 35163006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.