1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2022 Feb 4:2022.02.02.22270254. doi: 
10.1101/2022.02.02.22270254.

OraSure InteliSwab (®) Rapid Antigen Test performance with the SARS-CoV-2 
Variants of Concern Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, and Omicron.

Weishampel ZA(1), Young J(2), Fischl M(2), Fischer RJ(1), Donkor IO(1)(3), 
Riopelle JC(1), Schulz JE(1), Port JR(1), Saturday TA(1), van Doremalen N(1), 
Berry JD(2), Munster VJ(1), Yinda CK(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, MT 59840, USA.
(2)OraSure Technologies Inc., Research and Development, Bethlehem, PA 18015, 
USA.
(3)Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, Epidemiology Department, 
University of Ghana, Legon, GHAN.

Update in
    Viruses. 2022 Mar 06;14(3):543. doi: 10.3390/v14030543.

The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in the human population and the resulting COVID-19 
pandemic has led to the development of various diagnostic tests. The OraSure 
InteliSwab ® COVID-19 Rapid Test is a recently developed and FDA emergency use 
authorized rapid antigen-detecting test that functions as a lateral flow device 
targeting the nucleocapsid protein. Due to SARS-CoV-2 evolution, there is a need 
to evaluate the sensitivity of rapid antigen-detecting tests for new variants, 
especially variants of concern like Omicron. In this study, the sensitivity of 
the OraSure InteliSwab ® Test was investigated using cultured strains of the 
known variants of concern (VOCs, Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, and Omicron) and the 
ancestral lineage (lineage A). Based on dilution series in cell culture medium, 
an approximate limit of detection for each variant was determined. The OraSure 
InteliSwab ® Test showed an overall comparable performance using recombinant 
nucleocapsid protein and different cultured variants with recorded limits of 
detection ranging between 3.77 × 10 5 and 9.13 × 10 5 RNA copies/mL. Finally, 
the sensitivity was evaluated using oropharyngeal swabs from Syrian golden 
hamsters inoculated with the 6 VOCs. Ultimately, the OraSure InteliSwab ® 
COVID-19 Rapid Test showed no decrease in sensitivity between the ancestral 
SARS-CoV-2 strain and any VOCs including Omicron.

DOI: 10.1101/2022.02.02.22270254
PMCID: PMC8845516
PMID: 35169818

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.