1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Cell Transplant. 2022 Jan-Dec;31:9636897221075749. doi: 
10.1177/09636897221075749.

Lovastatin Inhibits RhoA to Suppress Canonical Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling and 
Alternative Wnt-YAP/TAZ Signaling in Colon Cancer.

Xiao Y(1), Liu Q(1), Peng N(1), Li Y(1), Qiu D(1), Yang T(1), Kang R(2), Usmani 
A(2), Amadasu E(2), Borlongan CV(2), Yu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery and Brain Repair, University of South Florida 
Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA.

Retraction in
    Cell Transplant. 2024 Jan-Dec;33:9636897241246903. doi: 
10.1177/09636897241246903.

Statins are first-line drugs used to control patient lipid levels, but there is 
recent evidence that statin treatment can lower colorectal cancer (CRC) 
incidence by 50% and prolong CRC patient survival through mechanisms that are 
poorly understood. In this study, we found that the treatment of APCmin mice by 
the mevalonate pathway inhibitor lovastatin significantly reduced the number of 
colonic masses and improved hypersplenism and peripheral anemia. Furthermore, 
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of colonic 
mass tissues showed a potent inhibitory effect in both Wnt/β-catenin signaling 
and YAP/TAZ signaling in the lovastatin treatment group. The results of our 
transcriptomic analyses in RKO indicated that lovastatin regulated several 
proliferation-related signaling pathways. Moreover, lovastatin suppressed 
important genes and proteins related to the canonical Wnt/β-catenin and 
alternative Wnt-YAP/TAZ signaling pathways in RKO and SW480 cells, and these 
effects were rescued by mevalonic acid (MVA), as confirmed through a series of 
Western blotting, RT-PCR, and reporter assays. Given that statins suppress 
oncogenic processes primarily through the inhibition of Rho GTPase in the 
mevalonate pathway, we speculate that lovastatin can inhibit certain Rho GTPases 
to suppress both canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling and alternative Wnt-YAP/TAZ 
signaling. In RKO cells, lovastatin showed similar inhibitory properties as the 
RhoA inhibitor CCG1423, being able to inhibit β-catenin, TAZ, and p-LATS1 
protein activity. Our results revealed that lovastatin inhibited RhoA activity, 
thereby suppressing the downstream canonical Wnt/β-catenin and alternative 
Wnt-YAP/TAZ pathways in colon cancer cells. These inhibitory properties suggest 
the promise of statins as a treatment for CRC. Altogether, the present findings 
support the potential clinical use of statins in non-cardiovascular contexts and 
highlight novel targets for anticancer treatments.

DOI: 10.1177/09636897221075749
PMCID: PMC8855423
PMID: 35168393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.