1. Molecules. 2022 Feb 2;27(3):1012. doi: 10.3390/molecules27031012.

Recent Advances in Macrocyclic Drugs and Microwave-Assisted and/or 
Solid-Supported Synthesis of Macrocycles.

Sun D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The Daniel K. Inouye College of 
Pharmacy, University of Hawaii at Hilo, Hilo, HI 96720, USA.

Macrocycles represent attractive candidates in organic synthesis and drug 
discovery. Since 2014, nineteen macrocyclic drugs, including three 
radiopharmaceuticals, have been approved by FDA for the treatment of bacterial 
and viral infections, cancer, obesity, immunosuppression, etc. As such, new 
synthetic methodologies and high throughput chemistry (e.g., microwave-assisted 
and/or solid-phase synthesis) to access various macrocycle entities have 
attracted great interest in this chemical space. This article serves as an 
update on our previous review related to macrocyclic drugs and new synthetic 
strategies toward macrocycles (Molecules, 2013, 18, 6230). In this work, I first 
reviewed recent FDA-approved macrocyclic drugs since 2014, followed by new 
advances in macrocycle synthesis using high throughput chemistry, including 
microwave-assisted and/or solid-supported macrocyclization strategies. Examples 
and highlights of macrocyclization include macrolactonization and 
macrolactamization, transition-metal catalyzed olefin ring-closure metathesis, 
intramolecular C-C and C-heteroatom cross-coupling, copper- or 
ruthenium-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition, intramolecular SNAr or SN2 
nucleophilic substitution, condensation reaction, and multi-component 
reaction-mediated macrocyclization, and covering the literature since 2010.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27031012
PMCID: PMC8839925
PMID: 35164274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.