1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Feb 7;23(3):1862. doi: 10.3390/ijms23031862.

Central Nervous System Stimulants Limit Caffeine Transport at the 
Blood-Cerebrospinal Fluid Barrier.

Ikeda-Murakami K(1), Tani N(1)(2), Ikeda T(1)(2), Aoki Y(1), Ishikawa T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Osaka City University Medical School, 1-4-3 
Asahi-machi, Abeno, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.
(2)Forensic Autopsy Section, Medico-Legal Consultation and Postmortem 
Investigation Support Center, c/o Department of Legal Medicine, Osaka City 
University Medical School, 1-4-3 Asahi-machi, Abeno, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

Caffeine, a common ingredient in energy drinks, crosses the blood-brain barrier 
easily, but the kinetics of caffeine across the blood-cerebrospinal fluid 
barrier (BCSFB) has not been investigated. Therefore, 127 autopsy cases (Group 
A, 30 patients, stimulant-detected group; and Group B, 97 patients, no stimulant 
detected group) were examined. In addition, a BCSFB model was constructed using 
human vascular endothelial cells and human choroid plexus epithelial cells 
separated by a filter, and the kinetics of caffeine in the BCSFB and the effects 
of 4-aminopyridine (4-AP), a neuroexcitatory agent, were studied. Caffeine 
concentrations in right heart blood (Rs) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were 
compared in the autopsy cases: caffeine concentrations were higher in Rs than 
CSF in Group A compared to Group B. In the BCSFB model, caffeine and 4-AP were 
added to the upper layer, and the concentration in the lower layer of choroid 
plexus epithelial cells was measured. The CSF caffeine concentration was 
suppressed, depending on the 4-AP concentration. Histomorphological examination 
suggested that choroid plexus epithelial cells were involved in inhibiting the 
efflux of caffeine to the CSF. Thus, the simultaneous presence of stimulants and 
caffeine inhibits caffeine transfer across the BCSFB.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23031862
PMCID: PMC8836437
PMID: 35163784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.