1. Int J Cancer. 2022 Jul 15;151(2):167-180. doi: 10.1002/ijc.33965. Epub 2022
Mar  4.

Repurposing autophagy regulators in brain tumors.

Petrosyan E(1)(2), Fares J(1)(2), Cordero A(1)(2), Rashidi A(1)(2), Arrieta 
VA(1)(2), Kanojia D(1)(2), Lesniak MS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Northwestern Medicine Malnati Brain Tumor Institute, Lurie Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.

Malignant brain tumors, such as glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and brain 
metastases, continue to be an unmet medical challenge. Despite advances in 
cancer diagnostics and therapeutics, tumor cell colonization in the central 
nervous system renders most treatment options ineffective. This is primarily due 
to the selective permeability of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), which hinders 
the crossing of targeting agents into the brain. As such, repositioning 
medications that demonstrate anticancer effects and possess the ability to cross 
the BBB can be a promising option. Antidepressants, which are BBB-permeable, 
have been reported to exhibit cytotoxicity against tumor cells. Autophagy, 
specifically, has been identified as one of the common key mediators of 
antidepressant's antitumor effects. In this work, we provide a comprehensive 
overview of US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved antidepressants with 
reported cytotoxic activities in different tumor models, where autophagy 
dysregulation was demonstrated to play the main part. As such, imipramine, 
maprotiline, fluoxetine and escitalopram were shown to induce autophagy, whereas 
nortriptyline, clomipramine and paroxetine were identified as autophagy 
inhibitors. Sertraline and desipramine, depending on the neoplastic context, 
were demonstrated to either induce or inhibit autophagy. Collectively, these 
medications were associated with favorable therapeutic outcomes in a variety of 
cancer cell models, including brain tumors.

Â© 2022 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.33965
PMCID: PMC9133056
PMID: 35179776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared