1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2022 Feb;29(2):121-129. doi: 10.1038/s41594-021-00719-x. 
Epub 2022 Feb 16.

Nucleosome recognition and DNA distortion by the Chd1 remodeler in a 
nucleotide-free state.

Nodelman IM(#)(1), Das S(#)(2), Faustino AM(3), Fried SD(1)(3), Bowman GD(4), 
Armache JP(5).

Author information:
(1)Thomas C. Jenkins Department of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Huck Institutes of 
the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Thomas C. Jenkins Department of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. gdbowman@jhu.edu.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Huck Institutes of 
the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA. 
jparmache@psu.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Chromatin remodelers are ATP-dependent enzymes that reorganize nucleosomes 
within all eukaryotic genomes. Here we report a complex of the Chd1 remodeler 
bound to a nucleosome in a nucleotide-free state, determined by cryo-EM to 2.3 Å 
resolution. The remodeler stimulates the nucleosome to absorb an additional 
nucleotide on each strand at two different locations: on the tracking strand 
within the ATPase binding site and on the guide strand one helical turn from the 
ATPase motor. Remarkably, the additional nucleotide on the tracking strand is 
associated with a local transformation toward an A-form geometry, explaining how 
sequential ratcheting of each DNA strand occurs. The structure also reveals a 
histone-binding motif, ChEx, which can block opposing remodelers on the 
nucleosome and may allow Chd1 to participate in histone reorganization during 
transcription.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41594-021-00719-x
PMCID: PMC9107065
PMID: 35173352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]