1. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2022 Mar;37(3):10.1002/gps.5692. doi: 
10.1002/gps.5692.

Examining the presence and nature of delusions in Alzheimer's disease and 
frontotemporal dementia syndromes.

Kumfor F(1)(2), Liang CT(1)(2), Hazelton JL(1)(2), Leyton CE(2)(3), Kaizik 
C(2)(4), Devenney E(2)(5), Connaughton E(6), Langdon R(6), Mioshi E(7), Kwok 
JB(2)(5)(8), Dobson-Stone C(2)(5)(8), Halliday GM(2)(5)(8), Piguet O(1)(2), 
Hodges JR(2)(5), Landin-Romero R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(2)Brain & Mind Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(4)Memory and Cognition Clinic, RPA Hospital, Sydney, Local Health District, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(5)Central Clinical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(6)Department of Cognitive Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(7)School of Health Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(8)School of Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: Abnormal beliefs and delusions have been reported in some people 
with dementia, however, the prevalence of delusions, and their neurocognitive 
basis has been underexplored. This study aimed to examine the presence, 
severity, content and neural correlates of delusions in a large, 
well-characterised cohort of dementia patients using a transdiagnostic, 
cross-sectional approach.
METHODS: Four-hundred and eighty-seven people with dementia were recruited: 102 
Alzheimer's disease, 136 behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia, 154 
primary progressive aphasia, 29 motor neurone disease, 46 corticobasal syndrome, 
20 progressive supranuclear palsy. All patients underwent neuropsychological 
assessment and brain magnetic resonance imaging, and the Neuropsychiatric 
Inventory was conducted with an informant, by an experienced clinician.
RESULTS: In our cohort, 48/487 patients (10.8%) had delusions. A diagnosis of 
behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia (18.4%) and Alzheimer's disease 
(11.8%) were associated with increased risk of delusions. A positive gene 
mutation was observed in 11/27 people with delusions. Individuals with frequent 
delusions performed worse on the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination 
(p = 0.035), particularly on the orientation/attention (p = 0.022) and memory 
(p = 0.013) subtests. Voxel-based morphometry analyses found that increased 
delusional psychopathology was associated with reduced integrity of the right 
middle frontal gyrus, right planum temporale and left anterior temporal pole.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that delusions are relatively common in 
dementia and uncover a unique cognitive and neural profile associated with the 
manifestation of delusions. Clinically, delusions may lead to delayed or 
misdiagnosis. Our results shed light on how to identify individuals at risk of 
neuropsychiatric features of dementia, a crucial first step to enable targeted 
symptom management.

© 2022 The Authors. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry published by 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.5692
PMCID: PMC9546395
PMID: 35178786

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no Conflicts of Interest to 
declare.