1. ACS Synth Biol. 2022 Mar 18;11(3):1049-1059. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00490. 
Epub 2022 Feb 17.

Improving the Robustness of Engineered Bacteria to Nutrient Stress Using 
Programmed Proteolysis.

Szydlo K(1), Ignatova Z(1), Gorochowski TE(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Hamburg, 
20146, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, BS8 1TQ, Bristol, 
United Kingdom.

The use of short peptide tags in synthetic genetic circuits allows for the 
tuning of gene expression dynamics and release of amino acid resources through 
targeted protein degradation. Here, we use elements of the Escherichia coli and 
Mesoplasma florum transfer-mRNA (tmRNA) ribosome rescue systems to compare 
endogenous and foreign proteolysis systems in E. coli. We characterize the 
performance and burden of each and show that, while both greatly shorten the 
half-life of a tagged protein, the endogenous system is approximately 10 times 
more efficient. On the basis of these results we then demonstrate using 
mathematical modeling and experiments how proteolysis can improve cellular 
robustness through targeted degradation of a reporter protein in auxotrophic 
strains, providing a limited secondary source of essential amino acids that help 
partially restore growth when nutrients become scarce. These findings provide 
avenues for controlling the functional lifetime of engineered cells once 
deployed and increasing their tolerance to fluctuations in nutrient 
availability.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00490
PMCID: PMC9097571
PMID: 35174698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.