1. Neuropathology. 2022 Jun;42(3):197-203. doi: 10.1111/neup.12793. Epub 2022 Feb
 20.

A case of ganglioglioma grade 3 with H3 K27M mutation arising in the medial 
temporal lobe in an elderly patient.

Fujii Y(1), Hatae R(1), Hata N(1), Suzuki SO(2), Sangatsuda Y(1), Takigawa K(1), 
Funakoshi Y(1), Fujioka Y(1), Kuga D(1), Mizoguchi M(1), Iwaki T(2), Yoshimoto 
K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

The mutation p.K27M in H3F3A (H3 K27M mutation) is mainly detected in diffuse 
midline glioma. However, recent studies have demonstrated that H3 K27M mutation 
could also be observed in a subset of gangliogliomas. Importantly, most H3 
K27-mutated ganglioglioma cases also harbor BRAF V600E mutation. Herein, we 
report a rare case of H3 K27M-mutated ganglioglioma grade 3 without BRAF 
mutation arising in the medial temporal lobe in an elderly man. A small biopsy 
specimen was sampled. The pathological diagnosis was diffuse astrocytoma. The 
tumor progressed gradually during an 18-month follow-up period. Gadolinium 
enhancement on magnetic resonance imaging was noted 36 months after the biopsy. 
The patient was referred to a hospital for tumor resection. Histological 
analysis of resected specimens led to a diagnosis of ganglioglioma grade 3 with 
H3 K27M mutation. The patient underwent concurrent temozolomide chemotherapy 
with radiotherapy. Although the patient's condition deteriorated after 
chemotherapy due to disease progression, he survived for more than 23 months 
after tumor resection. We present this rare case and discuss the involvement of 
H3 K27M mutation in ganglioglioma grade 3.

© 2022 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12793
PMID: 35187715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]