1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2022 Apr;9(12):e2104140. doi: 10.1002/advs.202104140. Epub
2022  Feb 20.

Photonic Nanojet-Mediated Optogenetics.

Guo J(1)(2), Wu Y(1)(2), Gong Z(3), Chen X(3), Cao F(2), Kala S(2), Qiu Z(2), 
Zhao X(1)(2), Chen JJ(1), He D(1), Chen T(1), Zeng R(1), Zhu J(2), Wong KF(2), 
Murugappan S(2), Zhu T(2), Xian Q(2), Hou X(2), Ruan YC(2), Li B(3), Li YC(3), 
Zhang Y(3), Sun L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 
510632, China.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Hong Kong SAR, 999077, China.
(3)Institute of Nanophotonics, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 511443, China.

Erratum in
    Adv Sci (Weinh). 2022 Sep;9(27):e2204667. doi: 10.1002/advs.202204667.

Optogenetics has become a widely used technique in neuroscience research, 
capable of controlling neuronal activity with high spatiotemporal precision and 
cell-type specificity. Expressing exogenous opsins in the selected cells can 
induce neuronal activation upon light irradiation, and the activation depends on 
the power of incident light. However, high optical power can also lead to 
off-target neuronal activation or even cell damage. Limiting the incident power, 
but enhancing power distribution to the targeted neurons, can improve 
optogenetic efficiency and reduce off-target effects. Here, the use of optical 
lenses made of polystyrene microspheres is demonstrated to achieve effective 
focusing of the incident light of relatively low power to neighboring neurons 
via photonic jets. The presence of microspheres significantly localizes and 
enhances the power density to the target neurons both in vitro and ex vivo, 
resulting in increased inward current and evoked action potentials. In vivo 
results show optogenetic stimulation with microspheres that can evoke 
significantly more motor behavior and neuronal activation at lowered power 
density. In all, a proof-of-concept of a strategy is demonstrated to increase 
the efficacy of optogenetic neuromodulation using pulses of reduced optical 
power.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202104140
PMCID: PMC9036029
PMID: 35187865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.