1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Feb 2;13:807330. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.807330. 
eCollection 2022.

Caffeine Functions by Inhibiting Dorsal and Ventral Hippocampal Adenosine 2A 
Receptors to Modulate Memory and Anxiety, Respectively.

Xu Y(1), Ning Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Peng Y(1), Luo F(1), Zhou Y(1), Li P(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Department of Army Occupational Disease, The 
Molecular Biology Center, Burn and Combined Injury, Daping Hospital, Army 
Medical University (Third Military Medical University), Chongqing, China.

As a nonspecific antagonist of the adenosine A2A receptor (A2AR), caffeine 
enhances learning and improves memory impairment. Simultaneously, the 
consumption of caffeine correlates with a feeling of anxiety. The hippocampus is 
functionally differentiated along its dorsal/ventral axis and plays a crucial 
role both in memory and anxiety. Whether caffeine exerts its regulation by 
inhibiting A2ARs in different subregions of the hippocampus is still unknown. In 
the present study, we found that after chronic intake of drinking water 
containing caffeine (1 g/L, 3 weeks), mice exhibited aggravated anxiety-like 
behavior and enhanced memory function. Tissue-specific, functional disruption of 
dorsal hippocampal A2ARs by the CRE-LoxP system prevented the memory-enhancing 
effect of caffeine, while selective disruption of ventral hippocampal A2ARs 
blocked the impact of caffeine on anxiety. These results, together with the 
enhanced memory of dorsal hippocampus A2AR knockout mice and greater 
anxiety-like behavior of ventral hippocampus A2AR knockout mice without 
caffeine, indicates a dissociation between the roles of ventral and dorsal 
hippocampal A2A receptors in caffeine's effects on anxiety-like and 
memory-related behavioral measures, respectively. Furthermore, optogenetic 
activation of dorsal or ventral hippocampal A2ARs reversed the behavioral 
alterations caused by drinking caffeine, leading to impaired memory or decreased 
anxiety-like behaviors, respectively. Taken together, our findings suggest that 
the memory- and anxiety-enhancing effects of caffeine are related to the 
differential effects of inhibiting A2ARs in the dorsal and ventral hippocampus, 
respectively.

Copyright © 2022 Xu, Ning, Zhao, Peng, Luo, Zhou and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.807330
PMCID: PMC8847668
PMID: 35185566

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.