1. J Neurovirol. 2022 Apr;28(2):291-304. doi: 10.1007/s13365-022-01054-7. Epub
2022  Feb 21.

Main lymphocyte subpopulations in cerebrospinal fluid and peripheral blood in 
HIV-1 subtypes C and B.

de Almeida SM(1), Beltrame MP(2), Tang B(3), Rotta I(4), Schluga Y(2), Justus 
JLP(2), da Rocha MT(2), Abramson I(3), Vaida F(3), Schrier R(3), Ellis RJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Virologia, Hospital de Clínicas, Universidade Federal do 
Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil. sergio.ma@ufpr.br.
(2)Laboratório de Citometria de Fluxo, Hospital de Clínicas, Universidade 
Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
(3)HNRC- HIV Neurobehavioral Research Center, UCSD, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Laboratório de Virologia, Hospital de Clínicas, Universidade Federal do 
Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.

HIV-1 subtype C (HIV-1C) shows reduced Tat protein chemoattractant activity 
compared with HIV-1B. The impact of HIV-1C Tat on the chemotaxis of the main 
lymphocyte subpopulations in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and the peripheral 
blood (PB) is unclear. We hypothesized that there would be a lower frequency of 
specific lymphocyte subpopulations CD3+ or CD19+ in CSF in HIV-1C than in 
HIV-1B. The objectives were to detect the differences in the proportions of main 
lymphocyte subpopulations in CSF and PB, between people with HIV (PWH) and 
HIV-1-uninfected volunteers (PWoH) and in HIV-1B and HIV-1C. Lymphocyte 
immunophenotyping was studied in CSF and paired PB samples of PWH (n = 22) and 
PWoH (n = 14). Lymphocytes were analyzed within the CD45+ gated region. The 
proportions of CSF CD3+CD4+, CD3+CD8+, and CD3-CD19+ lymphocytes in CSF were 
comparable in HIV-1B and C. There was an increase in the proportion of CD3+CD8+ 
cells and a decrease in CD3+CD4+ T cells (ps = 0.016) in the CSF samples of the 
PWH compared with the PWoH group. In the PWH group, both CD3+CD4+ and CD3+CD8+ 
lymphocytes were significantly higher in the CSF than in the PB (p = 0.047 and 
0.005). The proportion of CD3+CD4+ was lower and that of CD3+CD8+ was higher in 
the CSF samples of the aviremic group than that of HIV-negative control 
(p = 0.0008 and < 0.0001, respectively). HIV-1C Tat substitution (C30S) did not 
interfere with the CNS migration of the main lymphocyte subpopulations. This is 
the first study to evaluate these lymphocytes in CSF and PB of HIV-1C compared 
with HIV-1B.

© 2022. Journal of NeuroVirology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1007/s13365-022-01054-7
PMID: 35190973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]