1. Microbiol Spectr. 2022 Feb 23;10(1):e0256321. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.02563-21. 
Epub 2022 Feb 23.

Estimating SARS-CoV-2 Seroprevalence in Canadian Blood Donors, April 2020 to 
March 2021: Improving Accuracy with Multiple Assays.

Tuite AR(1)(2), Fisman D(1), Abe KT(3)(4), Rathod B(3), Pasculescu A(3), Colwill 
K(3), Gingras AC(3)(4), Yi QL(5)(6), O'Brien SF(5)(6), Drews SJ(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Torontogrid.17063.33, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Centre for Immunization Readiness, Public Health Agency of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute at Mt. Sinai Hospital, Sinai Health, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Torontogrid.17063.33, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Epidemiology and Surveillance, Canadian Blood Servicesgrid.423370.1, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.
(6)School of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.
(7)Canadian Blood Servicesgrid.423370.1, Microbiology, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

We have previously used composite reference standards and latent class analysis 
(LCA) to evaluate the performance of laboratory assays in the presence of 
tarnished gold standards. Here, we apply these techniques to repeated, 
cross-sectional study of Canadian blood donors, whose sera underwent parallel 
testing with four separate SARS-CoV-2 antibody assays. We designed a repeated 
cross-sectional design with random cross-sectional sampling of all available 
retention samples (n = 1500/month) for a 12 -month period from April 2020 until 
March 2021. Each sample was evaluated for SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies using four 
assays an Abbott Architect assay targeting the nucleocapsid antigen (Abbott-NP, 
Abbott, Chicago IL) and three in-house IgG ELISAs recognizing distinct 
recombinant viral antigens: full-length spike glycoprotein (Spike), spike 
glycoprotein receptor binding domain (RBD) and nucleocapsid (NP). We used two 
analytic approaches to estimate SAR-CoV-2 seroprevalence: a composite reference 
standard and LCA. Using LCA to estimate true seropositivity status based on the 
results of the four antibody tests, we estimated that seroprevalence increased 
from 0.8% (95% CI: 0.5-1.4%) in April 2020 to 6.3% (95% CI: 5.1-7.6%) in March 
2021. Our study provides further support for the use of LCA in upcoming public 
health crises, epidemics, and pandemics when a gold standard assay may not be 
available or identifiable. IMPORTANCE Here, we describe an approach to 
estimating seroprevalence in a low prevalence setting when multiple assays are 
available and yet no known gold standard exists. Because serological studies 
identify cases through both diagnostic testing and surveillance, and otherwise 
silent, unrecognized infections, serological data can be used to estimate the 
true infection fatality ratio of a disease. However, seroprevalence studies rely 
on assays with imperfect sensitivity and specificity. Seroreversion (loss of 
antibody response) also occurs over time, and with the advent of vaccination, 
distinction of antibody response resulting from vaccination as opposed to 
antibody response due to infection has posed an additional challenge. Our 
approach indicates that seroprevalence on Canadian blood donors by the end of 
March 2021was less than 10%. Our study supports the use of latent class analysis 
in upcoming public health crises, epidemics, and pandemics when a gold standard 
assay may not be available or identifiable.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.02563-21
PMCID: PMC8865569
PMID: 35196819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. The 
following authors declare no conflicts of interest: S.F.O., D.F., K.T.A., B.R., 
A.P., K.C., and Q-L.Y. S.J.D. has functioned as a content expert for respiratory 
viruses for Johnson & Johnson (Janssen), and A-C.G. receives research support 
from Providence Therapeutics Holdings, Inc. for other projects.