1. Mar Drugs. 2022 Jan 31;20(2):114. doi: 10.3390/md20020114.

Molecular Details of Actinomycin D-Treated MRSA Revealed via High-Dimensional 
Data.

Xia X(1), Liu J(2), Huang L(1), Zhang X(3), Deng Y(1), Li F(1), Liu Z(1), Huang 
R(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Food Quality and Safety, College of 
Food Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
(2)Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology, Guangdong Medical University, Zhanjiang 
524023, China.
(3)Joint Laboratory of Guangdong Province and Hong Kong Region on Marine 
Bioresource Conservation and Exploitation, College of Marine Sciences, South 
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is highly concerning as a 
principal infection pathogen. The investigation of higher effective natural 
anti-MRSA agents from marine Streptomyces parvulus has led to the isolation of 
actinomycin D, that showed potential anti-MRSA activity with MIC and MBC values 
of 1 and 8 Î¼g/mL, respectively. Proteomics-metabolomics analysis further 
demonstrated a total of 261 differential proteins and 144 differential 
metabolites induced by actinomycin D in MRSA, and the co-mapped correlation 
network of omics, indicated that actinomycin D induced the metabolism pathway of 
producing the antibiotic sensitivity in MRSA. Furthermore, the mRNA expression 
levels of the genes acnA, ebpS, clfA, icd, and gpmA related to the key 
differential proteins were down-regulated measured by qRT-PCR. Molecular docking 
predicted that actinomycin D was bound to the targets of the two key 
differential proteins AcnA and Icd by hydrogen bonds and interacted with 
multiple amino acid residues of the proteins. Thus, these findings will provide 
a basic understanding to further investigation of actinomycin D as a potential 
anti-MRSA agent.

DOI: 10.3390/md20020114
PMCID: PMC8878686
PMID: 35200643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.