1. Life (Basel). 2022 Feb 18;12(2):307. doi: 10.3390/life12020307.

PRIP: A Protein-RNA Interface Predictor Based on Semantics of Sequences.

Li Y(1), Lyu J(1), Wu Y(2), Liu Y(3), Huang G(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Electrical Engineering, Shaoyang University, Shaoyang 422000, 
China.
(2)Hunan Key Laboratory for Computation and Simulation in Science and 
Engineering, Xiangtan University, Xiangtan 411105, China.
(3)College of Information and Intelligence, Hunan Agricultural University, 
Changsha 410128, China.

RNA-protein interactions play an indispensable role in many biological 
processes. Growing evidence has indicated that aberration of the RNA-protein 
interaction is associated with many serious human diseases. The precise and 
quick detection of RNA-protein interactions is crucial to finding new functions 
and to uncovering the mechanism of interactions. Although many methods have been 
presented to recognize RNA-binding sites, there is much room left for the 
improvement of predictive accuracy. We present a sequence semantics-based method 
(called PRIP) for predicting RNA-binding interfaces. The PRIP extracted semantic 
embedding by pre-training the Word2vec with the corpus. Extreme gradient 
boosting was employed to train a classifier. The PRIP obtained a SN of 0.73 over 
the five-fold cross validation and a SN of 0.67 over the independent test, 
outperforming the state-of-the-art methods. Compared with other methods, this 
PRIP learned the hidden relations between words in the context. The analysis of 
the semantics relationship implied that the semantics of some words were 
specific to RNA-binding interfaces. This method is helpful to explore the 
mechanism of RNA-protein interactions from a semantics point of view.

DOI: 10.3390/life12020307
PMCID: PMC8879494
PMID: 35207594

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.