1. Biology (Basel). 2022 Feb 12;11(2):298. doi: 10.3390/biology11020298.

Selective Loss of MATR3 in Spinal Interneurons, Upper Motor Neurons and 
Hippocampal CA1 Neurons in a MATR3 S85C Knock-In Mouse Model of Amyotrophic 
Lateral Sclerosis.

You J(1)(2), Maksimovic K(1)(2), Lee J(1)(2), Khan M(1)(2), Masuda R(1)(2), Park 
J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
ON M5G 0A4, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, 
Canada.

The neuropathological hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is motor 
neuron degeneration in the spinal cord and cortex. Accumulating studies report 
that other neurons in the central nervous system (CNS) are also affected in ALS. 
Mutations in Matr3, which encodes a nuclear matrix protein involved in RNA 
splicing, have been linked to ALS. Previously, we generated a MATR3 S85C 
knock-in (KI) mouse model that recapitulates early-stage features of ALS. We 
reported that MATR3 S85C KI mice exhibit defects in lumbar spinal cord motor 
neurons and in cerebellar Purkinje cells, which are associated with reduced 
MATR3 immunoreactivity. Here, we show that neurons in various other regions of 
the CNS are affected in MATR3 S85C KI mice. Using histological analyses, we 
found selective loss of MATR3 staining in α-motor neurons, but not γ-motor 
neurons in the cervical and thoracic spinal cord. Loss of MATR3 was also found 
in parvalbumin-positive interneurons in the cervical, thoracic and lumbar spinal 
cord. In addition, we found the loss of MATR3 in subsets of upper motor neurons 
and hippocampal CA1 neurons. Collectively, our findings suggest that these 
additional neuronal types may contribute to the disease process in MATR3 S85C KI 
mice.

DOI: 10.3390/biology11020298
PMCID: PMC8869279
PMID: 35205163

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.