1. Viruses. 2022 Jan 18;14(2):177. doi: 10.3390/v14020177.

Identifying Inhibitors of -1 Programmed Ribosomal Frameshifting in a Broad 
Spectrum of Coronaviruses.

Munshi S(1), Neupane K(1), Ileperuma SM(1), Halma MTJ(1), Kelly JA(2), Halpern 
CF(2), Dinman JD(2), Loerch S(3), Woodside MT(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E1, Canada.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland, 
College Park, MD 20742, USA.
(3)Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, VA 20147, 
USA.
(4)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 
2E1, Canada.

Comment in
    Viruses. 2022 Jul 13;14(7):1526. doi: 10.3390/v14071526.

Recurrent outbreaks of novel zoonotic coronavirus (CoV) diseases in recent years 
have highlighted the importance of developing therapeutics with broad-spectrum 
activity against CoVs. Because all CoVs use -1 programmed ribosomal 
frameshifting (-1 PRF) to control expression of key viral proteins, the 
frameshift signal in viral mRNA that stimulates -1 PRF provides a promising 
potential target for such therapeutics. To test the viability of this strategy, 
we explored whether small-molecule inhibitors of -1 PRF in SARS-CoV-2 also 
inhibited -1 PRF in a range of bat CoVs-the most likely source of future 
zoonoses. Six inhibitors identified in new and previous screens against 
SARS-CoV-2 were evaluated against the frameshift signals from a panel of 
representative bat CoVs as well as MERS-CoV. Some drugs had strong activity 
against subsets of these CoV-derived frameshift signals, while having limited to 
no effect on -1 PRF caused by frameshift signals from other viruses used as 
negative controls. Notably, the serine protease inhibitor nafamostat suppressed 
-1 PRF significantly for multiple CoV-derived frameshift signals. These results 
suggest it is possible to find small-molecule ligands that inhibit -1 PRF 
specifically in a broad spectrum of CoVs, establishing frameshift signals as a 
viable target for developing pan-coronaviral therapeutics.

DOI: 10.3390/v14020177
PMCID: PMC8876150
PMID: 35215770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.