1. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2022 May;18(5):307-320. doi: 10.1038/s41581-022-00538-3. Epub
 2022 Feb 25.

The evolving story of apolipoprotein L1 nephropathy: the end of the beginning.

Daneshpajouhnejad P(1)(2), Kopp JB(3), Winkler CA(4), Rosenberg AZ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(3)Kidney Diseases Branch, NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Basic Research Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, 
Frederick, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. arosen34@jhmi.edu.

Genetic coding variants in APOL1, which encodes apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1), were 
identified in 2010 and are relatively common among individuals of sub-Saharan 
African ancestry. Approximately 13% of African Americans carry two APOL1 risk 
alleles. These variants, termed G1 and G2, are a frequent cause of kidney 
disease - termed APOL1 nephropathy - that typically manifests as focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis and the clinical syndrome of hypertension and 
arterionephrosclerosis. Cell culture studies suggest that APOL1 variants cause 
cell dysfunction through several processes, including alterations in cation 
channel activity, inflammasome activation, increased endoplasmic reticulum 
stress, activation of protein kinase R, mitochondrial dysfunction and disruption 
of APOL1 ubiquitinylation. Risk of APOL1 nephropathy is mostly confined to 
individuals with two APOL1 risk variants. However, only a minority of 
individuals with two APOL1 risk alleles develop kidney disease, suggesting the 
need for a 'second hit'. The best recognized factor responsible for this 'second 
hit' is a chronic viral infection, particularly HIV-1, resulting in 
interferon-mediated activation of the APOL1 promoter, although most individuals 
with APOL1 nephropathy do not have an obvious cofactor. Current therapies for 
APOL1 nephropathies are not adequate to halt progression of chronic kidney 
disease, and new targeted molecular therapies are in clinical trials.

Â© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41581-022-00538-3
PMCID: PMC8877744
PMID: 35217848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.