1. Front Oncol. 2022 Feb 8;11:763854. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.763854. eCollection 
2021.

Case Report: H3K27M-Mutant Glioblastoma Simultaneously Present in the Brain and 
Long-Segment Spinal Cord Accompanied by Acute Pulmonary Embolism.

Maimaiti B(1), Mijiti S(1), Jiang T(1), Xie Y(1), Zhao W(1), Cheng Y(1), Meng 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience Center, First Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, China.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly malignant glioma that 
rarely presents as an infratentorial tumor. Multicentric (MC) gliomas involve 
lesions widely separated in space or time, and MC gliomas involving supra- and 
infratentorial brain regions are rare. In most cases, the infratentorial lesion 
is seen after surgical manipulation or radiation therapy; it is typically 
located in the cerebellum or the cervical region, manifesting as metastasis 
originating from the brain. Besides, venous thromboembolism in brain tumors is 
usually seen after craniotomy.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present an uncommon adult case of symptomatic 
H3K27M-mutant MC glioblastoma simultaneously present in the brain, fourth 
ventricle, and cervical and lumbar spinal cord regions accompanied by acute 
pulmonary artery embolism in an adult woman who had not undergone previous 
therapeutic interventions. We also review the literature on this interesting 
presentation.
CONCLUSION: Our report highlights that clinicians should be alert to the 
potential alarming presentation of GBM. The incidence of spinal metastasis of 
cerebral GBM is increasing. Patients with a prior diagnosis of GBM with or 
without any new onset in the spinal cord should undergo an early MRI of the 
spinal cord to confirm the diagnosis at an early stage. While management of GBM 
remains controversial, more research is needed to explore molecular features of 
GBM further and develop novel targeted therapies for these patients.

Copyright Â© 2022 Maimaiti, Mijiti, Jiang, Xie, Zhao, Cheng and Meng.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.763854
PMCID: PMC8861510
PMID: 35211394

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.