1. Pharmaceutics. 2022 Feb 21;14(2):460. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14020460.

The Potential of Nanomedicine to Unlock the Limitless Applications of mRNA.

Taina-Gonz√°lez L(1)(2), de la Fuente M(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Nano-Oncology and Translational Therapeutics Group, Health Research Institute 
of Santiago de Compostela (IDIS), SERGAS, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(2)Universidad de Santiago de Compostela (USC), 15782 Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain.
(3)Cancer Network Research (CIBERONC), 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(4)DIVERSA Technologies, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

The year 2020 was a turning point in the way society perceives science. 
Messenger RNA (mRNA) technology finally showed and shared its potential, 
starting a new era in medicine. However, there is no doubt that 
commercialization of these vaccines would not have been possible without 
nanotechnology, which has finally answered the long-term question of how to 
deliver mRNA in vivo. The aim of this review is to showcase the importance of 
this scientific milestone for the development of additional mRNA therapeutics. 
Firstly, we provide a full description of the marketed vaccine formulations and 
disclose LNPs' pharmaceutical properties, including composition, structure, and 
manufacturing considerations Additionally, we review different types of 
lipid-based delivery technologies currently in preclinical and clinical 
development, namely lipoplexes and cationic nanoemulsions. Finally, we highlight 
the most promising clinical applications of mRNA in different fields such as 
vaccinology, immuno-oncology, gene therapy for rare genetic diseases and gene 
editing using CRISPR Cas9.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14020460
PMCID: PMC8879057
PMID: 35214191

Conflict of interest statement: M.d.l.F. is the co-founder and CEO of DIVERSA 
technologies.