1. Bioengineered. 2022 Mar;13(3):6629-6640. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2022.2044277.

The anti-cancer role of microRNA-143 in papillary thyroid carcinoma by targeting 
high mobility group AT-hook 2.

Ding C(1), Shi T(1), Wu G(1), Man J(1), Han H(1), Cui Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of General Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin 
Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.

Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), a common thyroid cancer (TC) subtype, rapidly 
increases in occurrence. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), which are non-coding small RNAs, 
have been demonstrated to play a role in cancer pathogenic mechanisms. Although 
miR-143 is involved in suppressing certain malignant tumor progression, its 
biological role is unknown in PTC. The present study found that miR-143 levels 
were strongly lower in PTC patient samples and cell lines, implying that miR-143 
may play a biological role in PTC. Down-regulation of miR-143 resulted in the 
increased expression of HMGA2. Furthermore, HMGA2 was found to be a direct 
target of miR-143. A dual-luciferase assay confirmed a direct binding site for 
miR-143 was confirmed on HMGA2 using a dual-luciferase assay. Next, 
over-expression of miR-143 suppressed PTC cell growth as analyzed by MTT, clone 
formation, and Ki-67 immunofluorescence staining assays. miR-143 mimics 
transfection downregulated the expression of PCNA, CDK4, CDK1, and Cyclin E1. In 
addition, wound healing and trans-well assays revealed that miR-143 
up-regulation inhibited PTC cells invasion and migration. Co-transfection of 
HMGA2 expression vector restored HMGA2 expression and rescued PTC cells 
proliferation capability in miR-143 mimics transfected PTC cells, indicating 
that miR-143 inhibited PTC cells proliferation via HMGA2. These observations 
were also obtained in xenografts experiments in nude mice. Altogether, our study 
shed light on miR-143's anti-cancer biological functions in PTC progression 
through targeting HMGA2, suggesting that restoration of miR-143 could be a 
potential therapeutic approach for PTC treatment.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2022.2044277
PMCID: PMC8973723
PMID: 35213273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).