1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2022 Feb 18;15(2):244. doi: 10.3390/ph15020244.

Determination of Phloridzin and Other Phenolic Compounds in Apple Tree Leaves, 
Bark, and Buds Using Liquid Chromatography with Multilayered Column Technology 
and Evaluation of the Total Antioxidant Activity.

Adamcová A(1), Horna A(1)(2), Šatínský D(1).

Author information:
(1)The Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Charles 
University, Ak. Heyrovského 1203, 500 05 Hradec Králové, Czech Republic.
(2)Institute of Nutrition and Diagnostics Pardubice, Sakařova 1400, 530 03 
Pardubice, Czech Republic.

Apples are known to be a rich source of phenolic compounds, however detailed 
studies about their content in the individual parts of apple trees are reported 
rarely. For this purpose, we tested various stationary phases for the 
determination of phenolic compounds in leaves, bark, and buds. Phloridzin, 
phloretin, chlorogenic acid, rutin, and quercitrin were analyzed with high 
performance liquid chromatography coupled with diode array detection. A YMC 
Triart C18-ExRS 150 × 4.6 mm, 5 µm particle size analytical column with 
multilayered particle technology was used. The separation was performed with a 
mobile phase that consisted of acetonitrile and 0.1% phosphoric acid, according 
to the gradient program, at a flow rate of 1 mL/min for 12.50 min. The 
concentration of phenolic compounds from 13 cultivars was in the range of 
64.89-106.01 mg/g of dry weight (DW) in leaves, 70.81-113.18 mg/g DW in bark, 
and 100.68-139.61 mg/g DW in buds. Phloridzin was a major compound. The total 
antioxidant activity was measured using flow analysis and the correlation with 
the total amount of phenolic compounds was found. This finding can lead to the 
re-use of apple tree material to isolate substances that can be utilized in the 
food, pharmaceutical, or cosmetics industries.

DOI: 10.3390/ph15020244
PMCID: PMC8880626
PMID: 35215355

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.