1. Front Neurol. 2022 Feb 8;12:786353. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.786353.
eCollection  2021.

Tau Ubiquitination in Alzheimer's Disease.

Li L(1), Jiang Y(1), Wang JZ(1)(2)(3), Liu R(1), Wang X(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Education Ministry/Hubei Province of China for Neurological 
Disorders, Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Co-innovation Center of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, 
China.
(3)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, School of Medicine, Jianghan 
University, Wuhan, China.

Paired helical filaments (PHFs) from the Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain are 
highly ubiquitinated and ubiquitination likely plays a vital role in tau 
filament formation. Whether tau ubiquitination is the causality or consequence 
of the disease in AD remains elusive. The following questions are worth 
considering: What does the extent of tau ubiquitination contribute to tau 
pathology in AD? Does tau ubiquitination influence aggregation or spreading 
during disease progression? In addition, tau is polyubiquitinated in nerve 
growth factor-induced PC12 cells and participates in mitogen-activated protein 
kinase signaling, in addition to its microtubule stabilization function. 
Therefore, ubiquitination possibly mediates tau signaling under physiological 
conditions, but tau aggregation in the pathobiology of AD. Here, we review the 
advancements in tau ubiquitination and the potential therapeutic effects of 
targeting tau ubiquitination to alleviate tau pathology in AD.

Copyright Â© 2022 Li, Jiang, Wang, Liu and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.786353
PMCID: PMC8860969
PMID: 35211074

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.