1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Feb 11;13:829089. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.829089. 
eCollection 2022.

Identifying Bixa orellana L. New Carotenoid Cleavage Dioxygenases 1 and 4 
Potentially Involved in Bixin Biosynthesis.

Us-Camas R(1), Aguilar-Espinosa M(1), Rodríguez-Campos J(2), Vallejo-Cardona 
AA(3), Carballo-Uicab VM(4), Serrano-Posada H(4), Rivera-Madrid R(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular de Plantas, Centro de Investigación 
Científica de Yucatán A.C., Mérida, Mexico.
(2)Unidad de Servicios Analíticos y Metrológicos, Centro de Investigación y 
Asistencia en Tecnología y Diseño del Estado de Jalisco, Guadalajara, Mexico.
(3)Unidad de Biotecnología Médica y Farmacéutica, CONACYT, Centro de 
Investigación y Asistencia en Tecnología y Diseño del Estado de Jalisco, 
Guadalajara, Mexico.
(4)CONACYT, Laboratorio de Biología Sintética, Estructural y Molecular, 
Laboratorio de Agrobiotecnología, Colima, Mexico.

Carotene cleavage dioxygenases (CCDs) are a large family of Fe2+ dependent 
enzymes responsible for the production of a wide variety of apocarotenoids, such 
as bixin. Among the natural apocarotenoids, bixin is second in economic 
importance. It has a red-orange color and is produced mainly in the seeds of B. 
orellana. The biosynthesis of bixin aldehyde from the oxidative cleavage of 
lycopene at 5,6/5',6' bonds by a CCD is considered the first step of bixin 
biosynthesis. Eight BoCCD (BoCCD1-1, BoCCD1-3, BoCCD1-4, CCD4-1, BoCCD4-2, 
BoCCD4-3 and BoCCD4-4) genes potentially involved in the first step of B. 
orellana bixin biosynthesis have been identified. However, the cleavage activity 
upon lycopene to produce bixin aldehyde has only been demonstrated for BoCCD1-1 
and BoCCD4-3. Using in vivo (Escherichia coli) and in vitro approaches, we 
determined that the other identified BoCCDs enzymes (BoCCD1-3, BoCCD1-4, 
BoCCD4-1, BoCCD4-2, and BoCCD4-4) also participate in the biosynthesis of bixin 
aldehyde from lycopene. The LC-ESI-QTOF-MS/MS analysis showed a peak 
corresponding to bixin aldehyde (m/z 349.1) in pACCRT-EIB E. coli cells that 
express the BoCCD1 and BoCCD4 proteins, which was confirmed by in vitro 
enzymatic assay. Interestingly, in the in vivo assay of BoCCD1-4, BoCCD4-1, 
BoCCD4-2, and BoCCD4-4, bixin aldehyde was oxidized to norbixin (m/z 380.2), the 
second product of the bixin biosynthesis pathway. In silico analysis also showed 
that BoCCD1 and BoCCD4 proteins encode functional dioxygenases that can use 
lycopene as substrate. The production of bixin aldehyde and norbixin was 
corroborated based on their ion fragmentation pattern, as well as by Fourier 
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. This work made it possible to clarify at 
the same time the first and second steps of the bixin biosynthesis pathway that 
had not been evaluated for a long time.

Copyright © 2022 Us-Camas, Aguilar-Espinosa, Rodríguez-Campos, Vallejo-Cardona, 
Carballo-Uicab, Serrano-Posada and Rivera-Madrid.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.829089
PMCID: PMC8874276
PMID: 35222486

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.