1. Biomedicine (Taipei). 2021 Mar 1;11(1):41-50. doi: 10.37796/2211-8039.1010. 
eCollection 2021.

Immunological and anti-oxidant profiles of malarial children in Abuja, Nigeria.

Abdullahi IN(1), Musa S(1), Emeribe AU(2), Muhammed M(3), Mustapha JO(4), Shuwa 
HA(5), Haruna S(1), Abubakar SD(1), Billyrose OMA(6), Bakare M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, 
Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Medical Laboratory Science, Faculty of Allied Medical Sciences, 
University of Calabar, Calabar, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Medicine (Immunology Unit), Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, 
Nigeria.
(4)Biological Sciences Department, Faculty of Science, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada.
(5)Department of Community Health, Federal University, Dutse, Nigeria.
(6)Department of Medical Laboratory Services, University of Abuja Teaching 
Hospital, Abuja, Nigeria.

BACKGROUND: The clinical symptoms, cellular immune response, and serum cytokine 
homeostasis during falciparum malaria among children living in endemic regions 
depend on the parasite densities. This study aims to evaluate the CD4+ and CD8+ 
T cells, leucocytes subpopulations, IL-6, IL-10 and biomarkers of oxidative 
stress among children infected with varying grades of malaria attending the 
University of Abuja Teaching Hospital and National Hospital, Abuja, Nigeria.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This case-control study involved blood samples collected 
from 165 children (between 5 and 12 years). This comprised 45 children with mild 
malaria, 40 each with moderate, severe malaria and apparently healthy (control). 
Serum cytokines, ferritin, malonaldehyde (MDA), ascorbate, α-tocopherol levels 
were determined by Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay (ELISA). Leucocytes 
differentials and CD4+/CD8+ T cells counts were enumerated by automated 
hematology analyzer and flow cytometry, respectively.
RESULTS: All malarial children had only Plasmodium falciparum. The male to 
female ratio of children with mild malaria was 1.5:1 (mean ± SD age of 8.5 ± 1.9 
years). However, other groups had 1:1 male to female ratio and mean ages of 9.2 
± 2.3, 9.8 ± 2.2, 8.5 ± 1.5 for children with moderate, severe malaria and 
control, respectively. There was a positive but not significant association of 
neutrophils and monocytes with the 3 grades of malaria parasitemia (p>0.05). 
There was a negative and significant correlation between severe malaria and 
lymphocyte count (p = 0.048; r = -0.647). However, there was positive and 
significant correlation between eosinophil with moderate (p = 0.03; r = 0.994) 
and severe malaria (p = 0.006; r = 0.825). There was a significant decline in 
serum ascorbate with increased malaria density (p<0.0001). However, there was no 
difference in the serum α-tocopherol concentration within the 4 groups of 
children (p = 0.182). Serum ferritin and MDA significantly elevated with an 
increase in malaria density (p<0.0001). There was a significant decline in CD4+ 
T and CD8+ T cells counts with an increase in malaria densities (p<0.0001). 
Serum IL-10 and IL-6 significantly elevated with increased malaria density 
(p<0.0001).
CONCLUSION: Based on these findings, severe malaria was significantly associated 
with declined CD4+ and CD8+ T cell counts, upregulation of IL-6, and high serum 
levels of oxidative stress biomarkers.

© the Author(s).

DOI: 10.37796/2211-8039.1010
PMCID: PMC8823466
PMID: 35223394

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None.