1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2022 Feb 9;15:820216. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.820216. 
eCollection 2021.

The Role of c-Jun and Autocrine Signaling Loops in the Control of Repair Schwann 
Cells and Regeneration.

Jessen KR(1), Mirsky R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.

After nerve injury, both Schwann cells and neurons switch to pro-regenerative 
states. For Schwann cells, this involves reprogramming of myelin and Remak cells 
to repair Schwann cells that provide the signals and mechanisms needed for the 
survival of injured neurons, myelin clearance, axonal regeneration and target 
reinnervation. Because functional repair cells are essential for regeneration, 
it is unfortunate that their phenotype is not robust. Repair cell activation 
falters as animals get older and the repair phenotype fades during chronic 
denervation. These malfunctions are important reasons for the poor outcomes 
after nerve damage in humans. This review will discuss injury-induced Schwann 
cell reprogramming and the concept of the repair Schwann cell, and consider the 
molecular control of these cells with emphasis on c-Jun. This transcription 
factor is required for the generation of functional repair cells, and failure of 
c-Jun expression is implicated in repair cell failures in older animals and 
during chronic denervation. Elevating c-Jun expression in repair cells promotes 
regeneration, showing in principle that targeting repair cells is an effective 
way of improving nerve repair. In this context, we will outline the emerging 
evidence that repair cells are sustained by autocrine signaling loops, 
attractive targets for interventions aimed at promoting regeneration.

Copyright Â© 2022 Jessen and Mirsky.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2021.820216
PMCID: PMC8863656
PMID: 35221918

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.