1. Exp Ther Med. 2022 Mar;23(3):228. doi: 10.3892/etm.2022.11153. Epub 2022 Jan
18.

Study on the value of antibiotic-resistant gene detection in Helicobacter pylori 
in China.

Dai J(1), Zhao J(1), Mao L(1), Hu Y(1), Lv B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310006, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to explore the value of detecting 
antibiotic-resistant genes in Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) and the 
association between genotype and antibiotic resistance. Two gastric mucosa 
samples from each H. pylori-positive patient were collected. Each patient's H. 
pylori sample was cultured in vitro, and the agar plate dilution method was 
conducted. In addition, all patient samples were analyzed for the detection of 
antibiotic resistance-related mutant genes and VacA gene genotypes. The 
association between VacA genotypes and antibiotic resistance was also determined 
and the value of mutant gene detection in predicting H. pylori resistance to 
antibiotics was evaluated. In total, 133 H. pylori-positive patients were 
enrolled. A total of 22 strains of H. pylori failed to grow in in vitro culture 
and 25 strains were negative in a H. pylori gene test. Among 108 strains 
detected by PCR, a total of 39 VacA s1m1 strains, 69 VacA s1m2 strains and no 
VacA s2 strain were identified. There was no significant association between 
VacA genotypes and antibiotic resistance. The mutation rates of G616A in the 
rdxA gene, T87A, G91A, A91G and G91T in the gyrA gene and A2143G and A2142G in 
the 23S rRNA gene were 32.1, 32.3, 22.6, 12.9, 6.5, 81.8 and 0.0%, respectively. 
Among these mutant sites, the mutation coincidence rates were as follows, 
according to the agar plate dilution method: rdxA G616A (81.8%), gyrA G91T 
(66.7%), gyrA G91A (54.5%), 23 S rRNA A2143G (49.1%), gyrA T87A (45.5%), gyrA 
A91G (33.3%), penicillin-binding protein 1 (PBP1) C556G (0.0%), PBP1 A562T 
(0.0%), PBP1 A562G (0.0%) and 16 S rRNA 926-927 (AT-GT) (0.0%). VacA m subtypes 
were not associated with H. pylori antibiotic resistance. In conclusion, the 
present findings suggested that the detection of related mutant genes had a 
clinical application value in predicting the antibiotic resistance of H. pylori, 
particularly resistance to clarithromycin and levofloxacin.

Copyright: Â© Dai et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2022.11153
PMCID: PMC8815056
PMID: 35222705

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.