1. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2022 Mar 2;13(1):28. doi: 10.1186/s40104-022-00676-5.

A review of the amino acid metabolism in placental function response to fetal 
loss and low birth weight in pigs.

Tan C(#)(1), Huang Z(#)(1), Xiong W(1), Ye H(1), Deng J(2), Yin Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition Control, National 
Engineering Research Center for Breeding Swine Industry, Institute of 
Subtropical Animal Nutrition and Feed, College of Animal Science, South China 
Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 510642, Guangdong, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition Control, National 
Engineering Research Center for Breeding Swine Industry, Institute of 
Subtropical Animal Nutrition and Feed, College of Animal Science, South China 
Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 510642, Guangdong, China. 
dengjinping@scau.edu.cn.
(3)National Engineering Laboratory for Pollution Control and Waste Utilization 
in Livestock and Poultry Production, Institute of Subtropical Agriculture, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changsha, 410125, Hunan, China. 
yinyulong@isa.ac.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The fertility of sows mainly depends on the embryo losses during gestation and 
the survival rate of the post-farrowing piglets. The selection of 
highly-prolific sows has been mainly focused on the selection of genotypes with 
high ovulatory quota. However, in the early- and post-implantation stages, the 
rate of embryo losses was increased with the increase of zygotes. Among the 
various factors, placental growth and development is the vital determinant for 
fetal survival, growth, and development. Despite the potential survival of 
fetuses with deficient placental development, their life-conditions and growth 
can be damaged by a process termed intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR). The 
newborn piglets affected by IUGR are prone to increased morbidity and mortality 
rates; meanwhile, the growth, health and welfare of the surviving piglets will 
remain hampered by these conditions, with a tendency to exacerbate with age. 
Functional amino acids such as glycine, proline, and arginine continue to 
increase with the development of placenta, which are not only essential to 
placental growth (including vascular growth) and development, but can also be 
used as substrates for the production of glutathione, polyamines and nitric 
oxide to benefit placental function in many ways. However, the exact regulation 
mechanism of these amino acids in placental function has not yet been clarified. 
In this review, we provide evidence from literature and our own work for the 
role and mechanism of dietary functional amino acids during pregnancy in 
regulating the placental functional response to fetal loss and birth weight of 
piglets. This review will provide novel insights into the response of 
nutritionally nonessential amino acids (glycine and proline) to placental 
development as well as feasible strategies to enhance the fertility of sows.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40104-022-00676-5
PMCID: PMC8889744
PMID: 35232472

Conflict of interest statement: There were no conflicts of interest.