1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Feb 10;9:820274. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.820274. 
eCollection 2021.

Single-Cell Sequencing Unveils the Heterogeneity of Nonimmune Cells in Chronic 
Apical Periodontitis.

Lin X(1)(2), Chi D(1)(2), Meng Q(1)(2), Gong Q(1)(2), Tong Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Operative Dentistry and Endodontics, Hospital of Stomatology, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou, China.

Chronic apical periodontitis (CAP) is a unique dynamic interaction between 
microbial invasions and host defense mechanisms, resulting in infiltration of 
immune cells, bone absorption, and periapical granuloma formation. To help to 
understand periapical tissue pathophysiology, we constituted a single-cell atlas 
for 26,737 high-quality cells from inflammatory periapical tissue and uncovered 
the complex cellular landscape. The eight types of cells, including nonimmune 
cells and immune cells, were identified in the periapical tissue of CAP. 
Considering the key roles of nonimmune cells in CAP, we emphasized osteo-like 
cells, basal/stromal cells, endothelial cells, and epithelial cells, and 
discovered their diversity and heterogeneity. The temporal profiling of genomic 
alterations from common CAP to typical periapical granuloma provided predictions 
for transcription factors and biological processes. Our study presented 
potential clues that the shift of inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, proteases, 
and growth factors initiated polymorphic cell differentiation, 
lymphangiogenesis, and angiogenesis during CAP.

Copyright Â© 2022 Lin, Chi, Meng, Gong and Tong.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.820274
PMCID: PMC8883837
PMID: 35237614

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.