1. Front Neurol. 2022 Feb 14;12:646817. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.646817.
eCollection  2021.

Baicalein Induces Mitochondrial Autophagy to Prevent Parkinson's Disease in Rats 
via miR-30b and the SIRT1/AMPK/mTOR Pathway.

Chen M(1), Peng L(1), Gong P(1), Zheng X(1), Sun T(2), Zhang X(1), Huo J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Taihe Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, 
Hubei, China.
(2)Department of Surgery, Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital, Guizhou, China.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a prevailing neurodegenerative disorder. Baicalein 
has neuroprotective effects on PD animals, but its mechanism is not clarified. 
We explored baicalein effects on PD rats. PD rat models were established by 
injecting 6-hydroxydopamine into the striatum of substantia nigra on the left 
side of the rat brain and treated with baicalein. Dopamine (DA) content, 
neuronal apoptosis, neuronal injury, neuronal mitochondria, and autophagy were 
assessed. Baicalein-treated PD rats were treated with autophagy inhibitor 
3-methyladenine to identify the role of autophagy in PD. PD rats were injected 
with AgomiR-30b-5p or sh-SIRT1 plasmids and treated with baicalein. PD rats 
elicited decreased neurological score and DA secretion of the striatum, 
increased neuronal apoptosis, and injury, and reduced number of mitochondria and 
autophagy, whereas baicalein alleviated neuronal injury and partly recovered 
mitochondrial dysfunction, 3-methyladenine inhibited the protection of 
baicalein. miR-30b-5p was elevated and SIRT1 was diminished in PD rats and 
inhibited by baicalein. miR-30b-5p targeted SIRT1. miR-30b-5p overexpression or 
SIRT1 silencing annulled the protection of baicalein. The phosphorylation level 
of AMPK in the substantia nigra of PD rats was decreased and mTOR was increased, 
whereas baicalein annulled these trends. Briefly, baicalein activated 
mitochondrial autophagy via miR-30b-5p and the SIRT1/AMPK/mTOR pathway, thus 
protecting PD rats.

Copyright Â© 2022 Chen, Peng, Gong, Zheng, Sun, Zhang and Huo.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.646817
PMCID: PMC8883053
PMID: 35237220

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.