1. Mol Neurobiol. 2022 May;59(5):2932-2945. doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02771-0. Epub
 2022 Mar 4.

T-Type Calcium Channel Inhibitors Induce Apoptosis in Medulloblastoma Cells 
Associated with Altered Metabolic Activity.

Sedeeq M(1), Maklad A(1), Dutta T(1), Feng Z(1), Wilson R(2), Gueven N(1), Azimi 
I(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, College of Health and Medicine, 
University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, 7001, Australia.
(2)Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, 7001, 
Australia.
(3)School of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, College of Health and Medicine, 
University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, 7001, Australia. 
iman.azimi@utas.edu.au.

Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant paediatric brain tumour. In 
our previous studies, we developed a novel 3D assay for MB cells that was used 
to screen a panel of plasma membrane calcium channel modulators for their effect 
on the 3D growth of D341 MB cells. These studies identified T-type (CaV3) 
channel inhibitors, mibefradil and NNC-55-0396 (NNC) as selective inhibitors of 
MB cell growth. Mibefradil was originally approved for the treatment of 
hypertension and angina pectoris, and recently successfully completed a phase I 
trial for recurrent high-grade glioma. NNC is an analogue of mibefradil with 
multiple advantages compared to mibefradil that makes it attractive for 
potential future clinical trials. T-type channels have a unique low 
voltage-dependent activation/inactivation, and many studies suggest that they 
have a direct regulatory role in controlling Ca2+ signalling in non-excitable 
tissues, including cancers. In our previous study, we also identified 
overexpression of CaV3.2 gene in MB tissues compared to normal brain tissues. In 
this study, we aimed to characterise the effect of mibefradil and NNC on MB 
cells and elucidate their mechanism of action. This study demonstrates that the 
induction of toxicity in MB cells is selective to T-type but not to L-type Ca2+ 
channel inhibitors. Addition of CaV3 inhibitors to vincristine sensitised MB 
cells to this MB chemotherapeutic agent, suggesting an additive effect. 
Furthermore, CaV3 inhibitors induced cell death in MB cells via apoptosis. 
Supported by proteomics data and cellular assays, apoptotic cell death was 
associated with reduced mitochondrial membrane potential and reduced ATP levels, 
which suggests that both compounds alter the metabolism of MB cells. This study 
offers new insights into the action of mibefradil and NNC and will pave the way 
to test these molecules or their analogues in pre-clinical MB models alone and 
in combination with vincristine to assess their suitability as a potential MB 
therapy.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-022-02771-0
PMCID: PMC9016057
PMID: 35243582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.