1. Microb Cell Fact. 2022 Mar 5;21(1):32. doi: 10.1186/s12934-022-01757-w.

Activation of cryptic xylose metabolism by a transcriptional activator Znf1 
boosts up xylitol production in the engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae lacking 
xylose suppressor BUD21 gene.

Songdech P(1), Intasit R(1), Yingchutrakul Y(2), Butkinaree C(2), 
Ratanakhanokchai K(1)(3), Soontorngun N(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemical Technology, School of Bioresources and Technology, 
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Bangkok, 10150, Thailand.
(2)National Omics Center, National Science and Technology Development Agency, 
Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand.
(3)Pilot Plant Development and Training Institute, King Mongkut's University of 
Technology Thonburi, Bangkok, 10150, Thailand.
(4)Division of Biochemical Technology, School of Bioresources and Technology, 
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Bangkok, 10150, Thailand. 
nitnipa.soo@kmutt.ac.th.

BACKGROUND: Xylitol is a valuable pentose sugar alcohol, used in the food and 
pharmaceutical industries. Biotechnological xylitol production is currently 
attractive due to possible conversion from abundant and low-cost industrial 
wastes or agricultural lignocellulosic biomass. In this study, the transcription 
factor Znf1 was characterised as being responsible for the activation of cryptic 
xylose metabolism in a poor xylose-assimilating S. cerevisiae for xylitol 
production.
RESULTS: The results suggest that the expression of several xylose-utilising 
enzyme genes, encoding xylose reductases for the reduction of xylose to xylitol 
was derepressed by xylose. Their expression and those of a pentose phosphate 
shunt and related pathways required for xylose utilisation were strongly 
activated by the transcription factor Znf1. Using an engineered S. cerevisiae 
strain overexpressing ZNF1 in the absence of the xylose suppressor bud21Δ, 
xylitol production was maximally by approximately 1200% to 12.14 g/L of xylitol, 
corresponding to 0.23 g/g xylose consumed, during 10% (w/v) xylose fermentation. 
Proteomic analysis supported the role of Znf1 and Bud21 in modulating levels of 
proteins associated with carbon metabolism, xylose utilisation, ribosomal 
protein synthesis, and others. Increased tolerance to lignocellulosic inhibitors 
and improved cell dry weight were also observed in this engineered 
bud21∆ + pLJ529-ZNF1 strain. A similar xylitol yield was achieved using 
fungus-pretreated rice straw hydrolysate as an eco-friendly and low-cost 
substrate.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, we identified the key modulators of pentose sugar metabolism, 
namely the transcription factor Znf1 and the suppressor Bud21, for enhanced 
xylose utilisation, providing a potential application of a generally recognised 
as safe yeast in supporting the sugar industry and the sustainable 
lignocellulose-based bioeconomy.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-022-01757-w
PMCID: PMC8897867
PMID: 35248023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]