1. Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2022 Feb 22;2022:5374262. doi: 10.1155/2022/5374262. 
eCollection 2022.

TWIST1-EP300 Expedites Gastric Cancer Cell Resistance to Apatinib by Activating 
the Expression of COL1A2.

Yu G(1), Chen W(1), Li X(2), Yu L(1), Xu Y(1), Ruan Q(1), He Y(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei, 230601 Anhui, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hefei Da'an Medical Laboratory Co., Ltd., 
Hefei, 230012 Anhui, China.

The association between collagen type I alpha (COL1A) and chemoresistance has 
been verified in cancers. However, the specific role of COL1A2 in gastric cancer 
(GC) cell resistance to apatinib, a highly selective small-molecule inhibitor of 
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2, has not been investigated before. 
The purpose of this study was to explore the potential factors associated with 
COL1A2 regulation on GC cell apatinib resistance in vitro. With the aid of the 
Oncomine database and integrated bioinformatics methods, we identified COL1A2 
overexpression in GC and its prognostic value. Mechanistically, the COL1A2 
promoter has a distinct H3K27ac modification site and that E1A binding protein 
p300 (EP300) and twist family bHLH transcription factor 1 (TWIST1) can bind to 
the COL1A2 promoter, which in turn transcriptionally activated COL1A2 
expression. In addition, overexpression of COL1A2 significantly promoted 
resistance to apatinib in GC cells, but knockdown of EP300 or TWIST1 remarkably 
inhibited COL1A2 expression and promoted sensitivity of GC cells to apatinib. 
Our findings demonstrated that the combination of EP300 and TWIST1 has a 
synergistically regulatory effect on COL1A2 expression, thus contributing to 
apatinib resistance in GC cells.

Copyright Â© 2022 Gang Yu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/5374262
PMCID: PMC8888114
PMID: 35242497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.