1. J Biol Chem. 2022 May;298(5):101781. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101781. Epub 2022
 Mar 2.

Recent structural insights into the mechanism of ClpP protease regulation by 
AAA+ chaperones and small molecules.

Mabanglo MF(1), Houry WA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
Electronic address: walid.houry@utoronto.ca.

ClpP is a highly conserved serine protease that is a critical enzyme in 
maintaining protein homeostasis and is an important drug target in pathogenic 
bacteria and various cancers. In its functional form, ClpP is a 
self-compartmentalizing protease composed of two stacked heptameric rings that 
allow protein degradation to occur within the catalytic chamber. ATPase 
chaperones such as ClpX and ClpA are hexameric ATPases that form larger 
complexes with ClpP and are responsible for the selection and unfolding of 
protein substrates prior to their degradation by ClpP. Although individual 
structures of ClpP and ATPase chaperones have offered mechanistic insights into 
their function and regulation, their structures together as a complex have only 
been recently determined to high resolution. Here, we discuss the cryoelectron 
microscopy structures of ClpP-ATPase complexes and describe findings previously 
inaccessible from individual Clp structures, including how a hexameric ATPase 
and a tetradecameric ClpP protease work together in a functional complex. We 
then discuss the consensus mechanism for substrate unfolding and translocation 
derived from these structures, consider alternative mechanisms, and present 
their strengths and limitations. Finally, new insights into the allosteric 
control of ClpP gained from studies using small molecules and gain or 
loss-of-function mutations are explored. Overall, this review aims to underscore 
the multilayered regulation of ClpP that may present novel ideas for 
structure-based drug design.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101781
PMCID: PMC9035409
PMID: 35245501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interest with the contents of this article.