1. Int J Oncol. 2022 Apr;60(4):44. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2022.5334. Epub 2022 Mar 4.

LncCCAT1 interaction protein PKM2 upregulates SREBP2 phosphorylation to promote 
osteosarcoma tumorigenesis by enhancing the Warburg effect and lipogenesis.

Pu F(#)(1), Liu J(#)(1), Jing D(#)(1), Chen F(2), Huang X(1), Shi D(1), Wu W(1), 
Lin H(1), Zhao L(1), Zhang Z(1), Lv X(1), Wang B(1), Zhang Z(1), Shao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Radiation and Medical Oncology, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, Hubei 430071, P.R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

Pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) plays an important role in the consumption of glucose 
and the production of lactic acid, the striking feature of cancer metabolism. 
The association of PKM2 with osteosarcoma (OS) has been reported but its role in 
OS has yet to be elucidated. To study this, PKM2‑bound RNAs in HeLa cells, a 
type of cancer cells widely used in the study of molecular function and 
mechanism, were obtained. Peak calling analysis revealed that PKM2 binds to long 
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), which are associated with cancer pathogenesis and 
development. Validation of the PKM2‑lncRNA interaction in the human OS cell line 
revealed that lncRNA colon cancer associated transcript‑1 (lncCCAT1) interacted 
with PKM2, which upregulated the phosphorylation of sterol regulatory 
element‑binding protein 2 (SREBP2). These factors promoted the Warburg effect, 
lipogenesis, and OS cell growth. PKM2 appears to be a key regulator in OS by 
binding to lncCCAT1. This further extends the biological functions of PKM2 in 
tumorigenesis and makes it a novel potential therapeutic for OS.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2022.5334
PMCID: PMC8923656
PMID: 35244192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.