1. iScience. 2022 Feb 9;25(3):103895. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.103895.
eCollection  2022 Mar 18.

Altered inhibitory function in hippocampal CA2 contributes in social memory 
deficits in Alzheimer's mouse model.

Rey CC(1), Robert V(2), Bouisset G(1), Loisy M(2), Lopez S(1), Cattaud V(1), 
Lejards C(1), Piskorowski RA(2)(3), Rampon C(1), Chevaleyre V(2)(3), Verret 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherches sur La Cognition Animale, Centre de Biologie 
Intégrative, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, 31062 Toulouse, France.
(2)University of Paris, Inserm UMR_S1266, Institute of Psychiatry and 
Neuroscience of Paris. Team Synaptic Plasticity and Neural Networks, 102-108 Rue 
de La Santé, 75014 Paris, France.
(3)GHU PARIS Psychiatrie & Neurosciences, 75014 Paris, France.

Parvalbumin (PV)-expressing interneurons which are often associated with the 
specific extracellular matrix perineuronal net (PNN) play a critical role in the 
alteration of brain activity and memory performance in Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
The integrity of these neurons is crucial for normal functioning of the 
hippocampal subfield CA2, and hence, social memory formation. Here, we find that 
social memory deficits of mouse models of AD are associated with decreased 
presence of PNN around PV cells and long-term synaptic plasticity in area CA2. 
Furthermore, single local injection of the growth factor neuregulin-1 (NRG1) is 
sufficient to restore both PV/PNN levels and social memory performance of these 
mice. Thus, the PV/PNN disruption in area CA2 could play a causal role in social 
memory deficits of AD mice, and activating PV cell pro-maturation pathways may 
be sufficient to restore social memory.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.103895
PMCID: PMC8873612
PMID: 35243253

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.