1. Heliyon. 2022 Feb 15;8(2):e08958. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e08958. 
eCollection 2022 Feb.

Fever temperatures impair hemolysis caused by strains of Escherichia coli and 
Staphylococcus aureus.

Palela M(1), Giol ED(1), Amzuta A(1), Ologu OG(1), Stan RC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cantacuzino Military-Medical Research and Development National Institute, 
Romania.
(2)Chonnam National University Medical School, South Korea.

Hemolysis modulates susceptibility to bacterial infections and predicts poor 
sepsis outcome. Hemolytic bacteria use hemolysins to induce erythrocyte lysis 
and obtain the heme that is essential for bacterial growth. Hemolysins are 
however potent immunogens and infections with hemolytic bacteria may cause a 
reversible fever response from the host that will aid in pathogen clearance. We 
hypothesized that fever temperatures impact the growth and infectivity of two 
hemolytic bacteria that are known to evoke fever in patients. To that end, we 
used high-sensitivity microcalorimetry to measure the evolution of heat 
production in fever-inducing strains of Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus 
aureus, under different temperature conditions. We determined specific bacterial 
aggregation profiles at temperatures equal to or exceeding 38.5 °C. Two melting 
temperatures peaks ranged from 38 °C to 43 °C for either species, a feature that 
we assigned to the formation of hemolysin aggregates of different 
oligomerization order. In order to measure the role of fever temperatures on 
hemolysis, we incubated the pathogens on blood agar plates at relevant 
temperatures, measuring the presence of hemolysis at 37 °C and its absence at 
40.5 °C, respectively. We conclude that fever temperatures affect the kinetics 
of hemolysin pore formation and subsequently the hemolysis of red blood cells in 
vitro. We reveal the potential of microcalorimetry to monitor heat response from 
fever inducing bacterial species. Furthermore, these results help establish an 
additional positive role of febrile temperatures in modulating the immune 
response to infections, through the abolishment of hemolysis.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e08958
PMCID: PMC8859000
PMID: 35243078

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.