1. Front Neurol. 2022 Feb 17;13:827945. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.827945.
eCollection  2022.

Good Performance of the Chinese Version of Mini Social Cognition and Emotional 
Assessment in the Early Diagnosis of Behavioral Variant Frontotemporal Dementia.

Wang F(1), Zhou A(1), Wei C(1), Zuo X(1), Ma X(2), Zhao L(1), Jin H(1), Li Y(1), 
Guo D(1), Jia J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Innovation Center for Neurological Disorders, Xuanwu 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang, China.

Social cognition impairment has been recognized as an early and characteristic 
change in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD). The Mini Social 
Cognition and Emotional Assessment (mini-SEA) is a clinical tool to rapidly 
evaluate social cognition. In this study, we explored the diagnostic value of 
social cognition by assessing the Chinese version of the mini-SEA and other 
standard neuropsychological tests in 22 patients with mild bvFTD, 26 patients 
with mild Alzheimer's disease (AD), including mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
and mild dementia, and 30 control subjects. The discriminatory powers of these 
tests were evaluated and compared using the receiver operating characteristic 
curve (ROC). The mini-SEA scores of the bvFTD patients were significantly lower 
than those of the controls (Z = -6.850, adjusted P < 0.001) and AD patients (Z = 
-3.737, adjusted P = 0.001). ROC analysis showed that the mini-SEA had a high 
discriminatory power for differentiating bvFTD from the controls, with an area 
under the curve (AUC) value of 0.989 (95% CI = 0.905-1.000, P < 0.001). The AUC 
value of the mini-SEA for differentiating bvFTD from AD was 0.899 (95% CI = 
0.777-0.967, P < 0.001), higher than that of the Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
Delayed Recall (AUC = 0.793), Boston Naming Test (AUC = 0.685) or Frontal 
Assessment Battery (AUC = 0.691). The Chinese version of mini-SEA is a good 
clinical tool for the early diagnosis of bvFTD, and has a high sensitivity and 
specificity to discriminate bvFTD from AD.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wang, Zhou, Wei, Zuo, Ma, Zhao, Jin, Li, Guo and Jia.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.827945
PMCID: PMC8891700
PMID: 35250831

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.