1. Adv Virol. 2022 Feb 26;2022:3387784. doi: 10.1155/2022/3387784. eCollection 
2022.

The Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) Pandemic: Are 
Africa's Prevalence and Mortality Rates Relatively Low?

Mariam SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Program, Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis 
Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), the cause of 
coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19), has been rapidly spreading since December 
2019, and within a few months, it turned out to be a global pandemic. The 
disease affects primarily the lungs, but its pathogenesis spreads to other 
organs as well. However, its mortality rates vary, and in the majority of 
infected people, there are no serious consequences. Many factors including 
advanced age, preexisting health conditions, and genetic predispositions are 
believed to exacerbate outcomes of COVID-19. The virus contains several 
structural proteins including the spike (S) protein with subunits for binding, 
fusion, and internalization into host cells following interaction with host cell 
receptors and proteases (ACE2 and TMPRSS2, respectively) to cause the subsequent 
pathology. Although the pandemic has spread into all countries, most of Africa 
is thought of as having relatively less prevalence and mortality. Several 
hypotheses have been forwarded as reasons for this and include warmer weather 
conditions, vaccination with BCG (i.e., trained immunity), and previous malaria 
infection. From genetics or metabolic points of view, it has been proposed that 
most African populations could be protected to some degree because they lack 
some genetic susceptibility risk factors or have low-level expression of allelic 
variants, such as ACE2 and TMPRSS2 that are thought to be involved in increased 
infection risk or disease severity. The frequency of occurrence of α-1 
antitrypsin (an inhibitor of a tissue-degrading protease, thereby protecting 
target host tissues including the lung) deficiency is also reported to be low in 
most African populations. More recently, infections in Africa appear to be on 
the rise. In general, there are few studies on the epidemiology and pathogenesis 
of the disease in African contexts, and the overall costs and human life losses 
due to the pandemic in Africa will be determined by all factors and conditions 
interacting in complex ways.

Copyright © 2022 Solomon H. Mariam.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/3387784
PMCID: PMC8898136
PMID: 35256885

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that there are no conflicts 
of interest.