1. Curr Biol. 2022 Apr 25;32(8):1675-1688.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2022.02.033.
Epub  2022 Mar 7.

Flexible reprogramming of Pristionchus pacificus motivation for attacking 
Caenorhabditis elegans in predator-prey competition.

Quach KT(1), Chalasani SH(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Graduate Program, University of California, San Diego, Gilman 
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Salk 
Institute for Biological Studies, North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, 
USA.
(2)Neurosciences Graduate Program, University of California, San Diego, Gilman 
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Salk 
Institute for Biological Studies, North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, 
USA. Electronic address: schalasani@salk.edu.

Erratum in
    Curr Biol. 2023 Feb 27;33(4):790. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2023.01.063.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2022 Apr 25;32(8):R367-R370. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2022.03.026.

Animals with diverse diets must adapt their food priorities to a wide variety of 
environmental conditions. This diet optimization problem is especially complex 
for predators that compete with prey for food. Although predator-prey 
competition is widespread and ecologically critical, it remains difficult to 
disentangle predatory and competitive motivations for attacking competing prey. 
Here, we dissect the foraging decisions of the omnivorous nematode Pristionchus 
pacificus to reveal that its seemingly failed predatory attempts against 
Caenorhabditis elegans are actually motivated acts of efficacious territorial 
aggression. While P. pacificus easily kills and eats larval C. elegans with a 
single bite, adult C. elegans typically survives and escapes bites. However, 
non-fatal biting can provide competitive benefits by reducing access of adult 
C. elegans and its progeny to bacterial food that P. pacificus also eats. We 
show that the costs and benefits of both predatory and territorial outcomes 
influence how P. pacificus decides which food goal, prey or bacteria, should 
guide its motivation for biting. These predatory and territorial motivations 
impose different sets of rules for adjusting willingness to bite in response to 
changes in bacterial abundance. In addition to biting, predatory and territorial 
motivations also influence which search tactic P. pacificus uses to increase 
encounters with C. elegans. When treated with an octopamine receptor antagonist, 
P. pacificus switches from territorial to predatory motivation for both biting 
and search. Overall, we demonstrate that P. pacificus assesses alternate 
outcomes of attacking C. elegans and flexibly reprograms its foraging strategy 
to prioritize either prey or bacterial food.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2022.02.033
PMCID: PMC9050875
PMID: 35259340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.