1. Animals (Basel). 2022 Feb 22;12(5):540. doi: 10.3390/ani12050540.

A Review on the Marek's Disease Outbreak and Its Virulence-Related meq 
Genovariation in Asia between 2011 and 2021.

Song B(1), Zeb J(1), Hussain S(1), Aziz MU(1), Circella E(2), Casalino G(2), 
Camarda A(2), Yang G(1), Buchon N(3), Sparagano O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Public Health, Jockey Club College of 
Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, 
Hong Kong 999077, China.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Bari, S.P. Casamassima km. 
3, 70010 Valenzano, Italy.
(3)Department of Entomology, Cornell Institute of Host-Microbe Interactions and 
Disease, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Marek's disease is an infectious disease in poultry that usually appears in 
neural and visceral tumors. This disease is caused by Gallid alphaherpesvirus 2 
infection in lymphocytes, and its meq gene is commonly used in virulent studies 
for coding the key protein functional in oncogenic transformation of the 
lymphocytes. Although vaccines have been introduced in many countries to control 
its spread and are proven to be efficient, recent records show a decline of such 
efficiency due to viral evolution. In this study, we reviewed the outbreak of 
Marek's disease in Asia for the last 10 years, together with associated meq 
sequences, finding a total of 36 studies recording outbreaks with 132 viral 
strains in 12 countries. The visceral type is the most common (13 in 16 studies) 
form of Marek's disease, but additional unobserved neural changes may exist. MD 
induces liver lymphoma most frequently (11 in 14 studies), and tumors were also 
found in spleen, kidney, heart, gizzard, skin, intestine, lung, and sciatic 
nerve. Twelve viral strains distributed in China have been reported to escape 
the CVI988 vaccine, reaching a mortality rate of more than 30%. Phylogenetic 
analyses show the internal connection between the Middle East (Turkey, Iraq, 
Iran, Saudi Arabia), South Asia (India, Indonesia), and East Asia (China and 
Japan), while external viral communications might occasionally occur. In 18 
strains with both sequential and mortality data, amino acid alignment showed 
several point substitutions that may be related to its virulence. We suggest 
more behavioral monitoring in Marek's disease-endemic regions and further 
studies on strain virulence, together with its Meq protein structural changes.

DOI: 10.3390/ani12050540
PMCID: PMC8908813
PMID: 35268107

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest to 
this study.