1. Sci Rep. 2022 Mar 9;12(1):3844. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-07752-w.

Multiplex quantification of C-terminal alpha-1-antitrypsin peptides provides a 
novel approach for characterizing systemic inflammation.

Bigalke A(1), Sponholz C(2), Schnabel C(3), Bauer M(2), Kiehntopf M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Jena University 
Hospital, Jena, Germany. arite.bigalke@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Therapy, Jena University 
Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(3)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Jena University 
Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(4)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Jena University 
Hospital, Jena, Germany. michael.kiehntopf@med.uni-jena.de.

C-terminal peptides (CAAPs) of the highly abundant serine protease 
alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) have been identified at various lengths in several 
human materials and have been proposed to serve as putative biomarkers for a 
variety of diseases. CAAPs are enzymatically formed and these enzymatic 
activities are often associated with excessive immune responses (e.g. sepsis, 
allergies). However, most of those CAAPs have been either detected using in 
vitro incubation experiments or in human materials which are not easily 
accessible. To gain a comprehensive understanding about the occurrence and 
function of CAAPs in health and disease, a LC-MS/MS method for the simultaneous 
detection of nine CAAPs was developed and validated for human plasma (EDTA and 
lithium-heparin) and serum. Using this newly developed method, we were able to 
detect and quantify five CAAPs in healthy individuals thereby providing an 
initial proof for the presence of C36, C37, C40 and C44 in human blood. 
Concentrations of four CAAPs in a clinical test cohort of patients suffering 
from sepsis were significantly higher compared to healthy controls. These 
results reveal that in addition to C42 other fragments of A1AT seem to play a 
crucial role during systemic infections. The proposed workflow is simple, rapid 
and robust; thus this method could be used as diagnostic tool in routine 
clinical chemistry as well as for research applications for elucidating the 
diagnostic potential of CAAPs in numerous diseases. To this end, we also provide 
an overview about the current state of knowledge for CAAPs identified in vitro 
and in vivo.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-07752-w
PMCID: PMC8907207
PMID: 35264629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PD Dr. Dr. Kiehntopf and Dr. Bigalke are 
inventors of a patent covering the presented method as a tool for characterizing 
systemic inflammation (applicant: University Hospital Jena; inventors: Arite 
Bigalke and Michael Kiehntopf; application number: 22154836.5; status of 
application: submitted). The University Hospital Jena is also applicant of other 
published patents which are related to methods determining the origin of an 
infection (EP17719610.2; EP16167699.4). A patent covering the initial 
identification of C42 is published as well (published as CN104204808, EP2592421, 
EP2780719, US20170242035; Applicant: University Hospital Jena; Inventors: 
Michael Kiehntopf, Diana Schmerler, Thomas Deufel, Frank Brunkhorst). C. 
Schnabel, C. Sponholz and M. Bauer declare no potential competing interests.