1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2022 Jun;20(6):1197-1212. doi: 10.1111/pbi.13803. Epub
2022  Mar 15.

CRISPR/Cas9-mediated P-CR domain-specific engineering of CESA4 
heterodimerization capacity alters cell wall architecture and improves 
saccharification efficiency in poplar.

Nayeri S(1), Baghban Kohnehrouz B(2), Ahmadikhah A(1), Mahna N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences and Biotechnology, Faculty of Life Sciences and 
Biotechnology, Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Plant Breeding and Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture, 
University of Tabriz, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Department of Horticultural Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, University of 
Tabriz, Tabriz, Iran.

Cellulose is the most abundant unique biopolymer in nature with widespread 
applications in bioenergy and high-value bioproducts. The large 
transmembrane-localized cellulose synthase (CESA) complexes (CSCs) play a 
pivotal role in the biosynthesis and orientation of the para-crystalline 
cellulose microfibrils during secondary cell wall (SCW) deposition. However, the 
hub CESA subunit with high potential homo/heterodimerization capacity and its 
functional effects on cell wall architecture, cellulose crystallinity, and 
saccharification efficiency remains unclear. Here, we reported the highly potent 
binding site containing four residues of Pro435, Trp436, Pro437, and Gly438 in 
the plant-conserved region (P-CR) of PalCESA4 subunit, which are involved in the 
CESA4-CESA8 heterodimerization. The CRISPR/Cas9-knockout mutagenesis in the 
predicted binding site results in physiological abnormalities, stunt growth, and 
deficient roots. The homozygous double substitution of W436Q and P437S and 
heterozygous double deletions of W436 and P437 residues potentially reduced 
CESA4-binding affinity resulting in normal roots, 1.5-2-fold higher plant growth 
and cell wall regeneration rates, 1.7-fold thinner cell wall, high hemicellulose 
content, 37%-67% decrease in cellulose content, high cellulose DP, 25%-37% 
decrease in cellulose crystallinity, and 50% increase in saccharification 
efficiency. The heterozygous deletion of W436 increases about 2-fold CESA4 
homo/heterodimerization capacity led to the 50% decrease in plant growth and 
increase in cell walls thickness, cellulose content (33%), cellulose DP (20%), 
and CrI (8%). Our findings provide a strategy for introducing commercial 
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated bioengineered poplars with promising cellulose 
applications. We anticipate our results could create an engineering revolution 
in bioenergy and cellulose-based nanomaterial technologies.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for 
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.13803
PMCID: PMC9129088
PMID: 35266285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.