1. Animals (Basel). 2022 Feb 24;12(5):570. doi: 10.3390/ani12050570.

Biomolecules, Fatty Acids, Meat Quality, and Growth Performance of Slow-Growing 
Chickens in an Organic Raising System.

Molee W(1), Khosinklang W(1), Tongduang P(1), Thumanu K(2), Yongsawatdigul J(3), 
Molee A(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Animal Technology and Innovation, Institute of Agricultural 
Technology, Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima 30000, 
Thailand.
(2)Research and Facility Department, Synchrotron Light Research Institute 
(Public Organization), Nakhon Ratchasima 30000, Thailand.
(3)School of Food Technology, Institute of Agricultural Technology, Suranaree 
University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima 30000, Thailand.

This study was to determine the effect of the organic raising system (OR) on 
growth performance, meat quality, and physicochemical properties of slow-growing 
chickens. Three hundred and sixty (one-day-old) Korat chickens (KRC) were 
randomly assigned to control (CO) and OR groups. The groups comprised six 
replicates of thirty chickens each. The chickens were housed in indoor pens (5 
birds/m2), wherein those in OR had free access to Ruzi pasture (1 bird/4 m2) 
from d 21 to d 84 of age. In the CO group, chickens were fed with a mixed feed 
derived from commercial feedstuffs, while those in the OR group were fed with 
mixed feed derived from organic feedstuffs. The results revealed a lower feed 
intake (p < 0.0001) and feed conversion ratio (p = 0.004) in the OR. The OR 
increased total collagen, protein, shear force, color of skin and meat, and 
decreased abdominal fat (p < 0.05). The OR improved fatty acid with increased 
DHA, n-3 PUFA, and decreased the ratio of n-6 to n-3 PUFA in KRC meat (p < 
0.05). The synchrotron radiation-based Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy 
and correlation loading analyses confirmed these results. In conclusion, our 
results proved that OR could improve growth performance and meat quality and 
suggested the raising system be adopted commercially. In addition, the observed 
differences in biochemical molecules could also serve as markers for monitoring 
meat quality.

DOI: 10.3390/ani12050570
PMCID: PMC8908829
PMID: 35268139

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.