1. Cancer Manag Res. 2022 Mar 3;14:953-965. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S346285.
eCollection  2022.

Thoracic Paravertebral Block Combined with General Anaesthesia or General 
Anaesthesia Alone for Thoracoscopic Lung Adenocarcinoma Surgery: A Retrospective 
Study.

Feng M(1), Wang L(2), Sun J(2), Chen Z(2), Fu J(3), Liu D(3), Zhang R(3), Li 
Y(2), Zhang Y(2), Zhang H(3), Zhang W(4), Feng C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Hospital of Shandong Academy of Medical 
Sciences, The third Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical University, 
Jinan, 250000, People's Republic of China.
(2)Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, 250033, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Department of Anaesthesiology, The Second Hospital, Cheeloo College of 
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, 250033, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Second Hospital, Cheeloo College of 
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, 250033, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the effects of ultrasound-guided thoracic paravertebral 
block combined with general anaesthesia or general anaesthesia alone for 
thoracoscopic lung adenocarcinoma surgery, and to provide new thoughts for 
improving the clinical outcomes.
METHODS: This was a retrospective study. Data were retrieved for 195 patients 
with lung adenocarcinoma undergoing elective radical lobectomy via 
video-assisted thoracoscopy between January 2018 and August 2019 in The Second 
Hospital of Shandong University, including 86 patients who received thoracic 
paravertebral block (TPVB) combined with general anaesthesia (group TG), and 109 
patients who received general anaesthesia alone (group GA). All patients were 
given self-controlled intravenous analgesia pump for 48 h after surgery. The 
primary outcome was the recurrence-free survival 2 years postoperatively (the 
time between surgery and the earliest date of recurrence, metastasis or lung 
cancer-cause death). The secondary outcomes included the average numeric rating 
scale (NRS) scores within 48 h postoperatively, the first time of postoperative 
ambulation, duration of chest tube drainage, length of postoperative 
hospitalization, perioperative opioid consumption and the postoperative side 
effects.
RESULTS: There were no statistical differences in the recurrence-free survival 2 
years postoperatively between groups (Multivariate hazard ratio 0.706, 95% CI 
0.126-3.941, P=0.691). The average NRS scores within 48 h postoperatively were 
significantly lower in group TG (P<0.05). The first time of postoperative 
ambulation, duration of chest tube drainage, and length of postoperative 
hospitalization in group TG were significantly reduced (P<0.05). Opioid 
consumption was significantly decreased in group TG (P<0.01). Finally, the 
incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) was significantly lower in 
group TG (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: TPVB for thoracoscopic lung adenocarcinoma surgery did not improve 
the recurrence-free survival 2 years postoperatively compared with general 
anaesthesia alone, but it significantly enhanced the postoperative analgesia 
effect, reduced opioid consumption as well as side effects, and accelerated 
postoperative early recovery.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: The Chinese Clinical Trial Registry 
(ChiCTR-2100050454).

Â© 2022 Feng et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S346285
PMCID: PMC8901418
PMID: 35264885

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflicts of interest 
for this work and no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.