1. Front Genet. 2022 Feb 21;13:823406. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.823406.
eCollection  2022.

The Relationship Between Low-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol and Progression of 
Mild Cognitive Impairment: The Influence of rs6859 in PVRL2.

Xiao Q(1), Xi J(1), Wang R(1), Zhao Q(2)(3), Liang X(2)(3), Wu W(2)(3), Zheng 
L(2)(3), Guo Q(2)(3), Hong Z(2)(3), Fu H(1), Ding D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Health Education, School of Public 
Health, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)National Clinical Research Center for Aging Diseases, Shanghai, China.

Background: Genome-wide association studies have identified many Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) genetic-risk single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and indicated 
the important role of the cholesterol/lipid metabolism pathway in AD 
pathogenesis. This study aims to investigate the effects of cholesterol and 
genetic risk factors on progression of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to AD. 
Methods: We prospectively followed 316 MCI participants aged ≥50 years with a 
baseline cholesterol profile and SNP genotyping data for 4.5 years on average in 
a sub-cohort of the Shanghai Aging Study. Total cholesterol, low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in 
serum were measured at baseline. SNP genotyping was performed using a MassARRAY 
system. At follow-up, consensus diagnosis of incident dementia and AD were 
established based on medical, neurological, and neuropsychological examinations. 
Cox regression models were used to assess the association of cholesterol and SNP 
with incident AD. Results: The AG/AA genotypes of PVRL2 rs6859 were 
significantly associated with increased incident AD in MCI participants, 
compared with GG genotype (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 2.75, 95% confidence 
interval [CI] 1.32-5.76, p = .007, false discovery rate-adjusted p = .030). In 
PVRL2 rs6859 AG/AA carriers, each-1 mmol/L higher level of LDL-C was 
significantly associated with a 48% decreased risk of AD (adjusted HR 0.52, 
95%CI 0.33-0.84, p = .007). Consistent results were obtained when using LDL-C as 
the categorical variable (P for trend = 0.016). Conclusion: The relationship 
between LDL-C and progression of MCI may be influenced by genetic variants.

Copyright © 2022 Xiao, Xi, Wang, Zhao, Liang, Wu, Zheng, Guo, Hong, Fu and Ding.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.823406
PMCID: PMC8901437
PMID: 35273639

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.