1. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2022 Feb 22;50(295):25-29.

Bradycardia during optical timolol therapy: its delayed remission after timolol 
discontinuation and unexpected further relapse.

Elikowski W(1), Fertała N(1), Zawodna-Marszałek M(1), Gaca-Wysocka M(2), 
Bolewski A(3).

Author information:
(1)Józef Struś Hospital, Poznań, Poland: Department of Internal Medicine.
(2)Józef Struś Hospital, Poznań, Poland: Department of Ophthalmology.
(3)Józef Struś Hospital, Poznań, Poland: Department of Cardiology.

Optical betablockers (BBs), including nonselective BB timolol, are commonly used 
for the management of primary open angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension. About 
80% of topically administered timolol is systemically absorbed, which can rarely 
induce such complications as bradycardia, bronchospasm and depression.
A CASE REPORT: The authors describe a case of a 67-year-old female referred 
because of significant bradycardia and a suggestion of pacemaker implantation. 
She had no cardiovascular history besides hyperlipidemia and mild hyperglycemia, 
so her previous treatment was focused on glaucoma due to which she had been 
using optical timolol for several years. Moreover, she suffered from depression 
which was treated with venlafaxine and sertraline. Over a few months, she 
started feeling weak and dizzy. Her daily heart rate (HR) markedly decreased to 
40-45/min. 24-hour ECG monitoring revealed multiple episodes of nodal rhythm and 
of sinoatrial block and the lowest HR of 33/min; bradycardia defined as HR less 
than 45/min constituted over 40% of the time recorded. Close observation with 
repeated 24-hour ECG monitoring after timolol discontinuation showed lasting 
several-daylong gradual bradycardia remission; after 2, 9, 16 and 23 days, 
bradycardia constituted 19.9%, 13.9%, 0.2% and 0% of the time recorded, 
respectively. Genetic testing of cytochrome P450 2D6 revealed the presence of 
the c.506 -1G>A variant with one non-functional allele (CYP2D6 *4/-) which might 
have slowed down timolol metabolism in the context of simultaneous 
antidepressants use, so venlafaxine and sertraline were reduced. However, during 
follow-up, incremental bradycardia relapse, suggestive of an underlying sinus 
node dysfunction, was observed.

© 2022 MEDPRESS.

PMID: 35278294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]