1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2023 Apr;64(2):161-178. doi: 
10.1007/s12016-022-08928-y. Epub 2022 Mar 11.

The Airway Microbiome-IL-17 Axis: a Critical Regulator of Chronic Inflammatory 
Disease.

Mannion JM(1), McLoughlin RM(1), Lalor SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, 
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)UCD School of Medicine, Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical 
Research, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. stephen.lalor@ucd.ie.

The respiratory tract is home to a diverse microbial community whose influence 
on local and systemic immune responses is only beginning to be appreciated. 
Increasing reports have linked changes in this microbiome to a range of 
pulmonary and extrapulmonary disorders, including asthma, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease and rheumatoid arthritis. Central to many of these findings is 
the role of IL-17-type immunity as an important driver of inflammation. Despite 
the crucial role played by IL-17-mediated immune responses in protection against 
infection, overt Th17 cell responses have been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
several chronic inflammatory diseases. However, our knowledge of the influence 
of bacteria that commonly colonise the respiratory tract on IL-17-driven 
inflammatory responses remains sparse. In this article, we review the current 
knowledge on the role of specific members of the airway microbiota in the 
modulation of IL-17-type immunity and discuss how this line of research may 
support the testing of susceptible individuals and targeting of inflammation at 
its earliest stages in the hope of preventing the development of chronic 
disease.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-022-08928-y
PMCID: PMC10017631
PMID: 35275333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.