1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Feb 22;13:821779. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.821779. 
eCollection 2022.

Metabolomic Impact of Lidocaine on a Triple Negative Breast Cancer Cell Line.

Chamaraux-Tran TN(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Muller M(1)(6), Pottecher J(1)(5)(6), 
Diemunsch PA(1), Tomasetto C(2)(3)(4), Namer IJ(6)(7)(8)(9), Dali-Youcef 
N(2)(3)(4)(6)(10).

Author information:
(1)Service d'anesthésie-réanimation et Médecine Périopératoire, Hôpital de 
Hautepierre, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(2)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire Illkirch, 
Illkirch, France.
(3)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR 7104, Illkirch, France.
(4)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1258, Illkirch, 
France.
(5)ER 3072, Mitochondrie Stress Oxydant et Protection Musculaire, Faculté de 
Médecine, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), 
Strasbourg, France.
(6)Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.
(7)MNMS-Platform, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France.
(8)Service de Médecine Nucléaire et d'Imagerie Moléculaire, Institut de 
Cancérologie Strasbourg Europe, Strasbourg, France.
(9)ICube, Université de Strasbourg/CNRS, UMR 7357, Strasbourg, France.
(10)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Pôle de Biologie, Hôpitaux 
Universitaires de Strasbourg, Nouvel Hôpital Civil, 1 Place de l'hôpital, 
Strasbourg, France.

Background: Metabolomics and onco-anesthesia are two emerging research fields in 
oncology. Metabolomics (metabolites analysis) is a new diagnostic and prognostic 
tool that can also be used for predicting the therapeutic or toxic responses to 
anticancer treatments. Onco-anesthesia studies assess the impact of anesthesia 
on disease-free and overall survival after cancer surgery. It has been shown 
that local anesthetics (LA), particularly lidocaine (LIDO), exert antitumor 
properties both in vitro and in vivo and may alter the biologic fingerprints of 
cancer cells. As LA are known to impair mitochondrial bioenergetics and 
byproducts, the aim of the present study was to assess the impact of LIDO on 
metabolomic profile of a breast cancer cell line. Methods: Breast cancer 
MDA-MB-231 cells were exposed for 4 h to 0.5 mM LIDO or vehicle (n = 4). The 
metabolomic fingerprint was characterized by high resolution magic angle 
spinning NMR spectroscopy (HRMAS). The multivariate technique using the 
Algorithm to Determine Expected Metabolite Level Alteration (ADEMA) (Cicek et 
al., PLoS Comput. Biol., 2013, 9, e1002859), based on mutual information to 
identify expected metabolite level changes with respect to a specific condition, 
was used to determine the metabolites variations caused by LIDO. Results: LIDO 
modulates cell metabolites levels. Several pathways, including glutaminolysis, 
choline, phosphocholine and total choline syntheses were significantly 
downregulated in the LIDO group. Discussion: This is the first study assessing 
the impact of LIDO on metabolomic fingerprint of breast cancer cells. Among 
pathways downregulated by LIDO, many metabolites are reported to be associated 
with adverse prognosis when present at a high titer in breast cancer patients. 
These results fit with the antitumor properties of LIDO and suggest its impact 
on metabolomics profile of cancer cells. These effects of LIDO are of clinical 
significance because it is widely used for local anesthesia with cutaneous 
infiltration during percutaneous tumor biopsy. Future in vitro and preclinical 
studies are necessary to assess whether metabolomics analysis requires 
modification of local anesthetic techniques during tumor biopsy.

Copyright © 2022 Chamaraux-Tran, Muller, Pottecher, Diemunsch, Tomasetto, Namer 
and Dali-Youcef.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.821779
PMCID: PMC8902240
PMID: 35273500

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.