1. Indian J Dermatol. 2021 Nov-Dec;66(6):632-637. doi: 10.4103/ijd.IJD_282_21.

HLA-Cw6 Status and Treatment Responses Between Psoriasis Patients.

Temel B(1), Adisen E(2), Gonen S(3).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology and Venereology, Ankara Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(2)Dermatology and Venerology, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(3)Laboratory of Tissue Typing and Pediatric Nephrology, Gazi University Faculty 
of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: The number of treatment options in psoriasis has increased 
considerably, so biomarkers should be searched to assist in the selection of the 
optimal treatment agent. The most common of these biomarkers is HLA-Cw6.
OBJECTIVE: The aim was to determine whether there is a relationship between 
HLA-Cw6-positivity (HLA-Cw6-POS) and the response of treatment agents in 
psoriasis.
METHODS: Blood samples of 124 patients were subjected to genetic study for 
HLA-Cw6.
RESULTS: Psoriasis area severity index (PASI) score of more than 75% (PASI75) 
response was received in 34 (73.9%) of the HLA-Cw6-POS methotrexate-treated 
patients, 30 (78.9%) of the HLA-Cw6-POS cyclosporine-treated patients, and 8 
(37.5%) of the HLA-Cw6-POS acitretin-treated patients. The differences were not 
statistically significant (P = 0.634-0.071-0.409). PASI75 response was received 
in 73 (68.2%) of the HLA-Cw6-POS patients in patients treated with conventional 
agents. In adalimumab-treated patients, PASI75 response was received in 8 
(53.3%) of the HLA-Cw6-POS patients, 6 (75%) of the HLA-Cw6-POS 
infliximab-treated patients, and 4 (57.1%) of the HLA-Cw6-POS 
ustekinumab-treated patients. The differences were not statistically significant 
(P = 0.245-1.00-0.322). PASI75 response was received in 24 (64.9%) of the 
HLA-Cw6-POS and 33 (84.6%) of HLA-Cw6 negative (HLA-Cw6-NEG) patients with 
biological agents. The biological agent response was statistically significantly 
lower in HLA-Cw6-POS.
CONCLUSION: None of the agents were affected by HLA-Cw6. When biological agents 
were evaluated collectively, the treatment response of HLA-Cw6-POS patients was 
lower.

Copyright: Â© 2022 Indian Journal of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.4103/ijd.IJD_282_21
PMCID: PMC8906299
PMID: 35283491

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest. Approval of 
Ethics Committee: Yes (Gazi University Ethics Committee)