1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jul 8;50(12):e67. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac173.

Expanding the DNA-encoded library toolbox: identifying small molecules targeting 
RNA.

Chen Q(1), Li Y(1), Lin C(1), Chen L(1), Luo H(1), Xia S(1), Liu C(1), Cheng 
X(1), Liu C(1), Li J(1), Dou D(1).

Author information:
(1)HitGen Inc., Shuangliu District, Chengdu, China.

DNA-encoded library (DEL) technology is a powerful tool for small molecule 
identification in drug discovery, yet the reported DEL selection strategies were 
applied primarily on protein targets in either purified form or in cellular 
context. To expand the application of this technology, we employed DEL selection 
on an RNA target HIV-1 TAR (trans-acting responsive region), but found that the 
majority of signals were resulted from false positive DNA-RNA binding. We thus 
developed an optimized selection strategy utilizing RNA patches and competitive 
elution to minimize unwanted DNA binding, followed by k-mer analysis and motif 
search to differentiate false positive signal. This optimized strategy resulted 
in a very clean background in a DEL selection against Escherichia coli FMN 
Riboswitch, and the enriched compounds were determined with double digit 
nanomolar binding affinity, as well as similar potency in functional FMN 
competition assay. These results demonstrated the feasibility of small molecule 
identification against RNA targets using DEL selection. The developed 
experimental and computational strategy provided a promising opportunity for RNA 
ligand screening and expanded the application of DEL selection to a much wider 
context in drug discovery.

Â© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac173
PMCID: PMC9262588
PMID: 35288754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]