1. Curr Res Parasitol Vector Borne Dis. 2021 Oct 14;1:100054. doi: 
10.1016/j.crpvbd.2021.100054. eCollection 2021.

Protecting dogs and cats against the Australian paralysis tick, Ixodes 
holocyclus (Acari: Ixodidae): A review of the Australian acaricide registration 
process.

Roeber F(1), Webster M(1).

Author information:
(1)Invetus Pty Ltd., Wongaburra Research Centre, Casino NSW 2470, Australia.

Tick control is mainly achieved through the use of effective ectoparasiticides 
that can be either dermally or systemically distributed in/on the host. Before 
any acaricide can be legally made available to veterinarians and pet owners, it 
must demonstrate efficacy in a series of well-designed dose confirmation 
studies. The data generated during these studies are then reviewed by government 
regulators and used for the registration of the acaricide. In Australia, the 
most significant tick species is the Australian paralysis tick, Ixodes 
holocyclus. This three-host tick produces a potent neurotoxin (holocyclotoxin) 
that induces a rapidly ascending flaccid paralysis that can be fatal to 
companion animals and larger mammals such as cattle and horses. The Australian 
Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA) is the national Australian 
regulator which sets the data requirements for the registration of acaricides. 
This paper reviews the requirements set by the APVMA and puts them in direct 
context with the biology, distribution and reported acaricide susceptibility of 
I. holocyclus. An overview of acaricides currently registered in Australia for 
the control of I. holocyclus in dogs and cats, their reported efficacy data and 
the conduct of I. holocyclus efficacy trials are also provided.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crpvbd.2021.100054
PMCID: PMC8906080
PMID: 35284866

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial 
interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing 
interests: FR and MW are employees of Invetus, a veterinary Contract Research 
Organization that conducts veterinary pre-clinical and clinical studies for the 
animal health industry.