1. Biol Methods Protoc. 2022 Mar 9;7(1):bpac006. doi: 10.1093/biomethods/bpac006.
 eCollection 2022.

Risk factors and early cardiovascular outcomes in cancer patients treated with 
anthracycline-based chemotherapy in Tanzania: a protocol for a 
quasi-experimental study.

Vicent B(1), Meda J(2), Ngoma M(3), Wan L(1), Yinglan L(1).

Author information:
(1)Xiangya School of Nursing, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(2)College of Health Sciences, University of Dodoma, P.O. Box 259, Dodoma, 
Tanzania.
(3)Ocean Road Cancer Institute, P.O. Box 3592, Dar es salaam, Tanzania.

The objective of this quasi-experimental study is to assess the risk factors and 
early cardiovascular outcomes in cancer patients treated with 
anthracycline-based chemotherapy in Tanzania. The study will be conducted at 
Ocean Road Cancer Institute in Dar es salaam, Tanzania. The study will have 
three phases: baseline survey, follow-up, and end-line survey. Participants will 
be newly diagnosed adult cancer patients who are eligible for 
anthracycline-based chemotherapy. A total of 427 participants will be involved. 
At baseline, participants will be evaluated for the cardiovascular risk factors 
before commencing chemotherapy. During follow-up, participants will commence 
their prescribed anthracycline and the cardiovascular indices monitored 
throughout until the patient completes the prescribed anthracycline cycles. 
After completing the prescribed anthracycline cycles, an end line survey will be 
conducted to evaluate any change in cardiovascular indices. The outcome variable 
in this study will be the change in biochemical data (high-density lipoprotein, 
low-density lipoprotein, triglyceride, and troponin I), blood pressure, and 
electrocardiographic information (heart rate and Bazett QT interval). 
Independent variables will be demographic characteristics, risk factors for 
cardiovascular disorders, current dietary practices, and body mass index. 
Descriptive statistics will be used to describe the participants. Independent 
and paired t-tests will be performed to make comparisons between and within 
groups. P-values <0.05 will be considered statistically significant. The results 
of this study will help clinicians and policymakers to understand the burden of 
early cardiovascular outcomes and plan for appropriate preventive strategies.

Â© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/biomethods/bpac006
PMCID: PMC8917873
PMID: 35291267