1. Front Neurosci. 2022 Mar 1;16:817067. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.817067. 
eCollection 2022.

Mendelian Randomization Analysis Suggests No Associations of Herpes Simplex 
Virus Infections With Multiple Sclerosis.

Zhang W(1)(2), Wu P(2)(3), Yin R(4), Sun M(5), Zhang R(6), Liao X(7), Lin Y(8), 
Lu H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, 
United States.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
United States.
(5)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Ultrasound, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(7)College of Medical Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(8)Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Previous studies have suggested an association between infection with herpes 
simplex virus (HSV) and liability to multiple sclerosis (MS), but it remains 
largely unknown whether the effect is causal. We performed a two-sample 
Mendelian randomization (MR) study to explore the relationship between 
genetically predicted HSV infection and MS risk. Genetic instrumental variables 
for diagnosed infections with HSV (p < 5 × 10-6) were retrieved from the FinnGen 
study, and single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with circulating 
immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels of HSV-1 and HSV-2 and corresponding summary-level 
statistics of MS were obtained from genome-wide association studies of the 
European-ancestry. Inverse-variance weighted MR was employed as the primary 
method and multiple sensitivity analyses were performed. Genetically proxied 
infection with HSV was not associated with the risk of MS (odds ratio [OR], 
0.96; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.90-1.02; p = 0.22) per one-unit increase 
in log-OR of herpes viral infections. MR results provided no evidence for the 
relationship between circulating HSV-1 IgG levels and MS risks (OR = 0.91; 95% 
CI, 0.81-1.03; p = 0.37), and suggested no causal effect of HSV-2 IgG (OR = 
1.04; 95% CI, 0.96-1.13; p = 0.32). Additional sensitivity analyses confirmed 
the robustness of these null findings. The MR study did not support the causal 
relationship between genetic susceptibly to HSV and MS in the European 
population. Further studies are still warranted to provide informative 
knowledge, and triangulating evidence across multiple lines of evidence are 
necessary to plan interventions for the treatment and prevention of MS.

Copyright © 2022 Zhang, Wu, Yin, Sun, Zhang, Liao, Lin and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2022.817067
PMCID: PMC8920987
PMID: 35299622

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.