1. Sci Rep. 2022 Mar 18;12(1):4704. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-08684-1.

Geographical prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 variants, August 2020 to July 2021.

Chan WS(1), Lam YM(1), Law JHY(1), Chan TL(1), Ma ESK(1), Tang BSF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Hong Kong Sanatorium and Hospital, Happy Valley, 
Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hong Kong Sanatorium and Hospital, Happy Valley, 
Hong Kong, China. Bone.SF.Tang@hksh.com.

We extracted one-year genomic data (August 2020-July 2021) from GISAID EpiCoV™ 
database and estimated monthly proportions of 11 SARS-CoV-2 variants in various 
geographical regions. From continental perspective, Delta VOC predominated in 
Africa, Asia, Europe, North America and Oceania, with proportions of 
67.58-98.31% in July 2021. In South America, proportion of Delta VOC (23.24%) 
has been approaching the predominant yet diminishing Gamma VOC (56.86%). We 
further analyzed monthly data on new COVID-19 cases, new deaths, vaccination 
status and variant proportions of 6 countries. Delta VOC predominated in all 
countries except Brazil (Gamma VOC) in July 2021. In most occasions, rise and 
predominance of Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta and Zeta variants were accompanied 
with surges of new cases, especially after the time point of major lineage 
interchange. The ascending phases of new cases lasted for 1-5 months with 1.69- 
to 40.63-fold peak growth, whereas new death tolls varied with regional 
vaccination status. Our data suggested surges of COVID-19 cases might be 
predicted from variant surveillance data. Despite vaccine breakthroughs by Delta 
VOC, death tolls were more stable in countries with better immunization 
coverage. Another takeaway is the urgent need to improve vaccine efficacy 
against Delta and emerging variants.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-08684-1
PMCID: PMC8931783
PMID: 35304553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.