1. Oncogene. 2022 Apr;41(17):2470-2479. doi: 10.1038/s41388-022-02263-4. Epub
2022  Mar 19.

Preclinical assessment of combination therapy of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
in a highly heterogeneous tumor model.

Ikeuchi H(1)(2), Hirose T(1), Ikegami M(1)(3), Takamochi K(2), Suzuki K(2), Mano 
H(1), Kohsaka S(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cellular Signaling, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo, 104-0045, Japan.
(2)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Juntendo University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, 113-8431, Japan.
(3)Department of Musculoskeletal Oncology, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and 
Infectious Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, 113-8677, Japan.
(4)Division of Cellular Signaling, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo, 104-0045, Japan. skohsaka@ncc.go.jp.

The development of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has improved the treatment 
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) mutations. The current research priority is to provide viable treatments 
for patients who have drug-resistant EGFR mutations. We evaluated the drug 
sensitivity of various EGFR mutants to monotherapies and combination therapies 
of EGFR-TKIs. In vitro, the transforming potential and drug sensitivity of 357 
EGFR variants were assessed. In vivo, we tested the sensitivity of EGFR variants 
to different regimens of EGFR-TKIs by examining changes in the proportion of 
each variant within the tumor. Out of 357 variants thoroughly examined for 
transforming activities, 144 (40.3%) and 282 (79.0%) transformed 3T3 and Ba/F3 
cells, respectively. Among the latter variants, 50 (17.7%) were found to be 
resistant or only partly resistant to osimertinib or afatinib. Four of 25 
afatinib-resistant variants (16%) were sensitive to osimertinib, whereas 25 of 
46 osimertinib-resistant variants (54.3%) were sensitive to afatinib. Despite 
the lack of a synergistic impact, TKI combination treatment effectively reduced 
in vivo the heterogeneous tumors composed of 3T3 cells with different EGFR 
variants. Regimens starting with afatinib and subsequently switched to 
osimertinib suppressed tumor development more efficiently than the opposite 
combination. Combination EGFR-TKI treatment may decrease tumor growth and 
prevent the development of resistant variants. This work created an experimental 
model of a heterogeneous tumor to find the best combination therapy regimen and 
proposes a basic notion of EGFR-TKI combination therapy to enhance the prognosis 
of NSCLC patients.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-022-02263-4
PMCID: PMC9033582
PMID: 35304574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Kohsaka received research funding from 
AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim. The other authors certify that no actual 
or potential conflict of interest in relation to this article exists.