1. J Mol Liq. 2022 May 15;354:118901. doi: 10.1016/j.molliq.2022.118901. Epub
2022  Mar 9.

Molecular dynamics simulation approach for discovering potential inhibitors 
against SARS-CoV-2: A structural review.

Ghahremanian S(1), Rashidi MM(1)(2), Raeisi K(3), Toghraie D(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic 
Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, Sichuan, PR China.
(2)Faculty of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Quchan University of 
Technology, Quchan, Iran.
(3)Department of Basic Science, Shahrekord Branch, Islamic Azad University, 
Shahrekord, Iran.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Khomeinishahr Branch, Islamic Azad 
University, Khomeinishahr, Iran.

Since the commencement of the novel Coronavirus, the disease has quickly turned 
into a worldwide crisis so that there has been growing attention in discovering 
possible hit compounds for tackling this pandemic. Discovering standard 
treatment strategies is a serious challenge because little information is 
available about this emerged infectious virus. Regarding the high impact of 
time, applying computational procedures to choose promising drugs from a catalog 
of licensed medications provides a precious chance for combat against the 
life-threatening disorder of COVID-19. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a 
promising approach for assessing the binding affinity of ligand-receptor as well 
as observing the conformational trajectory of docked complexes over time. Given 
that many computational studies are performed using MD along with the molecular 
docking on various candidates as antiviral inhibitors of COVID-19 protease, 
there is a demand to conduct a comprehensive review of the most important 
studies to reveal and compare the potential introduced agents that this study 
covers this defect. In this context, the present review intends to prepare an 
overview of these studies by considering RMSD, RMSF, radius of gyration, binding 
free energy, and Solvent-Accessible Surface Area (SASA) as effective parameters 
for evaluation. The outcomes will offer a road map for adjusting antiviral 
inhibitors, which can facilitate the selection and development of drug 
candidates for use in the medical therapy. Finally, the molecular modeling 
approaches rendered by this study may be valuable for future computational 
studies.

Â© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molliq.2022.118901
PMCID: PMC8916543
PMID: 35309259

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.