1. DEN Open. 2021 May 27;2(1):e17. doi: 10.1002/deo2.17. eCollection 2022 Apr.

Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography in a patient with complete situs 
inversus viscerum: A case report and literature review.

Emmanuel J(1), Sriram N(1), Muthukaruppan R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Queen Elizabeth Hospital Kota 
Kinabalu Sabah Malaysia.

Complete situs inversus viscerum (SIV) is a rare congenital condition, defined 
by a left-right transposition of all viscera with dextroposition of the heart. 
In patients with SIV that requires endoscopic intervention, namely endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), the left-right coordination can be 
technically demanding even with skilled endoscopist. We report a case of a 
patient with underlying SIV who presented with septic shock secondary to 
ascending cholangitis compounded with a malaria infection. Despite the 
ascertainment of a relatively large Common Bile Duct (CBD) stone, ERCP and 
stenting were pursued as an initial treatment modality in view of the clinical 
presentation of cholangitis and COVID-19-related delays in surgical intervention 
at our center. This case is unique as the patient was maintained in a supine 
position throughout the procedure. The patient underwent a successful ERCP 
procedure followed by a CBD Exploration and cholecystectomy 2 weeks later. A key 
factor that contributed to the success of this procedure was the combined 
utilization of a rotatable sphincterotome and extractor balloon which assisted 
with cannulation and shortening manoeuvre of the duodenoscope to facilitate 
biliary stenting.

Â© 2021 The Authors. DEN Open published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on 
behalf of Japan Gastroenterological Endoscopy Society.

DOI: 10.1002/deo2.17
PMCID: PMC8828210
PMID: 35310748

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests for 
this article.