1. J Clin Microbiol. 2022 Apr 20;60(4):e0169421. doi: 10.1128/jcm.01694-21. Epub 
2022 Mar 22.

Detection of Mixed Populations of Clarithromycin-Susceptible and -Resistant 
Mycobacterium abscessus Strains.

Shallom SJ(1), Zelazny AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Service, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center, 
National Institutes of Healthgrid.94365.3d, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Clarithromycin resistance in Mycobacterium abscessus subsp. abscessus, 
massiliense, and bolletii occurs through induction of erm(41) or mutations in 
rrl (23S rRNA) genes. Phenotypic detection of clarithromycin resistance is 
hindered by the need for extended incubation as well as co-occurrence of mixed 
populations of M. abscessus with different susceptibility profiles. We developed 
a quantitative EvaGreen-based droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) scheme for rapid 
detection of full-length or truncated erm(41) and a probe based ddPCR screening 
assay for assessment of 23S rRNA rrl mutational resistance. We tested 100 M. 
abscessus strains, synthetic mixes with different susceptibility profiles, and 
13 positive MGIT samples. Truncated and full-length erm(41) genes were detected 
in 27/100 and 73/100 strains and 4/13 and 9/13 MGIT samples, respectively 
yielding a sensitivity and specificity of 100%. Clarithromycin resistance 
mutations in rrl were detected in 26/100 isolates, i.e., A2058G (18/100), A2058C 
(7/100), and A2059G (1/100), and in 3/13 MGIT samples, i.e., A2058G (2/13) and 
A2059G (1/13). A screening assay of rrl ddPCR (A2058A/A2058G probes) showed 100% 
sensitivity in detecting the wild type or A2058G mutation as well as identifying 
samples requiring further testing. Upon inclusion of additional ddPCR assays, we 
were able to detect A2058C and A2059G clarithromycin resistance-conferring 
mutations in the rrl gene. Our ddPCR scheme can differentiate between 
full-length and truncated erm(41) and identify clarithromycin 
resistance-conferring mutations in the rrl gene from clinical isolates and 
positive MGIT samples as well as deconvolute and quantitate mixed populations of 
M. abscessus with different clarithromycin resistance traits.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.01694-21
PMCID: PMC9020357
PMID: 35313731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.