1. Virol Sin. 2022 Jun;37(3):398-407. doi: 10.1016/j.virs.2022.03.008. Epub 2022 
Mar 18.

In vitro investigation of HBV clinical isolates from Chinese patients reveals 
that genotype C isolates possess higher infectivity than genotype B isolates.

Liu T(1), Liu A(2), Liu Y(3), Cen S(4), Zhang Q(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, The 
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, 210008, 
China.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Beijing, 100730, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital and Jiangsu 
Key Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing, 210008, China.
(4)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, 
Beijing, 100050, China. Electronic address: shancen@imb.pumc.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital and Jiangsu 
Key Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing, 210008, China; Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing, 210008, China. Electronic address: 
huanlezq44@126.com.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) genotype B and C are two major genotypes that are 
prevalent in Asia and differ in natural history and disease progression. The 
impact of HBV genotypes on viral replication and protein expression has been 
explored by the transfection of hepatoma cells with replication-competent HBV 
DNA, which mimics the later stages of the viral life cycle. However, the 
influence of HBV genotypes on the early events of viral infection remains 
undetermined, mainly due to the difficulties in obtaining sufficient infectious 
viral particles for infection assays. Here, we report that a high-titer HBV 
inoculum can be generated from the transient transfection-based cell model after 
optimizing transfection conditions and modifying the HBV-expressing construct. 
By performing in vitro infection assays using transiently transfected derived 
viruses, we found that clinical genotype C isolates possessed higher infectivity 
than genotype B isolates. Moreover, we identified a naturally occurring mutation 
sL21S in small hepatitis B surface protein, which markedly decreased the 
infectivity of HBV genotype C isolates, but not that of genotype B isolates. In 
summary, using infectious viral particles provided by the optimized transient 
transfection-based cell model, we have been able to investigate a wide range of 
HBV variants on viral infectivity, which may contribute to our understanding of 
the reasons for different clinical outcomes in HBV infections and the 
development of therapeutic drugs targeting the early stages of HBV life cycle.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virs.2022.03.008
PMCID: PMC9243618
PMID: 35314401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.