1. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2022 Nov;69(6):e12906. doi: 10.1111/jeu.12906. Epub 2022
 May 4.

Parasite powerhouse: A review of the Toxoplasma gondii mitochondrion.

Usey MM(1)(2), Huet D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(2)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, 
Athens, Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, University of Georgia, 
Athens, Georgia, USA.

Toxoplasma gondii is a member of the apicomplexan phylum, a group of 
single-celled eukaryotic parasites that cause significant human morbidity and 
mortality around the world. T. gondii harbors two organelles of endosymbiotic 
origin: a non-photosynthetic plastid, known as the apicoplast, and a single 
mitochondrion derived from the ancient engulfment of an α-proteobacterium. Due 
to excitement surrounding the novelty of the apicoplast, the T. gondii 
mitochondrion was, to a certain extent, overlooked for about two decades. 
However, recent work has illustrated that the mitochondrion is an essential hub 
of apicomplexan-specific biology. Development of novel techniques, such as 
cryo-electron microscopy, complexome profiling, and next-generation sequencing 
have led to a renaissance in mitochondrial studies. This review will cover what 
is currently known about key features of the T. gondii mitochondrion, ranging 
from its genome to protein import machinery and biochemical pathways. Particular 
focus will be given to mitochondrial features that diverge significantly from 
the mammalian host, along with discussion of this important organelle as a drug 
target.

© 2022 International Society of Protistologists.

DOI: 10.1111/jeu.12906
PMCID: PMC9490983
PMID: 35315174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]