1. Healthcare (Basel). 2022 Mar 19;10(3):573. doi: 10.3390/healthcare10030573.

VLCKD in Combination with Physical Exercise Preserves Skeletal Muscle Mass in 
Sarcopenic Obesity after Severe COVID-19 Disease: A Case Report.

Camajani E(1)(2), Feraco A(2)(3), Basciani S(4), Gnessi L(4), Barrea L(5), 
Armani A(2)(3), Caprio M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)PhD Program in Endocrinological Sciences, University of Rome "La Sapienza", 
00161 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Human Sciences and Promotion of the Quality of Life, San 
Raffaele Roma Open University, 00166 Rome, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Endocrinology, IRCCS San Raffaele Roma, 00166 
Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Rome "La Sapienza", 00161 
Rome, Italy.
(5)Endocrinology Unit, Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University 
Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.

The prevalence of sarcopenic obesity is increasing worldwide, with a strong 
impact on public health and the national health care system. Sarcopenic obesity 
consists of fat depot expansion and associated systemic low-grade inflammation, 
exacerbating the decline in skeletal muscle mass and strength. Dietary approach 
and physical exercise represent essential tools for reducing body weight and 
preserving muscle mass and function in subjects with sarcopenic obesity. This 
case report describes the effects of a dietary intervention, based on a 
Very-Low-Calorie Ketogenic Diet (VLCKD) combined with physical exercise, on body 
composition, cardiometabolic risk factors, and muscle strength in a woman with 
sarcopenic obesity, two weeks after hospitalization for bilateral interstitial 
pneumonia due to COVID-19. To our knowledge, this is the first case report to 
describe the efficacy of a combined approach intervention including VLCKD along 
with physical exercise, in reducing fat mass, improving metabolic profile, and 
preserving skeletal muscle performance in a patient with obesity, soon after 
severe COVID-19 disease.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare10030573
PMCID: PMC8950622
PMID: 35327051

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.