1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Mar 8;14(6):1381. doi: 10.3390/cancers14061381.

A Cell Double-Barcoding System for Quantitative Evaluation of Primary Tumors and 
Metastasis in Animals That Uncovers Clonal-Specific Anti-Cancer Drug Effects.

Hesin A(1), Kumar S(1), Gahramanov V(1), Becker M(2), Vilenchik M(3), Alexandrov 
I(4), Yaglom J(1), Sherman MY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Ariel University, Ariel 40700, Israel.
(2)Adelson School of Medicine, Ariel University, Ariel 40700, Israel.
(3)Felicitex Therapeutics, Inc., Natick, MA 01760, USA.
(4)ActivSignal, Inc., Natick, MA 01760, USA.

Imaging in monitoring metastasis in mouse models has low sensitivity and is not 
quantitative. Cell DNA barcoding, demonstrating high sensitivity and resolution, 
allows monitoring effects of drugs on the number of tumor and metastatic clones. 
However, this technology is not suitable for comparison of sizes of metastatic 
clones in different animals, for example, drug treated and untreated, due to 
high biological and technical variability upon tumor and metastatic growth and 
isolation of barcodes from tissue DNA. However, both numbers of clones and their 
sizes are critical parameters for analysis of drug effects. Here we developed a 
modification of the barcoding approach for monitoring drug effects on tumors and 
metastasis that is quantitative, highly sensitive and highly reproducible. This 
novel cell double-barcoding system allows simultaneously following the fate of 
two or more cell variants or cell lines in xenograft models in vivo, and also 
following the fates of individual clones within each of these populations. This 
system allows comparing effects of drugs on different cell populations and thus 
normalizing drug effects by drug-resistant lines, which corrects for both 
biological and technical variabilities and significantly increases the 
reproducibility of results. Using this barcoding system, we uncovered that 
effects of a novel DYRK1B kinase inhibitor FX9847 on primary tumors and 
metastasis is clone-dependent, while a distinct drug osimertinib demonstrated 
clone-independent effects on cancer cell populations. Overall, a cell 
double-barcoding approach can significantly enrich our understanding of drug 
effects in basic research and preclinical studies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14061381
PMCID: PMC8946264
PMID: 35326533

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflict of 
interest.