1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 May;25(5):182. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12698. Epub 2022 Mar
24.

Whole body vibration remodels skeletal muscle via autophagy and energy 
metabolism in diabetic mice.

An S(1), Wang D(1), Ma X(1), Liu C(1).

Author information:
(1)First Affiliated Hospital of Jinzhou Medical University, Jinzhou, Liaoning 
121000, P.R. China.

Hyperglycemia occurs due to a defect in insulin secretion or impaired biological 
functions, or both. The long‑term hyperglycemia during diabetes causes chronic 
damage and dysfunction of various tissues. Whole body vibration (WBV) has 
significant effects on lipid and glucose metabolism and endocrine and motor 
systems. In order to explore the effects of WBV on skeletal muscle, mice trained 
for 12 weeks with WBV (15 Hz, 30 min) were used as experimental subjects and 
their skeletal muscle morphology under the pathological state of diabetes was 
observed. In addition, the blood lipids, blood glucose, gastrocnemius muscle 
glycogen and mRNA and protein levels of autophagy and glucose metabolism 
biomarkers were compared among the three groups of mice via western blot and 
RT‑qPCR. The results showed that WBV can significantly reshape skeletal muscle 
morphology and upregulate high density lipoprotein. The expression of 
glucose‑6‑phosphatase (G6P), Beclin1 and Atg7 in the gastrocnemius muscle of the 
WBV group was significantly increased. Therefore, it can be concluded that WBV 
promotes skeletal muscle remodeling in diabetic mice. The present study 
confirmed that WBV can attenuate the development of diabetes melitus (DM) and 
lead to lower level low density lipoprotein in the blood. In addition, G6P level 
plays an important role in WBV‑treated DM model and may be used to monitor the 
effect of WBV in patients. The findings of the present study may provide a new 
molecular basis for WBV to play a therapeutic role in the treatment of diabetes 
and may have potential clinical applications in the future.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12698
PMCID: PMC8972300
PMID: 35322859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.