1. Immunology. 2022 Jul;166(3):299-309. doi: 10.1111/imm.13472. Epub 2022 Mar 28.

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 suppresses CD4(+) T-cell effector functionality by 
inhibition of glycolysis.

Bishop EL(1), Gudgeon NH(1), Mackie GM(1), Chauss D(2), Roberts J(3), Tennant 
DA(3), Maslowski KM(1)(3), Afzali B(2), Hewison M(3), Dimeloe S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(2)Immunoregulation Section, Kidney Diseases Branch, National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.

In CD4+ T helper cells, the active form of vitamin D3 , 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 
(1,25D) suppresses production of inflammatory cytokines, including 
interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), but the mechanisms for this are not yet fully defined. 
In innate immune cells, response to 1,25D has been linked to metabolic 
reprogramming. It is unclear whether 1,25D has similar effects on CD4+ T cells, 
although it is known that antigen stimulation of these cells promotes an 
anabolic metabolic phenotype, characterized by high rates of aerobic glycolysis 
to support clonal expansion and effector cytokine expression. Here, we performed 
in-depth analysis of metabolic capacity and pathway usage, employing 
extracellular flux and stable isotope-based tracing approaches, in CD4+ T cells 
treated with 1,25D. We report that 1,25D significantly decreases rates of 
aerobic glycolysis in activated CD4+ T cells, whilst exerting a lesser effect on 
mitochondrial glucose oxidation. This is associated with transcriptional 
repression of Myc, but not repression of mTOR activity under these conditions. 
Consistent with the modest effect of 1,25D on mitochondrial activity, it also 
did not impact CD4+ T-cell mitochondrial mass or membrane potential. Finally, we 
demonstrate that inhibition of aerobic glycolysis by 1,25D substantially 
contributes to its immune-regulatory capacity in CD4+ T cells, since the 
suppression of IFN-γ expression was significantly blunted in the absence of 
aerobic glycolysis. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) suppresses the production 
of inflammatory cytokines such as interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) by CD4+ T cells, but 
the underpinning mechanisms are not yet fully defined. Here, we identify that 
1,25D inhibits aerobic glycolysis in activated CD4+ T cells, associated with 
decreased c-Myc expression. This mechanism appears to substantially contribute 
to the suppression of IFN-γ by 1,25D, since this is significantly blunted in the 
absence of aerobic glycolysis.

© 2022 The Authors. Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.13472
PMCID: PMC9232967
PMID: 35322416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.