1. Materials (Basel). 2022 Mar 8;15(6):2011. doi: 10.3390/ma15062011.

Rational Design of Waterborne Polyurethane Pressure Sensitive Adhesives for 
Different Working Temperatures.

Zhao H(1)(2), Xu Y(2), Luo Z(2), Gong CR(2), Zheng YQ(2), Yu LM(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Chemistry & Materials Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou 
350007, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Coal to Ethylene Glycol and Its Related Technology, Fujian 
Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Fuzhou 350000, China.

The appropriate pressure sensitive adhesion performances at working temperature 
are vital for the applications of waterborne polyurethane (WPU). Understanding 
the relationship among rheological behaviors, macromolecular structures and 
adhesive performances can be very useful to the rational design of waterborne 
polyurethane pressure sensitive adhesives (WPU-PSAs) for different operating 
temperatures, as well as other kinds of adhesives. In this study, four kinds of 
WPU-PSAs were prepared by reacting polypropylene glycol (PPG), hydrogenated 
hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (HHTPB), dimethyl alcohol propionic acid 
(DMPA), 1,6-hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI) and four kinds of chain extenders. 
Gel permeation chromatography (GPC), swelling and rheology tests were used in 
parallel with an analysis of adhesive performances of the dried films of the 
adhesives. Results showed that, in addition to the nature of chain extenders 
playing a role on the rheological behaviors and adhesive performances of 
polymer, the gel content could be used to adjust the macromolecular structure 
and molecular weight distribution of polymer, thus distinctly affected the 
adhesive performances of PSA. The relationship among rheological behaviors, 
macromolecular structure and adhesive performances was investigated, and the 
rational design of WPU was achieved with appropriate pressure sensitive adhesion 
properties for different working temperatures of 25 and 60 Â°C.

DOI: 10.3390/ma15062011
PMCID: PMC8949434
PMID: 35329462

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.