1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2022 May;9(15):e2104296. doi: 10.1002/advs.202104296. Epub
2022  Mar 24.

Bioactivity and miRNome Profiling of Native Extracellular Vesicles in Human 
Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Cardiomyocyte Differentiation.

Louro AF(1)(2), Paiva MA(1)(2), Oliveira MR(1)(2), Kasper KA(1)(2), Alves 
PM(1)(2), Gomes-Alves P(1)(2), Serra M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica, Apartado 12, Oeiras, 
2781-901, Portugal.
(2)ITQB-NOVA, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. da República, Oeiras, 2780-157, Portugal.

Extracellular vesicles (EV) are an attractive therapy to boost cardiac 
regeneration. Nevertheless, identification of native EV and corresponding cell 
platform(s) suitable for therapeutic application, is still a challenge. Here, EV 
are isolated from key stages of the human induced pluripotent stem 
cell-cardiomyocyte (hiPSC-CM) differentiation and maturation, i.e., from hiPSC 
(hiPSC-EV), cardiac progenitors, immature and mature cardiomyocytes, with the 
aim of identifying a promising cell biofactory for EV production, and pinpoint 
the genetic signatures of bioactive EV. EV secreted by hiPSC and cardiac 
derivatives show a typical size distribution profile and the expression of 
specific EV markers. Bioactivity assays show increased tube formation and 
migration in HUVEC treated with hiPSC-EV compared to EV from committed cell 
populations. hiPSC-EV also significantly increase cell cycle activity of 
hiPSC-CM. Global miRNA expression profiles, obtained by small RNA-seq analysis, 
corroborate an EV-miRNA pattern indicative of stem cell to cardiomyocyte 
specification, confirming that hiPSC-EV are enriched in pluripotency-associated 
miRNA with higher in vitro pro-angiogenic and pro-proliferative properties. In 
particular, a stemness maintenance miRNA cluster upregulated in hiPSC-EV targets 
the PTEN/PI3K/AKT pathway, involved in cell proliferation and survival. Overall, 
the findings validate hiPSC as cell biofactories for EV production for cardiac 
regenerative applications.

© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202104296
PMCID: PMC9130911
PMID: 35322574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.