1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Mar 10;23(6):2996. doi: 10.3390/ijms23062996.

Emerging Role of HDACs in Regeneration and Ageing in the Peripheral Nervous 
System: Repair Schwann Cells as Pivotal Targets.

Gomez-Sanchez JA(1)(2), Patel N(1)(2), Martirena F(3), Fazal SV(4)(5), Mutschler 
C(4), Cabedo H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante, Universidad Miguel Hernández-Consejo 
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 03550 San Juan de Alicante, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de Alicante (ISABIAL), 03010 
Alicante, Spain.
(3)Department of Hematology, General University Hospital of Elda, 03600 Elda, 
Spain.
(4)John Van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0PY, UK.
(5)Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Puddicombe Way, Cambridge CB2 
0AW, UK.

The peripheral nervous system (PNS) has a remarkable regenerative capacity in 
comparison to the central nervous system (CNS), a phenomenon that is impaired 
during ageing. The ability of PNS axons to regenerate after injury is due to 
Schwann cells (SC) being reprogrammed into a repair phenotype called Repair 
Schwann cells. These repair SCs are crucial for supporting axonal growth after 
injury, myelin degradation in a process known as myelinophagy, neurotropic 
factor secretion, and axonal growth guidance through the formation of Büngner 
bands. After regeneration, repair SCs can remyelinate newly regenerated axons 
and support nonmyelinated axons. Increasing evidence points to an epigenetic 
component in the regulation of repair SC gene expression changes, which is 
necessary for SC reprogramming and regeneration. One of these epigenetic 
regulations is histone acetylation by histone acetyl transferases (HATs) or 
histone deacetylation by histone deacetylases (HDACs). In this review, we have 
focused particularly on three HDAC classes (I, II, and IV) that are 
Zn2+-dependent deacetylases. These HDACs are important in repair SC biology and 
remyelination after PNS injury. Another key aspect explored in this review is 
HDAC genetic compensation in SCs and novel HDAC inhibitors that are being 
studied to improve nerve regeneration.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23062996
PMCID: PMC8951080
PMID: 35328416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.