1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Mar 19;23(6):3337. doi: 10.3390/ijms23063337.

A Study on the Effect of the Substituent against PAK4 Inhibition Using In Silico 
Methods.

Yoon HR(1), Chai CC(2), Kim CH(2), Kang NS(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of New Drug Discovery and Development, Chungnam National 
University, 99 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34134, Korea.
(2)Pharos iBio Co., Ltd. #1408, 38 Heungan-daero 427, Dongan-gu, Anyang-si 
14059, Korea.

The intrinsic inductive properties of atoms or functional groups depend on the 
chemical properties of either electron-withdrawing groups (EWGs) or 
electron-donating groups (EDGs). This study aimed to evaluate in silico methods 
to determine whether changes in chemical properties of the compound by single 
atomic substitution affect the biological activity of target proteins and 
whether the results depend on the properties of the functional groups. We found 
an imidazo[4,5-b]pyridine-based PAK4 inhibitor, compound 1, as an initial hit 
compound with the well-defined binding mode for PAK4. In this study, we used 
both experimental and in silico methods to investigate the effect of atomic 
substitution on biological activity to optimize the initial hit compound. In 
biological assays, in the case of EWG, as the size of the halogen atom became 
smaller and the electronegativity increased, the biological activity IC50 value 
ranged from 5150 nM to inactive; in the case of EDG, biological activity was 
inactive. Furthermore, we analyzed the interactions of PAK4 with compounds, 
focusing on the hinge region residues, L398 and E399, and gatekeeper residues, 
M395 and K350, of the PAK4 protein using molecular docking studies and fragment 
molecular orbital (FMO) methods to determine the differences between the effect 
of EWG and EDG on the activity of target proteins. These results of the docking 
score and binding energy did not explain the differences in biological activity. 
However, the pair-interaction energy obtained from the results of the FMO method 
indicated that there was a difference in the interaction energy between the EWG 
and EDG in the hinge region residues, L398 and E399, as well as in M395 and 
K350. The two groups with different properties exhibited opposite electrostatic 
energy and charge transfer energy between L398 and E399. Additionally, we 
investigated the electron distribution of the parts interacting with the hinge 
region by visualizing the molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) surface of the 
compounds. In conclusion, we described the properties of functional groups that 
affect biological activity using an in silico method, FMO.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23063337
PMCID: PMC8953563
PMID: 35328758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.