1. AAPS J. 2022 Mar 25;24(3):47. doi: 10.1208/s12248-022-00698-x.

Targeted Delivery of Endosomal Escape Peptides to Enhance Immunotoxin Potency 
and Anti-cancer Efficacy.

Polli JR(1), Chen P(1), Bordeau BM(1), Balthasar JP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, 14214, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, 14214, USA. jb@buffalo.edu.

This work describes use of anti-carcinoembryonic antigen antibodies (10H6, 
T84.66) for targeted delivery of an endosomal escape peptide (H6CM18) and 
gelonin, a type I ribosome inactivating protein. The viability of colorectal 
cancer cells (LS174T, LoVo) was assessed following treatment with gelonin or 
gelonin immunotoxins, with or without co-treatment with T84.66-H6CM18. 
Fluorescent microscopy was used to visualize the escape of immunoconjugates from 
endosomes of treated cells, and efficacy and toxicity were assessed in vivo in 
xenograft tumor-bearing mice following single- and multiple-dose regimens. 
Application of 25 pM T84.66-H6CM18 combined with T84.66-gelonin increased 
gelonin potency by ~ 1,000-fold and by ~ 6,000-fold in LS174T and LoVo cells. 
Intravenous 10H6-gelonin at 1.0 mg/kg was well tolerated by LS174T tumor-bearing 
mice, while 10 and 25 mg/kg doses led to signs of toxicity. Single-dose 
administration of PBS, gelonin conjugated to T84.66 or 10H6, T84.66-H6CM18, or 
gelonin immunotoxins co-administered with T84.66-H6CM18 were evaluated. The 
combinations of T84.66-gelonin + 1.0 mg/kg T84.66-H6CM18 and 
10H6-gelonin + 0.1 mg/kg T84.66-H6CM18 led to significant delays in LS174T 
growth. Use of a multiple-dose regimen allowed further anti-tumor effects, 
significantly extending median survival time by 33% and by 69%, for mice 
receiving 1 mg/kg 10H6-gelonin + 0.1 mg/kg T84.66-H6CM18 (p = 0.0072) and 
1 mg/kg 10H6-gelonin + 1 mg/kg T84.66-H6CM18 (p = 0.0017). Combined 
administration of gelonin immunoconjugates with antibody-targeted endosomal 
escape peptides increased the delivery of gelonin to the cytoplasm of targeted 
cells, increased gelonin cell killing in vitro by 1,000-6,000 fold, and 
significantly increased in vivo efficacy.

© 2022. This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the 
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1208/s12248-022-00698-x
PMCID: PMC9044403
PMID: 35338415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]