1. Nutrients. 2022 Mar 13;14(6):1218. doi: 10.3390/nu14061218.

Estimating the Direct Effect between Dietary Macronutrients and Cardiometabolic 
Disease, Accounting for Mediation by Adiposity and Physical Activity.

Pomares-Millan H(1), Atabaki-Pasdar N(1), Coral D(1), Johansson I(2), Giordano 
GN(1), Franks PW(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Lund University Diabetes Centre, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Skåne University Hospital, 21428 Malmö, Sweden.
(2)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, 90187 
Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.

Assessing the causal effects of individual dietary macronutrients and 
cardiometabolic disease is challenging because distinguish direct effects from 
those mediated or confounded by other factors is difficult. To estimate these 
effects, intake of protein, carbohydrate, sugar, fat, and its subtypes were 
obtained using food frequency data derived from a Swedish population-based 
cohort (n~60,000). Data on clinical outcomes (i.e., type 2 diabetes (T2D) and 
cardiovascular disease (CVD) incidence) were obtained by linking health registry 
data. We assessed the magnitude of direct and mediated effects of diet, 
adiposity and physical activity on T2D and CVD using structural equation 
modelling (SEM). To strengthen causal inference, we used Mendelian randomization 
(MR) to model macronutrient intake exposures against clinical outcomes. We 
identified likely causal effects of genetically predicted carbohydrate intake 
(including sugar intake) and T2D, independent of adiposity and physical 
activity. Pairwise, serial- and parallel-mediational configurations yielded 
similar results. In the integrative genomic analyses, the candidate causal 
variant localized to the established T2D gene TCF7L2. These findings may be 
informative when considering which dietary modifications included in nutritional 
guidelines are most likely to elicit health-promoting effects.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14061218
PMCID: PMC8949537
PMID: 35334875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.W.F. has received research grants from 
numerous diabetes drug companies and fees as consultant from Novo Nordisk, 
Lilly, and Zoe Global Ltd. He is currently the Scientific Director in Patient 
Care at the Novo Nordisk Foundation. Other authors declare no conflict of 
interests.