1. Psychiatry Investig. 2022 Mar;19(3):239-246. doi: 10.30773/pi.2021.0358. Epub 
2022 Mar 22.

The Relationship Between the Oxytocin Level and Rejection Sensitivity, Childhood 
Traumas, and Attachment Styles in Borderline Personality Disorder.

Kartal F(1), UÄŸur K(2), Mete B(3), Demirkol ME(4), Tamam L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Malatya Training and Research Hospital, Malatya, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Malatya Turgut Ozal University, Malatya, Turkey.
(3)Department of Public Health, Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: In this study, it is aimed to investigate the relationship between 
the oxytocin level and the rejection sensitivity, childhood mental traumas, and 
attachment styles in patients diagnosed with borderline personality disorder 
(BPD).
METHODS: Participants between the ages of 18-30 were included in the study. The 
patient group consists of 31 participants and the healthy control group consists 
of 31 participants. Sociodemographic/Clinical Variables Questionnaire, 
Relationship Scales Questionnaire, Rejection Sensitivity Questionnaire and 
Childhood Trauma Questionnaire were administered to the participants included in 
the study. Serum oxytocin levels of the participants were measured using the 
Elisa method.
RESULTS: The oxytocin levels were found to be significantly lower in patients 
with BPD than in healthy control subjects, whereas the rejection sensitivity and 
childhood traumas were found to be significantly higher. No difference was found 
between the patient and control groups in terms of attachment styles, yet it was 
determined that there may be differences between the oxytocin levels of the BPD 
patients according to the attachment styles the patients have.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, the findings of this study revealed that the 
rejection sensitivity in BPD patients is not associated with oxytocin levels and 
childhood traumas, indicating the need to assess the BPD patients in terms of 
other biopsychosocial factors related to the etiopathogenesis of BPD.

DOI: 10.30773/pi.2021.0358
PMCID: PMC8958212
PMID: 35330564

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have no 
potential conflicts of interest to disclose.