1. Front Genet. 2022 Mar 7;13:816660. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.816660. eCollection
 2022.

The Impact of ACEs on BMI: An Investigation of the Genotype-Environment Effects 
of BMI.

Schlauch KA(1), Read RW(1), Neveux I(1), Lipp B(1), Slonim A(2), Grzymski 
JJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, Desert Research Institute, Reno, NV, United 
States.
(2)Renown Health, Reno, NV, United States.

Adverse Childhood Experiences are stressful and traumatic events occurring 
before the age of eighteen shown to cause mental and physical health problems, 
including increased risk of obesity. Obesity remains an ongoing national 
challenge with no predicted solution. We examine a subset of the Healthy Nevada 
Project, focusing on a multi-ethnic cohort of 15,886 sequenced participants with 
recalled adverse childhood events, to study how ACEs and their 
genotype-environment interactions affect BMI. Specifically, the Healthy Nevada 
Project participants sequenced by the Helix Exome+ platform were 
cross-referenced to their electronic medical records and social health 
determinants questionnaire to identify: 1) the effect of ACEs on BMI in the 
absence of genetics; 2) the effect of genotype-environment interactions on BMI; 
3) how these gene-environment interactions differ from standard genetic 
associations of BMI. The study found very strong significant associations 
between the number of adverse childhood experiences and adult obesity. 
Additionally, we identified fifty-five common and rare variants that exhibited 
gene-interaction effects including three variants in the CAMK1D gene and four 
variants in LHPP; both genes are linked to schizophrenia. Surprisingly, none of 
the variants identified with interactive effects were in canonical 
obesity-related genes. Here we show the delicate balance between genes and 
environment, and how the two strongly influence each other.

Copyright Â© 2022 Schlauch, Read, Neveux, Lipp, Slonim and Grzymski.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.816660
PMCID: PMC8942770
PMID: 35342390

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.