1. Cancer Sci. 2022 Jun;113(6):2118-2128. doi: 10.1111/cas.15350. Epub 2022 Apr
18.

Novel cancer-specific epidermal growth factor receptor antibody obtained from 
the serum of esophageal cancer patients with long-term survival.

Takagi-Maeda S(1), Yajima S(2), Suzuki T(2), Usami K(1), Takahashi N(3), Niwa 
R(1), Shimada H(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Research and Development Division, Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd., Machida-shi, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Toho University, Ota-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)Research and Development Division, Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd., Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery and Clinical Oncology, Toho 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Although esophageal cancer has a poor prognosis after recurrence, some patients 
have shown long-term survival despite recurrence. We hypothesized that induction 
of either antitumor Abs or antitumor-specific CTLs could play a role in 
long-term survival (5 years or longer) in patients with recurrence and/or 
distant metastases. Therefore, we aimed to obtain Abs that specifically bind to 
cancer cells by using serum samples from patients with a good prognosis. A phage 
library was prepared using PBMC mRNA of the patients, and cell panning was 
carried out using an esophageal cancer cell line. Results showed the presence of 
an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) Ab, KT112, that specifically bound to 
the cancer cell line. Notably, KT112 bound to only EGFR-positive cancer cells 
but failed to bind to normal esophageal cells. Furthermore, KT112 was 
characterized by responses to EGFR expressed on cancer cells but not to the 
recombinant extracellular domain of EGFR. Immunohistochemical analysis showed 
that KT112 reacted with 17.4% of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma tissue but 
not with any other cancer or normal tissue, suggesting that the Ab recognizes 
cancer-specific forms of EGFR and might have contributed to tumor suppression in 
patients with esophageal cancer. Furthermore, because of its high cancer 
specificity, KT112 could be a promising therapeutic option (e.g., in Ab-drug 
conjugates) for esophageal cancer.

© 2022 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.15350
PMCID: PMC9207364
PMID: 35348270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]