1. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2022 Jun;41(6):692-703. doi: 
10.1016/j.healun.2022.02.020. Epub 2022 Mar 6.

Stem cell therapy for pulmonary arterial hypertension: An update.

Sun QW(1), Sun Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee.
(2)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee. Electronic address: Zsun10@uthsc.edu.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) remains a deadly disease, and there 
currently is no cure for this life-threating medical problem. The average 
lifespan is about 5 to 7 years after diagnosis of PAH. Therefore, a conceptual 
breakthrough to develop new therapeutic strategies for PAH is urgently needed. 
Growing evidence shows that stem cells are emerging as a novel effective 
treatment, but the understanding of its underlying mechanisms is still limited. 
This review highlights the mechanisms through which stem cells successfully 
reverse pulmonary vascular endothelial dysfunction, pulmonary artery smooth 
muscle cell over-proliferation, and mitochondrial dysfunction in PAH patients 
and common rodent models used in PAH research. They can modulate common 
underlying pathways involved in PAH, including the nitric oxide synthase, 
mitochondrial regulators, microRNAs and STAT3-BMPR signaling. Genetic 
modifications further enhance the therapeutic effects of stem cells on PAH. 
Clinical trials showed promising therapeutic potential of mesenchymal stem cells 
and endothelial progenitor cells for PAH. Potential limitations and challenges 
are also discussed. The current findings support the need for further 
investigation and validation of stem cell therapy for PAH.

Copyright Â© 2022 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.healun.2022.02.020
PMCID: PMC9133091
PMID: 35341679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement None of the authors have 
any competing interests in the manuscript.