1. Transl Oncol. 2022 Jun;20:101397. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2022.101397. Epub 2022
 Mar 30.

Iron (Fe)-doped mesoporous 45S5 bioactive glasses: Implications for cancer 
therapy.

Kermani F(1), Vojdani-Saghir A(1), Mollazadeh Beidokhti S(1), Nazarnezhad S(2), 
Mollaei Z(1), Hamzehlou S(3), El-Fiqi A(4), Baino F(5), Kargozar S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Ferdowsi 
University of Mashhad (FUM), Azadi Sq., Mashhad 917794-8564, Iran.
(2)Tissue Engineering Research Group (TERG), Department of Anatomy and Cell 
Biology, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad 
917794-8564, Iran.
(3)Genetics Laboratory, Ghaem Hospital, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran; Hematology/Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation Research 
Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Glass Research Department, National Research Centre, Cairo 12622, Egypt.
(5)Institute of Materials Physics and Engineering, Applied Science and 
Technology Department, Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi 24, 10129 
Torino, Italy.
(6)Tissue Engineering Research Group (TERG), Department of Anatomy and Cell 
Biology, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad 
917794-8564, Iran. Electronic address: kargozarsaeid@gmail.com.

The utilization of bioactive glasses (BGs) in cancer therapy has recently become 
quite promising; herein, a series of Fe-doped mesoporous 45S5-based BGs (MBGs) 
were synthesized via the sol-gel method in the presence of Pluronic P123 as a 
soft template. The physico-chemical and biological properties of the prepared 
glasses were well-characterized through structural assessments, thermal 
analyses, and electron microscopic studies. Electrochemical analyses, including 
cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), were 
also performed to investigate the actual potential of the Fe2O3-containing MBGs 
in modulating the Fenton's reaction. The XRD results confirmed the glassy state 
of the Fe-doped samples before immersion in simulated body fluid (SBF). The 
prepared Fe-doped MBGs exhibited a particle size in the range of 11-86 nm, 
surface charge of 27-30 mV, SBET of 95-306 m2/g, and Ms of 0.08 to 0.2 emu/g. 
The incorporation of Fe2O3 led to a negligible decrease in the bioactivity of 
the glasses. The CV analysis indicated that the Fe-doped MBGs could generate 
H2O2 in a cathodic potential higher than -0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in the 
O2-saturated Na2SO4 solution. Additionally, the data of the EIS test revealed 
that the Fe2O3-doped MBGs could increase the standard rate constant of 
Electro-Fenton's (EF) reaction up to 38.44 times as compared with the Fe-free 
glasses. In conclusion, Fe-doped 45S5-derived glasses may be useful in cancer 
therapy strategies due to their capability of activating Fenton's reaction and 
subsequent production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as •OH free 
radicals.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tranon.2022.101397
PMCID: PMC8972012
PMID: 35366536

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict to declare.