1. J Oncol. 2022 Mar 25;2022:4233782. doi: 10.1155/2022/4233782. eCollection
2022.

Retrospective Study on the Efficacy and Safety of Pyrotinib-Based Therapy for 
HER2-Positive Nonbreast Advanced Solid Tumors.

Wang J(1), Zhang B(2), Cheng X(2), Li Q(2), Lv H(1), Nie C(1), Chen B(1), Xu 
W(1), Zhao J(1), He Y(1), Tu S(2), Chen X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Henan Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou Henan Province 450008, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University, Shanghai 200127, China.

BACKGROUND: Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a member of the 
large ErbB family and an important oncogene in many solid tumors. Pyrotinib has 
been approved for the treatment of HER2-positive, recurrent, or metastatic 
breast cancer. However, there are very few clinical studies on pyrotinib in 
other HER2-positive solid tumors. Therefore, more evidence of clinical research 
is impendently needed to shepherd pyrotinib-based therapy in HER2-positive 
nonbreast advanced solid tumors. Patients and Methods. We performed a 
retrospective analysis of HER2-positive nonbreast advanced solid tumors patients 
with HER2 amplification or mutations who were administered with pyrotinib-based 
therapy in Henan Cancer Hospital between July 1, 2019, and December 2, 2021. In 
our research, 25 eligible patients were included with 16 patients with lung 
cancer, 6 patients with gastric cancer, 2 patients with colorectal cancer, and 1 
patient with cholangiocarcinoma. Progression-free survival (PFS) is our main 
research end point.
RESULTS: The median PFS was 188 days (95% CI: 83-not reached (NR)), and overall 
survival (OS) was 250 days (95% CI: 188-NR), respectively. 16 patients with lung 
cancer had a median PFS of 204 days (95% CI: 55-NR) and 6 patients with gastric 
cancer had PFS of 142 days (95% CI: 83-NR), respectively. The median OS was 366 
days (95% CI: 248-NR) in patients with lung cancer and 179 days (95% CI: 90-NR) 
in patients with gastric cancer. The median PFS and OS of patients receiving >3 
line treatment were lower than those receiving ≤3 line treatment (PFS: 188 days 
vs 204 days, p = 0.92; OS: 188 days vs 366 days, p = 0.43). All 25 patients can 
be evaluated. The objective response rate (ORR) was 24%, and the disease control 
rate (DCR) was 68%. Lung cancer ORR was 25%, and gastric cancer ORR was 16.7%. 
In addition, the DCR of lung cancer was 62.5% and that of gastric cancer was 
66.7%. In addition, the ORR and DCR of patients receiving treatment ≤3 lines 
were higher than those receiving treatment >3 lines (ORR: 35.7% vs 9.1%, p = 
0.18; DCR: 71.4% vs 63.6%, p > 0.99). The most common treatment-related adverse 
events (TRAEs) were diarrhea (84%), but only 3 patients (12%) reported grade 3 
diarrhea with good control.
CONCLUSION: These results show that in HER2-positive nonbreast advanced solid 
tumors, the treatment based on pyrotinib regimen has good antitumor activity and 
acceptable safety. This retrospective study aims to promote larger clinical 
studies to further clarify the efficacy and safety of pyrotinib in the treatment 
of nonbreast solid tumors.

Copyright © 2022 Jianzheng Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/4233782
PMCID: PMC8975634
PMID: 35368895

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.