1. J Oncol. 2022 Mar 25;2022:2883404. doi: 10.1155/2022/2883404. eCollection
2022.

Zinc Oxide Nanoparticle Inhibits Tumorigenesis of Renal Cell Carcinoma by 
Modulating Lipid Metabolism Targeting miR-454-3p to Repressing Metabolism Enzyme 
ACSL4.

Zhou X(1), Cao T(2).

Author information:
(1)The Second Department of Urology, Cangzhou Central Hospital, Cangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Medical Technology of Cangzhou Medical College, Cangzhou, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) affects the life quality of patients with 
advanced diseases despite good prognosis and exhibits abnormal lipid metabolism. 
Zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZONs) are metal oxide nanoparticles that are regarded 
as promising therapeutic candidate for multiple diseases. This study was for 
exploring the function of ZONs in RCC.
METHODS: We established in vitro cell model and in vivo xenograft model to 
determine the antitumor effect of ZONs. Cell viability and proliferation were 
evaluated via the cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8), colony formation, and 
5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EDU) assay. Protein and RNA levels were checked by 
using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and qRT-PCR assay. ROS, malondialdehyde (MDA), 
triglyceride, and total cholesterol were quantified to assess lipid oxidation 
and synthesis. Oil red O staining was performed to check lipid droplets 
accumulation. The ACSL4 and miR-454-3p expression in tumor samples and normal 
tissues were evaluated. The luciferase reporter gene assay was performed for 
checking the interaction between miR-454-3p and ACSL4 3'UTR region.
RESULTS: ZONs suppressed the proliferation and viability of RCC cells both in 
vitro and in vivo. ZONs suppressed accumulation of ROS, MDA, triglyceride, total 
cholesterol, and lipid droplets in RCC cells, along with upregulated miR-454-3p. 
miR-454-3p targeted the 3'UTR region to suppress its expression. In patient 
samples, ACSL4 expression was notably elevated and indicated poor prognosis of 
RCC patients.
CONCLUSION: ZONs treatment notably impeded proliferation, lipid accumulation, 
and oxidation in RCC cells, through upregulating miR-454-3p to suppression the 
function of ACSL4. Our data suggested that ZONs are promising and effective 
agent for RCC treatment.

Copyright Â© 2022 Xudong Zhou and Tingting Cao.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/2883404
PMCID: PMC8975638
PMID: 35368896

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.