1. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am. 2022 Apr;32(2):177-194. doi: 
10.1016/j.giec.2021.12.001. Epub 2022 Feb 22.

Cause, Epidemiology, and Histology of Polyps and Pathways to Colorectal Cancer.

Sullivan BA(1), Noujaim M(1), Roper J(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Duke University School 
of Medicine, 200 Trent Drive, Suite 03,107 Basement Orange Zone, Durham, NC 
27710, USA; Division of Gastroenterology, Durham Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, 508 Fulton Street, Durham, NC 27705, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Duke University School 
of Medicine, 200 Trent Drive, Suite 03,107 Basement Orange Zone, Durham, NC 
27710, USA; Division of Gastroenterology, Durham Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, 508 Fulton Street, Durham, NC 27705, USA. Electronic address: 
jatin.roper@duke.edu.

Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-associated mortality, 
with a lifetime risk of approximately 4% to 5%. Colorectal cancer develops from 
the sequential acquisition of defined genetic mutations in the colonic 
epithelium. Tumorigenesis from normal tissue to cancer occurs largely through 3 
pathways: the chromosomal instability pathway, the microsatellite instability 
pathway, and the sessile serrated pathway. Colorectal cancer incidence and 
mortality have decreased by approximately 35% since the beginning of screening 
programs in the 1990s, although other factors such as use of aspirin for 
coronary disease prevention and decreased smoking rates may also be important. 
In this review, we discuss the etiology, epidemiology, and histology of 
colorectal polyps and cancer.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.giec.2021.12.001
PMCID: PMC9924026
PMID: 35361330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure B.A. Sullivan reports support from 
Exact Sciences, which is outside the scope of the this work. J. Roper reports 
support from Fractyl, Karl Storz, Gilead, and Zentalis, which are outside the 
scope of this article.