1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2022 Mar 26;2022:2576310. doi: 10.1155/2022/2576310. 
eCollection 2022.

Effects of Peroxiredoxin 6 and Its Mutants on the Isoproterenol Induced 
Myocardial Injury in H9C2 Cells and Rats.

Mu R(1), Ye S(2), Lin R(2), Li Y(1), Guo X(2), An L(2).

Author information:
(1)Basic Medical College of Beihua University, Jilin, Jilin 132013, China.
(2)Pharmacy College of Beihua University, Jilin, Jilin 132013, China.

BACKGROUND: Peroxiredoxin 6 (PRDX6) is an important antioxidant enzyme, with a 
potential application value in the treatment of diseases caused by oxidative 
damage.
METHODS: PRDX6 and a mutant (mPRDX6) were heterologously expressed by using an 
E.coli expression system and purified by Ni-affinity chromatography. 
Isoproterenol (ISO) was used to induce a myocardial cell injury model and an 
animal myocardial injury model. After the treatment with PRDX6 and mPRDX6, the 
proliferation activity of H9C2 cells was detected by Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK8) 
method; the apoptosis was evaluated by flow cytometry, and the histological 
changes of myocardial cells were observed by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) 
staining, the levels of catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPX), 
malondialdehyde (MDA), and superoxide dismutase (SOD) in ISO-treated H9C2 cells 
as well as in the heart tissue and serum of rats treated with ISO were detected, 
and the expression levels of Bax, Bcl-2 and peroxisome proliferators-activated 
receptors-γ (PPAR-γ) proteins were detected by Western blot.
RESULTS: PRDX6 and mPRDX6 were successfully expressed and purified. The results 
of efficacy study showed that the mutant mPRDX6, in which the phospholipaseA2 
(PLA2) activity of PRDX6 was deleted by site directed mutation, had a better 
protective effect against the myocardial injury than PRDX6. CCK8 results showed 
that compared with that in ISO group, the proliferation activity of H9C2 cells 
was significantly enhanced (P < 0.01), the apoptosis rate was significantly 
decreased (P < 0.01), and the fluorescence intensity of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) was significantly decreased (P < 0.01) in mPRDX6 group. The results of H&E 
staining showed that the myocardial injury was alleviated to a certain extent in 
mPRDX6 group. Compared with those in ISO group, the activities of CAT, GPX, and 
SOD in H9C2 cells and the heart tissue and serum of rats were significantly 
increased (P < 0.05), while the contents of MDA were significantly decreased (P 
< 0.05). Western blot analysis showed that the expression level of Bcl-2 in H9C2 
cells was significantly decreased (P < 0.01), and that of Bax and PPAR-γ was 
significantly increased (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: mPRDX6 has a protective effect against the myocardial injury induced 
by ISO, and the mechanism may be related to its antioxidation. This study may 
provide a theoretical basis for the research and development of drugs used for 
the treatment of myocardial injury.

Copyright © 2022 Runhong Mu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/2576310
PMCID: PMC8976673
PMID: 35378825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.