1. Immunometabolism. 2022;4(2):e220007. doi: 10.20900/immunometab20220007. Epub 
2022 Mar 10.

Effects of PD-1 Signaling on Immunometabolic Reprogramming.

Boussiotis VA(1)(2), Patsoukis N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Programmed Death-1 (PD-1; CD279) is an inhibitory receptor induced in several 
activated immune cells and, after engagement with its ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2, 
serves as a key mediator of peripheral tolerance. However, PD-1 signaling also 
has detrimental effects on T cell function by posing breaks on antitumor and 
antiviral immunity. PD-1 blocking immunotherapy either alone or in combination 
with other therapeutic modalities has shown great promise in cancer treatment. 
However, it is unclear why only a small fraction of patients responds to this 
type of therapy. For this reason, efforts to better understand the mechanisms of 
PD-1 function have recently been intensified, with the goal to reveal new 
strategies to overcome current limitations. The signaling pathways that are 
inhibited by PD-1 impact key regulators of metabolism. Here, we provide an 
overview of the current knowledge about the effects of PD-1 on metabolic 
reprogramming of immune cells and their consequences on systemic metabolism.

DOI: 10.20900/immunometab20220007
PMCID: PMC8975241
PMID: 35371563

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST VAB has patents on the 
PD-1 pathway licensed by Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche, Merck, EMD-Serono, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Novartis, and Dako. The authors declare no 
other competing interests.