1. Chemistry (Basel). 2020 Jun;2(2):390-417. doi: 10.3390/chemistry2020025. Epub 
2020 May 6.

Reactive Sterol Electrophiles: Mechanisms of Formation and Reactions with 
Proteins and Amino Acid Nucleophiles.

Porter NA(1), Xu L(2), Pratt DA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology, 
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA.
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98195, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Ottawa, 10 
Marie Curie Pvt., Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Ontario, Canada.

Radical-mediated lipid oxidation and the formation of lipid hydroperoxides has 
been a focal point in the investigation of a number of human pathologies. Lipid 
peroxidation has long been linked to the inflammatory response and more 
recently, has been identified as the central tenet of the oxidative cell death 
mechanism known as ferroptosis. The formation of lipid electrophile-protein 
adducts has been associated with many of the disorders that involve 
perturbations of the cellular redox status, but the identities of adducted 
proteins and the effects of adduction on protein function are mostly unknown. 
Both cholesterol and 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC), which is the immediate 
biosynthetic precursor to cholesterol, are oxidizable by species such as ozone 
and oxygen-centered free radicals. Product mixtures from radical chain processes 
are particularly complex, with recent studies having expanded the sets of 
electrophilic compounds formed. Here, we describe recent developments related to 
the formation of sterol-derived electrophiles and the adduction of these 
electrophiles to proteins. A framework for understanding sterol peroxidation 
mechanisms, which has significantly advanced in recent years, as well as the 
methods for the study of sterol electrophile-protein adduction, are presented in 
this review.

DOI: 10.3390/chemistry2020025
PMCID: PMC8976181
PMID: 35372835

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.