1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Mar 17;13:807440. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.807440. 
eCollection 2022.

Strongylocentrotus nudus Eggs Polysaccharide Enhances Macrophage Phagocytosis 
Against E.coli Infection by TLR4/STAT3 Axis.

Tian X(1), Guo M(1), Zhang X(1), Guo L(1), Lan N(1), Cheng Y(1), Han Y(1), Wang 
M(1), Peng Z(2), Zhou C(1), Fan H(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Xiangnan University, Chenzhou, China.

Antibiotics resistance is one of the most significant public health threats 
globally. Strategies that strengthen host defenses to control pathogen infection 
has become a hot research field. Macrophages are part of early host defense 
mechanisms, and are activated via host pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), 
such as Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), which then facilitates phagocytosis and 
elimination of invading pathogens. However, few activators of PRRs have been 
approved for clinical use because of their toxic effects. This study aimed to 
investigate whether Strongylocentrotus nudus eggs polysaccharide (SEP), a 
non-toxic extract from seafood, contributes to host defense against bacterial 
infection. Results showed that SEP promoted bacterial clearance by enhancing 
phagocytosis by macrophages during E. coli infection in vitro, but was inhibited 
by TLR4 specific inhibitor TAK-242, STAT3 inhibitor Stattic or blockade of CD64. 
In addition, SEP protected mice from E. coli induced mortality, reduced 
pulmonary inflammation and inhibited dissemination of bacteria to organs, while 
TAK-242 retarded the protection of SEP. Overall, SEP strengthened innate host 
defense and improved the outcome in bacterial infection, suggesting that SEP 
could be used as a potential immunomodulator in host-directed therapies.

Copyright Â© 2022 Tian, Guo, Zhang, Guo, Lan, Cheng, Han, Wang, Peng, Zhou and 
Fan.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.807440
PMCID: PMC8968116
PMID: 35370674

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.