1. ACS Chem Biol. 2022 Apr 15;17(4):941-956. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.2c00089.
Epub  2022 Apr 6.

Panel of Engineered Ubiquitin Variants Targeting the Family of Human Ubiquitin 
Interacting Motifs.

Veggiani G(1), Yates BP(1), Martyn GD(1)(2), Manczyk N(3)(4), Singer AU(1), 
Kurinov I(5), Sicheri F(2)(3)(4), Sidhu SS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, Banting and Best 
Department of Medical Research, University of Toronto, 160 College Street, 
Toronto, Ontario M5S3E1, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 
1A8, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, 
Canada.
(4)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, Ontario 
M5G 1X5, Canada.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, NE-CAT, Cornell University, 
Argonne, Illinois 60439, United States.

Ubiquitin (Ub)-binding domains embedded in intracellular proteins act as readers 
of the complex Ub code and contribute to regulation of numerous eukaryotic 
processes. Ub-interacting motifs (UIMs) are short α-helical modular recognition 
elements whose role in controlling proteostasis and signal transduction has been 
poorly investigated. Moreover, impaired or aberrant activity of UIM-containing 
proteins has been implicated in numerous diseases, but targeting modular 
recognition elements in proteins remains a major challenge. To overcome this 
limitation, we developed Ub variants (UbVs) that bind to 42 UIMs in the human 
proteome with high affinity and specificity. Structural analysis of a UbV:UIM 
complex revealed the molecular determinants of enhanced affinity and 
specificity. Furthermore, we showed that a UbV targeting a UIM in the 
cancer-associated Ub-specific protease 28 potently inhibited catalytic activity. 
Our work demonstrates the versatility of UbVs to target short α-helical Ub 
receptors with high affinity and specificity. Moreover, the UbVs provide a 
toolkit to investigate the role of UIMs in regulating and transducing Ub signals 
and establish a general strategy for the systematic development of probes for 
Ub-binding domains.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.2c00089
PMCID: PMC9305627
PMID: 35385646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.