1. Nat Commun. 2022 Apr 6;13(1):1857. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29501-3.

Waffle Method: A general and flexible approach for improving throughput in 
FIB-milling.

Kelley K(1), Raczkowski AM(#)(1)(2), Klykov O(#)(1)(3), Jaroenlak P(#)(4), Bobe 
D(#)(1), Kopylov M(1), Eng ET(1), Bhabha G(4), Potter CS(1)(3), Carragher 
B(5)(6), Noble AJ(7).

Author information:
(1)National Center for In-situ Tomographic Ultramicroscopy, Simons Electron 
Microscopy Center, New York Structural Biology Center, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Cryo-Electron Microscopy Lab, Life Sciences Institute, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, USA.
(4)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine and Department of Cell Biology, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(5)National Center for In-situ Tomographic Ultramicroscopy, Simons Electron 
Microscopy Center, New York Structural Biology Center, New York, NY, USA. 
bcarr@nysbc.org.
(6)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine and Department of Cell Biology, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. bcarr@nysbc.org.
(7)National Center for In-situ Tomographic Ultramicroscopy, Simons Electron 
Microscopy Center, New York Structural Biology Center, New York, NY, USA. 
anoble@nysbc.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Cryo-FIB/SEM combined with cryo-ET has emerged from within the field of cryo-EM 
as the method for obtaining the highest resolution structural information of 
complex biological samples in-situ in native and non-native environments. 
However, challenges remain in conventional cryo-FIB/SEM workflows, including 
milling thick specimens with vitrification issues, specimens with preferred 
orientation, low-throughput when milling small and/or low concentration 
specimens, and specimens that distribute poorly across grid squares. Here we 
present a general approach called the 'Waffle Method' which leverages 
high-pressure freezing to address these challenges. We illustrate the mitigation 
of these challenges by applying the Waffle Method and cryo-ET to reveal the 
macrostructure of the polar tube in microsporidian spores in multiple 
complementary orientations, which was previously not possible due to preferred 
orientation. We demonstrate the broadness of the Waffle Method by applying it to 
three additional cellular samples and a single particle sample using a variety 
of cryo-FIB-milling hardware, with manual and automated approaches. We also 
present a unique and critical stress-relief gap designed specifically for 
waffled lamellae. We propose the Waffle Method as a way to achieve many 
advantages of cryo-liftout on the specimen grid while avoiding the long, 
challenging, and technically-demanding process required for cryo-liftout.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-29501-3
PMCID: PMC8987090
PMID: 35387991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.