1. ACS Synth Biol. 2022 Apr 15;11(4):1627-1638. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00033. 
Epub 2022 Apr 7.

Coupling a Live Cell Directed Evolution Assay with Coevolutionary Landscapes to 
Engineer an Improved Fluorescent Rhodopsin Chloride Sensor.

Chi H, Zhou Q, Tutol JN, Phelps SM, Lee J, Kapadia P, Morcos F, Dodani SC.

Our understanding of chloride in biology has been accelerated through the 
application of fluorescent protein-based sensors in living cells. These sensors 
can be generated and diversified to have a range of properties using 
laboratory-guided evolution. Recently, we established that the fluorescent 
proton-pumping rhodopsin wtGR from Gloeobacter violaceus can be converted into a 
fluorescent sensor for chloride. To unlock this non-natural function, a single 
point mutation at the Schiff counterion position (D121V) was introduced into 
wtGR fused to cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) resulting in GR1-CFP. Here, we have 
integrated coevolutionary analysis with directed evolution to understand how the 
rhodopsin sequence space can be explored and engineered to improve this starting 
point. We first show how evolutionary couplings are predictive of functional 
sites in the rhodopsin family and how a fitness metric based on a sequence can 
be used to quantify the known proton-pumping activities of GR-CFP variants. 
Then, we couple this ability to predict potential functional outcomes with a 
screening and selection assay in live Escherichia coli to reduce the mutational 
search space of five residues along the proton-pumping pathway in GR1-CFP. This 
iterative selection process results in GR2-CFP with four additional mutations: 
E132K, A84K, T125C, and V245I. Finally, bulk and single fluorescence 
measurements in live E.Â coli reveal that GR2-CFP is a reversible, ratiometric 
fluorescent sensor for extracellular chloride with an improved dynamic range. We 
anticipate that our framework will be applicable to other systems, providing a 
more efficient methodology to engineer fluorescent protein-based sensors with 
desired properties.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00033
PMCID: PMC9184236
PMID: 35389621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.