1. Bioact Mater. 2022 Feb 5;14:335-349. doi: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.01.045. 
eCollection 2022 Aug.

Graphene-based nanomaterials for cancer therapy and anti-infections.

Wang Y(1)(2), Li J(3), Li X(2), Shi J(1), Jiang Z(1), Zhang CY(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Physics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China.
(2)Institute of Biopharmaceutical and Health Engineering, Shenzhen International 
Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, 518055, China.
(3)Advanced Research Institute for Multidisciplinary Science, Beijing Institute 
of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China.

Graphene-based nanomaterials (GBNMs) has been thoroughly investigated and 
extensively used in many biomedical fields, especially cancer therapy and 
bacteria-induced infectious diseases treatment, which have attracted more and 
more attentions due to the improved therapeutic efficacy and reduced reverse 
effect. GBNMs, as classic two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials, have unique 
structure and excellent physicochemical properties, exhibiting tremendous 
potential in cancer therapy and bacteria-induced infectious diseases treatment. 
In this review, we first introduced the recent advances in development of GBNMs 
and GBNMs-based treatment strategies for cancer, including photothermal therapy 
(PTT), photodynamic therapy (PDT) and multiple combination therapies. Then, we 
surveyed the research progress of applications of GBNMs in anti-infection such 
as antimicrobial resistance, wound healing and removal of biofilm. The mechanism 
of GBNMs was also expounded. Finally, we concluded and discussed the advantages, 
challenges/limitations and perspective about the development of GBNMs and 
GBNMs-based therapies. Collectively, we think that GBNMs could be potential in 
clinic to promote the improvement of cancer therapy and infections treatment.

Â© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.01.045
PMCID: PMC8964986
PMID: 35386816

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.