1. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2022 Jun;74:102369. doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2022.102369.
Epub  2022 Apr 7.

Structural enzymology of cholesterol biosynthesis and storage.

Long T(1), Debler EW(2), Li X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. Electronic address: tao.long@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA, 19107, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA; Department of Biophysics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. Electronic address: 
xiaochun.li@utsouthwestern.edu.

Cholesterol biosynthesis occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Its lego-like 
construction from water-soluble small metabolites via intermediates of 
increasing complexity to water-insoluble cholesterol requires numerous distinct 
enzymes. Dysfunction of the involved enzymes can cause several human inborn 
defects and diseases. Here, we review recent structures of three key cholesterol 
biosynthetic enzymes: Squalene epoxidase (SQLE), NAD(P)-dependent steroid 
dehydrogenase-like (NSDHL), and 3β-hydroxysteroid Δ8-Δ7 isomerase termed EBP. 
Moreover, we discuss structures of acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) 
enzymes, which are responsible for forming cholesteryl esters from cholesterol 
to maintain cholesterol homeostasis in the ER. The structures of these enzymes 
reveal their catalytic mechanism and provide a molecular basis to develop drugs 
for treating diseases linked to their dysregulation.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.2022.102369
PMCID: PMC9189044
PMID: 35398802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement Nothing declared.