1. Hum Mutat. 2022 Jul;43(7):919-927. doi: 10.1002/humu.24376. Epub 2022 Apr 14.

Comparison of the frequency of loss-of-function LZTR1 variants between 
schwannomatosis patients and the general population.

Deng F(1), Evans DG(1)(2), Smith MJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Evolution, Infection and Genomics, Faculty of Biology, Medicine 
and Health, School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, 
UK.
(2)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester 
University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.

Schwannomatosis is a rare tumor predisposition syndrome that causes multiple 
schwannomas. Germline loss-of-function (LoF) LZTR1 variants were only recently 
identified as disease-causing, so relatively few variants have been identified 
in patients. In addition, many LoF variants exist in Genome Aggregation 
Database (gnomAD) in people who do not have clinical symptoms of 
schwannomatosis. These factors, and the incomplete penetrance seen in this 
condition, hinder definitive interpretation of the clinical significance of 
novel LoF variants identified in schwannomatosis patients. We collated published 
LOF LZTR1 variants identified in schwannomatosis patients and classified them 
according to current American College of Medical Genetics and 
Genomics/Association for Molecular Pathology/Association of Clinical Genomic 
Science guidelines. Subsequently, pathogenic/likely pathogenic 
schwannomatosis-associated LoF variants were compared with LoF LZTR1 variants 
reported in gnomAD data. Using current classification guidelines, 64/71 LoF 
LZTR1 variants reported in schwannomatosis patients in the literature were 
classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic, and their frequency in probands 
64/359 (17.8%) was significantly higher than the frequency of potential LoF 
variants identified in the general population (0.36%; p < 0.0001). The majority 
of published classifications of schwannomatosis-associated LoF variants are 
robust. However, the high frequency of LoF LZTR1 variants in the general 
population suggests that LZTR1 variants confer a reduced risk of schwannomas 
compared to germline NF2 and SMARCB1 pathogenic variants, making classification 
of novel variants challenging.

© 2022 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24376
PMCID: PMC9324957
PMID: 35391499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.