1. EXCLI J. 2022 Feb 22;21:487-518. doi: 10.17179/excli2021-4572. eCollection
2022.

Evaluating the adverse outcome of subtypes of heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction defined by machine learning: A systematic review focused on 
defining high risk phenogroups.

Rabkin SW(1).

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia.

The ability to distinguish clinically meaningful subtypes of heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) has recently been examined by machine 
learning techniques but studies appear to have produced discordant results. The 
objective of this study is to synthesize the types of HFpEF by examining their 
features and relating them to phenotypes with adverse prognosis. A systematic 
search was conducted using the search terms "Diastolic Heart Failure" OR "heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction" OR "heart failure with normal ejection 
fraction" OR "HFpEF" AND "machine learning" OR "artificial intelligence" OR 
'computational biology'. Ten studies were identified and they varied in their 
prevalence of ten clinical variables: age, sex, body mass index (BMI) or 
obesity, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, atrial 
fibrillation, chronic kidney disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or 
symptom severity (NYHA class or BNP). The clinical findings associated with the 
different phenotypes in > 85 % of studies were age, hypertension, atrial 
fibrillation, chronic kidney disease and worse symptoms severity; an adverse 
outcome was in 65 % to 85 % of studies identified diabetes mellitus and female 
sex and in less than 65 % of studies was body mass index or obesity, and 
coronary artery disease. COPD was a relevant factor in only 33 % of studies. 
Adverse clinical outcome - death or admission to hospital (for heart failure) 
defined phenogroups with the worst outcome. Combining the 4 studies that 
calculated the MAGGIC score showed a significant (p<0.05) linear relationship 
between MAGGIC score and outcome, using the one-year event rate. A new score 
based on strength of the evidence of the HFpEF studies analyzed here, using 9 
variables (eliminating COPD), showed a significant (p<0.009) linear relationship 
with one-year event rate. Three studies examined biomarkers in detail and the 
ones most prominently related to outcome or consistently found in the studies 
were GDF15, FABP4, FGF23, sST2, renin and TNF. The dominant factors that 
identified phenotypes of HFpEF with adverse outcome were hypertension, atrial 
fibrillation, chronic kidney disease and worse symptoms severity. A new 
simplified score, based on clinical factors, was proposed to assess prognosis in 
HFpEF. Several biomarkers were consistently elevated in phenogroups with adverse 
outcomes and may indicate the underlying mechanism or pathophysiology specific 
for phenotypes with an adverse prognosis.

Copyright Â© 2022 Rabkin.

DOI: 10.17179/excli2021-4572
PMCID: PMC8983850
PMID: 35391918