1. Cell Death Dis. 2022 Apr 9;13(4):326. doi: 10.1038/s41419-022-04781-1.

USP26 promotes anaplastic thyroid cancer progression by stabilizing TAZ.

Tang J(1), Luo Y(2), Xiao L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Liver Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Clinical Research Center for 
Breast Cancer Control and Prevention in Hunan Province, Central South 
University, Changsha, China. tjn1995@whu.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Urology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Liver Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Clinical Research Center for 
Breast Cancer Control and Prevention in Hunan Province, Central South 
University, Changsha, China. xiaoliang_rick@163.com.

Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is one of the most lethal and aggressive human 
malignancies, with no effective treatment currently available. The Hippo tumor 
suppressor pathway is highly conserved in mammals and plays an important role in 
carcinogenesis. TAZ is one of major key effectors of the Hippo pathway. However, 
the mechanism supporting abnormal TAZ expression in ATC remains to be 
characterized. In the present study, we identified USP26, a DUB enzyme in the 
ubiquitin-specific proteases family, as a bona fide deubiquitylase of TAZ in 
ATC. USP26 was shown to interact with, deubiquitylate, and stabilize TAZ in a 
deubiquitylation activity-dependent manner. USP26 depletion significantly 
decreased ATC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. The effects induced 
by USP26 depletion could be rescued by further TAZ overexpression. Depletion of 
USP26 decreased the TAZ protein level and the expression of TAZ/TEAD target 
genes in ATC, including CTGF, ANKRD1, and CYR61. In general, our findings 
establish a previously undocumented catalytic role for USP26 as a 
deubiquitinating enzyme of TAZ and provides a possible target for the therapy of 
ATC.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-022-04781-1
PMCID: PMC8994751
PMID: 35397626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.