1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Mar 22;23(7):3431. doi: 10.3390/ijms23073431.

40 Years after the Registration of Acyclovir: Do We Need New Anti-Herpetic 
Drugs?

Majewska A(1), Mlynarczyk-Bonikowska B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University of Warsaw, 
Chałubińskiego 5, 02-004 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Immunodermatology and Venereology, Medical 
University of Warsaw, Koszykowa 82a, 02-008 Warsaw, Poland.

Herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 HSV1 and 2, namely varicella-zoster VZV and 
cytomegalovirus CMV, are among the most common pathogens worldwide. They remain 
in the host body for life. The course of infection with these viruses is often 
asymptomatic or mild and self-limiting, but in immunocompromised patients, such 
as solid organ or bone marrow transplant recipients, the course can be very 
severe or even life-threatening. Unfortunately, in the latter group, the highest 
percentage of infections with strains resistant to routinely used drugs is 
observed. On the other hand, frequent recurrences of genital herpes can be a 
problem even in people with normal immunity. Genital herpes also increases the 
risk of acquiring sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV infection and, if 
present in pregnant women, poses a risk to the fetus and newborn. Even more 
frequently than herpes simplex, congenital infections can be caused by 
cytomegalovirus. We present the most important anti-herpesviral agents, the 
mechanisms of resistance to these drugs, and the associated mutations in the 
viral genome. Special emphasis was placed on newly introduced drugs such as 
maribavir and brincidofovir. We also briefly discuss the most promising 
substances in preclinical testing as well as immunotherapy options and vaccines 
currently in use and under investigation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23073431
PMCID: PMC8998721
PMID: 35408788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.