1. J Clin Med. 2022 Mar 26;11(7):1846. doi: 10.3390/jcm11071846.

Protocol for Characterization of Addiction and Dual Disorders: Effectiveness of 
Coadjuvant Chronotherapy in Patients with Partial Response.

Adan A(1)(2), Navarro JF(3), On Behalf Of Addischrono Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Psychology and Psychobiology, School of Psychology, 
University of Barcelona, Passeig de la Vall d'Hebrón 171, 08035 Barcelona, 
Spain.
(2)Institute of Neurosciences, University of Barcelona, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Psychobiology, School of Psychology, University of Málaga, 
Campus de Teatinos s/n, 29071 Málaga, Spain.

This protocol aims to characterize patients with dual disorders (DD; comorbid 
major depression and schizophrenia) compared with patients with only a diagnosis 
of substance use disorder (SUD) and those with only a diagnosis of severe mental 
illness (SMI; major depression and schizophrenia), evaluating clinical and 
personality characteristics, circadian rhythmic functioning, genetic 
polymorphism and neuropsychological performance in order to obtain a clinical 
endophenotype of differential vulnerability for these diagnostic entities. 
Patients will be divided into three groups: DD (45 men with comorbid 
schizophrenia, 45 men and 30 women with major depression), SUD (n = 90, with a 
minimum of 30 women) and SMI males (45 with schizophrenia, 45 with major 
depression). All patients will be under treatment, with at least three months of 
SUD abstinence and/or with SMI in remission or with stabilized symptoms. 
Outpatients of both sexes with insufficient restoration of circadian rhythmicity 
with SUD (n = 30) and dual depression (n = 30) will be asked to participate in a 
second two-month study, being alternately assigned to the condition of the 
chronobiological adjuvant approach to the treatment of regular hour habits and 
exposure to light or to the usual treatment (control). The effect of the 
intervention and patient compliance will be monitored with a Kronowise KW6® 
ambulatory device during the first two weeks of treatment and again at weeks 4 
and 8 weeks. After completing the evaluation, follow-up of the clinical 
evolution will be carried out at 3, 6 and 12 months. This project will allow us 
to analyze the functional impact of DD comorbidity and to develop the first 
study of chronobiological therapy in the treatment of SUD and dual depression, 
with results transferable to the clinical setting with cost-effective 
recommendations for a personalized approach.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11071846
PMCID: PMC8999756
PMID: 35407454

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.