1. Theranostics. 2022 Mar 6;12(6):2687-2706. doi: 10.7150/thno.67954. eCollection
 2022.

Disease-associated microglial activation prevents photoreceptor degeneration by 
suppressing the accumulation of cell debris and neutrophils in degenerating rat 
retinas.

He J(1)(2)(3), Fu Y(1)(2)(4), Ge L(1)(2), Dai J(1)(2), Fang Y(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), 
Gu X(1)(2), Tao Z(1)(2), Zou T(1)(2), Li M(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Xu H(1)(2), Yin 
ZQ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Southwest Hospital/Southwest Eye Hospital, Third Military Medical University 
(Amy Medical University), Chongqing, 400038, P.R. China.
(2)Key Lab of Visual Damage and Regeneration & Restoration of Chongqing, 
Chongqing, 400038, P.R. China.
(3)No. 927 Hospital, Joint Logistics Support Force of Chinese PLA, Puer 665000, 
Yunnan, China.
(4)The General Hospital of Western Theater Command, Chengdu 610083, China.

Retinitis pigmentosa initially presents as night blindness owing to defects in 
rods, and the secondary degeneration of cones ultimately leads to blindness. 
Previous studies have identified active roles of microglia in the pathogenesis 
of photoreceptor degeneration in RP. However, the contribution of microglia to 
photoreceptor degeneration remains controversial, partly due to limited 
knowledge of microglial phenotypes during RP. Rationale: In this study, we 
investigated the pathways of microglial activation and its contribution to 
photoreceptor degeneration in RP. Methods: A classic RP model, Royal College of 
Surgeons rat, was used to explore the process of microglial activation during 
the development of RP. An inhibitor of colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor 
(PLX3397) was fed to RCS rats for sustained ablation of microglia. 
Immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry, RT-qPCR, electroretinography and RNA-Seq 
were used to investigate the mechanisms by which activated microglia influenced 
photoreceptor degeneration. Results: Microglia were gradually activated to 
disease-associated microglia in the photoreceptor layers of RCS rats. Sustained 
treatment with PLX3397 ablated most of the disease-associated microglia and 
aggravated photoreceptor degeneration, including the secondary degeneration of 
cones, by downregulating the expression of genes associated with photoreceptor 
function and components and exacerbating the impairment of photoreceptor cell 
function. Disease-associated microglial activation promoted microglia to engulf 
apoptotic photoreceptor cell debris and suppressed the increase of infiltrated 
neutrophils by increasing engulfment and inhibiting CXCL1 secretion by Müller 
cells, which provided a healthier microenvironment for photoreceptor survival. 
Conclusions: Our data highlight a key role of disease-associated microglia 
activation in the suppression of rod and cone degeneration, which reduces 
secondary damage caused by the accumulation of dead cells and infiltrated 
neutrophils in the degenerating retina.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.67954
PMCID: PMC8965480
PMID: 35401812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.