1. Biomed Res Int. 2022 Mar 29;2022:9304552. doi: 10.1155/2022/9304552.
eCollection  2022.

Gypenoside-Induced Apoptosis via the PI3K/AKT/mTOR Signaling Pathway in Bladder 
Cancer.

Li X(1), Liu H(2), Lv C(3), Du J(4)(5)(6), Lian F(3), Zhang S(3), Wang Z(1), 
Zeng Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Affiliated Hospital of Chengde Medical University, 
Chengde, Hebei 067000, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengde 
Medical University, Chengde, Hebei 067000, China.
(3)Department of Urology the Cancer Hospital of China Medical University & 
Liaoning Cancer Hospital and Institute, Shenyang, Liaoning 110042, China.
(4)Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National Clinical 
Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin 300060, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin 300060, China.
(6)Tianjin's Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin 300060, China.

Gynostemma pentaphyllum (Thunb.) Makino (G. pentaphyllum) is a natural herbal 
drug that has been widely used to treat many diseases. The antitumor effects of 
G. pentaphyllum were first described in the illustrated catalog of plants. 
Gypenosides are the major active components of G. pentaphyllum, and they have 
been widely reported to possess antitumor effects in prostate cancer, gastric 
cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, colon cancer, lung cancer, and breast cancer. 
However, research on the use of gypenoside in the treatment of bladder cancer 
has not been conducted. In this study, we explored the potential molecular 
mechanisms of gypenosides in the treatment of bladder cancer using network 
pharmacology and experimental validation. First, we used a network 
pharmacology-based method to identify both the effective components of 
gypenosides and the molecular mechanism underlying their antibladder cancer 
effects. The results were further confirmed by molecular docking, CCK8 and 
colony formation assays, and cell cycle and cell apoptosis analyses. 
Additionally, a mouse xenograft model of bladder cancer was used to investigate 
the antitumor effect of gypenosides in vivo. We identified 10 bioactive 
ingredients and 163 gene targets of gypenosides. Network exploration suggested 
that VEGFA, STAT3, and PI3KCA may be candidate agents for the antibladder cancer 
effect of gypenosides. In addition, analysis of the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes 
and Genomes pathway revealed that the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase 
(PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway may play a 
crucial role in the mechanism of action of gypenosides against bladder cancer. 
Molecular docking revealed that gypenosides combine well with PI3K, AKT, and 
mTOR. As expected, gypenosides displayed apoptosis-inducing properties in 
bladder cancer cells by inactivating the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway in 
vitro. Furthermore, gypenosides significantly (P < 0.05) inhibited the growth of 
bladder cancer cells in vivo. Mechanistically, gypenosides induced the apoptosis 
of bladder cancer cells via inactivation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway.

Copyright Â© 2022 Xiuming Li et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/9304552
PMCID: PMC8984741
PMID: 35402614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.