1. Polymers (Basel). 2022 Apr 1;14(7):1448. doi: 10.3390/polym14071448.

Mathematical Description of the RAFT Copolymerization of Styrene and Glycidyl 
Methacrylate Using the Terminal Model.

Tenorio-López JA(1), Benvenuta-Tapia JJ(1), García-Navarro N(1), Vivaldo-Lima 
E(2), Champagne P(3), Saldívar-Guerra E(4).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Veracruzana (UV), Coatzacoalcos 
96535, Mexico.
(2)Facultad de Química, Departamento de Ingeniería Química, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México 04510, Mexico.
(3)Faculty of Engineering and Applied Science, Queen's University, Kingston, ON 
K7L3N6, Canada.
(4)Polymer Synthesis Department, Centro de Investigación en Química Aplicada 
(CIQA), Saltillo 25294, Mexico.

A mathematical model for the kinetics, composition and molar mass development of 
the bulk reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) 
copolymerization of glycidyl methacrylate (GMA) and styrene (St), at several GMA 
molar feed fractions at 103 °C, in the presence of 2-cyano isopropyl dodecyl 
trithiocarbonate as the RAFT agent and 1,1'-azobis(cyclohexane carbonitrile), as 
the initiator, is presented. The copolymerization proceeded in a controlled 
manner and dispersities of the copolymers remained narrow even at high 
conversions. Experimental data and calculated profiles of conversion versus 
time, composition versus conversion and molar mass development for the RAFT 
copolymerization of St and GMA agreed well for all conditions tested, including 
high-conversion regions. The kinetic rate constants associated with the RAFT- 
related reactions and diffusion-controlled parameters were properly estimated 
using a weighted nonlinear multivariable regression procedure. The mathematical 
model developed in this study may be used as an aid in the design and upscaling 
of industrial RAFT polymerization processes.

DOI: 10.3390/polym14071448
PMCID: PMC9003474
PMID: 35406321

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.