1. Vet World. 2022 Feb;15(2):488-495. doi: 10.14202/vetworld.2022.488-495. Epub 
2022 Feb 27.

Development of multidrug-resistant Escherichia coli in some Egyptian veterinary 
farms.

Samy AA(1), Mansour AS(1), Khalaf DD(1), Khairy EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, National Research Centre, Dokki, 
Cairo, Egypt.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Food of animal origin is considered a major source of 
foodborne diseases. In this context, multidrug-resistant (MDR) Escherichia coli 
pose a serious hazard to public health due to the consumption of food 
contaminated with antibiotics that are used for the treatment of various 
bacterial infections in farm animals. Therefore, this study aimed to determine 
the effect of the excessive use of antibiotics on the development of MDR E. coli 
strains in Egyptian poultry, dairy, and meat farms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 1225 samples were randomly collected from 
poultry, dairy, and meat products intended for human consumption in different 
governorates. E. coli were isolated from the collected samples and subjected to 
biochemical identification and antibiotic sensitivity tests with antibiotics 
commonly used in human and veterinary medicine. Then, amoxicillin (AML)- and 
oxytetracycline (OT)-resistant E. coli isolates were subjected to a polymerase 
chain reaction test to detect the bla TEM and tetA genes, respectively.
RESULTS: E. coli were isolated from 132 out of 350, 148 out of 350, 177 out of 
350, and 35 out of 175 poultry, milk, meat, and human samples, respectively. 
Most of the isolates expressed multidrug resistance, and resistance genes (bla 
TEM and tetA) were detected in all the tested AML- and OT-resistant E. coli 
isolates.
CONCLUSION: Foods of animal origin may represent a source of MDR E. coli, which 
can be a major threat to public health.

Copyright: Â© Samy, et al.

DOI: 10.14202/vetworld.2022.488-495
PMCID: PMC8980374
PMID: 35400950

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.