1. J Inflamm Res. 2022 Apr 5;15:2213-2228. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S352717. eCollection 
2022.

HSP70 Ameliorates Septic Acute Kidney Injury via Binding with TRAF6 to Inhibit 
of Inflammation-Mediated Apoptosis.

Zhang Y(#)(1), Song C(#)(1), Ni W(1)(2), Pei Q(1), Wang C(1), Ying Y(3), Yao 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Acute kidney injury (AKI) is one of the most severe complications of 
sepsis, the pathological features of which are excessive inflammation and 
programmed cell death of resident renal cells. Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is 
a critical stress protein for repressing inflammation, however, its role in AKI 
is not fully understood. The current study aimed to determine the protective 
effect of HSP70 on septic AKI and its underlying mechanisms.
METHODS: Hsp70.1 knockout and wildtype mice were used for creating sepsis model 
by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP). Renal function, histological changes, 
pro-inflammatory cytokines, and apoptosis were analyzed with H&E, PAS, ELISA, 
western-blot, and immunofluorescence. Moreover, the effects of HSP70 on renal 
proximal tubular epithelial (HK-2) cells with LPS were assessed by measuring the 
levels of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) signaling and downstream cytokines, 
viability, and apoptosis using western-blot, qRT-PCR, flow-cytometry, and 
immunofluorescence. Immunoprecipitate and immunoblotting were used for 
determining the interaction of HSP70 with tumor necrosis factor 
receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6). Exogenous HSP70 was applied to further 
identify its biological significance at the cellular and animal level.
RESULTS: Hsp70.1 deficiency significantly aggravated renal dysfunction with 
increasing serum levels of BUN, SCr, kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1), and 
neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), and shortened survival in CLP 
mice. Furthermore, hsp70.1 knockout caused renal-tissue structural damage, 
especially proximal tubular, and inflammatory cascade and increased apoptotic 
cells, along with elevated Bax, caspase 3 and cleaved caspase 3, as well as 
decreased Bcl2 in vivo and vitro. Significantly, HSP70 directly interacted with 
TRAF6 in HK-2 cells, leading to suppression of inflammatory response and 
apoptosis. Moreover, exogenous HSP70 alleviated renal damage, decreased 
apoptosis and elevated survival rate in septic AKI in vivo and vitro.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrated that HSP70 played a critical role in 
sepsis-induced AKI via interaction with TRAF6 and inhibiting inflammation and 
apoptosis.

© 2022 Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S352717
PMCID: PMC8994667
PMID: 35411167

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.