1. Indian J Clin Biochem. 2023 Jan;38(1):83-93. doi: 10.1007/s12291-022-01037-9. 
Epub 2022 Apr 8.

Glutamine-Driven Metabolic Adaptation to COVID-19 Infection.

Aydın H(1), Tekin YK(2), Korkmaz İ(2), Tekin G(3), Yurtbay S(4), Keleş S(5), 
Hekim N(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Sivas Cumhuriyet University Medicine Faculty, 
Sivas, Turkey.
(2)Emergency Department, Sivas Cumhuriyet University Medicine Faculty, Sivas, 
Turkey.
(3)Cardiology Department, Sivas Cumhuriyet University Medicine Faculty, Sivas, 
Turkey.
(4)Medicine Faculty Emergency Department, Sivas Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, 
Turkey.
(5)Ahenk Medical Diagnostic and Research Laboratory, Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Biruni University, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: COVID-19 is known to be transmitted by direct contact, droplets or 
feces/orally. There are many factors which determines the clinical progression 
of the disease. Aminoacid disturbance in viral disease is shown in many studies. 
İn this study we aimed to evaluate the change of aminoacid metabolism especially 
the aspartate, glutamine and glycine levels which have been associated with an 
immune defence effect in viral disease.
METHODS: Blood samples from 35 volunteer patients with COVID-19, concretized 
diagnosis was made by oropharyngeal from nazofaringeal swab specimens and 
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, and 35 control group were 
analyzed. The amino acid levels were measured with liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry technology. Two groups were compared by Kolmogorov-Smirnov 
analysis, Kruskal-Wallis and the Mann-Whitney U. The square test was used to 
evaluate the tests obtained by counting, and the error level was taken as 0.05.
RESULTS: The average age of the patient and control group were 48.5 ± 14.9 and 
48.8 ± 14.6 years respectively. The decrease in aspartate (p = 5.5 × 10-9) and 
glutamine levels (p = 9.0 × 10-17) were significiantly in COVID group, whereas 
Glycine (p = 0.243) increase was not significiant.
CONCLUSIONS: Metabolic pathways, are affected in rapidly dividing cells in viral 
diseases which are important for immun defence. We determined that aspartate, 
glutamine and glycine levels in Covid 19 patients were affected by the warburg 
effect, malate aspartate shuttle, glutaminolysis and pentose phosphate pathway. 
Enteral or parenteral administration of these plasma amino acid levels will 
correct the duration and pathophysiology of the patients' stay in hospital and 
intensive care.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Association of Clinical Biochemists 
of India 2022.

DOI: 10.1007/s12291-022-01037-9
PMCID: PMC8992789
PMID: 35431470

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
there are no potential conflicts of interest regarding the research, authorship 
and publication of this article.