1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Apr 1;13:785441. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.785441. 
eCollection 2022.

The Oncidium Ethylene Synthesis Gene Oncidium 1-Aminocyclopropane-1 Carboxylic 
Acid Synthase 12 and Ethylene Receptor Gene Oncidium ETR1 Affect GA-DELLA and 
Jasmonic Acid Signaling in Regulating Flowering Time, Anther Dehiscence, and 
Flower Senescence in Arabidopsis.

Huang TH(1), Hsu WH(1), Mao WT(1), Yang CH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(2)Advanced Plant Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.

In plants, the key enzyme in ethylene biosynthesis is 1-aminocyclopropane-1 
carboxylic acid (ACC) synthase (ACS), which catalyzes S-adenosyl-L-methionine 
(SAM) to ACC, the precursor of ethylene. Ethylene binds to its receptors, such 
as ethylene response 1 (ETR1), to switch on ethylene signal transduction. To 
understand the function of ACS and ETR1 in orchids, Oncidium ACC synthase 12 
(OnACS12) and Oncidium ETR1 (OnETR1) from Oncidium Gower Ramsey were 
functionally analyzed in Arabidopsis. 35S::OnACS12 caused late flowering and 
anther indehiscence phenotypes due to its effect on GA-DELLA signaling pathways. 
35S::OnACS12 repressed GA biosynthesis genes (CPS, KS, and GA3ox1), which caused 
the upregulation of DELLA [GA-INSENSITIVE (GAI), RGA-LIKE1 (RGL1), and RGL2] 
expression. The increase in DELLAs not only suppressed LEAFY (LFY) expression 
and caused late flowering but also repressed the jasmonic acid (JA) biosynthesis 
gene DAD1 and caused anther indehiscence by downregulating the 
endothecium-thickening-related genes MYB26, NST1, and NST2. The ectopic 
expression of an OnETR1 dominant-negative mutation (OnETR1-C65Y) caused both 
ethylene and JA insensitivity in Arabidopsis. 35S::OnETR1-C65Y delayed 
flower/leaf senescence by suppressing downstream genes in ethylene signaling, 
including EDF1-4 and ERF1, and in JA signaling, including MYC2 and WRKY33. JA 
signaling repression also resulted in indehiscent anthers via the downregulation 
of MYB26, NST1, NST2, and MYB85. These results not only provide new insight into 
the functions of ACS and ETR1 orthologs but also uncover their functional 
interactions with other hormone signaling pathways, such as GA-DELLA and JA, in 
plants.

Copyright Â© 2022 Huang, Hsu, Mao and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.785441
PMCID: PMC9011138
PMID: 35432433

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.