1. Front Chem. 2022 Apr 5;10:859095. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2022.859095. eCollection 
2022.

Coherent Control of Molecular Dissociation by Selective Excitation of Nuclear 
Wave Packets.

López Peña HA(1), Shusterman JM(1), Ampadu Boateng D(1), Lao KU(1), Tibbetts 
KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, 
United States.

We report on pump-probe control schemes to manipulate fragmentation product 
yields in p-nitrotoluene (PNT) cation. Strong field ionization of PNT prepares 
the parent cation in the ground electronic state, with coherent vibrational 
excitation along two normal modes: the C-C-N-O torsional mode at 80 cm-1 and the 
in-plane ring-stretching mode at 650 cm-1. Both vibrational wave packets are 
observed as oscillations in parent and fragment ion yields in the mass spectrum 
upon optical excitation. Excitation with 650 nm selectively fragments the PNT 
cation into C7H7+ , whereas excitation with 400 nm selectively produces C5H5+ 
and C3H3+ . In both cases the ion yield oscillations result from torsional wave 
packet excitation, but 650 and 400 nm excitation produce oscillations with 
opposite phases. Ab initio calculations of the ground and excited electronic 
potential energy surfaces of PNT cation along the C-C-N-O dihedral angle reveal 
that 400 nm excitation accesses an allowed transition from D0 to D6 at 0° 
dihedral angle, whereas 650 nm excitation accesses a strongly allowed transition 
from D0 to D4 at a dihedral angle of 90°. This ability to access different 
electronic excited states at different locations along the potential energy 
surface accounts for the selective fragmentation observed with different probe 
wavelengths. The ring-stretching mode, only observed using 800 nm excitation, is 
attributed to a D0 to D2 transition at a geometry with 90° dihedral angle and 
elongated C-N bond length. Collectively, these results demonstrate that strong 
field ionization induces multimode coherent excitation and that the vibrational 
wave packets can be excited with specific photon energies at different points on 
their potential energy surfaces to induce selective fragmentation.

Copyright © 2022 López Peña, Shusterman, Ampadu Boateng, Lao and Tibbetts.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2022.859095
PMCID: PMC9016217
PMID: 35449589

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.