1. J Fungi (Basel). 2022 Mar 30;8(4):358. doi: 10.3390/jof8040358.

Novel Evolutionary Engineering Approach to Alter Substrate Specificity of 
Disaccharide Transporter Mal11 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

de Valk SC(1), Mans R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, Van der Maasweg 
9, 2629 HZ Delft, The Netherlands.

A major challenge in the research of transport proteins is to understand how 
single amino acid residues contribute to their structure and biological 
function. Amino acid substitutions that result in a selective advantage in 
adaptive laboratory evolution experiments can provide valuable hints at their 
role in transport proteins. In this study, we applied an evolutionary 
engineering strategy to alter the substrate specificity of the proton-coupled 
disaccharide transporter Mal11 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which has affinity 
for sucrose, maltose and glucose. The introduction of MAL11 in a strain devoid 
of all other sugar transporters and disaccharide hydrolases restored growth on 
glucose but rendered the strain highly sensitive to the presence of sucrose or 
maltose. Evolution in glucose-limited continuous cultures with pulse-wise 
addition of a concentrated sucrose solution at increasing frequency resulted in 
the enrichment of spontaneous mutant cells that were less sensitive to the 
presence of sucrose and maltose. Sequence analysis showed that in each of the 
two independent experiments, three mutations occurred in MAL11, which were found 
responsible for the disaccharide-insensitive phenotype via reverse engineering. 
Our work demonstrates how laboratory evolution with proton-motive force-driven 
uptake of a non-metabolizable substrate can be a powerful tool to provide novel 
insights into the role of specific amino acid residues in the transport function 
of Mal11.

DOI: 10.3390/jof8040358
PMCID: PMC9024999
PMID: 35448589

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.