1. Regen Biomater. 2022 Feb 16;9(1):rbac010. doi: 10.1093/rb/rbac010. eCollection
 2022.

Effects of pore interconnectivity on bone regeneration in carbonate apatite 
blocks.

Elsheikh M(1), Kishida R(1), Hayashi K(1), Tsuchiya A(1), Shimabukuro M(1), 
Ishikawa K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomaterials, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 
3-1-1 Maidashi Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Porous architecture in bone substitutes, notably the interconnectivity of pores, 
is a critical factor for bone ingrowth. However, controlling the pore 
interconnectivity while maintaining the microarchitecture has not yet been 
achieved using conventional methods, such as sintering. Herein, we fabricated a 
porous block using the crystal growth of calcium sulfate dihydrate, and 
controlled the pore interconnectivity by limiting the region of crystal growth. 
The calcium sulfate dihydrate blocks were transformed to bone apatite, carbonate 
apatite (CO3Ap) through dissolution-precipitation reactions. Thus, CO3Ap blocks 
with 15% and 30% interconnected pore volumes were obtained while maintaining the 
microarchitecture: they were designated as CO3Ap-15 and CO3Ap-30, respectively. 
At 4 weeks after implantation in a rabbit femur defect, new bone formed 
throughout CO3Ap-30, whereas little bone was formed in the center region of 
CO3Ap-15. At 12 weeks after implantation, a large portion of CO3Ap-30 was 
replaced with new bone and the boundary with the host bone became blurred. In 
contrast, CO3Ap-15 remained in the defect and the boundary with the host bone 
was still clear. Thus, the interconnected pores promote bone ingrowth, followed 
by replacement of the material with new bone. These findings provide a useful 
guide for designing bone substitutes for rapid bone regeneration.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/rb/rbac010
PMCID: PMC9017375
PMID: 35449826