1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Dis Markers. 2022 Apr 9;2022:8290779. doi: 10.1155/2022/8290779. eCollection 
2022.

PTPN11 Gene Mutations and Its Association with the Risk of Congenital Heart 
Disease.

Xu ZQ(1), Chen WC(1), Li YJ(1), Suo MJ(1), Tian GX(1), Sheng W(1)(2), Huang 
GY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Birth Defects, Shanghai, China.

Retraction in
    Dis Markers. 2023 Jul 19;2023:9897082. doi: 10.1155/2023/9897082.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common congenital birth defect, with 
a prevalence of 8.98‰ of all live births in China. PTPN11 has been known to be 
closely involved in heart developments. In this research, we carried out 
whole-exome sequencing in nine CHD families and identified eight rare 
deleterious missense variants of PTPN11 gene in nine probands by stringently 
filtering criteria. Sanger sequencing of these probands and their unaffected 
familiar members revealed that six damaging variants were de novo in seven CHD 
families. Then, targeted sequencing was used to assess the PTPN11 exon variants 
in 672 sporadic CHD cases and 399 unrelated controls and identified 7 
deleterious missense variants in 8 patients. Fisher's exact test reveals a 
significant association of PTPN11 variations with CHD (P = 0.0289). We observed 
the distribution of different subtypes in CHD patients with PTPN11 variants and 
found atrial septal defect (ASD) is a prominent phenotype (58.8%, 10/17). In 
vitro functional assays revealed that the predicted PTPN11 variants disturb 
RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling activity by influencing the 
phosphorylation level of pathway proteins and increasing the proliferation and 
migration abilities of cardiomyocytes to different extents. Our findings 
demonstrated that PTPN11 variants were associated with increased risk of CHD 
development and may be served as an important susceptible genetic event for CHD, 
especially the ASD subphenotype.

Copyright © 2022 Zi-qing Xu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/8290779
PMCID: PMC9013483
PMID: 35440950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.