1. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2022 Mar 1;14(1):e2022017. doi: 
10.4084/mjhid.2022.017. eCollection 2022.

Efficacy and Safety of Cyclophosphamide Low-Dose Pre-Phase Chemotherapy in 
Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma with Gastrointestinal Involvement.

Guarnera L(1), Meconi F(1), Secchi R(1), Pascale MR(1), Esposito F(1), Zizzari 
A(1), Rapisarda VM(1), Rizzo M(1), Pupo L(1), Cantonetti M(1).

Author information:
(1)Hematology, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University, 
Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Gastric Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common 
extranodal site of lymphoma's involvement (30%-40% of all extranodal lymphomas 
and 55%-65% of all gastrointestinal lymphomas). However, gastric localizations 
are also sometimes found in systemic DLBCL. Gastric complications such as 
bleeding, perforation, and stenosis under chemotherapy are well documented.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 15 patients with newly diagnosed DLBCL with 
gastrointestinal involvement. Endoscopies were performed in these patients 
before and after treatment. Treatment consisted of cyclophosphamide low-dose 
pre-phase chemotherapy before conventional-dose chemotherapy.
RESULTS: Endoscopy at staging detected ulcers in 12 patients (80%). After 
low-dose pre-phase chemotherapy, GI ulcers healed in 91.6% of cases (1 ulcer 
detected). After the whole treatment (Low-dose pre-phase + chemotherapy) 9 
patients (60%) achieved complete response, 4 patients (26.6%) partial response, 
2 (13,3%) patients presented disease progression. The most frequent adverse 
event was neutropenia (73.3%); the most frequent non-hematological adverse event 
was transaminases elevation (20%).
CONCLUSION: Cyclophosphamide low-dose pre-phase chemotherapy resulted in a safe 
and effective way to prevent adverse events in systemic DLBCL with 
gastrointestinal involvement.

DOI: 10.4084/mjhid.2022.017
PMCID: PMC8992639
PMID: 35444769

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
conflict of Interest. Compliance with Ethical Standards. Disclosure of potential 
conflicts of interest: The authors did not receive support from any organization 
for the submitted work. The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial 
interests to disclose. Ethics Approval: All procedures performed in studies 
involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of 
the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki 
declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Informed 
consent: Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included 
in the study.