1. Vet Sci. 2022 Mar 22;9(4):150. doi: 10.3390/vetsci9040150.

Detection of African Swine Fever at an Abattoir in South Korea, 2020.

Cho KH(1), Kim HJ(2), Jang MK(1), Ryu JH(1), Yoo D(3), Kang HE(1), Park JY(1).

Author information:
(1)Foreign Animal Disease Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, 177 
Hyeoksin 8-ro, Gimcheon 39660, Korea.
(2)National Institute of Health, Osong Health Technology Administration Complex, 
187, Osongsaengmyeong 2-ro, Osong-eup, Heungduk-gu, Cheongju 28159, Korea.
(3)Department of Public Health, Graduate School, Korea University, 75 
Goryeodae-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02841, Korea.

In October 2020, a suspect case of African swine fever (ASF) was detected at an 
abattoir located in the north-central border region of South Korea. The farm of 
origin was traced and confirmed positive for ASF. This recurrence was following 
a period of absence of outbreaks in domestic pigs after the first incursion in 
2019, during which a total of 14 domestic pig farms were confirmed between 
September and October 2019. In 2020, a total of two farms were confirmed, and 
the molecular characterization of key regions of the genome showed that the two 
isolates from 2020 were identical with the previous isolates from South Korea in 
2019. The continued spread and circulation of ASF in the wild boar population 
represents an increased risk of spill-over outbreaks in domestic pigs, and, 
therefore, additional control measures should be implemented for farms in these 
regions, including a heightened level of surveillance. This was the case for the 
index farm, which was required to send pigs only to the designated abattoir at 
which the suspect case was quickly detected. The improvement of biosecurity in 
pig farms, particularly at the wild boar-domestic pig interface, will be key to 
the successful control of ASF in the region.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci9040150
PMCID: PMC9028545
PMID: 35448648

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.