1. Nat Commun. 2022 Apr 19;13(1):2063. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29606-9.

Chemotherapy-induced COX-2 upregulation by cancer cells defines their 
inflammatory properties and limits the efficacy of chemoimmunotherapy 
combinations.

Bell CR(1), Pelly VS(#)(1), Moeini A(#)(1), Chiang SC(#)(1), Flanagan E(1), 
Bromley CP(1), Clark C(2), Earnshaw CH(1), Koufaki MA(1), Bonavita E(1), Zelenay 
S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Inflammation and Immunity Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester 
Institute, The University of Manchester, Alderley Park, Manchester, UK.
(2)Molecular Biology Core Facility, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The 
University of Manchester, Alderley Park, Manchester, UK.
(3)Cancer Inflammation and Immunity Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester 
Institute, The University of Manchester, Alderley Park, Manchester, UK. 
Santiago.Zelenay@cruk.manchester.ac.uk.
(4)The Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, The University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK. Santiago.Zelenay@cruk.manchester.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Cell Stress. 2022 Aug 16;6(9):76-78. doi: 10.15698/cst2022.09.271.

Cytotoxic therapies, besides directly inducing cancer cell death, can stimulate 
immune-dependent tumor growth control or paradoxically accelerate tumor 
progression. The underlying mechanisms dictating these opposing outcomes are 
poorly defined. Here, we show that cytotoxic therapy acutely upregulates 
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 expression and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production in 
cancer cells with pre-existing COX-2 activity. Screening a compound library of 
1280 approved drugs, we find that all classes of chemotherapy drugs enhance 
COX-2 transcription whilst arresting cancer cell proliferation. Genetic 
manipulation of COX-2 expression or its gene promoter region uncover how 
augmented COX-2/PGE2 activity post-treatment profoundly alters the inflammatory 
properties of chemotherapy-treated cancer cells in vivo. Pharmacological COX-2 
inhibition boosts the efficacy of the combination of chemotherapy and PD-1 
blockade. Crucially, in a poorly immunogenic breast cancer model, only the 
triple therapy unleashes tumor growth control and significantly reduces relapse 
and spontaneous metastatic spread in an adjuvant setting. Our findings suggest 
COX-2/PGE2 upregulation by dying cancer cells acts as a major barrier to 
cytotoxic therapy-driven tumor immunity and uncover a strategy to improve the 
outcomes of immunotherapy and chemotherapy combinations.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-29606-9
PMCID: PMC9018752
PMID: 35440553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Outside this current work, S.Z. reports a grant 
from Ono Pharmaceutical. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.