1. Pharmaceutics. 2022 Apr 13;14(4):856. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14040856.

Peptide-Based Vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: Peptide Antigen Discovery and 
Screening of Adjuvant Systems.

Shalash AO(1), Azuar A(1), Madge HYR(1), Modhiran N(1)(2), Amarilla AA(1), Liang 
B(1), Khromykh AA(1), Hussein WM(1), Chappell KJ(1)(2), Watterson D(1)(2), Young 
PR(1)(2), Skwarczynski M(1), Toth I(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, 
St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia.
(2)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of 
Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia.
(3)School of Pharmacy, The University of Queensland, Woolloongabba, QLD 4102, 
Australia.

The SARS-CoV-2 virus has caused a global crisis, resulting in 0.5 billion 
infections and over 6 million deaths as of March 2022. Fortunately, infection 
and hospitalization rates were curbed due to the rollout of DNA and mRNA 
vaccines. However, the efficacy of these vaccines significantly drops a few 
months post immunization, from 88% down to 47% in the case of the Pfizer BNT162 
vaccine. The emergence of variant strains, especially delta and omicron, have 
also significantly reduced vaccine efficacy. We propose peptide vaccines as a 
potential solution to address the inadequacies of the current vaccines. Peptide 
vaccines can be easily modified to target emerging strains, have greater 
stability, and do not require cold-chain storage. We screened five peptide 
fragments (B1-B5) derived from the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein to identify 
neutralizing B-cell peptide antigens. We then investigated adjuvant systems for 
efficient stimulation of immune responses against the most promising peptide 
antigens, including liposomal formulations of polyleucine (L10) and 
polymethylacrylate (PMA), as well as classical adjuvants (CFA and MF59). Immune 
efficacy of formulations was evaluated using competitive ELISA, pseudovirion 
neutralization, and live virus neutralization assays. Unfortunately, peptide 
conjugation to L10 and PMA dramatically altered the secondary structure, 
resulting in low antibody neutralization efficacy. Of the peptides tested, only 
B3 administered with CFA or MF59 was highly immunogenic. Thus, a peptide vaccine 
relying on B3 may provide an attractive alternative to currently marketed 
vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14040856
PMCID: PMC9024957
PMID: 35456690

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
financial interest(s): M.S. and I.T. are co-inventors on a patent application 
entitled: Self-assembling, self-adjuvating system for delivery of vaccines, 
filed by The University of Queensland (WO/2021/138721). The remaining authors 
declare that they have no competing interest.