1. J Clin Med. 2022 Apr 15;11(8):2224. doi: 10.3390/jcm11082224.

The Impact of Exosomes/Microvesicles Derived from Myeloid Dendritic Cells 
Cultured in the Presence of Calcitriol and Tacalcitol on Acute B-Cell Precursor 
Cell Lines with MLL Fusion Gene.

Turlej E(1), Goszczy≈Ñski TM(2), Drab M(3), Orzechowska B(4), Maciejewska M(5), 
Banach J(5), Wietrzyk J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Biology, Wroclaw University of Environmental and 
Life Science, 50-375 Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Biomedical Chemistry, Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and 
Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, 53-114 Wroclaw, Poland.
(3)Laboratory of Interactions of Biological Nanostructures, Department of 
Immunology of Infectious Diseases, Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and 
Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, 53-114 Wroclaw, Poland.
(4)Laboratory of Virology, Department of Immunology of Infectious Diseases, 
Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of 
Sciences, 53-114 Wroclaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Experimental Oncology, Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and 
Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, 53-114 Wroclaw, Poland.

Vitamin D analogs (VDAs) may directly inhibit the growth of normal and malignant 
(derived from acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)) B cells, as both types of 
cells express vitamin D receptor (VDR). We performed anti-proliferative, 
morphology tests and phenotyping to evaluate the sensitivity of monocytes and 
iDCs (immature myeloid-derived dendritic cells) on calcitriol and tacalcitol 
treatment, phenotyping, morphology, and size distribution measurement to 
determine the characteristics of microvesicles (MVs) and exosomes (EXs) derived 
from them and, finally, phenotyping and Elisa test to determine the effects of 
VDAs on modulation of the phenotype of B cells through extracellular vesicles 
(EVs) released by iDCs. Our results confirmed that both SC cells and iDCs were 
sensitive to the VDAs and showed altered surface expression of markers 
associated with monocyte differentiation, which was resulting in the phenotypic 
changes in EVs derived from them. We also showed that obtained EVs could change 
the morphology and phenotype of ALL-B-derived precursor cells in a different 
way, depending on their origin. The differential effect of VDAs on ALL-B cells, 
which was associated with increased or decreased expression of CD27, CD24, CD38, 
and CD23 expression, was observed. Hence, further studies to explain the 
modulation in the composition of EVs by VDAs are required.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11082224
PMCID: PMC9032710
PMID: 35456315

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.