1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Apr 18;23(8):4461. doi: 10.3390/ijms23084461.

Serrated Colorectal Lesions: An Up-to-Date Review from Histological Pattern to 
Molecular Pathogenesis.

Mezzapesa M(1), Losurdo G(1)(2), Celiberto F(1)(2), Rizzi S(1), d'Amati A(3), 
Piscitelli D(3), Ierardi E(1), Di Leo A(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Emergency and Organ 
Transplantation, University of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(2)PhD Course in Organs and Tissues Transplantation and Cellular Therapies, 
Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, 70124 
Bari, Italy.
(3)Section of Pathology, Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, 
University of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.

Until 2010, colorectal serrated lesions were generally considered as harmless 
lesions and reported as hyperplastic polyps (HPs) by pathologists and 
gastroenterologists. However, recent evidence showed that they may bear the 
potential to develop into colorectal carcinoma (CRC). Therefore, the World 
Health Organization (WHO) classification has identified four categories of 
serrated lesions: hyperplastic polyps (HPs), sessile serrated lesions (SSLs), 
traditional serrated adenoma (TSAs) and unclassified serrated adenomas. SSLs 
with dysplasia and TSAs are the most common precursors of CRC. CRCs arising from 
serrated lesions originate via two different molecular pathways, namely sporadic 
microsatellite instability (MSI) and the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), 
the latter being considered as the major mechanism that drives the serrated 
pathway towards CRC. Unlike CRCs arising through the adenoma-carcinoma pathway, 
APC-inactivating mutations are rarely shown in the serrated neoplasia pathway.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23084461
PMCID: PMC9032676
PMID: 35457279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.