1. Biology (Basel). 2022 Apr 18;11(4):618. doi: 10.3390/biology11040618.

High-Fructose Diet Increases Renal ChREBPβ Expression, Leading to Intrarenal Fat 
Accumulation in a Rat Model with Metabolic Syndrome.

Bier A(1), Shapira E(1)(2), Khasbab R(3), Sharabi Y(1)(2)(3), Grossman 
E(1)(2)(3), Leibowitz A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Medicine D, The Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan 5262000, 
Israel.
(2)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel.
(3)Hypertension Unit, The Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan 
5262000, Israel.

Fructose consumption is associated with metabolic syndrome (MeS). Dysregulated 
lipid metabolism and ectopic lipid accumulation, such as in "fatty liver'', are 
pivotal components of the syndrome. MeS is also associated with chronic kidney 
disease (CKD). The aim of this study was to evaluate kidney fructose metabolism 
and whether the addition of fructose leads to intrarenal fat accumulation. 
Sprague Dawley rats were fed either normal chow (Ctrl) or a high-fructose diet 
(HFrD). MeS features such as blood pressure and metabolic parameters in blood 
were measured. The kidneys were harvested for ChREBPβ and de novo lipogenesis 
(DNL) gene expression, triglyceride content and histopathology staining. HK2 
(human kidney) cells were treated with fructose for 48 h and gene expression for 
ChREBPβ and DNL were determined. The HFrD rats exhibited higher blood pressure, 
glucose and triglyceride levels. The kidney weight of the HFrD rats was 
significantly higher than Ctrl rats. The difference can be explained by the 
higher triglyceride content in the HFrD kidneys. Oil red staining revealed lipid 
droplet formation in the HFrD kidneys, which was also supported by increased 
adipophilin mRNA expression. For ChREBPβ and its downstream genes, scd and fasn, 
mRNA expression was elevated in the HFrD kidneys. Treating HK2 cells with 40 mM 
fructose increased the expression of ChREBPβ. This study demonstrates that 
fructose consumption leads to intrarenal lipid accumulation and to the formation 
of a "fatty kidney". This suggests a potential mechanism that can at least 
partially explain CKD development in fructose-induced MeS.

DOI: 10.3390/biology11040618
PMCID: PMC9027247
PMID: 35453816

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.