1. Pharmaceutics. 2022 Apr 15;14(4):870. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14040870.

Effect of Solvents, Stabilizers and the Concentration of Stabilizers on the 
Physical Properties of Poly(d,l-lactide-co-glycolide) Nanoparticles: 
Encapsulation, In Vitro Release of Indomethacin and Cytotoxicity against 
HepG2-Cell.

Alkholief M(1), Kalam MA(1), Anwer MK(2), Alshamsan A(1).

Author information:
(1)Nanobiotechnology Unit, Department of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, 
King Saud University, P.O. Box 2457, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, Prince Sattam Bin Abdulaziz 
University, Al-Kharj 11942, Saudi Arabia.

A biocompatible, biodegradable and FDA-approved polymer [Poly lactic-co-glycolic 
acid (PLGA)] was used to prepare the nanoparticles (NPs) to observe the effect 
of solvents, stabilizers and their concentrations on the physical properties of 
the PLGA-NPs, following the encapsulation and in vitro release of Indomethacin 
(IND). PLGA-NPs were prepared by the single-emulsion solvent evaporation 
technique using dichloromethane (DCM)/chloroform as the organic phase with 
Polyvinyl-alcohol (PVA)/Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as stabilizers to encapsulate 
IND. The effects of different proportions of PVA/PVP with DCM/chloroform on the 
physiochemical properties (particle size, the polydispersity index, the zeta 
potential by Malvern Zetasizer and morphology by SEM) of the NPs were 
investigated. DSC was used to check the physical state, the possible 
complexation of PLGA with stabilizer(s) and the crystallinity of the 
encapsulated drug. Stabilizers at all concentrations produced spherical, 
regular-shaped, smooth-surfaced discrete NPs. Average size of 273.2-563.9 nm was 
obtained when PVA (stabilizer) with DCM, whereas it ranged from 317.6 to 588.1 
nm with chloroform. The particle size was 273.2-563.9 nm when PVP was the 
stabilizer with DCM, while it was 381.4-466.6 nm with chloroform. The zeta 
potentials of PVA-stabilized NPs were low and negative (-0.62 mV) while they 
were comparatively higher and positive for PVP-stabilized NPs (+17.73 mV). 
Finally, drug-loaded optimal NPs were composed of PLGA (40 mg) and IND (4 mg) in 
1 mL DCM/chloroform with PVA/PVP (1-3%), which resulted in sufficient 
encapsulation (54.94-74.86%) and drug loading (4.99-6.81%). No endothermic peak 
of PVA/PVP appeared in the optimized formulation, which indicated the amorphous 
state of IND in the core of the PLGA-NPs. The in vitro release study indicated a 
sustained release of IND (32.83-52.16%) from the PLGA-NPs till 72 h and 
primarily followed the Higuchi matrix release kinetics followed by 
Korsmeyer-Peppas models. The cell proliferation assay clearly established that 
the organic solvents used to prepare PLGA-NPs had evaporated. The PLGA-NPs did 
not show any particular toxicity in the HepG2 cells within the dose range of IND 
(250-500 µg/mL) and at an equivalent concentration of PLGA-NPs (3571.4-7142.7 
µg/mL). The cytotoxicity of the hepatotoxic drug (IND) was reduced by its 
encapsulation into PLGA-NPs. The outcomes of this investigation could be 
implemented to prepare PLGA-NPs of acceptable properties for the encapsulation 
of low/high molecular weight drugs. It would be useful for further in vitro and 
in vivo applications to use this delivery system.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14040870
PMCID: PMC9028368
PMID: 35456705

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no any conflict of interest.