1. Polymers (Basel). 2022 Apr 7;14(8):1504. doi: 10.3390/polym14081504.

Modified Release of the Pineal Hormone Melatonin from Matrix Tablets Containing 
Poly(L-lactic Acid) and Its PLA-co-PEAd and PLA-co-PBAd Copolymers.

Vlachou M(1), Siamidi A(1), Anagnostopoulou D(1), Christodoulou E(2), Bikiaris 
ND(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Technology, Department of Pharmacy, School of 
Health Sciences, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 
Panepistimioupoli-Zografou, 15784 Athens, Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Technology, Department of Chemistry, 
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece.

In terms of drug delivery, the attractive properties of poly(L-lactic acid) 
(PLA) and its aliphatic polyesters, poly(ethylene adipate) (PEAd) and 
poly(butylene adipate) (PBAd), render them ideal co-formulants for the 
preparation of modified-release pharmaceutical formulations. Furthermore, we 
have previously demonstrated that by adding a "softer" aliphatic polyester onto 
the macromolecular chain of PLA, i.e., PEAd or PBAd, resulting in the formation 
of the PLA's copolymers (PLA-co-PEAd and PLA-co-PBAd, in 95/5, 90/10, 75/25 and 
50/50 weight ratios), the hydrolysis rate is also severely affected, leading to 
improved dissolution rates of the active pharmaceutical ingredients (API). In 
the present report, we communicate our findings on the in vitro modified release 
of the chronobiotic hormone melatonin (MLT), in aqueous media (pH 1.2 and 6.8), 
from poly(L-lactic acid) and the aforementioned copolymer matrix tablets, 
enriched with commonly used biopolymers, such as hydroxypropylmethylcellulose 
(HPMC K15), lactose monohydrate, and sodium alginate. It was found that, 
depending on the composition and the relevant content of these excipients in the 
matrix tablets, the release of MLT satisfied the sought targets for fast sleep 
onset and sleep maintenance. These findings constitute a useful background for 
pursuing relevant in vivo studies on melatonin in the future.

DOI: 10.3390/polym14081504
PMCID: PMC9027688
PMID: 35458252

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.