1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2022;20(11):2034-2049. doi: 
10.2174/1570159X20666220420130109.

Insights into the Cellular Interactions and Molecular Mechanisms of Ketogenic 
Diet for Comprehensive Management of Epilepsy.

Kumar A(1)(2), Kumari S(1)(2), Singh D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacology and Toxicology Laboratory, Dietetics and Nutrition Technology 
Division, CSIR- Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Palampur 176061, 
Himachal Pradesh, India.
(2)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad-201002, 
India.

A high-fat diet with appropriate protein and low carbohydrate content, widely 
known as the ketogenic diet (KD), is considered as an effective 
non-pharmacotherapeutic treatment option for certain types of epilepsies. 
Several preclinical and clinical studies have been carried out to elucidate its 
mechanism of antiepileptic action. Ketone bodies produced after KD's breakdown 
interact with cellular excito-inhibitory processes and inhibit abnormal neuronal 
firing. The generated ketone bodies decrease glutamate release by inhibiting the 
vesicular glutamate transporter 1 and alter the transmembrane potential by 
hyperpolarization. Apart from their effect on the well-known pathogenic 
mechanisms of epilepsy, some recent studies have shown the interaction of KD 
metabolites with novel neuronal targets, particularly adenosine receptors, 
adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel, mammalian target of 
rapamycin, histone deacetylase, hydroxycarboxylic acid receptors, and the NLR 
family pyrin domain containing 3 inflammasomes to suppress seizures. The role of 
KD in augmenting gut microbiota as a potential mechanism for epileptic seizure 
suppression has been established. Furthermore, some recent findings also support 
the beneficial effect of KD against epilepsy- associated comorbidities. Despite 
several advantages of the KD in epilepsy management, its use is also associated 
with a wide range of side effects. Hypoglycemia, excessive ketosis, acidosis, 
renal stones, cardiomyopathies, and other metabolic disturbances are the primary 
adverse effects observed with the use of KD. However, in some recent studies, 
modified KD has been tested with lesser side effects and better tolerability. 
The present review discusses the molecular mechanism of KD and its role in 
managing epilepsy and its associated comorbidities.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1570159X20666220420130109
PMCID: PMC9886834
PMID: 35450526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]