1. Mol Neurobiol. 2022 Jul;59(7):3980-3995. doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02824-4. Epub
 2022 Apr 22.

Binding Stability of Antibody-α-Synuclein Complexes Predicts the Protective 
Efficacy of Anti-α-synuclein Antibodies.

Höllerhage M(1), Wolff A(2), Chakroun T(2)(3), Evsyukov V(4), Duan L(4), Chua 
OW(4), Tang Q(3), Koeglsperger T(3)(5), Höglinger GU(4)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, D-30625, Germany. 
hoellerhage.matthias@mh-hannover.de.
(2)Department of Neurology, Technical University of Munich (TUM), D-81675, 
Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Translational Neurodegeneration, German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), D-81377, Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, D-30625, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, Ludwig Maximilian University Munich, D-81377, 
Munich, Germany.

Spreading of alpha-synuclein (αSyn) may play an important role in Parkinson's 
disease and related synucleinopathies. Passive immunization with anti-αSyn 
antibodies is a promising method to slow down the spreading process and thereby 
the progression of synucleinopathies. Currently, it remains elusive which 
specific characteristics are essential to render therapeutic antibodies 
efficacious. Here, we established a neuronal co-culture model, in which αSyn 
species are being released from αSyn-overexpressing cells and induce toxicity in 
a priori healthy GFP-expressing cells. In this model, we investigated the 
protective efficacy of three anti-αSyn antibodies. Only two of these antibodies, 
one C-terminal and one N-terminal, protected from αSyn-induced toxicity by 
inhibiting the uptake of spreading-competent αSyn from the cell culture medium. 
Neither the binding epitope nor the affinity of the antibodies towards 
recombinant αSyn could explain differences in biological efficacy. However, both 
protective antibodies formed more stable antibody-αSyn complexes than the 
non-protective antibody. These findings indicate that the stability of 
antibody-αSyn complexes may be more important to confer protection than the 
binding epitope or affinity to recombinant αSyn.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-022-02824-4
PMCID: PMC9167191
PMID: 35460053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.