1. Int J Cancer. 2022 Sep 15;151(6):888-896. doi: 10.1002/ijc.34047. Epub 2022
May  9.

The role of MTNR1B polymorphism on circadian rhythm-related cancer: A UK Biobank 
cohort study.

Wu J(1), Tan X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences (Sleep Science Lab), Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden.

A common G risk allele in the melatonin receptor 1B (MTNR1B, rs10830963) gene 
has been associated with altered melatonin signaling and secretion. Given that 
melatonin possesses anticancerogenic properties, we hypothesized that breast and 
prostate cancer risks vary by rs10830963 genotype. A total of 216 702 
participants from the UK Biobank without cancer at baseline (aged 
56.4 ± 8.0 years, 50.79% female) were included. Multivariable Cox regression 
adjusting for known risk factors for breast or prostate cancer was used to 
estimate the independent effects of the rs10830963 SNP and chronotype on cancer 
risk. Over a median follow-up of 8 years, 2367 (2.15% of women) incidences of 
breast cancer and 2866 (2.69% of men) incidences of prostate cancer were 
documented in females and males, respectively. rs10830963 genotype is not 
associated with cancer risk independently (female Ptrend  = .103, male Ptrend 
 = .281). A late chronotype is associated with breast cancer risk in females 
(Ptrend  = .014), but not prostate cancer risk in males (Ptrend  = .915). 
Further stratification analysis revealed that the rs10830963 genotype is 
associated with a breast cancer risk in females with moderate evening chronotype 
(Ptrend  = .001) and late chronotype is associated with breast cancer risk in 
females who carry rs10830963 G risk allele (Ptrend  = .015). Our study suggests 
that having a late chronotype might increase the risk of breast cancer among 
females, while the effect of MTNR1B rs10830963 genotype on breast cancer risk is 
mediated by chronotype.

© 2022 The Authors. International Journal of Cancer published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.34047
PMCID: PMC9545001
PMID: 35467761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article have no conflicts of 
interest to disclose.