1. Contrast Media Mol Imaging. 2022 Apr 7;2022:7343412. doi:
10.1155/2022/7343412.  eCollection 2022.

Integrated Multichip Analysis and WGCNA Identify Potential Diagnostic Markers in 
the Pathogenesis of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction.

Liang Y(1), Wang W(1), Huang Q(1), Chen H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Xiaolan People's Hospital of Zhongshan, 
Zhongshan, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) is a myocardial 
infarction (MI) with ST-segment exaltation of electrocardiogram (ECG) caused by 
vascular occlusion of the epicardium. However, the diagnostic markers of STEMI 
remain little.
METHODS: STEMI raw microarray data are acquired from the Gene Expression Omnibus 
(GEO) database. Based on GSE60993 and GSE61144, differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs) are verified via R software, and key modules associated with pathological 
state of STEMI are verified by weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA). 
Take the intersection gene of key module and DEGs to perform the pathway 
enrichment analyses by Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes (KEGG). Construct the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network by 
Cytoscape. Then, select and identify the diagnostic biomarkers of STEMI by least 
absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) logistic regression and 
support vector machine-recursive feature elimination (SVM-RFE) algorithms. 
Finally, assess the infiltration of immune cells of STEMI by CIBERSORT and 
analyze the correlation between diagnostic markers and infiltrating immune 
cells.
RESULTS: We get 710 DEGs in the STEMI group and 376 genes associated with STEMI 
in blue module. 92 intersection genes were concentrated in 30 GO terms and 2 
KEGG pathways. 28 hub genes involved in the development of STEMI. Moreover, 
upregulated ALOX5AP (AUC = 1.00) and BST1 (AUC = 1.00) are confirmed as 
diagnostic markers of STEMI. CD8+T cells, regulatory T (Treg) cells, resting 
natural killer (NK) cells, M0 macrophages, resting mast cells, and neutrophils 
are related to the procession of STEMI. Moreover, ALOX5AP and BST1 are 
positively related to resting NK cells, M0 macrophages, and neutrophils, while 
ALOX5AP and BST1 are negatively related to CD8+ T cells, Treg cells, and resting 
mast cells.
CONCLUSION: ALOX5AP and BST1 may be the diagnostic markers of STEMI. Immune cell 
infiltration plays a key role in the development of STEMI.

Copyright © 2022 Yingliang Liang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/7343412
PMCID: PMC9010175
PMID: 35475279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.