1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2023 Jul;41(10):4295-4312. doi: 
10.1080/07391102.2022.2066179. Epub 2022 Apr 27.

Insights into structure and activity relationship of clinically mutated PER1 and 
PER2 class A β-lactamase enzymes.

Agarwal V(1), Yadav TC(2), Tiwari A(1), Varadwaj PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Sciences, Indian Institute of Information Technology, 
Jhalwa, Allahabad, India.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Roorkee, India.

PER1 and PER2 are among the class A β-lactamase enzymes, which have evolved 
clinically to form antibiotic resistance and have significantly expanded their 
spectrum of activity. Hence, there is a need to study the clinical mutation 
responsible for such β-lactamase mediated antibiotic resistance. Alterations in 
catalytic centre and Ω-loop structure could be the cause of antibiotic 
resistance in these β-lactamase enzymes. Structural and functional alterations 
are caused due to mutations on or near the catalytic centre, which results in 
active site plasticity and are responsible for its expanded spectrum of activity 
in these class A β-lactamase enzymes. Multiple sequence alignment, structure, 
kinetic, molecular docking, MMGBSA and molecular dynamic simulation comparisons 
were done on 38 clinically mutated and wild class A β-lactamase enzymes. This 
work shows that PER1 and PER2 enzymes contains most unique mutations and have 
altered Ω-loop structure, which could be responsible for altering the 
structure-activity relationship and extending the spectrum of activity of these 
enzymes. Alterations in molecular docking, MMGBSA, kinetic values reveals the 
modification in the binding and activity of these clinically mutated enzymes 
with antibiotics. Further, the cause of these alterations can be revealed by 
active site interactions and H-bonding pattern of these enzymes with 
antibiotics. Met69Gln, Glu104Thr, Tyr105Trp, Met129His, Pro167Ala, Glu168Gln, 
Asn170His, Ile173Asp and Asp176Gln mutations were uniquely found in PER1 and 
PER2 enzymes. These mutations occurs at catalytic important residues and results 
in altered interactions with β-lactam antibiotics. Hence, these mutations could 
be responsible for altering the structure-activity of PER1 and PER2 
enzymes.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2022.2066179
PMID: 35475497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]