1. PLoS One. 2022 Apr 27;17(4):e0267092. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0267092. 
eCollection 2022.

Salivary inflammatory mediators as biomarkers for oral mucositis and oral 
mucosal dryness in cancer patients: A pilot study.

Kiyomi A(1), Yoshida K(2)(3), Arai C(1), Usuki R(1), Yamazaki K(1), Hoshino 
N(3), Kurokawa A(2), Imai S(1), Suzuki N(3), Toyama A(3), Sugiura M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Safety and Risk Management, School of Pharmacy, Tokyo 
University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry & Graduate 
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata University, Niigata, Japan.
(3)Division of Hospital Pharmacy, Niigata University Medical and Dental 
Hospital, Niigata, Japan.

Oral mucositis (OM) is a common side effect in patients with cancer receiving 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy; however, no salivary mediator is known to be 
associated with OM. We aimed to determine candidate salivary inflammatory 
mediators potentially associated with OM in patients with cancer. To this end, 
we compared the relationships between OM grade, oral mucosal dryness, and 
inflammatory mediators (Interleukin (IL)-1Î², IL-6, IL-10, IL-12p70, tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF), prostaglandin E2, and vascular endothelial growth factor) 
in patients with cancer and in healthy volunteers (HV). We collected saliva 
samples from 18 patients with cancer according to the following schedule: 1) 
within 14 days of treatment initiation, 2) within 3 days of OM occurrence, 3) 
when OM was improved or got worsened, and 4) within 7 days after chemotherapy 
completion. The oral care support team determined the OM grade at each sample 
collection point based on CTCAE version 5.0. Salivary inflammatory mediator 
concentrations were detected using cytometric bead array or enzyme-linked 
immunoassay. We compared oral mucosal dryness in pre- and post-index patients 
with cancer to that in HV (n = 33) using an oral moisture-checking device. 
Fourteen of eighteen patients experienced OM (four, grade 3 OM; four, grade 2 
OM; six, grade 1 OM). IL-6, IL-10, and TNF salivary concentrations were 
significantly increased in the post-index group compared to those in the 
pre-index group (p = 0.0002, p = 0.0364, and p = 0.0160, respectively). 
Additionally, salivary IL-6, IL-10, and TNF levels were significantly higher in 
the post-index group than in the HV group (p < 0.0001, p < 0.05, and p < 0.05, 
respectively). Significant positive correlations were observed between OM grade 
and salivary IL-6, IL-10, and TNF levels (p = 0.0004, r = 0.4939; p = 0.0171, r 
= 0.3394; and p = 0007, r = 0.4662, respectively). Oral mucosal dryness was 
significantly higher in the HV than in the pre- and post-index groups (p < 
0.001). Our findings suggest that salivary IL-6, IL-10, and TNF levels may be 
used as biomarkers for OM occurrence and grade in patients with cancer. 
Furthermore, monitoring oral mucosal dryness and managing oral hygiene before 
cancer treatment is essential.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0267092
PMCID: PMC9045655
PMID: 35476641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.