1. ACS Omega. 2022 Apr 5;7(15):12643-12653. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c06872. 
eCollection 2022 Apr 19.

Improved Stability of Human CGI-58 Induced by Phosphomimetic S237E Mutation.

Llamas-García ML(1), Páez-Pérez ED(1), Benitez-Cardoza CG(2), Montero-Morán 
GM(3), Lara-González S(1).

Author information:
(1)IPICYT, División de Biología Molecular, Instituto Potosino de Investigación 
Científica y Tecnológica A.C., San Luis Potosí, San Luis Potosí 78216, México.
(2)Laboratorio de Investigación Bioquímica, Escuela Nacional de Medicina y 
Homeopatía, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de México 07320, México.
(3)Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosí, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, San 
Luis Potosí, San Luis Potosí 78210, México.

In lipolysis, the activating function of CGI-58 is regulated by its interaction 
with perilipin 1 (PLIN1) localized on the lipid droplet (LD), and its release is 
controlled by phosphorylation. Once lipolysis is stimulated by catecholamines, 
protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated phosphorylation enables the dissociation of the 
CGI-58/PLIN1 complex, thereby recruiting adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) and 
hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) to initiate fatty acid release. It has been shown 
that mouse CGI-58 mutant S239E, which mimics the phosphorylation of this 
residue, is able to dissociate from the CGI-58/PLIN1 complex and activate ATGL. 
Here, we analyze the stabilizing effect on human CGI-58 of a triple tryptophan 
to alanine mutant (3WA) on the LD-binding motif, as well as a quadruple mutant 
in which the phosphomimetic S237E substitution was introduced to the 3WA 
construct (3WA/S237E). We found that tryptophan residues promote wild-type (WT) 
protein aggregation in solution since their substitution for alanine residues 
favors the presence of the monomer. Our experimental data showed increased 
thermal stability and solubility of 3WA/S237E protein compared to the 3WA 
mutant. Moreover, the 3WA/S237E protein showed proper folding and a functional 
binding site for oleoyl-CoA. The analysis of a bioinformatic three-dimensional 
(3D) model suggests an intramolecular interaction between the phosphomimetic 
glutamic acid and a residue of the α/β hydrolase core. This could explain the 
increased solubility and stability observed in the 3WA/S237E mutant and 
evidences the possible role of serine 237 phosphorylation.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c06872
PMCID: PMC9026008
PMID: 35474805

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.