1. Front Immunol. 2022 Apr 11;13:874978. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.874978. 
eCollection 2022.

Identification of Molecular Correlations Between DHRS4 and Progressive 
Neurodegeneration in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis By Gene Co-Expression Network 
Analysis.

Li S(1), Zhu Y(1), Wei C(1), Li C(1), Chen W(1), Jiang S(1), Yuan D(1), Xu R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital, Affiliated 
People's Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease, and 
its candidate biomarkers have not yet been fully elucidated in previous studies. 
Therefore, with the present study, we aim to define and verify effective 
biomarkers of ALS by bioinformatics. Here, we employed differentially expressed 
gene (DEG) analysis, weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), 
enrichment analysis, immune infiltration analysis, and protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) to identify biomarkers of ALS. To validate the biomarkers, we 
isolated the lumbar spinal cord from mice and characterized them using Western 
blotting and immunofluorescence. The results showed that Dhrs4 expression in the 
spinal cord was upregulated with the progression of SOD1G93A mice, and the 
upregulation of DHRS4 and its synergistic DHRS3 might be primarily associated 
with the activation of the complement cascade in the immune system (C1QA, C1QB, 
C1QC, C3, and ITGB2), which might be a novel mechanism that induces spinal 
neurodegeneration in ALS. We propose that DHRS4 and its synergistic DHRS3 are 
promising molecular markers for detecting ALS progression.

Copyright Â© 2022 Li, Zhu, Wei, Li, Chen, Jiang, Yuan and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.874978
PMCID: PMC9035787
PMID: 35479082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.