1. Front Immunol. 2022 Apr 11;13:850616. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.850616. 
eCollection 2022.

Contact-Dependent Granzyme B-Mediated Cytotoxicity of Th17-Polarized Cells 
Toward Human Oligodendrocytes.

Jamann H(1)(2), Cui QL(3), Desu HL(1)(2), Pernin F(3), Tastet O(1), Halaweh 
A(1)(4), Farzam-Kia N(1)(2), Mamane VH(1)(2), Ouédraogo O(1)(4), Cleret-Buhot 
A(1), Daigneault A(1), Balthazard R(1)(2), Klement W(1)(2), Lemaître F(1)(2), 
Arbour N(1)(2), Antel J(3), Stratton JA(3), Larochelle C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal 
(CRCHUM), Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, 
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is characterized by the loss of myelin and of 
myelin-producing oligodendrocytes (OLs) in the central nervous system (CNS). 
Pro-inflammatory CD4+ Th17 cells are considered pathogenic in MS and are harmful 
to OLs. We investigated the mechanisms driving human CD4+ T cell-mediated OL 
cell death. Using fluorescent and brightfield in vitro live imaging, we found 
that compared to Th2-polarized cells, Th17-polarized cells show greater 
interactions with primary human OLs and human oligodendrocytic cell line MO3.13, 
displaying longer duration of contact, lower mean speed, and higher rate of 
vesicle-like structure formation at the sites of contact. Using single-cell RNA 
sequencing, we assessed the transcriptomic profile of primary human OLs and 
Th17-polarized cells in direct contact or separated by an insert. We showed that 
upon close interaction, OLs upregulate the expression of mRNA coding for 
chemokines and antioxidant/anti-apoptotic molecules, while Th17-polarized cells 
upregulate the expression of mRNA coding for chemokines and pro-inflammatory 
cytokines such as IL-17A, IFN-γ, and granzyme B. We found that secretion of 
CCL3, CXCL10, IFN-γ, TNFα, and granzyme B is induced upon direct contact in 
cocultures of human Th17-polarized cells with human OLs. In addition, we 
validated by flow cytometry and immunofluorescence that granzyme B levels are 
upregulated in Th17-polarized compared to Th2-polarized cells and are even 
higher in Th17-polarized cells upon direct contact with OLs or MO3.13 cells 
compared to Th17-polarized cells separated from OLs by an insert. Moreover, 
granzyme B is detected in OLs and MO3.13 cells following direct contact with 
Th17-polarized cells, suggesting the release of granzyme B from Th17-polarized 
cells into OLs/MO3.13 cells. To confirm granzyme B-mediated cytotoxicity toward 
OLs, we showed that recombinant human granzyme B can induce OLs and MO3.13 cell 
death. Furthermore, pretreatment of Th17-polarized cells with a reversible 
granzyme B blocker (Ac-IEPD-CHO) or a natural granzyme B blocker (serpina3N) 
improved survival of MO3.13 cells upon coculture with Th17 cells. In conclusion, 
we showed that human Th17-polarized cells form biologically significant contacts 
with human OLs and exert direct toxicity by releasing granzyme B.

Copyright © 2022 Jamann, Cui, Desu, Pernin, Tastet, Halaweh, Farzam-kia, Mamane, 
Ouédraogo, Cleret-Buhot, Daigneault, Balthazard, Klement, Lemaître, Arbour, 
Antel, Stratton and Larochelle.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.850616
PMCID: PMC9035748
PMID: 35479072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.