1. J Neuroendocrinol. 2022 Jun;34(6):e13133. doi: 10.1111/jne.13133. Epub 2022
Apr  26.

An appetite for growth: The role of the hypothalamic - pituitary - growth 
hormone axis in energy balance.

Dumbell R(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Science and Technology, Department of Biosciences, Nottingham Trent 
University, Nottingham, UK.

Links between the regulation of growth and energy balance are clear; to fuel 
growth, there must be consumption of energy. Therefore, it is perhaps intuitive 
that interactions between the hypothalamic - pituitary - growth hormone axis 
(growth axis) and pathways that drive metabolic processes exist. Overproduction 
of growth hormone has been associated with diabetes and metabolic disease for 
decades and the opposing effects of growth hormone and insulin have been studied 
since early experiments almost a century ago. The relationship between 
neuroendocrine axes can be complex and the growth axis is no exception, 
interacting with energy balance in several organ systems, both in the periphery 
and centrally in hypothalamic nuclei. Much is known about peripheral 
interactions between growth axis hormones and processes such as glucose 
homeostasis and adipogenesis. More is still being learned about the molecular 
actions of growth axis hormones in adipose and other metabolically active 
tissues, and recent findings are discussed in this perspective. However, less is 
known about interactions with central energy balance pathways in the 
hypothalamus. This perspective aims to summarise what is known about these 
interactions, taking lessons from human studies and animal genetic and seasonal 
models, and discusses what this may mean in an evolving landscape of 
personalised medicine.

Â© 2022 The Author. Journal of Neuroendocrinology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of British Society for Neuroendocrinology.

DOI: 10.1111/jne.13133
PMCID: PMC9285760
PMID: 35474620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declared that they have no conflict 
of interest to this work.