1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2022 Aug 1;90(4):456-462. doi: 
10.1097/QAI.0000000000002993.

Plasma Cell-Free Mitochondrial DNA as a Marker of Geriatric Syndromes in Older 
Adults With HIV.

Johnston CD(1), Siegler EL(2), Rice MC(3), Derry-Vick HM(2)(4), Hootman KC(5), 
Zhu YS(5)(6), Burchett CO(2)(7), Choi ME(3), Glesby MJ(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY.
(2)Division of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY.
(3)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY.
(4)Currently, Center for Discovery and Innovation, Hackensack Meridian Health, 
Nutley, NJ.
(5)Clinical and Translational Science Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY.
(6)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY; and.
(7)Currently, Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY.

BACKGROUND: Older people with HIV experience more comorbidities and geriatric 
syndromes than their HIV-negative peers, perhaps due to residual inflammation 
despite suppressive antiretroviral therapy. Cell-free mitochondrial DNA 
(cfmtDNA) released during necrosis-mediated cell death potentially acts as both 
mediator and marker of inflammatory dysregulation. Thus, we evaluated plasma 
cfmtDNA as a potential biomarker of geriatric syndromes.
METHODS: Participants underwent the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), 
frailty testing, and measurement of plasma cfmtDNA by qPCR and inflammatory 
markers including C-reactive protein, interleukin-6 (IL-6), interferon gamma, 
and tumor necrosis factor alpha in this cross-sectional study.
RESULTS: Across 155 participants, the median age was 60 years (Q1, Q3: 56, 64), 
one-third were female, and 92% had HIV-1 viral load <200 copies/mL. The median 
MoCA score was 24 (21, 27). The plasma cfmtDNA level was higher in those with 
cognitive impairment (MoCA <23) ( P = 0.02 by the t test) and remained 
significantly associated with cognitive impairment in a multivariable logistic 
regression model controlling for age, sex, race, CD4 T-cell nadir, HIV-1 
viremia, and depression. Two-thirds of participants met the criteria for a 
prefrail or frail state; higher plasma cfmtDNA was associated with slow walk and 
exhaustion but not overall frailty state. Cognitive dysfunction was not 
associated with C-reactive protein, IL-6, interferon gamma, or tumor necrosis 
factor alpha, and frailty state was only associated with IL-6.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma cfmtDNA may have a role as a novel biomarker of cognitive 
dysfunction and key components of frailty. Longitudinal investigation of cfmtDNA 
is warranted to assess its utility as a biomarker of geriatric syndromes in 
older people with HIV.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/QAI.0000000000002993
PMCID: PMC9246833
PMID: 35471420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E.L.S., M.C.R., and Y.-S.Z. have no conflicts of 
interest. C.D.J is a consultant for TheraTechnologies. K.C.H. receives 
consulting fees from Faeth Therapeutics, Inc.; is on the review board for PESI, 
Inc.; and receives personal fees for reviewing professional nutrition education 
programing for PESI, Inc. The spouse of H.M.D.-V. holds employment at Elanco. 
The spouse of M.E.C. is a cofounder and shareholder and serves on the Scientific 
Advisory Board of Proterris, Inc. M.J.G. reports research support to the 
institution (Weill Cornell) from Gilead Sciences and Regeneron; is a consultant 
for Enzychem, Regeneron, ReAlta Life Sciences, and Sobi and receives royalties 
from Springer and UpToDate.