1. RSC Adv. 2020 Apr 1;10(22):13293-13301. doi: 10.1039/c9ra10983h. eCollection 
2020 Mar 30.

Enzyme encapsulation by protein cages.

Chakraborti S(1), Lin TY(2), Glatt S(2), Heddle JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Bionanoscience and Biochemistry Laboratory, Malopolska Centre of 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University Krakow 30-387 Poland 
jonathan.heddle@uj.edu.pl.
(2)Max Planck Research Group, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian 
University Krakow 30-387 Poland.

Protein cages are hollow protein shells with a nanometric cavity that can be 
filled with useful materials. The encapsulating nature of the cages means that 
they are particularly attractive for loading with biological macromolecules, 
affording the guests protection in conditions where they may be degraded. Given 
the importance of proteins in both industrial and all cellular processes, 
encapsulation of functional protein cargoes, particularly enzymes, are of high 
interest both for in vivo diagnostic and therapeutic use as well as for ex vivo 
applications. Increasing knowledge of protein cage structures at high resolution 
along with recent advances in producing artificial protein cages means that they 
can now be designed with various attachment chemistries on their internal 
surfaces - a useful tool for cargo capture. Here we review the different 
available attachment strategies that have recently been successfully 
demonstrated for enzyme encapsulation in protein cages and consider their future 
potential.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/c9ra10983h
PMCID: PMC9051456
PMID: 35492120

Conflict of interest statement: JGH is named as an inventor on a patent 
application related to protein-cage assembly construction. He is also the 
founder of and holds equity in nCage Therapeutics LLC, which aims to 
commercialise protein cages for therapeutic applications.