1. RSC Adv. 2020 Feb 4;10(10):5566-5571. doi: 10.1039/c9ra09943c. eCollection
2020  Feb 4.

His18 promotes reactive oxidative stress production in copper-ion mediated human 
islet amyloid polypeptide aggregation.

Huo G(1), Chen W(1), Wang J(1), Chu X(1)(2), Xu W(1), Li B(2), Zhang Y(2), Xu 
B(3), Zhou X(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Physics Science and Technology, Ningbo University China 
zhouxingfei@nbu.edu.cn.
(2)Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences China.
(3)Single Molecule Study Laboratory, College of Engineering, University of 
Georgia Athens Georgia 30602 USA.

Copper ions play a critical role in human islet amyloid polypeptide (hIAPP) 
aggregation, which has been found in more than 90% of patients with type-2 
diabetes (T2D). The role of Cu(ii) in the cell cytotoxicity with hIAPP has been 
explored in two aspects: inhibiting the formation of fibrillar structures and 
stimulating the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In this work, we 
carried out spectroscopic studies of Cu(ii) interacting with several hIAPP 
fragments and their variants as well. Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) 
measurements and Amplex Red analysis showed that the amount of H2O2 generated in 
hIAPP(11-28) solution co-incubated with Cu(ii) was remarkably more than 
hIAPP(1-11) and hIAPP(28-37). Furthermore, the H2O2 level was seriously reduced 
when His18 of hIAPP(11-28) was replaced by Arg(R) or Ser(S), indicating that 
His18 is the key residue of Cu(ii) binding to hIAPP(11-28) to promote H2O2 
generation. This is likely because the donation of electrons from the peptide to 
Cu(ii) ions would result in the formation of the redox-active complexes, which 
could stimulate the formation of H2O2. Overall, this study provides further 
insight into the molecular mechanism of Cu(ii) induced ROS generation.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/c9ra09943c
PMCID: PMC9049296
PMID: 35497413

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.