1. Front Genet. 2022 Apr 13;13:782691. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.782691.
eCollection  2022.

A Bidirectional Mendelian Randomization Study of Selenium Levels and Ischemic 
Stroke.

Fang H(1), Liu W(1), Zhang L(1), Pei L(1), Gao Y(1), Zhao L(1), Zhang R(1), Yang 
J(1), Song B(1), Xu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.

Background: Previous observational studies have shown that circulating selenium 
levels are inversely associated with ischemic stroke (IS). Our aims were to 
evaluate the causal links between selenium levels and IS, and its subtypes by 
Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis. Methods: We used the two-sample Mendelian 
randomization (MR) method to determine whether the circulating selenium levels 
are causally associated with the risk of stroke. We extracted the genetic 
variants (SNPs) associated with blood and toenail selenium levels from a large 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis. Inverse variance-weighted 
(IVW) method was used as the determinant of the causal effects of exposures on 
outcomes. Results: A total of 4 SNPs (rs921943, rs6859667, rs6586282, and 
rs1789953) significantly associated with selenium levels were obtained. The 
results indicated no causal effects of selenium levels on ischemic stroke by MR 
analysis (OR = 0.968, 95% CI 0.914-1.026, p = 0.269). Meanwhile, there was no 
evidence of a causal link between circulating selenium levels and subtypes of 
IS. Conclusion: The MR study indicated no evidence to support the causal links 
between genetically predicted selenium levels and IS. Our results also did not 
support the use of selenium supplementation for IS prevention at the genetic 
level.

Copyright Â© 2022 Fang, Liu, Zhang, Pei, Gao, Zhao, Zhang, Yang, Song and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.782691
PMCID: PMC9043360
PMID: 35495125

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.