1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Comput Math Methods Med. 2022 Apr 20;2022:4066385. doi: 10.1155/2022/4066385. 
eCollection 2022.

Clinical Application of the Classical Theory of Traditional Chinese Medicine in 
Diabetic Nephropathy.

Pan J(1), Li H(2), Shi J(1).

Author information:
(1)Hubei Province Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nephropathy, China.
(2)Guangzhou Weimi Biological Technology Company, China.

Retraction in
    Comput Math Methods Med. 2023 Jun 28;2023:9874576. doi: 
10.1155/2023/9874576.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the clinical application of the classical theory of 
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) in diabetic nephropathy (DN).
METHODS: A total of 100 patients with DN treated in our hospital from May 2019 
to June 2021 were included. The patients were randomly assigned to the control 
group and the study group. The control group received routine treatment, and the 
study group was treated with the classical theory of TCM. The efficacy, TCM 
syndrome score, urine proteinuria (UTP), urine albumin-creatinine ratio (UACR), 
plasma albumin (ALB), hemoglobin A1c (HbA1C), fasting blood glucose (FBG), blood 
urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine (Cr), and treatment safety were compared between 
the two groups.
RESULTS: In comparison to the curative effect, the study group was significantly 
effective in 34 cases, effective in 12 cases, and ineffective in 4 cases, and 
the effective rate was 92.00%; the control group was significantly effective in 
16 cases, effective in 18 cases, and ineffective in 16 cases, and the effective 
rate was 68.00%. The effective rate in the study group was higher compared to 
the control (P < 0.05). In comparison to the TCM syndrome scores, there 
exhibited no significant difference before treatment (P > 0.05), but after 
treatment, the TCM syndrome scores of the two groups decreased, and the TCM 
syndrome scores of the study group were lower compared to the control at 6 
weeks, 12 weeks, 24 weeks, and 36 weeks of treatment (P < 0.05). There exhibited 
no significant difference in the indexes of UTP and UACR before treatment, but 
the indexes of UTP and UACR in the two groups decreased after treatment, and the 
indexes of UTP and UACR in the study group were lower compared to the control at 
6 and 12 weeks after treatment. There was no significant difference in the 
indexes of ALB, HbA1C, and FBG before treatment, but after treatment, the 
indexes of ALB increased, the indexes of HbA1C and FBG decreased in both groups, 
and the indexes of HbA1C and FBG i4n the study group were lower compared to the 
control, while the index of ALB in the study group was higher. The indexes of 
BUN and Cr were compared, and there was no significant difference before 
treatment, but after treatment, the indexes of BUN and Cr in the two groups 
decreased, and the indexes of BUN and Cr in the study group were lower compared 
to the control (P < 0.05). In terms of the treatment safety of the two groups, 
there was no abnormality in blood, urine, stool routine, and liver and kidney 
function examination in the study group. No obvious adverse reactions were found 
in all patients. There were 1 case of abnormal liver function and 2 cases of 
rash in the control group, and there exhibited no significant difference (P > 
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Under the guidance of classical theory, the optimization scheme of 
comprehensive treatment of TCM may improve renal function by improving metabolic 
disorders, vascular lesions, neurotrophic disorders, antioxidant stress, and 
other ways to repair nerve injury, improving the changes of TCM syndromes, 
signs, and indicators of patients, and delay the progress of DN.

Copyright Â© 2022 Jintong Pan et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/4066385
PMCID: PMC9045989
PMID: 35495881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.