1. Front Psychol. 2022 Apr 13;13:838878. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.838878. 
eCollection 2022.

Effects of Leisure Activities on the Cognitive Ability of Older Adults: A Latent 
Variable Growth Model Analysis.

Zhu CE(1), Zhou L(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Management, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang City, China.

Based on the data of four periods of CLHLS (2008, 2011, 2014, 2018), the latent 
variable growth model (LGCM) was applied to 2344 older adults who completed four 
follow-up surveys, to study the trajectory of leisure activities and cognitive 
ability and explore the relationship between leisure activities and cognitive 
ability of older adults. The results showed that: (1) leisure activities and 
cognitive ability of older adults showed a non-linear downward trend; (2) 
leisure activities significantly and positively predicted the cognitive ability 
of older adults at every time point; (3) the initial level of leisure activity 
positively predicted the initial level of cognitive ability but negatively 
predicted the rate of cognitive decline; In addition, cognitive activities had a 
greater effect on cognitive ability than non-exercise physical activities; (4) 
the rate of decline of leisure activities also significantly and positively 
predicted the rate of decline of cognitive ability; (5) cross-lagged regression 
analysis further suggested the overall positive predictive effect of leisure 
activity on cognitive ability; (6) overall, education level had a significant 
contribution to cognitive ability, and the higher the education level, the 
slower the decline of cognitive ability; and (7) smoking could promote cognitive 
ability in older adults and no significant effect was found between alcohol 
drinking and cognitive ability. Accordingly, the government should encourage 
older adults to do more leisure activities, especially the cognitive activity, 
to effectively prevent cognitive decline.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zhu, Zhou and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.838878
PMCID: PMC9045058
PMID: 35496137

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.