1. Sci Rep. 2022 May 3;12(1):7137. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-11320-7.

Investigation and validation of labelling loop mediated isothermal amplification 
(LAMP) products with different nucleotide modifications for various downstream 
analysis.

Warmt C(1), Yaslanmaz C(2), Henkel J(3).

Author information:
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology - Bioanalytics and 
Bioprocesses (IZI-BB), 14476, Potsdam, Germany. 
christian.warmt@izi-bb.fraunhofer.de.
(2)Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology - Bioanalytics and 
Bioprocesses (IZI-BB), 14476, Potsdam, Germany.
(3)Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology - Bioanalytics and 
Bioprocesses (IZI-BB), 14476, Potsdam, Germany. 
joerg.henkel@izi-bb.fraunhofer.de.

Loop mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) is one of the best known and most 
popular isothermal amplification methods. It's simplicity and speed make the 
method particularly suitable for point-of-care diagnostics. Nevertheless, false 
positive results remain a major drawback. Many (downstream) applications are 
known for the detection of LAMP amplicons like colorimetric assays, in-situ LAMP 
or CRISPR-Cas systems. Often, modifications of the LAMP products are necessary 
for different detection applications such as lateral flow assays. This is 
usually achieved with pre-modified primer. The aim of this study is to evaluate 
amplicon labelling with different modified nucleotides such as Cy5-dUTP, 
biotin-dUTP and aminoallyl-dUTP as an alternative to pre-labelled primers. To 
realise this, the effects on amplification and labelling efficiency were studied 
as a function of molecule size and nucleotide amount as well as target 
concentration. This research shows that diverse labelling of LAMP amplicons can 
be achieved using different, modified nucleotides during LAMP and that these 
samples can be analysed by a wide range of downstream applications such as 
fluorescence spectroscopy, gel electrophoresis, microarrays and lateral flow 
systems. Furthermore, microarray-based detection and the ability to identify and 
distinguish false positives were demonstrated as proof of concept.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-11320-7
PMCID: PMC9062634
PMID: 35504953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.