1. J Food Sci. 2022 Jun;87(6):2484-2503. doi: 10.1111/1750-3841.16157. Epub 2022 
May 3.

Physico-chemical properties, antioxidant activity, and ACE inhibitory activity 
of protein hydrolysates from wild jujube seed.

Han R(1), Shao S(1), Zhang H(1), Qi H(1), Xiao F(1), Shen Y(1), Fan L(1), Wang 
H(1), Zhao D(1), Li G(1)(2), Yan M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, Changchun, China.
(2)Jilin Provincial Science and Technology Innovation Center of Health Food of 
Chinese Medicine, Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, Changchun, Jilin, 
China.

Wild jujube seed protein (WJSP) as one kind of functional food material has 
attracted much attention due to its highly nutritive and medicinal value in 
anti-inflammatory and improving immunomodulatory ability. However, owing to its 
large molecular weight and complex structure, biological activities of WJSP were 
greatly limited and cannot be fully utilized by the human body. Therefore, how 
to improve the bioavailability of WJSP and develop promising WJSP nutritious 
materials is a great challenge. In this work, wild jujube seed protein 
hydrolysates (WJSPHs) were prepared from WJSP via enzymatic hydrolysis method, 
and their physico-chemical properties, antioxidant activity, and angiotensin 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitory activity in vitro have been investigated for 
the first time. SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and size-exclusion chromatographic 
results indicate that WJSPHs have lower molecular weight 
distribution (< 5,000 Da) than WJSP. Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy and 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) results illustrated that random 
coil is the main secondary structure of WJSPHs. Antioxidant experiments indicate 
that WJSPHs exhibit high radicals-scavenging ability of 
1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radicals (94.60%), 
2,2'-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonate) (ABTS+ ) radicals (90.84%), 
superoxide radicals (44.77%), and hydroxyl radicals (47.77%). In vitro, WJSPHs 
can significantly decrease the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and 
malondialdehyde (MDA), and increase the activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) 
and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) in HepG2 cells. Moreover, ACE activity was 
found that can be significantly inhibited by WJSPHs (73.02%). Therefore, all 
previously mentioned results suggest that WJSPHs may be a promising antioxidant 
food to prevent oxidative-related diseases in future. PRACTICAL APPLICATION: 
This study shows that WJSPHs exhibit high antioxidant activity and ACE 
inhibitory activity in vitro, which provide potential application value as 
antioxidant peptides to prevent oxidative-related diseases.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Food Science published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Institute of Food Technologists.

DOI: 10.1111/1750-3841.16157
PMCID: PMC9325541
PMID: 35502672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.