1. Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep. 2022 Apr 21;26:101550. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajoc.2022.101550. eCollection 2022 Jun.

Multimodal imaging evaluation of occult macular dystrophy associated with a 
novel RP1L1 variant.

Bianco L(1), Arrigo A(1), Antropoli A(1), Carrera P(2)(3), Spiga I(3), 
Patricelli MG(4), Bandello F(1), Battaglia Parodi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, 
Italy.
(2)Unit of Genomics for Human Disease Diagnosis, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical Molecular Biology, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, 
Italy.
(4)Medical Genetics, Molecular Biology and Citogenetics, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

PURPOSE: Occult Macular Dystrophy (OMD) is an autosomal dominant inherited 
retinal dystrophy caused by mutations in the retinitis pigmentosa 1-like 1 
(RP1L1) gene. The present study describes a novel RP1L1 variant, identified for 
the first time in two Italian sisters diagnosed with OMD, along with multimodal 
imaging features, including Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) Angiography.
METHODS: We performed multimodal imaging including spectral-domain OCT, blue 
light autofluorescence (BAF), infrared autofluorescence (IRAF), swept-source OCT 
Angiography (OCTA), full-field and multifocal electroretinography. Genetic 
analysis was performed using Next-Generation Sequencing. Pathogenic potential of 
nonsynonymous novel variants was scored with two in silico algorithms.
RESULTS: Proband 1 (P1) and proband 2 (P2) were two Italian sisters of 61 and 56 
years old. Both reported a history of progressive visual loss without 
fundoscopic alterations. P1 reported a 4-year history of rapid visual function 
worsening, and her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers in 
both eyes. P2 reported a 20-year history of mild but progressive visual acuity 
loss, and her BCVA was 1/10 and 2/10 respectively in her right and left eye. 
Structural OCT displayed disorganization of outer retinal bands at the macula 
and foveal cavitation; loss of foveal photoreceptors was remarkably evident on 
en-face OCT slabs. OCTA quantitative analysis found that vessel density was 
reduced both at SCP and DCP while choriocapillaris blood flow was relatively 
spared. Genetic analysis found the same rare dominant c.2873G > C, p.Arg958Pro 
variant in the RP1L1 gene. The substitution was regarded as moderately radical 
according to Grantham score while PolyPhen2 classified the amino acidic 
substitution as probably damaging.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPORTANCE: Our study expands the mutational spectrum of RP1L1 
gene: the rare c.2873G > C, p.Arg958Pro missense variant may be considered a new 
pathogenic variant for OMD, the first to be identified exclusively in an Italian 
family. Moreover, our quantitative OCTA data suggest that OMD is characterized 
by a rarefaction of superficial and deep capillary plexus.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2022.101550
PMCID: PMC9058645
PMID: 35509282