1. Cell Biol Toxicol. 2023 Apr;39(2):415-433. doi: 10.1007/s10565-022-09712-6.
Epub  2022 May 4.

High-content high-throughput imaging reveals distinct connections between 
mitochondrial morphology and functionality for OXPHOS complex I, III, and V 
inhibitors.

van der Stel W(1), Yang H(1), le Dévédec SE(1), van de Water B(1), Beltman 
JB(1), Danen EHJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Drug Discovery and Safety, Leiden Academic Centre of Drug 
Research, Leiden University, Einsteinweg, 55, 2333 CC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Division of Drug Discovery and Safety, Leiden Academic Centre of Drug 
Research, Leiden University, Einsteinweg, 55, 2333 CC, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
e.danen@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl.

Cells can adjust their mitochondrial morphology by altering the balance between 
mitochondrial fission and fusion to adapt to stressful conditions. The 
connection between a chemical perturbation, changes in mitochondrial function, 
and altered mitochondrial morphology is not well understood. Here, we made use 
of high-throughput high-content confocal microscopy to assess the effects of 
distinct classes of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) complex inhibitors on 
mitochondrial parameters in a concentration and time resolved manner. 
Mitochondrial morphology phenotypes were clustered based on machine learning 
algorithms and mitochondrial integrity patterns were mapped. In parallel, 
changes in mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), mitochondrial and cellular 
ATP levels, and viability were microscopically assessed. We found that 
inhibition of MMP, mitochondrial ATP production, and oxygen consumption rate 
(OCR) using sublethal concentrations of complex I and III inhibitors did not 
trigger mitochondrial fragmentation. Instead, complex V inhibitors that 
suppressed ATP and OCR but increased MMP provoked a more fragmented 
mitochondrial morphology. In agreement, complex V but not complex I or III 
inhibitors triggered proteolytic cleavage of the mitochondrial fusion protein, 
OPA1. The relation between increased MMP and fragmentation did not extend beyond 
OXPHOS complex inhibitors: increasing MMP by blocking the mPTP pore did not lead 
to OPA1 cleavage or mitochondrial fragmentation and the OXPHOS uncoupler FCCP 
was associated with OPA1 cleavage and MMP reduction. Altogether, our findings 
connect vital mitochondrial functions and phenotypes in a high-throughput 
high-content confocal microscopy approach that help understanding of 
chemical-induced toxicity caused by OXPHOS complex perturbing chemicals.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10565-022-09712-6
PMCID: PMC10247858
PMID: 35505273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.