1. Virol Sin. 2022 Aug;37(4):531-537. doi: 10.1016/j.virs.2022.04.015. Epub 2022 
May 2.

Screening and identification of HTNV(pv) entry inhibitors with high-throughput 
pseudovirus-based chemiluminescence.

Wen X(1), Zhang L(2), Liu Q(2), Xiao X(3), Huang W(4), Wang Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of HIV/AIDS and Sex-transmitted Virus Vaccines, Institute for 
Biological Product Control, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control 
(NIFDC) and WHO Collaborating Center for Standardization and Evaluation of 
Biologicals, Beijing 102629, China; Department of Microbiological Laboratory 
Technology, School of Public Health, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China.
(2)Division of HIV/AIDS and Sex-transmitted Virus Vaccines, Institute for 
Biological Product Control, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control 
(NIFDC) and WHO Collaborating Center for Standardization and Evaluation of 
Biologicals, Beijing 102629, China.
(3)Institute for Reference Standards and Standardization, National Institutes 
for Food and Drug Control, Beijing 102629, China.
(4)Division of HIV/AIDS and Sex-transmitted Virus Vaccines, Institute for 
Biological Product Control, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control 
(NIFDC) and WHO Collaborating Center for Standardization and Evaluation of 
Biologicals, Beijing 102629, China. Electronic address: 
huangweijin@nifdc.org.cn.
(5)Division of HIV/AIDS and Sex-transmitted Virus Vaccines, Institute for 
Biological Product Control, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control 
(NIFDC) and WHO Collaborating Center for Standardization and Evaluation of 
Biologicals, Beijing 102629, China. Electronic address: wangyc@nifdc.org.cn.

Hantaviruses, such as Hantaan virus (HTNV) and Seoul virus, are the causative 
agents of Hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HCPS) and hemorrhagic fever with 
renal syndrome (HFRS), and are important zoonotic pathogens. China has the 
highest incidence of HFRS, which is mainly caused by HTNV and Seoul virus. No 
approved antiviral drugs are available for these hantaviral diseases. Here, a 
chemiluminescence-based high-throughput-screening (HTS) assay was developed and 
used to screen HTNV pseudovirus (HTNVpv) inhibitors in a library of 1813 
approved drugs and 556 small-molecule compounds from traditional Chinese 
medicine sources. We identified six compounds with in vitro anti-HTNVpv 
activities in the low-micromolar range (EC50 values of 0.1-2.2 ​μmol/L; 
selectivity index of 40-900). Among the six selected compounds, cepharanthine 
not only showed good anti-HTNVpv activity in vitro but also inhibited 
HTNVpv-fluc infection in Balb/c mice 5 ​h after infection by 94% (180 ​mg/kg/d, 
P ​< ​0.01), 93% (90 ​mg/kg/d, P ​< ​0.01), or 92% (45 ​mg/kg/d, P ​< ​0.01), 
respectively, in a bioluminescent imaging mouse model. A time-of-addition 
analysis suggested that the antiviral mechanism of cepharanthine involves the 
membrane fusion and entry phases. Overall, we have established a HTS method for 
antiviral drugs screening, and shown that cepharanthine is a candidate for HCPS 
and HFRS therapy. These findings may offer a starting point for the treatment of 
patients infected with hantaviruses.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virs.2022.04.015
PMCID: PMC9437608
PMID: 35513270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]