1. Macromolecules. 2020 Sep 22;53(18):8108-8122. doi:
10.1021/acs.macromol.0c00778.  Epub 2020 Aug 29.

Metal Coordination Induces Phase Segregation in Amphipolar Arborescent 
Copolymers with a Core-Shell-Corona Architecture.

Dockendorff J(1), Mourran A(2), Gumerov RA(3)(2), Potemkin II(3)(2)(4), MÃ¶ller 
M(2), Gauthier M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Institute for Polymer Research and Waterloo 
Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue 
West, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada.
(2)DWI-Leibniz Institute for Interactive Materials, Forckenbeckstr. 50, D-52056 
Aachen, Germany.
(3)Physics Department, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory 1-2, 
Moscow 119991, Russian Federation.
(4)South Ural State University (National Research University), Chelyabinsk 
454080, Russian Federation.

Arborescent copolymers with a core-shell-corona (CSC) architecture were 
synthesized and the topology of the molecules was challenged (constrained) 
through intramolecular interactions, resulting in phase separation breaking the 
symmetry of radial density. The inner poly(2-vinylpyridine) shell of these 
arborescent polystyrene-g-[poly(2-vinylpyridine)-b-polystyrene] molecules can 
self-assemble by binding metallic salts and acids in apolar and 
intermediate-polarity solvents. Upon loading with HAuCl4, the characteristics of 
the polymer templates govern the "loading sites" of the metal within the 
molecules. Unique morphologies were observed for the metal-loaded G0-G4 
arborescent copolymers investigated, namely, spherical, toroidal, 
raspberry-like, spherical nanocage, and a new worm-in-sphere morphology. The 
reason for the emergence of such morphologies is the interplay among 
intramolecular interactions of unlike polymer segments, solvent selectivity, the 
entropic elasticity of the arborescent substrate, and phase segregation induced 
by coordination with the charged metallic species. Meanwhile, the stability of 
the arborescent molecules against aggregation provides intramolecular phase 
segregation with imposed "confined" geometry and thus leads to nonconventional 
morphologies. Furthermore, the size of the arborescent molecules is much smaller 
than that of other known particles (droplets) serving as confined geometries. 
Computer simulations were used to model the mesostructure of the arborescent 
copolymers, to demonstrate the influence of solvent selectivity, together with 
HAuCl4 loading, on the evolution of the morphology of the macromolecules.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.macromol.0c00778
PMCID: PMC9062874
PMID: 35516458

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.