1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 Apr 19;15:883358. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.883358. 
eCollection 2022.

Animal Models of Neurodegenerative Disease: Recent Advances in Fly Highlight 
Innovative Approaches to Drug Discovery.

Tello JA(1)(2), Williams HE(1)(2), Eppler RM(3), Steinhilb ML(3), Khanna 
M(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ, United States.
(2)Center of Innovation in Brain Science, Tucson, AZ, United States.
(3)Department of Biology, Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, MI, 
United States.
(4)Department of Molecular Pathobiology, New York University, New York, NY, 
United States.

Neurodegenerative diseases represent a formidable challenge to global health. As 
advances in other areas of medicine grant healthy living into later decades of 
life, aging diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other 
neurodegenerative disorders can diminish the quality of these additional years, 
owed largely to the lack of efficacious treatments and the absence of durable 
cures. Alzheimer's disease prevalence is predicted to more than double in the 
next 30 years, affecting nearly 15 million Americans, with AD-associated costs 
exceeding $1 billion by 2050. Delaying onset of AD and other neurodegenerative 
diseases is critical to improving the quality of life for patients and reducing 
the burden of disease on caregivers and healthcare systems. Significant progress 
has been made to model disease pathogenesis and identify points of therapeutic 
intervention. While some researchers have contributed to our understanding of 
the proteins and pathways that drive biological dysfunction in disease using in 
vitro and in vivo models, others have provided mathematical, biophysical, and 
computational technologies to identify potential therapeutic compounds using in 
silico modeling. The most exciting phase of the drug discovery process is now: 
by applying a target-directed approach that leverages the strengths of multiple 
techniques and validates lead hits using Drosophila as an animal model of 
disease, we are on the fast-track to identifying novel therapeutics to restore 
health to those impacted by neurodegenerative disease.

Copyright Â© 2022 Tello, Williams, Eppler, Steinhilb and Khanna.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.883358
PMCID: PMC9063566
PMID: 35514431

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.