1. RSC Adv. 2019 Oct 7;9(54):31797-31805. doi: 10.1039/c9ra06961e. eCollection
2019  Oct 1.

Observation of giant spin-orbit interaction in graphene and heavy metal 
heterostructures.

Afzal AM(1), Min KH(1), Ko BM(1), Eom J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics & Astronomy, Graphene Research Institute-Texas 
Photonics Center International Research Center (GRI-TPC IRC), Sejong University 
Seoul 05006 Korea eom@sejong.ac.kr.

Graphene is a promising material demonstrating some interesting phenomena such 
as the spin Hall effect, bipolar transistor effect, and non-trivial topological 
states. However, graphene has an intrinsically small spin-orbit interaction 
(SOI), making it difficult to apply in spintronic devices. The electronic band 
structure of graphene makes it possible to develop a systematic method to 
enhance SOI extrinsically. In this study, we designed a graphene field-effect 
transistor with a Pb layer intercalated between graphene (Gr) and Au layers and 
studied the effect on the strength of the SOI. The SOI in our system was 
significantly increased to 80 meV, which led to a giant non-local signal (∼180 
Ω) at room temperature due to the spin Hall effect. Further, we extract key 
parameters of spin transport from the length and width dependence of non-local 
measurement. To support these findings, we also measured the temperature and 
gate-dependent weak localization (WL) effect. We obtained the magnitude of the 
SOI and spin relaxation time of Gr via quantitative analysis of WL. The SOI 
magnitudes estimated from the non-local signal and the WL effect are close in 
value. The enhancement of the SOI of Gr at room temperature is a potential 
simple manipulation method to explore the use of this material for spin-based 
applications.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/c9ra06961e
PMCID: PMC9072641
PMID: 35527934

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.