1. Pharmacol Ther. 2022 Nov;239:108198. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2022.108198.
Epub  2022 May 5.

Clinical implications of tristetraprolin (TTP) modulation in the treatment of 
inflammatory diseases.

Snyder BL(1), Blackshear PJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, 
United States of America; Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, United States of America.
(2)Signal Transduction Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, 
United States of America; Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, United States of America; Department of Biochemistry, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, United States of America. 
Electronic address: Black009@niehs.nih.gov.

Abnormal regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine mediators can 
contribute to the excess inflammation characteristic of many autoimmune 
diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, Crohn's disease, type 1 
diabetes, and many others. The tristetraprolin (TTP) family consists of a small 
group of related RNA-binding proteins that bind to preferred AU-rich binding 
sites within the 3'-untranslated regions of specific mRNAs to promote mRNA 
deadenylation and decay. TTP deficient mice develop a severe systemic 
inflammatory syndrome consisting of arthritis, myeloid hyperplasia, dermatitis, 
autoimmunity and cachexia, due at least in part to the excess accumulation of 
proinflammatory chemokine and cytokine mRNAs and their encoded proteins. To 
investigate the possibility that increased TTP expression or activity might have 
a beneficial effect on inflammatory diseases, at least two mouse models have 
been developed that provide proof of principle that increasing TTP activity can 
promote the decay of pro-inflammatory and other relevant transcripts, and 
decrease the severity of mouse models of inflammatory disease. Animal studies of 
this type are summarized here, and we briefly review the prospects for 
harnessing these insights for the development of TTP-based anti-inflammatory 
treatments in humans.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2022.108198
PMCID: PMC9636069
PMID: 35525391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.