1. Immunol Rev. 2022 Oct;311(1):130-150. doi: 10.1111/imr.13083. Epub 2022 May 7.

Catching a killer: Mechanisms of programmed cell death and immune activation in 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.

Neel DV(1), Basu H(1), Gunner G(1), Chiu IM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Blavatnik Institute, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

In the central nervous system (CNS), execution of programmed cell death (PCD) is 
crucial for proper neurodevelopment. However, aberrant activation of these 
pathways in adult CNS leads to neurodegenerative diseases including amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS). How a cell dies is critical, as it can drive local 
immune activation and tissue damage. Classical apoptosis engages several 
mechanisms to evoke "immunologically silent" responses, whereas other forms of 
programmed death such as pyroptosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis release 
molecules that can potentiate immune responses and inflammation. In ALS, a fatal 
neuromuscular disorder marked by progressive death of lower and upper motor 
neurons, several cell types in the CNS express machinery for multiple PCD 
pathways. The specific cell types engaging PCD, and ultimate mechanisms by which 
neuronal death occurs in ALS are not well defined. Here, we provide an overview 
of different PCD pathways implicated in ALS. We also examine immune activation 
in ALS and differentiate apoptosis from necrotic mechanisms based on downstream 
immunological consequences. Lastly, we highlight therapeutic strategies that 
target cell death pathways in the treatment of neurodegeneration and 
inflammation in ALS.

Â© 2022 John Wiley &amp; Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.13083
PMCID: PMC9489610
PMID: 35524757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests: I.M.C. serves on 
scientific advisory boards of GSK pharmaceuticals and Limm therapeutics. His lab 
receives research support from Abbvie/Allergan pharmaceuticals.