1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2022 Apr;29(4):2738-2748. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.12.060. 
Epub 2022 Jan 3.

Aqueous Ajwa dates seeds extract improves memory impairment in type-2 diabetes 
mellitus rats by reducing blood glucose levels and enhancing brain cholinergic 
transmission.

Mani V(1), Arfeen M(2), Sajid S(1), Almogbel Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Qassim 
University, Buraydah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, 
Qassim University, Buraydah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy, Qassim University, 
Buraydah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Diabetes is a metabolic disorder prevalent across the globe and is known to 
cause brain dysfunction, especially memory and cognitive decline. The current 
study investigates the effect of aqueous Ajwa seeds extract (AASE) on type-2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM)-induced memory deficits using a rat model. T2DM was 
induced by an administration of nicotinamide (120 mg/kg, i.p.) and 
streptozotocin (STZ) (60 mg/kg, i.p.). AASE (200 and 400 mg/kg, p.o.) were 
treated to T2DM rats for 30 days and the results were compared with the 
metformin (200 mg/kg). Elevated plus maze (EPM), Y-maze, and novel object 
recognition (NOR) tests were performed to assess the memory functions. The blood 
glucose and plasma insulin levels were estimated to assess the anti-diabetic 
effects of AASE. Acetylcholine (ACh) and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) levels were 
estimated from brain homogenates to assess cholinergic transmission. Treatment 
with AASE resulted in the reversal of behavioral deficits. EPM showed, a 
significant reduction in transfer latency (TL) among T2DM rats. High exploration 
time with a novel object and improvement in discrimination index were observed 
among treated groups during the NOR test. The Y-Maze test improved the entries 
and also time spent in the novel arm. Moreover, treatment of AASE reversed 
hyperglycemic and enhanced plasma insulin levels (200 mg/kg: 3.81 ± 0.08 ng/ml 
and 400 mg/kg: 4.09 ± 0.10 ng/ml) among T2DM rats (2.81 ± 0.15 ng/ml). Improved 
ACh levels (200 mg/kg: 186.6 ± 9.51 pg/mg protein and 400 mg/kg: 
165.5 ± 9.25 pg/mg protein) and reduced AChE levels (200 mg/kg: 
0.29 ± 0.02 ng/mg protein and 400 mg/kg: 0.32 ± 0.03 ng/mg protein) were also 
noted in the brain of AASE treated groups as referred to diabetic group (ACh: 
107.1 ± 7.16 pg/mg protein and AChE: 0.51 ± 0.03 ng/mg protein). The above 
results were found to be comparable with the metformin-treated groups. From the 
results, it can be concluded that AASE has the potential to improve T2DM 
associated cognitive deficits.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2021.12.060
PMCID: PMC9072939
PMID: 35531250

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.