1. RSC Adv. 2018 May 11;8(31):17279-17292. doi: 10.1039/c8ra01216d. eCollection 
2018 May 9.

Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of AV6 derivatives as novel dual 
reactivators of latent HIV-1.

Ao M(1), Pan Z(1), Qian Y(1), Tang B(1), Feng Z(1), Fang H(2), Wu Z(1), Chen 
J(3), Xue Y(1), Fang M(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Innovative Drug Target Research, Xiamen University South Xiang-An Road Xiamen 
361102 China xueyuhua@xmu.edu.cn fangmj@xmu.edu.cn +86-592-2189868 
+86-592-2189868.
(2)The Third Institute of Oceanography of the State Oceanic Administration 
Xiamen 361005 China.
(3)Key Laboratory for Chemical Biology of Fujian Province, College of Chemistry 
and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University Xiamen 361005 China 
jwchen@xmu.edu.cn.

The "shock and kill" strategy might be a promising therapeutic approach for 
HIV/AIDS due to the existence of latent viral reservoirs. A major challenge of 
the "shock and kill" strategy arises from the general lack of clinically 
effective latency-reversing agents (LRAs). The 2-methylquinoline derivative, 
antiviral 6 (AV6) has been reported to induce latent HIV-1 expression and act 
synergistically with a HDAC inhibitor VA to reverse HIV latency. We report 
herein the design and identification of AV6 analogues which possess the 
zinc-binding group of HDAC inhibitors and have dual acting mechanism for the 
reactivation of HIV-1 from latency. Evaluation of compounds for the reactivation 
of HIV-1 latency identified two excellent active compounds 12c and 12d. Further 
bioassays revealed that these two compounds reactivated latent HIV-1 through 
dual mechanism, the inhibition of HDACs and NFAT-required for early HIV-1 gene 
expression. Additionally, it was found that 12c and 12d could reactivate HIV-1 
transcription by releasing P-TEFb from the inactive complex 7SK snRNP. At last, 
molecular docking identified their orientation and binding interactions at the 
active site of HDAC2. This experimental data suggests that 12c and 12d can be 
served as effective HIV-1 LRAs which can be taken up for further studies.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/c8ra01216d
PMCID: PMC9080425
PMID: 35539279

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.