1. Nat Commun. 2022 May 9;13(1):2595. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29868-3.

Double-tap gene drive uses iterative genome targeting to help overcome 
resistance alleles.

Bishop AL(1), López Del Amo V(1), Okamoto EM(1), Bodai Z(2), Komor AC(2), Gantz 
VM(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, 
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
(3)Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, 
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. vgantz@ucsd.edu.

Homing CRISPR gene drives could aid in curbing the spread of vector-borne 
diseases and controlling crop pest and invasive species populations due to an 
inheritance rate that surpasses Mendelian laws. However, this technology suffers 
from resistance alleles formed when the drive-induced DNA break is repaired by 
error-prone pathways, which creates mutations that disrupt the gRNA recognition 
sequence and prevent further gene-drive propagation. Here, we attempt to 
counteract this by encoding additional gRNAs that target the most commonly 
generated resistance alleles into the gene drive, allowing a second opportunity 
at gene-drive conversion. Our presented "double-tap" strategy improved drive 
efficiency by recycling resistance alleles. The double-tap drive also 
efficiently spreads in caged populations, outperforming the control drive. 
Overall, this double-tap strategy can be readily implemented in any CRISPR-based 
gene drive to improve performance, and similar approaches could benefit other 
systems suffering from low HDR frequencies, such as mammalian cells or mouse 
germline transformations.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-29868-3
PMCID: PMC9085836
PMID: 35534475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: V.M.G. is a founder of and has equity interests 
in Synbal, Inc. and Agragene, Inc., companies that may potentially benefit from 
the research results described in this manuscript. V.M.G. also serves on both 
the company’s Scientific Advisory Board and the Board of Directors of Synbal, 
Inc. The terms of this arrangement have been reviewed and approved by the 
University of California, San Diego in accordance with its conflict of interest 
policies. A.C.K. is a member of the SAB of Pairwise Plants, and is an equity 
holder for Pairwise Plants and Beam Therapeutics. A.C.K.’s interests have been 
reviewed and approved by the University of California, San Diego in accordance 
with its conflict of interest policies. A.L.B., V.L.D.A., E.O., and Z.B. declare 
no competing interests.