1. J Clin Immunol. 2022 Aug;42(6):1130-1136. doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01283-9.
Epub  2022 May 11.

Neutralizing SARS-CoV-2 Antibodies in Commercial Immunoglobulin Products Give 
Patients with X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia Limited Passive Immunity to the 
Omicron Variant.

Lindahl H(1)(2), Klingström J(3), Da Silva Rodrigues R(1), Christ W(3), Chen 
P(3), Ljunggren HG(3), Buggert M(3), Aleman S(3)(4), Smith CIE(4)(5), Bergman 
P(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Karolinska 
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden. peter.bergman@ki.se.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. 
peter.bergman@ki.se.

Immunodeficient individuals often rely on donor-derived immunoglobulin (Ig) 
replacement therapy (IGRT) to prevent infections. The passive immunity obtained 
by IGRT is limited and reflects the state of immunity in the plasma donor 
population at the time of donation. The objective of the current study was to 
describe how the potential of passive immunity to SARS-CoV-2 in commercial 
off-the-shelf Ig products used for IGRT has evolved during the pandemic. Samples 
were collected from all consecutive Ig batches (n = 60) from three Ig producers 
used at the Immunodeficiency Unit at Karolinska University Hospital from the 
start of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic until January 2022. SARS-CoV-2 antibody 
concentrations and neutralizing capacity were assessed in all samples. In vivo 
relevance was assessed by sampling patients with XLA (n = 4), lacking endogenous 
immunoglobulin synthesis and on continuous Ig substitution, for plasma 
SARS-CoV-2 antibody concentration. SARS-CoV-2 antibody concentrations in 
commercial Ig products increased over time but remained inconsistently present. 
Moreover, Ig batches with high neutralizing capacity towards the Wuhan-strain of 
SARS-CoV-2 had 32-fold lower activity against the Omicron variant. Despite 
increasing SARS-CoV-2 antibody concentrations in commercial Ig products, four 
XLA patients on IGRT had relatively low plasma concentrations of SARS-CoV-2 
antibodies with no potential to neutralize the Omicron variant in vitro. In line 
with this observation, three out the four XLA patients had symptomatic COVID-19 
during the Omicron wave. In conclusion, 2 years into the pandemic the amounts of 
antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 vary considerably among commercial Ig batches obtained 
from three commercial producers. Importantly, in batches with high 
concentrations of antibodies directed against the original virus strain, 
protective passive immunity to the Omicron variant appears to be insufficient.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-022-01283-9
PMCID: PMC9090539
PMID: 35538387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare, except S. A. who has received honoraria for lectures and educational 
events from Gilead, AbbVie, MSD, and Biogen and research grants from Gilead and 
AbbVie, not related to this work.