1. RSC Adv. 2018 Jul 18;8(45):25617-25635. doi: 10.1039/c8ra03408g. eCollection 
2018 Jul 16.

A study on the removal of propyl, butyl, and benzyl parabens via newly 
synthesised ionic liquid loaded magnetically confined polymeric mesoporous 
adsorbent.

Md Yusoff M(1), Yahaya N(1), Md Saleh N(2), Raoov M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Medicine Cluster, Advanced Medical and Dental Institute, 
Universiti Sains Malaysia Bertam 13200 Kepala Batas Penang Malaysia.
(2)Research Centre For Sustainable Process Technology, Chemical Engineering 
Programme, Faculty of Engineering and Built Environment, Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia 43600 UKM Bangi Selangor Malaysia.
(3)University of Malaya Centre for Ionic Liquids, Department of Chemistry, 
Faculty of Science, Universiti Malaya Kuala Lumpur 50603 Malaysia 
muggundha@um.edu.my.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Universiti Malaya Kuala Lumpur 
50603 Malaysia.

This study investigated the effectiveness of ionic liquids (ILs) loaded onto the 
surface of a polymeric adsorbent (βCD-TDI) grafted with modified magnetic 
nanoparticles (MNPs) via an analysis of water treatment, which resulted in high 
removal of selected endocrine-disrupting chemicals (parabens). The syntheses of 
MNPs, MNP-βCD-TDI, and IL-MNP-βCD-TDI were characterised and compared using 
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, carbon-hydrogen-nitrogen (CHN) 
analysis, vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM), scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) 
method, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The 
results of SEM and TEM indicated that the pore size distribution exhibited 
mesoporous characteristics with a small surface area (BET analysis: 42.95 m2 
g-1). Furthermore, a preliminary sorption experiment demonstrated the ability of 
IL-MNP-βCD-TDI to enhance not only the sorption capacity, but also the removal 
of propyl paraben (PP), butyl paraben (BP), and benzyl paraben (ArP). The 
adsorption process appeared to be pH-dependent, and hence the optimum pH of 6 
was selected for a subsequent batch adsorption study of all the studied parabens 
with an equilibrium time of 80 min. Next, in an attempt to investigate the 
interactions that occur between the adsorbent and the adsorbates, adsorption 
kinetics and isotherm studies were performed. All the studied parabens were 
found to best fit pseudo-second-order kinetics and the Freundlich isotherm with 
R 2 > 0.98 at room temperature (298 K). The interaction of the host-guest 
inclusion complex and the π-π interaction between βCD and a selected paraben 
compound (ArP) were identified by performing 1H nuclear magnetic resonance 
(NMR), together with ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopic analysis. 
Finally, the adsorption efficiency of the developed material was practically 
tested on tap water, drain water, and industrial wastewater, which revealed a 
significant removal of parabens of up to 60-90% in comparison with a prior 
analysis.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/c8ra03408g
PMCID: PMC9082765
PMID: 35539765

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.