1. Aging (Albany NY). 2022 May 10;14(9):3941-3955. doi: 10.18632/aging.204055.
Epub  2022 May 10.

Elucidating the anti-aging mechanism of Si Jun Zi Tang by integrating network 
pharmacology and experimental validation in vivo.

Yuan Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Zheng R(1), Yuan H(1), Zhou R(1), Jia S(1), Liu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Aging and Tumor, Medical School, Kunming 
University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, Yunnan, China.

Si Jun Zi Tang (SJZT) is a classic Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) 
prescription used to treat aging-related diseases. However, the potential 
molecular mechanisms of the anti-aging effects of the bioactive compounds and 
their targets remain elusive. In this study, we combined network pharmacology 
and molecular docking with in vivo experiments to elucidate the anti-aging 
molecular mechanism of SJZT. A series of network pharmacology strategies were 
used to predict potential targets and therapeutic mechanisms of SJZT, including 
compound screening, pathway enrichment analysis and molecular docking studies. 
Based on the network pharmacology predictions and observation of outward signs 
of aging, the expression levels of selected genes and proteins and possible key 
targets were subsequently validated and analysed using qRT-PCR and 
immunoblotting. Using a data mining approach, 235 effective targets of SJZT and 
aging were obtained. AKT1, STAT3, JUN, MAPK3, TP53, MAPK1, TNF, RELA, MAPK14 and 
IL6 were identified as core genes in the Protein-Protein Interaction Networks 
(PPI) analysis. The results of the effective target Gene Ontology (Go) 
functional enrichment analysis suggested that SJZT may be involved aging and 
antiapoptotic biological processes. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG) enrichment analysis indicated that the anti-aging mechanism of SJZT may 
be associated with the PI3K-AKT and P38 MAPK signalling pathways. Molecular 
docking analysis suggested that kaempferol and quercetin could fit in the 
binding pockets of the core targets. In addition, SJZT alleviated the aging 
symptoms of mice such as osteoporosis and hair loss. In conclusion, the 
anti-aging effect of SJZT was associated with the inhibition of the PI3K-AKT and 
P38 MAPK signalling pathways, and these findings were consistent with the 
network pharmacology prediction.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.204055
PMCID: PMC9134961
PMID: 35537009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
potential conflicts of interest.