1. Microb Biotechnol. 2022 Aug;15(8):2281-2291. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.14071.
Epub  2022 May 10.

Functional divergence in the proteins encoded by ARO80 from S. uvarum, S. 
kudriavzevii and S. cerevisiae explain differences in the aroma production 
during wine fermentation.

Tapia SM(1), Pérez-Torrado R(1), Adam AC(1), Macías LG(1)(2), Barrio E(1)(2), 
Querol A(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biotecnología de los Alimentos, Grupo de Biología de Sistemas 
en Levaduras de Interés Biotecnológico, Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de 
Los Alimentos (IATA)-CSIC, 46980, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Departament de Genètica, Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain.

Phenylethanol (PE) and phenylethyl acetate (PEA) are commonly desired compounds 
in wine because of their rose-like aroma. The yeast S. cerevisiae produces the 
PE either through de novo biosynthesis by shikimate pathway followed by the 
Ehrlich pathway or the direct phenylalanine catabolism via Ehrlich pathway, and 
then converted into PEA. Previous work demonstrated that, compared to S. 
cerevisiae, other Saccharomyces species, such as S. kudriavzevii and S. uvarum, 
produce higher concentrations of PE and PEA from the precursor phenylalanine, 
which indicates differential activities of the biosynthetic-involved enzymes. A 
previous in-silico analysis suggested that the transcriptional activator Aro80p 
is one of the best candidates to explain these differences. An improved 
functional analysis identified significant radical amino acid changes in the S. 
uvarum and S. kudriavzevii Aro80p that could impact the expression of the 
catabolic genes ARO9 and ARO10, and hence, the production of PE from 
phenylalanine. Indeed, wine S. cerevisiae strains carrying the S. uvarum and S. 
kudriavzevii ARO80 alleles increased the production of both compounds in the 
presence of phenylalanine by increasing the expression of ARO9 and ARO10. This 
study provides novel insights of the unidentified Aro80p regulatory region and 
the potential usage of alternatives ARO80 alleles to enhance the PE and PEA 
concentration in wine.

© 2022 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by Society for Applied 
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1751-7915.14071
PMCID: PMC9328738
PMID: 35536034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.