1. RSC Adv. 2018 Mar 13;8(19):10246-10254. doi: 10.1039/c8ra00842f. eCollection 
2018 Mar 13.

Design, synthesis and characterization of a novel bluish-green long-lasting 
phosphorescence phosphor BaLu(2)Si(3)O(10):Eu(2+), Nd(3).

Liu J(1)(2), Li G(1)(2), Guo H(1)(2), Liu D(1)(2), Feng P(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials Science, School of Physical Science and Technology, 
Lanzhou University Lanzhou 730000 PR China wyh@lzu.edu.cn +86 931 8913554 +86 
931 8912772.
(2)Key Laboratory for Special Function Materials and Structural Design of the 
Ministry of Education, Lanzhou University Lanzhou 730000 China.

Through drawing upon a solid-state reaction, a newly proposed long-lasting 
phosphor BaLu2Si3O10:Eu2+, Nd3+ is presented and prepared in this work. The 
thermoluminescence properties of the phosphor are substantially extended, and 
the long-lasting phosphorescence behavior is markedly intensified by virtue of 
the consolidation of Nd3+ ions which serve as trap centers. In line with density 
functional theory calculations, the conduction band is mostly composed of Lu 5d 
states while the Ba 5d states only have a tiny contribution. We analyzed the 
relationship between the phosphor's electronic structure and its optical 
properties. The photoluminescence emission spectrum shows a blue emitting band 
with a wide asymmetric property and an extremum of 426 nm, arising from the 
5d-4f transitions of the Eu2+ ions which occupy the Ba and Lu sites. It is 
asserted that the long-lasting phosphorescence of the Eu2+ ions which take up 
both Ba and Lu sites stems from the special form of conduction band and the 
occupying environment of the emission center. Yet, they have different 
contributions and induce an interesting phenomenon in which the blue emitting 
phosphor shows a bluish-green phosphorescence. The long-lasting phosphorescence 
can last in excess of 6 h at the recognized intensity level (0.32 mcd m-2) after 
excitation for 10 min. This work provides a new way of thinking for the 
development of multicolored LLP materials. This work analyzes and sheds light on 
the specific courses and provides a likely mechanism for the process.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/c8ra00842f
PMCID: PMC9078895
PMID: 35540470

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.