1. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2022 Jul;192:107626. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2022.107626. Epub
 2022 May 8.

Isolation driven changes in Iba1-positive microglial morphology are associated 
with social recognition memory in adults and adolescents.

Ferrara NC(1), Trask S(2), Yan L(3), Padival M(3), Helmstetter FJ(4), Rosenkranz 
JA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Foundational Sciences and Humanities, Discipline of Cellular 
and Molecular Pharmacology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University 
of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA; Center for Neurobiology of 
Stress Resilience and Psychiatric Disorders, Rosalind Franklin University of 
Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic address: 
nicole.ferrara@rosalindfranklin.edu.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 
USA.
(3)Department of Foundational Sciences and Humanities, Discipline of Cellular 
and Molecular Pharmacology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University 
of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA; Center for Neurobiology of 
Stress Resilience and Psychiatric Disorders, Rosalind Franklin University of 
Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Department of Psychology, The University of 
Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

Microglia are critical for regulation of neuronal circuits that mature from 
adolescence to adulthood. The morphological complexity and process length of 
microglia can indicate different activation states. These states are sensitive 
to a variety of environmental and stress conditions. Microglia are sensitive to 
many factors that also regulate social behavior, and in turn, microglial 
manipulations can impact social function. Brief social isolation is one factor 
that can lead to robust social changes. Here, we explored the role of microglia 
in the effects of brief social isolation on social recognition memory. Using 
morphological measures of Iba1 to index microglial intensity, complexity, and 
process length, we identified different effects of brief isolation on microglial 
complexity in the basal region of the amygdala between adults and adolescents 
alongside overall increases in intensity of Iba1 in several cortical brain 
regions. Short-term social recognition memory is sensitive to the amount of 
social engagement, and provides an opportunity to test if social engagement 
produced by brief isolation enhances social learning in a manner that relies on 
microglia. We found that brief isolation facilitated social interaction across 
ages but had opposing effects on short-term social recognition. Isolation 
increased novel partner investigation in adolescents, which is consistent with 
better social recognition, but increased familiar partner investigation in 
adults. Depletion of microglia with PLX3397 prevented these effects of brief 
isolation in adolescents, and reduced them in adults. These results suggest that 
distinct changes in microglial function driven by the social environment may 
differentially contribute to subsequent social recognition memory during 
development.

Copyright Â© 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nlm.2022.107626
PMCID: PMC9669926
PMID: 35545212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.