1. Bioengineered. 2022 May;13(5):11867-11880. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2022.2060162.

Knockdown of ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2T (UBE2T) suppresses lung 
adenocarcinoma progression via targeting fibulin-5 (FBLN5).

Li Y(1), Yang X(1), Lu D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiration Medicine, People's Hospital of Shanxi Province, 
Taiyuan City, PR China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan City, 
PR China.

Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is the main histological type of lung cancer, which 
is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths. Accumulating evidence has 
displayed that UBE2T is related to tumor progression. However, its role in LUAD 
has not been fully elucidated. The expression of UBE2T was detected in LUAD 
tissues by qRT-PCR, western blotting, and immunohistochemistry. UBE2T shRNAs 
were transfected into LUAD cells to analyze the consequent alteration in 
function through CCK-8 assay, Edu assay, transwell assay, and TUNEL staining. 
The potential mechanism of UBE2T was analyzed through GEPIA and verified using 
ChIP, EMSA, and GST pull-down assays. Furthermore, a xenograft mouse model was 
used to assess UBE2T function in vivo. Results showed that UBE2T level was 
significantly elevated in LUAD tissues and high UBE2T expression was associated 
with poor overall survival and disease-free survival. Results from the 
loss-of-function experiments in vitro showed that UBE2T modulated LUAD cell 
proliferation, migration, invasion, and apoptosis. The mechanism analysis 
demonstrated that silence of UBE2T increased FBLN5 expression and inhibited the 
activation of p-ERK, p-GSK3β, and β-catenin. Moreover, following knockdown of 
UBE2T, the cell proliferation, migration, and invasion were decreased, and 
sh-FBLN5 partially reverse the decrease. In in vivo experiments, it was found 
that UBE2T knockdown inhibits the tumor growth in LUAD. Immunohistochemically, 
there was a reduction in Ki67 and an increase in FBLN5 in UBE2T shRNA-treated 
tumor tissues. In conclusion, UBE2T might be a potential biomarker of LUAD, and 
targeting the UBE2T/FBLN5 axis might be a novel treatment strategy for LUAD.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2022.2060162
PMCID: PMC9275889
PMID: 35543375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).