1. Histochem Cell Biol. 2022 Aug;158(2):193-198. doi: 10.1007/s00418-022-02112-1.
 Epub 2022 May 12.

Evidence of cell cycle re-entry in post-mitotic, terminally differentiated 
feline neurons.

Wisnet K(1), Payer CHF(1), Bauder B(1), Url A(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Department of Pathobiology, Vetmeduni Vienna, 
Veterinärplatz 1, 1210, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Department of Pathobiology, Vetmeduni Vienna, 
Veterinärplatz 1, 1210, Vienna, Austria. angelika.url@vetmeduni.ac.at.

Parvovirus infections in dogs and cats are restricted to highly mitotically 
active tissues, predominantly to the epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract 
and, in cases of prenatal infections in cats, also to Purkinje cell neuroblasts. 
The evidence of parvovirus-infected mature feline neurons gave rise to 
reconsider the dogma of post-mitotically fixed and terminally differentiated 
neurons in the adult central nervous system. To elucidate the postulated 
capability of certain terminally differentiated feline neurons to re-enter the 
cell cycle, immunohistochemical double labeling using the transcription factor 
Sox2 and the tumor suppressor and cell cycle regulator retinoblastoma protein in 
its phosphorylated state (pRb) was performed. Formalin-fixed and 
paraffin-embedded brain tissue negative for parvovirus-antigen from 14 cats was 
compared to brain tissue from 13 cats with immunohistochemically confirmed 
cerebral parvovirus infection; the 27 cats were aged between 50 days of 
gestation (E50) and 5 years. Both groups revealed nuclear Sox2 and pRb 
immunosignals in numerous neurons, suggesting a more active state than mature 
neurons should have. Accordingly, parvovirus is not exclusively involved in the 
reactivation of the cell cycle machinery in those post-mitotic, terminally 
differentiated feline neurons.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00418-022-02112-1
PMCID: PMC9338102
PMID: 35551458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interests.