1. Front Immunol. 2022 Apr 26;13:856376. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.856376. 
eCollection 2022.

Microglia in the Neuroinflammatory Pathogenesis of Alzheimer's Disease and 
Related Therapeutic Targets.

Cai Y(1), Liu J(1), Wang B(1), Sun M(1), Yang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Fetology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 
Suzhou, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disease 
worldwide, characterized by progressive neuron degeneration or loss due to 
excessive accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides, formation of neurofibrillary 
tangles (NFTs), and hyperphosphorylated tau. The treatment of AD has been only 
partially successful as the majority of the pharmacotherapies on the market may 
alleviate some of the symptoms. In the occurrence of AD, increasing attention 
has been paid to neurodegeneration, while the resident glial cells, like 
microglia are also observed. Microglia, a kind of crucial glial cells associated 
with the innate immune response, functions as double-edge sword role in CNS. 
They exert a beneficial or detrimental influence on the adjacent neurons through 
secretion of both pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as neurotrophic factors. In 
addition, their endocytosis of debris and toxic protein like Aβ and tau ensures 
homeostasis of the neuronal microenvironment. In this review, we will 
systematically summarize recent research regarding the roles of microglia in AD 
pathology and latest microglia-associated therapeutic targets mainly including 
pro-inflammatory genes, anti-inflammatory genes and phagocytosis at length, some 
of which are contradictory and controversial and warrant to further be 
investigated.

Copyright © 2022 Cai, Liu, Wang, Sun and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.856376
PMCID: PMC9086828
PMID: 35558075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.