1. Front Mol Biosci. 2022 Apr 26;9:864302. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.864302. 
eCollection 2022.

The Role of Extracellular Matrix Remodeling in Skin Tumor Progression and 
Therapeutic Resistance.

Fromme JE(1)(2), Zigrino P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University of Cologne, Faculty of 
Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Mildred Scheel School of Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Düsseldorf (MSSO ABCD), 
Cologne, Germany.

The extracellular matrix remodeling in the skin results from a delicate balance 
of synthesis and degradation of matrix components, ensuring tissue homeostasis. 
These processes are altered during tumor invasion and growth, generating a 
microenvironment that supports growth, invasion, and metastasis. Apart from the 
cellular component, the tumor microenvironment is rich in extracellular matrix 
components and bound factors that provide structure and signals to the tumor and 
stromal cells. The continuous remodeling in the tissue compartment sustains the 
developing tumor during the various phases providing matrices and proteolytic 
enzymes. These are produced by cancer cells and stromal fibroblasts. In addition 
to fostering tumor growth, the expression of specific extracellular matrix 
proteins and proteinases supports tumor invasion after the initial therapeutic 
response. Lately, the expression and structural modification of matrices were 
also associated with therapeutic resistance. This review will focus on the 
significant alterations in the extracellular matrix components and the function 
of metalloproteinases that influence skin cancer progression and support the 
acquisition of therapeutic resistance.

Copyright © 2022 Fromme and Zigrino.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.864302
PMCID: PMC9086898
PMID: 35558554

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.