1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Apr 25;14(9):2134. doi: 10.3390/cancers14092134.

Impact of Levetiracetam Treatment on 5-Aminolevulinic Acid Fluorescence 
Expression in IDH1 Wild-Type Glioblastoma.

Wach J(1), Güresir Á(1), Hamed M(1), Vatter H(1), Herrlinger U(2), Güresir E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(2)Division of Clinical Neurooncology, Department of Neurology and Centre of 
Integrated Oncology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

The amino acid 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA) is the most established 
neurosurgical fluorescent dye and facilitates the achievement of gross total 
resection. In vitro studies raised concerns that antiepileptic drugs (AED) 
reduce the quality of fluorescence. Between 2013 and 2018, 175 IDH1 wild-type 
glioblastoma (GB) patients underwent 5-ALA guided surgery. Patients' data were 
retrospectively reviewed regarding demographics, comorbidities, medications, 
tumor morphology, neuropathological characteristics, and their association with 
intraoperative 5-ALA fluorescence. The fluorescence of 5-ALA was graded in a 
three point scaling system (grade 0 = no; grade 1 = weak; grade 2 = strong). 
Univariable analysis shows that the intake of dexamethasone or levetiracetam, 
and larger preoperative tumor area significantly reduce the intraoperative 
fluorescence activity (fluorescence grade: 0 + 1). Multivariable binary logistic 
regression analysis demonstrates the preoperative intake of levetiracetam 
(adjusted odds ratio: 12.05, 95% confidence interval: 3.91-37.16, p = 0.001) as 
the only independent and significant risk factor for reduced fluorescence 
quality. Preoperative levetiracetam intake significantly reduced intraoperative 
fluorescence. The indication for levetiracetam in suspected GB should be 
carefully reviewed and prophylactic treatment avoided for this tumor entity. 
Future comparative trials of neurosurgical fluorescent dyes need a special focus 
on the influence of levetiracetam on fluorescence intensity. Further trials must 
validate our findings.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14092134
PMCID: PMC9099986
PMID: 35565263

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.