1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Apr 20;23(9):4518. doi: 10.3390/ijms23094518.

Comparative Study of Starch Phosphorylase Genes and Encoded Proteins in Various 
Monocots and Dicots with Emphasis on Maize.

Yu G(1)(2), Shoaib N(1), Xie Y(1), Liu L(1), Mughal N(1), Li Y(2), Huang H(1), 
Zhang N(3), Zhang J(4), Liu Y(5), Hu Y(2), Liu H(4), Huang Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Demonstration Center for Experimental Crop Science Education, 
College of Agronomy, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Crop Gene Exploration and Utilization in Southwest 
China, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, China.
(3)College of Science, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, China.
(4)College of Life Science, Sichuan Agricultural University, Ya'an 625014, 
China.
(5)Maize Research Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, 
China.

Starch phosphorylase (PHO) is a multimeric enzyme with two distinct isoforms: 
plastidial starch phosphorylase (PHO1) and cytosolic starch phosphorylase 
(PHO2). PHO1 specifically resides in the plastid, while PHO2 is found in the 
cytosol. Both play a critical role in the synthesis and degradation of starch. 
This study aimed to report the detailed structure, function, and evolution of 
genes encoding PHO1 and PHO2 and their protein ligand-binding sites in eight 
monocots and four dicots. "True" orthologs of PHO1 and PHO2 of Oryza sativa were 
identified, and the structure of the enzyme at the protein level was studied. 
The genes controlling PHO2 were found to be more conserved than those 
controlling PHO1; the variations were mainly due to the variable sequence and 
length of introns. Cis-regulatory elements in the promoter region of both genes 
were identified, and the expression pattern was analyzed. The real-time 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction indicated that PHO2 was expressed in all 
tissues with a uniform pattern of transcripts, and the expression pattern of 
PHO1 indicates that it probably contributes to the starch biosynthesis during 
seed development in Zea mays. Under abscisic acid (ABA) treatment, PHO1 was 
found to be downregulated in Arabidopsis and Hordeum vulgare. However, we found 
that ABA could up-regulate the expression of both PHO1 and PHO2 within 12 h in 
Zea mays. In all monocots and dicots, the 3D structures were highly similar, and 
the ligand-binding sites were common yet fluctuating in the position of aa 
residues.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23094518
PMCID: PMC9104829
PMID: 35562912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.