1. Front Physiol. 2022 Apr 25;13:873370. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.873370. 
eCollection 2022.

The Effects of Eccentric Strength Training on Flexibility and Strength in 
Healthy Samples and Laboratory Settings: A Systematic Review.

Vetter S(1), Schleichardt A(2), Köhler HP(1), Witt M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomechanics in Sports, Faculty of Sports Science, Leipzig 
University, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Biomechanics, Institute for Applied Training Science, Leipzig, 
Germany.

Background: The risk of future injury appears to be influenced by agonist 
fascicle length (FL), joint range of motion (ROM) and eccentric strength. 
Biomechanical observations of the torque-angle-relationship further reveal a 
strong dependence on these factors. In practice, a longer FL improves sprinting 
performance and lowers injury risk. Classical stretching is a popular and 
evidenced-based training for enhancing ROM but does not have any effects on FL 
and injury risk. However, recent studies show that eccentric-only training (ECC) 
improves both flexibility and strength, and effectively lowers risk of injury. 
Objectives: To review the evidence on benefits of ECC for flexibility and 
strength. Methods: COCHRANE, PUBMED, SCOPUS, SPOLIT, and SPONET were searched 
for laboratory trials that compare ECC to at least one comparison group. Studies 
were eligible if they examined both strength and flexibility metrics in a 
healthy sample (<65 years) and met criteria for controlled or randomized 
clinical trials (CCT, RCT). 18 studies have been included and successfully rated 
using the PEDro scale. Results: 16 of 18 studies show strong evidence of 
strength and flexibility enhancements for the lower limb. While improvements 
between ECC and concentric training (CONC) were similar for eccentric (+19 ± 10% 
vs. +19 ± 11%) and isometric strength (+16 ± 10% vs. +13 ± 6%), CONC showed 
larger improvements for concentric strength (+9 ± 6% vs. +16 ± 7%). While for 
ROM ECC showed improvements (+9 ± 7%), no results could be found for CONC. The 
overall effectiveness of ECC seems to be higher than of CONC. Conclusion: There 
is clear evidence that ECC is an effective method for changes in muscle 
architecture, leading to both flexibility and strength improvements for the 
lower limb. Due to limited data no shoulder study could be included. Further 
research is needed for the upper body joints with a focus on functional and 
structural adaptions. Systematic Review Registration: 
https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?ID=CRD42021283248, 
identifier CRD42021283248.

Copyright © 2022 Vetter, Schleichardt, Köhler and Witt.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2022.873370
PMCID: PMC9100951
PMID: 35574461

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.