1. J Tissue Eng. 2022 May 9;13:20417314221095339. doi: 10.1177/20417314221095339.
 eCollection 2022 Jan-Dec.

Induced pluripotent stem cell-based organ-on-a-chip as personalized drug 
screening tools: A focus on neurodegenerative disorders.

Fanizza F(1), Campanile M(1), Forloni G(2), Giordano C(1), Albani D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Materials and Chemical Engineering "Giulio Natta," 
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri 
IRCCS, Milan, Italy.

The Organ-on-a-Chip (OoC) technology shows great potential to revolutionize the 
drugs development pipeline by mimicking the physiological environment and 
functions of human organs. The translational value of OoC is further enhanced 
when combined with patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) to 
develop more realistic disease models, paving the way for the development of a 
new generation of patient-on-a-chip devices. iPSCs differentiation capacity 
leads to invaluable improvements in personalized medicine. Moreover, the 
connection of single-OoC into multi-OoC or body-on-a-chip allows to investigate 
drug pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetics through the study of multi-organs 
cross-talks. The need of a breakthrough thanks to this technology is 
particularly relevant within the field of neurodegenerative diseases, where the 
number of patients is increasing and the successful rate in drug discovery is 
worryingly low. In this review we discuss current iPSC-based OoC as drug 
screening models and their implication in development of new therapies for 
neurodegenerative disorders.

Â© The Author(s) 2022.

DOI: 10.1177/20417314221095339
PMCID: PMC9092580
PMID: 35570845

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.