1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Apr 27;13:855559. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.855559. 
eCollection 2022.

Calcium Mediated Cold Acclimation in Plants: Underlying Signaling and Molecular 
Mechanisms.

Iqbal Z(1), Memon AG(2), Ahmad A(3), Iqbal MS(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Crop Research Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Qassim University, Buraydah, 
Saudi Arabia.
(3)Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Lucknow, Lucknow, India.

Exposure of plants to low temperatures adversely affects plant growth, 
development, and productivity. Plant response to cold stress is an intricate 
process that involves the orchestration of various physiological, signaling, 
biochemical, and molecular pathways. Calcium (Ca2+) signaling plays a crucial 
role in the acquisition of several stress responses, including cold. Upon 
perception of cold stress, Ca2+ channels and/or Ca2+ pumps are activated, which 
induces the Ca2+ signatures in plant cells. The Ca2+ signatures spatially and 
temporally act inside a plant cell and are eventually decoded by specific Ca2+ 
sensors. This series of events results in the molecular regulation of several 
transcription factors (TFs), leading to downstream gene expression and 
withdrawal of an appropriate response by the plant. In this context, calmodulin 
binding transcription activators (CAMTAs) constitute a group of TFs that 
regulate plant cold stress responses in a Ca2+ dependent manner. The present 
review provides a catalog of the recent progress made in comprehending the Ca2+ 
mediated cold acclimation in plants.

Copyright Â© 2022 Iqbal, Memon, Ahmad and Iqbal.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.855559
PMCID: PMC9094111
PMID: 35574126

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.