1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Apr 28;12:885348. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.885348. eCollection 2022.

Low Prevalence of Toxoplasma gondii in Dogs From Central China.

Zhu N(1)(2), Yang L(1), Xin S(1), Huang W(1), Jiang Y(2), Yang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, 
China.
(2)College of Animal Science, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Toxoplasma gondii can infect almost all warm-blooded animals, 
including humans and dogs. Humans can become infected with T. gondii by petting 
dogs that have eaten or contacted infected cat feces. The aim of this study was 
to evaluate T. gondii infections in dogs from central China. From 2015 to 2021, 
a total of 536 dog samples (195 fecal, 81 hearts, and 260 serum samples) from 
Henan Province were collected. Heart juice or serum samples (n = 341) were 
tested for T. gondii antibodies using the modified agglutination test (MAT). 
Fresh myocardium (n = 6) and blood (n = 2) samples were bioassayed in mice.
RESULTS: The present study showed that 4.40% (15/341) of the dogs were 
seropositive for T. gondii by MAT (cut-off, 1:25) and 4.10% (8/195) of dog feces 
contained T. gondii DNA. No T. gondii DNA was found in any myocardium (n = 81) 
or blood (n = 2) samples. The viable T. gondii strain was not isolated from any 
myocardium or blood samples (n = 8). Compared to the prevalence of T. gondii 
antibodies in dogs sampled from 2015 to 2018, the prevalence significantly 
declined from 2020 to 2021 (P < 0.05). Gender and age were not risk factors for 
dogs infected with T. gondii in this study. However, compared to other sources, 
dogs from Zhoukou City (close to the Yellow River) or from pet shops showed 
significantly higher prevalence for T. gondii (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: A total of 4.29% dogs were infected by T. gondii (23/536, 8 of 195 
fecal samples, 2 of 260 serum, and 13 of 81 heart juice samples). This is the 
first survey of T. gondii infection in dog feces from China. Dogs were exposed 
to T. gondii, and they could act as mechanical transmitters of T. gondii.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zhu, Yang, Xin, Huang, Jiang and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.885348
PMCID: PMC9097580
PMID: 35573782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.