1. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac084. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac084.

Attribution of Cancer Origins to Endogenous, Exogenous, and Preventable 
Mutational Processes.

Cannataro VL(1), Mandell JD(2), Townsend JP(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Emmanuel College, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, USA.

Mutational processes in tumors create distinctive patterns of mutations, 
composed of neutral "passenger" mutations and oncogenic drivers that have 
quantifiable effects on the proliferation and survival of cancer cell lineages. 
Increases in proliferation and survival are mediated by natural selection, which 
can be quantified by comparing the frequency at which we detect substitutions to 
the frequency at which we expect to detect substitutions assuming neutrality. 
Most of the variants detectable with whole-exome sequencing in tumors are 
neutral or nearly neutral in effect, and thus the processes generating the 
majority of mutations may not be the primary sources of the tumorigenic 
mutations. Across 24 cancer types, we identify the contributions of mutational 
processes to each oncogenic variant and quantify the degree to which each 
process contributes to tumorigenesis. We demonstrate that the origination of 
variants driving melanomas and lung cancers is predominantly attributable to the 
preventable, exogenous mutational processes associated with ultraviolet light 
and tobacco exposure, respectively, whereas the origination of selected variants 
in gliomas and prostate adenocarcinomas is largely attributable to endogenous 
processes associated with aging. Preventable mutations associated with pathogen 
exposure and apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme activity account for a large 
proportion of the cancer effect within head-and-neck, bladder, cervical, and 
breast cancers. These attributions complement epidemiological 
approaches-revealing the burden of cancer driven by single-nucleotide variants 
caused by either endogenous or exogenous, nonpreventable, or preventable 
processes, and crucially inform public health strategies.

Â© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac084
PMCID: PMC9113445
PMID: 35580068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]