1. Cancer Drug Resist. 2021 Mar 19;4(1):1-16. doi: 10.20517/cdr.2020.61. 
eCollection 2021.

The role of extracellular vesicles in acquisition of resistance to therapy in 
glioblastomas.

Yekula A(1), Taylor A(2), Beecroft A(2), Kang KM(1), Small JL(1), Muralidharan 
K(1), Rosh Z(1), Carter BS(1), Balaj L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, 
USA.
(2)Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602, USA.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive primary brain tumor with a median 
survival of 15 months despite standard care therapy consisting of maximal 
surgical debulking, followed by radiation therapy with concurrent and adjuvant 
temozolomide treatment. The natural history of GBM is characterized by 
inevitable recurrence with patients dying from increasingly resistant tumor 
regrowth after therapy. Several mechanisms including inter- and intratumoral 
heterogeneity, the evolution of therapy-resistant clonal subpopulations, 
reacquisition of stemness in glioblastoma stem cells, multiple drug efflux 
mechanisms, the tumor-promoting microenvironment, metabolic adaptations, and 
enhanced repair of drug-induced DNA damage have been implicated in therapy 
failure. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have emerged as crucial mediators in the 
maintenance and establishment of GBM. Multiple seminal studies have uncovered 
the multi-dynamic role of EVs in the acquisition of drug resistance. Mechanisms 
include EV-mediated cargo transfer and EVs functioning as drug efflux channels 
and decoys for antibody-based therapies. In this review, we discuss the various 
mechanisms of therapy resistance in GBM, highlighting the emerging role of 
EV-orchestrated drug resistance. Understanding the landscape of GBM resistance 
is critical in devising novel therapeutic approaches to fight this deadly 
disease.

Â© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.20517/cdr.2020.61
PMCID: PMC9019190
PMID: 35582008

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared that there are no conflicts 
of interest.