1. Front Immunol. 2022 May 3;13:869570. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.869570.
eCollection  2022.

Deficiency of Human Adenosine Deaminase Type 2 - A Diagnostic Conundrum for the 
Hematologist.

Pilania RK(1), Banday AZ(1), Sharma S(1), Kumrah R(1), Joshi V(1), Loganathan 
S(1), Dhaliwal M(1), Jindal AK(1), Vignesh P(1), Suri D(1), Rawat A(1), Singh 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Allergy Immunology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Advanced 
Pediatrics Centre, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research 
(PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.

Deficiency of adenosine deaminase type 2 (DADA2) was first described in 2014 as 
a monogenic cause of polyartertitis nodosa (PAN), early onset lacunar stroke and 
livedo reticularis. The clinical phenotype of DADA2 is, however, very broad and 
may involve several organ systems. Apart from vasculitis, children may present 
with i) Hematological manifestations (ii) Lymphoproliferation and iii) 
Immunodeficiencies. Patients with DADA2 can have variable patterns of cytopenias 
and bone marrow failure syndromes. Patients with DADA2 who have predominant 
haematological manifestations are associated with ADA2 gene variants that result 
in minimal or no residual ADA2 activity. Lymphoproliferation in patients with 
DADA2 may range from benign lymphoid hyperplasia to lymphoreticular 
malignancies. Patients may present with generalized lymphadenopathy, 
splenomegaly, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) like phenotype, 
Hodgkin lymphoma, T-cell large granular lymphocytic infiltration of bone marrow 
and multicentric Castleman disease. Immunodeficiencies associated with DADA are 
usually mild. Affected patients have variable hypogammaglobulinemia, decrease in 
B cells, low natural killer cells, common variable immunodeficiency and rarely T 
cell immunodeficiency. To conclude, DADA2 has an extremely variable phenotype 
and needs to be considered as a differential diagnosis in diverse clinical 
conditions. In this review, we describe the evolving clinical phenotypes of 
DADA2 with a special focus on haematological and immunological manifestations.

Copyright Â© 2022 Pilania, Banday, Sharma, Kumrah, Joshi, Loganathan, Dhaliwal, 
Jindal, Vignesh, Suri, Rawat and Singh.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.869570
PMCID: PMC9110783
PMID: 35592317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.