1. Blood. 2022 Aug 25;140(8):815-827. doi: 10.1182/blood.2022015970.

The multifaceted role of platelets in mediating brain function.

Burnouf T(1)(2)(3)(4), Walker TL(5).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Materials and Tissue Engineering.
(2)International Ph.D. Program in Biomedical Engineering, College of Biomedical 
Engineering.
(3)International Ph.D. Program in Cell Therapy and Regeneration Medicine, and.
(4)Ph.D. Program in Graduate Institute of Mind Brain and Consciousness, College 
of Humanities and Social Sciences, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; 
and.
(5)Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia.

Platelets, the small, anucleate blood cells that originate from megakaryocytes 
in the bone marrow, are typically associated with coagulation. However, it is 
now apparent that platelets are more multifaceted than originally thought, with 
their function extending beyond their traditional role in hemostasis to acting 
as important mediators of brain function. In this review, we outline the broad 
repertoire of platelet function in the central nervous system, focusing on the 
similarities between platelets and neurons. We also summarize the role that 
platelets play in the pathophysiology of various neurological diseases, with a 
particular focus on neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. Finally, we 
highlight the exciting prospect of harnessing the unique features of the 
platelet proteome and extracellular vesicles, which are rich in neurotrophic, 
antioxidative, and antiinflammatory factors, for the development of novel 
neuroprotective and neuroregenerative interventions to treat various 
neurodegenerative and traumatic pathologies.

Â© 2022 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2022015970
PMCID: PMC9412009
PMID: 35609283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]