1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 May 6;12:894213. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.894213. eCollection 2022.

Tag Thy Neighbour: Nanometre-Scale Insights Into Kinetoplastid Parasites With 
Proximity Dependent Biotinylation.

Geoghegan V(1), Mottram JC(1), Jones NG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, York Biomedical Research Institute, University of 
York, York, United Kingdom.

Proximity labelling is a powerful and rapidly developing technology for 
exploring the interaction space and molecular environment of a protein of 
interest at the nanometre scale. In proximity labelling, a promiscuous 
biotinylating enzyme is genetically fused to the protein of interest, initiation 
of labelling then results in the biotinylating enzyme generating reactive biotin 
which covalently 'tags' nearby molecules. Importantly, this labelling takes 
place in vivo whilst the protein of interest continues to perform its normal 
functions in the cell. Due to its unique advantageous characteristics, proximity 
labelling is driving discoveries in an ever increasing range of organisms. Here, 
we highlight the applications of proximity labelling to the study of 
kinetoplastids, a group of eukaryotic protozoa that includes trypanosomes and 
Leishmania which can cause serious disease in humans and livestock. We first 
provide a general overview of the proximity labelling experimental workflow 
including key labelling enzymes used, proper experimental design with 
appropriate controls and robust statistical analysis to maximise the amount of 
reliable spatial information that is generated. We discuss studies employing 
proximity labelling in kinetoplastid parasites to illustrate how these key 
principles of experimental design are applied. Finally, we highlight emerging 
trends in the development of proximity labelling methodology.

Copyright Â© 2022 Geoghegan, Mottram and Jones.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.894213
PMCID: PMC9120650
PMID: 35601102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.