1. Bioengineered. 2022 May;13(5):12625-12636. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2022.2076499.

Gastrodin protects retinal ganglion cells from ischemic injury by activating 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B/nuclear factor erythroid 
2-related factor 2 (PI3K/AKT/Nrf2) signaling pathway.

Li S(1), Yang Q(1), Zhou Z(1), Yang X(1), Liu Y(1), Hao K(1), Fu M(1).

Author information:
(1)Nanjing Tongren Eye Center, Nanjing Tongren Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Southeast University, Nanjing, P.R. China.

Glaucoma is a progressive optic neuropathy and improper treatment may cause 
irreversible damage to visual function. Gastrodin is an effective active 
substance extracted from Gastrodia elata and possesses antioxidant as well as 
anti-inflammatory properties. However, the therapeutic potential of gastrodin 
for retinal ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury remains unclear. We adopted oxygen 
and glucose deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/R) to induce R28 cells with the aim 
of simulating glaucomatous neurodegeneration. CCK-8 analysis and TUNEL were 
applied for examining cell proliferation and apoptosis . In addition, RT-qPCR 
and ELISA were performed to test the releases of inflammatory factors in cells . 
Related indicators of intracellular oxidative stress and ROS production were 
detected by corresponding kits. Moreover, western blot was applied to assay the 
expressions of PI3K/AKT/Nrf2 pathway-related proteins. OGD/R induction 
contributed to the decreased cell viability and reduced Bcl-2 protein 
expression, while the protein contents of Bax, Cyto-C, c-caspase 9 and c-PARP as 
well as ROS production were ascended. The co-treatment of hypoxia and gastrodin 
greatly improved R28 cell viability but effectively suppressed cell apoptosis, 
ROS level and the releases of OGD/R-induced inflammatory factors as well as 
oxidative stress. In addition, OGD/R stimulation reduced Nrf2, accompanied by a 
decrease in the phosphorylation levels of PI3K and AKT. Gastrodin significantly 
promoted the activation of PI3K/AKT/Nrf2 signaling pathway in R28 cells, which 
was then counteracted by PI3K/AKT inhibitors. In conclusion, the present study 
suggested that gastrodin has a protective effect on OGD/R-induced R28 cell 
injury, which is achieved through the activation of the PI3K/AKT/Nrf2 signaling 
pathway.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2022.2076499
PMCID: PMC9275977
PMID: 35609324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).