1. PLoS One. 2022 May 26;17(5):e0267295. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0267295. 
eCollection 2022.

High prevalence of an alpha variant lineage with a premature stop codon in ORF7a 
in Iraq, winter 2020-2021.

Al-Rashedi NAM(1), Alburkat H(2), Hadi AO(3)(4), Munahi MG(5), Jasim A(4), 
Hameed A(3), Oda BS(4), Lilo KM(6), AlObaidi LAH(1), Vapalahti O(2), Sironen 
T(2), Smura T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, College of Science, Al-Muthanna University, Samawah, 
Iraq.
(2)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Department of Health Administration, College of Health & Medical Technology, 
Sawa University, Samawah, Iraq.
(4)Department of Public Health, Al-Muthanna Health Directorate, Samawah, Iraq.
(5)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, Al-Muthanna University, Samawah, 
Iraq.
(6)Directorate of Medical Affairs, Ministry of Health, Baghdad, Iraq.

Since the first reported case of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in China, 
SARS-CoV-2 has been spreading worldwide. Genomic surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 has 
had a critical role in tracking the emergence, introduction, and spread of new 
variants, which may affect transmissibility, pathogenicity, and escape from 
infection or vaccine-induced immunity. As anticipated, the rapid increase in 
COVID-19 infections in Iraq in February 2021 is due to the introduction of 
variants of concern during the second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic. To 
understand the molecular epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 during the second wave in 
Iraq (2021), we sequenced 76 complete SARS-CoV-2 genomes using NGS technology 
and identified genomic mutations and proportions of circulating variants among 
these. Also, we performed an in silico study to predict the effect of the 
truncation of NS7a protein (ORF7a) on its function. We detected nine different 
lineages of SARS-CoV-2. The B.1.1.7 lineage was predominant (80.20%) from 
February to May 2021, while only one B.1.351 strain was detected. Interestingly, 
the phylogenetic analysis showed that multiple strains of the B.1.1.7 lineage 
clustered closely with those from European countries. A notable frequency 
(43.33%) of stop codon mutation (NS7a Q62stop) was detected among the B.1.1.7 
lineage sequences. In silico analysis of NS7a with Q62stop found that this stop 
codon had no considerable effect on the function of NS7a. This work provides 
molecular epidemiological insights into the spread variants of SARS-CoV-2 in 
Iraq, which are most likely imported from Europe.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0267295
PMCID: PMC9135184
PMID: 35617193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.