1. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 2022 May 24;8(1):61. doi: 10.1038/s41531-022-00322-x.

Beta2-adrenoreceptor agonist clenbuterol produces transient decreases in 
alpha-synuclein mRNA but no long-term reduction in protein.

Patterson JR(1), Hirst WD(2), Howe JW(3)(4), Russell CP(5), Cole-Strauss A(3), 
Kemp CJ(3), Duffy MF(3)(4), Lamp J(3), Umstead A(3), Kubik M(3)(4), Stoll 
AC(3)(6), Vega IE(3), Steece-Collier K(3), Chen Y(2), Campbell AC(2), Nezich 
CL(2), Glajch KE(2), Sortwell CE(3)(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Neuroscience, Michigan State University, Grand 
Rapids, MI, USA. patte401@msu.edu.
(2)Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Unit, Biogen, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Translational Neuroscience, Michigan State University, Grand 
Rapids, MI, USA.
(4)Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(5)Cell and Molecular Biology Department, Grand Valley State University, 
Allendale, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI, USA.
(7)Mercy Health Hauenstein Neuroscience Medical Center, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.

β2-adrenoreceptor (β2AR) agonists have been associated with a decreased risk of 
developing Parkinson's disease (PD) and are hypothesized to decrease expression 
of both alpha-synuclein mRNA (Snca) and protein (α-syn). Effects of β2AR agonist 
clenbuterol on the levels of Snca mRNA and α-syn protein were evaluated in vivo 
(rats and mice) and in rat primary cortical neurons by two independent 
laboratories. A modest decrease in Snca mRNA in the substantia nigra was 
observed after a single acute dose of clenbuterol in rats, however, this 
decrease was not maintained after multiple doses. In contrast, α-syn protein 
levels remained unchanged in both single and multiple dosing paradigms. 
Furthermore, clenbuterol did not decrease Snca in cultured rat primary cortical 
neurons, or decrease Snca or α-syn in mice. Additionally, compared to the 
single-dose paradigm, repeat dosing resulted in substantially lower levels of 
clenbuterol in plasma and brain tissue in rodents. Based on our observations of 
a transient decrease in Snca and no effect on α-syn protein in this preclinical 
study, these data support the conclusion that clenbuterol is not likely a viable 
disease-modifying strategy for PD.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41531-022-00322-x
PMCID: PMC9130326
PMID: 35610264

Conflict of interest statement: W.D.H., YC, A.C.C., C.L.N., and K.E.G. are 
employees of Biogen Inc. The authors declare no other competing interests.