1. Front Immunol. 2022 May 10;13:894445. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.894445. 
eCollection 2022.

The Role of C-Type Lectin Receptor Signaling in the Intestinal 
Microbiota-Inflammation-Cancer Axis.

Li M(1)(2), Zhang R(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Li J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Gut Microbiota Translational Medicine Research, Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

As a subset of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), C-type lectin-like 
receptors (CLRs) are mainly expressed by myeloid cells as both transmembrane and 
soluble forms. CLRs recognize not only pathogen associated molecular patterns 
(PAMPs), but also damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) to promote innate 
immune responses and affect adaptive immune responses. Upon engagement by PAMPs 
or DAMPs, CLR signaling initiates various biological activities in vivo, such as 
cytokine secretion and immune cell recruitment. Recently, several CLRs have been 
implicated as contributory to the pathogenesis of intestinal inflammation, which 
represents a prominent risk factor for colorectal cancer (CRC). CLRs function as 
an interface among microbiota, intestinal epithelial barrier and immune system, 
so we firstly discussed the relationship between dysbiosis caused by microbiota 
alteration and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), then focused on the role of 
CLRs signaling in pathogenesis of IBD (including Mincle, Dectin-3, Dectin-1, 
DCIR, DC-SIGN, LOX-1 and their downstream CARD9). Given that CLRs mediate 
intricate inflammatory signals and inflammation plays a significant role in 
tumorigenesis, we finally highlight the specific effects of CLRs on CRC, 
especially colitis-associated cancer (CAC), hoping to open new horizons on 
pathogenesis and therapeutics of IBD and CAC.

Copyright Â© 2022 Li, Zhang, Li and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.894445
PMCID: PMC9127077
PMID: 35619716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.