1. Gene. 2022 Aug 5;834:146612. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2022.146612. Epub 2022 May
23.

Using comparative genomics to detect mutations regulating plumage variations in 
graylag (A. anser) and swan geese (A. cygnoides).

Yang Y(1), Wang H(1), Li G(1), Liu Y(1), Wang C(1), Qiu S(2), Wang X(1), Yao 
J(1), Zhu L(1), He D(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Husbandry & Veterinary Science, Shanghai Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 201106, PR China.
(2)Chinese Academy of Inspection and Quarantine, Beijing 100176, PR China.
(3)Institute of Animal Husbandry & Veterinary Science, Shanghai Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 201106, PR China. Electronic address: 
daqianhe2022@163.com.

Although graylag geese (A. anser) showed similar plumages of white, grey, and 
white with grey patches compared to those in swan geese (A. cygnoides), it was 
believed the substantial molecular mechanism for plumage variations were 
different. To date, studies on genes responsible for diverse plumages among 
graylag geese were limited and causal mutations remain unknown. In this study, 
genomes from 57 individuals belonging to six breeds showing different plumages 
were sequenced at ∼10X depth. Firstly, the allele frequency differences (AFD) of 
variants on the scaffold394 (NW_013185915.1) between grey and white goose breeds 
(A. anser) was calculated and a genomic region between 768,290-779,889 bp was 
detected to carry candidate variants associated with plumages, including one SNP 
(g. 775,151G > T, ∼18.6 kb upstream of EDNRB2) found to be fixed in white geese. 
This region was overlapped with the one detected by the haplotype-based sweep 
analysis, in which significant signals defined a candidate region of 
736,610-820,622 bp on the same scaffold. Results from the transcriptomic data 
showed that expression levels of EDNRB2 and many other melanogenesis-related 
genes were significantly decreased among white geese compared to that in grey 
geese, especially at late embryonic stages (>E15). Modifications at 
transcriptional levels might result in abnormal melanocyte developments and thus 
the white plumages when they grow up. In addition, a frameshift mutation (C > -) 
in exon4 of MLANA gene on scaffold176 (NW_013185876.1) was suggested as the 
causal mutation for sex-linked dilution phenotype in graylag geese although this 
requires more demonstration experiments. Together with observed white plumages 
caused by EDNRB2 mutations in coding regions among swan geese and chicken, our 
study provided new examples to study the parallel evolution.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2022.146612
PMID: 35618220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]