1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Apr 26;13(5):763. doi: 10.3390/genes13050763.

p53N236S Activates Autophagy in Response to Hypoxic Stress Induced by DFO.

Gao K(1), Zong H(1), Hou K(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang R(1), Zhao D(1), Guo X(1), Luo 
Y(2), Jia S(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Aging and Tumor, Medical School, Kunming 
University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China.
(2)Guizhou Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenesis and Drug Development on 
Common Chronic Diseases, School of Basic Medicine, Guizhou Medical University, 
Guiyang 550000, China.

Hypoxia can lead to stabilization of the tumor suppressor gene p53 and cell 
death. However, p53 mutations could promote cell survival in a hypoxic 
environment. In this study, we found that p53N236S (p53N239S in humans, 
hereinafter referred to as p53S) mutant mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) 
resistant to deferoxamine (DFO) mimic a hypoxic environment. Further, Western 
blot and flow cytometry showed reduced apoptosis in p53S/S cells compared to WT 
after DFO treatment, suggesting an antiapoptosis function of p53S mutation in 
response to hypoxia-mimetic DFO. Instead, p53S/S cells underwent autophagy in 
response to hypoxia stress presumably through inhibition of the AKT/mTOR 
pathway, and this process was coupled with nuclear translocation of p53S 
protein. To understand the relationship between autophagy and apoptosis in 
p53S/S cells in response to hypoxia, the autophagic inhibitor 3-MA was used to 
treat both WT and p53S/S cells after DFO exposure. Both apoptotic signaling and 
cell death were enhanced by autophagy inhibition in p53S/S cells. In addition, 
the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and the ROS level results indicated 
that p53S might initiate mitophagy to clear up damaged mitochondria in response 
to hypoxic stress, thus increasing the proportion of intact mitochondria and 
maintaining cell survival. In conclusion, the p53S mutant activates autophagy 
instead of inducing an apoptotic process in response to hypoxia stress to 
protect cells from death.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13050763
PMCID: PMC9141750
PMID: 35627147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.