1. Brain Sci. 2022 Apr 28;12(5):567. doi: 10.3390/brainsci12050567.

Is Interstitial Chemotherapy with Carmustine (BCNU) Wafers Effective against 
Local Recurrence of Glioblastoma? A Pharmacokinetic Study by Measurement of BCNU 
in the Tumor Resection Cavity.

Ohnishi T(1), Yamashita D(2), Inoue A(2), Suehiro S(2), Ohue S(3), Kunieda T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Washoukai Sadamoto Hospital, Matsuyama 790-0052, 
Ehime, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Toon 791-0295, Ehime, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Ehime Prefectural Central Hospital, Matsuyama 
790-0024, Ehime, Japan.

The effectiveness of carmustine (BCNU) wafers on local recurrence of 
glioblastoma (GBM) remains contentious. We investigated the accumulating 
high-dose effects of BCNU released from the wafers on the survival of GBM 
patients by measuring BCNU concentration in the resection cavity of GBM over 
time. BCNU wafers (GliadelÂ®) were implanted with an Ommaya device in 15 
patients, including 12 patients with GBM. BCNU concentrations in the tumor 
resection cavity were measured for 30 days postoperatively. The area under the 
curve (AUC)all was calculated from BCNU concentration curves, and the 
relationships between AUCall and survival, tumor phenotypes on MRI, and 
recurrence patterns were analyzed. The BCNU concentration was maximal 1 h 
postoperatively, rapidly decreased within 24 h, and remained relatively high for 
7 days. GBM patients were classified into two groups: early recurrence (ER) and 
late or no recurrence (LN), using median progression-free survival as the 
cut-off. AUCall tended to be lower in the ER group than in the LN group, but the 
difference was not significant. MRI revealed that all patients in the ER group 
had highly invasive GBMs, whereas all patients in the LN group had less-invasive 
GBMs. A total of 9 patients experienced recurrence, with 6 local, 2 diffuse, and 
1 disseminated patterns. No differences in AUCall were seen between local and 
non-local recurrence groups. Total BCNU concentrations did not correlate with 
tumor progression or survival. However, a high concentration of BCNU may have 
potential to provide some survival benefit for less-invasive type GBM.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci12050567
PMCID: PMC9139119
PMID: 35624954

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this manuscript have no conflict 
of interest to declare.