1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 May 14;23(10):5485. doi: 10.3390/ijms23105485.

MicroPET Imaging Assessment of Brain Tau and Amyloid Deposition in 6 × Tg 
Alzheimer's Disease Model Mice.

Kang S(1)(2)(3), Kim J(2)(4), Lee SY(2)(4)(5), Okamura N(6), Chang KA(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Gachon University, Incheon 
21999, Korea.
(2)Neuroscience Research Institute, Gachon University, Incheon 21565, Korea.
(3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, VT 55905, USA.
(4)Gachon Advanced Institute for Health Science and Technology, Graduate School, 
Gachon University, Incheon 21999, Korea.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, Gachon University, Incheon 
21936, Korea.
(6)Division of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Tohoku Medical and 
Pharmaceutical University, Sendai 980-8576, Japan.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the deposition of extracellular 
amyloid plaques and intracellular accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFT). 
Amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau imaging are widely used for diagnosing and monitoring 
AD in clinical settings. We evaluated the pathology of a recently developed 6 × 
Tg - AD (6 × Tg) mouse model by crossbreeding 5 × FAD mice with mice expressing 
mutant (P301L) tau protein using micro-positron emission tomography (PET) image 
analysis. PET studies were performed in these 6 × Tg mice using 
[18F]Flutemetamol, which is an amyloid PET radiotracer; [18F]THK5351 and 
[18F]MK6240, which are tau PET radiotracers; moreover, [18F]DPA714, which is a 
translocator protein (TSPO) radiotracer, and comparisons were made with 
age-matched mice of their respective parental strains. We compared group 
differences in standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR), kinetic parameters, 
biodistribution, and histopathology. [18F]Flutemetamol images showed prominent 
cortical uptake and matched well with 6E10 staining images from 2-month-old 6 × 
Tg mice. [18F]Flutemetamol images showed a significant correlation with 
[18F]DPA714 in the cortex and hippocampus. [18F]THK5351 images revealed 
prominent hippocampal uptake and matched well with AT8 immunostaining images in 
4-month-old 6 × Tg mice. Moreover, [18F]THK5351 images were confirmed using 
[18F]MK6240, which revealed significant correlations in the cortex and 
hippocampus. Uptake of [18F]THK5351 or [18F]MK6240 was highly correlated with 
[18F]Flutemetamol in 4-month-old 6 × Tg mice. In conclusion, PET imaging 
revealed significant age-related uptake of Aβ, tau, and TSPO in 6 × Tg mice, 
which was highly correlated with age-dependent pathology.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23105485
PMCID: PMC9146140
PMID: 35628296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.