1. Genes (Basel). 2022 May 5;13(5):824. doi: 10.3390/genes13050824.

Exploring Relevant mRNAs and miRNAs in Injured Urethral Tissues of Rats with 
High-Throughput Sequencing.

Lin H(1), Guo S(2), Li S(1), Shen J(1), He J(3), Zheng Y(2), Gao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical 
University, Kunming 650032, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Primate Biomedical Research, Institute of Primate 
Translational Medicine, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 
650500, China.
(3)Faculty of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of 
Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China.

Acute urethral injuries caused by urethral endoscopy and other mechanical 
injuries are the main reasons for secondary infection and late urethral 
stricture. However, there are no studies to explore the transcriptomic changes 
in urethral injury and the molecular mechanism of urethral injury, which is 
important for the treatment and cure of urethral injury. Therefore, we used 
RNA-seq and sRNA-seq profiles from normal and injured urethral tissues to 
identify and characterize differentially expressed mRNAs and miRNAs. In total, 
we found 166 differentially expressed mRNAs, of which 69 were upregulated, and 
97 were downregulated in injured urethral tissues. The differentially expressed 
mRNAs were mainly involved in the positive regulation of epithelial cell 
differentiation, focal adhesion, cell adhesion molecules, protein activation 
cascade, complement activation, complement and coagulation cascades, and 
chemokine-mediated signaling pathway. Additionally, we found six upregulated and 
four downregulated miRNAs, respectively, in the injured urethral tissues. 
Notably, their target genes were involved in the vascular endothelial growth 
factor receptor 2 binding, PI3k-Akt signaling pathway, and Notch signaling 
pathway. In summary, our results suggest that the cell damage response induced 
by mechanical injury activates the pathological immune response in a variety of 
ways in injured urethral tissues.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13050824
PMCID: PMC9141346
PMID: 35627209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.