1. Viruses. 2022 Apr 30;14(5):944. doi: 10.3390/v14050944.

Treatment Response and Drug Resistance Profiling of Genotype 6 of Hepatitis C 
Virus in HCV/HIV Co-Infected Patients: A Pilot Study from INDIA.

Gupta E(1), Samal J(1), Pandey A(1), Singh G(1), Gupta HAS(2), Agarwal R(1), 
Sharma MK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Virology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New 
Delhi 110070, India.
(2)Department of Innate Immunity, ICMR-National Institute for Research in 
Reproductive and Child Health, Mumbai 400012, India.
(3)Department of Hepatology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New Delhi 
110070, India.

Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) genotype (GT) 6 demonstrates maximum genomic diversity 
out of all the known genotypes of HCV, attributable to its inherent 
intra-genotype and inter-genotype recombination property. This is the most 
common genotype seen in HCV/HIV co-infected cases. HIV/HCV co-infection is 
linked with increased genetic diversity in HCV structural genes. The detailed 
information on the distribution of HCV GT6, its subtypes, and resistance to 
currently available antiviral drugs is limited in the Indian subcontinent. 
Therefore, in this single-center retrospective cross-sectional study, we aimed 
to map the occurrence of HCV GT6, its subtypes and resistance-associated 
substitution (RAS), and its correlation with antiviral treatment response in 
HCV-infected patients. From a cohort of 2052 HCV-infected patients, the overall 
prevalence of GT6 was 2.5% (n = 53), with a maximum of 81.1% (n = 43) seen in 
HCV/HIV co-infected patients. Nine different subtypes, 6a, 6b, 6f, 6i, 6n, 6u, 
6v, 6w, and 6xa, were detected in the Indian population for the first time, with 
a predominance of 6xa (41.5%), a rare subtype, followed by 6n (39.6%). The 
phylogenetic analysis by the neighbor-joining method revealed three prominent 
viral clades, 6v, 6n, and 6xa-6u. The baseline (before treatment initiation) 
plasma samples of all GT6-infected patients were retrieved from -80 Â°C and a 
part of the NS5a and NS5b region of the viral genome was analyzed for the 
presence of RAS. No RASs were seen in the NS5b region, while in two patients 
(3.7%) RASs were seen at baseline in the NS5a region of the virus. Sustained 
viral response (SVR) was attained in 81% (n = 43) of patients. No difference in 
GT6 subtype distribution or occurrence of RAS was seen between mono-infected HCV 
and HIV/HCV co-infected cases. Our study revealed that RAS at baseline did not 
influence the attainment of SVR and the currently available antiviral therapy is 
effective against GT6 mono-infected and HIV/HCV co-infected patients.

DOI: 10.3390/v14050944
PMCID: PMC9146731
PMID: 35632686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.