1. Polymers (Basel). 2022 May 16;14(10):2034. doi: 10.3390/polym14102034.

Structural Behavior of RC Beams Containing Unreinforced Drilled Openings with 
and without CFRP Strengthening.

El-Sisi AA(1)(2), El-Emam HM(3), El-Kholy AEI(3), Ahmad SS(3), Sallam HM(3), 
Salim HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65211, USA.
(2)Structural Engineering, Zagazig University, Zagazig 44511, Egypt.
(3)Material Engineering, Zagazig University, Zagazig 44511, Egypt.

Construction deficiencies can cause serious problems that significantly decrease 
the design strength of concrete structures, such as the unreinforced drilled 
openings. With the absence of sufficient reinforcement, the stress 
concentrations generated around the opening corners produce cracks in the beams. 
The size and location of the opening significantly affect the behavior of the 
beam under static and dynamic load. In this work, an experimental and numerical 
program was performed to investigate the behavior of drilled reinforced concrete 
beams with and without strengthening using CFRP sheets. Energy absorption and 
SDOF analyses were performed to preliminary assess the behavior of the beams 
under the dynamic load, such as blast. One control beam without any openings, 
six beams with tension-zone openings, and six beams with shear-zone openings 
were tested. It was found that the samples with tension-zone openings were 
slightly affected by the opening, where the reduction in the ultimate strength 
was approximately 7 to 14%. The beams were able to recover up to 46% of the lost 
strength by CFRP strengthening. On the other hand, the shear-zone opening 
significantly decreased the strength and energy absorption and increased the 
blast response. It can be concluded that it is not recommended to drill any 
opening at the shear zone as strength loss can reach 57% even with the 
strengthening, especially for blast resisting structure; in addition, the 
strength recovered from approximately 11.95 to 32.46% only. The finite element 
model was able to predict the strength of the beams. The results were closer in 
the case of tension-zone opening than those in the case of the shear-zone 
opening. Shear cracks were observed at the corners of the openings even if the 
opening exists at the tension zone. A reduction in the density of cracks can be 
observed after the strengthening, where the FRP sheet decreases the stress in 
the concrete.

DOI: 10.3390/polym14102034
PMCID: PMC9145293
PMID: 35631916

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.