1. Viruses. 2022 Apr 29;14(5):939. doi: 10.3390/v14050939.

Interaction Network of Porcine Circovirus Type 3 and 4 Capsids with Host 
Proteins.

Zhou J(1)(2), Wang Y(3), Zhou L(1)(2), Qiu Y(1)(2), Zhao J(1)(2), Dai B(1)(2), 
Feng X(1)(2), Hou L(1)(2), Liu J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal 
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, 
Hefei 230036, China.

An extensive understanding of the interactions between host cellular and viral 
proteins provides clues for studying novel antiviral strategies. Porcine 
circovirus type 3 (PCV3) and type 4 (PCV4) have recently been identified as 
viruses that can potentially damage the swine industry. Herein, 401 putative 
PCV3 Cap-binding and 484 putative PCV4 Cap-binding proteins were characterized 
using co-immunoprecipitation and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Both 
PCV3 and PCV4 Caps shared 278 identical interacting proteins, but some putative 
interacting proteins (123 for PCV3 Cap and 206 for PCV4 Cap) differed. A 
protein-protein interaction network was constructed, and according to gene 
ontology (GO) annotation and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) 
database analyses, both PCV3 Cap- and PCV4 Cap-binding proteins participated 
mainly in ribosome biogenesis, nucleic acid binding, and ATP-dependent RNA 
helicase activities. Verification assays of eight putative interacting proteins 
indicated that nucleophosmin-1, nucleolin, DEAD-box RNA helicase 21, 
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1, YTH N6-methyladenosine RNA 
binding protein 1, and Y-box binding protein 1 bound directly to both PCV3 and 
PCV4 Caps, but ring finger protein 2 and signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 6 did not. Therefore, the interaction network provided helpful 
information to support further research into the underlying mechanisms of PCV3 
and PCV4 infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v14050939
PMCID: PMC9144384
PMID: 35632681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.