1. J Insect Sci. 2022 May 1;22(3):12. doi: 10.1093/jisesa/ieac028.

Long Noncoding RNA lncR17454 Regulates Metamorphosis of Silkworm Through let-7 
miRNA Cluster.

Fu Y(1), Wang Y(1), Huang Q(1), Zhao C(1), Li X(1), Kan Y(1)(2), Li D(1).

Author information:
(1)Henan Key Laboratory of Insect Biology in Funiu Mountain, Henan International 
Joint Laboratory of Insect Biology, College of Life Science and Agricultural 
Engineering, Nanyang Normal University, 1638 Wolong Road, Nanyang, Henan 473061, 
China.
(2)School of Life Science and Technology, Henan Institute of Science and 
Technology, 90 East of Hualan Avenue, Xinxiang, Henan 453003, China.

A number of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been identified in silkworm, but 
little is known about their functions. Recent study showed that the let-7 miRNA 
cluster (contains let-7, miR-2795, and miR-100) was transcribed from the last 
exon of lncRNA lncR17454 in silkworm. To investigate the functional role of 
lncR17454, dsRNAs of lncR17454 were injected into the hemolymph of 1-d-old 
third-instar larvae of Bombyx mori, repression of lncR17454 led to molting 
arrestment during the larval-larval and larval-pupal transition of silkworm, 
which was consistent to the result as let-7 knockdown in other studies. The 
expression level of mature let-7, miR-100, and miR-2795 decreased 40%, 36%, and 
40%, respectively, while the mRNA level of two predicted target genes of let-7, 
the Broad Complex isoform 2 (BR-C-Z2) and the BTB-Zinc finger transcription 
repression factor gene Abrupt (Ab), increased significantly after lncR17454 
knockdown. In contrast, when adding the 20-Hydroxyecdysone (20E) to silkworm 
BmN4 cell lines, the expression level of lncR17454 and let-7 cluster all 
increased significantly, but the expression of Abrupt, the predicted target gene 
of let-7, was repressed. Dual-luciferase reporter assays confirmed Abrupt was 
the real target of let-7. Here we found that the lncRNA lncR17454 can play 
regulator roles in the metamorphosis of silkworm through let-7 miRNA cluster and 
the ecdysone signaling pathway, which will provide new clues for lepidopteran 
pest control.

Â© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Entomological Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/jisesa/ieac028
PMCID: PMC9155153
PMID: 35640247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]