1. Genes Dev. 2022 May 1;36(9-10):601-617. doi: 10.1101/gad.349335.121. Epub 2022
 Jun 2.

Multiomics analysis of the NAD(+)-PARP1 axis reveals a role for site-specific 
ADP-ribosylation in splicing in embryonic stem cells.

Jones A(1)(2)(3), Kraus WL(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)The Laboratory of Signaling and Gene Expression, Cecil H. and Ida Green 
Center for Reproductive Biology Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.
(2)The Division of Basic Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.
(3)Program in Genetics, Development, and Disease, Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, 
USA.

The differentiation of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) into a lineage-committed 
state is a dynamic process involving changes in cellular metabolism, epigenetic 
modifications, post-translational modifications, gene expression, and RNA 
processing. Here we integrated data from metabolomic, proteomic, and 
transcriptomic assays to characterize how alterations in NAD+ metabolism during 
the differentiation of mouse ESCs lead to alteration of the PARP1-mediated 
ADP-ribosylated (ADPRylated) proteome and mRNA isoform specialization. Our 
metabolomic analyses indicate that mESCs use distinct NAD+ biosynthetic pathways 
in different cell states: the de novo pathway in the pluripotent state, and the 
salvage and Preiss-Handler pathways as differentiation progresses. We observed a 
dramatic induction of PARP1 catalytic activity driven by enhanced nuclear NAD+ 
biosynthesis during the early stages of mESC differentiation (e.g., within 12 h 
of LIF removal). PARP1-modified proteins in mESCs are enriched for biological 
processes related to stem cell maintenance, transcriptional regulation, and RNA 
processing. The PARP1 substrates include core spliceosome components, such as 
U2AF35 and U2AF65, whose splicing functions are modulated by PARP1-mediated 
site-specific ADP-ribosylation. Finally, we observed that splicing is 
dysregulated genome-wide in Parp1 knockout mESCs. Together, these results 
demonstrate a role for the NAD+-PARP1 axis in the maintenance of mESC state, 
specifically in the splicing program during differentiation.

Â© 2022 Jones and Kraus; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.349335.121
PMCID: PMC9186393
PMID: 35654456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]