1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2022 Aug;9(22):e2201734. doi: 10.1002/advs.202201734. Epub
2022  Jun 2.

Immunogenic Cell Death Activates the Tumor Immune Microenvironment to Boost the 
Immunotherapy Efficiency.

Li Z(1), Lai X(1), Fu S(1), Ren L(1), Cai H(1), Zhang H(1)(2), Gu Z(1), Ma X(1), 
Luo K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotherapy, Huaxi MR Research Center (HMRRC), Day Surgery 
Center, Department of Radiology, Cancer Center, Research Core Facilities of West 
China Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Geriatrics, Frontiers 
Science Center for Disease-Related Molecular Network, State Key Laboratory of 
Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(2)Amgen Bioprocessing Centre, Keck Graduate Institute, Claremont, CA, 91711, 
USA.
(3)Functional and Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, and 
Research Unit of Psychoradiology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Chengdu, 
610041, China.

Tumor immunotherapy is only effective in a fraction of patients due to a low 
response rate and severe side effects, and these challenges of immunotherapy in 
clinics can be addressed through induction of immunogenic cell death (ICD). ICD 
is elicited from many antitumor therapies to release danger associated molecular 
patterns (DAMPs) and tumor-associated antigens to facilitate maturation of 
dendritic cells (DCs) and infiltration of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). The 
process can reverse the tumor immunosuppressive microenvironment to improve the 
sensitivity of immunotherapy. Nanostructure-based drug delivery systems (NDDSs) 
are explored to induce ICD by incorporating therapeutic molecules for 
chemotherapy, photosensitizers (PSs) for photodynamic therapy (PDT), 
photothermal conversion agents for photothermal therapy (PTT), and 
radiosensitizers for radiotherapy (RT). These NDDSs can release loaded agents at 
a right dose in the right place at the right time, resulting in greater 
effectiveness and lower toxicity. Immunotherapeutic agents can also be combined 
with these NDDSs to achieve the synergic antitumor effect in a multi-modality 
therapeutic approach. In this review, NDDSs are harnessed to load multiple 
agents to induce ICD by chemotherapy, PDT, PTT, and RT in combination of 
immunotherapy to promote the therapeutic effect and reduce side effects 
associated with cancer treatment.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202201734
PMCID: PMC9353475
PMID: 35652198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.