1. Med Rev (2021). 2022 Mar 2;2(1):23-49. doi: 10.1515/mr-2021-0023. eCollection 
2022 Feb 1.

A review on COVID-19 transmission, epidemiological features, prevention and 
vaccination.

Zhang Y(1), Wu G(1), Chen S(1), Ju X(1), Yimaer W(1), Zhang W(1), Lin S(2), Hao 
Y(1)(3), Gu J(1), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, School of Public Health, 
University at Albany, State University of New York, Rensselaer, NY, USA.
(3)Sun Yat-Sen University Global Health Institute, School of Public Health and 
Institute of State Governance, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has caused hundreds 
of millions of infections and millions of deaths over past two years. Currently, 
many countries have still not been able to take the pandemic under control. In 
this review, we systematically summarized what we have done to mitigate the 
COVID-19 pandemic, from the perspectives of virus transmission, public health 
control measures, to the development and vaccination of COVID-19 vaccines. As a 
virus most likely coming from bats, the SARS-CoV-2 may transmit among people via 
airborne, faecal-oral, vertical or foodborne routes. Our meta-analysis suggested 
that the R0 of COVID-19 was 2.9 (95% CI: 2.7-3.1), and the estimates in Africa 
and Europe could be higher. The median Rt could decrease by 23-96% following the 
nonpharmacological interventions, including lockdown, isolation, social 
distance, and face mask, etc. Comprehensive intervention and lockdown were the 
most effective measures to control the pandemic. According to the pooled R0 in 
our meta-analysis, there should be at least 93.3% (95% CI: 89.9-96.2%) people 
being vaccinated around the world. Limited amount of vaccines and the inequity 
issues in vaccine allocation call for more international cooperation to achieve 
the anti-epidemic goals and vaccination fairness.

Â© 2021 Yuqin Zhang et al., published by De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/mr-2021-0023
PMCID: PMC9047653
PMID: 35658107

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Authors state no conflict 
of interest.