1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2022 Jun 3;10(1):82. doi: 10.1186/s40478-022-01382-z.

Multi-platform quantitation of alpha-synuclein human brain proteoforms suggests 
disease-specific biochemical profiles of synucleinopathies.

Moors TE(1)(2), Mona D(3), Luehe S(4), Duran-Pacheco G(5), Spycher L(3), Mundigl 
O(6), Kaluza K(6), Huber S(4), Hug MN(4), Kremer T(3), Ritter M(7), Dziadek 
S(8), Dernick G(4), van de Berg WDJ(9), Britschgi M(10).

Author information:
(1)Section Clinical Neuroanatomy and Biobanking, Department of Anatomy and 
Neurosciences, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije University 
Amsterdam, Boelelaan 1108, 1081HZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Department of Neurology, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 60 Fenwood Rd, MA, 02115, Boston, 
USA.
(3)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases 
Discovery and Translational Area, Roche Innovation Center Basel, 
Grenzacherstrasse 124, 4070, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Therapeutic Modalities, Roche 
Innovation Center Basel, Grenzacherstrasse 124, 4070, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development; Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Biostatistics, Roche Innovation Center Basel, Grenzacherstrasse 124, 4070, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Therapeutic Modalities; Large 
Molecule Research, Roche Innovation Center Munich, Nonnenwald 2, 82377, 
Penzberg, Germany.
(7)Research & Development Roche Diagnostics Solutions, Roche Diagnostics GmbH, 
Nonnenwald 2, 82377, Penzberg, Germany.
(8)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development; Oncology Discovery and 
Translational Area, Roche Innovation Center Basel, Grenzacherstrasse 124, 4070, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(9)Section Clinical Neuroanatomy and Biobanking, Department of Anatomy and 
Neurosciences, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije University 
Amsterdam, Boelelaan 1108, 1081HZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
wdj.vandeberg@amsterdamumc.nl.
(10)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases 
Discovery and Translational Area, Roche Innovation Center Basel, 
Grenzacherstrasse 124, 4070, Basel, Switzerland. markus.britschgi@roche.com.

Based on immunostainings and biochemical analyses, certain post-translationally 
modified alpha-synuclein (aSyn) variants, including C-terminally truncated (CTT) 
and Serine-129 phosphorylated (pSer129) aSyn, are proposed to be involved in the 
pathogenesis of synucleinopathies such as Parkinson's disease with (PDD) and 
without dementia (PD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and multiple system 
atrophy (MSA). However, quantitative information about aSyn proteoforms in the 
human brain in physiological and different pathological conditions is still 
limited. To address this, we generated sequential biochemical extracts of the 
substantia nigra, putamen and hippocampus from 28 donors diagnosed and 
neuropathologically-confirmed with different synucleinopathies (PD/PDD/DLB/MSA), 
as well as Alzheimer's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, and aged normal 
subjects. The tissue extracts were used to build a reverse phase array including 
65 aSyn antibodies for detection. In this multiplex approach, we observed 
increased immunoreactivity in donors with synucleinopathies compared to controls 
in detergent-insoluble fractions, mainly for antibodies against CT aSyn and 
pSer129 aSyn. In addition, despite of the restricted sample size, clustering 
analysis suggested disease-specific immunoreactivity signatures in patient 
groups with different synucleinopathies. We aimed to validate and quantify these 
findings using newly developed immunoassays towards total, 119 and 122 CTT, and 
pSer129 aSyn. In line with previous studies, we found that synucleinopathies 
shared an enrichment of post-translationally modified aSyn in 
detergent-insoluble fractions compared to the other analyzed groups. Our 
measurements allowed for a quantitative separation of PDD/DLB patients from 
other synucleinopathies based on higher detergent-insoluble pSer129 aSyn 
concentrations in the hippocampus. In addition, we found that MSA stood out due 
to enrichment of CTT and pSer129 aSyn also in the detergent-soluble fraction of 
the SN and putamen. Together, our results achieved by multiplexed and 
quantitative immunoassay-based approaches in human brain extracts of a limited 
sample set point to disease-specific biochemical aSyn proteoform profiles in 
distinct neurodegenerative disorders.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-022-01382-z
PMCID: PMC9164351
PMID: 35659116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. 
T.E.M., D.M., S.L., G. D., L. S., O.M., K.K., S.H., M.H., T.K., M.R., S.D., G.D. 
and M.B. are or were full-time employees of Roche/F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, and 
they may additionally hold Roche stock/stock options.