1. Cureus. 2022 May 26;14(5):e25353. doi: 10.7759/cureus.25353. eCollection 2022 
May.

The Association Between Selenium, Selenoprotein P (SEPP1), Fluid Intelligence, 
and Exercise in the UK Biobank Cohort.

Lehrer S(1), Rheinstein PH(2).

Author information:
(1)Radiation Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City, 
USA.
(2)Family Medicine, Severn Health Solutions, Severna Park, USA.

BACKGROUND: In the mouse hippocampus, exercise boosts neurogenesis. Increased 
levels of the selenium transport protein selenoprotein P (SEPP1) in the serum of 
exercised animals may contribute to the impact of exercise. SEPP1 is a protein 
that aids in the delivery of selenium to the brain. The effect of exercise on 
mouse brain precursor cell proliferation was diminished when SEPP1 or its 
receptor were genetically depleted. Selenium supplementation in the diet had the 
same effect as exercise in reducing some of the cognitive impairments associated 
with aging.
METHODS: In the current analysis, we sought to determine the association of 
selenium, the SEPP1 gene, fluid intelligence, and exercise in the UK Biobank 
Cohort. We analyzed SEPP1 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs7579, a single 
nucleotide variation (SNV), position chr5:42800706, C > T, minor allele 
frequency T = 0.281. Its consequence is a 3'- UTR variant. The 3'-UTR contains 
regulatory regions that post-transcriptionally influence gene expression and is 
responsible for selenoprotein synthesis. SNP rs7579 has been implicated in 
multiple forms of cancer. The univariate general linear model of SPSS (IBM 
Corp., Armonk, NY) was used to rule out the effects of age, years of education, 
and vigorous activity on fluid intelligence score, with fluid intelligence score 
as the dependent variable, rs7579 genotype, and selenium supplements as fixed 
factors, and age, years of education, and vigorous activity as covariates.
RESULTS: The effect of rs7579 genotype on fluid intelligence score was 
insignificant (p = 0.702). The effect of selenium supplements on fluid 
intelligence score was insignificant (p = 0.107). The interaction of rs7579 
genotype and selenium supplements was insignificant (p = 0.911) and unrelated to 
the significant effects of age (p < 0.001), years of education (p < 0.001), and 
vigorous activity (p < 0.001) on fluid intelligence score.  Conclusion: Our 
multivariate analysis of SEPP1 genotype, selenium supplement use, and fluid 
intelligence scores is consistent with the negligible effect selenium 
supplements seem to have on cognition. Selenium is found in nuts, dairy 
products, and grains. These foods can provide sufficient selenium for health. 
Selenium supplements are not recommended.

Copyright © 2022, Lehrer et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.25353
PMCID: PMC9134928
PMID: 35651983

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.