1. Front Chem. 2022 May 18;10:898436. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2022.898436. eCollection
 2022.

Design, Synthesis, and Apoptosis-Promoting Effect Evaluation of Rhopaladins' 
Analog 4-Arylidene-5-Oxopyrrolidine Derivatives.

Zhu J(1)(2), Kong LQ(2), Chen QH(3), Li B(1), Wu L(1), Ran FY(1), Ke LN(1), Zeng 
XH(1)(2), Wang HM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sinopharm Dongfeng General Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, 
China.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Wudang Local Chinese Medicine Research, School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hubei University of Medicine, Hubei, China.
(3)Shenzhen Baoan Authentic TCM Therapy Hospital, Shenzhen, China.

Marine alkaloids have novel structures and antitumor activities. Therefore, we 
synthesized rhopaladins' analogs from marine alkaloids rhopaladins A-D and 
modified their structures to synthesize 4-benzylidene-5-pyrrolidone derivatives. 
Among the compounds, (2E, 
4E)-4-(4-chlorobenzylidene)-2-(4-chlorostyryl)-N-cyclohexyl-1-(4-fluorophenyl)-5-oxopyrrolidine-2-carboxamide 
(RPDPRH) has high efficiency and less hepatotoxicity, with IC50 values of 4.66, 
6.42, 17.66, 15.2, 12.36, 22.4, and 243.2 μM in vitro anti-proliferative 
activity testing against cervical cancer C-33A, CaSki, SiHa, and HeLa cells, 
human hepatocarcinoma HepG2 and 7402 cells, and human normal liver LO2 cells, 
respectively. In particular, RPDPRH has similar activity to cisplatin on human 
hepatocarcinoma cells, and cisplatin served as a positive control in our study. 
Next, the apoptosis of HepG2 and 7402 cells induced by RPDPRH at different 
concentrations was detected by Annexin V/PI flow cytometry. Moreover, the 
expression of apoptotic proteins was detected by Western blot analysis. Finally, 
the results showed that RPDPRH could induce apoptosis of hepatocarcinoma cells 
by regulating Bax and Bcl-2 expressions. In summary, our results indicate that 
RPDPRH has the potential to serve as an antitumor agent and plays a significant 
role in future studies.

Copyright © 2022 Zhu, Kong, Chen, Li, Wu, Ran, Ke, Zeng and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2022.898436
PMCID: PMC9157788
PMID: 35665067

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.