1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 May 18;13:885259. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.885259. 
eCollection 2022.

Clinical Implementation of DPYD Pharmacogenetic Testing to Prevent Early-Onset 
Fluoropyrimidine-Related Toxicity in Cancer Patients in Switzerland.

Begré UBM(1), Jörger M(2), Aebi S(3), Amstutz U(1), Largiadèr CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen, 
St. Gallen, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology, Cantonal Hospital Lucerne, Lucerne, 
Switzerland.

The implementation of pharmacogenetic testing into clinical practice has been a 
slow process so far. Here, we review the implementation of pre-treatment testing 
of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase gene (DPYD) risk variants to prevent 
early-onset fluoropyrimidine (FP)-related toxicity in cancer patients in 
Switzerland based on data of a large Swiss diagnostic center. In January 2017, 
the Swiss Federal Office of Public Health introduced the reimbursement of DPYD 
testing by the compulsory health insurance in Switzerland based on evidence for 
the clinical relevance of DPYD-risk variants and the cost-effectiveness of 
pre-treatment testing, and on the availability of international guidelines. 
However, we did not observe a strong increase in DPYD testing at our diagnostic 
center from 2017 to 2019. Only a low number of DPYD-testing requests (28-42 per 
year), concerning mostly retrospective investigations of suspected FP-toxicity, 
were received. In contrast, we observed a 14-fold increase in DPYD testing 
together with a strong shift from retrospective to pre-treatment test requests 
upon the release of recommendations for DPYD testing prior to FP-treatment in 
April 2020 by the European Medicines Agency. This increase was mainly driven by 
three geographic regions of Switzerland, where partner institutions of previous 
research collaborations regarding FP-related toxicity are located and who acted 
as early-adopting institutions of DPYD testing. Our data suggest the important 
role of early adopters as accelerators of clinical implementation of 
pharmacogenetic testing by introducing these policies to their working 
environment and educating health workers from their own and nearby institutions.

Copyright © 2022 Begré, Jörger, Aebi, Amstutz and Largiadèr.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.885259
PMCID: PMC9159275
PMID: 35662713

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.