1. Front Vet Sci. 2022 May 18;9:860134. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2022.860134.
eCollection  2022.

Genomic Sequence and Pathogenicity of the Chicken Anemia Virus Isolated From 
Chicken in Yunnan Province, China.

Dai M(1), Huang Y(1), Wang L(1), Luo J(1), Yan N(1), Zhang L(1), Huang H(1), 
Zhou J(1), Li Z(1), Xu C(1).

Author information:
(1)National and Regional Joint Engineering Laboratory for Medicament of Zoonosis 
Prevention and Control, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Zoonosis 
Prevention and Control, College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural 
University, Guangzhou, China.

Chicken anemia virus (CAV), which has been reported in many countries, causes 
severe anemia and immunosuppression in chickens. In this study, a CAV strain 
YN04 belonging to genotype A was first identified from infected chickens in 
Yunnan province, China. Moreover, the animal infection experiments further 
confirmed that the strain YN04 is a highly pathogenic strain, which can cause 
86.67% mortality in chickens in the infection group. The mean death time of 
infected chickens was 13.1 days post infection (dpi). CAV infection induced 
severe anemia with significant decrease in packed cell volume (PCV), and serious 
atrophy and lesion of thymus and bursa with high viral load at 14 dpi. Besides, 
CAV infection caused a sharp decrease in chicken body weight and immune organ 
indices including the ratio of thymus or bursa to body weight at 21 dpi, which 
displayed the potential immunosuppression state at this stage. These findings 
enrich the epidemiological data on CAV and may provide information for 
preventing its further spread in Yunnan province, China.

Copyright Â© 2022 Dai, Huang, Wang, Luo, Yan, Zhang, Huang, Zhou, Li and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2022.860134
PMCID: PMC9158507
PMID: 35664859

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.