1. Mol Neurobiol. 2022 Aug;59(8):5000-5023. doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02895-3. Epub
 2022 Jun 4.

The Regulation of MiTF/TFE Transcription Factors Across Model Organisms: from 
Brain Physiology to Implication for Neurodegeneration.

Agostini F(#)(1), Agostinis R(#)(2)(3), Medina DL(2)(4), Bisaglia M(1), Greggio 
E(1), Plotegher N(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padua, Italy.
(2)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy.
(3)Scuola Superiore Meridionale SSM, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical and Translational, Science, II University, Naples, 
Federico, Italy.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padua, Italy. 
nicoletta.plotegher@unipd.it.
(#)Contributed equally

The microphthalmia/transcription factor E (MiTF/TFE) transcription factors are 
responsible for the regulation of various key processes for the maintenance of 
brain function, including autophagy-lysosomal pathway, lipid catabolism, and 
mitochondrial homeostasis. Among them, autophagy is one of the most relevant 
pathways in this frame; it is evolutionary conserved and crucial for cellular 
homeostasis. The dysregulation of MiTF/TFE proteins was shown to be involved in 
the development and progression of neurodegenerative diseases. Thus, the 
characterization of their function is key in the understanding of the etiology 
of these diseases, with the potential to develop novel therapeutics targeted to 
MiTF/TFE proteins and to the autophagic process. The fact that these proteins 
are evolutionary conserved suggests that their function and dysfunction can be 
investigated in model organisms with a simpler nervous system than the mammalian 
one. Building not only on studies in mammalian models but also in complementary 
model organisms, in this review we discuss (1) the mechanistic regulation of 
MiTF/TFE transcription factors; (2) their roles in different regions of the 
central nervous system, in different cell types, and their involvement in the 
development of neurodegenerative diseases, including lysosomal storage 
disorders; (3) the overlap and the compensation that occur among the different 
members of the family; (4) the importance of the evolutionary conservation of 
these protein and the process they regulate, which allows their study in 
different model organisms; and (5) their possible role as therapeutic targets in 
neurodegeneration.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-022-02895-3
PMCID: PMC9363479
PMID: 35665902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.