1. Front Physiol. 2022 May 19;13:880422. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.880422. 
eCollection 2022.

Inhibition of Serine Proteases as a Novel Therapeutic Strategy for Abdominal 
Pain in IBS.

Decraecker L(1), Boeckxstaens G(1), Denadai-Souza A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Intestinal Neuro-immune Interaction, Translational Research 
Center for Gastrointestinal Disorders, Department of Chronic Diseases, 
Metabolism and Ageing, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Serine proteases are heavily present in the gastrointestinal tract where they 
are essential in numerous physiological processes. An imbalance in the 
proteolytic activity is a central mechanism underlying abdominal pain in 
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Therefore, protease inhibitors are emerging as a 
promising therapeutic tool to manage abdominal pain in this functional 
gastrointestinal disorder. With this review, we provide an up-to-date overview 
of the implications of serine proteases in the development of abdominal pain in 
IBS, along with a critical assessment of the current developments and prospects 
of protease inhibitors as a therapeutic tool. In particular, we highlight the 
current knowledge gap concerning the identity of dysregulated serine proteases 
that are released by the rectal mucosa of IBS patients. Finally, we suggest a 
workflow with state-of-the-art techniques that will help address the knowledge 
gap, guiding future research towards the development of more effective and 
selective protease inhibitors to manage abdominal pain in IBS.

Copyright Â© 2022 Decraecker, Boeckxstaens and Denadai-Souza.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2022.880422
PMCID: PMC9161638
PMID: 35665224

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.