1. BMC Med. 2022 Jun 7;20(1):205. doi: 10.1186/s12916-022-02375-4.

Observational study of population genomic screening for variants associated with 
endocrine tumor syndromes in a large, healthcare-based cohort.

Savatt JM(1), Ortiz NM(2), Thone GM(2), McDonald WS(2), Kelly MA(2), Berry 
ASF(3), Alvi MM(4)(5), Hallquist MLG(2), Malinowski J(2), Purdy NC(5)(6), 
Williams MS(2)(5), Sturm AC(2)(5)(7), Buchanan AH(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger, Danville, PA, USA. 
jmsavatt@geisinger.edu.
(2)Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger, Danville, PA, USA.
(3)Autism & Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger, Lewisburg, PA, USA.
(4)Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Geisinger, Danville, PA, USA.
(5)Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine, Scranton, PA, USA.
(6)Otolaryngology, Geisinger, Danville, PA, USA.
(7)Heart and Vascular Institute, Geisinger, Danville, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: In current care, patients' personal and self-reported family 
histories are primarily used to determine whether genetic testing for hereditary 
endocrine tumor syndromes (ETS) is indicated. Population genomic screening for 
other conditions has increased ascertainment of individuals with 
pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants, leading to improved management and 
earlier diagnoses. It is unknown whether such benefits occur when screening 
broader populations for P/LP ETS variants. This manuscript assesses clinical 
utility outcomes of a large, unselected, healthcare-based genomic screening 
program by describing personal and family history of syndrome-related features, 
risk management behaviors after result disclosure, and rates of relevant 
post-disclosure diagnoses in patient-participants with P/LP ETS variants.
METHODS: Observational study of individuals informed of a P/LP variant in MEN1, 
RET, SDHAF2, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, or VHL through Geisinger's MyCode Community 
Health Initiative between June 2016 and October 2019. Electronic health records 
(EHRs) of participants were evaluated for a report of pre-disclosure personal 
and self-reported family histories and post-disclosure risk management and 
diagnoses.
RESULTS: P/LP variants in genes of interest were identified in 199 of 130,490 (1 
in 656) adult Geisinger MyCode patient-participants, 80 of which were disclosed 
during the study period. Eighty-one percent (n = 65) did not have prior evidence 
of the result in their EHR and, because they were identified via MyCode, were 
included in further analyses. Five participants identified via MyCode (8%) had a 
personal history of syndrome-related features; 16 (25%) had a positive 
self-reported family history. Time from result disclosure to EHR review was a 
median of 0.7 years. Post-disclosure, 36 (55.4%) completed a recommended risk 
management behavior; 11 (17%) were diagnosed with a syndrome-related neoplasm 
after completing a risk management intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: Broader screening for pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants 
associated with endocrine tumor syndromes enables detection of at-risk 
individuals, leads to the uptake of risk management, and facilitates relevant 
diagnoses. Further research will be necessary to continue to determine the 
clinical utility of screening diverse, unselected populations for such variants.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-022-02375-4
PMCID: PMC9172012
PMID: 35668420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JMS, NMO, GMT, WSM, MAK, AB1, MLGH, JM, NCP, 
MMA, and MSW have nothing to declare. ACS receives grant funding 
(8/20/2019-7/31/2024) from the NIH All of Us Research Program’s Genetic 
Counseling Resource in her role as Chair to the Genetic Counseling Resource 
Advisory Board. AB2 receives compensation as an editorial board member for the 
Journal of Genetic Counseling and has an equity stake in MeTree and You, Inc.