1. World J Clin Cases. 2022 May 16;10(14):4541-4549. doi: 
10.12998/wjcc.v10.i14.4541.

Bronchiolar adenoma with unusual presentation: Two case reports.

Du Y(1), Wang ZY(1), Zheng Z(1), Li YX(1), Wang XY(1), Du R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical 
University (Liaocheng People's Hospital), Liaocheng 252000, Shandong Province, 
China.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical 
University (Liaocheng People's Hospital), Liaocheng 252000, Shandong Province, 
China. chinaduying@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The clinicopathological features, immunohistochemical 
characteristics, and genetic mutation profile of two unusual cases of distal 
bronchiolar adenoma are retrospectively analyzed and the relevant literature is 
reviewed.
CASE SUMMARY: Case 1 was a 63-year-old female patient who had a mixed 
ground-glass nodule, with mild cells in morphology, visible cilia, and bilayer 
structures in focal areas. Immunohistochemical staining for P63 and cytokeratin 
(CK)5/6 revealed the lack of a continuous bilayer structure in most areas, and 
no mutations were found in epidermal growth factor receptor, anaplastic lymphoma 
kinase, ROS1, Kirsten rat sarcoma, PIK3CA, BRAF, human epidermal growth factor 
receptor-2 (HER2), RET, and neuroblastoma RAS genes. Case 2 was a 58-year-old 
female patient who presented with a solid nodule, in which most cells were 
observed to be medium sized, the nuclear chromatin was pale and homogeneous, 
local cells had atypia, and cilia were found locally. Immunohistochemical 
staining for P63 and CK5/6 showed no expression of these proteins in mild cell 
morphology whereas the heteromorphic cells showed a bilayer structure. The same 
nine genes as above were analyzed, and HER2 gene mutation was identified.
CONCLUSION: Some unresolved questions remain to be answered to determine whether 
the lesion is a benign adenoma or a part of the process of malignant 
transformation from benign adenoma of the bronchial epithelium. Furthermore, 
whether lesions with atypical bilayer structures are similar to atypical 
hyperplastic lesions of the breast remains to be elucidated. Moreover, clarity 
on whether these lesions can be called atypical bronchiolar adenoma and whether 
they are invasive precursor lesions is needed. Future studies should examine the 
diagnostic significance of HER2 gene mutation as a prognostic indicator.

Â©The Author(s) 2022. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i14.4541
PMCID: PMC9125294
PMID: 35663079

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest to disclose.