1. Cell Syst. 2022 Jun 15;13(6):471-487.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2022.05.003. Epub
 2022 Jun 7.

Granger-causal inference of the lamellipodial actin regulator hierarchy by live 
cell imaging without perturbation.

Noh J(1), Isogai T(1), Chi J(1), Bhatt K(1), Danuser G(2).

Author information:
(1)Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(2)Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: gaudenz.danuser@utsouthwestern.edu.

Many cell regulatory systems implicate nonlinearity and redundancy among 
components. The regulatory network governing lamellipodial and lamellar actin 
structures is prototypical of such a system, containing tens of actin-nucleating 
and -modulating molecules with functional overlap and feedback loops. Due to 
instantaneous and long-term compensation, phenotyping the system response to 
perturbation provides limited information on the roles the targeted component 
plays in the unperturbed system. Accordingly, how individual actin regulators 
contribute to lamellipodial dynamics remains ambiguous. Here, we present a 
perturbation-free reconstruction of cause-effect relations among actin 
regulators by applying Granger-causal inference to constitutive image 
fluctuations that indicate regulator recruitment as a proxy for activity. Our 
analysis identifies distinct zones of actin regulator activation and of causal 
effects on filament assembly and delineates actin-dependent and 
actin-independent regulator roles in controlling edge motion. We propose that 
edge motion is driven by assembly of two independently operating actin filament 
systems.

Copyright Â© 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cels.2022.05.003
PMCID: PMC9271366
PMID: 35675823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.