1. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 2022 Jan-Jun;789:108409. doi: 
10.1016/j.mrrev.2021.108409. Epub 2021 Dec 20.

DNA damage, DNA repair and carcinogenicity: Tobacco smoke versus electronic 
cigarette aerosol.

Tang MS(1), Lee HW(2), Weng MW(2), Wang HT(2), Hu Y(2), Chen LC(2), Park SH(2), 
Chan HW(2), Xu J(2), Wu XR(3), Wang H(4), Yang R(2), Galdane K(2), Jackson K(2), 
Chu A(2), Halzack E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, Pathology and Medicine, United States. 
Electronic address: moon-shong.tang@nyumc.org.
(2)Department of Environmental Medicine, Pathology and Medicine, United States.
(3)Departmemt of Urology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY10016, United States.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson 
MedicalSchool, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, United States.

The allure of tobacco smoking is linked to the instant gratification provided by 
inhaled nicotine. Unfortunately, tobacco curing and burning generates many 
mutagens including more than 70 carcinogens. There are two types of mutagens and 
carcinogens in tobacco smoke (TS): direct DNA damaging carcinogens and 
procarcinogens, which require metabolic activation to become DNA damaging. 
Recent studies provide three new insights on TS-induced DNA damage. First, two 
major types of TS DNA damage are induced by direct carcinogen aldehydes, 
cyclic-1,N2-hydroxy-deoxyguanosine (γ-OH-PdG) and α-methyl-1, N2-γ-OH-PdG, 
rather than by the procarcinogens, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and aromatic 
amines. Second, TS reduces DNA repair proteins and activity levels. TS aldehydes 
also prevent procarcinogen activation. Based on these findings, we propose that 
aldehydes are major sources of TS induce DNA damage and a driving force for 
carcinogenesis. E-cigarettes (E-cigs) are designed to deliver nicotine in an 
aerosol state, without burning tobacco. E-cigarette aerosols (ECAs) contain 
nicotine, propylene glycol and vegetable glycerin. ECAs induce 
O6-methyl-deoxyguanosines (O6-medG) and cyclic γ-hydroxy-1,N2--propano-dG 
(γ-OH-PdG) in mouse lung, heart and bladder tissues and causes a reduction of 
DNA repair proteins and activity in lungs. Nicotine and nicotine-derived 
nitrosamine ketone (NNK) induce the same types of DNA adducts and cause DNA 
repair inhibition in human cells. After long-term exposure, ECAs induce lung 
adenocarcinoma and bladder urothelial hyperplasia in mice. We propose that E-cig 
nicotine can be nitrosated in mouse and human cells becoming nitrosamines, 
thereby causing two carcinogenic effects, induction of DNA damage and inhibition 
of DNA repair, and that ECA is carcinogenic in mice. Thus, this article reviews 
the newest literature on DNA adducts and DNA repair inhibition induced by 
nicotine and ECAs in mice and cultured human cells, and provides insights into 
ECA carcinogenicity in mice.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2021.108409
PMCID: PMC9208310
PMID: 35690412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests The authors declare no 
competing interest.