1. Front Genet. 2022 May 27;13:849562. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.849562.
eCollection  2022.

Case Report: Identification Pathogenic Abnormal Splicing of BBS1 Causing 
Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Type I (BBS1) due to Missense Mutation.

Yan K(1)(2), Sun Y(1)(2), Yang Y(1)(2), Liu B(1)(2), Dong M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Reproductive Genetics, Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Reproductive Genetics (Zhejiang University), Ministry of 
Education, Hangzhou, China.

Conventionally, protein features affected by missense mutation was attributed to 
destroy an important domain with amino acid alternation, and it was difficult to 
clearly specify the pathogenicity of a novel missense mutation. Nevertheless, 
the associations between missense mutations and abnormal splicing are nowadays 
increasingly reported. Rarely, some missense mutations, locating at the 
non-canonical splicing sites, are observed to damage the splicing process. In 
this study, a couple has three adverse pregnancy history that the affected fetus 
presented typical polydactyly, renal abnormalities, and cerebral 
ventriculomegaly. To identify its genetic etiology, whole-exome sequencing (WES) 
was performed and a missense mutation c.1339G > A was identified, which was 
located at the non-canonical splicing sites of the BBS1 gene. Then, reverse 
transcription polymerase chain reaction was carried out and demonstrated extra 
115bp originating from intron 13 cut into cDNA, which generated a predicted 
premature termination codon (PTC) in the BBS1 protein. Further expression 
analysis by using real-time reverse-transcribed PCR confirmed the occurrence of 
nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). Therefore, the pathogenicity of the missense 
mutation c.1339G > A was explicit and our study helped to extend the spectrum of 
pathogenic mutations in Bardet-Biedl syndrome type I.

Copyright Â© 2022 Yan, Sun, Yang, Liu and Dong.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.849562
PMCID: PMC9186647
PMID: 35692835

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.