1. Front Mol Biosci. 2022 May 25;9:909151. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.909151. 
eCollection 2022.

Triglyceride and Triglyceride-Rich Lipoproteins in Atherosclerosis.

Zhang BH(1), Yin F(1), Qiao YN(1), Guo SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Lipid Metabolism and Atherosclerosis, Innovative Drug Research 
Centre, School of Pharmacy, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, China.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is still the leading cause of death globally, and 
atherosclerosis is the main pathological basis of CVDs. Low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (LDL-C) is a strong causal factor of atherosclerosis. However, the 
first-line lipid-lowering drugs, statins, only reduce approximately 30% of the 
CVD risk. Of note, atherosclerotic CVD (ASCVD) cannot be eliminated in a great 
number of patients even their LDL-C levels meet the recommended clinical goals. 
Previously, whether the elevated plasma level of triglyceride is causally 
associated with ASCVD has been controversial. Recent genetic and epidemiological 
studies have demonstrated that triglyceride and triglyceride-rich lipoprotein 
(TGRL) are the main causal risk factors of the residual ASCVD. TGRLs and their 
metabolites can promote atherosclerosis via modulating inflammation, oxidative 
stress, and formation of foam cells. In this article, we will make a short 
review of TG and TGRL metabolism, display evidence of association between TG and 
ASCVD, summarize the atherogenic factors of TGRLs and their metabolites, and 
discuss the current findings and advances in TG-lowering therapies. This review 
provides information useful for the researchers in the field of CVD as well as 
for pharmacologists and clinicians.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zhang, Yin, Qiao and Guo.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.909151
PMCID: PMC9174947
PMID: 35693558

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.