1. mBio. 2022 Aug 30;13(4):e0051922. doi: 10.1128/mbio.00519-22. Epub 2022 Jun
16.

Metalloproteinase-Dependent and TMPRSS2-Independent Cell Surface Entry Pathway 
of SARS-CoV-2 Requires the Furin Cleavage Site and the S2 Domain of Spike 
Protein.

Yamamoto M(1), Gohda J(1), Kobayashi A(1), Tomita K(1), Hirayama Y(1), Koshikawa 
N(2), Seiki M(3), Semba K(4), Akiyama T(5), Kawaguchi Y(1)(6), Inoue JI(7).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Asian Infectious Diseases, The Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyogrid.26999.3d, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Life Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 
Yokohama, Japan.
(3)Division of Cancer Cell Research, The Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyogrid.26999.3d, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Life Science and Medical Bio-Science, Waseda 
Universitygrid.5290.e, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute for Quantitative 
Biosciences, The University of Tokyogrid.26999.3d, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Division of Molecular Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyogrid.26999.3d, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(7)Research Platform Office, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of 
Tokyogrid.26999.3d, Tokyo, Japan.

The ongoing global vaccination program to prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection, the 
causative agent of COVID-19, has had significant success. However, recently, 
virus variants that can evade the immunity in a host achieved through 
vaccination have emerged. Consequently, new therapeutic agents that can 
efficiently prevent infection from these new variants, and hence COVID-19 
spread, are urgently required. To achieve this, extensive characterization of 
virus-host cell interactions to identify effective therapeutic targets is 
warranted. Here, we report a cell surface entry pathway of SARS-CoV-2 that 
exists in a cell type-dependent manner and is TMPRSS2 independent but sensitive 
to various broad-spectrum metalloproteinase inhibitors such as marimastat and 
prinomastat. Experiments with selective metalloproteinase inhibitors and 
gene-specific small interfering RNAS (siRNAs) revealed that a disintegrin and 
metalloproteinase 10 (ADAM10) is partially involved in the metalloproteinase 
pathway. Consistent with our finding that the pathway is unique to SARS-CoV-2 
among highly pathogenic human coronaviruses, both the furin cleavage motif in 
the S1/S2 boundary and the S2 domain of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein are essential 
for metalloproteinase-dependent entry. In contrast, the two elements of 
SARS-CoV-2 independently contributed to TMPRSS2-dependent S2 priming. The 
metalloproteinase pathway is involved in SARS-CoV-2-induced syncytium formation 
and cytopathicity, leading us to theorize that it is also involved in the rapid 
spread of SARS-CoV-2 and the pathogenesis of COVID-19. Thus, targeting the 
metalloproteinase pathway in addition to the TMPRSS2 and endosomal pathways 
could be an effective strategy by which to cure COVID-19 in the future. 
IMPORTANCE To develop effective therapeutics against COVID-19, it is necessary 
to elucidate in detail the infection mechanism of the causative agent, 
SARS-CoV-2. SARS-CoV-2 binds to the cell surface receptor ACE2 via the spike 
protein, and then the spike protein is cleaved by host proteases to enable 
entry. Here, we found that the metalloproteinase-mediated pathway is important 
for SARS-CoV-2 infection in addition to the TMPRSS2-mediated pathway and the 
endosomal pathway. The metalloproteinase-mediated pathway requires both the 
prior cleavage of spike into two domains and a specific sequence in the second 
domain, S2, conditions met by SARS-CoV-2 but lacking in the related human 
coronavirus SARS-CoV. Besides the contribution of metalloproteinases to 
SARS-CoV-2 infection, inhibition of metalloproteinases was important in 
preventing cell death, which may cause organ damage. Our study provides new 
insights into the complex pathogenesis unique to COVID-19 and relevant to the 
development of effective therapies.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.00519-22
PMCID: PMC9426510
PMID: 35708281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.