1. Hum Mol Genet. 2022 Oct 28;31(21):3741-3756. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac137.

Investigating DNA methylation as a mediator of genetic risk in childhood acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Xu K(1), Li S(1), Pandey P(1), Kang AY(2), Morimoto LM(2), Mancuso N(1), Ma 
X(3), Metayer C(2), Wiemels JL(1), de Smith AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Population and Public Health 
Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.
(2)School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 
94704, USA.
(3)Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public Health, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Genome-wide association studies have identified a growing number of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with childhood acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (ALL), yet the functional roles of most SNPs are unclear. Multiple 
lines of evidence suggest that epigenetic mechanisms may mediate the impact of 
heritable genetic variation on phenotypes. Here, we investigated whether DNA 
methylation mediates the effect of genetic risk loci for childhood ALL. We 
performed an epigenome-wide association study (EWAS) including 808 childhood ALL 
cases and 919 controls from California-based studies using neonatal blood DNA. 
For differentially methylated CpG positions (DMPs), we next conducted 
association analysis with 23 known ALL risk SNPs followed by causal mediation 
analyses addressing the significant SNP-DMP pairs. DNA methylation at CpG 
cg01139861, in the promoter region of IKZF1, mediated the effects of the 
intronic IKZF1 risk SNP rs78396808, with the average causal mediation effect 
(ACME) explaining ~30% of the total effect (ACME P = 0.0031). In analyses 
stratified by self-reported race/ethnicity, the mediation effect was only 
significant in Latinos, explaining ~41% of the total effect of rs78396808 on ALL 
risk (ACME P = 0.0037). Conditional analyses confirmed the presence of at least 
three independent genetic risk loci for childhood ALL at IKZF1, with rs78396808 
unique to non-European populations. We also demonstrated that the most 
significant DMP in the EWAS, CpG cg13344587 at gene ARID5B (P = 8.61 × 10-10), 
was entirely confounded by the ARID5B ALL risk SNP rs7090445. Our findings 
provide new insights into the functional pathways of ALL risk SNPs and the DNA 
methylation differences associated with risk of childhood ALL.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac137
PMCID: PMC9616572
PMID: 35717575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]