1. BMJ Open. 2022 Jun 16;12(6):e060431. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-060431.

Safety and tumour-specific immunological responses of combined dendritic cell 
vaccination and anti-CD40 agonistic antibody treatment for patients with 
metastatic pancreatic cancer: protocol for a phase I, open-label, single-arm, 
dose-escalation study (REACtiVe-2 trial).

Lau SP(1), van 't Land FR(1), van der Burg SH(2), Homs MYV(3), Lolkema MP(3), 
Aerts JGJV(4), van Eijck CHJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands 
c.vaneijck@erasmusmc.nl.

INTRODUCTION: The prognosis of patients with advanced pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is dismal and conventional chemotherapy treatment delivers 
limited survival improvement. Immunotherapy may complement our current treatment 
strategies. We previously demonstrated that the combination of an allogeneic 
tumour-lysate dendritic cell (DC) vaccine with an anti-CD40 agonistic antibody 
resulted in robust antitumour responses with survival benefit in a murine PDAC 
model. In the Rotterdam PancrEAtic Cancer Vaccination-2 trial, we aim to 
translate our findings into patients. This study will determine the safety of 
DC/anti-CD40 agonistic antibody combination treatment, and treatment-induced 
tumour-specific immunological responses.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: In this open-label, single-centre (Erasmus Univsersity 
Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands), single-arm, phase I dose finding study, 
adult patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer with progressive disease after 
FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy will receive monocyte-derived DCs loaded with an 
allogeneic tumour lysate in conjunction with a CD40 agonistic antibody. This 
combination-immunotherapy regimen will be administered three times every 2 
weeks, and booster treatments will be given after 3 and 6 months following the 
third injection. A minimum of 12 and a maximum of 18 patients will be included. 
The primary endpoint is safety and tolerability of the combination 
immunotherapy. To determine the maximum tolerated dose, DCs will be given at a 
fixed dosage and anti-CD40 agonist in a traditional 3+3 dose-escalation design. 
Secondary endpoints include radiographic response according to the RECIST 
(V.1.1) and iRECIST criteria, and the detection of antitumour specific immune 
responses.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The Central Committee on Research Involving Human 
Subjects (CCMO; NL76592.000.21) and the Medical Ethics Committee (METC; 
MEC-2021-0566) of the Erasmus M.C. University Medical Center Rotterdam approved 
the conduct of the trial. Written informed consent will be required for all 
participants. The results of the trial will be submitted for publication in a 
peer-reviewed scientific journal.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NL9723.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-060431
PMCID: PMC9207896
PMID: 35710239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MPL: Grants to Institute: 
JnJ, Astellas, MSD, Sanofi. Consulting or Advisory Role: Roche, Bayer, Amgen, 
JnJ, Sanofi, Servier, Pfizer, Incyte, Novartis, Pan-Cancer T. J.G.J.V.A: Stock 
or other Ownership: Amphera. Consulting or Advisory Role: Eli-Lilly, MSD 
Oncology, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche, AstraZeneca. Rest of the authors have no 
relationship to disclose in relation to the submitted work.