1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 May 30;14:890010. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.890010. 
eCollection 2022.

The Effect of Lifetime Noise Exposure and Aging on Speech-Perception-in-Noise 
Ability and Self-Reported Hearing Symptoms: An Online Study.

Shehabi AM(1)(2), Prendergast G(1), Guest H(1), Plack CJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Manchester Centre for Audiology and Deafness, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Audiology and Speech Therapy, Birzeit University, Birzeit, 
Palestine.
(3)Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Front Aging Neurosci. 2023 Aug 28;15:1275798. doi: 
10.3389/fnagi.2023.1275798.

Animal research shows that aging and excessive noise exposure damage cochlear 
outer hair cells, inner hair cells, and the synapses connecting inner hair cells 
with the auditory nerve. This may translate into auditory symptoms such as 
difficulty understanding speech in noise, tinnitus, and hyperacusis. The current 
study, using a novel online approach, assessed and quantified the effects of 
lifetime noise exposure and aging on (i) speech-perception-in-noise (SPiN) 
thresholds, (ii) self-reported hearing ability, and (iii) the presence of 
tinnitus. Secondary aims involved documenting the effects of lifetime noise 
exposure and aging on tinnitus handicap and the severity of hyperacusis. Two 
hundred and ninety-four adults with no past diagnosis of hearing or memory 
impairments were recruited online. Participants were assigned into two groups: 
217 "young" (age range: 18-35 years, females: 151) and 77 "older" (age range: 
50-70 years, females: 50). Participants completed a set of online instruments 
including an otologic health and demographic questionnaire, a dementia screening 
tool, forward and backward digit span tests, a noise exposure questionnaire, the 
Khalfa hyperacusis questionnaire, the short-form of the Speech, Spatial, and 
Qualities of Hearing scale, the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory, a digits-in-noise 
test, and a Coordinate Response Measure speech-perception test. Analyses 
controlled for sex and cognitive function as reflected by the digit span. A 
detailed protocol was pre-registered, to guard against "p-hacking" of this 
extensive dataset. Lifetime noise exposure did not predict SPiN thresholds, 
self-reported hearing ability, or the presence of tinnitus in either age group. 
Exploratory analyses showed that worse hyperacusis scores, and a greater 
prevalence of tinnitus, were associated significantly with high lifetime noise 
exposure in the young, but not in the older group. Age was a significant 
predictor of SPiN thresholds and the presence of tinnitus, but not of 
self-reported hearing ability, tinnitus handicap, or severity of hyperacusis. 
Consistent with several lab studies, our online-derived data suggest that older 
adults with no diagnosis of hearing impairment have a poorer SPiN ability and a 
higher risk of tinnitus than their younger counterparts. Moreover, lifetime 
noise exposure may increase the risk of tinnitus and the severity of hyperacusis 
in young adults with no diagnosis of hearing impairment.

Copyright Â© 2022 Shehabi, Prendergast, Guest and Plack.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.890010
PMCID: PMC9195834
PMID: 35711902

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.