1. Biomol Ther (Seoul). 2022 Jul 1;30(4):340-347. doi:
10.4062/biomolther.2022.066.  Epub 2022 Jun 20.

PRR16/Largen Induces Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition through the Interaction 
with ABI2 Leading to the Activation of ABL1 Kinase.

Kang GJ(1), Park JH(2), Kim HJ(2), Kim EJ(1), Kim B(2), Byun HJ(2), Yu L(2), 
Nguyen TM(2), Nguyen TH(2), Kim KS(2), Huy HP(2), Rahman M(2), Kim YH(2), Jang 
JY(2)(3), Park MK(3), Lee H(3), Choi CI(2), Lee K(2), Han HK(2), Cho J(2), Rho 
SB(3), Lee CH(2).

Author information:
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 
USA.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Dongguk University, Goyang 10326, Republic of Korea.
(3)National Cancer Center, Goyang 10408, Republic of Korea.

Advanced or metastatic breast cancer affects multiple organs and is a leading 
cause of cancer-related death. Cancer metastasis is associated with 
epithelial-mesenchymal metastasis (EMT). However, the specific signals that 
induce and regulate EMT in carcinoma cells remain unclear. PRR16/Largen is a 
cell size regulator that is independent of mTOR and Hippo signalling pathways. 
However, little is known about the role PRR16 plays in the EMT process. We found 
that the expression of PRR16 was increased in mesenchymal breast cancer cell 
lines. PRR16 overexpression induced EMT in MCF7 breast cancer cells and enhances 
migration and invasion. To determine how PRR16 induces EMT, the binding proteins 
for PRR16 were screened, revealing that PRR16 binds to Abl interactor 2 (ABI2). 
We then investigated whether ABI2 is involved in EMT. Gene silencing of ABI2 
induces EMT, leading to enhanced migration and invasion. ABI2 is a gene that 
codes for a protein that interacts with ABL proto-oncogene 1 (ABL1) kinase. 
Therefore, we investigated whether the change in ABI2 expression affected the 
activation of ABL1 kinase. The knockdown of ABI2 and PRR16 overexpression 
increased the phosphorylation of Y412 in ABL1 kinase. Our results suggest that 
PRR16 may be involved in EMT by binding to ABI2 and interfering with its 
inhibition of ABL1 kinase. This indicates that ABL1 kinase inhibitors may be 
potential therapeutic agents for the treatment of PRR16-related breast cancer.

DOI: 10.4062/biomolther.2022.066
PMCID: PMC9252882
PMID: 35719027