1. Adv Biomed Res. 2022 Mar 30;11:26. doi: 10.4103/abr.abr_65_21. eCollection
2022.

The Effect of Orexin-2 and Endocannabinoid-1 Antagonists on Neuronal Activity of 
Hippocampal CA1 Pyramidal Neurons in Response to Tramadol in Rats.

Imanpour V(1), Reisi P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: CA1, as a major structure involved in learning and memory, has been 
shown to be affected by tramadol addiction. Both orexin and endocannabinoid 
receptors express in CA1 and play an important role in drug dependency. The aim 
of this study was to evaluate the modulatory effects of orexin-2 (OX2R) and 
endocannabinoid-1 (CB1R) receptors on neuronal activity in CA1, in response to 
tramadol in rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male Wistar rats were divided into 8 groups (n = 6-7); 
saline-dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), tramadol-DMSO, saline-TCS-OX2-29, 
saline-AM251, tramadol-TCS-OX2-29, tramadol-AM251, saline-TCS-OX2-29-AM251, 
tramadol-TCS-OX2-29-AM251. Tramadol was injected intraperitoneally, and then, 
AM251 (1 nmol/0.3 μL), CB1R antagonist and TCS-OX2-29 (1 nmol/0.3 μL), OX2R 
antagonist, were microinjected individually or concurrently into the CA1. Using 
in vivo extracellular single-unit recording, the firing of CA1 pyramidal neurons 
was investigated.
RESULTS: Tramadol decreased neuronal activity in CA1 (P < 0.01) but increased it 
after micro-injection of DMSO. TCS-OX2-29 increased neuronal activity in saline 
group (P < 0.05) but decreased it in tramadol group. AM251 had no effect on 
saline group but decreased neuronal activity in tramadol group (P < 0.05). 
Concurrent micro-injection of TCS-OX2-29 and AM251 had no effect on saline group 
but decreased neuronal activity in tramadol group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that neural activity in CA1 is rapidly 
affected by acute use of tramadol, and some of these effects may be induced 
through the endocannabinoid and orexin systems. Thus, the function of 
endocannabinoid and orexin systems in CA1 may play a role in tramadol addiction.

Copyright: © 2022 Advanced Biomedical Research.

DOI: 10.4103/abr.abr_65_21
PMCID: PMC9201222
PMID: 35720213

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.