1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jun 3;13:884132. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.884132.
eCollection  2022.

Coevolved Canonical Loops Conformations of Single-Domain Antibodies: A Tale of 
Three Pockets Playing Musical Chairs.

Gaudreault F(1), Corbeil CR(1), Purisima EO(1), Sulea T(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Health Therapeutics, National Research Council Canada, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.

Single-domain antibodies (sdAbs) are a promising class of biotherapeutics with 
unique structural traits within their paratope region. The distribution of 
canonical conformations explored by their complementarity determining region 
(CDR) loops differs to some extent from conventional two-chain Fv fragments of 
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). In this study, we explored in detail the canonical 
structures of sdAb CDR-H1 and CDR-H2 loops and compared those with mAbs from the 
IGHV3 and IGHV1 gene families. We surveyed the antibody structures catalogued in 
SAbDab and clustered the CDR canonical loops in Cartesian space. While most of 
the sdAb clusters were sub-populations of previously defined canonical Fv 
conformations of CDR-H1 and CDR-H2, our stricter clustering approach defined 
narrower clusters in sequence-space. Meticulous visual inspection of 
sub-populations allowed a clearer understanding of sequence-structure 
relationships. The packing densities within structural pockets contacted by 
CDR-H1 and CDR-H2 canonical conformations were analyzed on the premise that 
these pockets cannot be left vacant as they would leave exposed supportive 
hydrophobic residues. The fine resolution of the canonical clusters defined here 
revealed unique signatures within these pockets, including distinct structural 
complementarities between CDR-H1 and CDR-H2 canonical clusters, which could not 
be perceived with the previous coarser clusters. We highlight examples where a 
single residue change in CDR-H1 sequence is sufficient to induce a dramatic 
population shift in CDR-H2 conformation. This suggests that preferences in 
combining CDR-H1 and CDR-H2 emerged naturally during antibody evolution, leading 
to preferred sets of conserved amino acids at key positions in the framework as 
well as within the CDR loops. We outline a game of musical chairs that is 
necessary to maintain the integrity of the antibody structures that arose during 
evolution. Our study also provides refined CDR-H1 and CDR-H2 structural 
templates for sdAb homology modeling that could be leveraged for improved 
antibody design.

Copyright Â© 2022 Gaudreault, Corbeil, Purisima and Sulea.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.884132
PMCID: PMC9203998
PMID: 35720356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.