1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Jun 3;13:901558. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.901558. 
eCollection 2022.

Engineering of Src Homology 2 Domain Leading to Sulfotyrosine Recognition With a 
High Affinity by Integrating a Distinctive Selection Theme and Next-Generation 
Sequencing.

Zhao D(1)(2), Li C(1), Jiang H(1), Yin Y(2), Zhou C(3), Huang H(2), Qi Y(4), Li 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Drug Discovery, Noventi Biopharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Sino Genomics Technology Co., Ltd., Qingdao, China.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.

Tyrosine sulfation plays a vital role in various biochemical reactions. Although 
sulfated tyrosine (sTyr) has a similar structure to phosphotyrosine (pTyr), the 
number of available sTyr sites is significantly less than that of pTyr sites, 
mainly because of the lack of effective sTyr probes. A few sTyr binders were 
identified on the basis of structural similarity by engineering the pTyr-binding 
pocket of an Src Homology 2 (SH2) domain through phage selections against sTyr 
peptides. Nevertheless, they still interact with pTyr peptides with comparable 
affinity. This study aims to identify sTyr superbinders using the SH2 domain as 
a template. We created a distinctive phage selection scheme that separately 
covered selections against sTyr and pTyr peptides, followed by next-generation 
sequencing (NGS). After selections, phage pools showed strong enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) signal intensities for both modified peptides, 
indicating that the variants evolved with a high affinity for these peptides, 
which causes difficulty in identifying sTyr-specific binders. In contrast, NGS 
data from selected pools showed significant differences, suggesting the 
enrichment of sTyr-specific variants during selections. Accordingly, we obtained 
the sTyr features based on NGS data analysis and prioritized a few potential 
sTyr binders. The variant SH2-4 showed a stronger affinity for sTyr than pTyr 
and was superior to previous sTyr binders as measured by the Biolayer 
Interferometry assay. In summary, we described the strategy of integrating NGS 
data mining with a novel selection scheme to identify sTyr superbinders.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zhao, Li, Jiang, Yin, Zhou, Huang, Qi and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.901558
PMCID: PMC9204161
PMID: 35722314

Conflict of interest statement: HH and YY were the employees of Noventi 
Biopharmaceuticals Co., Ltd. CZ was the employee of Sino Genomics Technology 
Co., Ltd. LL, DZ, and CZ filed a provisional Chinese patent application related 
to this work. DZ was an intern of Noventi Biopharmaceuticals. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.