1. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2022 Oct;272(7):1193-1203. doi: 
10.1007/s00406-022-01435-3. Epub 2022 Jun 20.

Association of polygenic risk for schizophrenia with fast sleep spindle density 
depends on pro-cognitive variants.

Schilling C(1), Zillich L(2), Schredl M(3), Frank J(2), Schwarz E(4), Deuschle 
M(4), Meyer-Lindenberg A(4), Rietschel M(2), Witt SH(2)(5), Streit F(2).

Author information:
(1)Central Institute of Mental Health, Sleep Laboratory, Medical Faculty 
Mannheim, Heidelberg University, J5, 68159, Mannheim, Germany. 
claudia.schilling@zi-mannheim.de.
(2)Central Institute of Mental Health, Department of Genetic Epidemiology in 
Psychiatry, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.
(3)Central Institute of Mental Health, Sleep Laboratory, Medical Faculty 
Mannheim, Heidelberg University, J5, 68159, Mannheim, Germany.
(4)Central Institute of Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, 
Germany.
(5)Central Institute of Mental Health, Center for Innovative Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, 
Germany.

Cognitive impairment is a common feature in schizophrenia and the strongest 
prognostic factor for long-term outcome. Identifying a trait associated with the 
genetic background for cognitive outcome in schizophrenia may aid in a deeper 
understanding of clinical disease subtypes. Fast sleep spindles may represent 
such a biomarker as they are strongly genetically determined, associated with 
cognitive functioning and impaired in schizophrenia and unaffected relatives. We 
measured fast sleep spindle density in 150 healthy adults and investigated its 
association with a genome-wide polygenic score for schizophrenia (SCZ-PGS). The 
association between SCZ-PGS and fast spindle density was further characterized 
by stratifying it to the genetic background of intelligence. SCZ-PGS was 
positively associated with fast spindle density. This association mainly 
depended on pro-cognitive genetic variants. Our results strengthen the evidence 
for a genetic background of spindle abnormalities in schizophrenia. Spindle 
density might represent an easily accessible marker for a favourable cognitive 
outcome which should be further investigated in clinical samples.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00406-022-01435-3
PMCID: PMC9508216
PMID: 35723738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.