1. Front Physiol. 2022 Jun 6;13:913496. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.913496.
eCollection  2022.

Long-Lasting Effects of Incubation Temperature During Fetal Development on 
Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue of Broilers.

Almeida AR(1), Morita VS(1), Matos Junior JB(2), Sgavioli S(3), Vicentini TI(1), 
Boleli IC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Morphology and Physiology, Faculty of Agricultural and 
Veterinary Sciences, Sao Paulo State University-UNESP, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Federal Institute of Acre-IFAC, Sena Madureira, Brazil.
(3)Brasil University, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Increasing evidence indicates that fetal programming may cause permanent effects 
on offspring adipose tissue and body composition. Previous study showed 
reduction in newly-hatched broiler chick adiposity by manipulating incubation 
temperature during fetal development. The present study examined whether 
incubation temperature during fetal development has long-term effects on 
post-hatching fat deposition in broilers. Broiler breeder eggs (Cobb-500®) were 
incubated under constant low (36°C, LT), control (37.5°C, CT) or high (39°C, HT) 
temperature from day 13 onward, giving to eggshell temperature of 37.3 ± 0.08°C, 
37.8 ± 0.2°C, and 38.8 ± 0.3°C, respectively. Male chicks were reared under 
recommended temperatures until 42 days old. LT 21 days old broilers exhibited 
higher blood cholesterol than CT broilers, and higher triglycerids, VLDL, and 
LDL, and lower HDL than CT and HT broilers. LT broilers presented higher liver 
cholesterol than CT broilers and lower ether extract percentage than CT 
broilers. Adipocyte count was lower in the abdomen than in the thigh. Until day 
21 of age, feed intake was higher in LT than in HT broilers. At day 42 of age, 
blood cholesterol and LDL were higher in HT broilers than in CT and LT broilers. 
Liver cholesterol was higher in LT than in HT broilers. LT treatment reduced 
neck and increased thigh adipocyte size compared to CT treatment, while the HT 
treatment reduced abdomen and neck adipocyte size compared to other two 
treatments and in the thigh compared to LT treatment. In CT broilers, thigh 
adipocytes were smaller than abdomen and neck adipocytes. HT treatment increased 
adipocyte number per area in the neck compared to LT and CT treatment, and LT 
and HT treatments reduced adipocyte count in the thigh compared to CT treatment. 
CT broilers presented higher adipocyte count in the thigh than the abdomen and 
neck, while HT broilers presented higher adipocyte count in the neck than the 
abdomen and thigh. Cell proliferation was lower in the abdomen than in the 
thigh. The results show incubation temperature manipulation during fetal 
development has long-term and distinct effects on regional adiposity, and can be 
used to modulate broiler fat deposition.

Copyright © 2022 Almeida, Morita, Matos Junior, Sgavioli, Vicentini and Boleli.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2022.913496
PMCID: PMC9207451
PMID: 35734000

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.