1. Front Genet. 2022 Jun 6;13:918983. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.918983. eCollection
 2022.

N7-Methylguanosine Genes Related Prognostic Biomarker in Hepatocellular 
Carcinoma.

Regmi P(1), He ZQ(1), Lia T(2), Paudyal A(3), Li FY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biliary Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(2)Department of Uro Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(3)Department of Dermatology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.

Background: About 90% of liver cancer-related deaths are caused by 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). N7-methylguanosine (m7G) modification is 
associated with the biological process and regulation of various diseases. To 
the best of our knowledge, its role in the pathogenesis and prognosis of HCC has 
not been thoroughly investigated. Aim: To identify N7-methylguanosine (m7G) 
related prognostic biomarkers in HCC. Furthermore, we also studied the 
association of m7G-related prognostic gene signature with immune infiltration in 
HCC. Methods: The TCGA datasets were used as a training and GEO dataset 
"GSE76427" for validation of the results. Statistical analyses were performed 
using the R statistical software version 4.1.2. Results: Functional enrichment 
analysis identified some pathogenesis related to HCC. We identified 3 
m7G-related genes (CDK1, ANO1, and PDGFRA) as prognostic biomarkers for HCC. A 
risk score was calculated from these 3 prognostic m7G-related genes which showed 
the high-risk group had a significantly poorer prognosis than the low-risk group 
in both training and validation datasets. The 3- and 5-years overall survival 
was predicted better with the risk score than the ideal model in the entire 
cohort in the predictive nomogram. Furthermore, immune checkpoint genes like 
CTLA4, HAVCR2, LAG3, and TIGT were expressed significantly higher in the 
high-risk group and the chemotherapy sensitivity analysis showed that the 
high-risk groups were responsive to sorafenib treatment. Conclusion: These 3 m7G 
genes related signature model can be used as prognostic biomarkers in HCC and a 
guide for immunotherapy and chemotherapy response. Future clinical study on this 
biomarker model is required to verify its clinical implications.

Copyright Â© 2022 Regmi, He, Lia, Paudyal and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.918983
PMCID: PMC9207530
PMID: 35734429

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.