1. Life (Basel). 2022 Jun 17;12(6):910. doi: 10.3390/life12060910.

Crosstalk of Astrocytes and Other Cells during Ischemic Stroke.

He T(1)(2), Yang GY(2), Zhang Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University, 
Shanghai 200072, China.
(2)Neuroscience and Neuroengineering Center, Med-X Research Institute and School 
of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, 
China.

Stroke is a leading cause of death and long-term disability worldwide. 
Astrocytes structurally compose tripartite synapses, blood-brain barrier, and 
the neurovascular unit and perform multiple functions through cell-to-cell 
signaling of neurons, glial cells, and vasculature. The crosstalk of astrocytes 
and other cells is complicated and incompletely understood. Here we review the 
role of astrocytes in response to ischemic stroke, both beneficial and 
detrimental, from a cell-cell interaction perspective. Reactive astrocytes 
provide neuroprotection through antioxidation and antiexcitatory effects and 
metabolic support; they also contribute to neurorestoration involving 
neurogenesis, synaptogenesis, angiogenesis, and oligodendrogenesis by crosstalk 
with stem cells and cell lineage. In the meantime, reactive astrocytes also play 
a vital role in neuroinflammation and brain edema. Glial scar formation in the 
chronic phase hinders functional recovery. We further discuss astrocyte enriched 
microRNAs and exosomes in the regulation of ischemic stroke. In addition, the 
latest notion of reactive astrocyte subsets and astrocytic activity revealed by 
optogenetics is mentioned. This review discusses the current understanding of 
the intimate molecular conversation between astrocytes and other cells and 
outlines its potential implications after ischemic stroke. "Neurocentric" 
strategies may not be sufficient for neurological protection and recovery; 
future therapeutic strategies could target reactive astrocytes.

DOI: 10.3390/life12060910
PMCID: PMC9228674
PMID: 35743941

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.