1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Jun 6;13(6):1019. doi: 10.3390/genes13061019.

H1299R Variant in Factor V and Recurrent Pregnancy Loss: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis Protocol.

Ardizzone A(1), Capra AP(1), Mondello S(2), Briuglia S(2), La Rosa MA(3), 
Campolo M(1), Esposito E(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical, Biological, Pharmaceutical, and Environmental 
Sciences, University of Messina, Viale Ferdinando Stagno D'Alcontres 31, 98166 
Messina, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Dental Sciences and Morphofunctional Imaging, 
University of Messina, Via Consolare Valeria 1, 98125 Messina, Italy.
(3)Genetics and Pharmacogenetics Unit, "Gaetano Martino" University Hospital, 
Via Consolare Valeria 1, 98125 Messina, Italy.

Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is defined as the loss of two or more 
pregnancies, affecting approximately 1 to 3% of women worldwide. Scientific data 
highlight a possible correlation between thrombophilic genetic variants and RPL. 
H1299R variant in the factor V gene would lead to an increased thrombotic risk 
associated with frequent miscarriages. However, the data are often conflicting, 
making this an interesting question for further investigations by evaluating 
genotype-phenotype correlations to improve the clinical management and genetic 
counseling of couples. A systematic review and meta-analysis will follow the 
preferred reporting elements for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols 
(PRISMA-P). The Pubmed (MEDLINE) and Embase (OVID) databases will be explored to 
identify suitable articles based on inclusion and exclusion criteria. Inclusion 
criteria are: (a) H1299R genotyping with clear data reported, referred to as 
Heterozygous (Het) and/or Homozygous (Hom); (b) articles written in English; (c) 
analyses of only RPL female patients having at least two or more previous 
pregnancy losses and compared with a control group. This analysis will present 
selected scientific evidence, addressing the questions concerning the 
association between the H1299R variant and RPL, hoping to clarify this still 
unresolved issue. PROSPERO registration number: CRD42022330077.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13061019
PMCID: PMC9222435
PMID: 35741781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.