1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Jun 18;13(6):1083. doi: 10.3390/genes13061083.

Identification of the Core Promoter and Variants Regulating Chicken CCKAR 
Expression.

Wang Z(1)(2), Reid AMA(2), Wilson PW(2), Dunn IC(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 
712100, China.
(2)Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, Roslin Institute, University of 
Edinburgh, Midlothian EH25 9RG, UK.

Decreased expression of chicken cholecystokinin A receptor (CCKAR) attenuates 
satiety, which contributes to increased food intake and growth for modern 
broilers. The study aims to define the core promoter of CCKAR, and to identify 
variants associated with expression activity. A 21 kb region around the CCKAR 
was re-sequenced to detect sequence variants. A series of 5'-deleted promoter 
plasmids were constructed to define the core promoter of CCKAR. The effects of 
sequence variants located in promoter (PSNP) and conserved (CSNP) regions on 
promoter activity were analyzed by comparing luciferase activity between 
haplotypes. A total of 182 variants were found in the 21 kb region. There were 
no large structural variants around CCKAR. pNL-328/+183, the one with the 
shortest insertion, showed the highest activity among the six promoter 
constructs, implying that the key cis elements regulating CCKAR expression are 
mainly distributed 328 bp upstream. We detected significant activity differences 
between high- and low-growth associated haplotypes in four of the six promoter 
constructs. The high-growth haplotypes of constructs pNL-1646/+183, pNL-799/+183 
and pNL-528/+183 showed lower activities than the low-growth haplotypes, which 
is consistent with decreased expression of CCKAR in high-growth chickens. Lower 
expression of the high-growth allele was also detected for the CSNP5-containing 
construct. The data suggest that the core promoter of CCKAR is located the 328 
bp region upstream from the transcription start site. Lower expression 
activities shown by the high-growth haplotypes in the reporter assay suggest 
that CSNP5 and variants located between 328 bp and 1646 bp upstream form a 
promising molecular basis for decreased expression of CCKAR and increased growth 
in chickens.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13061083
PMCID: PMC9222909
PMID: 35741846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.