1. PLoS One. 2022 Jun 24;17(6):e0270431. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0270431. 
eCollection 2022.

Trpc6 gain-of-function disease mutation enhances phosphatidylserine exposure in 
murine platelets.

Boekell KL(1), Brown BJ(1), Talbot BE(1), Schlondorff JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Platelets enhance coagulation by exposing phosphatidylserine (PS) on their cell 
surface in response to strong agonist activation. Transient receptor potential 
channels, including TRPC6, have been implicated in the calcium influx central to 
this process. Here, we characterize the effect of a Trpc6 gain-of-function (GOF) 
disease-associated, and a dominant negative (DN), mutation on murine platelet 
activation. Platelets from mice harboring Trpc6E896K/E896K (GOF) and Trpc6DN/DN 
mutations were subject to in vitro analysis. Trpc6E896K/E896K and Trpc6DN/DN 
mutant platelets show enhanced and absent calcium influx, respectively, upon 
addition of the TRPC3/6 agonist GSK1702934A (GSK). GSK was sufficient to induce 
integrin αIIbβ3 activation, P-selection and PS exposure, talin cleavage, and 
MLC2 phosphorylation in Trpc6E896K/E896K, but not in wild-type, platelets. 
Thrombin-induced calcium influx and PS exposure were enhanced, and clot 
retraction delayed, by GOF TRPC6, while no differences were noted between 
wild-type and Trpc6DN/DN platelets. In contrast, Erk activation upon GSK 
treatment was absent in Trpc6DN/DN, and enhanced in Trpc6E896K/E896K, platelets, 
compared to wild-type. The positive allosteric modulator, TRPC6-PAM-C20, and 
fluoxetine maintained their ability to enhance and inhibit, respectively, 
GSK-mediated calcium influx in Trpc6E896K/E896K platelets. The data demonstrate 
that gain-of-function mutant TRPC6 channel can enhance platelet activation, 
including PS exposure, while confirming that TRPC6 is not necessary for this 
process. Furthermore, the results suggest that Trpc6 GOF disease mutants do not 
simply increase wild-type TRPC6 responses, but can affect pathways not usually 
modulated by TRPC6 channel activity, displaying a true gain-of-function 
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0270431
PMCID: PMC9231752
PMID: 35749414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.