1. Nutrients. 2022 Jun 8;14(12):2375. doi: 10.3390/nu14122375.

Selenium Status in Paediatric Patients with Neurodevelopmental Diseases.

Görlich CL(1)(2), Sun Q(1), Roggenkamp V(2), Hackler J(1), Mehl S(1), Minich 
WB(1), Kaindl AM(2)(3)(4), Schomburg L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Experimental Endocrinology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
13353 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Center for Chronically Sick Children (SPZ), Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

Neurodevelopmental diseases are often associated with other comorbidities, 
especially inflammatory processes. The disease may affect the trace element (TE) 
status, which in turn may affect disease severity and progression. Selenium (Se) 
is an essential TE required for the biosynthesis of selenoproteins including the 
transporter selenoprotein P (SELENOP) and extracellular glutathione peroxidase 
(GPX3). SELENOP deficiency in transgenic mice resulted in a Se status-dependent 
phenotype characterized by impaired growth and disturbed neuronal development, 
with epileptic seizures on a Se-deficient diet. Therefore, we hypothesized that 
Se and SELENOP deficiencies may be prevalent in paediatric patients with a 
neurodevelopmental disease. In an exploratory cross-sectional study, serum 
samples from children with neurodevelopmental diseases (n = 147) were analysed 
for total serum Se, copper (Cu), and zinc (Zn) concentrations as well as for the 
TE biomarkers SELENOP, ceruloplasmin (CP), and GPX3 activity. Children with 
epilepsy displayed elevated Cu and Zn concentrations but no dysregulation of 
serum Se status. Significantly reduced SELENOP concentrations were found in 
association with intellectual disability (mean ± SD (standard deviation); 3.9 ± 
0.9 mg/L vs. 4.4 ± 1.2 mg/L, p = 0.015). A particularly low GPX3 activity (mean 
± SD; 172.4 ± 36.5 vs. 192.6 ± 46.8 U/L, p = 0.012) was observed in 
phacomatoses. Autoantibodies to SELENOP, known to impair Se transport, were not 
detected in any of the children. In conclusion, there was no general association 
between Se deficiency and epilepsy in this observational analysis, which does 
not exclude its relevance to individual cases. Sufficiently high SELENOP 
concentrations seem to be of relevance to the support of normal mental 
development. Decreased GPX3 activity in phacomatoses may be relevant to the 
characteristic skin lesions and merits further analysis. Longitudinal studies 
are needed to determine whether the observed differences are relevant to disease 
progression and whether correcting a diagnosed TE deficiency may confer health 
benefits to affected children.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14122375
PMCID: PMC9227519
PMID: 35745104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.S. holds shares of selenOmed GmbH, a company 
involved in Se status assessment and supplementation. The other authors declare 
no competing interests.