1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2022 Jun 16;15(6):752. doi: 10.3390/ph15060752.

Application of In Silico Filtering and Isothermal Titration Calorimetry for the 
Discovery of Small Molecule Inhibitors of MDM2.

Alali H(1), Bloch I(2), Rapaport I(2), Rodrigues L(1), Sher I(1), Ansbacher 
T(1)(3), Gal M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Biology, Goldschleger School of Dental Medicine, Faculty 
of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel.
(2)Migal-Galilee Research Institute, Tel-Hai Academic College, Upper Galilee 
12210, Israel.
(3)Hadassah Academic College, Jerusalem 91010, Israel.

The initial discovery phase of protein modulators, which consists of filtering 
molecular libraries and in vitro direct binding validation, is central in drug 
discovery. Thus, virtual screening of large molecular libraries, together with 
the evaluation of binding affinity by isothermal calorimetry, generates an 
efficient experimental setup. Herein, we applied virtual screening for 
discovering small molecule inhibitors of MDM2, a major negative regulator of the 
tumor suppressor p53, and thus a promising therapeutic target. A library of 20 
million small molecules was screened against an averaged model derived from 
multiple structural conformations of MDM2 based on published structures. 
Selected molecules originating from the computational filtering were tested in 
vitro for their direct binding to MDM2 via isothermal titration calorimetry. 
Three new molecules, representing distinct chemical scaffolds, showed binding to 
MDM2. These were further evaluated by exploring structure-similar chemical 
analogues. Two scaffolds were further evaluated by de novo synthesis of 
molecules derived from the initial molecules that bound MDM2, one with a central 
oxoazetidine acetamide and one with benzene sulfonamide. Several molecules 
derived from these scaffolds increased wild-type p53 activity in MCF7 cancer 
cells. These set a basis for further chemical optimization and the development 
of new chemical entities as anticancer drugs.

DOI: 10.3390/ph15060752
PMCID: PMC9230431
PMID: 35745671

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.