1. Cells. 2022 Jun 17;11(12):1958. doi: 10.3390/cells11121958.

Telomere Maintenance and the cGAS-STING Pathway in Cancer.

Ebata H(1)(2), Loo TM(2), Takahashi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(2)Project for Cellular Senescence, Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for 
Cancer Research, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.

Cancer cells exhibit the unique characteristics of high proliferation and 
aberrant DNA damage response, which prevents cancer therapy from effectively 
eliminating them. The machinery required for telomere maintenance, such as 
telomerase and the alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT), enables cancer 
cells to proliferate indefinitely. In addition, the molecules in this system are 
involved in noncanonical pro-tumorigenic functions. Of these, the function of 
the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)-stimulator of interferon genes (STING) 
pathway, which contains telomere-related molecules, is a well-known contributor 
to the tumor microenvironment (TME). This review summarizes the current 
knowledge of the role of telomerase and ALT in cancer regulation, with emphasis 
on their noncanonical roles beyond telomere maintenance. The components of the 
cGAS-STING pathway are summarized with respect to intercell communication in the 
TME. Elucidating the underlying functional connection between telomere-related 
molecules and TME regulation is important for the development of cancer 
therapeutics that target cancer-specific pathways in different contexts. 
Finally, strategies for designing new cancer therapies that target cancer cells 
and the TME are discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11121958
PMCID: PMC9221635
PMID: 35741087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.