1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2022 Jun 14;11(6):1162. doi: 10.3390/antiox11061162.

NADPH Oxidases in Pain Processing.

Kallenborn-Gerhardt W(1), Schr√∂der K(2)(3), Schmidtko A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy, Goethe University Frankfurt, 
Max-von-Laue-Str. 9, 60438 Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60590 
Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner Site Rhein Main, 
60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

Inflammation or injury to the somatosensory nervous system may result in chronic 
pain conditions, which affect millions of people and often cause major health 
problems. Emerging lines of evidence indicate that reactive oxygen species 
(ROS), such as superoxide anion or hydrogen peroxide, are produced in the 
nociceptive system during chronic inflammatory and neuropathic pain and act as 
specific signaling molecules in pain processing. Among potential ROS sources in 
the somatosensory system are NADPH oxidases, a group of electron-transporting 
transmembrane enzymes whose sole function seems to be the generation of ROS. 
Interestingly, the expression and relevant function of the Nox family members 
Nox1, Nox2, and Nox4 in various cells of the nociceptive system have been 
demonstrated. Studies using knockout mice or specific knockdown of these 
isoforms indicate that Nox1, Nox2, and Nox4 specifically contribute to distinct 
signaling pathways in chronic inflammatory and/or neuropathic pain states. As 
selective Nox inhibitors are currently being developed and investigated in 
various physiological and pathophysiological settings, targeting Nox1, Nox2, 
and/or Nox4 could be a novel strategy for the treatment of chronic pain. Here, 
we summarize the distinct roles of Nox1, Nox2, and Nox4 in inflammatory and 
neuropathic processing and discuss the effectiveness of currently available Nox 
inhibitors in the treatment of chronic pain conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox11061162
PMCID: PMC9219759
PMID: 35740059

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.