1. Molecules. 2022 Jun 11;27(12):3765. doi: 10.3390/molecules27123765.

Development of Reduced Peptide Bond Pseudopeptide Michael Acceptors for the 
Treatment of Human African Trypanosomiasis.

Previti S(1), Ettari R(1), Di Chio C(1)(2), Ravichandran R(3), Bogacz M(4), 
Hellmich UA(4)(5), Schirmeister T(6), Cosconati S(3), Zappalà M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical, Biological, Pharmaceutical and Environmental 
Sciences, University of Messina, Viale Stagno d'Alcontres 31, 98166 Messina, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Messina, Via 
C. Valeria, 98125 Messina, Italy.
(3)DiSTABiF, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Via Vivaldi 43, 81100 
Caserta, Italy.
(4)Institute of Organic Chemistry & Macromolecular Chemistry, 
Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena, Humboldtstraße 10, 07743 Jena, Germany.
(5)Centre for Biomolecular Magnetic Resonance (BMRZ), Goethe University 
Frankfurt, Max von Laue Str. 9, 60438 Frankfurt, Germany.
(6)Institute of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, University of Mainz, 
Staudingerweg 5, 55128 Mainz, Germany.

Human African Trypanosomiasis (HAT) is an endemic protozoan disease widespread 
in the sub-Saharan region that is caused by T. b. gambiense and T. b. 
rhodesiense. The development of molecules targeting rhodesain, the main cysteine 
protease of T. b. rhodesiense, has led to a panel of inhibitors endowed with 
micro/sub-micromolar activity towards the protozoa. However, whilst impressive 
binding affinity against rhodesain has been observed, the limited selectivity 
towards the target still remains a hard challenge for the development of 
antitrypanosomal agents. In this paper, we report the synthesis, biological 
evaluation, as well as docking studies of a series of reduced peptide bond 
pseudopeptide Michael acceptors (SPR10-SPR19) as potential anti-HAT agents. The 
new molecules show Ki values in the low-micro/sub-micromolar range against 
rhodesain, coupled with k2nd values between 1314 and 6950 M-1 min-1. With a few 
exceptions, an appreciable selectivity over human cathepsin L was observed. In 
in vitro assays against T. b. brucei cultures, SPR16 and SPR18 exhibited 
single-digit micromolar activity against the protozoa, comparable to those 
reported for very potent rhodesain inhibitors, while no significant cytotoxicity 
up to 70 µM towards mammalian cells was observed. The discrepancy between 
rhodesain inhibition and the antitrypanosomal effect could suggest additional 
mechanisms of action. The biological characterization of peptide inhibitor SPR34 
highlights the essential role played by the reduced bond for the 
antitrypanosomal effect. Overall, this series of molecules could represent the 
starting point for further investigations of reduced peptide bond-containing 
analogs as potential anti-HAT agents.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27123765
PMCID: PMC9229991
PMID: 35744891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.