1. Viruses. 2022 Jun 18;14(6):1332. doi: 10.3390/v14061332.

Developing Pseudovirus-Based Neutralization Assay against Omicron-Included 
SARS-CoV-2 Variants.

Sun H(1), Xu J(1), Zhang G(1), Han J(1), Hao M(1), Chen Z(1), Fang T(1), Chi 
X(1), Yu C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing 
100071, China.

The global spread of SARS-CoV-2 and its variants poses a serious threat to human 
health worldwide. Recently, the emergence of Omicron has presented a new 
challenge to the prevention and control of the COVID-19 pandemic. A convenient 
and reliable in vitro neutralization assay is an important method for validating 
the efficiency of antibodies, vaccines, and other potential drugs. Here, we 
established an effective assay based on a pseudovirus carrying a full-length 
spike (S) protein of SARS-CoV-2 variants in the HIV-1 backbone, with a 
luciferase reporter gene inserted into the non-replicate pseudovirus genome. The 
key parameters for packaging the pseudovirus were optimized, including the ratio 
of the S protein expression plasmids to the HIV backbone plasmids and the 
collection time for the Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Kappa, and Omicron pseudovirus 
particles. The pseudovirus neutralization assay was validated using several 
approved or developed monoclonal antibodies, underscoring that Omicron can 
escape some neutralizing antibodies, such as REGN10987 and REGN10933, while S309 
and ADG-2 still function with reduced neutralization capability. The 
neutralizing capacity of convalescent plasma from COVID-19 convalescent patients 
in Wuhan was tested against these pseudoviruses, revealing the immune evasion of 
Omicron. Our work established a practical pseudovirus-based neutralization assay 
for SARS-CoV-2 variants, which can be conducted safely under biosafety level-2 
(BSL-2) conditions, and this assay will be a promising tool for studying and 
characterizing vaccines and therapeutic candidates against Omicron-included 
SARS-CoV-2 variants.

DOI: 10.3390/v14061332
PMCID: PMC9231177
PMID: 35746803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.