1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2022 Jun 27;16(6):e0010536. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0010536. eCollection 2022 Jun.

Frequency distribution of cytokine and associated transcription factor single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in Zimbabweans: Impact on schistosome infection and 
cytokine levels.

Hanton AJ(1)(2), Scott F(1)(2), Stenzel K(1), Nausch N(1), Zdesenko G(1)(2), 
Mduluza T(3), Mutapi F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology & Infection Research, University of Edinburgh, 
Ashworth Laboratories, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)NIHR Global Health Research Unit Tackling Infections to Benefit Africa 
(TIBA), University of Edinburgh, Ashworth Laboratories, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe.

Cytokines mediate T-helper (TH) responses that are crucial for determining the 
course of infection and disease. The expression of cytokines is regulated by 
transcription factors (TFs). Here we present the frequencies of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in cytokine and TF genes in a Zimbabwean 
population, and further relate SNPs to susceptibility to schistosomiasis and 
cytokine levels. Individuals (N = 850) were genotyped for SNPs across the 
cytokines IL4, IL10, IL13, IL33, and IFNG, and their TFs STAT4, STAT5A/B, STAT6, 
GATA3, FOXP3, and TBX21 to determine allele frequencies. Circulatory levels of 
systemic and parasite-specific IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, IL-13, and IFNγ were 
quantified via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Schistosoma haematobium 
infection was determined by enumerating parasite eggs excreted in urine by 
microscopy. SNP allele frequencies were related to infection status by 
case-control analysis and logistic regression, and egg burdens and systemic and 
parasite-specific cytokine levels by analysis of variance and linear regression. 
Novel findings were i) IL4 rs2070874*T's association with protection from 
schistosomiasis, as carriage of ≥1 allele gave an odds ratio of infection of 
0.597 (95% CIs, 0.421-0.848, p = 0.0021) and IFNG rs2069727*G's association with 
susceptibility to schistosomiasis as carriage of ≥1 allele gave an odds ratio of 
infection of 1.692 (1.229-2.33, p = 0.0013). Neither IL4 rs2070874*T nor IFNG 
rs2069727*G were significantly associated with cytokine levels. This study found 
TH2-upregulating SNPs were more frequent among the Zimbabwean sample compared to 
African and European populations, highlighting the value of immunogenetic 
studies of African populations in the context of infectious diseases and other 
conditions, including allergic and atopic disease. In addition, the 
identification of novel infection-associated alleles in both TH1- and 
TH2-associated genes highlights the role of both in regulating and controlling 
responses to Schistosoma.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0010536
PMCID: PMC9236240
PMID: 35759449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: FM - 1) WHO - Member, 
WHO Diagnostic Technical Advisory Group (DTAG) for neglected tropical diseases. 
Schistosomiasis Sub-group 2) UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) - Global 
Challenges Research Fund Strategic Advisory Group 3) UK Foreign, Commonwealth & 
Development Office - Member, Science Advisory Group 4) WHO AFRO - Member of the 
WHO AFRO Independent Advisory Group No other authors report competing interests.