1. Bioact Mater. 2022 Jun 8;20:306-317. doi: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.05.029. 
eCollection 2023 Feb.

Thiol-ene conjugation of VEGF peptide to electrospun scaffolds as potential 
application for angiogenesis.

Yao T(1)(2), Chen H(3), Wang R(4), Rivero R(2), Wang F(5), Kessels L(6), Agten 
SM(7), Hackeng TM(7), Wolfs TGAM(6)(8), Fan D(1), Baker MB(2), Moroni L(2).

Author information:
(1)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Degradable Biomedical Materials and Shaanxi R&D 
Center of Biomaterials and Fermentation Engineering, School of Chemical 
Engineering, Northwest University, Taibai North Road 229, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 
710069, China.
(2)Complex Tissue Regeneration Department, MERLN Institute for Technology 
Inspired Regenerative Medicine Maastricht University, Maastricht, 6229 ER, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(4)Radboudumc, Department of Dentistry-Regenerative Biomaterials, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Philips van Leydenlaan 25, 6525 EX, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands.
(5)School of Medicine, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, 
China.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Maastricht University Medical Center+, 6229 ER, the 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht 
(CARIM), Maastricht University, 6229ER, the Netherlands.
(8)School for Oncology and Developmental Biology (GROW), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays a vital role in promoting 
attachment and proliferation of endothelial cells, and induces angiogenesis. In 
recent years, much research has been conducted on functionalization of tissue 
engineering scaffolds with VEGF or VEGF-mimetic peptide to promote angiogenesis. 
However, most chemical reactions are nonspecific and require organic solvents, 
which can compromise control over functionalization and alter peptide/protein 
activity. An attractive alternative is the fabrication of functionalizable 
electrospun fibers, which can overcome these hurdles. In this study, we used 
thiol-ene chemistry for the conjugation of a VEGF-mimetic peptide to the surface 
of poly (ε-caprolactone) (PCL) fibrous scaffolds with varying amounts of a 
functional PCL-diacrylate (PCL-DA) polymer. 30% PCL-DA was selected due to 
homogeneous fiber morphology. A VEGF-mimetic peptide was then immobilized on 
PCL-DA fibrous scaffolds by a light-initiated thiol-ene reaction. 
7-Mercapto-4-methylcoumarin, RGD-FITC peptide and VEGF-TAMRA mimetic peptide 
were used to validate the thiol-ene reaction with fibrous scaffolds. Tensile 
strength and elastic modulus of 30% PCL-DA fibrous scaffolds were significantly 
increased after the reaction. Conjugation of 30% PCL-DA fibrous scaffolds with 
VEGF peptide increased the surface water wettability of the scaffolds. Patterned 
structures could be obtained after using a photomask on the fibrous film. 
Moreover, in vitro studies indicated that scaffolds functionalized with the 
VEGF-mimetic peptide were able to induce phosphorylation of VEGF receptor and 
enhanced HUVECs survival, proliferation and adhesion. A chick chorioallantoic 
membrane (CAM) assay further indicated that the VEGF peptide functionalized 
scaffolds are able to promote angiogenesis in vivo. These results show that 
scaffold functionalization can be controlled via a simple polymer mixing 
approach, and that the functionalized VEGF peptide-scaffolds have potential for 
vascular tissue regeneration.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.05.029
PMCID: PMC9192696
PMID: 35755423

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.