1. Front Neurosci. 2022 Jun 9;16:878296. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.878296. 
eCollection 2022.

Cell Non-autonomous Proteostasis Regulation in Aging and Disease.

Ferreira JV(1), da Rosa Soares A(1), Pereira P(1).

Author information:
(1)Proteostasis and Intercellular Communication Lab, Chronic Diseases Research 
Centre (CEDOC), NOVA Medical School, Faculdade de Ciencias Medicas, Universidade 
NOVA de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.

Aging is a risk factor for a number of diseases, being the more notorious ones 
perhaps neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. These 
and other age-related pathologies are often associated with accumulation of 
proteotoxic material inside cells, as well as with the accumulation of protein 
deposits extracellularly. It is widely accepted that this accumulation of toxic 
proteins trails a progressive decline in the mechanisms that regulate protein 
homeostasis, or proteostasis, during aging. However, despite significant 
efforts, the progress in terms of novel or improved therapies targeting 
accumulation of proteotoxic material has been rather limited. For example, 
clinical trials for new drugs aimed at treating Alzheimer's disease, by 
preventing accumulation of toxic proteins, have notoriously failed. On the other 
hand, it is becoming increasingly apparent that regulation of proteostasis is 
not a cell autonomous process. In fact, cells rely on complex transcellular 
networks to maintain tissue and organ homeostasis involving endocrine and 
paracrine signaling pathways. In this review we will discuss the impact of cell 
non-autonomous proteostasis mechanisms and their impact in aging and disease. We 
will focus on how transcellular proteostasis networks can shed new light into 
stablished paradigms about the aging of organisms.

Copyright Â© 2022 Ferreira, da Rosa Soares and Pereira.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2022.878296
PMCID: PMC9220288
PMID: 35757551

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.