1. Front Genet. 2022 Jun 8;13:910932. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.910932. eCollection
 2022.

Whole-Exome Sequencing Identified Genes Responsible for Thoracic Aortic 
Aneurysms and Dissections in three Chinese Families.

Guo R(1)(2), Du P(1), Pei Y(1), Yang J(3), Li S(1), Chang S(1), Sun H(1), He 
X(1), Dong J(1)(4), Zhou J(1), Jing Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Naval Military Medical 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Vascular Surgery, Taian Central Hospital, Taian, China.
(3)Department of Vascular Surgery, Suining Central Hostpital, Suining, China.
(4)Department of Vascular Surgery, Shanghai TCM-Integrated Hospital, Shanghai 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections are precarious conditions that often 
cannot be diagnosed with fatal outcomes. Over the last few years, pathogenic 
variants in numerous genes have been identified that predispose to heritable 
presentations of TAAD. An evidence-based strategy for the selection of genes to 
test in familial TAAD helps inform family screening and intervention to prevent 
life-threatening events. Using whole-exome sequencing, four members of three 
unrelated families clinically diagnosed with TAAD were used to identify the 
genetic origin of the disorder. Variant evaluation was carried out to detect the 
pathogenic mutation. Our studies suggest that mutations of COL3A1 and ACTA2 are 
responsible for familial TAAD. In addition, we highlight FBLN5, FBN1, SLC2A10, 
FBN2, and NOTCH1 as candidate genes. Future studies of crosstalk among the 
pathways may provide us a step toward understanding the pathogenic mechanism. 
This finding indicates the necessity of obtaining family medical history and 
screening of extended relatives of patients with TAAD for the early 
identification and treatment of TAAD.

Copyright Â© 2022 Guo, Du, Pei, Yang, Li, Chang, Sun, He, Dong, Zhou and Jing.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.910932
PMCID: PMC9215720
PMID: 35754816

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.