1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Aug;298(8):102163. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102163. Epub 2022
 Jun 22.

Seed-competent tau monomer initiates pathology in a tauopathy mouse model.

Mirbaha H(1), Chen D(2), Mullapudi V(2), Terpack SJ(2), White CL 3rd(1), 
Joachimiak LA(2), Diamond MI(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Alzheimer's and Neurodegenerative Diseases, Peter O'Donnell Jr. 
Brain Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, 
USA; Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Center for Alzheimer's and Neurodegenerative Diseases, Peter O'Donnell Jr. 
Brain Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, 
USA.
(3)Center for Alzheimer's and Neurodegenerative Diseases, Peter O'Donnell Jr. 
Brain Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, 
USA. Electronic address: marc.diamond@utsouthwestern.edu.

Tau aggregation into ordered assemblies causes neurodegenerative tauopathies. We 
previously reported that tau monomer exists in either inert (Mi) or 
seed-competent (Ms) conformational ensembles and that Ms encodes strains, that 
is, unique, self-replicating, biologically active assemblies. It is unknown if 
disease begins with Ms formation followed by fibril assembly or if Ms derives 
from fibrils and is therefore an epiphenomenon. Here, we studied a tauopathy 
mouse model (PS19) that expresses full-length mutant human (1N4R) tau (P301S). 
Insoluble tau seeding activity appeared at 2 months of age and insoluble tau 
protein assemblies by immunoblot at 3 months. Tau monomer from mice aged 1 to 6 
weeks, purified using size-exclusion chromatography, contained soluble seeding 
activity at 4 weeks, before insoluble material or larger assemblies were 
observed, with assemblies ranging from n = 1 to 3 tau units. By 5 to 6 weeks, 
large soluble assemblies had formed. This indicated that the first detectable 
pathological forms of tau were in fact Ms. We next examined posttranslational 
modifications of tau monomer from 1 to 6 weeks. We detected no phosphorylation 
unique to Ms in PS19 or human Alzheimer's disease brains. We conclude that 
tauopathy begins with formation of the Ms monomer, whose activity is 
phosphorylation independent. Ms then self assembles to form oligomers before it 
forms insoluble fibrils. The conversion of tau monomer from Mi to Ms thus 
constitutes the first detectable step in the initiation of tauopathy in this 
mouse model, with obvious implications for the origins of tauopathy in humans.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102163
PMCID: PMC9307951
PMID: 35750209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.