1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022 Jul 5;11(13):e026135. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.122.026135.
Epub  2022 Jun 29.

Inhibiting Succinate Release Worsens Cardiac Reperfusion Injury by Enhancing 
Mitochondrial Reactive Oxygen Species Generation.

Milliken AS(1), Nadtochiy SM(2), Brookes PS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology University of Rochester Medical 
Center Rochester NY.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine University of 
Rochester Medical Center Rochester NY.

Background The metabolite succinate accumulates during cardiac ischemia. Within 
5â€‰minutes of reperfusion, succinate returns to baseline levels via both its 
release from cells and oxidation by mitochondrial complex II. The latter drives 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and subsequent opening of the 
mitochondrial permeability transition (PT) pore, leading to cell death. 
Targeting succinate dynamics (accumulation/oxidation/release) may be 
therapeutically beneficial in cardiac ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury. It has 
been proposed that blocking MCT1 (monocarboxylate transporter 1) may be 
beneficial in IR injury, by preventing succinate release and subsequent 
engagement of downstream inflammatory signaling pathways. In contrast, herein we 
hypothesized that blocking MCT1 would retain succinate in cells, exacerbating 
ROS generation and IR injury. Methods and Results Using the mitochondrial ROS 
probe mitoSOX and a custom-built murine heart perfusion rig built into a 
spectrofluorometer, we measured ROS generation in situ during the first moments 
of reperfusion. We found that acute MCT1 inhibition enhanced mitochondrial ROS 
generation at reperfusion and worsened IR injury (recovery of function and 
infarct size). Both of these effects were abrogated by tandem inhibition of 
mitochondrial complex II, suggesting that succinate retention worsens IR because 
it drives more mitochondrial ROS generation. Furthermore, using the PT pore 
inhibitor cyclosporin A, along with monitoring of PT pore opening via the 
mitochondrial membrane potential indicator tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester, we 
herein provide evidence that ROS generation during early reperfusion is upstream 
of the PT pore, not downstream as proposed by others. In addition, pore opening 
was exacerbated by MCT1 inhibition. Conclusions Together, these findings 
highlight the importance of succinate dynamics and mitochondrial ROS generation 
as key determinants of PT pore opening and IR injury outcomes.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.122.026135
PMCID: PMC9333399
PMID: 35766275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]