1. Minerva Cardiol Angiol. 2023 Aug;71(4):374-380. doi: 
10.23736/S2724-5683.22.06021-5. Epub 2022 Jun 29.

Acute myocardial infarction in a patient with MELAS syndrome: a possible link?

Cosma J(1)(2), Russo A(3), Schino S(3), Belli M(3), Mango R(3), Chiricolo G(3), 
Martuscelli E(3), Mariano EG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tor Vergata University of Rome, Rome, Italy - 
josephcosma1990@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Saint Martin Private Hospital Center, Caen, France 
- josephcosma1990@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Tor Vergata University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    Minerva Cardiol Angiol. 2023 Dec;71(6):702-703. doi: 
10.23736/S2724-5683.22.06194-4.

The mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke (MELAS) 
syndrome is a mitochondrial disorder, commonly caused by m.3243A>G mutation in 
the MT-TL1 gene. It encodes for the mitochondrial leucine transfer RNA (tRNA Leu 
[UUR]), implicated in the translation of proteins involved in the assembly and 
function of mitochondrial complexes in the electron transport chain. The 
m.3243A>G mutation determines complex I (CI) deficiency, ultimately leading to 
NADH accumulation, higher rates of glycolysis in order to compensate for the 
reduced ATP production and increase in lactates, the end-product of glycolysis. 
Disruption of the oxidative phosphorylation function with an inability to 
produce sufficient energy results in multi-organ dysfunction, with high energy 
demanding cells, such as myocytes and neurons, being the most affected ones. 
Therefore, MELAS syndrome is characterized by a heterogeneous clinical spectrum. 
Here we report on a case of a 55-year-old man affected by MELA syndrome with no 
cardiovascular risk factors. He was admitted to our department because of a non 
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). A coronary angioplasty of 
the posterior descending artery and of the left anterior descending artery was 
realized. Transthoracic echocardiography showed inferior and anterior left 
ventricular wall hypokinesis together with a moderate left ventricle 
hypertrophy. Cardiac involvement is reported in about a third of the patients 
and left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is the most common phenotype, with 
possible dilated cardiomyopathy in end-stage disease; brady- arrhythmias and 
tachy-arrhythmias are also frequently reported as well as Wolff- Parkinson-White 
(WPW) syndrome. Organ impairment and clinical manifestations depend on the 
heteroplasmy level of mutant DNA in cells that can differ among individuals, 
explaining why some patients present a more severe disease. A clear relationship 
between MELAS syndrome and atherosclerosis has never been established, however 
recently advocated. In vitro studies in MELAS patients have shown that higher 
mitochondrial ROS levels and increased expression of oxidative stress-related 
genes, as a consequence of complex I deficiency and disrupted electron 
transport, allow circulating LDL to be promptly oxidized into ox-LDL, 
contributing to endothelial dysfunction and atherosclerosis plaque formation. In 
light of the recent evidence suggesting a possible link between mitochondrial 
disorders and atherosclerosis, we speculate that MELAS syndrome may have played 
a role in the pathogenesis of coronary artery disease in our patient. Further 
investigations are needed to confirm a pathogenetic link.

DOI: 10.23736/S2724-5683.22.06021-5
PMID: 35767235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]