1. Iran J Pharm Res. 2022 Mar 8;21(1):e123826. doi: 10.5812/ijpr.123826. 
eCollection 2022 Dec.

Targeting EGFR Tyrosine Kinase: Design, Synthesis and Biological Evaluation of 
Novel Quinazolinone Derivatives.

Nematpour M(1), Rezaee E(1), Nazari M(1), Hosseini O(2), Tabatabai SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Central Research Labretories, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

Impaired cell cycle regulation and disturbance in signal transduction pathway 
are two major causes of a condition defined as cancer, one of the significant 
reasons for mortality worldwide. Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) have been commonly used as anticancer agents, and 
the majority of this medications possess quinazoline moiety as a heteroaromatic 
core. In this study, two novel series of EGFR-TKIs containing quinazolinone core 
were designed and synthesized. Most compounds showed reasonable inhibitory 
activity against EGFR-TK compared to that of erlotinib, a reversible inhibitor 
of this enzyme. Compound 8b, 
2-((2-chlorobenzyl)amino)-6-phenoxyquinazolin-4(1H)-one, with an IC50 value of 
1.37 nM exhibited the highest potency. Molecular docking study of compound 8b 
showed that it had the same direction of erlotinib and formed proper hydrogen 
bonds and hydrophobic interactions with the important amino acid residues of the 
active site. Based on in-silico calculations of ADME properties, our novel 
compounds have the potential to be orally active agents.

Copyright Â© 2022, Author(s).

DOI: 10.5812/ijpr.123826
PMCID: PMC9191221
PMID: 35765503

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Intrests: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest, financial or otherwise.