1. J Membr Biol. 2023 Feb;256(1):63-77. doi: 10.1007/s00232-022-00252-y. Epub
2022  Jun 28.

Intracellular Binding of Terfenadine Competes with Its Access to Pancreatic 
ß-cell ATP-Sensitive K(+) Channels and Human ether-à-go-go-Related Gene 
Channels.

Zünkler BJ(1)(2), Wos-Maganga M(3), Bohnet S(3), Kleinau A(3), Manns D(3), 
Chatterjee S(3).

Author information:
(1)Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices, Kurt-Georg-Kiesinger-Allee 
3, 53175, Bonn, Germany. Jochen.Zuenkler@bfarm.de.
(2)Institute of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacy, Technische 
Universität Braunschweig, Mendelssohnstr. 1, 38106, Braunschweig, Germany. 
Jochen.Zuenkler@bfarm.de.
(3)Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices, Kurt-Georg-Kiesinger-Allee 
3, 53175, Bonn, Germany.

Most blockers of both hERG (human ether-à-go-go-related gene) channels and 
pancreatic ß-cell ATP-sensitive K+ (KATP) channels access their binding sites 
from the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane. It is unknown whether binding 
to intracellular components competes with binding of these substances to K+ 
channels. The whole-cell configuration of the patch-clamp technique, a 
laser-scanning confocal microscope, and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy 
(FCS) were used to study hERG channels expressed in HEK (human embryonic kidney) 
293 cells and KATP channels from the clonal insulinoma cell line RINm5F. When 
applied via the pipette solution in the whole-cell configuration, terfenadine 
blocked both hERG and KATP currents with much lower potency than after 
application via the bath solution, which was not due to P-glycoprotein-mediated 
efflux of terfenadine. Such a difference was not observed with dofetilide and 
tolbutamide. 37-68% of hERG/EGFP (enhanced green-fluorescent protein) fusion 
proteins expressed in HEK 293 cells were slowly diffusible as determined by 
laser-scanning microscopy in the whole-cell configuration and by FCS in intact 
cells. Bath application of a green-fluorescent sulphonylurea derivative 
(Bodipy-glibenclamide) induced a diffuse fluorescence in the cytosol of RINm5F 
cells under whole-cell patch-clamp conditions. These observations demonstrate 
the presence of intracellular binding sites for hERG and KATP channel blockers 
not dialyzable by the patch-pipette solution. Intracellular binding of 
terfenadine was not influenced by a mutated hERG (Y652A) channel. In conclusion, 
substances with high lipophilicity are not freely diffusible inside the cell but 
steep concentration gradients might exist within the cell and in the 
sub-membrane space.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00232-022-00252-y
PMCID: PMC9884252
PMID: 35763054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to declare.