1. Sci Rep. 2022 Jun 29;12(1):10979. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-15198-3.

Retrospective detection for V-type OPNAs exposure via phosphonylation and 
disulfide adducts in albumin.

Wang J(1), Sun F(1), Lu X(1), Gao R(1), Pei C(1), Wang H(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of NBC Protection for Civilian, Beijing, 102205, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of NBC Protection for Civilian, Beijing, 102205, China. 
wanghongmei@dicp.ac.cn.

Organophosphorus nerve agents (OPNAs) that damage the central nervous system by 
inhibiting acetylcholinesterase activity, pose severe threats to human health 
and life security. Reliable biomarkers that quickly and accurately detect OPNAs 
exposure are urgently needed to help diagnose quickly and treat in time. 
Albumins that covalently bind to OPNAs could serve as important targets for 
retrospective verification of OPNAs exposure. The goal of this study is to 
explore the potential biomarkers in albumins with high reactivity and good 
stability and expand the group of potential biomarkers in different species for 
detecting the exposure of V-type OPNAs including O-ethyl 
S-(2-(diisopropylamino)ethyl) methylphosphonothioate (VX), O-isobutyl 
S-(2(diethylamino)ethyl) methylphosphonothioate (VR), and O-butyl 
S-(2-(diethylamino)ethyl) methylphosphonothioate (Vs). Taking human serum 
albumin (HSA), bovine serum albumin (BSA) and rabbit serum albumin (RSA) as the 
research objectives, multiple active sites including phosphonylation and 
disulfide adduct sites were observed in albumins from different species. 
Numerous phosphonylation sites labeled by all agents in one type of albumin were 
found. Among the different species, four shared phosphonylation sites with high 
reactivity include K499, K549, K249, and Y108. In addition, Y108 on 
ETY*GEMADCCAK, Y287 on Y*ICENQDSISSK, Y377 on TY*ETTLEK and Y164 on YLY*EIAR in 
HSA were stably phosphonylated by all agents in gradient concentration, making 
them stable and suitable potential biomarkers for V-type OPNAs exposure. 
Notably, Y108 on ETY*GEMADCCAK in HSA, on DTY*GDVADCCEK in RSA, and on 
ETY*GDMADCCEK in BSA were highly reactive to all V-type agents, regardless of 
species. It was also successfully labeled in HSA exposed to class V agents in 
gradient concentration. Y108 is expected to be used to screen and identify the 
exposure of V-type agents in the retrospective research. Disulfide adducts 
sites, consisted of four sites in HSA and two sites in BSA were also 
successfully labeled by V-type agents, and characteristic ion fragments from 
these disulfide adducts were also identified by secondary mass spectrometry. 
Molecular simulation of the stably modified sites were conducted to discover the 
promoting factors of covalent adduct formation, which help further clarify 
formation mechanism of albumin adducts at active sites.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-15198-3
PMCID: PMC9243071
PMID: 35768567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.