1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Jun 15;13:895843. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.895843. eCollection 2022.

Impaired Sensitivity to Thyroid Hormones Is Associated With Elevated Blood 
Glucose in Coronary Heart Disease.

Yu L(1), Li Z(1), Yang R(1), Pan G(1), Cheng Q(1), He Y(1), Liu Y(1), Liu F(1), 
Ma M(1), Yang T(1), Wang Y(1), Su J(1), Zheng Y(1), Gao S(1), Xu Q(2), Li L(1), 
Yu C(1).

Author information:
(1)Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, China.
(2)Second Teaching Hospital of Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Tianjin, China.

CONTEXT: Thyroid hormones influence glucose homeostasis through central and 
peripheral regulation. To date, the association between thyroid hormone 
sensitivity and elevated blood glucose (EBG) in patients with coronary heart 
disease (CHD) remains unknown. The purpose of this study was to investigate the 
association between thyroid hormone sensitivity and risk of EBG in patients with 
CHD, and to further explore their association in different sexes and ages.
METHODS: This large multicenter retrospective study included 30,244 patients 
with CHD (aged 30-80 years) between 1 January 2014 and 30 September 2020. 
Parameters representing central and peripheral sensitivity to thyroid hormones 
were calculated. Central sensitivity to thyroid hormones was assessed by 
calculating the Thyroid Feedback Quantile-based Index (TFQI), 
Thyroid-stimulating Hormone Index (TSHI), and Thyrotropin Thyroxine Resistance 
Index (TT4RI), and Parametric Thyroid Feedback Quantile-based Index (PTFQI); 
peripheral sensitivity to thyroid hormones was evaluated using the ratio of free 
triiodothyronine (FT3) /free thyroxine (FT4). Taking normal glucose tolerance 
(NGT) as a reference, logistic regression was used to analyse the relationship 
between central and peripheral thyroid hormone sensitivity and EBG in patients 
with CHD.
RESULTS: Among the 30,244 participants, 15,493 (51.23%) had EBG. The risk of EBG 
was negatively correlated with TSHI (OR: 0.91; 95%CI: 0.91 to 0.92; P < 0.001), 
TT4RI (OR: 0.99; 95% CI: 0.99 to 0.99; P<0.001), TFQI (OR: 0.82; 95%CI: 0.80 to 
0.84; P <0.001) and PTFQI (OR: 0.76; 95%CI: 0.74 to 0.78; P<0.001). Compared to 
males and patients aged 60 and below, the OR value for EBG was lower in females 
and in patients aged over 60 years old. Conversely, EBG risk was positively 
associated with FT3/FT4 (OR: 1.08; 95% CI: 1.07 to 1.09; P <0.001) and in the 
sex-categorized subgroups, males had higher OR values than females.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that thyroid hormone sensitivity is significantly 
associated with EBG in patients with CHD. This association is higher in females 
than in males, and the association in those aged over 60 years old is higher 
than that in patients aged 60 years and below.

Copyright Â© 2022 Yu, Li, Yang, Pan, Cheng, He, Liu, Liu, Ma, Yang, Wang, Su, 
Zheng, Gao, Xu, Li and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.895843
PMCID: PMC9240192
PMID: 35784545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.