1. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2022 Jul 6;7(1):217. doi: 
10.1038/s41392-022-01078-9.

The role of histone modifications: from neurodevelopment to neurodiseases.

Park J(1), Lee K(1), Kim K(2), Yi SJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Chungbuk National 
University, Cheongju, Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Chungbuk National 
University, Cheongju, Chungbuk, Republic of Korea. kyungkim@chungbuk.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Chungbuk National 
University, Cheongju, Chungbuk, Republic of Korea. sjyi@chungbuk.ac.kr.

Epigenetic regulatory mechanisms, including DNA methylation, histone 
modification, chromatin remodeling, and microRNA expression, play critical roles 
in cell differentiation and organ development through spatial and temporal gene 
regulation. Neurogenesis is a sophisticated and complex process by which neural 
stem cells differentiate into specialized brain cell types at specific times and 
regions of the brain. A growing body of evidence suggests that epigenetic 
mechanisms, such as histone modifications, allow the fine-tuning and 
coordination of spatiotemporal gene expressions during neurogenesis. Aberrant 
histone modifications contribute to the development of neurodegenerative and 
neuropsychiatric diseases. Herein, recent progress in understanding histone 
modifications in regulating embryonic and adult neurogenesis is comprehensively 
reviewed. The histone modifications implicated in neurodegenerative and 
neuropsychiatric diseases are also covered, and future directions in this area 
are provided.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41392-022-01078-9
PMCID: PMC9259618
PMID: 35794091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.