1. J Infect. 2022 Oct;85(4):418-427. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2022.06.030. Epub 2022
Jul  3.

Spike-mediated ACE2 down-regulation was involved in the pathogenesis of 
SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Gao X(1), Zhang S(1), Gou J(2), Wen Y(1), Fan L(3), Zhou J(1), Zhou G(2), Xu 
G(4), Zhang Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Hepatology, National Clinical Research Center for Infectious 
Disease, Shenzhen Third People's Hospital the Second Affiliated Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong 
518112, China.
(2)Department for Pathology, Shenzhen Third People's Hospital the Second 
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Southern University of Science and 
Technology, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Guangzhou Laboratory, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Institute for Hepatology, National Clinical Research Center for Infectious 
Disease, Shenzhen Third People's Hospital the Second Affiliated Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong 
518112, China. Electronic address: xugang3@mail.sustech.edu.cn.
(5)Institute for Hepatology, National Clinical Research Center for Infectious 
Disease, Shenzhen Third People's Hospital the Second Affiliated Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong 
518112, China; Guangdong Key laboratory for anti-infection Drug Quality 
Evaluation, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518112, China; Shenzhen Research Center for 
Communicable Disease Diagnosis, Treatment of Chinese Academy of Medical Science, 
Shenzhen, Guangdong 518112, China. Electronic address: 
zhangzheng1975@aliyun.com.

The ongoing global pandemic of Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) poses a 
serious threat to human health, with patients reportedly suffering from 
thrombus, vascular injury and coagulation in addition to acute and diffuse lung 
injury and respiratory diseases. Angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) as the 
receptor for SARS-CoV-2 entry, is also an important regulator of 
renin-angiotensin system (RAS) homeostasis, which plays an unsettled role in the 
pathogenesis of COVID-19. Here, we demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein 
activated intracellular signals to degrade ACE2 mRNA. The decrease of ACE2 and 
higher level of angiotensin (Ang) II were verified in COVID-19 patients. High 
dose of Ang II induced pulmonary artery endothelial cell death in vitro, which 
was also observed in the lung of COVID-19 patients. Our finding indicates that 
the downregulation of ACE2 potentially links COVID-19 to the imbalance of RAS.

Copyright Â© 2022. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2022.06.030
PMCID: PMC9250808
PMID: 35793758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.