1. Mod Pathol. 2022 Dec;35(12):1870-1881. doi: 10.1038/s41379-022-01129-0. Epub 
2022 Jul 6.

Defining the spatial landscape of KRAS mutated congenital pulmonary airway 
malformations: a distinct entity with a spectrum of histopathologic features.

Nelson ND(1)(2), Xu F(1), Chandrasekaran P(3), Litzky LA(2), Peranteau WH(4), 
Frank DB(3), Li M(1), Pogoriler J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hospital of the University 
of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman 
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman 
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. pogorilerj@chop.edu.

The potential pathogenetic mechanisms underlying the varied morphology of 
congenital pulmonary airway malformations (CPAMs) have not been molecularly 
determined, but a subset have been shown to contain clusters of mucinous cells 
(MCC). These clusters are believed to serve as precursors for potential invasive 
mucinous adenocarcinoma, and they are associated with KRAS codon 12 mutations. 
To assess the universality of KRAS mutations in MCCs, we sequenced exon 2 of 
KRAS in 61 MCCs from 18 patients, and we found a KRAS codon 12 mutation in all 
61 MCCs. Furthermore, all MCCs from a single patient always had the same KRAS 
mutation, and the same KRAS mutation was also found in non-mucinous lesional 
tissue. Next generation sequencing of seven MCCs showed no other mutations or 
copy number variations. Sequencing of 46 additional CPAMs with MCCs revealed 
KRAS mutations in non-mucinous lesional tissue in all cases. RNA in situ 
hybridization confirmed widespread distribution of cells with mutant KRAS RNA, 
even extending outside of the bronchiolar type epithelium. We identified 25 
additional CPAMs with overall histologic architecture similar to CPAMs with KRAS 
mutations but without identifiable MCCs, and we found KRAS mutations in 17 
(68%). The histologic features of these KRAS mutated CPAMs included type 1 and 
type 3 morphology, as well as lesions with an intermediate histologic 
appearance, and analysis revealed a strong correlation between the specific 
amino acid substitution and histomorphology. These findings, together with 
previously published model organism data, suggests that the formation of type 1 
and 3 CPAMs is driven by mosaic KRAS mutations arising in the lung epithelium 
early in development and places them within the growing field of mosaic 
RASopathies. The presence of widespread epithelial mutation explains late 
metastatic disease in incompletely resected patients and reinforces the 
recommendation for complete resection of these lesions.

Â© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to United States & Canadian 
Academy of Pathology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-022-01129-0
PMCID: PMC10462420
PMID: 35794233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None of the authors of the 
paper have competing financial interests. The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to disclose.