1. Sci Rep. 2022 Jul 7;12(1):10856. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-14459-5.

Structural and biochemical analyses of the flagellar expression regulator DegU 
from Listeria monocytogenes.

Oh HB(1), Lee SJ(1), Yoon SI(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Convergence, College of Biomedical Science, Kangwon 
National University, 1 Kangwondaehak-gil, Biomedical Science Building A-204, 
Chuncheon, 24341, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Biomedical Convergence, College of Biomedical Science, Kangwon 
National University, 1 Kangwondaehak-gil, Biomedical Science Building A-204, 
Chuncheon, 24341, Republic of Korea. sungil@kangwon.ac.kr.

Listeria monocytogenes is a pathogenic bacterium that produces flagella, the 
locomotory organelles, in a temperature-dependent manner. At 37 °C inside 
humans, L. monocytogenes employs MogR to repress the expression of flagellar 
proteins, thereby preventing the production of flagella. However, in the 
low-temperature environment outside of the host, the antirepressor GmaR 
inactivates MogR, allowing flagellar formation. Additionally, DegU is necessary 
for flagellar expression at low temperatures. DegU transcriptionally activates 
the expression of GmaR and flagellar proteins by binding the operator DNA in the 
fliN-gmaR promoter as a response regulator of a two-component regulatory system. 
To determine the DegU-mediated regulation mechanism, we performed structural and 
biochemical analyses on the recognition of operator DNA by DegU. The DegU-DNA 
interaction is primarily mediated by a C-terminal DNA-binding domain (DBD) and 
can be fortified by an N-terminal receiver domain (RD). The DegU DBD adopts a 
tetrahelical helix-turn-helix structure and assembles into a dimer. The DegU DBD 
dimer recognizes the operator DNA using a positive patch. Unexpectedly, unlike 
typical response regulators, DegU interacts with operator DNA in both 
unphosphorylated and phosphorylated states with similar binding affinities. 
Therefore, we conclude that DegU is a noncanonical response regulator that is 
constitutively active irrespective of phosphorylation.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-14459-5
PMCID: PMC9263151
PMID: 35798759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.