1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jul 22;50(13):7623-7636. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac557.

P-bodies directly regulate MARF1-mediated mRNA decay in human cells.

Brothers WR(1), Fakim H(1), Kajjo S(1), Fabian MR(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Lady David Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, 
Montreal, Quebec, H3T 1E2, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University Montreal, Quebec, H3A 1A3, 
Canada.
(3)Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, McGill University Montreal, Quebec, 
H3A 1G5, Canada.

Processing bodies (P-bodies) are ribonucleoprotein granules that contain mRNAs, 
RNA-binding proteins and effectors of mRNA turnover. While P-bodies have been 
reported to contain translationally repressed mRNAs, a causative role for 
P-bodies in regulating mRNA decay has yet to be established. Enhancer of 
decapping protein 4 (EDC4) is a core P-body component that interacts with 
multiple mRNA decay factors, including the mRNA decapping (DCP2) and decay 
(XRN1) enzymes. EDC4 also associates with the RNA endonuclease MARF1, an 
interaction that antagonizes the decay of MARF1-targeted mRNAs. How EDC4 
interacts with MARF1 and how it represses MARF1 activity is unclear. In this 
study, we show that human MARF1 and XRN1 interact with EDC4 using analogous 
conserved short linear motifs in a mutually exclusive manner. While the 
EDC4-MARF1 interaction is required for EDC4 to inhibit MARF1 activity, our data 
indicate that the interaction with EDC4 alone is not sufficient. Importantly, we 
show that P-body architecture plays a critical role in antagonizing 
MARF1-mediated mRNA decay. Taken together, our study suggests that P-bodies can 
directly regulate mRNA turnover by sequestering an mRNA decay enzyme and 
preventing it from interfacing with and degrading targeted mRNAs.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac557
PMCID: PMC9303261
PMID: 35801873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]