1. Cells. 2022 Jun 30;11(13):2095. doi: 10.3390/cells11132095.

Regeneration or Repair? The Role of Alveolar Epithelial Cells in the 
Pathogenesis of Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF).

Confalonieri P(1)(2), Volpe MC(3), Jacob J(3), Maiocchi S(3)(4), Salton F(1)(2), 
Ruaro B(1)(2), Confalonieri M(1)(2), Braga L(3).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonology Department, Cattinara Hospital, University of Trieste, 34127 
Trieste, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Surgical and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
34127 Trieste, Italy.
(3)Functional Cell Biology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering 
and Biotechnology (ICGEB), 34149 Trieste, Italy.
(4)Life Sciences Department, University of Trieste, 34128 Trieste, Italy.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic, progressive interstitial lung 
disease (ILD) with unknown etiology in which gradual fibrotic scarring of the 
lungs leads to usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) and, ultimately, to death. IPF 
affects three million people worldwide, and the only currently available 
treatments include the antifibrotic drugs nintedanib and pirfenidone, which 
effectively reduce fibrosis progression are, unfortunately, not effective in 
curing the disease. In recent years, the paradigm of IPF pathogenesis has 
shifted from a fibroblast-driven disease to an epithelium-driven disease, 
wherein, upon recurrent microinjuries, dysfunctional alveolar type II epithelial 
cells (ATII) are not only unable to sustain physiological lung regeneration but 
also promote aberrant epithelial-mesenchymal crosstalk. This creates a drift 
towards fibrosis rather than regeneration. In the context of this review 
article, we discuss the most relevant mechanisms involved in IPF pathogenesis 
with a specific focus on the role of dysfunctional ATII cells in promoting 
disease progression. In particular, we summarize the main causes of ATII cell 
dysfunction, such as aging, environmental factors, and genetic determinants. 
Next, we describe the known mechanisms of physiological lung regeneration by 
drawing a parallel between embryonic lung development and the known pathways 
involved in ATII-driven alveolar re-epithelization after injury. Finally, we 
review the most relevant interventional clinical trials performed in the last 20 
years with the aim of underlining the urgency of developing new therapies 
against IPF that are not only aimed at reducing disease progression by hampering 
ECM deposition but also boost the physiological processes of ATII-driven 
alveolar regeneration.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11132095
PMCID: PMC9266271
PMID: 35805179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.