1. Nutrients. 2022 Jul 5;14(13):2768. doi: 10.3390/nu14132768.

Construction and Application of Hepatocyte Model Based on Microfluidic Chip 
Technique in Evaluating Emodin.

Chen D(1), Yin J(1), Yang Z(1), Qin W(1), Huo J(1), Huang J(1), Sun J(1), Piao 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Nutrition and Health, Chinese Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Beijing 100050, China.

The current cytological evaluation technique of health food raw materials does 
not entirely meet the needs of evaluating health food. Our study adopted the 
microfluidic chip technique for the first time to construct a hepatocyte model 
of evaluating emodin, which was composed of a human hepatocellular carcinoma 
cell (HepG2) and microfluidic chip. The mixed glue of a model with rat tail 
collagen type I (1.3 mg/mL) + gelatin (7.5%) was used to simulate the 
microenvironment of a cell. The validity of this model was evaluated by cell 
proliferation activity and cell staining, and the toxicity of emodin was 
evaluated by a series of metabolic indicators on this model. The results 
indicated that the repeatability of the constructed hepatocyte model was 
favorable, with a coefficient of variation (CV) of 2.8%. After emodin 
continuously was exposed for 48 h, the cell inhibition was obvious at 100 and 
200 Î¼M, and the number of dead cells gradually increased with the increasing of 
emodin concentration, and the difference of BUN was significant between the 
emodin group and blank group (p < 0.05). The constructed model has a favorable 
applicability in evaluating emodin. This study provides an important platform 
and a potential in vitro alternative model for assessing and predicting the 
health effects of health food.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14132768
PMCID: PMC9268988
PMID: 35807948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.