1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Jun 21;9:864580. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.864580. 
eCollection 2022.

3D Printed Bioreactor Enabling the Pulsatile Culture of Native and Angioplastied 
Large Arteries.

Matos RS(1), Maselli D(1), McVey JH(1), Heiss C(1)(2), Campagnolo P(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Section, Department of Biochemical Sciences, Guildford, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Clinical Medicine Section, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Surrey, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom.

Routine interventions such as balloon angioplasty, result in vascular activation 
and remodeling, often requiring re-intervention. 2D in vitro models and small 
animal experiments have enabled the discovery of important mechanisms involved 
in this process, however the clinical translation is often underwhelming. There 
is a critical need for an ex vivo model representative of the human vascular 
physiology and encompassing the complexity of the vascular wall and the physical 
forces regulating its function. Vascular bioreactors for ex vivo culture of 
large vessels are viable alternatives, but their custom-made design and 
insufficient characterization often hinders the reproducibility of the 
experiments. The objective of the study was to design and validate a novel 3D 
printed cost-efficient and versatile perfusion system, capable of sustaining the 
viability and functionality of large porcine arteries for 7 days and enabling 
early post-injury evaluations. MultiJet Fusion 3D printing was used to engineer 
the EasyFlow insert, converting a conventional 50 ml centrifuge tube into a mini 
bioreactor. Porcine carotid arteries either left untreated or injured with an 
angioplasty balloon, were cultured under pulsatile flow for up to 7 days. 
Pressure, heart rate, medium viscosity and shear conditions were adjusted to 
resemble arterial in vivo hemodynamics. Tissue viability, cell activation and 
matrix remodeling were analyzed by immunohistochemistry, and vascular function 
was monitored by duplex ultrasound. Culture conditions in the EasyFlow 
bioreactor preserved endothelial coverage and smooth muscle organization and 
extracellular matrix structure in the vessel wall, as compared to static 
culture. Injured arteries presented hallmarks of early remodeling, such as 
intimal denudation, smooth muscle cell disarray and media/adventitia activation 
in flow culture. Duplex ultrasound confirmed continuous pulsatile blood flow 
conditions, dose-dependent vasodilator response to nitroglycerin in untreated 
vessels and impaired dilator response in angioplastied vessels. The scope of 
this work is to validate a low-cost, robust and reproducible system to explore 
the culture of native and injured large arteries under pulsatile flow. While the 
study of vascular pathology is beyond the scope of the present paper, our system 
enables future investigations and provides a platform to test novel therapies 
and devices ex vivo, in a patient relevant system.

Copyright Â© 2022 Matos, Maselli, McVey, Heiss and Campagnolo.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.864580
PMCID: PMC9253513
PMID: 35800166

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.