1. Orthopadie (Heidelb). 2022 Dec;51(12):1015-1021. doi: 
10.1007/s00132-022-04278-x. Epub 2022 Jul 8.

Pediatric patient with a bilateral Salter-Harris II fracture and slipped capital 
femoral epiphysis secondary to autosomal recessive osteopetrosis.

Jaber A(1), Schwarze M(2), Steinle V(3), Götze M(2), Hagmann S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Trauma Surgery, Center for Orthopedics, Trauma 
Surgery and Spinal Cord Injury, Heidelberg University Hospital, Schlierbacher 
Landstr. 200a, 69118, Heidelberg, Germany. ayham.jaber@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Department of Orthopedics and Trauma Surgery, Center for Orthopedics, Trauma 
Surgery and Spinal Cord Injury, Heidelberg University Hospital, Schlierbacher 
Landstr. 200a, 69118, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Diagnostic and interventional Radiology, Heidelberg University 
Hospital, Im Neuenheimer Feld 420, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Orthopadie (Heidelb). 2022 Dec;51(12):1022. doi: 10.1007/s00132-022-04289-8.

Treatment of femoral neck fractures secondary to osteopetrosis is an uncertain 
and puzzled decision. Experience in the treatment, especially in the pediatric 
population, is scarcely reported. The duration of conservative treatment is 
prolonged and poses the risks of non-union and development of coxa vara 
deformity. The recommended treatment is closed reduction and internal fixation; 
however, surgery on osteopetrotic bone is challenging due to defective bone 
marrow function, delayed consolidation and higher risk of intraoperative 
fractures. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis secondary to osteopetrosis is very 
rarely reported. This article presents the case of a 5-year-old female patient 
with rapidly deteriorating physical function due to bilateral proximal femoral 
Salter-Harris type II fractures with associated slippage of the growth plates 
secondary to confirmed autosomal recessive osteopetrosis. Operative treatment 
was performed in a tertiary level orthopedic center with closed reduction and 
internal fixation with cannulated screws. A loss of fixation with coxa vara 
deformity was seen on the left side 7 months postoperatively with increasing 
pain. A revision surgery with reosteosynthesis and a valgus osteotomy was thus 
performed which showed good subjective and objective results 1 year 
postoperatively with complete bony union.

Publisher: Die Behandlung von Schenkelhalsfrakturen als Folge einer Osteopetrose 
ist eine Herausforderung. Erfahrungen mit der Behandlung, insbesondere bei 
Kindern und Jugendlichen, liegen kaum vor. Die Dauer der konservativen Therapie 
ist verlängert und birgt das Risiko einer Pseudarthrose und der Entwicklung 
einer Coxa-vara-Deformität. Die empfohlene Behandlung ist eine geschlossene 
Reposition und interne Fixation. Die osteopetrotischen Knochen sind jedoch 
aufgrund der defekten Knochenmarkfunktion, der verzögerten Konsolidierung und 
des höheren Risikos für intraoperative Frakturen eine Herausforderung. Sehr 
selten wird über eine Epiphyseolysis capitis femoris bei Osteopetrose berichtet. 
Dieser Fall stellt eine 5‑jährige Patientin mit rasch nachlassender körperlicher 
Funktionsfähigkeit aufgrund einer bilateralen Salter-Harris-II-Fraktur mit 
beidseitiger Epiphyseolysis capitis femoris als Folge einer bestätigten 
autosomal-rezessiven Osteopetrose vor. Die operative Behandlung wurde in einem 
Universitätsklinikum durchgeführt mit geschlossener Reposition und interner 
Fixation mit kannelierten Schrauben. Sieben Monate postoperativ zeigte sich auf 
der linken Seite ein Fixationsverlust mit Coxa vara und zunehmenden Schmerzen. 
Daher wurde eine Revisionsoperation mit Reosteosynthese und einer 
Valgisierungsosteotomie durchgeführt, die 1 Jahr postoperativ gute subjektive 
und objektive Ergebnisse mit einer vollständigen Knochenheilung zeigte.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00132-022-04278-x
PMCID: PMC9715516
PMID: 35802155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A. Jaber, M. Schwarze, V. Steinle, M. Götze and 
S. Hagmann declare that they have no competing interests.