1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jul 4;23(13):7445. doi: 10.3390/ijms23137445.

Overexpression of UBA5 in Cells Mimics the Phenotype of Cells Lacking UBA5.

Kumari S(1)(2), Banerjee S(1), Kumar M(1), Hayashi A(1), Solaimuthu B(1), 
Cohen-Kfir E(1), Shaul YD(1), Rouvinski A(2), Wiener R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Institute for Medical 
Research Israel-Canada, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 
91120, Israel.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The Institute for Medical 
Research Israel-Canada, The Kuvin Center for the Study of Infectious and 
Tropical Diseases, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, 
Israel.

Ufmylation is a posttranslational modification in which the modifier UFM1 is 
attached to target proteins. This conjugation requires the concerted work of 
three enzymes named UBA5, UFC1, and UFL1. Initially, UBA5 activates UFM1 in a 
process that ends with UFM1 attached to UBA5's active site Cys. Then, in a 
trans-thiolation reaction, UFM1 is transferred from UBA5 to UFC1, forming a 
thioester bond with the latter. Finally, with the help of UFL1, UFM1 is 
transferred to the final destination-a lysine residue on a target protein. 
Therefore, not surprisingly, deletion of one of these enzymes abrogates the 
conjugation process. However, how overexpression of these enzymes affects this 
process is not yet clear. Here we found, unexpectedly, that overexpression of 
UBA5, but not UFC1, damages the ability of cells to migrate, in a similar way to 
cells lacking UBA5 or UFC1. At the mechanistic level, we found that 
overexpression of UBA5 reverses the trans-thiolation reaction, thereby leading 
to a back transfer of UFM1 from UFC1 to UBA5. This, as seen in cells lacking 
UBA5, reduces the level of charged UFC1 and therefore harms the conjugation 
process. In contrast, co-expression of UBA5 with UFM1 abolishes this effect, 
suggesting that the reverse transfer of UFM1 from UFC1 to UBA5 depends on the 
level of free UFM1. Overall, our results propose that the cellular expression 
level of the UFM1 conjugation enzymes has to be tightly regulated to ensure the 
proper directionality of UFM1 transfer.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23137445
PMCID: PMC9267032
PMID: 35806453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.