1. Infect Drug Resist. 2022 Jun 30;15:3417-3425. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S364241. 
eCollection 2022.

Pneumonia Caused by Coinfection with Cytomegalovirus and Pneumocystis jirovecii 
in an HIV-Negative Infant Diagnosed by Metagenomic Next-Generation Sequencing.

Lyu J(#)(1)(2), Deng Q(#)(2), Li R(3), Tian B(1)(2), Zhao Y(2), Hu X(2), Zhou 
M(2), Gu B(2).

Author information:
(1)Xuzhou Key Laboratory of Laboratory Diagnostics, School of Medical 
Technology, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, 221004, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Laboratory Medicine, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, 510000, People's Republic of China.
(3)Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Xuzhou Medical 
University, Xuzhou, 221004, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Pneumonia produced by coinfection with Pneumocystis jirovecii (PJ) 
and cytomegalovirus (CMV) in infants and young children without timely diagnosis 
and treatment is often fatal due to the limitations of traditional tests. More 
accurate and rapid diagnostic methods for multiple infections are urgently 
needed.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here, we report a case of a 2-month-old boy with pneumonia 
caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii (PJ) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) without HIV 
infection. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed massive exudative consolidation 
in both lungs. Microscopic examination of stained sputum and smear specimens and 
bacterial and fungal culture tests were all negative, and CMV nucleic acid and 
antibody tests were positive. After a period of antiviral and anti-infective 
therapy, pulmonary inflammation was not relieved. Subsequently, sputum and 
venous blood samples were analysed by metagenomic next-generation sequencing 
(mNGS), and the sequences of PJ and CMV were acquired. The patient was finally 
diagnosed with pneumonia caused by PJ and CMV coinfection. Anti-fungal combined 
with anti-viral therapy was given immediately. mNGS re-examination of 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) also revealed the same primary pathogen. 
Therapy was stopped due to the request of the patient's guardian. Hence, the 
child was discharged from the hospital and eventually died.
CONCLUSION: This case emphasizes the combined use of mNGS and traditional tests 
in the clinical diagnosis of mixed lung infections in infants without HIV 
infection. mNGS is a new adjunctive diagnostic method that can rapidly 
discriminate multiple causes of pneumonia.

Â© 2022 Lyu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S364241
PMCID: PMC9253620
PMID: 35800120

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.