1. Sci Rep. 2022 Jul 8;12(1):11596. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-15505-y.

Crystal structure of potato 14-3-3 protein St14f revealed the importance of 
helix I in StFDL1 recognition.

Harada KI(1), Furuita K(1), Yamashita E(1), Taoka KI(2), Tsuji H(2), Fujiwara 
T(1), Nakagawa A(1), Kojima C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Kihara Institute for Biological Research, Yokohama City University, Yokohama, 
Japan.
(3)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. 
kojima-chojiro-xk@ynu.ac.jp.
(4)Graduate School of Engineering Science, Yokohama National University, 
Yokohama, Japan. kojima-chojiro-xk@ynu.ac.jp.

In potato (Solanum tuberosum L.), 14-3-3 protein forms a protein complex with 
the FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT)-like protein StSP6A and the FD-like protein StFDL1 to 
activate potato tuber formation. Eleven 14-3-3 isoforms were reported in potato, 
designated as St14a-k. In this study, the crystal structure of the free form of 
St14f was determined at 2.5 Å resolution. Three chains were included in the 
asymmetric unit of the St14f free form crystal, and the structural deviation 
among the three chain structures was found on the C-terminal helix H and I. The 
St14f free form structure in solution was also investigated by nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR) residual dipolar coupling analysis, and the chain B in the 
crystal structure was consistent with NMR data. Compared to other crystal 
structures, St14f helix I exhibited a different conformation with larger 
B-factor values. Larger B-factor values on helix I were also found in the 14-3-3 
free form structure with higher solvent contents. The mutation in St14f Helix I 
stabilized the complex with StFDL1. These data clearly showed that the 
flexibility of helix I of 14-3-3 protein plays an important role in the 
recognition of target protein.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-15505-y
PMCID: PMC9270373
PMID: 35804047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.