1. Parasit Vectors. 2022 Jul 8;15(1):247. doi: 10.1186/s13071-022-05339-y.

Morphological identification and genetic characterization of Anopheles stephensi 
in Somaliland.

Ali S(1), Samake JN(2), Spear J(2), Carter TE(3).

Author information:
(1)National Malaria Control Program, Ministry of Health Development, Hargeisa, 
Somaliland.
(2)Baylor University, Waco, TX, USA.
(3)Baylor University, Waco, TX, USA. tamar_carter@baylor.edu.

Malaria control in Somaliland depends on the effective identification of 
potential malaria vectors, particularly those that may be invasive. The malaria 
vector Anopheles stephensi has been detected in multiple countries in the Horn 
of Africa (HOA), but data on its geographic distribution and population genetic 
diversity are incomplete. We implemented a vector surveillance program and 
performed molecular analysis of Anopheles in three urban areas in Somaliland. 
Our study confirmed the presence of both the invasive An. stephensi and the 
long-established HOA malaria vector Anopheles arabiensis. Further analysis of 
An. stephensi genetic diversity revealed three cytochrome oxidase I (COI) 
haplotypes, all of which have been observed in other countries in East Africa 
and one also observed in South Asia. We also detected the knockdown resistance 
(kdr) L1014F mutation, which is associated with pyrethroid resistance; this 
finding supports the need for further assessment of the potential for 
insecticide resistance. The detection of multiple haplotypes previously observed 
in other regions of East Africa indicates that An. stephensi is an established 
population in Somaliland and likely shares its origin with other newly 
identified An. stephensi populations in East Africa. The detection of genetic 
diversity in An. stephensi in Somaliland provides a basis for future studies on 
the history of the species in the region and its dispersal throughout East 
Africa.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-022-05339-y
PMCID: PMC9270831
PMID: 35804441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.