1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 Jun 23;15:949095. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.949095. 
eCollection 2022.

Long Non-coding RNA HOTAIR in Central Nervous System Disorders: New Insights in 
Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Therapeutic Potential.

Wang J(1), Zhao J(1), Hu P(1), Gao L(2), Tian S(2), He Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.

Central nervous system (CNS) disorders, such as ischemic stroke, 
neurodegenerative diseases, multiple sclerosis, traumatic brain injury, and 
corresponding neuropathological changes, often lead to death or long-term 
disability. Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) is a class of non-coding RNA with a 
transcription length over 200 nt and transcriptional regulation. lncRNA is 
extensively involved in physiological and pathological processes through 
epigenetic, transcription, and post-transcriptional regulation. Further, 
dysregulated lncRNA is closely related to the occurrence and development of 
human diseases, including CNS disorders. HOX Transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR) 
is the first discovered lncRNA with trans-transcriptional regulation. Recent 
studies have shown that HOTAIR may participate in the regulation of the 
occurrence and development of CNS disorders. In addition, HOTAIR has the 
potential to become a new biomarker for the diagnosis and prognosis assessment 
of CNS disorders and even provide a new therapeutic target for CNS disorders. 
Here, we reviewed the research results of HOTAIR in CNS disorders to provide new 
insights into the pathogenesis, diagnostic value, and therapeutic target 
potential of HOTAIR in human CNS disorders.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wang, Zhao, Hu, Gao, Tian and He.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.949095
PMCID: PMC9259972
PMID: 35813070

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.