1. Neurol Genet. 2022 Jul 6;8(4):e200009. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200009. 
eCollection 2022 Aug.

FUS-P525L Juvenile Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Intellectual Disability: 
Evidence for Association and Oligogenic Inheritance.

Goldstein O(1), Inbar T(1), Kedmi M(1), Gana-Weisz M(1), Abramovich B(1), 
Orr-Urtreger A(1), Drory VE(1).

Author information:
(1)The Genomic Research Laboratory for Neurodegeneration (O.G., M.K., M.G.-W., 
A.O.-U.), Neurological Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center; Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine (T.I., A.O.-U., V.E.D.), Tel Aviv University; and 
Neuromuscular Diseases Unit (B.A., V.E.D.), Department of Neurology, Tel Aviv 
Sourasky Medical Center, Israel.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized 
by upper and lower motor neuron degeneration, with juvenile ALS (jALS) defined 
as disease with age at onset (AAO) before 25 years. We aimed to identify the 
genetic basis of 2 unrelated patients with jALS with very rapid deterioration 
and early age intellectual disability (ID) and to assess association of genetic 
findings with both phenotypes in a large cohort of patients with ALS and 
controls, and in the literature.
METHODS: Exome sequencing was performed in 2 unrelated probands and their 
parents. Trio analyses included de novo, rare homozygosity, and compound 
heterozygosity analyses. A TaqMan genotyping assay was used to genotype ALS 
cohorts. A systematic literature review was conducted and additional information 
from authors obtained to assess prevalence of fused in sarcoma (FUS)-ALS 
associated with ID.
RESULTS: A de novo mutation FUS-P525L was identified in both patients. 
Additional variations were identified in other genes related to intellectual 
disabilities. Among 8 additional unrelated juvenile patients, one carried the 
same FUS mutation and had a similar medical history of mild ID and fulminant 
ALS, whereas the others did not carry any FUS coding mutations and had no 
reported learning or intellectual disabilities (p = 0.0083). In addition, 486 
patients with ALS with AAO ≥25 years were negative for this mutation. An 
extensive literature review showed that among all patients with FUS-related ALS 
with full phenotype reports, 10.3% exhibited additional learning/intellectual 
disabilities.
DISCUSSION: FUS-P525L mutation was identified in 3 among 10 patients with jALS 
(30%) in our clinical cohort, all with a very aggressive disease course and ID. 
Together with literature reports, these results support a novel association 
between mutations in FUS and early life ID. Additional variations identified in 
genes related to ID and brain development in our patients (GPT2, DNAH10, and 
SCUBE2) may suggest a complex oligogenic inheritance for this phenotype. We 
propose that this mutation should be screened in patients with ALS with very 
early AAO, aggressive disease course, and sporadic occurrence, especially when 
ALS is accompanied by ID.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200009
PMCID: PMC9258982
PMID: 35812163