1. Indian J Clin Biochem. 2023 Jul;38(3):361-373. doi:
10.1007/s12291-022-01056-6.  Epub 2022 Jul 5.

Identification of Cyanobacteria-Based Natural Inhibitors Against SARS-CoV-2 
Druggable Target ACE2 Using Molecular Docking Study, ADME and Toxicity Analysis.

Sahu N(1), Mishra S(1), Kesheri M(1), Kanchan S(1), Sinha RP(1).

Author information:
(1)Varanasi, 221005 India Laboratory of Photobiology and Molecular Microbiology, 
Centre of Advanced Study in Botany, Banaras Hindu University.

In 2019-2020, the novel "severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 
(SARS-CoV-2)" had emerged as the biggest challenge for humanity, causing 
"coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19)". Scientists around the world have been 
putting continuous efforts to unfold potential inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2. We have 
performed computational studies that help us to identify cyanobacterial 
photoprotective compounds as potential inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2 druggable 
target human angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE2), which plays a vital role in 
the attachment and entry of the virus into the cell. Blocking the 
receptor-binding domain of ACE2 can prevent the access of the virus into the 
compartment. A molecular docking study was performed between photoprotective 
compounds mycosporine-like amino acids, scytonemins and ACE2 protein using 
AutoDock tools. Among sixteen molecularly docked metabolites, seven compounds 
were selected with binding energy < 6.8 kcal/mol. Afterwards, drug-likeness and 
toxicity of the top candidate were predicted using Swiss ADME and Pro Tox-II 
online servers. All top hits show desirable drug-likeness properties, but 
toxicity pattern analysis discloses the toxic effect of scytonemin and its 
derivatives, resulting in the elimination from the screening pipeline. Further 
molecular interaction study of the rest two ligands, mycosporine-glycine-valine 
and shinorine with ACE2 was performed using PyMol, Biovia Discovery studio and 
LigPlot+. Lastly biological activity of both the ligands was predicted by using 
the PASS online server. Combining the docking score and other studied 
properties, we believe that mycosporine-glycine-valine and shinorine have 
potential to be potent inhibitors of ACE2 and can be explored further to use 
against COVID-19.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Association of Clinical Biochemists 
of India 2022.

DOI: 10.1007/s12291-022-01056-6
PMCID: PMC9255548
PMID: 35812791

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no 
conflict of interest.