1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Jun 23;10:929288. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.929288. 
eCollection 2022.

FBXO38 Ubiquitin Ligase Controls Centromere Integrity via ZXDA/B Stability.

Dibus N(1), Korinek V(2), Cermak L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech 
Academy of Sciences, Vestec, Czechia.
(2)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics 
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czechia.

Erratum in
    Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Sep 14;10:1000878. doi: 
10.3389/fcell.2022.1000878.

Alterations in the gene encoding the E3 ubiquitin ligase substrate receptor 
FBXO38 have been associated with several diseases, including early-onset motor 
neuronopathy. However, the cellular processes affected by the enzymatic action 
of FBXO38 are not yet known. Here, we identify the zinc finger proteins ZXDA/B 
as its interaction partners. FBXO38 controls the stability of ZXDA/B proteins 
via ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation. We show that ZXDA/B 
proteins associate with the centromeric protein CENP-B and that the interaction 
between ZXDA/B and FBXO38 or CENP-B is mutually exclusive. Functionally, ZXDA/B 
factors control the protein level of chromatin-associated CENP-B. Furthermore, 
their inappropriate stabilization leads to upregulation of CENP-A and CENP-B 
positive centromeric chromatin. Thus we demonstrate a previously unknown role of 
cullin-dependent protein degradation in the control of centromeric chromatin 
integrity.

Copyright Â© 2022 Dibus, Korinek and Cermak.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.929288
PMCID: PMC9260856
PMID: 35813202

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.