1. PLoS Genet. 2022 Jul 12;18(7):e1010313. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010313. 
eCollection 2022 Jul.

Targeting early proximal-rod component substrate FlgB to FlhB for flagellar-type 
III secretion in Salmonella.

Qu D(1), Jiang M(1), Duffin C(2), Hughes KT(2), Chevance FFV(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Food Quality and Safety, School of Food Science and 
Biotechnology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, 
United States of America.

The Salmonella flagellar secretion apparatus is a member of the type III 
secretion (T3S) family of export systems in bacteria. After completion of the 
flagellar motor structure, the hook-basal body (HBB), the flagellar T3S system 
undergoes a switch from early to late substrate secretion, which results in the 
expression and assembly of the external, filament propeller-like structure. In 
order to characterize early substrate secretion-signals in the flagellar T3S 
system, the FlgB, and FlgC components of the flagellar rod, which acts as the 
drive-shaft within the HBB, were subject to deletion mutagenesis to identify 
regions of these proteins that were important for secretion. The Î²-lactamase 
protein lacking its Sec-dependent secretion signal (Bla) was fused to the 
C-terminus of FlgB and FlgC and used as a reporter to select for and quantify 
the secretion of FlgB and FlgC into the periplasm. Secretion of Bla into the 
periplasm confers resistance to ampicillin. In-frame deletions of amino acids 9 
through 18 and amino acids 39 through 58 of FlgB decreased FlgB secretion levels 
while deleting amino acid 6 through 14 diminished FlgC secretion levels. Further 
PCR-directed mutagenesis indicated that amino acid F45 of FlgB was critical for 
secretion. Single amino acid mutagenesis revealed that all amino acid 
substitutions at F45 of FlgB position impaired rod assembly, which was due to a 
defect of FlgB secretion. An equivalent F49 position in FlgC was essential for 
assembly but not for secretion. This study also revealed that a hydrophobic 
patch in the cleaved C-terminal domain of FlhB is critical for recognition of 
FlgB at F45.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010313
PMCID: PMC9307174
PMID: 35819991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.