1. Immunol Invest. 2022 Oct;51(7):2009-2024. doi: 10.1080/08820139.2022.2093118. 
Epub 2022 Jul 11.

Toll-Like Receptor 4 Gene Polymorphisms and Susceptibility to Schizophrenia: A 
Case-Control Study.

Mostafa M(1), Elwasify M(2), Fathy AA(3), Abdelsalam M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, 
Mansoura, Egypt.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura, 
Egypt.
(3)Department of Public Health, and Community, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura 
University, Mansoura, Egypt.
(4)Department of Immunology, Egypt Center for Research and Regenerative Medicine 
(ECRRM), Cairo Egypt.

Schizophrenia is a common psychiatric disorder that exhibits a variety of 
symptoms. The exact etiology and pathogenesis are still doubtful. However, 
genetic and environmental factors seem to have a role. Years ago, the role of 
the immune system was focused on auto-antibodies, cytokines, different types of 
immune cells and immune genes. The Toll-like receptors (TLR) are a cornerstone 
of the innate immune system, particularly TLR4. TLR4 primarily recognises 
gram-negative lipopolysaccharides bacteria. This case-control study, for the 
first time to our knowledge, examined the role of TLR4 gene polymorphisms in 142 
Egyptian schizophrenic patients and 175 healthy controls. Using polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP), four single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were investigated in the TLR4 gene rs11536889, 
rs10759931, rs1927911, and rs1927914. The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale 
(PANSS) was used in diagnosis and assessment. A statistically significant 
association was observed between rs11536889, rs1927911 and rs1927914, but no 
association was found between rs10759931. There was no association between the 
different SNP genotypes and PANSS, except between rs1927914 and general 
psychopathologic symptoms. This study shows a strong association between TLR4 
rs11356889 and rs1927911 minor alleles and schizophrenia. These findings could 
be additional evidence for the immune system's role in schizophrenia 
development. However, more studies with a more significant sample number, TLR4 
protein assessment, and a larger number of SNPs are recommended.

DOI: 10.1080/08820139.2022.2093118
PMID: 35815676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]