1. Dis Markers. 2022 Jul 2;2022:6423237. doi: 10.1155/2022/6423237. eCollection 
2022.

miR-127-5p Targets JAM3 to Regulate Ferroptosis, Proliferation, and Metastasis 
in Malignant Meningioma Cells.

Zhang J(1), Liu Z(1), Dong Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, No. 95 Yong'an Road, Xicheng District, Beijing 100050, China.

OBJECTIVE: Meningiomas are one of the most common primary tumors of the central 
nervous system. Most of them are benign and can be cured by surgery, while a few 
meningiomas are malignant. Ferroptosis gene characteristics might be associated 
with drug therapy and survival in patients with clinically aggressive, 
unresectable meningiomas. This study explored the mechanism of differentially 
expressed miRNAs and ferroptosis in meningioma to provide a new reference to 
treat meningioma.
METHODS: Bioinformatics analysis of differential miRNA profiles and functions in 
patients with meningioma was performed. The contents of lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH), malondialdehyde (MDA), and Fe2+ were determined. Reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) values, as well as cell cycle changes, were analyzed by flow cytometry. 
The targets of miR-127-5p and JAM3 were detected by dual luciferase assays. Cell 
counting kit-8 (CCK8) and Transwell assays were used to analyze cell activity. 
Ki67 expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry. Expression levels of 
miR-127-5p and JAM3 were analyzed by RT-qPCR. GPX4 expression was quantified by 
western blotting.
RESULTS: miR-127-5p was expressed at low levels in IOMM-Lee cells, while JAM3 
was highly expressed in IOMM-Lee cells. A dual luciferase assay demonstrated 
that miR-127-5p could target JAM3. Upregulation of miR-127-5p in IOMM-Lee cells 
resulted in cell cycle arrest and inhibition of cell activity. Upregulation of 
miR-127-5p increased LDH, MDA, and ROS levels and Fe2+ content and inhibited the 
expression of GPX4 protein. Upregulation of JAM3 reversed the results of 
miR-127-5p upregulation.
CONCLUSION: miR-127-5p regulated meningioma formation and ferroptosis through 
JAM3, providing insights for the development of new treatments for meningioma.

Copyright Â© 2022 Jing Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/6423237
PMCID: PMC9271006
PMID: 35818586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.