1. Front Genet. 2022 Jun 22;13:917142. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.917142.
eCollection  2022.

Causal Inference of Genetic Variants and Genes in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.

Pan S(1)(2), Liu X(1)(3), Liu T(1), Zhao Z(4), Dai Y(4), Wang YY(1), Jia P(1), 
Liu F(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Genomic and Precision Medicine, Beijing Institute of 
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and China National Center for 
Bioinformation, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Center for Precision Health, School of Biomedical Informatics, The University 
of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, United States.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal progressive multisystem disorder 
with limited therapeutic options. Although genome-wide association studies 
(GWASs) have revealed multiple ALS susceptibility loci, the exact identities of 
causal variants, genes, cell types, tissues, and their functional roles in the 
development of ALS remain largely unknown. Here, we reported a comprehensive 
post-GWAS analysis of the recent large ALS GWAS (n = 80,610), including 
functional mapping and annotation (FUMA), transcriptome-wide association study 
(TWAS), colocalization (COLOC), and summary data-based Mendelian randomization 
analyses (SMR) in extensive multi-omics datasets. Gene property analysis 
highlighted inhibitory neuron 6, oligodendrocytes, and GABAergic neurons 
(Gad1/Gad2) as functional cell types of ALS and confirmed cerebellum and 
cerebellar hemisphere as functional tissues of ALS. Functional annotation 
detected the presence of multiple deleterious variants at three loci (9p21.2, 
12q13.3, and 12q14.2) and highlighted a list of SNPs that are potentially 
functional. TWAS, COLOC, and SMR identified 43 genes at 24 loci, including 23 
novel genes and 10 novel loci, showing significant evidence of causality. 
Integrating multiple lines of evidence, we further proposed that rs2453555 at 
9p21.2 and rs229243 at 14q12 functionally contribute to the development of ALS 
by regulating the expression of C9orf72 in pituitary and SCFD1 in skeletal 
muscle, respectively. Together, these results advance our understanding of the 
biological etiology of ALS, feed into new therapies, and provide a guide for 
subsequent functional experiments.

Copyright Â© 2022 Pan, Liu, Liu, Zhao, Dai, Wang, Jia and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.917142
PMCID: PMC9257137
PMID: 35812739

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer YY declared a 
shared parent affiliation with the authors ZZ and YD to the handling editor at 
the time of the review.