1. JIMD Rep. 2022 Jun 3;63(4):316-321. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12305. eCollection 2022 
Jul.

Ascites in infantile onset type II Sialidosis.

Tazi K(1), Guy-Viterbo V(2), Gheldof A(3), Empain A(4), Paternoster A(5), De 
Laet C(4).

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Department Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles Avenue Jean Joseph Crocq 15, 1020 Brussels 
Belgium.
(2)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine 
Fabiola, Université Libre de Bruxelles Avenue Jean Joseph Crocq 15, 1020 
Brussels Belgium.
(3)Center for Medical Genetics Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Vrije 
Universiteit Brussel Avenue du Laerbeek 101, 1090 Brussels Belgium.
(4)Nutrition and Metabolic Unit Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles Avenue Jean Joseph Crocq 15, 1020 Brussels 
Belgium.
(5)Paediatric Department Centre Hospitalier EpiCURA Route de Mons 63, 7301 Hornu 
Belgium.

Sialidosis is a rare autosomal-recessive lysosomal storage disease due to 
mutations in the NEU1 gene leading to a deficit of alpha-n-acetyl neuraminidase 
and causing aberrant accumulation of sialylated glycoproteins/peptides and 
oligosaccharides in the lysosomes of various organs and tissues. Type II 
sialidosis (dysmorphic form) is classified into three subgroups based on the age 
of onset and the clinical severity: Congenital or neonatal, infantile (onset 
0-12 months) and juvenile form (onset 13 months-20 years). We report the case of 
a 3-year-old boy with sialidosis type II infantile form, who developed a 
voluminous ascites. To the best of our knowledge, ascites is not described in 
the infantile form but in the congenital form of the disease. Ascites seems to 
be of a multifactorial origin regarding our investigations: on the one hand, 
portal hypertension and on the other hypoalbuminemia maintained by proteinuria 
secondary to nephrosialidosis. Loss of plasma proteins in the gastrointestinal 
tract (protein-losing enteropathy) should also be considered in the case of 
portal hypertension and damages of the reticuloendothelial system.

© 2022 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12305
PMCID: PMC9259393
PMID: 35822090

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that there is no conflict of 
interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the research 
reported.