1. Hortic Res. 2022 May 17;9:uhac109. doi: 10.1093/hr/uhac109. eCollection 2022.

Mechanism of CsGPA1 in regulating cold tolerance of cucumber.

Yan Y(1), Mintao S(1), Si M(2), Qian F(1), Yijia W(1), Qinghua D(1), Mengdi 
Z(1), Chaoxing H(1), Yansu L(1), Lihong G(2), Xianchang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Vegetables and Flowers, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Haidian District, Zhongguancun South St, Beijing 100081, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Growth and Developmental Regulation for Protected 
Vegetable Crops, China Agricultural University, 2 Yuanmingyuan West Road, 
Haidian District, Beijing 100193, China.

G proteins function directly in cold tolerance of plants. However, the framework 
of the Gα subunit in regulating cold tolerance remains to be explored. Here, we 
used protein interaction techniques to elucidate cold-related pathways regulated 
by CsGPA1. Suppression of CsGPA1 decreased the cold tolerance of cucumber. 
Further protein interaction experiments showed that CsGPA1 interacted with 
Csa_4G663630.1 located in the cell membrane and nucleus and with CsCOR413PM2 
located in the cell membrane. Csa_4G663630.1 was named CsCDL1 due to its 71% 
protein sequence similarity to AtCDL1, a positive brassinolide signal gene. 
Suppression of CsGPA1 decreased the expression of most of brassinolide-related 
genes (including CsCDL1) under cold stress. Principal component and linear 
regression analyses showed that expressions of CsGPA1 and brassinolide-related 
genes were positively correlated. Suppression of CsCOR413PM2 also decreased cold 
tolerance of cucumber. The expression and protein content of CsCOR413PM2 and 
CsGPA1 in CsGPA1-RNAi and CsCOR413PM2-RNAi lines were determined under cold 
tolerance. Only CsGPA1 silencing affected the expression and protein content of 
CsCOR413PM2 during cold stress. Moreover, suppression of CsGPA1 or CsCOR413PM2 
decreased Ca 2+ influx at low temperature and then decreased the expression of 
CsICE-CsCBF. These results indicated that the CsGPA1-CsCOR413PM2-Ca2+ axis 
regulated the expression of CsICE-CsCBF during cold stress. In conclusion, Our 
results provide the first framework of CsGPA1 in regulating cold tolerance of 
cucumber, laying the foundation for further mechanistic studies of cold 
tolerance for Gα in cucumber.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nanjing 
Agricultural University.

DOI: 10.1093/hr/uhac109
PMCID: PMC9265480
PMID: 35821703