1. JIMD Rep. 2022 May 7;63(4):276-291. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12292. eCollection 2022 
Jul.

Combined isobutyryl-CoA and multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in a boy 
with altered riboflavin homeostasis.

Tummolo A(1), Leone P(2), Tolomeo M(2), Solito R(2), Mattiuzzo M(3), Lepri 
FR(3), Lorè T(4), Cardinali R(4), De Giovanni D(1), Simonetti S(4), Barile M(2).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases and Clinical Genetics Unit Children's Hospital "Giovanni 
XXIII" Bari Italy.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnology and Biopharmaceutics University of 
Bari "A. Moro" Bari Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Medical Genetics Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, 
Bambino Gesù Children Hospital Rome Italy.
(4)Regional Centre for Neonatal Screening Children's Hospital "Giovanni XXIII" 
Bari Italy.

In this report, we describe the case of an 11-year-old boy, who came to our 
attention for myalgia and muscle weakness, associated with inappetence and 
vomiting. Hypertransaminasemia was also noted, with ultrasound evidence of 
hepatomegaly. Biochemical investigations revealed acylcarnitine and organic acid 
profiles resembling those seen in MADD, that is, multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiencies (OMIM #231680) a rare inherited disorder of fatty acids, amino 
acids, and choline metabolism. The patient carried a single pathogenetic variant 
in the ETFDH gene (c.524G>A, p.Arg175His) and no pathogenetic variant in the 
riboflavin (Rf) homeostasis related genes (SLC52A1, SLC52A2, SLC52A3, SLC25A32, 
FLAD1). Instead, compound heterozygosity was found in the ACAD8 gene (c.512C>G, 
p.Ser171Cys; c.822C>A, p.Asn274Lys), coding for isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase 
(IBD), whose pathogenic variants are associated to IBD deficiency (OMIM 
#611283), a rare autosomal recessive disorder of valine catabolism. The c.822C>A 
was never previously described in a patient. Subsequent further analyses of Rf 
homeostasis showed reduced levels of flavins in plasma and altered FAD-dependent 
enzymatic activities in erythrocytes, as well as a significant reduction in the 
level of the plasma membrane Rf transporter 2 in erythrocytes. The observed 
Rf/flavin scarcity in this patient, possibly associated with a decreased ETF:QO 
efficiency might be responsible for the observed MADD-like phenotype. The 
patient's clinical picture improved after supplementation of Rf, l-carnitine, 
Coenzyme Q10, and also 3OH-butyrate. This report demonstrates that, even in the 
absence of genetic defects in genes involved in Rf homeostasis, further targeted 
molecular analysis may reveal secondary and possibly treatable biochemical 
alterations in this pattern.

© 2022 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12292
PMCID: PMC9259400
PMID: 35822092

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.