1. Clin Biochem. 2022 Oct;108:42-45. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2022.07.001. Epub
 2022 Jul 9.

Homozygous familial lipoprotein lipase deficiency without obvious coronary 
artery stenosis.

Minamizuka T(1), Kobayashi J(2), Tada H(3), Koshizaka M(1), Maezawa Y(1), Yokote 
K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism, Hematology and Geriatrics, Chiba 
University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-8-1, Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba City, 
Chiba 260-0856, Japan.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism, Hematology and Geriatrics, Chiba 
University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-8-1, Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba City, 
Chiba 260-0856, Japan. Electronic address: junjimaryland@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kanazawa University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa City, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.

The prevalence of familial lipoprotein lipase deficiency (LPLD) is approximately 
one in 1,000,000 in the general population. There are conflicting reports on 
whether or not LPLD is atherogenic. We conducted coronary computed tomographic 
(CT) angiography on two patients in their 70 s who had genetically confirmed 
LPLD. Patient 1 was a 73 year old woman with a body mass index (BMI) of 
27.5 kg/m2, no history of diabetes mellitus and no history of drinking alcohol 
or smoking. At the time of her first visit, her serum total cholesterol, 
triglycerides and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels were 4.8 mmol/L, 
17.3 mmol/L, and 0.5 mmol/L, respectively. She was treated with a 
lipid-restricted diet and fibrate but her serum TG levels remained extremely 
high. Next-generation sequencing analysis revealed a missense mutation (homo) in 
the LPL gene, c.662T>C (p. Ile221Thr), leading to the diagnosis of homozygous 
familial LPL deficiency (LPLD). Patient 2 was another 73- year- old woman. She 
also had marked hypertriglyceridemia with no history of diabetes mellitus, 
drinking alcohol, or smoking. Previous genetic studies showed she had a nonsense 
mutation (homozygous) in the LPL gene, c.1277G>A (p.Trp409Ter). To clarify the 
degree of coronary artery stenosis in these two cases, we conducted coronary CT 
angiography and found that no coronary artery stenosis in either the right or 
left coronary arteries. Based on the findings in these two elderly women along 
with previous reports on patients in their 60 s with LPLD and 
hypertriglyceridemia, we suggest that LPLD may not be associated with the 
development or progression of coronary artery disease.

Copyright © 2022 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2022.07.001
PMID: 35820489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.