1. Am J Case Rep. 2022 Jul 14;23:e936505. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.936505.

Selinexor in Patients from Argentina with Multiple Myeloma Treated with Multiple 
Prior Therapies: A Case Series.

Remaggi G(1), Ochoa PA(2), Garate GM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Fundaleu, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Department of Hematology, Instituto Alexander Fleming, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(3)Department of Hematology, Hospital Alem√°n, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

BACKGROUND Numerous treatment options are available for patients with multiple 
myeloma (MM). Because of the course of the disease, most patients will 
experience serial relapse or the MM will become refractory to most of these 
treatments, leaving patients with few or no treatment options over time. 
Selinexor, a treatment with a novel mechanism of action, is an oral selective 
inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE) compound that blocks exportin 1, the major 
nuclear exporter of tumor suppressor proteins. CASE REPORT In this case series, 
we report on treatment with the weekly oral administration of selinexor combined 
with bortezomib and dexamethasone (XVd) in 3 patients from Argentina who were 
heavily treated (5-7 prior therapies) for MM that relapsed or was refractory to 
each previous treatment. Two patients had the high-risk cytogenetic abnormality 
del(17p). All 3 patients experienced efficacy with XVd reaching a best response 
of partial response or very good partial response. These responses were 
consistent with those of patients from the BOSTON study who were treated with 
XVd but were less heavily pretreated (1-3 prior therapies) and had a shorter 
median time since diagnosis of MM (7 years vs 3.7 years). The 3 patients 
experienced adverse events (AEs) that included nausea, thrombocytopenia, 
asthenia, and fatigue, which were similar to the most commonly reported AEs 
associated with selinexor treatment. CONCLUSIONS With its oral administration, 
novel mechanism of action, and responses in heavily pretreated patients, 
selinexor may help to address an important clinical need in the treatment of 
patients with relapsed/refractory MM.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.936505
PMCID: PMC9295189
PMID: 35834427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared