1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2022 Jul 15;22(1):345. doi: 10.1186/s12876-022-02421-8.

Construction of a novel necroptosis-related lncRNA signature for prognosis 
prediction in esophageal cancer.

Liu Y(1), Hao H(2), Kang L(1), Zheng G(1), Guo X(3), Li B(1), Zhao H(4), Hao 
H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang, China. 
ZHAO552588@126.com.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, The Key Laboratory of New Drug Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, Center of Innovative Drug Research and Evaluation, Hebei Medical 
University, Shijiazhuang, China. haohan555@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal cancer (EC), one highly malignant gastrointestinal 
cancer, is the 6th leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Necroptosis 
and long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) play important roles in the occurrence and 
development of EC, but the research on the role of necroptosis-related lncRNA in 
EC is not conclusive. This study aims to use bioinformatics to investigate the 
prognostic value of necroptosis-related lncRNA in EC.
METHODS: Transcriptome data containing EC and normal samples, and clinical 
information were obtained from the Cancer Genome Atlas database. 102 
necroptosis-related genes were obtained from Kanehisa Laboratories. 
Necroptosis-related lncRNAs were screened out via univariate, multivariate Cox 
and the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator regression analyses to 
construct the risk predictive model. The reliability of the risk model was 
evaluated mainly through quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), the receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) curves and the constructed nomogram. KEGG 
pathways were explored in the high- and low-risk groups of EC patients via gene 
set enrichment analyses (GSEA) software. Immune microenvironment and potential 
therapeutic agents in risk groups were also analyzed.
RESULTS: A 6 necroptosis-related lncRNAs risk model composed of AC022211.2, 
Z94721.1, AC007991.2, SAMD12-AS1, AL035461.2 and AC051619.4 was established to 
predict the prognosis level of EC patients. qRT-PCR analysis showed upregulated 
Z94721.1 and AL035461.2 mRNA levels and downregulated AC051619.4 mRNA level in 
EC tissues compared with normal tissues. According to clinical characteristics, 
the patients in the high-risk group had a shorter overall survival than the 
low-risk group. The ROC curve and nomogram confirmed this model as one 
independent and predominant predictor. GSEA analysis showed metabolic and 
immune-related pathways enriched in the risk model. Most of the immune cells and 
immune checkpoints were positively correlated with the risk model, mainly active 
in the high-risk group. For the prediction of potential therapeutic drugs, 16 
compounds in the high-risk group and 2 compounds in the low-risk group exhibited 
higher sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results supported the necroptosis-related lncRNA signature 
could independently predict prognosis of EC patients, and provided theoretical 
basis for improving the clinical treatment of EC.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12876-022-02421-8
PMCID: PMC9287891
PMID: 35840890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.