1. Front Genet. 2022 Jun 30;13:898860. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.898860.
eCollection  2022.

Prenatal Diagnosis of Isovaleric Acidemia From Amniotic Fluid Using Genetic and 
Biochemical Approaches.

Ding S(1), Liang L(1), Qiu W(1), Zhang H(1), Xiao B(1), Dong L(2), Ji W(1), Xu 
F(1), Gong Z(1), Gu X(1), Wang L(3), Han L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Xinhua 
Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Pediatric Research, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Neonatal Disease Screening Center, Zibo Maternal and Child Health Hospital, 
Zibo, China.
(3)Center for Prenatal Diagnosis, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Background: Isovaleric acidemia (IVA) is an inborn error of leucine metabolism 
and different approaches have been applied to its prenatal diagnosis. However, 
systemic application of a biochemical strategy is rare. To evaluate its 
reliability and validity, we conducted a retrospective study of our experience 
with metabolite measurement together with genetic analysis in IVA prenatal 
diagnosis at a single center. Methods: A total of eight pregnancies whose 
probands were diagnosed as IVA were referred to our center for prenatal 
diagnosis. Prenatal data of genetic analysis and metabolite measurement using 
tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) and gas chromatography/mass spectrometry 
(GC/MS) in amniotic fluid (AF) samples were retrospectively reviewed. Results: 
Genetic and biochemical results were both available in these eight at-risk 
fetuses. Among them, two fetuses had higher levels of isovalerylcarnitine (C5) 
and C5/acetylcarnitine (C2) in AF compared with normal reference range and, 
thus, were determined to be affected, both of whom were found to carry compound 
heterogeneous mutations according to genetic analysis. The remaining six fetuses 
were determined to be unaffected based on a normal AF metabolite profile, except 
one showed slightly elevated C5 and they were found to be carriers according to 
genetic analysis. However, the level of isovalerylglycine (IVG) could not be 
detected at all in both groups. Conclusion: The biochemical analysis, as a quick 
and convenient method, could be an additional reliable option for the prenatal 
diagnosis of IVA, especially in families with inconclusive genetic results, and 
can achieve a more precise diagnosis in conjunction with mutation analysis.

Copyright Â© 2022 Ding, Liang, Qiu, Zhang, Xiao, Dong, Ji, Xu, Gong, Gu, Wang and 
Han.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.898860
PMCID: PMC9280075
PMID: 35846131

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.