1. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2022 Nov;82(7):626-638. doi: 10.1002/jdn.10215. Epub 2022 
Jul 25.

A novel thymidine phosphorylase mutation in a family with Mitochondrial 
Neurogastrointestinal Encephalomyopathy (MNGIE): Molecular docking, dynamic 
simulation and computational investigations.

Ammar M(1), Safi W(2), Tlili A(3), Alila-Fersi O(1), Frikha F(4), Chouchen J(3), 
Mnif F(2), Kharrat M(1), Maalej M(1), Felhi R(1), Abid M(2), Mnif-Feki M(2), 
Kacem FH(2), Fakhfakh F(1), Mkaouar-Rebai E(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Genetics, Faculty of Sciences, 
University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.
(2)Department of Endocrinology Diabetology, CHU Hedi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia.
(3)Department of Applied Biology, College of Sciences, University of Sharjah, 
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Screening Processes, Center of 
Biotechnology of Sfax, University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.

Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE; OMIM 603041) is a 
rare inherited metabolic disorder mostly caused by mutations in TYMP gene 
encoding thymidine phosphorylase (TP) protein that affects the mitochondrial 
nucleotide metabolism. TP, functionally active as a homodimer, is involved in 
the salvage pathway of pyrimidine nucleosides. MNGIE-like syndrome having an 
overlapping phenotype of MNGIE was also described and has been associated with 
mutations in POLG and RRM2B genes. In the present study, we report the molecular 
investigation of a consanguineous family including two patients with clinical 
features suggestive of MNGIE syndrome. Bioinformatics analyses were carried out 
in addition to mtDNA deletion screening and copy number quantification in the 
blood of the two patients. Whole exome sequencing and Sanger sequencing analyses 
revealed the segregation in the affected family a novel mutation c.1205T>A 
(p.L402Q) within the exon 9 of the TYMP gene. In addition, mtDNA analysis 
revealed the absence of mtDNA deletions and a decrease of the copy number in the 
blood of the two patients of the studied family. The p.Leu402Gln mutation was 
located in a conserved amino acid within the α/β domain of the TP protein and 
several software supported its pathogenicity. In addition, and based on docking 
and molecular dynamic simulation analyses, results revealed that L402Q caused a 
conformational change in TP mutated structure and could therefore alter its 
flexibility and stability. These changes prevent also the formation of stable 
homodimer leading to non-functional protein with partial or complete loss of its 
catalytic activity.

© 2022 International Society for Developmental Neuroscience.

DOI: 10.1002/jdn.10215
PMID: 35841120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]