1. EJHaem. 2021 Nov 1;3(1):301-313. doi: 10.1002/jha2.317. eCollection 2022 Feb.

The spectrum of genetic mutations in myelodysplastic syndrome: Should we update 
prognostication?

Cook MR(1), Karp JE(2), Lai C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Georgetown University Hospital Washington District of Columbia USA.
(2)Divison of Hematology and Oncology The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer 
Center Johns Hopkins University Hospital Baltimore Maryland USA.

The natural history of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is dependent 
upon the presence and magnitude of diverse genetic and molecular aberrations. 
The International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) and revised IPSS (IPSS-R) are 
the most widely used classification and prognostic systems; however, somatic 
mutations are not currently incorporated into these systems, despite evidence of 
their independent impact on prognosis. Our manuscript reviews prognostic 
information for TP53, EZH2, DNMT3A, ASXL1, RUNX1, SRSF2, CBL, IDH 1/2, TET2, 
BCOR, ETV6, GATA2, U2AF1, ZRSR2, RAS, STAG2, and SF3B1. Mutations in TP53, EZH2, 
ASXL1, DNMT3A, RUNX1, SRSF2, and CBL have extensive evidence for their negative 
impact on survival, whereas SF3B1 is the lone mutation carrying a favorable 
prognosis. We use the existing literature to propose the incorporation of 
somatic mutations into the IPSS-R. More data are needed to define the broad 
spectrum of other genetic lesions, as well as the impact of variant allele 
frequencies, class of mutation, and impact of multiple interactive genomic 
lesions. We postulate that the incorporation of these data into MDS 
prognostication systems will not only enhance our therapeutic decision making 
but lead to targeted treatment in an attempt to improve outcomes in this 
formidable disease.

Â© 2021 The Authors. eJHaem published by British Society for Haematology and John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jha2.317
PMCID: PMC9176033
PMID: 35846202

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.