1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Jul 4;13:903539. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.903539. 
eCollection 2022.

Plant Foraging Strategies Driven by Distinct Genetic Modules: Cross-Ecosystem 
Transcriptomics Approach.

Sugimura Y(1), Kawahara A(2), Maruyama H(1), Ezawa T(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Agriculture, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Health & Crop Sciences Research Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical, Co., Ltd., 
Takarazuka, Japan.

Plants have evolved diverse strategies for foraging, e.g., mycorrhizae, 
modification of root system architecture, and secretion of phosphatase. Despite 
extensive molecular/physiological studies on individual strategies under 
laboratory/greenhouse conditions, there is little information about how plants 
orchestrate these strategies in the field. We hypothesized that individual 
strategies are independently driven by corresponding genetic modules in response 
to deficiency/unbalance in nutrients. Roots colonized by mycorrhizal fungi, 
leaves, and root-zone soils were collected from 251 maize plants grown across 
the United States Corn Belt and Japan, which provided a large gradient of soil 
characteristics/agricultural practice and thus gene expression for foraging. RNA 
was extracted from the roots, sequenced, and subjected to gene coexpression 
network analysis. Nineteen genetic modules were defined and functionally 
characterized, from which three genetic modules, mycorrhiza formation, phosphate 
starvation response (PSR), and root development, were selected as those directly 
involved in foraging. The mycorrhizal module consists of genes responsible for 
mycorrhiza formation and was upregulated by both phosphorus and nitrogen 
deficiencies. The PSR module that consists of genes encoding phosphate 
transporter, secreted acid phosphatase, and enzymes involved in 
internal-phosphate recycling was regulated independent of the mycorrhizal module 
and strongly upregulated by phosphorus deficiency relative to nitrogen. The root 
development module that consists of regulatory genes for root development and 
cellulose biogenesis was upregulated by phosphorus and nitrogen enrichment. The 
expression of this module was negatively correlated with that of the mycorrhizal 
module, suggesting that root development is intrinsically an opposite strategy 
of mycorrhizae. Our approach provides new insights into understanding plant 
foraging strategies in complex environments at the molecular level.

Copyright Â© 2022 Sugimura, Kawahara, Maruyama and Ezawa.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.903539
PMCID: PMC9290524
PMID: 35860530

Conflict of interest statement: AK was employed by Sumitomo Chemical, Co., Ltd. 
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of 
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.