1. PLoS One. 2022 Jul 21;17(7):e0270852. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0270852. 
eCollection 2022.

NTD-DR: Nonnegative tensor decomposition for drug repositioning.

Jamali AA(1), Tan Y(1)(2), Kusalik A(1)(3), Wu FX(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Engineering, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
SK, Canada.
(2)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Huazhong Normal University, Wuhan, 
China.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
SK, Canada.

Computational drug repositioning aims to identify potential applications of 
existing drugs for the treatment of diseases for which they were not designed. 
This approach can considerably accelerate the traditional drug discovery process 
by decreasing the required time and costs of drug development. Tensor 
decomposition enables us to integrate multiple drug- and disease-related data to 
boost the performance of prediction. In this study, a nonnegative tensor 
decomposition for drug repositioning, NTD-DR, is proposed. In order to capture 
the hidden information in drug-target, drug-disease, and target-disease 
networks, NTD-DR uses these pairwise associations to construct a 
three-dimensional tensor representing drug-target-disease triplet associations 
and integrates them with similarity information of drugs, targets, and disease 
to make a prediction. We compare NTD-DR with recent state-of-the-art methods in 
terms of the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) 
and the area under the precision and recall curve (AUPR) and find that our 
method outperforms competing methods. Moreover, case studies with five diseases 
also confirm the reliability of predictions made by NTD-DR. Our proposed method 
identifies more known associations among the top 50 predictions than other 
methods. In addition, novel associations identified by NTD-DR are validated by 
literature analyses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0270852
PMCID: PMC9302855
PMID: 35862409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.