1. J Sep Sci. 2022 Sep;45(18):3614-3623. doi: 10.1002/jssc.202200423. Epub 2022
Aug  3.

Separation and characterization of bovine milk proteins by capillary 
electrophoresis-mass spectrometry.

Ghafoori Z(1)(2), Tehrani T(1), Pont L(1)(3), Benavente F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Chemistry, Institute for 
Research on Nutrition and Food Safety (INSA·UB), University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Food Hygiene, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Shahid Chamran 
University, Ahvaz, Iran.
(3)Serra Húnter Programe, Generalitat de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.

Protein profiling of major bovine milk proteins (i.e., whey and casein proteins) 
is of great interest in food science and technology. This complex set of protein 
proteoforms may vary with breed, genetics, lactation stage, health, and 
nutritional status of the animal. Current routine methods for bovine milk 
protein profiling at the intact level are typically based on capillary 
electrophoresis-ultraviolet, which does not allow confirming unequivocally the 
identity of the separated proteins. As an alternative, in this study, we 
describe for the first time a novel and simple capillary electrophoresis-mass 
spectrometry method in positive electrospray ionization mode. Under the 
optimized conditions, capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry allowed the 
separation and identification at the intact level of major bovine milk whey and 
casein proteins in less than 15 min. Furthermore, high-resolution mass 
spectrometry confirmed its importance in the reliable characterization of bovine 
milk protein proteoforms, especially those with slight molecular mass 
differences, such as β-casein A1 and A2, which are relevant to unequivocally 
identify milk with specific β-casein compositions (e.g., A2A2 milk, which is 
widely known as A2 milk). This differentiation was not possible by 
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry, which provided 
rapidly and easily a rich but less accurate fingerprint of bovine milk proteins 
due to the lower mass resolution.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Separation Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/jssc.202200423
PMCID: PMC9805173
PMID: 35866669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.