1. Front Oncol. 2022 Jul 4;12:895106. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.895106. eCollection 
2022.

Cold Atmospheric Plasma Conveys Selectivity Against Hepatocellular Carcinoma 
Cells via Triggering EGFR(Tyr1068)-Mediated Autophagy.

Wang D(1), Zhang J(1), Cai L(2), Dai X(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Genomics Institution (BGI) College & Henan Institute of Medical and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences in Academy of Medical Science, Zhengzhou University.
(2)Wuxi School of Medicine, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China.
(3)CAPsoul Medical Biotechnology Company, Ltd., Beijing, China.

Hepatocellular carcinomas remain as a global health threat given its high 
mortality rate. We have previously identified the selectivity of cold 
atmospheric plasma (CAP) against multiple types of malignant tumors and proposed 
it as a promising onco-therapeutic strategy. Here, we investigated its roles in 
controlling hepatocellular carcinoma malignancy and one possible driving 
molecular mechanism. By focusing on post-translational modifications including 
acetylation, phosphorylation, and ubiquitination, we identified the crosstalk 
between EGFR acetylation and EGFR(Tyr1068) phosphorylation and their collective 
roles in determining LC3B ubiquitination and proposed the EGFR/p-JNK/BIRC6/LC3B 
axis in CAP-triggered autophagy. Our study not only demonstrated the selectivity 
of CAP against hepatocellular carcinoma malignancy and confirmed its roles as an 
onco-therapeutic tool but also opened the horizon of translating CAP into 
clinics toward a broader scope that included human longevity and anti-aging.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wang, Zhang, Cai and Dai.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.895106
PMCID: PMC9292981
PMID: 35860596

Conflict of interest statement: Author XD was employed by CAPsoul Medical 
Biotechnology Company, Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.