1. Front Oncol. 2022 Jul 4;12:899925. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.899925. eCollection 
2022.

Identification and Validation of Immune-Related Long Non-Coding RNA Signature 
for Predicting Immunotherapeutic Response and Prognosis in NSCLC Patients 
Treated With Immunotherapy.

Ma J(1), Zhang M(2), Yu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, Shandong University Cancer Center, Jinan, China.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital, 
Harbin, China.

BACKGROUND: Numerous studies have reported that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) 
play important roles in immune-related pathways in cancer. However, 
immune-related lncRNAs and their roles in predicting immunotherapeutic response 
and prognosis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with 
immunotherapy remain largely unexplored.
METHODS: Transcriptomic data from NSCLC patients were used to identify novel 
lncRNAs by a custom pipeline. ImmuCellAI was utilized to calculate the 
infiltration score of immune cells. The marker genes of immunotherapeutic 
response-related (ITR)-immune cells were used to identify immune-related 
(IR)-lncRNAs. A co-expression network was constructed to determine their 
functions. LASSO and multivariate Cox analyses were performed on the training 
set to construct an immunotherapeutic response and immune-related (ITIR)-lncRNA 
signature for predicting the immunotherapeutic response and prognosis of NSCLC. 
Four independent datasets involving NSCLC and melanoma patients were used to 
validate the ITIR-lncRNA signature.
RESULTS: In total, 7,693 novel lncRNAs were identified for NSCLC. By comparing 
responders with non-responders, 154 ITR-lncRNAs were identified. Based on the 
correlation between the marker genes of ITR-immune cells and lncRNAs, 39 
ITIR-lncRNAs were identified. A co-expression network was constructed and the 
potential functions of 38 ITIR-lncRNAs were annotated, most of which were 
related to immune/inflammatory-related pathways. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis 
was performed to confirm the functional prediction results of an ITIR-lncRNA, 
LINC01272. Four-ITIR-lncRNA signature was identified and verified for predicting 
the immunotherapeutic response and prognosis of NSCLC. Compared with 
non-responders, responders had a lower risk score in both NSCLC datasets 
(P<0.05). NSCLC patients in the high-risk group had significantly shorter PFS/OS 
time than those in the low-risk group in the training and testing sets (P<0.05). 
The AUC value was 1 of responsiveness in the training set. In melanoma 
validation datasets, patients in the high-risk group also had significantly 
shorter OS/PFS time than those in the low-risk group (P<0.05). The ITIR-lncRNA 
signature was an independent prognostic factor (P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Thousands of novel lncRNAs in NSCLC were identified and 
characterized. In total, 39 ITIR-lncRNAs were identified, 38 of which were 
functionally annotated. Four ITIR-lncRNAs were identified as a novel ITIR-lncRNA 
signature for predicting the immunotherapeutic response and prognosis in NSCLC 
patients treated with immunotherapy.

Copyright Â© 2022 Ma, Zhang and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.899925
PMCID: PMC9289523
PMID: 35860577

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor CL 
declared a shared parent affiliation with the author MZ at the time of review.