1. Caspian J Intern Med. 2022;13(Suppl 3):277-280. doi: 10.22088/cjim.13.0.277.

Dexamethasone Induced Sino-Orbital Mucormycosis In a Patient Infected With 
COVID-19.

Mardani M(1), Alavi Darazam I(1), Babamahmoodi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine Research Center, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: The most common causes of immunodeficiency are iatrogenic and the 
result of the widespread use of therapies which modulates the immune system, 
whether they are planned or haphazardly. Mucormycosis is an invasive fungal 
disease which is usually secondary to immunosuppression, diabetic ketoacidosis, 
and long-term use of antibiotics, corticosteroids, and cytotoxic drugs. There 
are researches which show patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), 
especially severely ill or immunocompromised, are more likely to suffer from 
invasive fungal infections. Patients with diabetes are at a higher risk for 
severe COVID-19 outcomes. However, there has been no clear evidence on the 
relationship between pre-diabetes state and mucormycosis as a complication of 
SARS-CoV-2 infection so far.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here, we report a case of sino-orbital mucormycosis in a 
pre-diabetic 54-year-old female without any underlying diseases. The patient 
suffered from COVID-19 pneumonia. She received 8 mg dexamethasone for 12 days. 
Afterwards, she returned three days after her discharge with a complaint of 
pre-orbital cellulitis, unilateral facial numbness and decreased visual acuity. 
Therefore, after primary diagnostic imaging, she was regarded as a candidate for 
invasive surgical intervention and was consequently treated with a combination 
of liposomal amphotericin B, radical recurrent surgery and posaconazole.
CONCLUSION: It is very important to consider patients who are in the 
pre-diabetic state or possibly immunocompromised before prescribing steroids. 
The patients should be examined for invasive fungal infections in post-discharge 
period.

DOI: 10.22088/cjim.13.0.277
PMCID: PMC9272951
PMID: 35872692

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.