1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Jul 6;13:958307. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.958307. 
eCollection 2022.

New Insights in the Interplay Between African Swine Fever Virus and Innate 
Immunity and Its Impact on Viral Pathogenicity.

Ayanwale A(1), Trapp S(1), Guabiraba R(1), Caballero I(1), Roesch F(1).

Author information:
(1)UMR 1282 ISP, INRAE Centre Val de Loire, Nouzilly, France.

The continuous spread of African swine fever virus (ASFV) in Europe and Asia 
represents a major threat to livestock health, with billions of dollars of 
income losses and major perturbations of the global pig industry. One striking 
feature of African swine fever (ASF) is the existence of different forms of the 
disease, ranging from acute with mortality rates approaching 100% to chronic, 
with mild clinical manifestations. These differences in pathogenicity have been 
linked to genomic alterations present in attenuated ASFV strains (and absent in 
virulent ones) and differences in the immune response of infected animals. In 
this mini-review, we summarized current knowledge on the connection between ASFV 
pathogenicity and the innate immune response induced in infected hosts, with a 
particular focus on the pathways involved in ASFV detection. Indeed, recent 
studies have highlighted the key role of the DNA sensor cGAS in ASFV sensing. We 
discussed what other pathways may be involved in ASFV sensing and inflammasome 
activation and summarized recent findings on the viral ASFV genes involved in 
the modulation of the interferon (IFN) and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) 
pathways.

Copyright © 2022 Ayanwale, Trapp, Guabiraba, Caballero and Roesch.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.958307
PMCID: PMC9298521
PMID: 35875580

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.