1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Jul 7;9:850991. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.850991. 
eCollection 2022.

Comprehensive Analysis of circRNA-miRNA-mRNA Regulatory Network and Novel 
Potential Biomarkers in Acute Myocardial Infarction.

Wu J(1)(2), Li C(1)(2), Lei Z(1)(2), Cai H(1)(2), Hu Y(1)(2), Zhu Y(1)(2), Zhang 
T(1)(2), Zhu H(1)(2), Cao J(1)(2), Hu X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
China.
(2)Institute of Myocardial Injury and Repair, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Circular RNA (circRNA) plays an important role in the regulation of 
gene expression and the occurrence of human diseases. However, studies on the 
role of circRNA in acute myocardial infarction (AMI) are limited. This study was 
performed to explore novel circRNA-related regulatory networks in AMI, aiming to 
better understand the molecular mechanism of circRNAs involvement in AMI and 
provide basis for further scientific research and clinical decision-making.
METHODS: The AMI-related microarray datasets GSE160717 (circRNA), GSE31568 
(miRNA), GSE61741 (miRNA), and GSE24519 (mRNA) were obtained from the Gene 
Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. After differential expression analysis, the 
regulatory relationships between these DERNAs were identified by online 
databases circBank, circInteractome, miRDB, miRWalk, Targetscan, and then two 
circRNA-miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks were constructed. Differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs) in this network were selected followed by enrichment 
analysis and protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis. Hub genes were 
identified using Cytohubba plug-in of Cytoscape software. Hub genes and hub 
gene-related miRNAs were used for receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) 
analysis to identify potential biomarkers. The relative expression levels of 
these biomarkers were further assessed by GSE31568 (miRNA) and GSE66360 (mRNA). 
Finally, on the basis of the above analysis, myocardial hypoxia model was 
constructed to verify the expression of Hub genes and related circRNAs.
RESULTS: A total of 83 DEcircRNAs, 109 CoDEmiRNAs and 1204 DEGs were 
significantly differentially expressed in these datasets. The up-regulated 
circRNAs and down-regulated circRNAs were used to construct a circRNA-miRNA-mRNA 
regulatory network respectively. These circRNA-related DEGs were mainly enriched 
in the terms of "FOXO signaling pathway," "T cell receptor signaling pathway," 
"MAPK signaling pathway," "Insulin resistance," "cAMP signaling pathway," and 
"mTOR signaling pathway." The top 10 hub genes ATP2B2, KCNA1, GRIN2A, SCN2B, 
GPM6A, CACNA1E, HDAC2, SRSF1, ANK2, and HNRNPA2B1 were identified from the PPI 
network. Hub genes GPM6A, SRSF1, ANK2 and hub gene-related circRNAs 
hsa_circ_0023461, hsa_circ_0004561, hsa_circ_0001147, hsa_circ_0004771, 
hsa_circ_0061276, and hsa_circ_0045519 were identified as potential biomarkers 
in AMI.
CONCLUSION: In this study, the potential circRNAs associated with AMI were 
identified and two circRNA-miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks were constructed. This 
study explored the mechanism of circRNA involvement in AMI and provided new 
clues for the selection of new diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets for 
AMI.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wu, Li, Lei, Cai, Hu, Zhu, Zhang, Zhu, Cao and Hu.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.850991
PMCID: PMC9300925
PMID: 35872921

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.