1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Front Immunol. 2022 Jul 6;13:940228. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.940228. eCollection 
2022.

Lactobacillus paracasei X11 Ameliorates Hyperuricemia and Modulates Gut 
Microbiota in Mice.

Cao J(1), Liu Q(1), Hao H(1), Bu Y(1), Tian X(1), Wang T(1), Yi H(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Food Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, 
China.

Retraction in
    Front Immunol. 2024 Nov 06;15:1517021. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1517021.

Hyperuricemia (HUA) is the presence of excessive uric acid (UA) in blood, which 
leads to an increased risk of chronic kidney disease and gout. Probiotics have 
the potential effect of alleviating HUA. The purpose of this study was to screen 
probiotics with UA-lowering activity and explore the underlying mechanism. The 
UA-lowering activity of 20 lactic acid bacteria strains was investigated in 
vitro, and the effect of candidate probiotics on UA metabolism was evaluated 
using the HUA Balb/c mouse model. The results showed that Lactobacillus 
paracasei X11 had excellent UA-lowering activity in vitro, which could degrade 
nucleotides and nucleosides completely within 30 min, and the degradation rates 
of purine and trioxypurine could reach 83.25% and 80.42%, respectively. In 
addition, oral administration of L. paracasei X11 could reduce serum UA by 
52.45% and inhibit renal proinflammatory cytokine IL-1β by 50.69%, regulating 
adenosine deaminase (ADA), xanthine oxidase (XOD), and transporter expression 
(GLUT9, NPT1, and URAT1) to a normal level. Moreover, it could restore the ratio 
of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes (Bac/Firm ratio) and showed a positive effect on 
the recovery of the intestinal microbiota. These findings provided fundamental 
information about the UA-lowering properties of probiotics, which suggested that 
L. paracasei X11 had the potential to be developed as a novel probiotic strain 
to ameliorate HUA.

Copyright © 2022 Cao, Liu, Hao, Bu, Tian, Wang and Yi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.940228
PMCID: PMC9296831
PMID: 35874662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.