1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2022 Sep 1;323(3):L329-L337. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00061.2022. Epub 2022 Jul 26.

Muc5b plays a role in the development of inflammation and fibrosis in 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis induced by Saccharopolyspora rectivirgula.

Okamoto T(1)(2)(3), Dobrinskikh E(1)(4), Hennessy CE(1), Liu N(1), Schwarz 
MI(1), Evans CM(1), Fontenot AP(1), Yang IV(1), Schwartz DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Immunotherapeutics, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.

Previously we have shown that a gain-of-function MUC5B promoter variant 
(rs35705950) is the strongest risk factor for the development of idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis. We have also found that Muc5b overexpression reduces 
mucociliary clearance in mice, potentially leading to recurrent injury to the 
bronchoalveolar epithelia. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is induced by 
inhalation of numerous causative antigens that may be affected by mucociliary 
clearance. We conducted this study to determine the role of Muc5b in a mouse 
model of HP induced by Saccharopolyspora rectivirgula (SR) antigen. We used 
Muc5b-deficient and wild-type (WT) mice to determine whether Muc5b plays a role 
in inflammation and fibrosis at 3 and 6 wk in an SR model of HP. We measured 
cell concentrations and MUC5B expression in whole lung lavage (WLL) and 
quantified fibrosis using hydroxyproline assay and second harmonic generation. 
Muc5b expression in WLL fluid was significantly increased in SR-exposed WT mice 
compared with saline controls. WT mice challenged with SR developed more 
inflammation and lung fibrosis at 6 wk compared with 3 wk postexposure. 
Moreover, we found that 6 wk following challenge with SR, Muc5b-deficient mice 
had less lung inflammation and less lung fibrosis than Muc5b WT mice. 
Furthermore, Muc5b-deficient mice had significantly lower concentrations of 
TGF-Î²1 in the WLL compared with Muc5b WT mice at 6 wk of exposure. Muc5b appears 
to play a role in fibrosis in the animal model of HP and this may have 
implications for HP in humans.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00061.2022
PMCID: PMC9423777
PMID: 35881171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D. Schwartz is the founder and chief scientific 
officer of Eleven P15, a company dedicated to the early diagnosis and treatment 
of pulmonary fibrosis. None of the other authors has any conflicts of interest, 
financial or otherwise, to disclose.