1. Biomolecules. 2022 Jun 24;12(7):880. doi: 10.3390/biom12070880.

The Mitochondrial HSP90 Paralog TRAP1: Structural Dynamics, Interactome, Role in 
Metabolic Regulation, and Inhibitors.

Joshi A(1), Ito T(1), Picard D(2), Neckers L(1).

Author information:
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute (NCI), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Université de Genève, Sciences 
III, 30 Quai Ernest-Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

The HSP90 paralog TRAP1 was discovered more than 20 years ago; yet, a detailed 
understanding of the function of this mitochondrial molecular chaperone remains 
elusive. The dispensable nature of TRAP1 in vitro and in vivo further 
complicates an understanding of its role in mitochondrial biology. TRAP1 is more 
homologous to the bacterial HSP90, HtpG, than to eukaryotic HSP90. Lacking 
co-chaperones, the unique structural features of TRAP1 likely regulate its 
temperature-sensitive ATPase activity and shed light on the alternative 
mechanisms driving the chaperone's nucleotide-dependent cycle in a defined 
environment whose physiological temperature approaches 50 °C. TRAP1 appears to 
be an important bioregulator of mitochondrial respiration, mediating the balance 
between oxidative phosphorylation and glycolysis, while at the same time 
promoting mitochondrial homeostasis and displaying cytoprotective activity. 
Inactivation/loss of TRAP1 has been observed in several neurodegenerative 
diseases while TRAP1 expression is reported to be elevated in multiple cancers 
and, as with HSP90, evidence of addiction to TRAP1 has been observed. In this 
review, we summarize what is currently known about this unique HSP90 paralog and 
why a better understanding of TRAP1 structure, function, and regulation is 
likely to enhance our understanding of the mechanistic basis of mitochondrial 
homeostasis.

DOI: 10.3390/biom12070880
PMCID: PMC9312948
PMID: 35883436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.