1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2022 Jun 30;11(7):1307. doi: 10.3390/antiox11071307.

Copper-Induced Interactions of Caffeic Acid and Sinapic Acid to Generate New 
Compounds in Artificial Biological Fluid Conditions.

Iwasaki Y(1), Manabe R(1), Kimoto M(1), Fukuda M(1), Mase N(1), Miyazawa M(1), 
Hosokawa K(1), Kamei J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biopharmaceutics and Analytical Science, Hoshi University 
School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-4-41 Ebara, Shinagawa-ku, 
Tokyo 142-8501, Japan.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Pharmacology, Hoshi University School of Pharmacy 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-4-41 Ebara, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8501, Japan.
(3)Juntendo Advanced Research Institute for Health Science, Juntendo University, 
2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

Active ingredients may be ingested through foods, and they can cause several 
interactions in the human body. Although drug-drug or drug-food interactions are 
evaluated before the approval of medicines, several functional food interactions 
are not well-documented because of the wide range of possible combinations of 
interactions. In this study, we examined the chemical reactions between 
hydroxycinnamic acids (HCAs), a group of polyphenols, and metal ions in 
artificial gastric juice or artificial intestinal fluid. Caffeic acid (CaA) and 
sinapic acid (SA) reacted with copper ions under artificial intestinal fluid 
conditions and produced new compounds. The triple interactions of CaA or SA with 
iron and copper ions were also examined. Relative to the initial compounds, CaA 
and SA derivatives produced by condensation exhibited an increased antioxidant 
and a decreased prooxidant activity. This study revealed a new food ingredient 
interaction pattern in which new compounds are produced under biological 
conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox11071307
PMCID: PMC9311897
PMID: 35883798

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.