1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jul 18;23(14):7918. doi: 10.3390/ijms23147918.

Effect of Mortalin on Scar Formation in Human Dermal Fibroblasts and a Rat 
Incisional Scar Model.

Jung BK(1)(2), Roh TS(1), Roh H(1), Lee JH(3), Yun CO(4), Lee WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Human Tissue Restoration, Department of Plastic & 
Reconstructive Surgery, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea.
(2)College of Medicine, Graduate School, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Korea.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Cutaneous Biology Research Institute, Severance 
Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, College of Engineering, Hanyang University, 
Seoul 04763, Korea.

Wound healing is a complicated cascading process; disequilibrium among 
reparative processes leads to the formation of pathologic scars. Herein, we 
explored the role of mortalin in scar formation and its association with the 
interleukin-1α receptor using in vitro and in vivo models. To investigate the 
effects of mortalin, we performed an MTT cell viability assay, qRT-PCR, and 
Western blot analyses, in addition to immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation 
studies using cultured fibroblasts. A rat incisional wound model was used to 
evaluate the effect of a mortalin-specific shRNA (dE1-RGD/GFP/shMot) Ad vector 
in scar tissue. In vitro, the mortalin-treated human dermal fibroblast displayed 
a significant increase in proliferation of type I collagen, α-smooth muscle 
actin, transforming growth factor-β, phospho-Smad2/3-complex, and NF-κB levels. 
Immunofluorescence staining revealed markedly increased mortalin and 
interleukin-1α receptor protein in keloid tissue compared to those in normal 
tissue, suggesting that the association between mortalin and IL-1α receptor was 
responsible for the fibrogenic effect. In vivo, mortalin-specific 
shRNA-expressing Ad vectors significantly decreased the scar size and 
type-I-collagen, α-SMA, and phospho-Smad2/3-complex expression in rat incisional 
scar tissue. Thus, dE1-RGD/GEP/shMot can inhibit the TGF-β/α-SMA axis and NF-κB 
signal pathways in scar formation, and blocking endogenous mortalin could be a 
potential therapeutic target for keloids.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23147918
PMCID: PMC9318157
PMID: 35887263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.