1. Life (Basel). 2022 Jul 21;12(7):1091. doi: 10.3390/life12071091.

Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma and Associated Endocrinopathies in Slovenia from 
1995 to 2021.

Milicevic S(1), Krajc M(1)(2), Blatnik A(1)(2), Peric B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Zaloska 2, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Zaloska 2, 1000 Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.

BACKGROUND: Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is a rare endocrine tumour that is 
sporadic in 75% of cases and occurs as a part of inherited cancer syndromes in 
approximately 25% of cases. The aim of this study was to determine the frequency 
and type of RET pathogenic variants (PVs) in the Slovenian MTC patient 
population diagnosed between 1995 and 2021 and to elucidate the full range of 
associated endocrinopathies.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of medical records of 266 MTC patients and 
their relatives seen in a tertiary centre between 1995 and 2021 was performed. 
Sequence analysis of exons 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, and 16 of the RET gene was 
analysed in most patients using Sanger sequencing. From 2017, the entire 
sequence of RET gene was analysed in most patients using targeted 
next-generation sequencing.
RESULTS: Germline PVs in the RET proto-oncogene were identified in 21.6% 
probands from 21 different MTC families. Of their tested relatives, 65% (67/103) 
were RET-positive and 35% (36/103) were RET-negative. PVs were detected in codon 
618 and codon 634 in 28.6%, and in codon 790 in 23.8%. The RET-positive group 
consisted of 52 MTC patients, 13 patients with C cell hyperplasia and 2 
individuals with neither. Associated endocrinopathies were diagnosed in 8/21 
families: primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) in six families and 
pheochromocytoma (PHEO) in five families. In 62% of RET-positive families 
(13/21), no associated endocrinopathies were diagnosed. PHEO was most commonly 
associated with C634R (6/13) and PHPT with C634R (4/7). Hirschsprung's disease 
appeared in one patient with RET PV in codon 618. Based on data from the Cancer 
Registry of Republic of Slovenia, only individual cases of common cancers with 
well understood environmental risk factors were discovered; lung cancer in 2/21 
of families, papillary thyroid cancer in 3/21 of families, cutaneous melanoma in 
2/21 of families, cervical cancer in 1/21 families, and lymphoma in 1/21 
families.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of prospectively collected MTC cases during a 27-year 
period revealed that 21.6% of Slovenian patients are RET PV carriers. Sixty-two 
percent of families had none of the associated endocrinopathies, confirming the 
thesis that FMTC is the most common presentation. This could suggest using 
risk-stratified management approaches when screening for PHEO and PHPT in RET PV 
carriers. However, more studies are needed to evaluate potential genetic risk 
modifiers as well as safety, improved quality of life, and medical cost 
reduction in the case of a patient-oriented approach.

DOI: 10.3390/life12071091
PMCID: PMC9320156
PMID: 35888179

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.