1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2022 Jul 11;58(7):923. doi: 10.3390/medicina58070923.

Oxytocin: Narrative Expert Review of Current Perspectives on the Relationship 
with Other Neurotransmitters and the Impact on the Main Psychiatric Disorders.

Florea T(1), Palimariciuc M(1)(2), Cristofor AC(1)(2), Dobrin I(1)(2), Chiriță 
R(1)(2), Bîrsan M(3), Dobrin RP(1)(2), Pădurariu M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine III, Faculty of Medicine, Grigore T. Popa University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy of Iasi, 16 Universității Street, 700115 Iasi, Romania.
(2)Institute of Psychiatry "Socola", 36 Bucium Street, 700282 Iasi, Romania.
(3)Department of Drug Industry and Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Grigore T. Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Iaşi, 16 
Universităţii Street, 700115 Iaşi, Romania.

Is a cyclic neuropeptide produced primarily in the hypothalamus and plays an 
important neuromodulatory role for other neurotransmitter systems, with an 
impact on behavior, response to danger, stress, and complex social interactions, 
such as pair bonding and child care. This narrative expert review examines the 
literature on oxytocin as a brain hormone. We focused on oxytocin structure, 
distribution, genetics, and the oxytocin receptor system, as well as the 
relationship of oxytocin with other neurotransmitters and the resulting impacts 
on the main psychiatric disorders. Oxytocin levels have been correlated over 
time with mental illness, with numerous studies focusing on oxytocin and the 
pathophysiology of the main psychiatric disorders, such as autism, 
schizophrenia, personality disorders, mood, and eating disorders. We highlight 
the role oxytocin plays in improving symptoms such as anxiety, depression, and 
social behavior, as the literature suggests. Risk factors and causes for 
psychiatric disorders range from genetic to environmental and social factors. 
Oxytocin could impact the latter, being linked with other neurotransmitter 
systems that are responsible for integrating different situations during the 
development phases of individuals. Also, these systems have an important role in 
how the body responds to stressors or bonding with others, helping with the 
creation of social support groups that could speed up recovery in many 
situations. Oxytocin has the potential to become a key therapeutic agent for 
future treatment and prevention strategies concerning the main psychiatric 
disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina58070923
PMCID: PMC9318841
PMID: 35888641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.