1. Microbiol Spectr. 2022 Aug 31;10(4):e0101422. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01014-22. 
Epub 2022 Jul 26.

Rapid Detection of Antimicrobial Resistance in Mycoplasma genitalium by 
High-Resolution Melting Analysis with Unlabeled Probes.

Li Y(#)(1)(2), Xiu L(#)(3)(4), Wang L(1)(2), Zhang L(1)(2), Wang F(5), Peng 
J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen 
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease Pathogenomics, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Global Health, Chinese Center for Tropical Diseases Research, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)One Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University-The University of Edinburgh, 
Shanghai, China.
(5)Shenzhen Center for Chronic Disease Control, Shenzhen, China.
(#)Contributed equally

With looming resistance to fluoroquinolones in Mycoplasma genitalium, public 
health control strategies require effective antimicrobial resistance (AMR) 
diagnostic methods for clinical and phenotypic AMR surveillance. We developed a 
novel AMR detection method, MGparC-AsyHRM, based on the combination of 
asymmetric high-resolution melting (HRM) technology and unlabeled probes, which 
simultaneously performs M. genitalium identification and genotypes eight 
mutations in the parC gene that are responsible for most cases of 
fluoroquinolone resistance. These enhancements expand the traditional HRM from 
the conventional detection of single-position mutations to a method capable of 
detecting short fragments with closely located AMR positions with a high 
diversity of mutations. Based on the results of clinical sample testing, this 
method produces an accordance of 98.7% with the Sanger sequencing method. 
Furthermore, the specificity for detecting S83I, S83N, S83R, and D87Y variants, 
the most frequently detected mutations in fluoroquinolone resistance, was 100%. 
This method maintained a stable and accurate performance for genomic copies at 
rates of â‰¥20 copies per reaction, demonstrating high sensitivity. Additionally, 
no specific cross-reactions were observed when testing eight common sexually 
transmitted infection (STI)-related agents. Notably, this work highlights the 
significant potential of our method in the field of AMR testing, with the 
results suggesting that our method can be applied in a range of scenarios and to 
additional pathogens. In summary, our method enables high throughput, provides 
excellent specificity and sensitivity, and is cost-effective, suggesting that 
this method can be used to rapidly monitor the molecular AMR status and 
complement current AMR surveillance. IMPORTANCE Mycoplasma genitalium was 
recently added to the antimicrobial-resistant (AMR) threats "watch list" of the 
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention because this pathogen has become 
extremely difficult to treat as a result of increased resistance. M. genitalium 
is also difficult to culture, and therefore, molecule detection is the only 
method available for AMR testing. In this work, we developed a novel AMR 
detection method, MGparC-AsyHRM, based on the combination of asymmetrical HRM 
technology and unlabeled probes, and it simultaneously performs M. genitalium 
identification and genotypes eight mutations in the parC gene that are 
responsible for most cases of fluoroquinolone resistance. The MGparC-AsyHRM 
method is a high-throughput, low-cost, simple, and culture-free procedure that 
can enhance public health and management of M. genitalium infections and AMR 
control, providing a strong complement to phenotypic AMR surveillance to address 
the spread of fluoroquinolone resistance.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01014-22
PMCID: PMC9430336
PMID: 35880894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.