1. Nutrients. 2022 Jul 20;14(14):2962. doi: 10.3390/nu14142962.

Profile of Folate in Breast Milk from Chinese Women over 1-400 Days Postpartum.

Su Y(1), Mao Y(2), Tian F(2), Cai X(2), Chen R(1), Li N(1), Qian C(1), Li X(2), 
Zhao Y(2), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China.
(2)Abbott Nutrition Research & Development Center, Abbott Ltd., Shanghai 200233, 
China.

Folate is an essential nutrient for growth in early life. This study aimed to 
determine the levels and compositions of folate in Chinese breast milk samples. 
This study was part of the Maternal Nutrition and Infant Investigation (MUAI) 
study. A total of 205 healthy mothers were randomly recruited in Chengdu over 
1−400 days postpartum. Five different species of folate, including 
tetrahydrofolate (THF), 5-methyl-THF, 5,10-methenyl-THF,5-formyl-THF and 
unmetabolized folic acid (UMFA), were measured for liquid chromatography−tandem 
mass spectrometry (LC-MS). The median levels of total folate ranged from 12.86 
to 56.77 ng/mL in the breast milk of mothers at 1−400 days postpartum, gradually 
increasing throughout the lactating periods. The median levels of 5-methyl-THF, 
minor reduced folate (the sum of THF, 5,10-methenyl-THF and 5-formyl-THF) and 
UMFA were in the ranges of 8.52−40.65 ng/mL, 3.48−16.15 ng/mL and 0.00−1.24 
ng/mL during 1−400 days postpartum, respectively. 5-Methyl-THF accounted for 
more than 65% of the total folate in all breast milk samples. The levels of UMFA 
in mature breast milk samples were higher in supplement users than nonusers, but 
not for colostrum and transitional milk samples (p < 0.05). In conclusion, the 
level of total folate in the breast milk changed along with the prolonged 
lactating periods, but 5-methyl-THF remains the dominant species of folate in 
the breast milk of Chinese populations across all entire lactating periods.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14142962
PMCID: PMC9319857
PMID: 35889919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
Y.M., F.T., X.C., X.L. and Y.Z. were all employees of Abbott Laboratories Ltd. 
when this work was completed.