1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2022 Jul 8;15(7):842. doi: 10.3390/ph15070842.

The Protective Effect of Edaravone on TDP-43 Plus Oxidative Stress-Induced 
Neurotoxicity in Neuronal Cells: Analysis of Its Neuroprotective Mechanisms 
Using RNA Sequencing.

Soejima-Kusunoki A(1), Okada K(2), Saito R(2), Watabe K(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit of Neuroscience, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, Yokohama 
227-0033, Japan.
(2)Discovery Technology Laboratories, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, 
Yokohama 227-0033, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, Kyorin University, Tokyo 181-8612, Japan.

Edaravone is a free-radical scavenger drug that was recently approved for the 
treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a neurodegenerative disease. A 
pathological hallmark of ALS is the accumulation of ubiquitinated or 
phosphorylated aggregates of the 43-kDa transactive response DNA binding protein 
(TDP-43) within the cytoplasm of motor neurons. This study revealed the efficacy 
of edaravone in preventing neuronal cell death in a TDP-43 proteinopathy model 
and analyzed the molecular changes associated with the neuroprotection. The 
viability of the neuronal cells expressing TDP-43 was reduced by oxidative 
stress, and edaravone (≥10 μmol/L) protected in a concentration-dependent manner 
against the neurotoxic insult. Differential gene expression analysis revealed 
changes among pathways related to nuclear erythroid 2-related-factor 
(Nrf2)-mediated oxidative stress response in cells expressing TDP-43. In 
edaravone-treated cells expressing TDP-43, significant changes in gene 
expression were also identified among Nrf2-oxidative response, unfolded protein 
response, and autophagy pathways. In addition, the expression of genes belonging 
to phosphatidylinositol metabolism pathways was modified. These findings suggest 
that the neuroprotective effect of edaravone involves the prevention of TDP-43 
misfolding and enhanced clearance of pathological TDP-43 in TDP-43 
proteinopathy.

DOI: 10.3390/ph15070842
PMCID: PMC9319738
PMID: 35890141

Conflict of interest statement: A.S.-K., K.O., and R.S. are employees of 
Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, Ltd. K.W. received a research fund from 
Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation. The writing of the manuscript was funded 
by Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation.