1. Viruses. 2022 Jul 16;14(7):1556. doi: 10.3390/v14071556.

Phosphomimetic S207D Lysyl-tRNA Synthetase Binds HIV-1 5'UTR in an Open 
Conformation and Increases RNA Dynamics.

Cantara WA(1)(2)(3), Pathirage C(1)(2)(3)(4), Hatterschide J(1)(2)(3), Olson 
ED(1)(2)(3)(4), Musier-Forsyth K(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Center for Retrovirus Research, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.
(3)Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(4)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

Interactions between lysyl-tRNA synthetase (LysRS) and HIV-1 Gag facilitate 
selective packaging of the HIV-1 reverse transcription primer, tRNALys3. During 
HIV-1 infection, LysRS is phosphorylated at S207, released from a 
multi-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex and packaged into progeny virions. LysRS 
is critical for proper targeting of tRNALys3 to the primer-binding site (PBS) by 
specifically binding a PBS-adjacent tRNA-like element (TLE), which promotes 
release of the tRNA proximal to the PBS. However, whether LysRS phosphorylation 
plays a role in this process remains unknown. Here, we used a combination of 
binding assays, RNA chemical probing, and small-angle X-ray scattering to show 
that both wild-type (WT) and a phosphomimetic S207D LysRS mutant bind similarly 
to the HIV-1 genomic RNA (gRNA) 5'UTR via direct interactions with the TLE and 
stem loop 1 (SL1) and have a modest preference for binding dimeric gRNA. Unlike 
WT, S207D LysRS bound in an open conformation and increased the dynamics of both 
the PBS region and SL1. A new working model is proposed wherein a dimeric 
phosphorylated LysRS/tRNA complex binds to a gRNA dimer to facilitate tRNA 
primer release and placement onto the PBS. Future anti-viral strategies that 
prevent this host factor-gRNA interaction are envisioned.

DOI: 10.3390/v14071556
PMCID: PMC9315659
PMID: 35891536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.