1. Sci Rep. 2022 Jul 27;12(1):12803. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-17208-w.

A new approach to broaden the range of eye colour identifiable by IrisPlex in 
DNA phenotyping.

Paparazzo E(#)(1), Gozalishvili A(#)(2)(3), Lagani V(4)(5), Geracitano S(1), 
Bauleo A(6), Falcone E(6), Passarino G(1), Montesanto A(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, 
87036, Rende, Italy.
(2)Toptal, LLC, 2810 N. Church St. #36879, Wilmington, DE, 19802-4447, USA.
(3)Ivane Javakhishvili Tbilisi State University, 0162, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(4)Institute of Chemical Biology, Ilia State University, 0162, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(5)Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering Division (BESE), King 
Abdullah University of Science and Technology KAUST, Thuwal, 23952, Saudi 
Arabia.
(6)BIOGENET, Medical and Forensic Genetics Laboratory, 87100, Cosenza, ASP, 
Italy.
(7)Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, 
87036, Rende, Italy. alberto.montesanto@unical.it.
(#)Contributed equally

IrisPlex system represents the most popular model for eye colour prediction. 
Based on six polymorphisms this model provides very accurate predictions that 
strongly depend on the definition of eye colour phenotypes. The aim of the 
present study was to introduce a new approach to improve eye colour prediction 
using the well-validated IrisPlex system. A sample of 238 individuals from a 
Southern Italian population was collected and for each of them a high-resolution 
image of eye was obtained. By quantifying eye colour variation into CIELAB space 
several clustering algorithms were applied for eye colour classification. 
Predictions with the IrisPlex model were obtained using eye colour categories 
defined by both visual inspection and clustering algorithms. IrisPlex system 
predicted blue and brown eye colour with high accuracy while it was inefficient 
in the prediction of intermediate eye colour. Clustering-based eye colour 
resulted in a significantly increased accuracy of the model especially for brown 
eyes. Our results confirm the validity of the IrisPlex system for forensic 
purposes. Although the quantitative approach here proposed for eye colour 
definition slightly improves its prediction accuracy, further research is still 
required to improve the model particularly for the intermediate eye colour 
prediction.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-17208-w
PMCID: PMC9329466
PMID: 35896692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.