1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 Sep;26(3):292. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12808. Epub 2022 Jul
29.

Inhibition of miR‑98‑5p promotes high glucose‑induced suppression of 
preosteoblast proliferation and differentiation via the activation of the 
PI3K/AKT/GSK3β signaling pathway by targeting BMP2.

Zheng F(1), Zhang F(2), Wang F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Qinghai Provincial People's Hospital, Xining, 
Qinghai 810007, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Qinghai Provincial People's Hospital, Xining, 
Qinghai 810007, P.R. China.

Osteoporosis (OP) is a bone metabolic disease, in which low bone mass and the 
microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue contribute to the fragility of 
bones and increase the risk of fracture. The aim of the present study was to 
determine the role of microRNA (miR)‑98‑5p in high glucose (HG)‑induced 
preosteoblasts. HG was used to induce preosteoblasts treated in a 
differentiation medium to establish an in vitro OP model. Next, miR‑98‑5p 
expression was determined using reverse transcription‑quantitative PCR. 
Following the transfection of an miR‑98‑5p inhibitor into HG‑treated 
osteoblasts, cell viability was assessed using a Cell Counting Kit‑8 assay, 
while alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, differentiation ability and the 
expression of differentiation‑regulated genes osteocalcin and osteopontin were 
measured using the corresponding ALP, Alizarin red staining, reverse 
transcription‑quantitative PCR and western blotting assays. The association 
between miR‑98‑5p and the PI3K/AKT/GSK3β signaling pathway was determined using 
western blotting. Next, the binding relationship between miR‑98‑5p and bone 
morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) was predicted and verified, and the role of BMP2 
in the regulation of the PI3K/AKT/GSK3β signaling pathway was explored using 
western blotting. The results revealed that miR‑98‑5p expression was upregulated 
in HG‑induced osteoblasts, and the inhibition of miR‑98‑5p resulted in enhanced 
cell viability, alkaline phosphatase activity and differentiation in osteoblasts 
following HG induction. It was also discovered that miR‑98‑5p inhibition 
activated PI3K/AKT/GSK3β signaling, while knockdown of BMP2, which binds to 
miR‑98‑5p, enhanced the activation of this signaling pathway and the 
differentiation ability of osteoblasts. In conclusion, the findings of the 
present study suggested that the inhibition of miR‑98‑5p expression may activate 
PI3K/AKT/GSK3β signaling to promote HG‑induced suppression of preosteoblast 
viability and differentiation by targeting BMP2, which provides a novel insight 
into future potential molecular markers for OP treatment.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12808
PMCID: PMC9366150
PMID: 35904181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.