1. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2022 Jul 30;19(1):52. doi: 10.1186/s12986-022-00687-z.

The potential mechanisms of lactate in mediating exercise-enhanced cognitive 
function: a dual role as an energy supply substrate and a signaling molecule.

Xue X(1)(2), Liu B(1)(3), Hu J(1), Bian X(1), Lou S(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Exercise and Health Sciences of Ministry of Education, 
Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai, 200438, China.
(2)Shanghai Frontiers Science Research Base of Exercise and Metabolic Health, 
Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai, 200438, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, Weifang Medical College, Weifang, 261053, 
Shandong, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Exercise and Health Sciences of Ministry of Education, 
Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai, 200438, China. shujielou319@163.com.
(5)Shanghai Frontiers Science Research Base of Exercise and Metabolic Health, 
Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai, 200438, China. shujielou319@163.com.

Lactate has previously been considered a metabolic waste and is mainly involved 
in exercise-induced fatigue. However, recent studies have found that lactate may 
be a mediator of the beneficial effects of exercise on brain health. Lactate 
plays a dual role as an energy supply substrate and a signaling molecule in this 
process. On the one hand, astrocytes can uptake circulating glucose or degrade 
glycogen for glycolysis to produce lactate, which is released into the 
extracellular space. Neurons can uptake extracellular lactate as an important 
supplement to their energy metabolism substrates, to meet the demand for large 
amounts of energy when synaptic activity is enhanced. Thus, synaptic activity 
and energy transfer show tight metabolic coupling. On the other hand, lactate 
acts as a signaling molecule to activate downstream signaling transduction 
pathways by specific receptors, inducing the expression of immediate early genes 
and cerebral angiogenesis. Moderate to high-intensity exercise not only 
increases lactate production and accumulation in muscle and blood but also 
promotes the uptake of skeletal muscle-derived lactate by the brain and enhances 
aerobic glycolysis to increase brain-derived lactate production. Furthermore, 
exercise regulates the expression or activity of transporters and enzymes 
involved in the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle to maintain the efficiency of 
this process; exercise also activates lactate receptor HCAR1, thus affecting 
brain plasticity. Rethinking the role of lactate in cognitive function and the 
regulatory effect of exercise is the main focus and highlights of the review. 
This may enrich the theoretical basis of lactate-related to promote brain health 
during exercise, and provide new perspectives for promoting a healthy aging 
strategy.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12986-022-00687-z
PMCID: PMC9338682
PMID: 35907984

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.