1. mBio. 2022 Aug 30;13(4):e0111922. doi: 10.1128/mbio.01119-22. Epub 2022 Aug 1.

CroR Regulates Expression of pbp4(5) to Promote Cephalosporin Resistance in 
Enterococcus faecalis.

Timmler SB(1), Kellogg SL(1), Atkinson SN(1)(2), Little JL(1), DjoriÄ‡ D(1), 
Kristich CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College of 
Wisconsingrid.30760.32, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Center for Microbiome Research, Medical College of Wisconsingrid.30760.32, 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.

Enterococcus faecalis is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of severe 
nosocomial infections. Treatment options against enterococcal infections are 
declining due to the resistance of enterococci to numerous antibiotics. A key 
risk factor for developing enterococcal infections is treatment with 
cephalosporin antibiotics, to which enterococci are intrinsically resistant. For 
susceptible organisms, cephalosporins inhibit bacterial growth by acylating the 
active site of penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), key enzymes that catalyze 
peptidoglycan cross-linking. Two specific PBPs of enterococci, Pbp4(5) and 
PbpA(2b), exhibit low reactivity toward cephalosporins, allowing these PBPs to 
cross-link peptidoglycan in the presence of cephalosporins to drive resistance 
in enterococci, but the mechanisms by which these PBPs are regulated are poorly 
understood. The CroS/R two-component signal transduction system (TCS) is also 
required for cephalosporin resistance. Activation of CroS/R by cephalosporins 
leads to CroR-dependent changes in gene expression. However, the specific genes 
regulated by CroS/R that are responsible for cephalosporin resistance remain 
largely unknown. In this study, we characterized CroR-dependent transcriptome 
remodeling by RNA-seq, identifying pbp4(5) as a CroR regulon member in multiple, 
diverse lineages of E. faecalis. Through genetic analysis of the pbp4(5) and 
croR promoters, we uncovered a CroR-dependent regulatory motif. Mutations in 
this motif to disrupt CroR-dependent upregulation of pbp4(5) in the presence of 
cell wall stress resulted in a reduction of resistance to cephalosporins in E. 
faecalis, demonstrating that enhanced production of Pbp4(5) and likely other 
proteins involved in peptidoglycan biogenesis by the CroS/R system drives 
enterococcal cephalosporin resistance. IMPORTANCE Investigation into molecular 
mechanisms used by enterococci to subvert cephalosporin antibiotics is 
imperative for preventing and treating life-threatening infections. In this 
study, we used genetic means to investigate the functional output of the CroS/R 
TCS required for enterococcal resistance to cephalosporins. We found that 
enhanced production of the penicillin-binding protein Pbp4(5) upon exposure to 
cell wall stress was mediated by CroS/R and was critical for intrinsic 
cephalosporin resistance of E. faecalis.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.01119-22
PMCID: PMC9426447
PMID: 35913163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.