1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Jul 13;10:909604. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.909604. 
eCollection 2022.

Translating the Arabidopsis thaliana Peroxisome Proteome Insights to Solanum 
lycopersicum: Consensus Versus Diversity.

Tarafdar S(1), Chowdhary G(1).

Author information:
(1)Plant Molecular Biology Laboratory, School of Biotechnology, KIIT, 
Bhubaneswar, India.

Peroxisomes are small, single-membrane specialized organelles present in all 
eukaryotic organisms. The peroxisome is one of the nodal centers of reactive 
oxygen species homeostasis in plants, which are generated in a high amount due 
to various stress conditions. Over the past decade, there has been extensive 
study on peroxisomal proteins and their signaling pathways in the model plant 
Arabidopsis thaliana, and a lot has been deciphered. However, not much impetus 
has been given to studying the peroxisome proteome of economically important 
crops. Owing to the significance of peroxisomes in the physiology of plants 
during normal and stress conditions, understating its proteome is of much 
importance. Hence, in this paper, we have made a snapshot of putative 
peroxisomal matrix proteins in the economically important vegetable crop tomato 
(Solanum lycopersicum, (L.) family Solanaceae). First, a reference peroxisomal 
matrix proteome map was generated for Arabidopsis thaliana using the available 
proteomic and localization studies, and proteins were categorized into various 
groups as per their annotations. This was used to create the putative 
peroxisomal matrix proteome map for S. lycopersicum. The putative peroxisome 
proteome in S. lycopersicum retains the basic framework: the bulk of proteins 
had peroxisomal targeting signal (PTS) type 1, a minor group had PTS2, and the 
catalase family retained its characteristic internal PTS. Apart from these, a 
considerable number of S. lycopersicum orthologs did not contain any "obvious" 
PTS. The number of PTS2 isoforms was found to be reduced in S. lycopersicum. We 
further investigated the PTS1s in the case of both the plant species and 
generated a pattern for canonical and non-canonical PTS1s. The number of 
canonical PTS1 proteins was comparatively lesser in S. lycopersicum. The 
non-canonical PTS1s were found to be comparable in both the plant species; 
however, S. lycopersicum showed greater diversity in the composition of the 
signal tripeptide. Finally, we have tried to address the lacunas and probable 
strategies to fill those gaps.

Copyright Â© 2022 Tarafdar and Chowdhary.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.909604
PMCID: PMC9328179
PMID: 35912119

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.