1. Apoptosis. 2022 Dec;27(11-12):883-898. doi: 10.1007/s10495-022-01751-y. Epub 
2022 Aug 1.

The histone deacetylase SIRT6 promotes glycolysis through the HIF-1α/HK2 
signaling axis and induces erlotinib resistance in non-small cell lung cancer.

You Q(1), Wang J(1), Yu Y(1), Li F(1), Meng L(1), Chen M(1), Yang Q(1), Xu Z(1), 
Sun J(1), Zhuo W(2), Chen Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing, 
400037, China.
(2)Institute of Cancer, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing, 
400037, China. zhuowenlei@tmmu.edu.cn.
(3)Institute of Cancer, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing, 
400037, China. czt__05@163.com.

Erlotinib is a first-generation epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI). Overcoming erlotinib resistance is crucial to improve the 
survival of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with sensitive 
EGFR mutations. It is also an important clinical problem that urgently needs a 
solution. In this study, we explored strategies to overcome erlotinib resistance 
from the perspective of energy metabolism. SIRT6 is a histone deacetylase. Here, 
we found that high expression of SIRT6 is associated with poor prognosis of lung 
adenocarcinoma, especially in EGFR-mutated NSCLC patients. The next cell 
experiment found that SIRT6 expression increased in erlotinib-resistant cells, 
and SIRT6 expression was negatively correlated with the sensitivity of NSCLC to 
erlotinib. Inhibition of SIRT6 promoted erlotinib-induced apoptosis in 
erlotinib-resistant cells, and glycolysis in drug-resistant cells was also 
inhibited. Functional studies have shown that SIRT6 increases glycolysis through 
the HIF-1α/HK2 signaling axis in drug-resistant cells and inhibits the 
sensitivity of NSCLC cells to erlotinib. In addition, the HIF-1α blocker 
PX478-2HCL attenuated the glycolysis and erlotinib resistance induced by SIRT6. 
More importantly, we confirmed the antitumor effect of SIRT6 inhibition combined 
with erlotinib in NSCLC-bearing mice. Our findings indicate that the cancer 
metabolic pathway regulated by SIRT6 may be a new target for attenuating NSCLC 
erlotinib resistance and has potential as a biomarker or therapeutic target to 
improve outcomes in NSCLC patients.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10495-022-01751-y
PMCID: PMC9617843
PMID: 35915188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.