1. ACS Omega. 2022 Jul 13;7(29):25705-25714. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.2c02954. 
eCollection 2022 Jul 26.

Structural Insights into the NAD(P)H:Quinone Oxidoreductase from Phytophthora 
capsici.

Yang C(1), Huang Z(1), Zhang X(1), Zhu C(2).

Author information:
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory for Biology of Vegetable Diseases and 
Insect Pests, College of Plant Protection, Shandong Agricultural University, 
Taian 271018, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian 271018, 
China.

Soluble quinone oxidoreductases catalyze transfer of electrons from NADPH to 
quinones. Transfer of electrons is essential for detoxification of synthetic 
compounds. Here, we present the crystal structure of a NADPH-dependent QOR from 
Phytophthora capsici (Pc) complexed with NADPH at 2.4 Å resolution. The enzyme 
exhibits a bi-modular architecture, containing a NADPH-binding groove and a 
substrate-binding pocket in each subunit. In the crystal, each asymmetric unit 
of PcQOR contains two molecules stabilized by intermolecular interactions. Gel 
filtration and ultracentrifugation analyses reveal that it functions as a 
tetramer in solution. Alignment of homologous structures exhibits a conserved 
topology. However, the active sites vary among the homologues, indicating 
differences in substrate specificities. Enzymatic assays indicate that PcQOR 
tends to catalyze the large substrates, like 9,10-phenanthrenequinone. 
Computational simulation associated with site-directed mutagenesis and enzymatic 
activity analysis declares a potential quinone-binding channel. The ability to 
reduce quinones probably helps P. capsici to detoxify some harmful chemicals 
encountered during invasion.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.2c02954
PMCID: PMC9330140
PMID: 35910145

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.