1. Reprod Domest Anim. 2022 Nov;57(11):1450-1464. doi: 10.1111/rda.14222. Epub
2022  Aug 16.

Anti-Müllerian hormone as an endocrine biomarker of reproductive longevity and 
assessment of single nucleotide polymorphisms in AMH gene of Bos indicus breeds 
of cattle.

Ramesha KP(1), Jeyakumar S(1), Mall S(1), Vedamurthy GV(1), Kumaresan A(1), 
Devadasn MJ(1), Kataktalware MA(1), Arul D(1), Das DN(1), Manimaran A(1).

Author information:
(1)Protegenomics Laboratory, Dairy Production Section, ICAR - National Dairy 
Research Institute, Southern Regional Station, Bengaluru, India.

Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) is a member of the TGF-β superfamily produced by 
follicular granulosa cells in women and cattle and is considered an endocrine 
biomarker of ovarian follicular reserve. The study examined how age and parity 
influence serum AMH concentration and investigated the presence of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in AMH gene in Bos indicus breeds viz Malnad Gidda 
Amritmahal and Hallikar. All five exons of AMH gene amplified by polymerase 
chain reaction were subjected to sanger sequencing and identified important SNP 
and its effects. We observed a highly significant relationship between parity 
and AMH concentration in Amritmahal cattle, whereas Malnad Gidda and Hallikar 
breeds did not show a significant difference. We identified one SNP located in 
exon 5 (rs21402788) with base change A>G, a non-synonymous mutation resulting in 
a change in amino acid Q>R and the protein product. It is concluded that AMH 
level could be considered as an indicator of the ovarian reserve and productive 
herd life (longevity) irrespective of age/parity, especially in B. indicus 
breeds of cattle.

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/rda.14222
PMID: 35916244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]