1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Jul 15;13:840167. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.840167. 
eCollection 2022.

Central Metabolism and Growth Rate Impacts on Hydrogen and Carbon Isotope 
Fractionation During Amino Acid Synthesis in E. coli.

Smith DA(1), Nakamoto BJ(2)(3), Suess MK(4), Fogel ML(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United 
States.
(2)Department of Biology, University of New Brunswick Fredericton, Fredericton, 
NB, Canada.
(3)Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, EDGE Institute, University of 
California, Riverside, Riverside, CA, United States.
(4)Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Washington University in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, MO, United States.

Compound specific stable isotope analysis (CSIA) of amino acids from bacterial 
biomass is a newly emerging powerful tool for exploring central carbon 
metabolism pathways and fluxes. By comparing isotopic values and fractionations 
relative to water and growth substrate, the impact of variable flow path for 
metabolites through different central metabolic pathways, perturbations of these 
paths, and their resultant consequences on intracellular pools and resultant 
biomass may be elucidated. Here, we explore the effects that central carbon 
metabolism and growth rate can have on stable hydrogen (δ2H) and carbon (δ13C) 
compound specific isotopic values of amino acids, and whether diagnostic 
isotopic fingerprints are revealed by these paired analyses. We measured δ2H and 
δ13C in amino acids in the wild type Escherichia coli (MG1655) across a range of 
growth rates in chemostat cultures to address the unknown isotopic consequences 
as metabolic fluxes are shuffled between catabolic and anabolic metabolisms. 
Additionally, two E. coli knockout mutants, one with deficiency in glycolysis 
-pgi (LC1888) and another inhibiting the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway 
(OPPP) -zwf (LC1889), were grown on glucose and used as a comparison against the 
wild type E. coli (MG1655) to address the isotopic changes of amino acids 
produced in these perturbed metabolic pathways. Amino acid δ2H values, which 
collectively vary in composition by more than 400‰, are altered along with δ13C 
values demonstrating fundamental shifts in central metabolic pathways and/or 
fluxes. Within our linear discriminant analysis with a simple model organism to 
examine potential amino acid fingerprinting, our knockout strains and variable 
growth rate samples plot across a wider array of organism classification than 
merely within the boundaries of other bacterial data.

Copyright © 2022 Smith, Nakamoto, Suess and Fogel.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.840167
PMCID: PMC9335129
PMID: 35910622

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.