1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Sep;298(9):102313. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102313. Epub 2022
 Jul 31.

Unusual β1-4-galactosidase activity of an α1-6-mannosidase from Xanthomonas 
manihotis in the processing of branched hybrid and complex glycans.

She YM(1), Klupt K(2), Hatfield G(1), Jia Z(2), Tam RY(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Biologics Evaluation, Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs 
Directorate, Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, 
Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Centre for Biologics Evaluation, Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs 
Directorate, Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: 
roger.tam@hc-sc.gc.ca.

Mannosidases are a diverse group of glycoside hydrolases that play crucial roles 
in mannose trimming of oligomannose glycans, glycoconjugates, and glycoproteins 
involved in numerous cellular processes, such as glycan biosynthesis and 
metabolism, structure regulation, cellular recognition, and cell-pathogen 
interactions. Exomannosidases and endomannosidases cleave specific glycosidic 
bonds of mannoside linkages in glycans and can be used in enzyme-based methods 
for sequencing of isomeric glycan structures. α1-6-mannosidase from Xanthomonas 
manihotis is known as a highly specific exoglycosidase that removes unbranched 
α1-6 linked mannose residues from oligosaccharides. However, we discovered that 
this α1-6-mannosidase also possesses an unexpected β1-4-galactosidase activity 
in the processing of branched hybrid and complex glycans through our use of 
enzymatic reactions, high performance anion-exchange chromatography, and liquid 
chromatography mass spectrometric sequencing. Our docking simulation of the 
α1-6-mannosidase with glycan substrates reveals potential interacting residues 
in a relatively shallow pocket slightly differing from its homologous enzymes in 
the glycoside hydrolase 125 family, which may be responsible for the observed 
higher promiscuity in substrate binding and subsequent terminal glycan 
hydrolysis. This observation of novel β1-4-galactosidase activity of the 
α1-6-mannosidase provides unique insights into its bifunctional activity on the 
substrate structure-dependent processing of terminal α1-6-mannose of unbranched 
glycans and terminal β1-4-galactose of hybrid and complex glycans. The finding 
thus suggests the dual glycosidase specificity of this α1-6-mannosidase and the 
need for careful consideration when used for the structural elucidation of 
glycan isomers.

Crown Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102313
PMCID: PMC9425025
PMID: 35921895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.