1. Life Sci Alliance. 2022 Aug 4;5(12):e202201492. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201492.

Ubiquitome profiling reveals a regulatory pattern of UPL3 with UBP12 on 
metabolic-leaf senescence.

Lan W(1), Ma W(1), Zheng S(1), Qiu Y(1), Zhang H(1), Lu H(1), Zhang Y(1), Miao 
Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Biology, College of Life 
Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Biology, College of Life 
Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, China 
ymiao@fafu.edu.cn.

The HECT-type UPL3 ligase plays critical roles in plant development and stress 
protection, but understanding of its regulation remains limited. Here, the 
multi-omics analyses of ubiquitinated proteins in &lt;i&gt;upl3&lt;/i&gt; 
mutants were performed. A landscape of UPL3-dependent ubiquitinated proteins is 
constructed: Preferential ubiquitination of proteins related to carbon fixation 
represented the largest set of proteins with increased ubiquitination in the 
&lt;i&gt;upl3&lt;/i&gt; plant, including most of carbohydrate metabolic enzymes, 
BRM, and variant histone, whereas a small set of proteins with reduced 
ubiquitination caused by the &lt;i&gt;upl3&lt;/i&gt; mutation were linked to 
cysteine/methionine synthesis, as well as hexokinase 1 (HXK1) and 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase 2 (PPC2). Notably, ubiquitin hydrolase 12 
(UBP12), BRM, HXK1, and PPC2 were identified as the UPL3-interacting partners in 
vivo and in vitro. Characterization of &lt;i&gt;brm&lt;/i&gt;, 
&lt;i&gt;upl3&lt;/i&gt;, &lt;i&gt;ppc2&lt;/i&gt;, &lt;i&gt;gin2&lt;/i&gt;, and 
&lt;i&gt;ubp12&lt;/i&gt; mutant plants and proteomic and transcriptomic analysis 
suggested that UPL3 fine-tunes carbohydrate metabolism, mediating cellular 
senescence by interacting with UBP12, BRM, HXK1, and PPC2. Our results highlight 
a regulatory pattern of UPL3 with UBP12 as a hub of regulator on 
proteolysis-independent regulation and proteolysis-dependent degradation.

Â© 2022 Lan et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202201492
PMCID: PMC9354775
PMID: 35926874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.