1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jul 18;14:932541. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.932541. 
eCollection 2022.

The Fate of Tau Aggregates Between Clearance and Transmission.

Seitkazina A(1)(2), Kim KH(1)(2), Fagan E(3), Sung Y(1)(2), Kim YK(1)(2), Lim 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Convergence Research Center for Brain Science, Brain Science Institute, Korea 
Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Division of Bio-Medical Science and Technology, Korea Institute of Science 
and Technology (KIST) School, University of Science and Technology (UST), Seoul, 
South Korea.
(3)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT), Cambridge, MA, United States.

Neuronal accumulation of mis-folded tau is the pathological hallmark of multiple 
neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease. Distinct from 
amyloid plaques, which appear simultaneously throughout the brain, tau pathology 
develops first in a specific brain region and then propagates to 
neuroanatomically connected brain regions, exacerbating the disease. Due to the 
implication in disease progression, prevention of tau transmission is recognized 
as an important therapeutic strategy that can halt disease progression in the 
brain. Recently, accumulating studies have demonstrated diverse cellular 
mechanisms associated with cell-to-cell transmission of tau. Once transmitted, 
mis-folded tau species act as a prion-like seed for native tau aggregation in 
the recipient neuron. In this review, we summarize the diverse cellular 
mechanisms associated with the secretion and uptake of tau, and highlight 
tau-trafficking receptors, which mediate tau clearance or cell-to-cell tau 
transmission.

Copyright Â© 2022 Seitkazina, Kim, Fagan, Sung, Kim and Lim.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.932541
PMCID: PMC9339952
PMID: 35923541

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.