1. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2023;42(1):1-16. doi: 
10.1080/15257770.2022.2107216. Epub 2022 Aug 8.

A common genetic variation in paraoxonase 1 and risk of breast cancer: a 
literature review, meta-analysis, and in silico analysis.

Karimian M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, 
University of Mazandaran, Babolsar, Iran.

Paraoxonase 1 (PON1), an enzyme with multifactorial antioxidant activity, has a 
protective role against oxidative stress, which is supposed to contribute to the 
development of cancers including breast cancer. The aim of this study was to 
examine the correlation of PON1-L55M common genetic polymorphism with the risk 
of breast cancer in a meta-analysis approach which was followed by an in silico 
analysis. The eligible studies were collected from valid electronic databases 
such as Google Scholar, PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science. Quantitative 
synthesis was performed to report the strength of PON1-L55M polymorphism with 
breast cancer. Some bioinformatics tools were used to analyze the effects of 
L55M variation on PON1 gene function. The meta-analysis revealed that there are 
significant associations between the mentioned polymorphism and breast cancer in 
M vs. L, MM vs. LL, LM vs. LL, MM + LM vs. LL, and MM vs. LL + LM genetic 
models. Besides, similar results were observed in the stratified analyses based 
on ethnicity, genotyping method, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in control groups, 
and sample size. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the PON1 could be 
damaging to the protein function. Our findings propose that the PON1-L55M 
genetic polymorphism might be a genetic risk factor for the risk of breast 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1080/15257770.2022.2107216
PMID: 35938743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]