1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Jul 22;13:848808. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.848808. eCollection 2022.

TAC3/TACR3 System Function in the Catadromous Migration Teleost, Anguilla 
japonica.

Zuo C(1), Lyu L(1), Zou W(2), Wen H(1), Li Y(1), Qi X(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Mariculture, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of 
China, Qingdao, China.
(2)College of Ocean, Key Laboratory of Tropical Biological Resources of Ministry 
of Education, Hainan University, Haikou, China.

Neurokinin B (NKB), a member of the tachykinin (TAC) family, plays important 
roles in mammalian neuropeptide secretion in related to reproduction. However, 
its potential role in spawning migration teleost is less clear. In the present 
study, Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica) was employed to study the performance of 
NKB in regulating reproduction. Results showed that two tac3 and one tacr3 genes 
were identified in Japanese eel. Sequence analysis showed that two tac3 
transcripts, tac3a and tac3b, encode four NKBs: NKBa-13, NKBa-10, NKBb-13, and 
NKBb-10. However, compared with other species, a mutation caused early 
termination of TACR3 protein was confirmed, leading to the loss of the 35 amino 
acid (aa) C-terminal of the receptor. Expression analysis in different tissues 
showed that both tac3a and tac3b mRNAs were highly expressed in the brain. In 
situ hybridization localized both tac3a and tac3b mRNAs to several brain 
regions, mainly in the telencephalon and hypothalamus. Because of the mutation 
in TACR3 of Japanese eel, we further analyzed whether it could activate the 
downstream signaling pathway. Luciferase assay results showed the negative 
regulation of cAMP Response Element (CRE) and Sterol Response Element (SRE) 
signal pathways by Japanese eel NKBs. Intraperitoneal injection of four 
different NKB mature peptides at 100 ng/g had negative effect on either gnrh or 
gth gene expression. However, the high concentration of NKBa-10 and NKBb-13 
(1,000 ng/g) upregulated mgnrh and fshb or lhb expression level significantly, 
which may be mediated by other receptors. In general, the NKBs/NK3Rs system has 
important functions in regulating eel puberty onset.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zuo, Lyu, Zou, Wen, Li and Qi.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.848808
PMCID: PMC9355281
PMID: 35937808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.