1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Sep;298(9):102328. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102328. Epub 2022
 Aug 4.

Isoforms of GPR35 have distinct extracellular N-termini that allosterically 
modify receptor-transducer coupling and mediate intracellular pathway bias.

Schihada H(1), Klompstra TM(2), Humphrys LJ(3), Cervenka I(2), Dadvar S(2), Kolb 
P(4), Ruas JL(2), Schulte G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden; Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Philipps-University Marburg, 
Marburg, Germany. Electronic address: hannes.schihada@ki.se.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Institute of Pharmacy, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, 
Germany.
(5)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. Electronic address: gunnar.schulte@ki.se.

Within the intestine, the human G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) GPR35 is 
involved in oncogenic signaling, bacterial infections, and inflammatory bowel 
disease. GPR35 is known to be expressed as two distinct isoforms that differ 
only in the length of their extracellular N-termini by 31 amino acids, but 
detailed insights into their functional differences are lacking. Through gene 
expression analysis in immune and gastrointestinal cells, we show that these 
isoforms emerge from distinct promoter usage and alternative splicing. 
Additionally, we employed optical assays in living cells to thoroughly profile 
both GPR35 isoforms for constitutive and ligand-induced activation and signaling 
of 10 different heterotrimeric G proteins, ligand-induced arrestin recruitment, 
and receptor internalization. Our results reveal that the extended N-terminus of 
the long isoform limits G protein activation yet elevates receptor-β-arrestin 
interaction. To better understand the structural basis for this bias, we 
examined structural models of GPR35 and conducted experiments with mutants of 
both isoforms. We found that a proposed disulfide bridge between the N-terminus 
and extracellular loop 3, present in both isoforms, is crucial for constitutive 
G13 activation, while an additional cysteine contributed by the extended 
N-terminus of the long GPR35 isoform limits the extent of agonist-induced 
receptor-β-arrestin2 interaction. The pharmacological profiles and mechanistic 
insights of our study provide clues for the future design of isoform-specific 
GPR35 ligands that selectively modulate GPR35-transducer interactions and allow 
for mechanism-based therapies against, for example, inflammatory bowel disease 
or bacterial infections of the gastrointestinal system.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102328
PMCID: PMC9450150
PMID: 35933013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.