1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2022 Aug 16;119(33):e2208004119. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2208004119. Epub 2022 Aug 8.

Cohesin ATPase activities regulate DNA binding and coiled-coil configuration.

Xu X(1), Kanai R(2), Wang L(1), Yanagida M(1).

Author information:
(1)G0 Cell Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate 
University, Onna-son, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan.
(2)Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 113-0032 
Japan.

The cohesin complex is required for sister chromatid cohesion and genome 
compaction. Cohesin coiled coils (CCs) can fold at break sites near midpoints to 
bring head and hinge domains, located at opposite ends of coiled coils, into 
proximity. Whether ATPase activities in the head play a role in this 
conformational change is yet to be known. Here, we dissected functions of 
cohesin ATPase activities in cohesin dynamics in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. 
Isolation and characterization of cohesin ATPase temperature-sensitive (ts) 
mutants indicate that both ATPase domains are required for proper chromosome 
segregation. Unbiased screening of spontaneous suppressor mutations rescuing the 
temperature lethality of cohesin ATPase mutants identified several suppressor 
hotspots in cohesin that located outside of ATPase domains. Then, we performed 
comprehensive saturation mutagenesis targeted to these suppressor hotspots. 
Large numbers of the identified suppressor mutations indicated several different 
ways to compensate for the ATPase mutants: 1) Substitutions to amino acids with 
smaller side chains in coiled coils at break sites around midpoints may enable 
folding and extension of coiled coils more easily; 2) substitutions to arginine 
in the DNA binding region of the head may enhance DNA binding; or 3) 
substitutions to hydrophobic amino acids in coiled coils, connecting the head 
and interacting with other subunits, may alter conformation of coiled coils 
close to the head. These results reflect serial structural changes in cohesin 
driven by its ATPase activities potentially for packaging DNAs.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2208004119
PMCID: PMC9388089
PMID: 35939705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.