1. Case Rep Gastroenterol. 2022 Jun 13;16(2):375-381. doi: 10.1159/000524944. 
eCollection 2022 May-Aug.

Promotion Effects of Smoking in Polyp Development in Monozygotic Twins with 
Atypical Colorectal Polyposis.

Yoshida N(1), Ishikawa H(2), Eguchi H(3), Okazaki Y(3), Hirose R(1), Inoue K(1), 
Dohi O(1), Itoh Y(1), Mutoh M(2), Ishiguro S(4), Ishida H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyoto Prefectural 
University of Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular-Targeting Cancer Prevention, Kyoto Prefectural 
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Diagnostics and Therapeutics of Intractable Diseases, Intractable Disease 
Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Pathology & Cytology Laboratories Japan, Suginami-ku, Japan.
(5)Department of Digestive Tract and General Surgery, Saitama Medical Center, 
Saitama Medical University, Kawagoe, Japan.

Smoking is a known risk factor for the development of colorectal polyps. Even in 
familial adenomatous polyposis and serrated polyposis syndrome, smoking is a 
risk factor of the development of polyps. Here, we report a case of monozygotic 
twins with atypical colorectal polyposis showing lots of hyperplastic polyps and 
adenomas and describe how the polyposis developed differently in the brothers 
based on the presence or absence of smoking. The case was of a set of 
monozygotic male twins, and the twins were in their 50s. The younger brother 
smoked 40 cigarettes a day since he was 16 years old. The older brother had 
smoked about 25 cigarettes a day since he was 16 years old but stopped smoking 
after he was diagnosed with polyposis. As we previously reported, we managed to 
remove polyps as much as possible from both twins without surgery. The median 
number of removed polyps (IQR: 25-75%) per colonoscopy for 20 years was 9.0 
(3.5-14.8) in the older brother and 20.5 (7.5-35.5) in the younger brother. 
There was a significant difference between the twins (p < 0.01). Additionally, 
genetic tests found that the twins carried a rare missense variant of BRCA2, and 
this variation has not been previously reported. In conclusion, these 
monozygotic twins with atypical colorectal polyposis showing a new variant of 
BRCA2 suggest that smoking is related to the development of colorectal polyps. 
Further analysis will be required for the identified BRCA2 variant in possible 
involvement in the development of atypical polyposis.

Copyright Â© 2022 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000524944
PMCID: PMC9247489
PMID: 35949244

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors had access to the data and 
control over the decision to publish. No financial support was provided for this 
study. All the authors declare no conflicts of interest associated with this 
study.