1. Mol Biol Cell. 2022 Oct 1;33(12):ar113. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E21-11-0534-T. Epub 
2022 Aug 10.

The ultrastructural organization of endoplasmic reticulum-plasma membrane 
contacts is conserved in epithelial cells.

Chung GHC(1), Lorvellec M(1)(2), Gissen P(1)(2), Pichaud F(1), Burden JJ(1), 
Stefan CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London WC1E 
6BT, UK.
(2)NIHR Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, University 
College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

Contacts between the endoplasmic reticulum and the plasma membrane (ER-PM 
contacts) have important roles in membrane lipid and calcium dynamics, yet their 
organization in polarized epithelial cells has not been thoroughly described. 
Here we examine ER-PM contacts in hepatocytes in mouse liver using electron 
microscopy, providing the first comprehensive ultrastructural study of ER-PM 
contacts in a mammalian epithelial tissue. Our quantitative analyses reveal 
strikingly distinct ER-PM contact architectures spatially linked to apical, 
lateral, and basal PM domains. Notably, we find that an extensive network of 
ER-PM contacts exists at lateral PM domains that form intercellular junctions 
between hepatocytes. Moreover, the spatial organization of ER-PM contacts is 
conserved in epithelial spheroids, suggesting that ER-PM contacts may serve 
conserved roles in epithelial cell architecture. Consistent with this notion, we 
show that ORP5 activity at ER-PM contacts modulates the apical-basolateral 
aspect ratio in HepG2 cells. Thus ER-PM contacts have a conserved distribution 
and crucial roles in PM domain architecture across epithelial cell types.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E21-11-0534-T
PMCID: PMC9635291
PMID: 35947498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]