1. Mol Neurobiol. 2022 Oct;59(10):6397-6410. doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02977-2.
Epub  2022 Aug 9.

Adenosine A(2A) Receptor Blockade Ameliorates Mania Like Symptoms in Rats: 
Signaling to PKC-α and Akt/GSK-3β/β-Catenin.

Shalaby HN(1), Zaki HF(2), Ain-Shoka AAA(2), Mohammed RA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo 
University, Cairo, Egypt. heba.nasr@pharma.cu.edu.eg.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo 
University, Cairo, Egypt.

Adenosinergic system dysfunction is implicated in the pathophysiology of 
multiple neuropsychiatric disorders including mania and bipolar diseases. The 
established synergistic interaction between A2A and D2 receptors in the 
prefrontal cortex could highlight the idea of A2A receptor antagonism as a 
possible anti-manic strategy. Hence, the present study was performed to examine 
the effect of a selective adenosine A2A receptor blocker (SCH58261) on 
methylphenidate-induced mania-like behavior while investigating the underlying 
mechanisms. Rats were injected with methylphenidate (5 mg/kg/day, i.p.) for 
3 weeks with or without administration of either SCH58261 (0.01 mg/kg/day, i.p.) 
or lithium (150 mg/kg/day, i.p.) starting from day 9. In the diseased rats, 
adenosine A2AR antagonism reduced locomotor hyperactivity and risk-taking 
behavior along with decreased dopamine and glutamate levels. Meanwhile, SCH58261 
restored NMDA receptor function, suppressed PKC-α expression, down-regulated 
β-Arrestin-2, up-regulated pS473-Akt and pS9-GSK-3β. Further, SCH58261 promoted 
synaptic plasticity markers through increasing BDNF levels along with 
down-regulating GAP-43 and SNAP-25. The A2A antagonist also reduced NF-κBp65 and 
TNF-α together with elevating IL-27 level giving an anti-inflammatory effect. In 
conclusion, suppression of PKC-α and modulation of Akt/GSK-3β/β-catenin axis 
through A2AR inhibition, could introduce adenosine A2AR as a possible 
therapeutic target for treatment of mania-like behavior. This notion is 
supported by the ability of the A2AR antagonist (SCH58261) to produce comparable 
results to those observed with the standard anti-manic drug (Lithium).

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-022-02977-2
PMCID: PMC9463338
PMID: 35943710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.