1. J Neurosci. 2022 Sep 14;42(37):7166-7181. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0409-22.2022.
 Epub 2022 Aug 9.

Shared and Distinct Functional Effects of Patient-Specific Tbr1 Mutations on 
Cortical Development.

Co M(1)(2), Barnard RA(1), Jahncke JN(2), Grindstaff S(1), Fedorov LM(3), Adey 
AC(1), Wright KM(2), O'Roak BJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, Oregon 97239.
(2)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239.
(3)Transgenic Mouse Models Core, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
Oregon 97239.
(4)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, Oregon 97239 oroak@ohsu.edu.

T-Box Brain Transcription Factor 1 (TBR1) plays essential roles in brain 
development, mediating neuronal migration, fate specification, and axon tract 
formation. While heterozygous loss-of-function and missense TBR1 mutations are 
associated with neurodevelopmental conditions, the effects of these 
heterogeneous mutations on brain development have yet to be fully explored. We 
characterized multiple mouse lines carrying Tbr1 mutations differing by type and 
exonic location, including the previously generated Tbr1 exon 2-3 knock-out (KO) 
line, and we analyzed male and female mice at neonatal and adult stages. The 
frameshift patient mutation A136PfsX80 (A136fs) caused reduced TBR1 protein in 
cortex similar to Tbr1 KO, while the missense patient mutation K228E caused 
significant TBR1 upregulation. Analysis of cortical layer formation found 
similar defects between KO and A136fs homozygotes in their CUX1+ and CTIP2+ 
layer positions, while K228E homozygosity produced layering defects distinct 
from these mutants. Meanwhile, the examination of cortical apoptosis found 
extensive cell death in KO homozygotes but limited cell death in A136fs or K228E 
homozygotes. Despite their discordant cortical phenotypes, these Tbr1 mutations 
produced several congruent phenotypes, including anterior commissure reduction 
in heterozygotes, which was previously observed in humans with TBR1 mutations. 
These results indicate that patient-specific Tbr1 mutant mice will be valuable 
translational models for pinpointing shared and distinct etiologies among 
patients with TBR1-related developmental conditions.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT 
Mutations of the TBR1 gene increase the likelihood of neurodevelopmental 
conditions such as intellectual disability and autism. Therefore, the study of 
TBR1 can offer insights into the biological mechanisms underlying these 
conditions, which affect millions worldwide. To improve the modeling of 
TBR1-related conditions over current Tbr1 knock-out mice, we created mouse lines 
carrying Tbr1 mutations identical to those found in human patients. Mice with 
one mutant Tbr1 copy show reduced amygdalar connections regardless of mutation 
type, suggesting a core biomarker for TBR1-related disorders. In mice with two 
mutant Tbr1 copies, brain phenotypes diverge by mutation type, suggesting 
differences in Tbr1 gene functionality in different patients. These mouse models 
will serve as valuable tools for understanding genotype-phenotype relationships 
among patients with neurodevelopmental conditions.

Copyright Â© 2022 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0409-22.2022
PMCID: PMC9480892
PMID: 35944998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]