1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jul 31;23(15):8494. doi: 10.3390/ijms23158494.

Stem Cell-Based Therapies for Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Zhang HM(1)(2), Yuan S(1)(2), Meng H(2), Hou XT(2), Li J(2)(3), Xue JC(2)(3), Li 
Y(2), Wang Q(2), Nan JX(1), Jin XJ(1), Zhang QG(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Natural Resources of Changbai Mountain & Functional 
Molecules, Ministry of Education, Molecular Medicine Research Center, College of 
Pharmacy, Yanbian University, Yanji 133002, China.
(2)Chronic Disease Research Center, Medical College, Dalian University, Dalian 
116622, China.
(3)Department of Immunology and Pathogenic Biology, College of Basic Medicine, 
Yanbian University, Yanji 133002, China.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic, relapsing disease that severely 
affects patients' quality of life. The exact cause of IBD is uncertain, but 
current studies suggest that abnormal activation of the immune system, genetic 
susceptibility, and altered intestinal flora due to mucosal barrier defects may 
play an essential role in the pathogenesis of IBD. Unfortunately, IBD is 
currently difficult to be wholly cured. Thus, more treatment options are needed 
for different patients. Stem cell therapy, mainly including hematopoietic stem 
cell therapy and mesenchymal stem cell therapy, has shown the potential to 
improve the clinical disease activity of patients when conventional treatments 
are not effective. Stem cell therapy, an emerging therapy for IBD, can alleviate 
mucosal inflammation through mechanisms such as immunomodulation and 
colonization repair. Clinical studies have confirmed the effectiveness of stem 
cell transplantation in refractory IBD and the ability to maintain long-term 
remission in some patients. However, stem cell therapy is still in the research 
stage, and its safety and long-term efficacy remain to be further evaluated. 
This article reviews the upcoming stem cell transplantation methods for clinical 
application and the results of ongoing clinical trials to provide ideas for the 
clinical use of stem cell transplantation as a potential treatment for IBD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23158494
PMCID: PMC9368934
PMID: 35955628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.