1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Aug 7;23(15):8770. doi: 10.3390/ijms23158770.

Inborn Errors of Nucleoside Transporter (NT)-Encoding Genes (SLC28 and SLC29).

Pastor-Anglada M(1)(2)(3), Mata-Ventosa A(1)(2)(3), Pérez-Torras S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biomedicina Molecular, Institut de Biomedicina de 
la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, 
Spain.
(2)Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu (IR SJD), Esplugues de Llobregat, 08950 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y 
Digestivas (CIBER EHD), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

The proper regulation of nucleotide pools is essential for all types of cellular 
functions and depends on de novo nucleotide biosynthesis, salvage, and 
degradation pathways. Despite the apparent essentiality of these processes, a 
significant number of rare diseases associated with mutations in genes encoding 
various enzymes of these pathways have been already identified, and others are 
likely yet to come. However, knowledge on genetic alterations impacting on 
nucleoside and nucleobase transporters is still limited. At this moment three 
gene-encoding nucleoside and nucleobase transporter proteins have been reported 
to be mutated in humans, SLC29A1, SLC29A3, and SLC28A1, impacting on the 
expression and function of ENT1, ENT3, and CNT1, respectively. ENT1 alterations 
determine Augustine-null blood type and cause ectopic calcification during 
aging. ENT3 deficiency translates into various clinical manifestations and 
syndromes, altogether listed in the OMIM catalog as 
histiocytosis-lymphoadenopathy plus syndrome (OMIM#602782). CNT1 deficiency 
causes uridine-cytidineuria (URCTU) (OMIM#618477), a unique type of 
pyrimidineuria with an as yet not well-known clinical impact. Increasing 
knowledge on the physiological, molecular and structural features of these 
transporter proteins is helping us to better understand the biological basis 
behind the biochemical and clinical manifestations caused by these deficiencies. 
Moreover, they also support the view that some metabolic compensation might 
occur in these disturbances, because they do not seem to significantly impact 
nucleotide homeostasis, but rather other biological events associated with 
particular subtypes of transporter proteins.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23158770
PMCID: PMC9369021
PMID: 35955904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.