1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Aug 8;23(15):8827. doi: 10.3390/ijms23158827.

Extracellular Vesicles in Myeloid Neoplasms.

Karantanou C(1), Minciacchi VR(1), Karantanos T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy, 
60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Division of Hematologic Malignancies and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Sidney 
Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21218, USA.
(3)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, The Bunting-Blaustein Cancer Research Building, 1650 Orleans 
Street, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

Myeloid neoplasms arise from malignant primitive cells, which exhibit growth 
advantage within the bone marrow microenvironment (BMM). The interaction between 
these malignant cells and BMM cells is critical for the progression of these 
diseases. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are lipid bound vesicles secreted into 
the extracellular space and involved in intercellular communication. Recent 
studies have described RNA and protein alterations in EVs isolated from myeloid 
neoplasm patients compared to healthy controls. The altered expression of 
various micro-RNAs is the best-described feature of EVs of these patients. Some 
of these micro-RNAs induce growth-related pathways such as AKT/mTOR and promote 
the acquisition of stem cell-like features by malignant cells. Another 
well-described characteristic of EVs in myeloid neoplasms is their ability to 
suppress healthy hematopoiesis either via direct effect on healthy CD34+ cells 
or via alteration of the differentiation of BMM cells. These results support a 
role of EVs in the pathogenesis of myeloid neoplasms. mainly through mediating 
the interaction between malignant and BMM cells, and warrant further study to 
better understand their biology. In this review, we describe the reported 
alterations of EV composition in myeloid neoplasms and the recent discoveries 
supporting their involvement in the development and progression of these 
diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23158827
PMCID: PMC9369333
PMID: 35955960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.