1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Aug 4;14(15):3800. doi: 10.3390/cancers14153800.

Strategies for Radioiodine Treatment: What's New.

Sparano C(1)(2), Moog S(2), Hadoux J(2), Dupuy C(3), Al Ghuzlan A(4), Breuskin 
I(5), Guerlain J(5), Hartl D(5), Baudin E(2), Lamartina L(2).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Unit, Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical 
Sciences "Mario Serio", University of Florence, 50139 Florence, Italy.
(2)Service d'oncologie Endocrinienne, Département d'Imagerie Médicale, Gustave 
Roussy, 112 rue Edouard Vaillant, 94805 Villejuif, France.
(3)UMR 9019 CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Gustave Roussy, 94800 Villejuif, 
France.
(4)Département de Biologie et Pathologie Médicales, Gustave Roussy, 112 rue 
Edouard Vaillant, 94805 Villejuif, France.
(5)Département Anesthésie Chirurgie et Interventionnel, Gustave Roussy, 112 rue 
Edouard Vaillant, 94805 Villejuif, France.

Radioiodine treatment (RAI) represents the most widespread and effective therapy 
for differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC). RAI goals encompass ablative 
(destruction of thyroid remnants, to enhance thyroglobulin predictive value), 
adjuvant (destruction of microscopic disease to reduce recurrences), and 
therapeutic (in case of macroscopic iodine avid lesions) purposes, but its use 
has evolved over time. Randomized trial results have enabled the refinement of 
RAI indications, moving from a standardized practice to a tailored approach. In 
most cases, low-risk patients may safely avoid RAI, but where necessary, a 
simplified protocol, based on lower iodine activities and human recombinant TSH 
preparation, proved to be just as effective, reducing overtreatment or useless 
impairment of quality of life. In pediatric DTC, RAI treatments may allow tumor 
healing even at the advanced stages. Finally, new challenges have arisen with 
the advancement in redifferentiation protocols, through which RAI still 
represents a leading therapy, even in former iodine refractory cases. RAI 
therapy is usually well-tolerated at low activities rates, but some concerns 
exist concerning higher cumulative doses and long-term outcomes. Despite these 
achievements, several issues still need to be addressed in terms of RAI 
indications and protocols, heading toward the RAI strategy of the future.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14153800
PMCID: PMC9367259
PMID: 35954463

Conflict of interest statement: L.L. has participated in the BAYER, EISAI and 
IPSEN tumor boards, has received honoraria from EISAI, Lilly and support for 
attending a meeting from Novartis AAA. The other authors declare no conflict of 
interest.