1. New Phytol. 2022 Nov;236(4):1281-1295. doi: 10.1111/nph.18427. Epub 2022 Sep
1.

Mesophyll conductance response to short-term changes in pCO(2) is related to 
leaf anatomy and biochemistry in diverse C(4) grasses.

Pathare VS(1), DiMario RJ(1), Koteyeva N(1)(2), Cousins AB(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 
99164-4236, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Anatomy and Morphology, V.L. Komarov Botanical Institute of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, 197376, St Petersburg, Russia.

Mesophyll CO2 conductance (gm ) in C3 species responds to short-term (minutes) 
changes in environment potentially due to changes in leaf anatomical and 
biochemical properties and measurement artefacts. Compared with C3 species, 
there is less information on gm responses to short-term changes in environmental 
conditions such as partial pressure of CO2 (pCO2 ) across diverse C4 species and 
the potential determinants of these responses. Using 16 C4 grasses we 
investigated the response of gm to short-term changes in pCO2 and its 
relationship with leaf anatomy and biochemistry. In general, gm increased as 
pCO2 decreased (statistically significant increase in 12 species), with 
percentage increases in gm ranging from +13% to +250%. Greater increase in gm at 
low pCO2 was observed in species exhibiting relatively thinner mesophyll cell 
walls along with greater mesophyll surface area exposed to intercellular air 
spaces, leaf N, photosynthetic capacity and activities of phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxylase and Rubisco. Species with greater CO2 responses of gm were also able 
to maintain their leaf water-use efficiencies (TEi ) under low CO2 . Our study 
advances understanding of CO2 response of gm in diverse C4 species, identifies 
the key leaf traits related to this response and has implications for improving 
C4 photosynthetic models and TEi through modification of gm .

© 2022 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2022 New Phytologist Foundation.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.18427
PMCID: PMC9825963
PMID: 35959528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]