1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jul 30;23(15):8443. doi: 10.3390/ijms23158443.

Reporter Genes for Brain Imaging Using MRI, SPECT and PET.

Gao T(1), Wang P(1), Gong T(2), Zhou Y(1), Wang A(1), Tang X(1)(3), Song X(2), 
Fan Y(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, 
China.
(2)Center for Biomedical Imaging Research, School of Medicine, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing 100084, China.
(3)School of Medical Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 
100081, China.

The use of molecular imaging technologies for brain imaging can not only play an 
important supporting role in disease diagnosis and treatment but can also be 
used to deeply study brain functions. Recently, with the support of reporter 
gene technology, optical imaging has achieved a breakthrough in brain function 
studies at the molecular level. Reporter gene technology based on traditional 
clinical imaging modalities is also expanding. By benefiting from the deeper 
imaging depths and wider imaging ranges now possible, these methods have led to 
breakthroughs in preclinical and clinical research. This article focuses on the 
applications of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), single-photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT), and positron emission tomography (PET) reporter 
gene technologies for use in brain imaging. The tracking of cell therapies and 
gene therapies is the most successful and widely used application of these 
techniques. Meanwhile, breakthroughs have been achieved in the research and 
development of reporter genes and their imaging probe pairs with respect to 
brain function research. This paper introduces the imaging principles and 
classifications of the reporter gene technologies of these imaging modalities, 
lists the relevant brain imaging applications, reviews their characteristics, 
and discusses the opportunities and challenges faced by clinical imaging 
modalities based on reporter gene technology. The conclusion is provided in the 
last section.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23158443
PMCID: PMC9368793
PMID: 35955578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.