1. Curr Biol. 2022 Sep 12;32(17):3862-3870.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2022.07.029.
Epub  2022 Aug 11.

Force generation of KIF1C is impaired by pathogenic mutations.

Siddiqui N(1), Roth D(1), Toleikis A(1), Zwetsloot AJ(1), Cross RA(1), Straube 
A(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Mechanochemical Cell Biology, Division of Biomedical Sciences, 
Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
(2)Centre for Mechanochemical Cell Biology, Division of Biomedical Sciences, 
Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK. Electronic 
address: anne@mechanochemistry.org.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2022 Sep 12;32(17):R914-R916. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2022.07.045.

Intracellular transport is essential for neuronal function and survival. The 
most effective plus-end-directed neuronal transporter is the kinesin-3 KIF1C, 
which transports large secretory vesicles and endosomes.1-4 Mutations in KIF1C 
cause hereditary spastic paraplegia and cerebellar dysfunction in human 
patients.5-8 In contrast to other kinesin-3s, KIF1C is a stable dimer and a 
highly processive motor in its native state.9,10 Here, we establish a baseline 
for the single-molecule mechanics of Kif1C. We show that full-length KIF1C 
molecules can processively step against the load of an optical trap and reach 
average stall forces of 3.7 pN. Compared with kinesin-1, KIF1C has a higher 
propensity to slip backward under load, which results in a lower maximal 
single-molecule force. However, KIF1C remains attached to the microtubule while 
slipping backward and re-engages quickly, consistent with its super 
processivity. Two pathogenic mutations, P176L and R169W, that cause hereditary 
spastic paraplegia in humans7,8 maintain fast, processive single-molecule 
motility in vitro but with decreased run length and slightly increased unloaded 
velocity compared with the wild-type motor. Under load in an optical trap, force 
generation by these mutants is severely reduced. In cells, the same mutants are 
impaired in producing sufficient force to efficiently relocate organelles. Our 
results show how its mechanics supports KIF1C's role as an intracellular 
transporter and explain how pathogenic mutations at the microtubule-binding 
interface of KIF1C impair the cellular function of these long-distance 
transporters and result in neuronal disease.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2022.07.029
PMCID: PMC9631238
PMID: 35961316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.