1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2022 Dec;11(1):2291-2303. doi: 
10.1080/22221751.2022.2114853.

A variant NS1 protein from H5N2 avian influenza virus suppresses PKR activation 
and promotes replication and virulence in mammals.

Chung YT(1), Kuan CY(1), Liao GR(1), Albrecht RA(2), Tseng YY(3), Hsu YC(1), Ou 
SC(1), Hsu WL(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Public Health, National Chung Hsing 
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(3)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza, VIDRL, 
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses (HPAIVs) frequently receive global 
attention as threats to public health. The NS1 protein is a key virulence factor 
known to impair host antiviral responses. The study herein revealed HPAIV H5N2 
NS gene encoded additional protein; a truncated NS1 variant, designated NS3, 
produced by alternative splicing of the NS transcript. To examine the function 
of NS3 during infection, we generated recombinant viruses expressing either 
full-length NS1 (RG-AIV-T375G) or NS3 (RG-AIV-NS3). Interestingly, RG-AIV-NS3 
virus produced higher titres than RG-AIV-T375G in multiple mammalian cell lines. 
However, RG-AIV-T375G exhibited a replication advantage over RG-AIV-NS3 in 
chicken DF-1 cells, indicating that host cell identity dictates the effect of 
NS3 on viral replication. In mice and mammalian cells, RG-AIV-NS3 infection 
elicited higher level of cytokines, including IFN-β, MX and TNF-α, potentially 
due to its higher replication activity. Based on mini-genome assay, NS3 had 
pronounced effects on viral replication machinery. Surprisingly, NS3 retained an 
interaction with PKR and suppressed PKR activation despite its lack of 
amino-acid residues 126-167. The poor replication ability of RG-AIV-T375G was 
partially restored in cells deficient in PKR suggesting that full-length NS1 may 
be insufficient to suppress PKR function. Notably, virulence of the full-length 
NS1-expressing RG-AIV-T375G virus was highly attenuated in mice when compared to 
RG-AIV-NS3. In summary, our study reveals the existence and function of a 
previously unidentified H5N2 viral protein, NS3. We found that NS3 is 
functionally distinct from NS1 protein, as it enhances viral replication and 
pathogenicity in mammalian systems, potentially via suppression of PKR activity.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2022.2114853
PMCID: PMC9559317
PMID: 35979918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).