1. Commun Biol. 2022 Aug 16;5(1):825. doi: 10.1038/s42003-022-03755-5.

Structural features of Dnase1L3 responsible for serum antigen clearance.

McCord JJ(1), Engavale M(2), Masoumzadeh E(3), Villarreal J(1), Mapp B(2), 
Latham MP(3), Keyel PA(2), Sutton RB(4).

Author information:
(1)Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Dept of Cell Physiology and 
Molecular Biophysics, Lubbock, TX, USA.
(2)Texas Tech University, Dept. of Biological Sciences, Lubbock, TX, USA.
(3)Texas Tech University, Dept. of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Lubbock, TX, USA.
(4)Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Dept of Cell Physiology and 
Molecular Biophysics, Lubbock, TX, USA. roger.b.sutton@ttuhsc.edu.

Autoimmunity develops when extracellular DNA released from dying cells is not 
cleared from serum. While serum DNA is primarily digested by Dnase1 and 
Dnase1L3, Dnase1 cannot rescue autoimmunity arising from Dnase1L3 deficiencies. 
Dnase1L3 uniquely degrades antigenic forms of cell-free DNA, including DNA 
complexed with lipids and proteins. The distinct activity of Dnase1L3 relies on 
its unique C-terminal Domain (CTD), but the mechanism is unknown. We used 
multiple biophysical techniques and functional assays to study the interplay 
between the core catalytic domain and the CTD. While the core domain resembles 
Dnase1, there are key structural differences between the two enzymes. First, 
Dnase1L3 is not inhibited by actin due to multiple differences in the actin 
recognition site. Second, the CTD augments the ability of the core to bind DNA, 
thereby facilitating the degradation of complexed DNA. Together, these 
structural insights will inform the development of Dnase1L3-based therapies for 
autoimmunity.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-022-03755-5
PMCID: PMC9381713
PMID: 35974043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors P.A.K., R.B.S., and J.J.M. are inventors 
on pending TTUS patent applications (US17763913, EP20874456.5) relating to 
certain research described in this article. The remaining authors declare no 
competing interests.