1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2022 Jul-Aug;26(7-8):391-397. doi: 
10.1089/gtmb.2022.0018. Epub 2022 Aug 17.

Association of the CASP3 rs4647602 Gene Polymorphism with Periodontitis in South 
Indians of Tamil Ethnicity.

Loka AM(1), Ponnaiyan D(1), Parthasarathy H(1), Tadepalli A(1), Victor DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontics, SRM Dental College, Chennai, India.

Objective: Caspase-3 activation is central to apoptosis and is involved in 
periodontal disease pathogenesis. Thus, CASP3 gene polymorphisms in a population 
may influence the severity of periodontal disease. In this study we examined the 
association of the CASP3 rs4647602 alleles and genotypes with periodontitis 
using cohorts of periodontally diseased and healthy South Indian subjects of 
Tamil ethnicity. Materials and Methods: Allele specific polymerase chain 
reaction genotyping were performed to identify CASP3 rs4647602 gene polymorphism 
in 145 periodontally healthy subjects and 145 periodontitis patients. The 
associations between gene polymorphism frequencies and the risk of periodontitis 
were analyzed by the Pearson chi-square test, the Mann Whitney U test, t test, 
logistic regression and assessed by odds ratio (ORs) and 95% confidence interval 
(95% CIs). Results: The statistical test results demonstrated a significant 
difference in genotype distribution between the two groups (p < 0.001) with the 
variant GG genotype associated with a significantly increased risk for 
periodontitis (OR = 3.55, 95% CI = 1.89-6.68, p < 0.001). Furthermore, all 
clinical parameters were highly significantly correlated with the genotypes in 
periodontitis subjects (p < 0.05). Conclusion: The present study suggests that 
the rs4647602 GG genotype of CASP3 is associated with the increased 
periodontitis risk in South Indians of Tamil ethnicity. Clinical Trial 
Registration Number: (CTRI/2021/03/032412).

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2022.0018
PMID: 35976099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]