1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Aug 1;13:908346. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.908346. 
eCollection 2022.

Spontaneous Resistance of Erwinia amylovora Against Bacteriophage Y2 Affects 
Infectivity of Multiple Phages.

Knecht LE(1)(2), Born Y(1), Pelludat C(3), Pothier JF(4), Smits THM(4), Loessner 
MJ(2), Fieseler L(1).

Author information:
(1)Food Microbiology Research Group, Institute of Food and Beverage Innovation, 
Zurich University of Applied Sciences (ZHAW), Wädenswil, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Agroscope, Plant Pathology and Zoology in Fruit and Vegetable Production, 
Wädenswil, Switzerland.
(4)Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology Research Group, Institute of 
Natural Resource Sciences, Zurich University of Applied Sciences (ZHAW), 
Wädenswil, Switzerland.

Broad application of antibiotics gave rise to increasing numbers of antibiotic 
resistant bacteria. Therefore, effective alternatives are currently 
investigated. Bacteriophages, natural predators of bacteria, could work as such 
an alternative. Although phages can be highly effective at eliminating specific 
bacteria, phage resistance can be observed after application. The nature of this 
resistance, however, can differ depending on the phage. Exposing Erwinia 
amylovora CFBP 1430, the causative agent of fire blight, to the different phages 
Bue1, L1, S2, S6, or M7 led to transient resistance. The bacteria reversed to a 
phage sensitive state after the phage was eliminated. When wild type bacteria 
were incubated with Y2, permanently resistant colonies (1430 Y2R ) formed 
spontaneously. In addition, 1430 Y2R revealed cross-resistance against other 
phages (Bue1) or lowered the efficiency of plating (L1, S2, and S6). Pull down 
experiments revealed that Y2 is no longer able to bind to the mutant suggesting 
mutation or masking of the Y2 receptor. Other phages tested were still able to 
bind to 1430 Y2R . Bue1 was observed to still adsorb to the mutant, but no host 
lysis was found. These findings indicated that, in addition to the alterations 
of the Y2 receptor, the 1430 Y2R mutant might block phage attack at different 
stage of infection. Whole genome sequencing of 1430 Y2R revealed a deletion in 
the gene with the locus tag EAMY_2231. The gene, which encodes a putative 
galactosyltransferase, was truncated due to the resulting frameshift. The mutant 
1430 Y2R was monitored for potential defects or fitness loss. Weaker growth was 
observed in LB medium compared to the wild type but not in minimal medium. 
Strain 1430 Y2R was still highly virulent in blossoms even though amylovoran 
production was observed to be reduced. Additionally, LPS structures were 
analyzed and were clearly shown to be altered in the mutant. Complementation of 
the truncated EAMY_2231 in trans restored the wild type phenotype. The 
truncation of EAMY_2231 can therefore be associated with manifold modifications 
in 1430 Y2R , which can affect different phages simultaneously.

Copyright © 2022 Knecht, Born, Pelludat, Pothier, Smits, Loessner and Fieseler.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.908346
PMCID: PMC9376448
PMID: 35979490

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.