1. Hemoglobin. 2022 Mar;46(2):75-80. doi: 10.1080/03630269.2022.2072326. Epub
2022  Aug 18.

The Long-Term Efficacy of Deferiprone in Thalassemia Patients With Iron 
Overload: Real-World Data from the Registry Database.

Kittipoom T(1), Tantiworawit A(1), Punnachet T(1), Hantrakun N(1), 
Piriyakhuntorn P(1), Rattanathammethee T(1), Hantrakool S(1), Chai-Adisaksopha 
C(1), Rattarittamrong E(1), Norasetthada L(1), Fanhchaksai K(2), Charoenkwan 
P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Chiang Mai 
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.

Deferiprone (DFP) is an oral iron-chelating agent that is widely used in 
thalassemia patients with iron overload. This study aimed to investigate the 
long-term efficacy of DFP monotherapy on serum ferritin (SF) and adverse events. 
All thalassemia patients aged 15 years or older who received DFP monotherapy 
were identified from the thalassemia registry database between November 2008 and 
October 2019. After treatment, patients who achieved a target SF level, defined 
as <1000.0 ng/mL in transfusion-dependent thalassemia (TDT) and <800.0 ng/mL in 
non-TDT (NTDT) for two consecutive visits, were categorized as the achievable 
group. We used multivariate analysis to identify factors that contribute to 
differences between groups. One hundred and five patients were enrolled in the 
study with a median age of 28 (19-41) years and median initial SF level of 
1399.0 (1141.0-2169.0) ng/mL. Of these, 61.0% carried Hb E (HBB: 
c.79G>A)/β-thalassemia (β-thal) and 60.0% were TDT patients. The median DFP dose 
was 63 (47-73) mg/kg/d and the median follow-up duration of treatment was 36 
(20-54) months. A total of 58 (55.24%) patients were in the achievable group. 
The initial SF level <1350.0 ng/mL was significantly associated with achieving a 
targeted SF level (p = 0.002). Ten adverse events resulted in withholding DFP. 
The most common was gastrointestinal irritation in four patients and three 
patients with agranulocytosis. In conclusion, DFP is an effective iron chelator 
in thalassemia patients. Slightly more than half the patients (55.0%) achieved a 
target SF level. Lower SF levels at the beginning were an important factor.

DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2022.2072326
PMID: 35982534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]