1. Nat Commun. 2022 Aug 19;13(1):4877. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32588-3.

In situ structure and dynamics of an alphacoronavirus spike protein by cryo-ET 
and cryo-EM.

Huang CY(#)(1), Draczkowski P(#)(1)(2), Wang YS(#)(1)(3), Chang CY(#)(1)(4), 
Chien YC(1)(3), Cheng YH(4), Wu YM(5), Wang CH(5), Chang YC(1)(5), Chang YC(4), 
Yang TJ(1)(3), Tsai YX(1)(3), Khoo KH(1)(3), Chang HW(4), Hsu SD(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11529, Taiwan.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of Lublin, ul. W. Chodzki 4a, 20-093, 
Lublin, Poland.
(3)Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 11529, 
Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, School of 
Veterinary Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 10617, Taiwan.
(5)Academia Sinica Cryo-EM Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11529, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11529, Taiwan. 
sthsu@gate.sinica.edu.tw.
(7)Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 11529, 
Taiwan. sthsu@gate.sinica.edu.tw.
(#)Contributed equally

Porcine epidemic diarrhea (PED) is a highly contagious swine disease caused by 
porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV). PED causes enteric disorders with an 
exceptionally high fatality in neonates, bringing substantial economic losses in 
the pork industry. The trimeric spike (S) glycoprotein of PEDV is responsible 
for virus-host recognition, membrane fusion, and is the main target for vaccine 
development and antigenic analysis. The atomic structures of the recombinant 
PEDV S proteins of two different strains have been reported, but they reveal 
distinct N-terminal domain 0 (D0) architectures that may correspond to different 
functional states. The existence of the D0 is a unique feature of 
alphacoronavirus. Here we combined cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET) and 
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to demonstrate in situ the asynchronous S 
protein D0 motions on intact viral particles of a highly virulent PEDV Pintung 
52 strain. We further determined the cryo-EM structure of the recombinant S 
protein derived from a porcine cell line, which revealed additional domain 
motions likely associated with receptor binding. By integrating mass 
spectrometry and cryo-EM, we delineated the complex compositions and spatial 
distribution of the PEDV S protein N-glycans, and demonstrated the functional 
role of a key N-glycan in modulating the D0 conformation.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-32588-3
PMCID: PMC9388967
PMID: 35986008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.