1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2022 Jul 29:2022.07.29.502072. doi: 
10.1101/2022.07.29.502072.

Infection- or vaccine mediated immunity reduces SARS-CoV-2 transmission, but 
increases competitiveness of Omicron in hamsters.

Port JR(1), Yinda CK(1), Riopelle JC(1), Weishampel ZA(1), Saturday TA(1), 
Avanzato VA(1), Schulz JE(1), Holbrook MG(1), Barbian K(2), Perry-Gottschalk 
R(3), Haddock E(1), Martens C(2), Shaia CI(4), Lambe T(5), Gilbert SC(5), van 
Doremalen N(1), Munster VJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT, 
USA.
(2)Genomics Research Section, Research Technologies Branch, Division of 
Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT, USA.
(3)Rocky Mountain Visual and Medical Arts Unit, Research Technologies Branch, 
Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT, USA.
(4)Rocky Mountain Veterinary Branch, Division of Intramural Research, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Hamilton, MT, USA.
(5)The Jenner Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.

Update in
    Nat Commun. 2023 Oct 18;14(1):6592. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-42346-8.

Omicron has demonstrated a competitive advantage over Delta in vaccinated 
people. To understand this, we designed a transmission chain experiment using 
naïve, intranasally (IN) or intramuscularly (IM) vaccinated, and previously 
infected (PI) hamsters. Vaccination and previous infection protected animals 
from disease and virus replication after Delta and Omicron dual challenge. A 
gradient in transmission blockage was observed: IM vaccination displayed 
moderate transmission blockage potential over three airborne chains (approx. 
70%), whereas, IN vaccination and PI blocked airborne transmission in >90%. In 
naïve hamsters, Delta completely outcompeted Omicron within and between hosts 
after dual infection in onward transmission. Although Delta also outcompeted 
Omicron in the vaccinated and PI transmission chains, an increase in Omicron 
competitiveness was observed in these groups. This correlated with the increase 
in the strength of the humoral response against Delta, with the strongest 
response seen in PI animals. These data highlight the continuous need to assess 
the emergence and spread of novel variants in populations with pre-existing 
immunity and address the additional evolutionary pressure this may exert on the 
virus.

DOI: 10.1101/2022.07.29.502072
PMCID: PMC9387121
PMID: 35982658