1. Physiol Rep. 2022 Aug;10(16):e15422. doi: 10.14814/phy2.15422.

Hydrogen sulfide mitigates skeletal muscle mitophagy-led tissue remodeling via 
epigenetic regulation of the gene writer and eraser function.

Singh M(1), Pushpakumar S(1), Zheng Y(1), Homme RP(1), Smolenkova I(1), 
Mokshagundam SPL(2), Tyagi SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Louisville School of Medicine, 
Louisville, Kentucky, USA.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes and Robley Rex VA Medical 
Center, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky, USA.

Ketone bodies (KB) serve as the food for mitochondrial biogenetics. 
Interestingly, probiotics are known to promote KB formation in the gut 
(especially those that belong to the Lactobacillus genus). Furthermore, 
Lactobacillus helps produce folate that lowers the levels of homocysteine (Hcy); 
a hallmark non-proteinogenic amino acid that defines the importance of 
epigenetics, and its landscape. In this study, we decided to test whether 
hydrogen sulfide (H2 S), another Hcy lowering agent regulates the epigenetic 
gene writer DNA methyltransferase (DNMT), eraser FTO and TET2, and thus 
mitigates the skeletal muscle remodeling. We treated hyperhomocysteinemic (HHcy, 
cystathionine beta-synthase heterozygote knockout; CBS+/- ) mice with NaHS (the 
H2 S donor). The results suggested multi-organ damage by HHcy in the CBS+/- 
mouse strain compared with WT control mice (CBS+/+ ). H2 S treatment abrogated 
most of the HHcy-induced damage. The levels of gene writer (DNMT2) and H3K9 
(methylation) were higher in the CBS+/- mice, and the H2 S treatment normalized 
their levels. More importantly, the levels of eraser FTO, TET, and associated 
GADD45, and MMP-13 were decreased in the CBS+/- mice; however, H2 S treatment 
mitigated their respective decrease. These events were associated with 
mitochondrial fission, i.e., an increase in DRP1, and mitophagy. Although the 
MMP-2 level was lower in CBS+/- compared to WT but H2 S could further lower it 
in the CBS+/- mice. The MMPs levels were associated with an increase in 
interstitial fibrosis in the CBS+/- skeletal muscle. Due to fibrosis, the 
femoral artery blood flow was reduced in the CBS+/- mice, and that was 
normalized by H2 S. The bone and muscle strengths were found to be decreased in 
the CBS+/- mice but the H2 S treatment normalized skeletal muscle strength in 
the CBS+/- mice. Our findings suggest that H2 S mitigates the mitophagy-led 
skeletal muscle remodeling via epigenetic regulation of the gene writer and 
eraser function.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.15422
PMCID: PMC9391604
PMID: 35986494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise.