1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Oct;298(10):102396. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102396. Epub
2022  Aug 18.

Micro-electron diffraction structure of the aggregation-driving N terminus of 
Drosophila neuronal protein Orb2A reveals amyloid-like β-sheets.

Bowler JT(1), Sawaya MR(2), Boyer DR(2), Cascio D(2), Bali M(2), Eisenberg 
DS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA-DOE Institute, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, and Molecular Biology Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA. 
Electronic address: jbowler@ucla.edu.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA-DOE Institute, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, and Molecular Biology Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA-DOE Institute, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, and Molecular Biology Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA. 
Electronic address: david@mbi.ucla.edu.

Amyloid protein aggregation is commonly associated with progressive 
neurodegenerative diseases, however not all amyloid fibrils are pathogenic. The 
neuronal cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein is a regulator of 
synaptic mRNA translation and has been shown to form functional amyloid 
aggregates that stabilize long-term memory. In adult Drosophila neurons, the 
cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding homolog Orb2 is expressed as 2 
isoforms, of which the Orb2B isoform is far more abundant, but the rarer Orb2A 
isoform is required to initiate Orb2 aggregation. The N terminus is a 
distinctive feature of the Orb2A isoform and is critical for its aggregation. 
Intriguingly, replacement of phenylalanine in the fifth position of Orb2A with 
tyrosine (F5Y) in Drosophila impairs stabilization of long-term memory. The 
structure of endogenous Orb2B fibers was recently determined by cryo-EM, but the 
structure adopted by fibrillar Orb2A is less certain. Here we use micro-electron 
diffraction to determine the structure of the first 9 N-terminal residues of 
Orb2A, at a resolution of 1.05 Å. We find that this segment (which we term M9I) 
forms an amyloid-like array of parallel in-register β-sheets, which interact 
through side chain interdigitation of aromatic and hydrophobic residues. Our 
structure provides an explanation for the decreased aggregation observed for the 
F5Y mutant and offers a hypothesis for how the addition of a single atom (the 
tyrosyl oxygen) affects long-term memory. We also propose a structural model of 
Orb2A that integrates our structure of the M9I segment with the published Orb2B 
cryo-EM structure.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102396
PMCID: PMC9556795
PMID: 35988647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest D.S.E. is a SAB member and 
equity holder in ADRx, Inc.