1. SLAS Discov. 2022 Oct;27(7):395-404. doi: 10.1016/j.slasd.2022.08.003. Epub
2022  Aug 20.

Identification of chemicals breaking the USP8 interaction with its endocytic 
substrate CHMP1B.

Journet A(1), Barette C(1), Aubry L(2), Soleilhac E(1), Fauvarque MO(3).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Inserm, IRIG, BGE, F-38000 Grenoble, France.
(2)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, Inserm, IRIG, BGE, F-38000 Grenoble, France.
(3)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Inserm, IRIG, BGE, F-38000 Grenoble, France. 
Electronic address: marie-odile.fauvarque@cea.fr.

The ubiquitin-specific protease USP8 plays a major role in controlling the 
stability and intracellular trafficking of numerous cell surface proteins among 
which the EGF receptor that regulates cell growth and proliferation in many 
physio-pathological processes. The function of USP8 at the endocytic pathway 
level partly relies on binding to and deubiquitination of the Endosomal Sorting 
Complex Required for Transport (ESCRT) protein CHMP1B. In the aim of finding 
chemical inhibitors of the USP8::CHMP1B interaction, we performed a 
high-throughput screening campaign using an HTRF® assay to monitor the 
interaction directly in lysates of cells co-expressing both partners. The assay 
was carried out in an automated format to screen the academic Fr-PPIChem library 
(Bosc N et al., 2020), which includes 10,314 compounds dedicated to the 
targeting of protein-protein interactions (PPIs). Eleven confirmed hits 
inhibited the USP8::CHMP1B interaction within a range of 30% to 70% inhibition 
at 50 µM, while they were inactive on a set of other PPI interfaces 
demonstrating the feasibility of specifically disrupting this particular 
interface. In parallel, we adapted this HTRF® assay to compare the USP8 
interacting capacity of CHMP1B variants. As anticipated from earlier studies, a 
deletion of the MIM (Microtubule Interacting and Trafficking domain Interacting 
Motif) domain or mutation of two conserved leucine residues, L192 and L195, in 
this domain respectively abolished or strongly impeded the USP8::CHMP1B 
interaction. By contrast, a CHMP1B mutant that displays a highly decreased 
ubiquitination level following mutation of four lysine residues in arginine 
interacted at a similar level as the wild-type form with USP8. Therefore, 
conserved leucine residues within the MIT domain rather than its ubiquitinated 
status triggers CHMP1B substrate recognition by USP8.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.slasd.2022.08.003
PMID: 35995394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.