1. Front Chem. 2022 Aug 5;10:961787. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2022.961787. eCollection 
2022.

Unexpected kinetically controlled organoselenium-based isomaleimide: X-ray 
structure, hirshfeld surface analysis, 3D energy framework approach, and density 
functional theory calculation.

Shaaban S(1)(2), Ferjani H(3), Abd El-Lateef HM(1)(4), Khalaf MM(1)(4), Gouda 
M(1), Alaasar M(5)(6), Yousef TA(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, King Faisal University, Al 
Hofuf, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Organic Chemistry Division, College of Science, 
Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt.
(3)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, IMSIU (Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud 
Islamic University), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Sohag University, Sohag, Egypt.
(5)Institute of Chemistry, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle 
(Saale), Germany.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt.
(7)Toxic and Narcotic Drug, Forensic Medicine Department, Mansoura Laboratory, 
Medicolegal Organization, Ministry of Justice, Cairo, Egypt.

Reduction of 4,4'-diselanediyldianiline (1) followed by the reaction with 
bromo-4-(bromomethyl)benzene afforded the corresponding 
4-((4-bromobenzyl)selanyl)aniline (2) in 85% yield. N-Maleanilic acid 3 was 
obtained in 94% yield via the reaction of selenoamine 2 with toxilic anhydride. 
Subsequent dehydration of N-maleanilic acid 3 using acetic anhydride furnished 
the unexpected isomaleimide 
5-((4-((4-bromophenyl)selanyl)phenyl)imino)furan-2(5H)-one (4) instead of the 
maleimide 5. The molecular structure of compound 4 was confirmed by mass 
spectrometry, 1H- and 13C-NMR spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction analysis. 
Their cytotoxicity was assessed against two oligodendrocytes, and their 
respective redox properties were evaluated using 
2',7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (H2-DCFDA) assay. Furthermore, their 
antiapoptotic potential was also evaluated by flow cytometry. The compound 
crystallizes in triclinic P-1 space group with unit cell parameters a = 5.7880 
(4) Å, b = 9.8913 (6) Å, c = 14.5951 (9) Å, V = 1731.0 (3) Å3 and Z = 2. The 
crystal packing is stabilized by intermolecular hydrogen bonding, π···π, 
C-Br···π stacking interactions, and other non-covalent interactions. The mapping 
of different Hirshfeld surfaces and 2D-fingerprint were used to investigate 
intermolecular interactions. The interaction energies that stabilize the crystal 
packing were calculated and graphically represented as framework energy 
diagrams. We present a computational investigation of compound 4's molecular 
structure at the Density Functional Theory level using the B3LYP method and the 
6-31G ++ basis set in this paper. The optimized structure matches the 
experimental outcome. The global reactivity descriptors and molecular 
electrostatic potential (M.E.P.) map emphasize the molecule's reactive 
locations, allowing reactivity prediction. The charge transfer properties of 
molecules can be estimated by examining Frontier molecular orbitals.

Copyright © 2022 Shaaban, Ferjani, Abd El-Lateef, Khalaf, Gouda, Alaasar and 
Yousef.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2022.961787
PMCID: PMC9388736
PMID: 35991613

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.