1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Aug 5;9:880937. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.880937. 
eCollection 2022.

Nudix Hydroxylase 15 Mutations Strongly Predict Thiopurine-Induced Leukopenia 
Across Different Asian Ethnicities: Implications for Screening in a Diverse 
Population.

Khoo XH(1), Wong SY(2), Ibrahim NRW(3), Ng RT(4), Chew KS(4), Lee WS(4), Wong 
ZQ(5), Raja Ali RA(5), Shahrani S(1), Leow AH(1), Hilmi IN(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, 
University of Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Clinical Research Centre, Pantai Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia.
(3)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Hospital Selayang, Selangor, 
Malaysia.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(6)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Thiopurines, which are immunosuppressive drugs for 
maintaining remission for inflammatory bowel disease, are known to cause 
myelotoxicity in patients with Nudix Hydroxylase 15 (NUDT15) genetic variants in 
some Asian countries with monoethnic populations. We aimed to investigate the 
association of NUDT15 variants with leukopenia in a multiethnic population in 
Southeast Asia.
METHODS: Patients with a confirmed diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease were 
recruited. We collected demographic and clinical characteristics and whole blood 
counts before and after initiating thiopurines. Thiopurine S-methyltransferase 
(TPMT) and NUDT15 genotypes were analyzed with the single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) genotyping assay. Leukopenia was defined as a white blood 
cell (WBC) count < 3,000/μl.
RESULTS: In this study, 19 (18.6%) of the 102 patients who had adequate 
thiopurine therapy experienced leukopenia, 11 patients (57.9%) had NUDT15 c.415C 
> T variants, 2 patients (10.5%) had NUDT15 c.52G > A variants while one (5.3%) 
had a TPMT variation. Individually, NUDT15 c.415C > T had a sensitivity and 
specificity of 57.9% and 94.0% (odds ratio [OR] = 21.45, 95% CI 5.94-77.41, p < 
0.001), respectively, for predicting thiopurine-induced leukopenia, while NUDT15 
c.52G > A was only observed in patients with leukopenia. As compared with 
patients with wild-type NUDT15, both NUDT15 variations had a combined 
sensitivity and specificity of 68.4% and 94%, respectively (OR = 33.80, 95% CI 
8.99-127.05, p < 0.001), for predicting thiopurine-induced leukopenia as well as 
a shorter onset to leukopenia (median onset [months] 2.0 vs. 5.5; p = 0.045). 
Sub-group analysis showed that both NUDT15 variations were strongly associated 
with leukopenia among the Chinese and Indians but not among the Malays.
CONCLUSION: Nudix Hydroxylase 15 variants strongly predicted thiopurine-induced 
leukopenia across a multiethnic Southeast Asian population, particularly among 
the Chinese and Indians.

Copyright © 2022 Khoo, Wong, Ibrahim, Ng, Chew, Lee, Wong, Raja Ali, Shahrani, 
Leow and Hilmi.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.880937
PMCID: PMC9388767
PMID: 35991642

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.