1. J Pediatr Genet. 2021 Feb 11;11(3):192-197. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1722856. 
eCollection 2022 Sep.

Determination of High-Resolution HLA-DQB1 Suballeles and IL-17 Polymorphisms in 
Turkish Pediatric Patients.

Eldem A(1), Ayna TK(1), Baran M(2), Soyöz M(1), Pirim İ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Izmir Katip Celebi University, 
Izmir Tepecik Education and Research Hospital Tissue Typing Laboratory, İzmir, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Izmir Katip Celebi University, 
Izmir Tepecik Education and Research Hospital, İzmir, Turkey.

Celiac disease (CD) is an autoimmune enteropathy in the small intestine caused 
by gluten intolerance of the patients. The most important genetic 
disease-related factor is human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DQ polymorphism. 
Association between interleukin (IL)-17A expression of CD4 + T cells and various 
autoimmune diseases has been reported. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the relationship between single nucleotide polymorphism (rs2275913) IL-17A and 
HLA-DQ polymorphisms in Turkish pediatric celiac patients. Study group included 
125 pediatric celiac patients with CD and 100 healthy pediatric controls. 
Deoxyribonucleic acid was isolated from peripheral blood samples. IL-17A 
polymorphism (rs2275913) was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction-restriction 
fragment polymorphism method. IL-17A polymorphism and low-/high-resolution 
HLA-DQ results of patients were evaluated. GG and GA genotype frequencies of 
IL-17A (rs2275913) polymorphism were significantly higher ( p  < 0.05) in the CD 
patients than the control group. HLA-DQB1*02 and HLA-DQA1*05 alleles were 
detected in patients, while HLA-DQB1*03 and HLA-DQA1*01 alleles in the control 
group. Also, when we compared the patient and control groups in terms of 
HLA-DQ-DR haplotypes, HLA-DQB1*02-DQA1*05-DRB1*03 was found with the relative 
risk of 42.5 ( p  < 0.05). As a result of high-resolution HLA-DQB1 typing, 
DQB1*02:01 and DQB1*03:02 were at high frequency ( p  < 0.05; in 25 patient 
group). IL-17A (rs2275913) polymorphism genotype frequency was found to be 
significant in the patient group compared with the control group. The most 
common HLA-DQB1 suballele was observed as DQB1*02:01.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1722856
PMCID: PMC9385257
PMID: 35990032

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.