1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Sep 9;50(16):9162-9174. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac683.

ATRX histone binding and helicase activities have distinct roles in neuronal 
differentiation.

Bieluszewska A(1)(2), Wulfridge P(1)(2), Doherty J(1)(2), Ren W(1)(2), Sarma 
K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Gene Expression and Regulation Program, The Wistar 
Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.

ATRX is a chromatin remodeler, which is mutated in ATRX syndrome, a 
neurodevelopmental disorder. ATRX mutations that alter histone binding or 
chromatin remodeling activities cluster in the PHD finger or the helicase domain 
respectively. Using engineered mouse embryonic stem cells that exclusively 
express ATRX protein with mutations in the PHD finger (PHDmut) or helicase 
domains (K1584R), we examine how specific ATRX mutations affect 
neurodifferentiation. ATRX PHDmut and K1584R proteins interact with the DAXX 
histone chaperone but show reduced localization to pericentromeres. 
Neurodifferentiation is both delayed and compromised in PHDmut and K1584R, and 
manifest differently from complete ATRX loss. We observe reduced enrichment of 
PHDmut protein to ATRX targets, while K1584R accumulates at these sites. 
Interestingly, ATRX mutations have distinct effects on the genome-wide 
localization of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), with PHDmut and ATRX 
knockout showing reduced PRC2 binding at polycomb targets and K1584R showing 
loss at some sites and gains at others. Notably, each mutation associated with 
unique gene signatures, suggesting distinct pathways leading to impaired 
neurodifferentiation. Our results indicate that the histone binding and 
chromatin remodeling functions of ATRX play non-redundant roles in 
neurodevelopment, and when mutated lead to ATRX syndrome through separate 
regulatory pathways.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac683
PMCID: PMC9458459
PMID: 35998910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]