1. Biochemistry. 2022 Sep 6;61(17):1766-1773. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.2c00283. 
Epub 2022 Aug 24.

Untwisted α-Synuclein Filaments Formed in the Presence of Lipid Vesicles.

Dasari AKR(1), Dillard L(2), Yi S(1), Viverette E(2), Hojjatian A(3), Sengupta 
U(4), Kayed R(4), Taylor KA(3), Borgnia MJ(2), Lim KH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina 
27858, United States.
(2)Department of Health and Human Services, Genome Integrity and Structural 
Biology Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, 
United States.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biophysics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, 
Florida 32306-4380, United States.
(4)Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555, United States.

Accumulation of filamentous aggregates of α-synuclein is a pathological hallmark 
of several neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD). The 
interaction between α-synuclein and phospholipids has been shown to play a 
critical role in the aggregation of α-synuclein. Most structural studies have, 
however, been focused on α-synuclein filaments formed in the absence of lipids. 
Here, we report the structural investigation of α-synuclein filaments assembled 
under the quiescent condition in the presence of anionic lipid vesicles using 
electron microscopy (EM), including cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM). Our 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analyses reveal that α-synuclein forms 
curly protofilaments at an early stage of aggregation. The flexible 
protofilaments were then converted to long filaments after a longer incubation 
of 30 days. More detailed structural analyses using cryo-EM reveal that the long 
filaments adopt untwisted structures with different diameters, which have not 
been observed in previous α-synuclein fibrils formed in vitro. The untwisted 
filaments are rather similar to straight filaments with no observable twist that 
are extracted from patients with dementia with Lewy bodies. Our structural 
studies highlight the conformational diversity of α-synuclein filaments, 
requiring additional structural investigation of not only more ex vivo 
α-synuclein filaments but also in vitro α-synuclein filaments formed in the 
presence of diverse cofactors to better understand the molecular basis of 
diverse molecular conformations of α-synuclein filaments.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.2c00283
PMCID: PMC10289115
PMID: 36001818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.