1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Aug 9;13:969445. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.969445. 
eCollection 2022.

The characteristics of protein-glutaminase from an isolated Chryseobacterium 
cucumeris strain and its deamidation application.

Qu R(1)(2), Dai T(1), Wu J(1), Tian A(1), Zhang Y(1), Kang L(1), Ouyang W(1), 
Jin C(1), Niu J(1), Li Z(1), Chang Z(1), Jiang D(1), Huang J(1), Gao H(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Health & Social Care, Shanghai Urban Construction Vocational 
College, Shanghai, China.

Protein-glutaminase (PG), a deamidation enzyme commercially derived from 
Chryseobacterium proteolyticum, is used to improve the solubility and other 
functional properties of food proteins. In this study, a new PG-producing 
strain, Chryseobacterium cucumeris ZYF120413-7, was isolated from soil, and it 
had a high PG yield and a short culture time. It gave the maximum PG activity 
with 0.557 U/ml on Cbz-Gln-Gly after 12 h of culture, indicating that it was 
more suitable for PG production. The enzyme activity recovery and purification 
fold were 32.95% and 161.95-fold, respectively, with a specific activity of 
27.37 U/mg. The PG was a pre-pro-protein with a 16 amino acids putative signal 
peptide, a pro-PG of 118 amino acids, and a mature PG of 185 amino acids. The 
amino acid sequence identity of PG from strain ZYF120413-7 was 74 and 45%, 
respectively, to that of PG from C. proteolyticum 9670T and BH-PG. The optimum 
reaction pH and temperature of PG was 6 and 60°C, respectively. Enzyme activity 
was inhibited by Cu2+. The optimum PG substrate was Cbz-Gln-Gly, and the Km and 
Vmax values were 1.68 mM and 1.41 μM mg protein-1 min-1, respectively. Degree of 
deamidation (DD) of soy protein isolate (SPI) treated by purified PG was 40.75% 
within the first 2 h and 52.35% after 18 h. These results demonstrated that the 
PG from C. cucumeris ZYF120413-7 was a promising protein-deamidating enzyme for 
improving the functionality of food proteins.

Copyright © 2022 Qu, Dai, Wu, Tian, Zhang, Kang, Ouyang, Jin, Niu, Li, Chang, 
Jiang, Huang and Gao.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.969445
PMCID: PMC9396377
PMID: 36016794

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.