1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Aug 20;23(16):9392. doi: 10.3390/ijms23169392.

Multi-Omic Investigations of a 17-19 Translocation Links MINK1 Disruption to 
Autism, Epilepsy and Osteoporosis.

Eisfeldt J(1)(2)(3), Schuy J(1), Stattin EL(4), Kvarnung M(1)(2), Falk A(5)(6), 
Feuk L(4)(7), Lindstrand A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 171 76 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet Science Park, 171 65 
Solna, Sweden.
(4)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, 751 08 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Biomedicum, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Lund Stem Cell Center, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund 
University, 221 84 Lund, Sweden.
(7)Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, 752 37 Uppsala, Sweden.

Balanced structural variants, such as reciprocal translocations, are sometimes 
hard to detect with sequencing, especially when the breakpoints are located in 
repetitive or insufficiently mapped regions of the genome. In such cases, 
long-range information is required to resolve the rearrangement, identify 
disrupted genes and, in symptomatic carriers, pinpoint the disease-causing 
mechanisms. Here, we report an individual with autism, epilepsy and osteoporosis 
and a de novo balanced reciprocal translocation: t(17;19) (p13;p11). The genomic 
DNA was analyzed by short-, linked- and long-read genome sequencing, as well as 
optical mapping. Transcriptional consequences were assessed by transcriptome 
sequencing of patient-specific neuroepithelial stem cells derived from induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSC). The translocation breakpoints were only detected 
by long-read sequencing, the first on 17p13, located between exon 1 and exon 2 
of MINK1 (Misshapen-like kinase 1), and the second in the chromosome 19 
centromere. Functional validation in induced neural cells showed that MINK1 
expression was reduced by >50% in the patient’s cells compared to healthy 
control cells. Furthermore, pathway analysis revealed an enrichment of changed 
neural pathways in the patient’s cells. Altogether, our multi-omics experiments 
highlight MINK1 as a candidate monogenic disease gene and show the advantages of 
long-read genome sequencing in capturing centromeric translocations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23169392
PMCID: PMC9408972
PMID: 36012658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Anna Lindstrand has received honoraria from 
Illumina. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the 
decision to publish the results.