1. Polymers (Basel). 2022 Aug 19;14(16):3406. doi: 10.3390/polym14163406.

Drug-Polymers Composite Matrix Tablets: Effect of Hydroxypropyl Methylcellulose 
(HPMC) K-Series on Porosity, Compatibility, and Release Behavior of the Tablet 
Containing a BCS Class I Drug.

Hirun N(1), Kraisit P(1).

Author information:
(1)Thammasat University Research Unit in Smart Materials and Innovative 
Technology for Pharmaceutical Applications (SMIT-Pharm), Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Thammasat University, Pathumthani 12120, Thailand.

The purpose of this research was to see how the physicochemical properties and 
porosity of matrix tablets containing various types of hydroxypropyl 
methylcellulose (HPMC) K series affected the release of propranolol 
hydrochloride (PNL). PNL is a class I drug (high solubility and permeability) 
according to the Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS), making it an 
excellent model drug used for studying extended-release drug products. The 
direct compression method was used to prepare the HPMC-based matrix tablets. PNL 
and the excipients were found to be compatible using Fourier transform infrared 
spectroscopy (FTIR), powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD), and differential scanning 
calorimetry (DSC). The surfaces of all the compressed HPMC-based matrix tablets 
were rough, with accumulated particles and small holes. The compressed 
HPMC-based matrix tablet porosity was also determined by using mercury 
porosimetry. The compressed HPMC-based matrix tablets made of low viscosity HPMC 
had tiny pores (diameter < 0.01 Î¼m). The shorter polymeric chains are more prone 
to deformation, resulting in a small pore proportion. The compressed HPMC-based 
matrix tablets sustained the release of PNL for over 12 h. The release exponent 
values (n), which reflect the release mechanism of the drug from the tablets, 
ranged from 0.476 to 0.497. These values indicated that the release was governed 
by anomalous transport. The compressed HPMC-based matrix tablets have the 
potential for a sustained release of PNL.

DOI: 10.3390/polym14163406
PMCID: PMC9412306
PMID: 36015661

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.