1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Aug 12;23(16):9038. doi: 10.3390/ijms23169038.

Membrane Internalization Mechanisms and Design Strategies of Arginine-Rich 
Cell-Penetrating Peptides.

Hao M(1), Zhang L(2), Chen P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Advanced Materials Institute, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy 
of Sciences), Jinan 250014, China.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology, 
University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, ON N2L3G1, Canada.

Cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) have been discovered to deliver chemical drugs, 
nucleic acids, and macromolecules to permeate cell membranes, creating a novel 
route for exogenous substances to enter cells. Up until now, various sequence 
structures and fundamental action mechanisms of CPPs have been established. 
Among them, arginine-rich peptides with unique cell penetration properties have 
attracted substantial scientific attention. Due to the positively charged 
essential amino acids of the arginine-rich peptides, they can interact with 
negatively charged drug molecules and cell membranes through non-covalent 
interaction, including electrostatic interactions. Significantly, the sequence 
design and the penetrating mechanisms are critical. In this brief synopsis, we 
summarize the transmembrane processes and mechanisms of arginine-rich peptides; 
and outline the relationship between the function of arginine-rich peptides and 
the number of arginine residues, arginine optical isomers, primary sequence, 
secondary and ternary structures, etc. Taking advantage of the penetration 
ability, biomedical applications of arginine-rich peptides have been refreshed, 
including drug/RNA delivery systems, biosensors, and blood-brain barrier (BBB) 
penetration. Understanding the membrane internalization mechanisms and design 
strategies of CPPs will expand their potential applications in clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23169038
PMCID: PMC9409441
PMID: 36012300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.