1. Plants (Basel). 2022 Aug 18;11(16):2143. doi: 10.3390/plants11162143.

Monoterpenoids Evolution and MEP Pathway Gene Expression Profiles in Seven Table 
Grape Varieties.

Zhou X(1)(2)(3), Liu S(1)(2)(3), Gao W(1)(2), Hu B(1)(2), Zhu B(1)(2), Sun L(3).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Tree Breeding by Molecular Design, 
Beijing Forestry University, Beijing 100083, China.
(2)Department of Food Science and Engineering, College of Biological Sciences 
and Biotechnology, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing 100083, China.
(3)Institute of Forestry and Pomology, Beijing Academy of Agricultural and 
Forestry Sciences, Beijing 100093, China.

This research investigated the evolution of both monoterpenoids and expression 
profiles of related biosynthesis genes in the MEP pathway in seven different 
table grape varieties from veraison to maturity stage in two seasons, and the 
correlation was further evaluated between monoterpenoid accumulation and 
expression of these genes studied in these varieties. Results showed that 
linalool, trans-furan linalool oxide, geraniol, and cis-furan linalool oxide 
were the main compounds in the five Muscat varieties two seasons. 
'Zaomeiguixiang' had the highest contents of geraniol and Î²-Citronellol. 
'Xiangfei' had the most abundant of linalool and cis-furan linalool oxide, 
whereas the neutral varieties of 'Moldova' and 'Christmas Rose' had the least 
amount. Monoterpenoid volatiles have been grouped in three evolutionary patterns 
in the berry development of these varieties. 'Zaomeiguixiang' and 'Xiangfei' had 
distinct different pattern of terpenoids evolution profiles. Pearson's 
correlation analysis showed that in the MEP pathway, the first biosynthesis gene 
VvDXS3 was significantly correlated to the accumulation of monoterpenoids, and 
appeared to be an important candidate gene for synthesis of the monoterpenoids.

DOI: 10.3390/plants11162143
PMCID: PMC9413098
PMID: 36015445

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.