1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Aug 18;19(16):10261. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph191610261.

Commonalities in Metabolic Reprogramming between Tobacco Use and Oral Cancer.

Rushing BR(1)(2), Tilley S(1), Molina S(2), Schroder M(2), Sumner S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Durham, 
NC 27599, USA.
(2)Nutrition Research Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Kannapolis, NC 28081, USA.

Tobacco use is a major public health concern and is linked to myriad diseases, 
including cancer. The link between tobacco use and oral cancer, specifically, is 
very strong, making tobacco use one of the primary risk factors for oral cancer. 
While this association is well known, the underlying biochemical changes that 
result from tobacco use, and how this links to metabolic phenotypes of oral 
cancer, is not well understood. To address this knowledge gap, a combination of 
literature reviews and metabolomics studies were performed to identify 
commonalities in metabolic perturbations between tobacco use and oral cancers. 
Metabolomics analysis was performed on pooled reference urine from smokers and 
non-smokers, healthy and malignant oral tissues, and cultured oral cells with or 
without treatment of the well-known tobacco carcinogen 
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK). Alterations in amino acid 
metabolism, carbohydrates/oxidative phosphorylation, fatty acid oxidation, 
nucleotide metabolism, steroid metabolism, and vitamin metabolism were found to 
be shared between tobacco use and oral cancer. These results support the 
conclusion that tobacco use metabolically reprograms oral cells to support 
malignant transformation through these pathways. These metabolic reprogramming 
events may be potential targets to prevent or treat oral cancers that arise from 
tobacco use.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph191610261
PMCID: PMC9408724
PMID: 36011897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.