1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Oct;298(10):102421. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102421. Epub
2022  Aug 25.

G protein-coupled receptor kinase 6 (GRK6) regulates insulin processing and 
secretion via effects on proinsulin conversion to insulin.

Varney MJ(1), Steyaert W(2), Coucke PJ(3), Delanghe JR(4), Uehling DE(5), Joseph 
B(5), Marcellus R(5), Al-Awar R(6), Benovic JL(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical 
College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Center for Medical 
Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Drug Discovery Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(6)Drug Discovery Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical 
College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Electronic 
address: jeffrey.benovic@jefferson.edu.

Recent studies identified a missense mutation in the gene coding for G 
protein-coupled receptor kinase 6 (GRK6) that segregates with type 2 diabetes 
(T2D). To better understand how GRK6 might be involved in T2D, we used 
pharmacological inhibition and genetic knockdown in the mouse β-cell line, MIN6, 
to determine whether GRK6 regulates insulin dynamics. We show inhibition of GRK5 
and GRK6 increased insulin secretion but reduced insulin processing while GRK6 
knockdown revealed these same processing defects with reduced levels of cellular 
insulin. GRK6 knockdown cells also had attenuated insulin secretion but enhanced 
proinsulin secretion consistent with decreased processing. In support of these 
findings, we demonstrate GRK6 rescue experiments in knockdown cells restored 
insulin secretion after glucose treatment. The altered insulin profile appears 
to be caused by changes in the proprotein convertases, the enzymes responsible 
for proinsulin to insulin conversion, as GRK6 knockdown resulted in 
significantly reduced convertase expression and activity. To identify how the 
GRK6-P384S mutation found in T2D patients might affect insulin processing, we 
performed biochemical and cell biological assays to study the properties of the 
mutant. We found that while GRK6-P384S was more active than WT GRK6, it 
displayed a cytosolic distribution in cells compared to the normal plasma 
membrane localization of GRK6. Additionally, GRK6 overexpression in MIN6 cells 
enhanced proinsulin processing, while GRK6-P384S expression had little effect. 
Taken together, our data show that GRK6 regulates insulin processing and 
secretion in a glucose-dependent manner and provide a foundation for 
understanding the contribution of GRK6 to T2D.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102421
PMCID: PMC9526158
PMID: 36030052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.