1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2022 Sep 6;119(36):e2204725119. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2204725119. Epub 2022 Aug 29.

Manipulating complex chromatin folding via CRISPR-guided bioorthogonal 
chemistry.

Qin G(1)(2)(3), Yang J(1)(2)(3), Zhao C(1)(2)(3), Ren J(1)(2)(3), Qu X(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resource Utilization, Changchun Institute 
of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)Laboratory of Chemical Biology, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, 
Changchun 130022, People's Republic of China.
(3)School of Applied Chemistry and Engineering, University of Science and 
Technology of China, Hefei 230026, People's Republic of China.

Precise manipulation of chromatin folding is important for understanding the 
relationship between the three-dimensional genome and nuclear function. Existing 
tools can reversibly establish individual chromatin loops but fail to manipulate 
two or more chromatin loops. Here, we engineer a powerful CRISPR system which 
can manipulate multiple chromatin contacts using bioorthogonal reactions, termed 
the bioorthogonal reaction-mediated programmable chromatin loop (BPCL) system. 
The multiinput BPCL system employs engineered single-guide RNAs recognized by 
discrete bioorthogonal adaptors to independently and dynamically control 
different chromatin loops formation without cross-talk in the same cell or to 
establish hubs of multiway chromatin contacts. We use the BPCL system to 
successfully juxtapose the pluripotency gene promoters to enhancers and activate 
their endogenous expression. BPCL enables us to independently engineer multiway 
chromatin contacts without cross-talk, which provides a way to precisely dissect 
the high complexity and dynamic nature of chromatin folding.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2204725119
PMCID: PMC9457169
PMID: 36037371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.