1. Europace. 2022 Nov 22;24(11):1809-1823. doi: 10.1093/europace/euac087.

Effectiveness and safety of mexiletine in patients at risk for (recurrent) 
ventricular arrhythmias: a systematic review.

van der Ree MH(1), van Dussen L(2)(3), Rosenberg N(2)(3), Stolwijk N(2)(3), van 
den Berg S(2)(3), van der Wel V(3), Jacobs BAW(3)(4), Wilde AAM(1), Hollak 
CEM(2)(3), Postema PG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Cardiology, Heart Center, Amsterdam UMC-University of 
Amsterdam, Cardiovascular Sciences, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Amsterdam UMC-University of 
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 15, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Medicine for Society, Platform at Amsterdam UMC-University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Amsterdam UMC-University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 
15, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

AIMS: While mexiletine has been used for over 40 years for prevention of 
(recurrent) ventricular arrhythmias and for myotonia, patient access has 
recently been critically endangered. Here we aim to demonstrate the 
effectiveness and safety of mexiletine in the treatment of patients with 
(recurrent) ventricular arrhythmias, emphasizing the absolute necessity of its 
accessibility.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Studies were included in this systematic review (PROSPERO, 
CRD42020213434) if the efficacy or safety of mexiletine in any dose was 
evaluated in patients at risk for (recurrent) ventricular arrhythmias with or 
without comparison with alternative treatments (e.g. placebo). A systematic 
search was performed in Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, and in the clinical trial registry 
databases ClinicalTrials.gov and ICTRP. Risk of bias were assessed and tailored 
to the different study designs. Large heterogeneity in study designs and outcome 
measures prompted a narrative synthesis approach. In total, 221 studies were 
included reporting on 8970 patients treated with mexiletine. Age ranged from 0 
to 88 years. A decrease in ventricular arrhythmias of >50% was observed in 72% 
of the studies for pre-mature ventricular complexes, 64% for ventricular 
tachycardia, and 33% for ventricular fibrillation. Electrocardiographic effects 
of mexiletine were small; only in a subset of patients with primary arrhythmia 
syndromes, a relative (desired) QTc decrease was reproducibly observed. As for 
adverse events, gastrointestinal complaints were most frequently observed (33% 
of the patients).
CONCLUSIONS: In this systematic review, we present all the currently available 
knowledge of mexiletine in patients at risk for (recurrent) ventricular 
arrhythmias and show that mexiletine is both effective and safe.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/europace/euac087
PMCID: PMC9681134
PMID: 36036670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: P.G.P. is a member of the 
Scientific Advisory Group on Cardiovascular Issues (SAG-CVS) of the EMA since 
2021. C.E.M.H. is involved in pre-marketing research with Sanofi, Protalix, and 
Idorsia, outside the submitted work. N.R., N.S., S.B., V.W., B.J., and C.E.M.H. 
are members of the platform ‘Medicijn voor de Maatschappij’. This is an academic 
initiative that aims to support sustainable access to medicines for rare 
diseases, including mexiletine. V.W. reports personal fees from Fair Medicine 
Foundation, personal fees from Patient One, outside the submitted work.