1. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes. 2022 Aug 29;8(1):69. doi:
10.1038/s41522-022-00328-6.

Distinct colon mucosa microbiomes associated with tubular adenomas and serrated 
polyps.

Avelar-Barragan J(1), DeDecker L(2), Lu ZN(2), Coppedge B(3), Karnes WE(2), 
Whiteson KL(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA. 
javelarb@uci.edu.
(2)School of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA. 
katrine@uci.edu.

Colorectal cancer is the second most deadly and third most common cancer in the 
world. Its development is heterogenous, with multiple mechanisms of 
carcinogenesis. Two distinct mechanisms include the adenoma-carcinoma sequence 
and the serrated pathway. The gut microbiome has been identified as a key player 
in the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, but its role in serrated carcinogenesis is 
less clear. In this study, we characterized the gut microbiome of 140 polyp-free 
and polyp-bearing individuals using colon mucosa and fecal samples to determine 
if microbiome composition was associated with each of the two key pathways. We 
discovered significant differences between the microbiomes of colon mucosa and 
fecal samples, with sample type explaining 10-15% of the variation observed in 
the microbiome. Multiple mucosal brushings were collected from each individual 
to investigate whether the gut microbiome differed between polyp and healthy 
intestinal tissue, but no differences were found. Mucosal aspirate sampling 
revealed that the microbiomes of individuals with tubular adenomas and serrated 
polyps were significantly different from each other and polyp-free individuals, 
explaining 1-4% of the variance in the microbiome. Microbiome composition also 
enabled the accurate prediction of subject polyp types using Random Forest, 
which produced an area under curve values of 0.87-0.99. By directly sampling the 
colon mucosa and distinguishing between the different developmental pathways of 
colorectal cancer, our study helps characterize potential mechanistic targets 
for serrated carcinogenesis. This research also provides insight into multiple 
microbiome sampling strategies by assessing each method's practicality and 
effect on microbial community composition.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41522-022-00328-6
PMCID: PMC9424272
PMID: 36038569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.