1. Afr Health Sci. 2022 Mar;22(1):367-376. doi: 10.4314/ahs.v22i1.45.

Effects of hypohydration and fluid balance in athletes' cognitive performance: a 
systematic review.

Dube A(1), Gouws C(1), Breukelman G(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Zululand, Human Movement Sciences.

BACKGROUND: The effects of progressive body fluid loss on athletic and cognitive 
performance are known to result from exposure to environmental heat stress, 
morphologic factors, and limited fluid replenishment. Athletes need to restore 
lost body water. However, athletes may fail to maintain euhydration during 
exercise. This systematic review investigated hypohydration and fluid balance 
effects on an athlete's cognitive function.
METHODS: The PubMed, Sports Discuss, and Ebsco databases were searched for 
studies reporting on hypohydration, fluid balance and heat on cognitive 
performance in sport. Multiple phrases including hydration, dehydration, fluid 
balance, mood, cognition, vigilance, decision making, and brain were explored. 
Participants in the studies did either receive fluid or did not receive fluid 
during exercise.
RESULTS: Twenty-four trials (n=493 participants) from 24 articles met the 
inclusion criteria. Significant hypohydration, >2% body mass loss was reported 
consistently in 16 publications. Five articles where hypohydration was 
associated with heat stress and limited fluid intake (3-5% body mass loss) 
impaired cognitive performance. Mood disturbance, fatigue, and ratings of 
perceived exertion constantly complemented hypohydration impairment on 
cognition.
CONCLUSION: Findings show that hypohydration impairs cognitive performance and 
mood at higher levels of 3-5% body mass loss. However, sport-specific cognitive 
protocols of accessing hypohydration and fluid balance in individual and team 
sports remain equivocal.

Â© 2022 Dube A et al.

DOI: 10.4314/ahs.v22i1.45
PMCID: PMC9382508
PMID: 36032481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]