1. Front Genet. 2022 Aug 10;13:909131. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.909131.
eCollection  2022.

Identified novel heterozygous HTRA1 pathogenic variants in Chinese patients with 
HTRA1-associated dominant cerebral small vessel disease.

Chen MJ(1)(2), Zhang Y(1), Luo WJ(1), Dong HL(1), Wei Q(1), Zhang J(1)(2), Ruan 
QQ(3), Ni W(1), Li HF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Research Center of Neurology in Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Key Laboratory of Medical 
Neurobiology of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang Chinese 
Medical University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Shangyu People's Hospital, Shaoxing, China.

Background: Homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations in HTRA1 cause 
cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL). Recently, heterozygous pathogenic variants in 
HTRA1 were described in patients with autosomal dominant cerebral small vessel 
disease (CSVD). Here, we investigated the genetic variants in a cohort of 
Chinese patients with CSVD. Methods: A total of 95 Chinese index patients with 
typical characteristics of CSVD were collected. Whole exome sequencing was 
performed in the probands, followed by Sanger sequencing. Pathogenicity 
prediction software was applied to evaluate the pathogenicity of the identified 
variants. Results: We detected five heterozygous HTRA1 pathogenic variants in 
five index patients. These pathogenic variants included four known variants 
(c.543delT, c.854C>T, c.889G>A, and c.824C>T) and one novel variant (c.472 + 
1G>A). Among them, c.854C>T, c.824C>T, and c.472 + 1G>A have never been reported 
in China and c.889G>A was once reported in homozygous but never in heterozygous. 
Three of them were distributed in exon 4, one in exon 2, and another splicing 
variant in intron 1. Four out of five probands presented typical features of 
CARASIL but less severe. The common clinical features included lacunar 
infarction, cognitive decline, alopecia, and spondylosis. All of them showed 
leukoencephalopathy, and the main involved cerebral area include periventricular 
and frontal area, centrum semiovale, thalamus, and corpus callosum. Anterior 
temporal lobes and external capsule involvement were also observed. Three 
probands had intracranial microbleeds. Conclusion: Our study expanded the 
mutation spectrum of HTRA1, especially in Chinese populations, and provided 
further evidence for "hot regions" in exon 1-4, especially in exon 4, in 
heterozygous HTRA1 pathogenic variants. Our work further supported that patients 
with heterozygous HTRA1 pathogenic variants presented with similar but 
less-severe features than CARASIL but in an autosomal dominantly inherited 
pattern.

Copyright Â© 2022 Chen, Zhang, Luo, Dong, Wei, Zhang, Ruan, Ni and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.909131
PMCID: PMC9399615
PMID: 36035189

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.