1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2022 Nov 15;20(12):2303-2319. doi: 
10.2174/1570159X20666220830102628.

Ketogenic Diet: An Effective Treatment Approach for Neurodegenerative Diseases.

Tao Y(1), Leng SX(2), Zhang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang 110001, China.
(2)Division of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, Department of Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 5501 Hopkins Bayview Circle - Room 
1A.38A, Baltimore, MD, 21224, USA.

This review discusses the effects and mechanisms of a ketogenic diet on 
neurodegenerative diseases on the basis of available evidence. A ketogenic diet 
refers to a high-fat, mediumprotein, and low-carbohydrate diet that leads to a 
metabolic shift to ketosis. This review systematically summarizes the scientific 
literature supporting this effective treatment approach for neurodegenerative 
diseases, including effects on mitochondrial function, oxidative stress, 
neuronal apoptosis, neuroinflammation, and the microbiota-gut-brain axis. It 
also highlights the clinical evidence for the effects of the ketogenic diet in 
the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and motor neuron 
disease. Finally, it discusses the common adverse effects of ketogenic therapy. 
Although the complete mechanism of the ketogenic diet in the treatment of 
neurodegenerative diseases remains to be elucidated, its clinical efficacy has 
attracted many new followers. The ketogenic diet is a good candidate for 
adjuvant therapy, but its specific applicability depends on the type and the 
degree of the disease.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1570159X20666220830102628
PMCID: PMC9890290
PMID: 36043794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]