1. J Inflamm Res. 2022 Aug 24;15:4817-4831. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S377402. eCollection
 2022.

Whole Exome Sequencing Revealed Variants That Predict Pulmonary Artery 
Involvement in Patients with Takayasu Arteritis.

Liu L(1), Chen J(2), Li J(1), Yang Y(1), Zeng X(1), Tian X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, National Clinical Research 
Center for Dermatologic and Immunologic Diseases (NCRC-DID), Ministry of Science 
& Technology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH), Key Laboratory of Rheumatology and 
Clinical Immunology, Ministry of Education, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to 
Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: To conduct the first whole exome sequencing (WES) on Takayasu arteritis 
(TAK) to identify common and rare variants responsible for disease 
susceptibility.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 200 patients and 1675 healthy controls from 
China were recruited for this study. Site-based association analysis for common 
variants and gene-based burden analysis for rare variants were conducted. A 
weighted genetic risk score (wGRS) was calculated for each patient with TAK 
based on the independent risk alleles identified in the association analyses. 
The ability of the patient wGRS to discriminate between different phenotypes was 
evaluated.
RESULTS: In the site-based analysis, the top association signal was CCHCR1 
(rs1265067, p = 8.27 × 10-12, OR = 2.41), a proxy for HLA-B*52:01. HLA-DQB1 
(rs9273902), HLA-DQB2 (rs34109750), and a haplotype block in the human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) class III region (represented by rs3130618) also exhibited 
significant associations independently. In addition, four novel non-HLA 
susceptibility loci were identified: PRRT4, TLL2, LRP1B, and DLGAP2. Twelve 
independently associated single nucleotide polymorphisms were used to calculate 
the wGRS. TAK patients with a higher wGRS were found to have an increased risk 
of pulmonary artery involvement compared with those with a lower wGRS (p = 5.76 
× 10-7, OR = 13.92). The wGRS algorithm showed good predictive capability for 
pulmonary artery involvement in TAK (sensitivity, 92.1%; specificity, 59.9%). In 
the gene-based analysis, risk genes that reached exome-wide significance were 
not identified.
CONCLUSION: This WES study on TAK supports a previously reported association 
within the HLA region. Moreover, novel susceptibility loci were identified 
outside the HLA region. These risk alleles showed potential associations with 
pulmonary artery involvement in TAK. However, additional studies are warranted 
to verify our findings.

© 2022 Liu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S377402
PMCID: PMC9420927
PMID: 36046661

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.