1. Neurol Genet. 2022 Aug 29;8(5):e200014. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200014. 
eCollection 2022 Oct.

Genetic Evidence for Protective Effects of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Against 
Alzheimer Disease But Not Other Neurodegenerative Diseases in European 
Populations.

Ryan DK(1), Karhunen V(1), Su B(1), Traylor M(1), Richardson TG(1), Burgess 
S(1), Tzoulaki I(1), Gill D(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Group (D.K.R., D.G.), Pharmacy and Medicines 
Directorate, St George's University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust; Clinical 
Pharmacology and Therapeutics Section (D.K.R., D.G.), Institute of Medical and 
Biomedical Education and Institute for Infection and Immunity, St George's, 
University of London; Centre for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 
(D.K.R.), University College London; Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics (V.K., B.S., I.T., D.G.), School of Public Health, Imperial 
College London, United Kingdom; Research Unit of Mathematical Sciences (V.K.), 
University of Oulu; Center for Life Course Health Research (V.K.), University of 
Oulu, Finland; Clinical Pharmacology (M.T.), William Harvey Research Institute, 
Queen Mary University of London; The Barts Heart Centre and NIHR Barts 
Biomedical Research Centre-Barts Health NHS Trust (M.T.), The William Harvey 
Research Institute, Queen Mary University London; Novo Nordisk Research Centre 
Oxford (M.T., T.G.R., D.G.), Old Road Campus, Oxford; Medical Research Council 
Integrative Epidemiology Unit (T.G.R.), University of Bristol; Medical Research 
Council Biostatistics Unit (S.B., D.G.), Cambridge Institute of Public Health; 
Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit (S.B.), Department of Public Health and Primary 
Care, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom; and Department of Hygiene and 
Epidemiology (I.T.), University of Ioannina, Greece.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are a 
commonly prescribed class of medication used to treat heart failure, 
hypertension, and chronic kidney disease. However, previous observational 
studies have shown conflicting directions of associations between ACE inhibitors 
and risk of Alzheimer disease. Genetic evidence has supported a protective 
effect of cerebral ACE against Alzheimer disease (AD). However, it is unclear 
whether this effect is mediated through blood pressure and extends to other 
neurodegenerative diseases.
METHODS: We performed genetic colocalization investigating an effect of cortical 
ACE expression on AD risk in people of European ancestry. We further 
investigated whether any effect of ACE expression on AD risk is mediated through 
changes in blood pressure and whether effects extend to Parkinson disease, 
small-vessel disease, or cognitive function in a Mendelian randomization 
paradigm.
RESULTS: There was genetic evidence supporting a protective effect of cortical 
ACE expression on AD risk in people of European ancestry. Although higher 
cortical ACE expression was associated with higher blood pressure, there was no 
strong evidence to support that its association with AD was mediated through 
blood pressure nor that ACE expression affected risk of other neurodegenerative 
traits.
DISCUSSION: Genetic evidence supports protective effects of cerebral ACE 
expression on AD, but not other neurodegenerative outcomes in people of European 
ancestry. Further work is required to investigate whether therapeutic inhibition 
of ACE increases risk of Alzheimer disease.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200014
PMCID: PMC9425221
PMID: 36046424