1. Front Physiol. 2022 Aug 15;13:880004. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.880004. 
eCollection 2022.

Antagonizing Sec62 function in intracellular Ca(2+) homeostasis represents a 
novel therapeutic strategy for head and neck cancer.

Körner S(1), Pick T(2), Bochen F(1), Wemmert S(1), Körbel C(3), Menger MD(3), 
Cavalié A(2), Kühn JP(1), Schick B(1), Linxweiler M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Saarland University 
Medical Center, Homburg, Germany.
(2)Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Pre-Clinical Center 
for Molecular Signalling (PSMZ), Saarland University, Homburg, Germany.
(3)Institute for Clinical and Experimental Surgery, Saarland University, 
Homburg, Germany.

Various cancer types including head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) 
show a frequent amplification of chromosomal region 3q26 that encodes, among 
others, for the SEC62 gene. Located in the ER membrane, this translocation 
protein is known to play a critical role as a potential driver oncogene in 
cancer development. High SEC62 expression levels were observed in various cancer 
entities and were associated with a poor outcome and increased metastatic 
burden. Because of its intracellular localization the SEC62 protein is poorly 
accessible for therapeutic antibodies, therefore a functional SEC62 knockdown 
represents the most promising mechanism of a potential antineoplastic targeted 
therapy. By stimulating the Ca2+ efflux from the ER lumen and thereby increasing 
cellular stress levels, a functional inhibition of SEC62 bears the potential to 
limit tumor growth and metastasis formation. In this study, two potential 
anti-metastatic and -proliferative agents that counteract SEC62 function were 
investigated in functional in vitro assays by utilizing an immortalized human 
hypopharyngeal cancer cell line as well as a newly established orthotopic murine 
in vivo model. Additionally, a CRISPR/Cas9 based SEC62 knockout HNSCC cell line 
was generated and functionally characterized for its relevance in HNSCC cell 
proliferation and migration as well as sensitivity to SEC62 targeted therapy in 
vitro.

Copyright © 2022 Körner, Pick, Bochen, Wemmert, Körbel, Menger, Cavalié, Kühn, 
Schick and Linxweiler.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2022.880004
PMCID: PMC9421371
PMID: 36045752

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.