1. Front Oncol. 2022 Aug 16;12:948933. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.948933. eCollection
 2022.

Case report: The effective response to pembrolizumab in combination with 
bevacizumab in the treatment of a recurrent glioblastoma with multiple 
extracranial metastases.

Yang G(1), Fang Y(2), Zhou M(1), Li W(2), Dong D(3), Chen J(2), Da Y(1), Wang 
K(1), Li X(1), Zhang X(2), Ma T(2), Shen G(1).

Author information:
(1)Oncology Department, Beijing Fengtai You'anmen Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Genetron Health (Beijing) Technology, Co. Ltd., Beijing, China.
(3)Oncology Department, Beijing Hui'an TCM-Integrated Hospital, Beijing, China.

Multiple extracranial metastases of recurrent glioblastoma are rare and often 
indicate a very poor prognosis. The main conventional treatments are 
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, chemoradiotherapy or antiangiogenic therapy. Median 
overall survival is 2.3 to 6 months after the detection of extracranial 
metastases, and to date, there is no effective treatment for these patients. 
Herein, we report a recurrent glioblastoma patient with lung metastasis treated 
with a combination therapy containing bevacizumab and pembrolizumab due to 
overexpression of PD-L1 and the absence of driver mutations. The 
progression-free survival was 11 months from lung metastases to bone metastases. 
This combination treatment was further used as maintenance therapy for another 
11 months after bone metastasis and secondary dorsal metastasis because there 
was no suitable treatment alternative. The overall survival was 27 months after 
lung metastases, which is much longer than previously reported cases. To our 
knowledge, this was the first effective use of bevacizumab plus pembrolizumab in 
a glioblastoma patient with extracranial metastases. Furthermore, this was the 
first time that bevacizumab plus pembrolizumab was used as a maintenance 
treatment in glioblastoma, with 11 months of response. Importantly, we showed 
that such combination therapy may be a novel and effective therapy for 
glioblastoma patients with extracranial metastases.

Copyright Â© 2022 Yang, Fang, Zhou, Li, Dong, Chen, Da, Wang, Li, Zhang, Ma and 
Shen.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.948933
PMCID: PMC9424992
PMID: 36052225

Conflict of interest statement: Author YF, WL, JC, XZ and TM are employed by 
Genetron Health (Beijing) Technology, Co. Ltd. The remaining authors declare 
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.