1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Oct;298(10):102443. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102443. Epub
2022  Aug 31.

Ubiquitin ligase Triad1 promotes neurite outgrowth by inhibiting MDM2-mediated 
ubiquitination of the neuroprotective factor pleiotrophin.

Wu C(1), Xu G(2), Bao G(2), Gao H(2), Chen J(2), Zhang J(2), Chen C(2), Hong 
H(2), Xue P(2), Jiang J(2), Liu Y(2), Huang J(2), Sun Y(2), Fu J(2), Li Y(2), 
Cui Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital 2 of Nantong University, 
The First People's Hospital of Nantong, Nantong, China; Key Laboratory for 
Restoration Mechanism and Clinical Translation of Spinal Cord Injury, Nantong, 
China; Research Institute for Spine and Spinal Cord Disease of Nantong 
University, Nantong, China.
(2)Department of Spine Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital 2 of Nantong University, 
The First People's Hospital of Nantong, Nantong, China.
(3)Department of Spine Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital 2 of Nantong University, 
The First People's Hospital of Nantong, Nantong, China; Key Laboratory for 
Restoration Mechanism and Clinical Translation of Spinal Cord Injury, Nantong, 
China; Research Institute for Spine and Spinal Cord Disease of Nantong 
University, Nantong, China. Electronic address: zhimingcuispine@163.com.

Spinal cord injury (SCI) is the most severe result of spine injury, but no 
effective therapy exists to treat SCI. We have previously shown that the E3 
ubiquitin ligase Two RING fingers and DRIL 1 (Triad1) promotes neurite outgrowth 
after SCI. However, the mechanism by which Triad1 affects neuron growth and the 
potential involvement of its ubiquitination activity is unclear. Neuroprotective 
cytokine pleiotrophin (PTN) can promote microglia proliferation and neurotrophic 
factor secretion to achieve neuroprotection. We find using immunostaining and 
behavioral assays in rats that the expression of Triad1 and the PTN was peaked 
at 1 day after SCI and Triad1 improved motor function and histomorphological 
injury after SCI. We show using flow cytometry and astrocyte/neuronal coculture 
assays that Triad1 overexpression promoted PTN protein levels, neurotrophic 
growth factor (NGF) expression, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 
expression, astrocyte and neuronal viability, and neurite outgrowth but 
suppressed astrocyte apoptosis, while shRNA-mediated knockdown of Triad1 and PTN 
had the opposite effects. Ubiquitin ligase murine double mutant 2 (MDM2) has 
previously been demonstrated to participate in the process of neurite outgrowth 
and mediate ubiquitination of p53. Furthermore, we demonstrate overexpression of 
MDM2 downregulated PTN protein levels, NGF expression and BDNF expression in 
astrocytes, and inhibited neurite outgrowth of neurons. In addition, MDM2 
facilitated PTN ubiquitination, which was reversed by Triad1. Finally, we show 
simultaneous sh-PTN and MDM2 overexpression attenuated the neurite 
outgrowth-promoting effect of Triad1 overexpression. In conclusion, we propose 
Triad1 promotes astrocyte-dependent neurite outgrowth to accelerate recovery 
after SCI by inhibiting MDM2-mediated PTN ubiquitination.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102443
PMCID: PMC9531182
PMID: 36055408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.