1. Plant Physiol. 2022 Nov 28;190(4):2417-2429. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiac409.

Mutation of histone H3 serine 28 to alanine influences H3K27me3-mediated gene 
silencing in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Xu L(1), Cheng J(1), Jiang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research, Gatersleben, 
Germany.

Histone modifications are essential for chromatin activity and play an important 
role in many biological processes. Trimethylation of histone H3K27 (H3K27me3) is 
a repressive modification established by Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). 
Although the presence of the histone H3 serine 28 phosphorylation (H3S28ph) 
modification at adjacent amino acid residues has both positive and negative 
effects on Polycomb silencing in mammals, little is known about the effect of 
H3S28ph on H3K27me3-mediated gene silencing in plants. In this study, we show 
that mutating H3S28A in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) causes a 
dominant-negative effect that leads to an early-flowering phenotype by promoting 
the expression of flowering-promoting genes independently of abnormal cell 
division. While H3S28ph levels decreased due to the H3S28A mutation, H3K27me3 
levels at the same loci did not increase. Moreover, we observed decreased 
H3K27me3 levels at some known PRC2 target genes in H3.3S28A transgenic lines, 
rather than the expected enhanced H3K27me3-mediated silencing. In line with the 
reduced H3K27me3 levels, the expression of the PRC2 catalytic subunits CURLY 
LEAF and SWINGER decreased. Taken together, these data demonstrate that H3.3S28 
is required for PRC2-dependent H3K27me3-mediated silencing in Arabidopsis, 
suggesting that H3S28 has a noncanonical function in H3K27me3-mediated gene 
silencing.

Â© American Society of Plant Biologists 2022. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiac409
PMCID: PMC9706487
PMID: 36053193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]