1. Front Immunol. 2022 Aug 19;13:943510. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.943510. 
eCollection 2022.

Interleukin-7 receptor signaling is crucial for enhancer-dependent TCRδ germline 
transcription mediated through STAT5 recruitment.

Rodríguez-Caparrós A(1), Tani-Ichi S(2), Casal Á(1), López-Ros J(1), Suñé C(1), 
Ikuta K(2), Hernández-Munain C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Parasitology and Biomedicine "López-Neyra"- Spanish Scientific 
Research Council (IPBLN-CSIC), Technological Park of Health Sciences (PTS), 
Granada, Spain.
(2)Laboratory of Immune Regulation, Department of Virus Research, Institute for 
Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

γδ T cells play important roles in immune responses by rapidly producing large 
quantities of cytokines. Recently, γδ T cells have been found to be involved in 
tissue homeostatic regulation, playing roles in thermogenesis, bone regeneration 
and synaptic plasticity. Nonetheless, the mechanisms involved in γδ T-cell 
development, especially the regulation of TCRδ gene transcription, have not yet 
been clarified. Previous studies have established that NOTCH1 signaling plays an 
important role in the Tcrg and Tcrd germline transcriptional regulation induced 
by enhancer activation, which is mediated through the recruitment of RUNX1 and 
MYB. In addition, interleukin-7 signaling has been shown to be required for Tcrg 
germline transcription, VγJγ rearrangement and γδ T-lymphocyte generation as 
well as for promoting T-cell survival. In this study, we discovered that 
interleukin-7 is required for the activation of enhancer-dependent Tcrd germline 
transcription during thymocyte development. These results indicate that the 
activation of both Tcrg and Tcrd enhancers during γδ T-cell development in the 
thymus depends on the same NOTCH1- and interleukin-7-mediated signaling 
pathways. Understanding the regulation of the Tcrd enhancer during thymocyte 
development might lead to a better understanding of the enhancer-dependent 
mechanisms involved in the genomic instability and chromosomal translocations 
that cause leukemia.

Copyright © 2022 Rodríguez-Caparrós, Tani-ichi, Casal, López-Ros, Suñé, Ikuta 
and Hernández-Munain.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.943510
PMCID: PMC9437428
PMID: 36059467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.