1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Aug 17;13:920280. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.920280. 
eCollection 2022.

Establishment of a human cell line with a surface display system for screening 
and optimizing Na(+)-taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide-binding peptides.

Wang PY(1), Yang X(1), Guo L(1), Wang YW(2)(3), Zhang WL(1), Sun YX(1), Li J(1), 
Gan CY(1), Long SY(1), Liu JJ(1), Fan SY(1), Huang AL(1), Hu JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology on Infectious Diseases, Ministry of 
Education, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Chongqing, China.
(3)Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases Integrated 
Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Chongqing Hospital of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Chongqing, China.

One of the most desirable targets for HBV medications is the sodium taurocholate 
cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP), an entry receptor for the hepatitis B virus 
(HBV). N-myristoylated preS1 2-48 (Myrcludex B or Hepcludex), an NTCP-binding 
peptide from the large surface protein of HBV, has been developed as the 
first-in-class entry inhibitor. However, its relatively large molecular weight 
contributes to increased immunogenicity and antibody production. As a result, it 
is preferable to look for an NTCP-binding peptide with a smaller size. To do 
this, we developed a human cell surface display strategy and screened peptides 
based on preS1-21. PreS1-21 (genotype D) was extended by 7 random amino acids 
and fused with mCherry and FasL transmembrane domain. The pooled constructs were 
transfected into HEK293 cells by using the transposon/transposase system to 
create a library displaying various peptides on the cell surface with red 
fluorescence. On the other hand, we expressed NTCP protein fused with EGFP on 
HEK293 and used the membrane lysate containing NTCP-GFP as the bait protein to 
select peptides with increased NTCP affinity. After 7 cycles of selection, the 
deep sequencing results revealed that some polypeptides were more than 1,000 
times enriched. Further screening of the mostly enriched 10 peptides yields the 
peptide preS1-21-pep3. Replacing the preS1-21 sequence of preS1-21-pep3 with 
those from different genotypes demonstrated that the consensus sequence of 
genotype A-F had the best performance. The peptide (Myr-preS1-21-pep3) was 
synthesized and tested on the HepG2-NTCP cell model. The results showed that 
Myr-preS1-21-pep3 is approximately 10 times more potent than the initial peptide 
Myr-preS1-21 in preventing HBV infection. In conclusion, we developed a new 
strategy for screening peptides binding to membrane proteins and identified a 
new NTCP-binding peptide with a much smaller size than Hepcludex.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wang, Yang, Guo, Wang, Zhang, Sun, Li, Gan, Long, Liu, Fan, 
Huang and Hu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.920280
PMCID: PMC9428559
PMID: 36060770

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.