1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Aug 19;10:942762. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.942762. 
eCollection 2022.

PanCircBase: An online resource for the exploration of circular RNAs in 
pancreatic islets.

Sinha T(1)(2), Mishra SS(1), Singh S(1)(2), Panda AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Nalco Square, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.
(2)Regional Center for Biotechnology, Faridabad, India.

Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a novel class of covalently closed RNA molecules 
that recently emerged as a critical regulator of gene expression in development 
and diseases. Recent research has highlighted the importance of novel circRNAs 
in the biosynthesis and secretion of insulin from β-cells of pancreatic islets. 
However, all circRNAs expressed in pancreatic islets or β-cells are not readily 
available in the database. In this study, we analyzed publicly available 
RNA-sequencing datasets of the pancreatic islets to catalog all circRNAs 
expressed in pancreatic islets to construct the PanCircBase 
(https://www.pancircbase.net/) database that provides the following resources: 
1) pancreatic islet circRNA annotation details (genomic position, host gene, 
exon information, splice length, sequence, other database IDs, cross-species 
conservation), 2) divergent primers for PCR analysis of circRNAs, 3) siRNAs for 
silencing of target circRNAs, 4) miRNAs associated with circRNAs, 5) possible 
protein-coding circRNAs and their polypeptides. In summary, this is a 
comprehensive online resource for exploring circRNA expression and its possible 
function in pancreatic β-cells.

Copyright © 2022 Sinha, Mishra, Singh and Panda.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.942762
PMCID: PMC9437246
PMID: 36060809

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.