1. Cardiol Res Pract. 2022 Aug 27;2022:8570486. doi: 10.1155/2022/8570486. 
eCollection 2022.

The Relationship between Serum CXCL8 and ET-1 Expression Levels and Sepsis 
Complicated with Heart Failure.

Zhu J(1), Song C(2), Cai T(3), Yi L(4), Zhang W(1), Zhong J(5), Shen M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Ganzhou People's Hospital, Ganzhou 
341000, China.
(2)Department of Emergency, Ganzhou People's Hospital, Ganzhou 341000, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Ganzhou People's Hospital, Ganzhou 341000, 
China.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Ganzhou People's Hospital, Ganzhou 341000, China.
(5)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Quannan People's Hospital, Ganzhou 
341000, China.

OBJECTIVE: The objective is to investigate the relationship between sepsis 
complicated with heart failure and the expression levels of CXC chemokine ligand 
8 (CXCL8) and endothelin-1 (ET-1).
METHODS: A total of 128 sepsis patients accepted by the Ganzhou People's 
Hospital from March 2019 to December 2021 were collected as observation objects, 
and they were separated into a simple sepsis group (86 cases) and a complicated 
heart failure group (42 cases) according to whether they were accompanied by 
heart failure or not. General data such as Sequential Organ Failure Assessment 
(SOFA) score and Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) 
were collected; the expression levels of serum CXCL8 and ET-1 were detected by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); the cardiac function parameters such 
as left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), stroke volume (SV), cardiac output 
(CO), and cardiac index (CI) were measured by color Doppler ultrasound; the 
correlation between serum CXCL8 and ET-1 expression levels with clinical data 
and cardiac function parameters in patients with sepsis complicated with heart 
failure was analyzed by the Pearson correlation; and the influencing factors of 
sepsis complicated with heart failure were analyzed by the logistic regression 
analysis.
RESULTS: The serum CXCL8 and ET-1 expression levels, SOFA score, and APACHE II 
score in the complicated heart failure group were higher than those in the 
simple sepsis group (P < 0.05), and LVEF, SV, CO, and CI in the complicated 
heart failure group were lower than those in the simple sepsis group (P < 0.05). 
Serum CXCL8 was positively correlated with ET-1 in patients with sepsis 
complicated with heart failure (r = 0.531, P < 0.05), and the two were 
positively correlated with SOFA score and APACHE II score (P < 0.05) and were 
negatively correlated with LVEF, SV, CO, and CI (P < 0.05). CXCL8 and ET-1 were 
independent risk factors for sepsis complicated with heart failure (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The expression levels of serum CXCL8 and ET-1 in sepsis patients 
with heart failure are significantly increased, and both are risk factors for 
heart failure in sepsis patients.

Copyright © 2022 Jianlong Zhu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/8570486
PMCID: PMC9440819
PMID: 36065195

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.