1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Aug 23;14(17):4067. doi: 10.3390/cancers14174067.

BRAF Mutations in Colorectal Liver Metastases: Prognostic Implications and 
Potential Therapeutic Strategies.

Wang PP(1)(2), Lin C(2), Wang J(3), Margonis GA(4), Wu B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, 
Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of 
China, Hefei 230001, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, 
China.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94158, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065, USA.

Surgery combined with chemotherapy and precision medicine is the only potential 
treatment for patients with colorectal cancer liver metastases (CRLM). The use 
of modern molecular biotechnology to identify suitable biomarkers is of great 
significance for predicting prognosis and formulating individualized treatment 
plans for these patients. BRAF mutations, particularly V600E, are widely 
believed to be associated with poor prognosis in patients with metastatic CRC 
(mCRC). However, it is unclear which specific factors affect the prognosis of 
CRLM patients with BRAF mutations. It is also unknown whether patients with 
resectable CRLM and BRAF mutations should undergo surgical treatment since there 
is an increased recurrence rate after surgery in these patients. In this review, 
we combined the molecular mechanism and clinical characteristics of BRAF 
mutations to explore the prognostic significance and potential targeted therapy 
strategies for patients with BRAF-mutated CRLM.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14174067
PMCID: PMC9454989
PMID: 36077604

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.