1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Sep 4;23(17):10115. doi: 10.3390/ijms231710115.

Temporal Expression of Myogenic Regulatory Genes in Different Chicken Breeds 
during Embryonic Development.

Gu S(1), Wen C(1), Li J(1), Liu H(1), Huang Q(1), Zheng J(1), Sun C(1), Yang 
N(1).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding and Key Laboratory of 
Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.

The basic units of skeletal muscle in all vertebrates are multinucleate 
myofibers, which are formed from the fusion of mononuclear myoblasts during the 
embryonic period. In order to understand the regulation of embryonic muscle 
development, we selected four chicken breeds, namely, Cornish (CN), White 
Plymouth Rock (WPR), White Leghorn (WL), and Beijing-You Chicken (BYC), for 
evaluation of their temporal expression patterns of known key regulatory genes 
(Myomaker, MYOD, and MSTN) during pectoral muscle (PM) and thigh muscle (TM) 
development. The highest expression level of Myomaker occurred from embryonic 
days E13 to E15 for all breeds, indicating that it was the crucial stage of 
myoblast fusion. Interestingly, the fast-growing CN showed the highest gene 
expression level of Myomaker during the crucial stage. The MYOD gene expression 
at D1 was much higher, implying that MYOD might have an important role after 
hatching. Histomorphology of PM and TM suggested that the myofibers was largely 
complete at E17, which was speculated to have occurred because of the expression 
increase in MSTN and the expression decrease in Myomaker. Our research 
contributes to lay a foundation for the study of myofiber development during the 
embryonic period in different chicken breeds.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms231710115
PMCID: PMC9456251
PMID: 36077516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.