1. Cancer Sci. 2022 Dec;113(12):4311-4326. doi: 10.1111/cas.15569. Epub 2022 Oct 
12.

Pentraxin 3 is an adipose tissue-related serum marker for pancreatic cancer 
cachexia predicting subsequent muscle mass and visceral fat loss.

Sato K(1), Hikita H(1), Shigekawa M(1), Kato S(1), Sasaki Y(1), Shinkai K(1), 
Fukuoka M(1), Kudo S(1), Sato Y(1), Fukumoto K(1), Shirai K(1), Myojin Y(1), 
Sakane S(1), Murai K(1), Yoshioka T(1), Nishio A(1), Kodama T(1), Sakamori R(1), 
Tatsumi T(1), Takehara T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Osaka University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Suita, Japan.

Cancer cachexia, a paraneoplastic syndrome characterized by ongoing skeletal 
muscle mass loss, is accompanied by adipose tissue loss and strongly affects 
chemotherapy endurance. Our aim was to detect a serum marker reflecting 
pancreatic cancer cachexia and predicting subsequent loss of muscle mass and 
adipose tissue, focusing on adipose tissue-secreted proteins. Murine-derived 
pancreatic cancer cells were orthotopically injected into the mouse pancreatic 
tail. After 3 weeks, RNA sequencing of perigonadal fat and orthotopic tumors was 
carried out. We analyzed stocked sera and clinical data of metastatic pancreatic 
cancer patients who received chemotherapy. Perigonadal fat weight/body weight 
decreased in mice with orthotopic tumors compared to those without tumors. By 
RNA sequencing and real-time PCR validation, pentraxin 3 (PTX3) was identified 
as a secreted protein-encoded gene whose expression was significantly higher in 
the perigonadal fat of mice with orthotopic tumors than in that of mice without 
orthotopic tumors and was least expressed in orthotopic tumors. Serum PTX3 
levels correlated with PTX3 mRNA levels in perigonadal fat and were higher in 
mice with orthotopic tumors than in those without tumors. In 84 patients 
diagnosed with metastatic pancreatic cancer, patients with high serum PTX3 
levels showed a greater visceral fat loss/month and skeletal muscle mass index 
(SMI) decrease/month than those with low serum PTX3 levels. High serum PTX3 was 
an independent risk factor for visceral fat loss, decreased SMI, and poor 
prognosis. High serum PTX3 in pancreatic cancer patients predicts visceral fat 
and muscle mass loss and major clinical outcomes of cancer cachexia.

© 2022 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.15569
PMCID: PMC9746057
PMID: 36074525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]