1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Sep 1;23(17):9957. doi: 10.3390/ijms23179957.

Therapeutics That Can Potentially Replicate or Augment the Anti-Aging Effects of 
Physical Exercise.

De Sousa Lages A(1), Lopes V(1), Horta J(2), Espregueira-Mendes J(3), Andrade 
R(3), Rebelo-Marques A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Department, Hospital de Braga, 4710 Braga, Portugal.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, 3000 Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)Cl√≠nica Espregueira, FIFA Excellence Centre of Medicine, 4350 Porto, 
Portugal.

Globally, better health care access and social conditions ensured a significant 
increase in the life expectancy of the population. There is, however, a clear 
increase in the incidence of age-related diseases which, besides affecting the 
social and economic sustainability of countries and regions around the globe, 
leads to a decrease in the individual's quality of life. There is an urgent need 
for interventions that can reverse, or at least prevent and delay, the 
age-associated pathological deterioration. Within this line, this narrative 
review aims to assess updated evidence that explores the potential therapeutic 
targets that can mimic or complement the recognized anti-aging effects of 
physical exercise. We considered pertinent to review the anti-aging effects of 
the following drugs and supplements: Rapamycin and Rapamycin analogues 
(Rapalogs); Metformin; 2-deoxy-D-glucose; Somatostatin analogues; Pegvisomant; 
Trametinib; Spermidine; Fisetin; Quercetin; Navitoclax; TA-65; Resveratrol; 
Melatonin; Curcumin; Rhodiola rosea and Caffeine. The current scientific 
evidence on the anti-aging effect of these drugs and supplements is still scarce 
and no recommendation of their generalized use can be made at this stage. 
Further studies are warranted to determine which therapies display a 
geroprotective effect and are capable of emulating the benefits of physical 
exercise.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23179957
PMCID: PMC9456478
PMID: 36077358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.