1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Aug 30;14(17):4211. doi: 10.3390/cancers14174211.

Oncostatin M: From Intracellular Signaling to Therapeutic Targets in Liver 
Cancer.

Caligiuri A(1), Gitto S(1), Lori G(1), Marra F(1), Parola M(2), Cannito S(2), 
Gentilini A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
50139 Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Unit of Experimental Medicine 
& Clinical Pathology, University of Torino, 10125 Torino, Italy.

Primary liver cancers represent the third-most-common cause of cancer-related 
mortality worldwide, with an incidence of 80-90% for hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC) and 10-15% for cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), and an increasing morbidity and 
mortality rate. Although HCC and CCA originate from independent cell populations 
(hepatocytes and biliary epithelial cells, respectively), they develop in 
chronically inflamed livers. Evidence obtained in the last decade has revealed a 
role for cytokines of the IL-6 family in the development of primary liver 
cancers. These cytokines operate through the receptor subunit gp130 and the 
downstream Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 
(JAK/STAT) signaling pathways. Oncostatin M (OSM), a member of the IL-6 family, 
plays a significant role in inflammation, autoimmunity, and cancer, including 
liver tumors. Although, in recent years, therapeutic approaches for the 
treatment of HCC and CCA have been implemented, limited treatment options with 
marginal clinical benefits are available. We discuss how OSM-related pathways 
can be selectively inhibited and therapeutically exploited for the treatment of 
liver malignancies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14174211
PMCID: PMC9454586
PMID: 36077744

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.