1. Nutrients. 2022 Aug 31;14(17):3586. doi: 10.3390/nu14173586.

The Response of the Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cell Transcriptome to 
Variation in Magnesium Concentration.

Almousa LA(1), Salter AM(2), Castellanos M(3), May ST(3), Langley-Evans SC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, College of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, 
Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh 11671, Saudi 
Arabia.
(2)Division of Nutritional Sciences, School of Biosciences, The University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2TU, UK.
(3)Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre, School of Biosciences, The University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2TU, UK.

Vascular endothelial cells have a critical role in the maintenance of 
cardiovascular function. Evidence suggests that endothelial function may be 
compromised under conditions of magnesium deficiency, which increases 
vulnerability to inflammation. Whole genome transcription analysis was used to 
explore the acute (24 h) effects of magnesium on human umbilical vascular 
endothelial cells (HUVEC) cultured in low (0.1 mM) or high (5 mM) 
concentrations. With low magnesium 2728 transcripts were differentially 
expressed compared to the 1 mM control cultures and 3030 were differentially 
expressed with high magnesium. 615 transcripts were differentially expressed 
under both conditions, of which only 34 showed a concentration-dependent 
response. Analysis indicated that cellular organisation and biogenesis and key 
cellular processes such as apoptosis were impacted by both low and high 
conditions. High magnesium also influenced protein binding functions, 
intracellular signal transduction, metabolic and catalytic processes. Both 
conditions impacted on stress-related processes, in particular the inflammatory 
response. Key mediators of calcium-dependent regulation of gene expression were 
responsive to both high and low magnesium conditions. The HUVEC transcriptome is 
highly sensitive to acute changes in the concentration of magnesium in culture 
medium. The findings of this study support the view that whilst inflammation is 
an important process that is responsive to magnesium, the function of the 
endothelium may be impacted by other magnesium-induced changes including 
maintenance of cellular integrity, receptor expression and metabolic functions. 
The high proportion of transcripts that did not show a concentration-dependent 
response suggests variation in magnesium may elicit indirect changes, possibly 
mediated by other ions.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14173586
PMCID: PMC9460622
PMID: 36079843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.