1. Molecules. 2022 Aug 26;27(17):5481. doi: 10.3390/molecules27175481.

Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Model of Neuroinflammation: Mechanisms of Action, 
Research Application and Future Directions for Its Use.

Skrzypczak-Wiercioch A(1), Sa≈Çat K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Anatomy and Preclinical Sciences, University Centre of 
Veterinary Medicine JU-UA, University of Agriculture in Krakow, 24/28 
Mickiewicza St., 30-059 Krakow, Poland.
(2)Department of Pharmacodynamics, Chair of Pharmacodynamics, Jagiellonian 
University Medical College, 9 Medyczna St., 30-688 Krakow, Poland.

Despite advances in antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory therapies, inflammation 
and its consequences still remain a significant problem in medicine. Acute 
inflammatory responses are responsible for directly life-threating conditions 
such as septic shock; on the other hand, chronic inflammation can cause 
degeneration of body tissues leading to severe impairment of their function. 
Neuroinflammation is defined as an inflammatory response in the central nervous 
system involving microglia, astrocytes, and cytokines including chemokines. It 
is considered an important cause of neurodegerative diseases, such as 
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a strong immunogenic particle present in the outer 
membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. It is a major triggering factor for the 
inflammatory cascade in response to a Gram-negative bacteria infection. The use 
of LPS as a strong pro-inflammatory agent is a well-known model of inflammation 
applied in both in vivo and in vitro studies. This review offers a summary of 
the pathogenesis associated with LPS exposure, especially in the field of 
neuroinflammation. Moreover, we analyzed different in vivo LPS models utilized 
in the area of neuroscience. This paper presents recent knowledge and is focused 
on new insights in the LPS experimental model.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27175481
PMCID: PMC9457753
PMID: 36080253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.