1. Microb Biotechnol. 2023 Feb;16(2):195-217. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.14135. Epub 
2022 Sep 13.

Microbial enzymes will offer limited solutions to the global plastic pollution 
crisis.

Chow J(1), Perez-Garcia P(1), Dierkes R(1), Streit WR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, 
Germany.

Global economies depend on the use of fossil-fuel-based polymers with 360-400 
million metric tons of synthetic polymers being produced per year. 
Unfortunately, an estimated 60% of the global production is disposed into the 
environment. Within this framework, microbiologists have tried to identify 
plastic-active enzymes over the past decade. Until now, this research has 
largely failed to deliver functional biocatalysts acting on the commodity 
polymers such as polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), polyvinylchloride (PVC), 
ether-based polyurethane (PUR), polyamide (PA), polystyrene (PS) and synthetic 
rubber (SR). However, few enzymes are known to act on low-density and 
low-crystalline (amorphous) polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and ester-based 
PUR. These above-mentioned polymers represent >95% of all synthetic plastics 
produced. Therefore, the main challenge microbiologists are currently facing is 
in finding polymer-active enzymes targeting the majority of fossil-fuel-based 
plastics. However, identifying plastic-active enzymes either to implement them 
in biotechnological processes or to understand their potential role in nature is 
an emerging research field. The application of these enzymes is still in its 
infancy. Here, we summarize the current knowledge on microbial plastic-active 
enzymes, their global distribution and potential impact on plastic degradation 
in industrial processes and nature. We further outline major challenges in 
finding novel plastic-active enzymes, optimizing known ones by synthetic 
approaches and problems arising through falsely annotated and unfiltered use of 
database entries. Finally, we highlight potential biotechnological applications 
and possible re- and upcycling concepts using microorganisms.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by Society for Applied 
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1751-7915.14135
PMCID: PMC9871534
PMID: 36099200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.