1. PLoS One. 2022 Sep 14;17(9):e0273948. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0273948. 
eCollection 2022.

An examination of the prevalence of metabolic syndrome in older adults in 
Ireland: Findings from The Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing (TILDA).

McCarthy K(1)(2), Laird E(1), O'Halloran AM(1), Fallon P(1), O'Connor D(1), 
Ortuño RR(1)(2), Kenny RA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Mercer's Institute for Successful Ageing, St James's Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland.

Metabolic syndrome (MetS) consists of the cluster of central obesity, insulin 
resistance, hypertension and atherogenic dyslipidaemia. It is a risk factor for 
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and mortality. The prevalence of MetS has not 
been described in older adults from a population-representative sample in a 
European country before. This study aimed to determine the prevalence of MetS in 
older adults in Ireland and examine the association between MetS and 
socio-demographic, health, and lifestyle factors. This study used data from a 
population aged ≥50 years from waves 1 and 3 of the Irish Longitudinal Study on 
Ageing. The prevalence of MetS using the National Cholesterol Education Program 
Third Adult Treatment Panel (ATPIII) and the International Diabetes Foundation 
(IDF) criteria were determined. Weighted logistic regression examined the 
association between MetS and age, sex, education, and physical activity. MetS 
status was determined at both waves with transitions examined. 5340 participants 
had complete data for MetS criteria at wave 1. 33% had MetS according to the 
ATPIII criteria (32.5%; 95% CI: 31.1, 34.0), with 39% according to the IDF 
criteria (39.3%; 95% CI: 37.8, 40.8). MetS was more prevalent with advancing 
age, among males, those with lower educational attainment and lower physical 
activity. 3609 participants had complete data for both waves- 25% of those with 
MetS at wave 1 did not have MetS at wave 3 but the overall number of 
participants with MetS increased by 19.8% (ATPIII) and 14.7% (IDF). MetS is 
highly prevalent in older adults in Ireland. 40% of the 1.2 million population 
aged ≥50 years in Ireland meet either the ATPIII or IDF criteria. Increasing 
age, male sex, lower educational attainment, and lower physical activity were 
all associated with an increased likelihood of MetS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0273948
PMCID: PMC9473442
PMID: 36103469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.