1. Biology (Basel). 2022 Jun 23;11(7):953. doi: 10.3390/biology11070953.

The Complete Genome of the "Flavescence Dorée" Phytoplasma Reveals 
Characteristics of Low Genome Plasticity.

Debonneville C(1), Mandelli L(1), Brodard J(1), Groux R(1), Roquis D(2), Schumpp 
O(1).

Author information:
(1)Virology, Bacteriology and Phytoplasmology, Agroscope, CH-1260 Nyon, 
Switzerland.
(2)Plant Genome Dynamics, Agroscope, CH-1260 Nyon, Switzerland.

Members of the genus 'Candidatus Phytoplasma' are obligate intracellular 
bacteria restricted to phloem sieve elements and are able to colonize several 
tissues and the hemolymph in their insect vectors. The current unfeasibility of 
axenic culture and the low complexity of genomic sequences are obstacles in 
assembling complete chromosomes. Here, a method combining pathogen DNA 
enrichment from infected insects and dual deep-sequencing technologies was used 
to obtain the complete genome of a phytoplasma causing Grapevine Flavescence 
dorée. The de novo assembly generated a circular chromosome of 654,223 bp 
containing 506 protein-coding genes. Quality assessment of the draft showed a 
high degree of completeness. Comparative analysis with other phytoplasmas 
revealed the absence of potential mobile units and a reduced amount of putative 
phage-derived segments, suggesting a low genome plasticity. Phylogenetic 
analyses identified Candidatus Phytoplasma ziziphi as the closest fully 
sequenced relative. The "Flavescence dorée" phytoplasma strain CH genome also 
encoded for several putative effector proteins potentially playing a role in 
pathogen virulence. The availability of this genome provides the basis for the 
study of the pathogenicity mechanisms and evolution of the Flavescence dorée 
phytoplasma.

DOI: 10.3390/biology11070953
PMCID: PMC9312162
PMID: 36101334

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.