1. Inorg Chem. 2022 Sep 26;61(38):15070-15084. doi:
10.1021/acs.inorgchem.2c02160.  Epub 2022 Sep 13.

Impact of the Anthryl Linking Mode on the Photophysics and Excited-State 
Dynamics of Re(I) Complexes [ReCl(CO)(3)(4'-An-terpy-κ(2)N)].

Małecka M(1), Szlapa-Kula A(1), Maroń AM(1), Ledwon P(2), Siwy M(3), 
Schab-Balcerzak E(1)(3), Sulowska K(4), Maćkowski S(4), Erfurt K(5), Machura 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chemistry, University of Silesia, 9th Szkolna Street, 40-006 
Katowice, Poland.
(2)Department of Physical Chemistry and Technology of Polymers, Silesian 
University of Technology, Strzody 9, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland.
(3)Centre of Polymer and Carbon Materials, Polish Academy of Sciences, 34 M. 
Curie-Sklodowska Street, 41-819 Zabrze, Poland.
(4)Nanophotonics Group, Institute of Physics, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and 
Informatics, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 5 Grudziadzka Street, 87-100 Torun, 
Poland.
(5)Department of Chemical Organic Technology and Petrochemistry, Silesian 
University of Technology, Krzywoustego 4, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland.

Rhenium(I) complexes with 2,2':6',2″-terpyridines (terpy) substituted with 
9-anthryl (1) and 2-anthryl (2) were synthesized, and the impact of the anthryl 
linking mode on the ground- and excited-state properties of resulting complexes 
[ReCl(CO)3(4'-An-terpy-κ2N)] (An─anthryl) was investigated using a combination 
of steady-state and time-resolved optical techniques accompanied by theoretical 
calculations. Different attachment positions of anthracene modify the overlap 
between the molecular orbitals and thus the electronic coupling of the 
anthracene and {ReCl(CO)3(terpy-κ2N)} chromophores. Following the femtosecond 
transient absorption, the lowest triplet excited state of both complexes was 
found to be localized on the anthracene chromophore. The striking difference 
between 1 and 2 concerns the triplet-state formation dynamics. A more planar 
geometry of 2-anthryl-terpy (2), and thus better electronic communication 
between the anthracene and {ReCl(CO)3(terpy-κ2N)} chromophores, facilitates the 
formation of the 3An triplet state. In steady-state photoluminescence spectra, 
the population ratio of 3MLCT and 3An was found to be dependent not only on the 
anthryl linking mode but also on solvent polarity and excitation wavelengths. In 
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), compounds 1 and 2 excited with λexc > 410 nm show 
both 3MLCT and 3An emissions, which are rarely observed. Additionally, the 
abilities of the designed complexes for 1O2 generation and light emission under 
the external voltage were preliminary examined.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.2c02160
PMCID: PMC9516691
PMID: 36101987

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.