1. Biomed Res Int. 2022 Sep 5;2022:9082455. doi: 10.1155/2022/9082455.
eCollection  2022.

Inflammasome Genetic Variants Are Associated with Protection to Clinical 
Severity of COVID-19 among Patients from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

de Sá NBR(1), Neira-Goulart M(1), Ribeiro-Alves M(2), Perazzo H(2), Geraldo 
KM(2), Ribeiro MPD(2), Cardoso SW(2), Grinsztejn B(2), Veloso VG(2), Capão A(3), 
Siqueira MM(3), de Lima Bezerra OC(3), Garcia CC(3), Gomes LR(4), da Silva 
Cazote A(1), de Almeida DV(1), Giacoia-Gripp CBW(1), Côrtes FH(1), Morgado 
MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of AIDS & Molecular Immunology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, FIOCRUZ, 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Research on STD/AIDS, National Institute of 
Infectology Evandro Chagas, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Respiratory Virus and Measles, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, FIOCRUZ, 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Center of Technological Development in Health (CDTS)/National Institute of 
Science and Technological for Innovation on Neglected Population Diseases 
(INCT-IDPN), FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

COVID-19 has a broad spectrum of clinical manifestations, from asymptomatic or 
mild/moderate symptoms to severe symptoms and death. The mechanisms underlying 
its clinical evolution are still unclear. Upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, host 
factors, such as the inflammasome system, are activated by the presence of the 
virus inside host cells. The search for COVID-19 risk factors is of relevance 
for clinical management. In this study, we investigated the impact of 
inflammasome single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in SARS-CoV-2-infected 
individuals with distinct severity profiles at clinical presentation. Patients 
were divided into two groups according to disease severity at clinical 
presentation based on the WHO Clinical Progression Scale. Group 1 included 
patients with mild/moderate disease (WHO < 6; n = 76), and group 2 included 
patients with severe/critical COVID-19 (WHO ≥ 6; n = 357). Inpatients with 
moderate to severe/critical profiles were recruited and followed-up at Hospital 
Center for COVID-19 Pandemic - National Institute of Infectology (INI)/FIOCRUZ, 
RJ, Brazil, from June 2020 to March 2021. Patients with mild disease were 
recruited at Oswaldo Cruz Institute (IOC)/FIOCRUZ, RJ, Brazil, in August 2020. 
Genotyping of 11 inflammasome SNPs was determined by real-time PCR. Protection 
and risk estimation were performed using unconditional logistic regression 
models. Significant differences in NLRP3 rs1539019 and CARD8 rs2043211 were 
observed between the two groups. Protection against disease severity was 
associated with the A/A genotype (ORadj = 0.36; P = 0.032), allele A (ORadj = 
0.93; P = 0.010), or carrier-A (ORadj = 0.45; P = 0.027) in the NLRP3 rs1539019 
polymorphism; A/T genotype (ORadj = 0.5; P = 0.045), allele T (ORadj = 0.93; P = 
0.018), or carrier-T (ORadj = 0.48; P = 0.029) in the CARD8 rs2043211 
polymorphism; and the A-C-G-C-C (ORadj = 0.11; P = 0.018), A-C-G-C-G (ORadj = 
0.23; P = 0.003), C-C-G-C-C (ORadj = 0.37; P = 0.021), and C-T-G-A-C (ORadj = 
0.04; P = 0.0473) in NLRP3 genetic haplotype variants. No significant 
associations were observed for the other polymorphisms. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first study demonstrating an association between CARD8 
and NLRP3 inflammasome genetic variants and protection against COVID-19 
severity, contributing to the discussion of the impact of inflammasomes on 
COVID-19 outcomes.

Copyright © 2022 Nathalia Beatriz Ramos de Sá et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/9082455
PMCID: PMC9467712
PMID: 36105941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.