1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2022 Sep 5;2022:3181133. doi: 
10.1155/2022/3181133. eCollection 2022.

Low-Dose Apatinib Improves the Prognosis of Patients with Recurrent High-Grade 
Gliomas.

Zhang M(1), Gao L(1), Liu X(1), Dong F(1), Su Q(1), Zhang Y(1), Li F(1), Wang 
H(2), Han P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, Gansu Provincial Cancer Hospital, Lanzhou, Gansu, 
China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Lanzhou Maternal and Child Health 
Care Hospital, Lanzhou, Gansu, China.

Retraction in
    Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2023 Jun 21;2023:9853753. doi: 
10.1155/2023/9853753.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy, safety, and prognostic value of low-dose 
apatinib in combination with temozolomide in the treatment of primary or 
recurrent high-grade gliomas (HGGs).
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of patients with postoperative and recurrent 
HGGs treated in our hospital from April 1, 2018, to April 30, 2020. Patients 
should be treated by combination therapy 
(surgery + radiotherapy + chemotherapy). Patients who received apatinib combined 
with temozolomide chemotherapy were allocated to the research group (RG), while 
patients who received temozolomide chemotherapy alone were allocated to the 
control group (CG). The efficacy and toxic side effects were compared between 
the two groups.
RESULTS: There were 67 qualified patients retrieved, including 37 cases in the 
RG and 30 cases in the CG. There were no significant differences in objective 
remission rate (ORR) or disease control rate (DCR) between the control group and 
the study group (P > 0.05). However, the overall improvement of clinical 
efficacy in the observation group was better than that in the control group (P < 
0.05). There was no significant difference in the incidence of adverse effects 
between the two groups (P > 0.05). There were no significant differences in 
overall survival (OS) or progression-free survival (PFS) between the two groups 
(P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Low-dose apatinib combined with temozolomide and radiotherapy for 
HGGs is effective in improving efficacy, relieving brain edema, reducing the use 
of glucocorticoid drugs, and improving patients' quality of life. It has mild 
adverse effects and is well tolerated by patients.

Copyright © 2022 Ming Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/3181133
PMCID: PMC9467810
PMID: 36106030

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.