1. Comput Methods Programs Biomed Update. 2022;2:100066. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpbup.2022.100066. Epub 2022 Sep 9.

Machine learning models to detect anxiety and depression through social media: A 
scoping review.

Ahmed A(1), Aziz S(1), Toro CT(2), Alzubaidi M(3), Irshaidat S(4), Serhan HA(4), 
Abd-Alrazaq AA(1), Househ M(3).

Author information:
(1)AI Center for Precision Health, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Institute of Digital Healthcare, WMG University of Warwick, Warwick, UK.
(3)College of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, 
Qatar.
(4)Jordan University Hospital, Amman, Jordan.

Despite improvement in detection rates, the prevalence of mental health 
disorders such as anxiety and depression are on the rise especially since the 
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Symptoms of mental health disorders have been 
noted and observed on social media forums such Facebook. We explored machine 
learning models used to detect anxiety and depression through social media. Six 
bibliographic databases were searched for conducting the review following 
PRISMA-ScR protocol. We included 54 of 2219 retrieved studies. Users suffering 
from anxiety or depression were identified in the reviewed studies by screening 
their online presence and their sharing of diagnosis by patterns in their 
language and online activity. Majority of the studies (70%, 38/54) were 
conducted at the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic (2019-2020). The studies made use 
of social media data from a variety of different platforms to develop predictive 
models for the detection of depression or anxiety. These included Twitter, 
Facebook, Instagram, Reddit, Sina Weibo, and a combination of different social 
sites posts. We report the most common Machine Learning models identified. 
Identification of those suffering from anxiety and depression disorders may be 
achieved using prediction models to detect user's language on social media and 
has the potential to complimenting traditional screening. Such analysis could 
also provide insights into the mental health of the public especially so when 
access to health professionals can be restricted due to lockdowns and temporary 
closure of services such as we saw during the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpbup.2022.100066
PMCID: PMC9461333
PMID: 36105318

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.