1. J Clin Invest. 2022 Nov 15;132(22):e157002. doi: 10.1172/JCI157002.

Human immunomodulatory ligand B7-1 mediates synaptic remodeling via the p75 
neurotrophin receptor.

Morano NC(1)(2), Smith RS(3), Danelon V(3), Schreiner R(4), Patel U(1), Herrera 
NG(1), Smith C(1), Olson SM(5), Laerke MK(3), Celikgil A(1), Garforth SJ(1), 
Garrett-Thomson SC(1), Lee FS(6), Hempstead BL(3), Almo SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, 
New York, USA.
(2)Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Columbia University, New York, New 
York, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
New York, New York, USA.
(4)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Hartman Institute for Therapeutic Organ 
Regeneration, Ansary Stem Cell Institute, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Cell surface receptors, ligands, and adhesion molecules underlie development, 
circuit formation, and synaptic function of the central nervous system and 
represent important therapeutic targets for many neuropathologies. The 
functional contributions of interactions between cell surface proteins of 
neurons and nonneuronal cells have not been fully addressed. Using an unbiased 
protein-protein interaction screen, we showed that the human immunomodulatory 
ligand B7-1 (hB7-1) interacts with the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) and 
that the B7-1:p75NTR interaction is a recent evolutionary adaptation present in 
humans and other primates, but absent in mice, rats, and other lower mammals. 
The surface of hB7-1 that engages p75NTR overlaps with the hB7-1 surface 
involved in CTLA-4/CD28 recognition, and these molecules directly compete for 
binding to p75NTR. Soluble or membrane-bound hB7-1 altered dendritic morphology 
of cultured hippocampal neurons, with loss of the postsynaptic protein PSD95 in 
a p75NTR-dependent manner. Abatacept, an FDA-approved therapeutic (CTLA-4-hFc 
fusion) inhibited these processes. In vivo injection of hB7-1 into the murine 
subiculum, a hippocampal region affected in Alzheimer's disease, resulted in 
p75NTR-dependent pruning of dendritic spines. Here, we report the biochemical 
interaction between B7-1 and p75NTR, describe biological effects on neuronal 
morphology, and identify a therapeutic opportunity for treatment of 
neuroinflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI157002
PMCID: PMC9663165
PMID: 36107635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]