1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2023 Sep-Oct;41(16):7582-7594. doi: 
10.1080/07391102.2022.2123391. Epub 2022 Sep 15.

Canonical structural-binding modes in the calmodulin-target protein complexes.

Denesyuk AI(1)(2), Permyakov SE(1), Permyakov EA(1), Johnson MS(2), Denessiouk 
K(2), Uversky VN(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biological Instrumentation of the, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Federal Research Center, "Pushchino Scientific Center for Biological Research of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences", Pushchino Moscow Region, Russia.
(2)Structural Bioinformatics Laboratory, Biochemistry, InFLAMES Research 
Flagship Center, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Åbo Akademi University, 
Turku, Finland.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Research 
Institute, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, 
USA.

Intracellular calcium sensor protein calmodulin (CaM) belongs to the large 
EF-hand protein superfamily. CaM shows a unique and not fully understood ability 
to bind to multiple targets, allows them to participate in a variety of 
regulatory processes. The protein has two approximately symmetrical globular 
domains (the N- and C-lobes). Analysis of the CaM-binding sites of target 
proteins showed that they have two hydrophobic 'anchor' amino acids separated by 
10 to 17 residues. Consequently, several CaM-binding motifs: {1-10}, {1-11}, 
{1-13}, {1-14}, {1-16}, {1-17}, differing by the distance between the two anchor 
residues along the amino acid sequence, have been identified. Despite extensive 
structural information on the role of target-protein amino acid residues in the 
formation of complexes with CaM, much less is known about the role of amino 
acids from CaM contributing to these interactions. In this work, a quantitative 
analysis of the contact surfaces of CaM and target proteins has been carried out 
for 35 representative three-dimensional structures. It has been shown that, in 
addition to the two hydrophobic terminal residues of the target fragment, the 
interaction also involves residues that are 4 residues earlier in the sequence 
(binding mode {1-5}). It has also been found that the N- and C-lobes of CaM bind 
the {1-5} motif located at the ends of the target in a structurally identical 
manner. Methionine residues at positions 51 (corresponding to 124 in the 
C-lobe), 71 (144), and 72 (145) of the CaM amino acid sequence are key 
hydrophobic residues for this interaction. They are located at the N- and 
C-boundaries of the even EF-hand motifs. The hydrophobic core of CaM 
('Ф-quatrefoil') consists of 10 amino acids in the N-lobe (and in the C-lobe): 
Phe16 (Phe89), Phe19 (Phe92), Ile27 (Ile100), Thr29 (Ala102), Leu32 (Leu105), 
Ile52 (Ile125), Val55 (Ala128), Ile63 (Val136), Phe65 (Tyr138), and Phe68 
(Phe141) and do not intersect with the target-binding methionine residues. CaM 
belongs to the 'dynamic' group of EF-hand proteins, in which calcium and protein 
ligand binding causes only global conformational changes but does not alter the 
conservative 'black' and 'grey' clusters described in our earlier works (PLoS 
One. 2014; 9(10):e109287). The membership of CaM in the 'dynamic' group is 
determined by the triggering and protective methionine layer: Met51 (Met124), 
Met71 (Met144) and Met72 (Met145). HIGHLIGHTSInterchain interactions in the 
unique 35 CaM complex structures were analyzed.Methionine amino acids of the N- 
and C-lobes of CaM form triggering and protective layers.Interactions of the 
target terminal residues with these methionine layers are structurally 
identical.CaM belonging to the 'dynamic' group is determined by the triggering 
and protective methionine layer.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2022.2123391
PMID: 36106955