1. Biophys J. 2022 Oct 18;121(20):3826-3836. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2022.09.010. Epub
 2022 Sep 14.

Influence of the extracellular domain size on the dynamic behavior of membrane 
proteins.

Gurdap CO(1), Wedemann L(1), Sych T(1), Sezgin E(2).

Author information:
(1)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Women's and Children's Health, 
Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden.
(2)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Women's and Children's Health, 
Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden. Electronic address: erdinc.sezgin@ki.se.

The dynamic behavior of plasma membrane proteins mediates various cellular 
processes such as cellular motility, communication, and signaling. It is widely 
accepted that the dynamics of the membrane proteins is determined either by the 
interactions of the transmembrane domain with the surrounding lipids or by the 
interactions of the intracellular domain with cytosolic components such as 
cortical actin. Although initiation of different cellular signaling events at 
the plasma membrane has been attributed to the extracellular domain (ECD) 
properties recently, the impact of ECDs on the dynamic behavior of membrane 
proteins is rather unexplored. Here, we investigate how ECD properties influence 
protein dynamics in the lipid bilayer by reconstituting ECDs of different sizes 
or glycosylation in model membrane systems and analyzing ECD-driven protein 
sorting in lipid domains as well as protein mobility. Our data show that 
increasing the ECD mass or glycosylation leads to a decrease in ordered domain 
partitioning and diffusivity. Our data reconcile different mechanisms proposed 
for the initiation of cellular signaling by linking the ECD size of membrane 
proteins with their localization and diffusion dynamics in the plasma membrane.

Copyright Â© 2022 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2022.09.010
PMCID: PMC9674980
PMID: 36110044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.