1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Oct;298(10):102502. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102502. Epub
2022  Sep 16.

Structural and functional studies of legumain-mycocypin complexes revealed a 
competitive, exosite-regulated mode of interaction.

Elamin T(1), Santos NP(1), Briza P(1), Brandstetter H(1), Dall E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences and Medical Biology, University of Salzburg, 
Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Medical Biology, University of Salzburg, 
Salzburg, Austria. Electronic address: elfriede.dall@plus.ac.at.

Under pathophysiologic conditions such as Alzheimer's disease and cancer, the 
endolysosomal cysteine protease legumain was found to translocate to the 
cytosol, the nucleus, and the extracellular space. These noncanonical 
localizations demand for a tight regulation of legumain activity, which is in 
part conferred by protein inhibitors. While there is a significant body of 
knowledge on the interaction of human legumain with endogenous cystatins, only 
little is known on its regulation by fungal mycocypins. Mycocypins are 
characterized by (i) versatile, plastic surface loops allowing them to inhibit 
different classes of enzymes and (ii) a high resistance toward extremes of pH 
and temperature. These properties make mycocypins attractive starting points for 
biotechnological and medical applications. In this study, we show that 
mycocypins utilize an adaptable reactive center loop to target the active site 
of legumain in a substrate-like manner. The interaction was further stabilized 
by variable, isoform-specific exosites, converting the substrate recognition 
into inhibition. Additionally, we found that selected mycocypins were capable of 
covalent complex formation with legumain by forming a disulfide bond to the 
active site cysteine. Furthermore, our inhibition studies with other clan CD 
proteases suggested that mycocypins may serve as broad-spectrum inhibitors of 
clan CD proteases. Our studies uncovered the potential of mycocypins as a new 
scaffold for drug development, providing the basis for the design of specific 
legumain inhibitors.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102502
PMCID: PMC9579014
PMID: 36116553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest with the contents of this article.