1. Elife. 2022 Sep 16;11:e80015. doi: 10.7554/eLife.80015.

Neural signatures of auditory hypersensitivity following acoustic trauma.

McGill M(1)(2), Hight AE(1)(2), Watanabe YL(1), Parthasarathy A(1)(3), Cai 
D(1)(3), Clayton K(1)(3), Hancock KE(1)(3), Takesian A(1)(3), Kujawa SG(1)(3), 
Polley DB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Eaton-Peabody Laboratories, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, 
United States.
(2)Division of Medical Sciences, Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, United States.

Neurons in sensory cortex exhibit a remarkable capacity to maintain stable 
firing rates despite large fluctuations in afferent activity levels. However, 
sudden peripheral deafferentation in adulthood can trigger an excessive, 
non-homeostatic cortical compensatory response that may underlie perceptual 
disorders including sensory hypersensitivity, phantom limb pain, and tinnitus. 
Here, we show that mice with noise-induced damage of the high-frequency cochlear 
base were behaviorally hypersensitive to spared mid-frequency tones and to 
direct optogenetic stimulation of auditory thalamocortical neurons. Chronic 
two-photon calcium imaging from ACtx pyramidal neurons (PyrNs) revealed an 
initial stage of spatially diffuse hyperactivity, hyper-correlation, and 
auditory hyperresponsivity that consolidated around deafferented map regions 
three or more days after acoustic trauma. Deafferented PyrN ensembles also 
displayed hypersensitive decoding of spared mid-frequency tones that mirrored 
behavioral hypersensitivity, suggesting that non-homeostatic regulation of 
cortical sound intensity coding following sensorineural loss may be an 
underlying source of auditory hypersensitivity. Excess cortical response gain 
after acoustic trauma was expressed heterogeneously among individual PyrNs, yet 
40% of this variability could be accounted for by each cell's baseline response 
properties prior to acoustic trauma. PyrNs with initially high spontaneous 
activity and gradual monotonic intensity growth functions were more likely to 
exhibit non-homeostatic excess gain after acoustic trauma. This suggests that 
while cortical gain changes are triggered by reduced bottom-up afferent input, 
their subsequent stabilization is also shaped by their local circuit milieu, 
where indicators of reduced inhibition can presage pathological hyperactivity 
following sensorineural hearing loss.

Â© 2022, McGill et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.80015
PMCID: PMC9555866
PMID: 36111669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MM, AH, YW, AP, DC, KC, KH, AT, SK, DP No 
competing interests declared