1. Front Oncol. 2022 Aug 30;12:844250. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.844250. eCollection
 2022.

DNA damage response and repair genes in advanced bone and soft tissue sarcomas: 
An 8-gene signature as a candidate predictive biomarker of response to 
trabectedin and olaparib combination.

Merlini A(1)(2), Centomo ML(1)(2), Ferrero G(3)(4), Chiabotto G(5), Miglio U(1), 
Berrino E(1)(5), Giordano G(1)(2), Brusco S(1)(2), Pisacane A(1), Maldi E(1), 
Sarotto I(1), Capozzi F(1), Lano C(1)(2), Isella C(1)(2), Crisafulli G(1)(2), 
Aglietta M(1)(2), Dei Tos AP(6)(7), Sbaraglia M(6), Sangiolo D(1)(2), D'Ambrosio 
L(1)(2)(8), Bardelli A(1)(2), Pignochino Y(1)(3), Grignani G(1).

Author information:
(1)Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO-IRCCS, Turin, Italy.
(2)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Torino, Turin, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(5)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(6)Department of Pathology, Azienda Ospedale-Università Padova, Padua, Italy.
(7)Department of Medicine (DIMED), University of Padua School of Medicine, 
Padua, Italy.
(8)Medical Oncology, AOU San Luigi Gonzaga, Orbassano (TO), Italy.

BACKGROUND: Advanced and unresectable bone and soft tissue sarcomas (BSTS) still 
represent an unmet medical need. We demonstrated that the alkylating agent 
trabectedin and the PARP1-inhibitor olaparib display antitumor activity in BSTS 
preclinical models. Moreover, in a phase Ib clinical trial (NCT02398058), 
feasibility, tolerability and encouraging results have been observed and the 
treatment combination is currently under study in a phase II trial 
(NCT03838744).
METHODS: Differential expression of genes involved in DNA Damage Response and 
Repair was evaluated by Nanostring® technology, extracting RNA from 
pre-treatment tumor samples of 16 responder (≥6-month progression free survival) 
and 16 non-responder patients. Data validation was performed by quantitative 
real-time PCR, RNA in situ hybridization, and immunohistochemistry. The 
correlation between the identified candidate genes and both progression-free 
survival and overall survival was investigated in the publicly available dataset 
"Sarcoma (TCGA, The Cancer Genome Atlas)".
RESULTS: Differential RNA expression analysis revealed an 8-gene signature 
(CDKN2A, PIK3R1, SLFN11, ATM, APEX2, BLM, XRCC2, MAD2L2) defining patients with 
better outcome upon trabectedin+olaparib treatment. In responder vs. 
non-responder patients, a significant differential expression of these genes was 
further confirmed by RNA in situ hybridization and by qRT-PCR and 
immunohistochemistry in selected experiments. Correlation between survival 
outcomes and genetic alterations in the identified genes was shown in the TCGA 
sarcoma dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: This work identified an 8-gene expression signature to improve 
prediction of response to trabectedin+olaparib combination in BSTS. The 
predictive role of these potential biomarkers warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2022 Merlini, Centomo, Ferrero, Chiabotto, Miglio, Berrino, 
Giordano, Brusco, Pisacane, Maldi, Sarotto, Capozzi, Lano, Isella, Crisafulli, 
Aglietta, Dei Tos, Sbaraglia, Sangiolo, D’Ambrosio, Bardelli, Pignochino and 
Grignani.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.844250
PMCID: PMC9469659
PMID: 36110934

Conflict of interest statement: GGr has received fees for consulting/advisory 
roles from PharmaMar, Lilly, Novartis, Bayer, and Eisai. LDA received travel 
grant from PharmaMar and Lilly. MA has received fees for consulting/advisory 
roles from Bristol- Myers Squibb, Merck, and Roche. AB served in a 
consulting/advisory role for Illumina and Inivata. AB is cofounder and 
shareholder of NeoPhore. AB is a member of the NeoPhore scientific advisory 
board. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.