1. Front Oncol. 2022 Sep 2;12:949098. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.949098. eCollection 
2022.

Thyroid cancer harboring PTEN and TP53 mutations: A peculiar molecular and 
clinical case report.

Colombo C(1)(2), Pogliaghi G(2)(3), Tosi D(4), Muzza M(3), Bulfamante G(4), 
Persani L(1)(3)(5), Fugazzola L(1)(2), Cirello V(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Istituto Auxologico Italiano 
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Endocrine and Metabolic Research, Istituto Auxologico Italiano 
IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(4)Unit of Human Pathology, Department of Health Sciences Santi Paolo e Carlo 
Medical School, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.

To date, the molecular mechanisms that underline aggressiveness and resistance 
to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in some thyroid carcinomas (TCs) are not known 
yet. We report the case of a young patient with a metastatic poorly 
differentiated (PDTC) and follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) refractory to 
conventional therapies and to Sorafenib. The patient, despite an initial partial 
response, died of progressive disease 21 months after diagnosis. The genetic 
analysis performed on the primary tumor and on lymph nodes and distant 
metastases allowed to identify a frameshift mutation (p.P248Tfs*5) in the PTEN 
gene, never described in TC. This mutation was present in the primary tumor and, 
with a lower allelic frequency, in metastases diagnosed after treatment with 
Sorafenib. Mutations in TP53 (p.C135Y and c.920-2A>G previously detected in 
anaplastic carcinomas and p.M133R never found in TC) were also detected in the 
primary tissue together with a mono-allelic expression of the p.C135Y mutant at 
RNA level. At metastatic sites level, we found only the TP53 splicing mutation 
c.920-2A>G. The presence of defects in mismatch repair (MMR) proteins and 
genomic instability was also evaluated. The primary tumor showed a partial 
expression of MMR proteins together with a strong genomic instability. In 
conclusion, we demonstrated that the rare combination of somatic PTEN and TP53 
mutations in a patient with a metastatic FTC, together with the presence of 
tumor heterogeneity and genomic instability, might be associated with a high 
tumor aggressiveness and resistance to treatments.

Copyright Â© 2022 Colombo, Pogliaghi, Tosi, Muzza, Bulfamante, Persani, Fugazzola 
and Cirello.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.949098
PMCID: PMC9478947
PMID: 36119511

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.