1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Oct;298(10):102489. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102489. Epub
2022  Sep 14.

Chloroplast envelope ATPase PGA1/AtFtsH12 is required for chloroplast protein 
accumulation and cytosol-chloroplast protein homeostasis in Arabidopsis.

Li Q(1), Wang X(1), Lei Y(1), Wang Y(1), Li B(1), Liu X(1), An L(1), Yu F(1), Qi 
Y(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas and College of 
Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas and College of 
Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China. Electronic 
address: Yafei.Qi@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

The establishment of photosynthetic protein complexes during chloroplast 
development requires the influx of a large number of chloroplast proteins that 
are encoded by the nuclear genome, which is critical for cytosol and chloroplast 
protein homeostasis and chloroplast development. However, the mechanisms 
regulating this process are still not well understood in higher plants. Here, we 
report the isolation and characterization of the pale green Arabidopsis pga1-1 
mutant, which is defective in chloroplast development and chloroplast protein 
accumulation. Using genetic and biochemical evidence, we reveal that PGA1 
encodes AtFtsH12, a chloroplast envelope-localized protein of the FtsH family 
proteins. We determined a G703R mutation in the GAD motif of the conserved 
ATPase domain renders the pga1-1 a viable hypomorphic allele of the essential 
gene AtFtsH12. In de-etiolation assays, we showed that the accumulation of 
photosynthetic proteins and the expression of photosynthetic genes were impaired 
in pga1-1. Using the FNRctp-GFP and pTAC2-GFP reporters, we demonstrated that 
AtFtsH12 was required for the accumulation of chloroplast proteins in vivo. 
Interestingly, we identified an increase in expression of the mutant AtFtsH12 
gene in pga1-1, suggesting a feedback regulation. Moreover, we found that 
cytosolic and chloroplast proteostasis responses were triggered in pga1-1. 
Together, taking advantage of the novel pga1-1 mutant, we demonstrate the 
function of AtFtsH12 in chloroplast protein homeostasis and chloroplast 
development.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102489
PMCID: PMC9574505
PMID: 36113581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest with the contents of this article.