1. Can J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2022 Sep 6;2022:6010367. doi:
10.1155/2022/6010367.  eCollection 2022.

Impact of an Abdominal Compression Bandage on the Completion of Colonoscopy for 
Obese Adults: A Prospective Randomized Controlled Trial.

Liu TT(1), Meng YT(1), Xiong F(1), Wei C(1), Luo S(1), Zhan SG(1), Song Y(1), Li 
YX(1), Shi RY(1), Yao J(1), Wang LS(1), Li DF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shenzhen People's Hospital, The Second 
Clinical Medical College, Jinan University, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518020, Guangdong, 
China.

METHODS: Eligible patients were randomly allocated into the abdominal bandage 
and conventional groups during a routine colonoscopy. The primary outcome was 
CCR.
RESULTS: A total of 250 eligible patients were randomly assigned to the 
abdominal bandage and conventional groups from January 2021 to April 2021. 
Eleven patients (five in the abdominal bandage group and six in the conventional 
group) were excluded due to schedule cancellation after randomization, and 239 
patients were eventually included in the final analysis. There were no 
significant differences between the two groups regarding baseline 
characteristics (P > 0.05). Furthermore, no significant differences were 
observed in terms of advanced adenoma detection rate (AADR), polyp detection 
rate (PDR), bowel preparation scale (BBPS), bubble scale (BS), and withdrawal 
time between the two groups (P > 0.05). However, compared with the conventional 
group, the cecal insertion time (CIT) of the abdominal bandage group was 
significantly shortened (279.00 (234.50-305.75) vs. 421.00 (327.00-485.00), 
P < 0.001), and the CCR (96.7% vs. 88.2%, P = 0.01) and adenoma detection rate 
(ADR) (47.5% vs. 32.8%, P < 0.001) were improved. Besides, logistic regression 
analysis showed that body mass index (BMI) and abdominal compression bandage 
were associated with CCR.
CONCLUSIONS: Abdominal compression bandages could effectively shorten CIT and 
improve CCR and ADR for obese patients during a routine colonoscopy. This trial 
is registered with the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (No. ChiCTR2100043556).

Copyright © 2022 Ting-Ting Liu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/6010367
PMCID: PMC9470372
PMID: 36111243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.