1. RSC Adv. 2022 Aug 26;12(37):24301-24310. doi: 10.1039/d2ra02831j. eCollection 
2022 Aug 22.

Compound green tea (CGT) regulates lipid metabolism in high-fat diet induced 
mice.

Zhou C(1)(2), Hu L(1)(2), Mu R(1), Mei X(1), Wu X(1), Wang C(3), Zhou X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Biological Science and Agriculture, Qiannan Normal University for 
Nationalities 5 Jianjiang Avenue Middle Section Duyun Guizhou 558000 China 
xmeisci@yeah.net arainbowl@163.com.
(2)School of Crop Production Technology, Institute of Agricultural Technology, 
Suranaree University of Technology Nakhon Ratchasima 30000 Thailand.
(3)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine Guizhou 550000 China.

This work aims to study the effect of compound green tea (CGT) on liver lipid 
metabolism in mice based on metabolomics of liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS), and preliminarily identify potential biomarkers and 
pathways of action by using a metabonomic network database to explore the 
lipid-lowering effect of CGT. In this study, forty mice were randomly divided 
into four groups: compound tea treatment group (DH), high-fat model control 
group (NK), normal control group (CK) and positive drug group (YK). After a 
month of different interventions, the mice were weighed and the blood lipid 
indexes were detected. In addition, differential liver metabolites were 
monitored by using LC-MS. The results showed that CGT and positive drug 
treatment were able to decrease body weight, liver coefficient, TC, TG and LDL 
levels of obese mice, while increasing HDL levels. Among the 110 compounds 
obtained, 54 metabolites were significantly altered in the four comparisons. 
More importantly, 15 remarkably downregulated metabolites involved in Lysopc 
16:1, Lysopc 18:1, and Lysopc 18:2 were found in the DH group when the mice were 
treated with CGT; meanwhile, the positive drug Xuezhikang was able to 
significantly downregulate 14 compounds, including (±)18-HEPE, and 6 keto-PGF1α, 
compared with the NK group. Besides, KEGG enrichment analysis also revealed the 
important metabolic pathways, such as linoleic acid metabolism, Biosynthesis of 
unsaturated fatty acids, and α-linolenic acid metabolism, were related to fatty 
acid metabolism. These results suggested that CGT could regulate the lipid 
metabolism in the liver of hyperlipidemia mice, and may regulate 54 potential 
biomarkers in mice through a related metabolic pathway to make them return to a 
normal state and improve the disorder of lipid metabolism.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d2ra02831j
PMCID: PMC9412714
PMID: 36128535

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.