1. Blood Adv. 2023 Apr 25;7(8):1477-1487. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007884.

A transcriptome analysis of basal and stimulated VWF release from endothelial 
cells derived from patients with type 1 VWD.

Kloosterman R(1), Zago-Schmitt M(1), Grabell J(2), Thibeault L(2), De Lima 
PA(3), Bowman M(2), Tyryshkin K(1), Hindmarch CCT(3), Renwick N(4), James P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, 
ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, Queen's Cardiopulmonary Unit, Translational Institute 
of Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Laboratory of Translational 
RNA Biology, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.

Type 1 von Willebrand disease (VWD) is associated with a reduction in 
qualitatively normal von Willebrand factor (VWF). Current diagnostic guidelines 
only take into consideration the contribution of basal VWF levels, despite a 
lack of correlation with bleeding severity. Defects in stimulated VWF release, 
which occurs after hemostatic challenge, may contribute to bleeding in type 1 
VWD, but the pathogenic mechanisms are poorly defined. In this study, a layered 
multiomic approach including messenger RNA (mRNA) and microRNA (miRNA) 
sequencing was used to evaluate transcriptome-wide differences between type 1 
VWD- and control-derived endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs) during basal 
and stimulated VWF release. ECFCs from 8 patients with type 1 VWD and 4 other 
patients were included in this study as controls. VWF protein analysis revealed 
heterogenous responses to stimulation among type 1 VWD and control ECFCs. During 
basal VWF release, 64 mRNAs and 7 miRNAs were differentially regulated between 
type 1 VWD and control ECFCs, and 65 putatively pathogenic miRNA-mRNA 
interactions were identified. During stimulated VWF release, 190 mRNAs and 5 
mRNAs were differentially regulated between type 1 VWD and control ECFCs, and 
110 putatively pathogenic miRNA-mRNA interactions were identified. Five gene 
ontology terms including coagulation, regulation of cell shape, and regulation 
of cell signaling were also differentially regulated in type 1 VWD ECFCs during 
stimulated release. To our knowledge, we have shown for the first time that 
transcriptome-wide differences exist between type 1 VWD and control ECFCs. These 
differences may contribute to bleeding in type 1 VWD, and further investigation 
may reveal novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

Â© 2023 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007884
PMCID: PMC10125911
PMID: 36121439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: P.J. receives 
funding from Bayer Pharmaceuticals, CSL Behring, and Takeda Pharmaceutical 
Company. The remaining authors declare no competing financial interests. This 
research was funded by a Translational Institute of Medicine (TIME) Incubator 
grant.