1. Pestic Biochem Physiol. 2022 Oct;187:105181. doi:
10.1016/j.pestbp.2022.105181.  Epub 2022 Jul 28.

Amplification refractory mutation system based real-time PCR (ARMS-qPCR) for 
rapid resistance characterization of Tribolium castaneum to phosphine.

Wang K(1), Che M(2), Chen E(2), Jian F(3), Tang P(4).

Author information:
(1)Collaborative Innovation Center for Modern Grain Circulation and Safety, 
College of Food Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Finance and 
Economics, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210023, China. Electronic address: 
wangkx@nufe.edu.cn.
(2)Collaborative Innovation Center for Modern Grain Circulation and Safety, 
College of Food Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Finance and 
Economics, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210023, China.
(3)Department of Biosystems Engineering, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg R3T 
5V6, Canada.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center for Modern Grain Circulation and Safety, 
College of Food Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Finance and 
Economics, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210023, China. Electronic address: 
tangpeian@163.com.

Resistance of Tribolium castaneum to phosphine is related to point mutations in 
DNA code corresponding to amino acid changes associated with a core metabolic 
enzyme dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (DLD), but the mutation patterns vary 
among different resistant populations. Thus, there is a great need to develop a 
cost-effective method to detect core mutations in T. castaneum, which would be 
the key factor to understand the molecular basis of phosphine resistance. 
Amplification refractory mutation system-based quantitative Real-Time PCR 
(ARMS-qPCR) is an ideal method that can rapidly detect point mutations. Here, 
the P45S and G131D mutations existed in the DLD of T. castaneum selected from 
strong Chinese resistance phenotypes, and the DLD P45S mutation, which 
represents a strong phosphine resistance allele, was confirmed as the most 
abundant mutation to determine strong resistance genotypes. Our study found that 
85 out of 120 beetles carried the P45S resistance allele, including 51 
homozygous and 34 heterozygous individuals. Moreover, there was a strong linear 
relationship (R2 = 0.917) between the resistance ratio and the resistance allele 
frequency among the strongly resistant populations. Our data showed that the 
ARMS-qPCR method that we developed could rapidly determine strong resistance 
phenotypes of T. castaneum to phosphine by detecting the DLD P45S mutation. 
These results not only provide a detailed example for developing an 
ARMS-qPCR-based method to characterize pesticide resistance, but also support 
further elucidation of the molecular basis of phosphine resistance.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pestbp.2022.105181
PMID: 36127043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this 
paper.