1. Microbiol Spectr. 2022 Oct 26;10(5):e0207222. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.02072-22. 
Epub 2022 Sep 21.

Characterization of Phage Resistance and Their Impacts on Bacterial Fitness in 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Li N(#)(1), Zeng Y(#)(2), Wang M(1), Bao R(3), Chen Y(1), Li X(4), Pan J(1), Zhu 
T(2), Hu B(1), Tan D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan 
Universitygrid.8547.e, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan Universitygrid.8547.e, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan 
Universitygrid.8547.e, Shanghai, China.
(4)School of Bioengineering, Dalian University of Technologygrid.30055.33, 
Dalian, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance pose serious environmental and 
health challenges. Attention has been drawn to phage therapy as an alternative 
approach to combat antibiotic resistance with immense potential. However, one of 
the obstacles to phage therapy is phage resistance, and it can be acquired 
through genetic mutations, followed by consequences of phenotypic variations. 
Therefore, understanding the mechanisms underlying phage-host interactions will 
provide us with greater detail on how to optimize phage therapy. In this study, 
three lytic phages (phipa2, phipa4, and phipa10) were isolated to investigate 
phage resistance and the potential fitness trade-offs in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
Specifically, in phage-resistant mutants phipa2-R and phipa4-R, mutations in 
conferring resistance occurred in genes pilT and pilB, both essential for type 
IV pili (T4P) biosynthesis. In the phage-resistant mutant phipa10-R, a large 
chromosomal deletion of ~294â€‰kb, including the hmgA (homogentisate 
1,2-dioxygenase) and galU (UTP-glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase) genes, 
was observed and conferred phage phipa10 resistance. Further, we show examples 
of associated trade-offs in these phage-resistant mutations, e.g., impaired 
motility, reduced biofilm formation, and increased antibiotic susceptibility. 
Collectively, our study sheds light on resistance-mediated genetic mutations and 
their pleiotropic phenotypes, further emphasizing the impressive complexity and 
diversity of phage-host interactions and the challenges they pose when 
controlling bacterial diseases in this important pathogen. IMPORTANCE Battling 
phage resistance is one of the main challenges faced by phage therapy. To 
overcome this challenge, detailed information about the mechanisms of phage-host 
interactions is required to understand the bacterial evolutionary processes. In 
this study, we identified mutations in key steps of type IV pili (T4P) and 
O-antigen biosynthesis leading to phage resistance and provided new evidence on 
how phage predation contributed toward host phenotypes and fitness variations. 
Together, our results add further fundamental knowledge on phage-host 
interactions and how they regulate different aspects of Pseudomonas cell 
behaviors.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.02072-22
PMCID: PMC9603268
PMID: 36129287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.