1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Sep 2;13:945836. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.945836. 
eCollection 2022.

Intrapallidal injection of cannabidiol or a selective GPR55 antagonist decreases 
motor asymmetry and improves fine motor skills in hemiparkinsonian rats.

Patricio F(1), Morales Dávila E(2), Patricio-Martínez A(1)(3), Arana Del Carmen 
N(1), Martínez I(4), Aguilera J(5)(6), Perez-Aguilar JM(2), Limón ID(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Neurofarmacología, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Benemérita 
Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, Puebla, Mexico.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, 
Puebla, Mexico.
(3)Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, 
Puebla, Mexico.
(4)Laboratorio de Neuroquímica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Benemérita 
Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, Puebla, Mexico.
(5)Departament de Bioquímica i de Biologia Molecular, Facultad de Medicina, 
Institut de Neurociències, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades 
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Barcelona, Spain.

Cannabidiol (CBD) presents antiparkinsonian properties and neuromodulatory 
effects, possibly due to the pleiotropic activity caused at multiple molecular 
targets. Recently, the GPR55 receptor has emerged as a molecular target of CBD. 
Interestingly, GPR55 mRNA is expressed in the external globus pallidus (GPe) and 
striatum, hence, it has been suggested that its activity is linked to motor 
dysfunction in Parkinson's disease (PD). The present study aimed to evaluate the 
effect of the intrapallidal injection of both CBD and a selective GPR55 
antagonist (CID16020046) on motor asymmetry, fine motor skills, and GAD-67 
expression in hemiparkinsonian rats. The hemiparkinsonian animal model applied 
involved the induction of a lesion in male Wistar rats via the infusion of the 
neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) into the medial forebrain bundle via 
stereotaxic surgery. After a period of twenty days, a second surgical procedure 
was performed to implant a guide cannula into the GPe. Seven days later, 
lysophosphatidylinositol (LPI), CBD, or CID16020046 were injected once a day for 
three consecutive days (from the 28th to the 30th day post-lesion). 
Amphetamine-induced turning behavior was evaluated on the 14th and 30th days 
post-injury. The staircase test and fine motor skills were evaluated as follows: 
the rats were subject to a ten-day training period prior to the 6-OHDA injury; 
from the 15th to the 19th days post-lesion, the motor skills alterations were 
evaluated under basal conditions; and, from the 28th to the 30th day 
post-lesion, the pharmacological effects of the drugs administered were 
evaluated. The results obtained show that the administration of LPI or CBD 
generated lower levels of motor asymmetry in the turning behavior of 
hemiparkinsonian rats. It was also found that the injection of CBD or 
CID16020046, but not LPI, in the hemiparkinsonian rats generated significantly 
superior performance in the staircase test, in terms of the use of the forelimb 
contralateral to the 6-OHDA-induced lesion, when evaluated from the 28th to the 
30th day post-lesion. Similar results were also observed for superior fine motor 
skills performance for pronation, grasp, and supination. Finally, the 
immunoreactivity levels were found to decrease for the GAD-67 enzyme in the 
striatum and the ipsilateral GPe of the rats injected with CBD and CID16020046, 
in contrast with those lesioned with 6-OHDA. The results obtained suggest that 
the inhibitory effects of CBD and CID16020046 on GPR55 in the GPe could be 
related to GABAergic overactivation in hemiparkinsonism, thus opening new 
perspectives to explain, at a cellular level, the reversal of the motor 
impairment observed in PD models.

Copyright © 2022 Patricio, Morales Dávila, Patricio-Martínez, Arana Del Carmen, 
Martínez, Aguilera, Perez-Aguilar and Limón.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.945836
PMCID: PMC9479130
PMID: 36120297

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.