1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Sep 2;13:1003310. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1003310. 
eCollection 2022.

Exploring the mechanism of action of licorice in the treatment of COVID-19 
through bioinformatics analysis and molecular dynamics simulation.

Cao JF(1)(2), Gong Y(3), Wu M(1), Yang X(1), Xiong L(1), Chen S(1), Xiao Z(3), 
Li Y(3), Zhang L(4), Zan W(5), Zhang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Medicine, Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, China.
(2)Chengdu Medical College of Basic Medical Sciences, Chengdu, China.
(3)Laboratory Medicine, Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, China.
(4)Yunnan Academy of Forestry Sciences, Kunming, China.
(5)Chengdu Medical College of Pharmacy, Chengdu, China.

Purpose: The rapid worldwide spread of Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has 
become not only a global challenge, but also a lack of effective clinical 
treatments. Studies have shown that licorice can significantly improve clinical 
symptoms such as fever, dry cough and shortness of breath in COVID-19 patients 
with no significant adverse effects. However, there is still a lack of in-depth 
analysis of the specific active ingredients of licorice in the treatment of 
COVID-19 and its mechanism of action. Therefore, we used molecular docking and 
molecular dynamics to explore the mechanism of action of licorice in the 
treatment of COVID-19. Methods: We used bioinformatics to screen active 
pharmaceutical ingredients and potential targets, the disease-core gene 
target-drug network was established and molecular docking was used for 
verification. Molecular dynamics simulations were carried out to verify that 
active ingredients were stably combined with protein targets. The supercomputer 
platform was used to measure and analyze stability of protein targets at the 
residue level, solvent accessible surface area, number of hydrogen bonds, radius 
of gyration and binding free energy. Results: Licorice had 255 gene targets, 
COVID-19 had 4,628 gene targets, the intersection gene targets were 101. Kyoto 
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene ontology (GO) analysis showed 
that licorice played an important role mainly through the signaling pathways of 
inflammatory factors and oxidative stress. Molecular docking showed that 
Glycyrol, Phaseol and Glyasperin F in licorice may playe a role in treating 
COVID-19 by acting on STAT3, IL2RA, MMP1, and CXCL8. Molecular dynamics were 
used to demonstrate and analyze the binding stability of active ingredients to 
protein targets. Conclusion: This study found that Phaseol in licorice may 
reduce inflammatory cell activation and inflammatory response by inhibiting the 
activation of CXCL8 and IL2RA; Glycyrol may regulate cell proliferation and 
survival by acting on STAT3. Glyasperin F may regulate cell growth by inhibiting 
the activation of MMP1, thus reducing tissue damage and cell death caused by 
excessive inflammatory response and promoting the growth of new tissues. 
Therefore, licorice is proposed as an effective candidate for the treatment of 
COVID-19 through STAT3, IL2RA, MMP1, and CXCL8.

Copyright Â© 2022 Cao, Gong, Wu, Yang, Xiong, Chen, Xiao, Li, Zhang, Zan and 
Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1003310
PMCID: PMC9481297
PMID: 36120307

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.