1. RSC Chem Biol. 2022 Jul 15;3(9):1111-1120. doi: 10.1039/d2cb00153e.
eCollection  2022 Aug 31.

Development of ultra-high affinity bivalent ligands targeting the polo-like 
kinase 1.

Tsuji K(1)(2), Hymel D(1), Ma B(3), Tamamura H(2), Nussinov R(3), Burke TR 
Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Chemical Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health Frederick MD 21702 USA burkete@nih.gov.
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Institute of Biomaterials and 
Bioengineering, Tokyo Medical and Dental University Tokyo 101-0062 Japan.
(3)Computational Structural Biology Section, Laboratory of Immunometabolism, 
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute at 
Frederick Frederick MD 21702 USA.

The polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) is an important mediator of cell cycle regulation 
and a recognized anti-cancer molecular target. In addition to its catalytic 
kinase domain (KD), Plk1 contains a polo-box domain (PBD), which engages in 
protein-protein interactions (PPIs) essential to proper Plk1 function. We have 
developed a number of extremely high-affinity PBD-binding peptide inhibitors. 
However, we have reached an apparent limit to increasing the affinities of these 
monovalent ligands. Accordingly, we undertook an extensive investigation of 
bivalent ligands, designed to engage both KD and PBD regions of Plk1. This has 
resulted in bivalent constructs exhibiting more than 100-fold Plk1 affinity 
enhancement relative to the best monovalent PBD-binding ligands. Startlingly, 
and in contradiction to widely accepted notions of KD-PBD interactions, we have 
found that full affinities can be retained even with minimal linkers between KD 
and PBD-binding components. In addition to significantly advancing the 
development of PBD-binding ligands, our findings may cause a rethinking of the 
structure - function of Plk1.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d2cb00153e
PMCID: PMC9428768
PMID: 36128509

Conflict of interest statement: Aspects of the work presented are contained 
within one or more patent applications.