1. Sci Adv. 2022 Sep 23;8(38):eabq8486. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abq8486. Epub 2022
Sep  23.

Islet primary cilia motility controls insulin secretion.

Cho JH(1), Li ZA(1), Zhu L(1), Muegge BD(1)(2), Roseman HF(1), Lee EY(1)(3), 
Utterback T(4), Woodhams LG(4), Bayly PV(4), Hughes JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South 
Euclid Ave, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, VA Medical Center, 915 North Grand Blvd, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.
(3)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Washington 
University McKelvey School of Engineering, 1 Brookings Drive, St. Louis, MO, 
USA.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1126/sciadv.ade4450.

Primary cilia are specialized cell-surface organelles that mediate sensory 
perception and, in contrast to motile cilia and flagella, are thought to lack 
motility function. Here, we show that primary cilia in human and mouse 
pancreatic islets exhibit movement that is required for glucose-dependent 
insulin secretion. Islet primary cilia contain motor proteins conserved from 
those found in classic motile cilia, and their three-dimensional motion is 
dynein-driven and dependent on adenosine 5'-triphosphate and glucose metabolism. 
Inhibition of cilia motion blocks beta cell calcium influx and insulin 
secretion. Human beta cells have enriched ciliary gene expression, and motile 
cilia genes are altered in type 2 diabetes. Our findings redefine primary cilia 
as dynamic structures having both sensory and motile function and establish that 
pancreatic islet cilia movement plays a regulatory role in insulin secretion.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abq8486
PMCID: PMC9506710
PMID: 36149960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]