1. Viruses. 2022 Sep 7;14(9):1980. doi: 10.3390/v14091980.

Forging a Functional Cure for HIV: Transcription Regulators and Inhibitors.

Mediouni S(1), Lyu S(1), Schader SM(2), Valente ST(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, UF Scripps Biomedical Research, 
130 Scripps Way, 3C1, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease Research, Drug Development Division, 
Southern Research, 431 Aviation Way, Frederick, MD 21701, USA.

Current antiretroviral therapy (ART) increases the survival of HIV-infected 
individuals, yet it is not curative. The major barrier to finding a definitive 
cure for HIV is our inability to identify and eliminate long-lived cells 
containing the dormant provirus, termed viral reservoir. When ART is 
interrupted, the viral reservoir ensures heterogenous and stochastic HIV viral 
gene expression, which can reseed infection back to pre-ART levels. While 
strategies to permanently eradicate the virus have not yet provided significant 
success, recent work has focused on the management of this residual viral 
reservoir to effectively limit comorbidities associated with the ongoing viral 
transcription still observed during suppressive ART, as well as limit the need 
for daily ART. Our group has been at the forefront of exploring the viability of 
the block-and-lock remission approach, focused on the long-lasting epigenetic 
block of viral transcription such that without daily ART, there is no risk of 
viral rebound, transmission, or progression to AIDS. Numerous studies have 
reported inhibitors of both viral and host factors required for HIV 
transcriptional activation. Here, we highlight and review some of the latest HIV 
transcriptional inhibitor discoveries that may be leveraged for the clinical 
exploration of block-and-lock and revolutionize the way we treat HIV infections.

DOI: 10.3390/v14091980
PMCID: PMC9502519
PMID: 36146786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.