1. Front Genet. 2022 Sep 6;13:932763. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.932763. eCollection
 2022.

Identification of a signature of evolutionarily conserved stress-induced 
mutagenesis in cancer.

Cisneros LH(1)(2), Vaske C(1), Bussey KJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)NantOmics, LLC, Santa Cruz, CA, United States.
(2)The Beyond Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ, United States.
(3)Precision Medicine, Midwestern University, Glendale, AZ, United States.

The clustering of mutations observed in cancer cells is reminiscent of the 
stress-induced mutagenesis (SIM) response in bacteria. Bacteria deploy SIM when 
faced with DNA double-strand breaks in the presence of conditions that elicit an 
SOS response. SIM employs DinB, the evolutionary precursor to human trans-lesion 
synthesis (TLS) error-prone polymerases, and results in mutations concentrated 
around DNA double-strand breaks with an abundance that decays with distance. We 
performed a quantitative study on single nucleotide variant calls for 
whole-genome sequencing data from 1950 tumors, non-inherited mutations from 129 
normal samples, and acquired mutations in 3 cell line models of stress-induced 
adaptive mutation. We introduce statistical methods to identify mutational 
clusters, quantify their shapes and tease out the potential mechanism that 
produced them. Our results show that mutations in both normal and cancer samples 
are indeed clustered and have shapes indicative of SIM. Clusters in normal 
samples occur more often in the same genomic location across samples than in 
cancer suggesting loss of regulation over the mutational process during 
carcinogenesis. Additionally, the signatures of TLS contribute the most to 
mutational cluster formation in both patient samples as well as experimental 
models of SIM. Furthermore, a measure of cluster shape heterogeneity was 
associated with cancer patient survival with a hazard ratio of 5.744 (Cox 
Proportional Hazard Regression, 95% CI: 1.824-18.09). Our results support the 
conclusion that the ancient and evolutionary-conserved adaptive mutation 
response found in bacteria is a source of genomic instability in cancer. 
Biological adaptation through SIM might explain the ability of tumors to evolve 
in the face of strong selective pressures such as treatment and suggests that 
the conventional 'hit it hard' approaches to therapy could prove themselves 
counterproductive.

Copyright Â© 2022 Cisneros, Vaske and Bussey.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.932763
PMCID: PMC9488704
PMID: 36147501

Conflict of interest statement: LC, CV, and KB were employed by the company 
NantOmics, LLC.