1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Aug 24;13(9):1513. doi: 10.3390/genes13091513.

Alterations in Microbiota and Metabolites Related to Spontaneous Diabetes and 
Pre-Diabetes in Rhesus Macaques.

Jiang C(1), Pan X(1), Luo J(1), Liu X(1), Zhang L(1), Liu Y(1), Lei G(2), Hu 
G(2), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment (Ministry of Education), 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, No. 24 South Section 1, Yihuan 
Road, Chengdu 610065, China.
(2)SCU-SGHB Joint Laboratory on Non-Human Primates Research, Sichuan Green-House 
Biotech Co., Ltd., Meishan 620000, China.

Spontaneous type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) macaques are valuable resources for 
our understanding the pathological mechanism of T2DM. Based on one month's 
fasting blood glucose survey, we identified seven spontaneous T2DM macaques and 
five impaired glucose regulation (IGR) macaques from 1408 captive individuals. 
FPG, HbA1c, FPI and IR values were significant higher in T2DM and IGR than in 
controls. 16S rRNA sequencing of fecal microbes showed the significantly greater 
abundance of Oribacterium, bacteria inhibiting the production of secondary bile 
acids, and Phascolarctobacterium, bacteria producing short-chain fatty acids was 
significantly lower in T2DM macaques. In addition, several opportunistic 
pathogens, such as Mogibacterium and Kocuria were significantly more abundant in 
both T2DM and IGR macaques. Fecal metabolites analysis based on UHPLC-MS 
identified 50 differential metabolites (DMs) between T2DM and controls, and 26 
DMs between IGR and controls. The DMs were significantly enriched in the bile 
acids metabolism, fatty acids metabolism and amino acids metabolism pathways. 
Combining results from physiochemical parameters, microbiota and metabolomics, 
we demonstrate that the imbalance of gut microbial community leading to the 
dysfunction of glucose, bile acids, fatty acids and amino acids metabolism may 
contribute to the hyperglycaemia in macaques, and suggest several microbes and 
metabolites are potential biomarkers for T2DM and IGR macaques.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13091513
PMCID: PMC9498908
PMID: 36140683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.