1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2022 Sep 7;15(9):1114. doi: 10.3390/ph15091114.

An In Vitro Model for Characterization of Drug Permeability across the Tympanic 
Membrane.

Veit JGS(1)(2), Birru B(1)(2), Singh R(1)(2), Arrigali EM(1)(2), Serban 
MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Montana, 
Missoula, MT 59812, USA.
(2)Montana Biotechnology Center (BIOTECH), University of Montana, Missoula, MT 
59812, USA.

Otic disorders, such as otitis media and hearing loss, affect a substantial 
portion of the global population. Despite this, oto-therapeutics, in particular 
those intended to treat hearing loss, have seen limited development and 
innovation. A significant factor to this is likely a result of the inherent 
costs and complexities of drug discovery and development. With in vitro 3D 
tissue models seeing increased utility for the rapid, high-throughput screening 
of drug candidates, it stands to reason that the field of otology could greatly 
benefit from such innovations. In this study, we propose and describe an in 
vitro 3D model, designed using a physiologically based approach, which we 
suggest can be used to estimate drug permeability across human tympanic 
membranes (TM). We characterize the permeability properties of several template 
drugs in this model under various growth and storage conditions. The 
availability of such cost-effective, rapid, high-throughput screening tools 
should allow for increased innovation and the discovery of novel drug candidates 
over the currently used animal models. In the context of this TM permeation 
model, it may promote the development of topical drugs and formulations that can 
non-invasively traverse the TM and provide tissue-targeted drug delivery as an 
alternative to systemic treatment, an objective which has seen limited study 
until present.

DOI: 10.3390/ph15091114
PMCID: PMC9503993
PMID: 36145335

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.