1. J Pers Med. 2022 Aug 31;12(9):1423. doi: 10.3390/jpm12091423.

COVID-19 Severity and Mortality after Vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 in Central 
Greece.

Samara AA(1), Boutlas S(2), Janho MB(1), Gourgoulianis KI(2), Sotiriou S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences, 
University of Thessaly, 41110 Larissa, Greece.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Thessaly, 41110 Larissa, Greece.

Background: Vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) has become crucial for 
limiting disease transmission and reducing its severity, hospitalizations and 
mortality; however, despite universal acceptance, vaccine hesitancy is still 
significant. In the present manuscript, we aim to assess COVID-19-attributed 
mortality after the prevalence of new variants of the virus (Delta and Omicron 
viral strains) and to evaluate the vaccination effect. Methods: All patients 
that were hospitalized due to COVID-19 infection in the Respiratory Department 
of a tertiary referral center in central Greece between 1st of June 2021 and 1st 
of February 2022 were included in the present study. Results: 760 consecutive 
patients were included in the study; 89 (11.7%) were diagnosed with severe 
COVID-19 and 220 (38.7%) patients were fully vaccinated. In logistic regression, 
increased age (aOR = 1.12, p < 0.001), male gender (aOR = 2.29, p = 0.013) and 
vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 virus (aOR = 0.2, p < 0.001) were associated with 
mortality attributed to COVID-19 with a statistically significant association. 
Moreover, increased age (aOR = 1.09, p < 0.001), male gender (aOR = 1.92, p = 
0.025) and vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 virus (aOR = 0.25, p < 0.001) were 
statistically significantly associated with clinical severity of COVID-19 
infection. However, when comparing the length of hospitalization between 
vaccinated and unvaccinated patients, the difference was not statistically 
significant between the two groups (p = 0.138). Conclusions: Vaccination against 
SARS-CoV-2 virus had a protective effect in terms of mortality and clinical 
severity of COVID-19 during the fourth wave of the pandemic in Central Greece. 
The national vaccination policy has to focus on vulnerable populations that are 
expected to benefit the most from the vaccineâ€™s protection.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm12091423
PMCID: PMC9502864
PMID: 36143207

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.