1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Sep 15;19(18):11622. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph191811622.

Climbing as an Add-On Treatment Option for Patients with Severe Anxiety 
Disorders and PTSD: Feasibility Analysis and First Results of a Randomized 
Controlled Longitudinal Clinical Pilot Trial.

Bichler CS(1), Niedermeier M(1), Hüfner K(2), Gálffy M(2), Gostner JM(3), Nelles 
P(2), Schöttl SE(1), Sperner-Unterweger B(2), Kopp M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sport Science, University of Innsbruck, Fuerstenweg 185, 6020 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy, Psychosomatics and Medical 
Psychology, University Hospital of Psychiatry II, Innsbruck Medical University, 
Anichstraße 35, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Biocenter, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, Innrain 80-82, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Exercise has considerable effects on physical and psychological 
health. Anxiolytic effects of climbing exercise have been found in people 
suffering from depression. However, there are no studies on patients with severe 
anxiety disorders or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) practicing climbing 
as add-on treatment. Additionally, many studies on physical therapy fail to use 
adequate active control groups. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the 
feasibility of a four-week climbing exercise program for patients with anxiety 
disorders or PTSD in comparison to a standard exercise treatment and a social 
control group.
METHODS: Outpatients diagnosed with anxiety disorders or PTSD (F 40, F 41, F 
43.1 according to ICD-10) were randomly assigned to (a) climbing exercise (n = 
27), (b) Nordic walking exercise (n = 23), or (c) control condition (n = 23) 
providing the same amount of social contact for eight sessions of 90 minutes 
each. Psychological parameters (symptom severity, worry symptoms, self-efficacy, 
quality of life) and biological parameters were assessed at the beginning and at 
the end of the four-week program. Additionally, follow-up assessments were 
conducted three and six months after the program ended.
RESULTS: Sixty outpatients (75% female) aged 18-65 years with a longstanding 
history of a mental disorder (>10 years) and classified as treatment-resistant 
(95%) and with averaging 3.8 psychiatric comorbidities completed the pilot 
trial. After participation, symptoms of anxiety disorders were significantly 
reduced (p = 0.003), and health-related characteristics significantly improved 
(depression symptoms: p < 0.001, worry symptoms: p < 0.001, self-efficacy: p < 
0.001, quality of life-physical health: p = 0.002, quality of life-psychological 
health: p = 0.006) in all groups. The feasibility of conducting climbing 
exercises for the patient groups could be demonstrated, and a general acceptance 
in the groups was recorded. No significant time-by-group interactions were 
found. At the completion of the program, psychological parameters improved, 
while biological parameters remained the same in all three groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Participation in the climbing group as well as in Nordic walking 
and social contact groups demonstrated beneficial results in patients with 
anxiety disorders and PTSD with severe mental burden. Nevertheless, climbing did 
not show any additional clinically relevant benefits compared to Nordic walking 
or social contact. Studies with larger sample sizes and qualitative insights are 
needed to further evaluate the possible benefits of climbing in this population.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph191811622
PMCID: PMC9517148
PMID: 36141895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.