1. BMC Vet Res. 2022 Sep 24;18(1):357. doi: 10.1186/s12917-022-03452-9.

Berberine supplementation modulates the somatotropic axis and ameliorates 
glucose tolerance in dairy goats during late gestation and early lactation.

Ghavipanje N(1), Fathi Nasri MH(2), Farhangfar SH(2), Ghiasi SE(2), 
Vargas-Bello-Pérez E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Birjand, 
Birjand, 97175-331, Iran. navid.ghavipanje@birjand.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Birjand, 
Birjand, 97175-331, Iran.
(3)Department of Animal Sciences, School of Agriculture, Policy and Development, 
University of Reading, P.O. Box 237, Earley Gate, Reading, RG6 6EU, UK. 
e.vargasbelloperez@reading.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Pregnancy, parturition, and the onset of lactation represent an 
enormous physiological and hormonal challenge to the homeostasis of dairy 
animals, being a risk for their health and reproduction. Thus, as a part of the 
homothetic changes in preparturition period, goats undergo a period of IR as 
well as uncoupled GH/IGF-1 axis. The objective for this study was to determine 
the effect of berberine (BBR) during the peripartal period on hormonal 
alteration and somatotropic axis in dairy goats as well as glucose and insulin 
kinetics during an intravenous glucose tolerance test (IVGTT). At 21 days before 
the expected kidding date, 24 primiparous Saanen goats were assigned randomly to 
4 dietary treatments. Goats were fed a basal diet from wk. 3 antepartum (AP) 
until wk. 3 postpartum (PP) supplemented with 0 (CTRL), 1 (BBR1), 2 (BBR2), and 
4 (BBR4) g/d BBR. Blood samples were collected on days - 21, - 14, - 7, 0, 7, 
14, and 21 relative to the expected kidding date. An IVGTT was also performed on 
day 22 PP.
RESULTS: Compared with CTRL, supplementation with either BBR2 or BBR4 increased 
DMI at kidding day and PP, as well as body conditional score (BCS) and milk 
production (p ≤ 0.05). On d 7 and 14 PP plasma glucose was higher in BBR2- and 
BBR4-treated than in CTRL. The glucagon concentration was not affected by BBR 
during the experimental period. However, supplemental BBR indicated a tendency 
to decrease in cortisol concentration on days 7 (p = 0.093) and 14 (p = 0.100) 
PP. Lower plasma GH was observed in BBR than in non-BBR goats (p ≤ 0.05). Plasma 
IGF-1 concentration was enhanced in both BBR2 and BBR4 at kidding and day 7 PP 
(p ≤ 0.05). During the IVGTT, glucose area under the curve (AUC), clearance rate 
(CR), T1/2, and Tbasal was lower (p ≤ 0.05) in both BBR2 and BBR4 goats as 
compared with CTRL. Likewise, the insulin CR was higher (p ≤ 0.05) in goats 
receiving either BBR2 or BBR4 which was accompanied by a lower insulin T1/2 and 
AUC.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our results indicated an improved glucose and insulin 
status along with the modulation of the somatotropic axis and glucose and 
insulin response to IVGTT in dairy goats supplemented with 2 and 4 g/d BBR.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-022-03452-9
PMCID: PMC9508731
PMID: 36153497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest that would prejudice the impartiality of this scientific work.