1. Front Immunol. 2022 Sep 9;13:972003. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.972003.
eCollection  2022.

Maturation of circulating Ly6C(hi)CCR2(+) monocytes by mannan-MOG induces 
antigen-specific tolerance and reverses autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Dagkonaki A(1), Papalambrou A(1), Avloniti M(1), Gkika A(2), Evangelidou M(1), 
Androutsou ME(3), Tselios T(2), Probert L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Immunology, Hellenic Pasteur 
Institute, Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Patras, Greece.
(3)Research and Development Department, Vianex PLC, Nea Erythrea, Greece.

Autoimmune diseases affecting the CNS not only overcome immune privilege 
mechanisms that protect neural tissues but also peripheral immune tolerance 
mechanisms towards self. Together with antigen-specific T cells, myeloid cells 
are main effector cells in CNS autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis, 
but the relative contributions of blood-derived monocytes and the tissue 
resident macrophages to pathology and repair is incompletely understood. Through 
the study of oxidized mannan-conjugated myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
35-55 (OM-MOG), we show that peripheral maturation of Ly6ChiCCR2+ monocytes to 
Ly6ChiMHCII+PD-L1+ cells is sufficient to reverse spinal cord inflammation and 
demyelination in MOG-induced autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Soluble intradermal 
OM-MOG drains directly to the skin draining lymph node to be sequestered by 
subcapsular sinus macrophages, activates Ly6ChiCCR2+ monocytes to produce MHC 
class II and PD-L1, prevents immune cell trafficking to spinal cord, and 
reverses established lesions. We previously showed that protection by 
OM-peptides is antigen specific. Here, using a neutralizing anti-PD-L1 antibody 
in vivo and dendritic cell-specific Pdl1 knockout mice, we further demonstrate 
that PD-L1 in non-dendritic cells is essential for the therapeutic effects of 
OM-MOG. These results show that maturation of circulating Ly6ChiCCR2+ monocytes 
by OM-myelin peptides represents a novel mechanism of immune tolerance that 
reverses autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Copyright Â© 2022 Dagkonaki, Papalambrou, Avloniti, Gkika, Evangelidou, 
Androutsou, Tselios and Probert.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.972003
PMCID: PMC9501702
PMID: 36159850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M-EA was employed by the company Vianex S.A. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.