1. Mol Microbiol. 2022 Dec;118(6):637-651. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14984. Epub 2022 Oct
5.

New insights into the Tat protein transport cycle from characterizing the 
assembled Tat translocon.

Alcock F(1)(2), Berks BC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Microbes in Health and Disease Theme, Newcastle University Biosciences 
Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

The twin-arginine protein translocation (Tat) system transports folded proteins 
across the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane and the thylakoid membrane of 
chloroplasts. The Tat translocation site is transiently assembled by the 
recruitment of multiple TatA proteins to a substrate-activated TatBC receptor 
complex in a process requiring the protonmotive force. The ephemeral nature of 
the Tat translocation site has so far precluded its isolation. We now report 
that detergent solubilization of membranes during active transport allows the 
recovery of receptor complexes that are associated with elevated levels of TatA. 
We apply this biochemical analysis in combination with live cell fluorescence 
imaging to Tat systems trapped in the assembled state. We resolve sub-steps in 
the Tat translocation cycle and infer that TatA assembly precedes the functional 
interaction of TatA with a polar cluster site on TatC. We observe that 
dissipation of the protonmotive force releases TatA oligomers from the assembled 
translocation site demonstrating that the stability of the TatA oligomer does 
not depend on binding to the receptor complex and implying that the TatA 
oligomer is assembled at the periphery of the receptor complex. This work 
provides new insight into the Tat transport cycle and advances efforts to 
isolate the active Tat translocon.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14984
PMCID: PMC10092561
PMID: 36151601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]