1. Tunis Med. 2022 avril;100(4):285-294.

Update meta-analysis from biomedical literature about MTHFR'polymorphisms and 
the CML' risk.

Turki F, Louati N, Kamoun H, Keskes L, Rebaii T, Frikha R.

BACKGROUND: The MTHFR gene polymorphisms are closely related to the chronic 
myeloid leukemia (CML). Case-control studies have associated the MTHFR 
polymorphisms and susceptibility to CML but the results were not conclusive.
AIM: To assess this association through an update meta-analysis.
METHODS: A descriptive and qualitative study was conducted among students in the 
6th year of the faculty during the academic year 2020/2021. The data were 
collected through a questionnaire written in french evaluating the teaching 
methods. A focus group of ten persons was led to understand better student's 
opinions.
RESULTS: Totally, 17 and 12 case-control studies including CML cases and 
controls were enrolled in the meta-analysis respectively for C677T and A1298C 
polymorphism and CML risk. A poor association between the C677T (T vs C ; OR= 
1,28; IC95%= [1,01;1,63]; p=0,04) and the one not significant between the A1298C 
(C vs A ; OR= 1,52; IC95%= [0,92; 2,51]; p= 0,1) polymorphisms and the CML risk 
for overall population were found.
CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis suggested no significant 
association between C677T and A1298C polymorphisms and CML risk leading to 
consider other factors such us folic acid intake, gene-gene and gene- 
environment interactions.

Introduction : Les polymorphismes du gène MTHFR sont impliqués dans la survenue 
de la leucémie myéloïde chronique (LMC). Des études cas-témoins ont évalué 
l’association entre ces polymorphismes et le risque de la LMC dans différents 
pays mais les résultats ont été discordants. Objectif : Analyser la relation 
entre les polymorphismes du MTHFR et le risque de la LMC via une méta-analyse 
actualisée. Méthodes : Une recherche électronique sur la banque de données « 
Pubmed » a été conduite par deux investigateurs indépendants pour la sélection 
des articles cas-témoins publiés avant Juin 2018. L’analyse statistique a été 
faite selon les critères de l’éthnicité et le modèle génétique. Le odds ratio 
avec son intervalle de confiance (IC95%) est calculé à partir des données de la 
distribution génétique. Des tests d’hétérogénéité et des tests pour la 
détermination des biais de publication ont été utilisés. Résultats et 
discussion : Les études cas-témoins incluant des cas de LMC et des sujets 
contrôles ont été inscrites pour le polymorphisme C677T et A1298C au nombre de 
17 et 12, respectivement. Une association faible entre le polymorphisme C677T (T 
vs C ; OR= 1,28; IC95%= [1,01;1,63]; p=0,04), absente entre le polymorphisme 
A1298C (C vs A ; OR= 1,52; IC95%= [0,92; 2,51]; p= 0,1) et le risque de LMC ont 
été décrites dans cette méta-analyse. Conclusion : La faible ou l’absence 
d’association entre les polymorphismes C677T et A1298C et le risque de survenue 
de la LMC suggère la considération d’autres facteurs comme la consommation de 
l’acide folique, les interactions entre gène-gène et gène-environnement.

PMCID: PMC9476263
PMID: 36155899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]