1. Womens Health (Lond). 2022 Jan-Dec;18:17455057221125577. doi: 
10.1177/17455057221125577.

Romosozumab for the treatment of osteoporosis in women: Efficacy, safety, and 
cardiovascular risk.

Lim SY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Hawaii Pacific Health Medical Group, Pali Momi Medical Center, Aiea, HI, USA.
(2)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawai'i at MƒÅnoa, Honolulu, 
HI, USA.

Increased understanding of the Wnt signaling pathway has led to the development 
of romosozumab, one of the most potent osteoanabolic agents to date for 
osteoporosis treatment. Romosozumab is a monoclonal antibody that inhibits 
sclerostin, a natural inhibitor of the Wnt signaling pathway. Romosozumab, by 
inhibiting sclerostin activates the Wnt signaling pathway, leading to increased 
bone formation and decreased bone resorption. The pivotal ARCH and FRAME studies 
established romosozumab's fracture reduction efficacy. Romosozumab was superior 
to alendronate in fracture reduction and bone mineral density gain in the ARCH 
study. Romosozumab treatment should be followed sequentially with a potent 
antiresorptive agent. The antifracture efficacy gained from romosozumab is 
maintained or improved after transitioning to an antiresorptive agent. As one of 
the most potent osteoanabolic agents, the introduction of romosozumab has 
significantly increased our ability to treat osteoporosis. Studies have provided 
important information on using romosozumab with other osteoporosis medications 
to optimize osteoporosis treatment. Romosozumab used before antiresorptive 
medications is associated with more significant bone mineral density increases 
than when an antiresorptive agent is used before romosozumab. Romosozumab is 
recommended for osteoporosis treatment in patients at very high risk for 
fracture with low cardiovascular risk. Romosozumab is generally well tolerated, 
with 4%-5% of patients having injection site reactions. The ARCH trial showed a 
higher risk of cardiovascular events in patients receiving romosozumab. 
Romosozumab carries a black box warning that romosozumab should not be initiated 
in patients with myocardial infarction or stroke in the preceding year. However, 
the information on romosozumab and increased cardiovascular risk is conflicting. 
The risk of cardiovascular disease with romosozumab is unclear. While 
romosozumab has demonstrated significant osteoanabolic effect and antifracture 
efficacy and will benefit high fracture risk patients, further studies are 
needed to investigate the cardiovascular safety of romosozumab.

DOI: 10.1177/17455057221125577
PMCID: PMC9511529
PMID: 36154750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The author(s) declared no 
potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article.