1. Theranostics. 2022 Aug 29;12(14):6363-6379. doi: 10.7150/thno.74600.
eCollection  2022.

The N(6)-methyladenosine-mediated lncRNA WEE2-AS1 promotes glioblastoma 
progression by stabilizing RPN2.

Li B(1)(2), Zhao R(1)(2), Qiu W(1)(2), Pan Z(1)(2), Zhao S(1)(2), Qi Y(1)(2), 
Qiu J(1)(2), Zhang S(1)(2), Guo Q(1)(2), Fan Y(1)(2), Xu H(1)(2), Li M(1)(2), Li 
G(1)(2), Xue H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine and 
Institute of Brain and Brain-Inspired Science, Shandong University, Jinan 
250012, Shandong, China.
(2)Shandong Key Laboratory of Brain Function Remodeling, Jinan 250012, Shandong, 
China.

Background: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary brain malignancy and 
has high aggressiveness and a poor prognosis. N6-methyladenosine (m6A) 
represents the most prevalent methylation modification of lncRNAs and has been 
shown to play important roles in the pathophysiological processes of tumors. 
However, the distribution and function of m6A modifications in lncRNAs in GBM 
tissues have not been fully revealed. Methods: The global depiction of 
m6A-modified lncRNA expression patterns in GBM tumor tissues was screened via 
m6A high-throughput sequencing. Gain- and loss-of-function assays were performed 
to investigate the role of WEE2-AS1 in GBM. Mass spectrometry and RNA-pulldown, 
RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP), luciferase reporter and coimmunoprecipitation 
assays were performed to explore the mechanism of m6A-mediated upregulation of 
WEE2-AS1 expression and the downstream mechanism promoting the malignant 
progression of GBM. Results: Herein, we report the differential expression 
profile of m6A-modified lncRNAs in human GBM tissues for the first time. 
WEE2-AS1 was identified as a novel m6A-modified lncRNA that promotes GBM 
progression and was post-transcriptionally stabilized by IGF2BP3, an m6A reader. 
Moreover, we confirmed that WEE2-AS1 promoted RPN2 protein stabilization by 
preventing CUL2-mediated RPN2 K322 ubiquitination, thereby contributing to GBM 
malignant progression by activating the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. In 
translational medicine, we found that blocking WEE2-AS1 expression improved the 
therapeutic sensitivity of dasatinib, a central nervous system penetrant that is 
FDA-approved in GBM. Conclusions: Overall, this work highlights that WEE2-AS1 
may serve as a potential prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target in GBM, the 
knockdown of which significantly improves the efficacy of dasatinib, providing a 
promising strategy for improving targeted combination therapy for GBM patients.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.74600
PMCID: PMC9475453
PMID: 36168628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.