1. ACS Synth Biol. 2022 Oct 21;11(10):3493-3503. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00389. 
Epub 2022 Sep 27.

Discovery and Heterologous Expression of Microginins from Microcystis aeruginosa 
LEGE 91341.

Eusébio N(1), Castelo-Branco R(1), Sousa D(1), Preto M(1), D'Agostino P(2), 
Gulder TAM(2), Leão PN(1).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research (CIIMAR/CIMAR), 
University of Porto, Avenida General Norton de Matos, s/n, 4450-208 Matosinhos, 
Portugal.
(2)Chair of Technical Biochemistry, Technical University of Dresden, Bergstraße 
66, 01069 Dresden, Germany.

Microginins are a large family of cyanobacterial lipopeptide protease 
inhibitors. A hybrid polyketide synthase/non-ribosomal peptide synthetase 
biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) found in several microginin-producing 
strains─mic─was proposed to encode the production of microginins, based on 
bioinformatic analysis. Here, we explored a cyanobacterium, Microcystis 
aeruginosa LEGE 91341, which contains a mic BGC, to discover 12 new microginin 
variants. The new compounds contain uncommon amino acids, namely, 
homophenylalanine (Hphe), homotyrosine (Htyr), or methylproline, as well as a 
3-aminodecanoic acid (Ada) residue, which in some variants was chlorinated at 
its terminal methyl group. We have used direct pathway cloning (DiPaC) to 
heterologously express the mic BGC from M. aeruginosa LEGE 91341 in Escherichia 
coli, which led to the production of several microginins. This proved that the 
mic BGC is, in fact, responsible for the biosynthesis of microginins and paves 
the way to accessing new variants from (meta)genome data or through pathway 
engineering.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00389
PMCID: PMC9594780
PMID: 36166626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.