1. Front Neurosci. 2022 Sep 7;16:936104. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.936104. 
eCollection 2022.

Chronobiology of epilepsy and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy.

Kreitlow BL(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Li W(4)(5), Buchanan GF(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United 
States.
(2)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, United States.
(3)Iowa Neuroscience Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United 
States.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States.
(5)Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States.

Epilepsy is a neurological disease characterized by spontaneous, unprovoked 
seizures. Various insults render the brain hyperexcitable and susceptible to 
seizure. Despite there being dozens of preventative anti-seizure medications 
available, these drugs fail to control seizures in nearly 1 in 3 patients with 
epilepsy. Over the last century, a large body of evidence has demonstrated that 
internal and external rhythms can modify seizure phenotypes. Physiologically 
relevant rhythms with shorter periodic rhythms, such as endogenous circadian 
rhythms and sleep-state, as well as rhythms with longer periodicity, including 
multidien rhythms and menses, influence the timing of seizures through poorly 
understood mechanisms. The purpose of this review is to discuss the findings 
from both human and animal studies that consider the effect of such biologically 
relevant rhythms on epilepsy and seizure-associated death. Patients with 
medically refractory epilepsy are at increased risk of sudden unexpected death 
in epilepsy (SUDEP). The role that some of these rhythms play in the nocturnal 
susceptibility to SUDEP will also be discussed. While the involvement of some of 
these rhythms in epilepsy has been known for over a century, applying the 
rhythmic nature of such phenomenon to epilepsy management, particularly in 
mitigating the risk of SUDEP, has been underutilized. As our understanding of 
the physiological influence on such rhythmic phenomenon improves, and as 
technology for chronic intracranial epileptiform monitoring becomes more 
widespread, smaller and less invasive, novel seizure-prediction technologies and 
time-dependent chronotherapeutic seizure management strategies can be realized.

Copyright Â© 2022 Kreitlow, Li and Buchanan.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2022.936104
PMCID: PMC9490261
PMID: 36161152

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.