1. Front Genet. 2022 Sep 13;13:946854. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.946854.
eCollection  2022.

Synergistic effects of rare variants of ARHGAP31 and FBLN1 in vitro in terminal 
transverse limb defects.

Tian H(1), Chu F(1), Li Y(1), Xu M(1), Li W(2), Li C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.

Background: Aplasia cutis congenita (ACC) and terminal transverse limb defects 
(TTLDs) are the most common features of Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS). ARHGAP31 is 
one of the causative genes for autosomal dominant forms of AOS, meanwhile its 
variants may only cause isolated TTLD. Here, we report a proband presented with 
apparent TTLD but not ACC. Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) and Sanger 
sequencing were applied to identify causative genes. Expression vectors were 
constructed for transfections in mammalian cell cultures followed by biochemical 
and functional analysis including immunoblotting, immunofluorescence staining, 
and cell counting kit-8 assay. Results: WES and Sanger sequencing suggested that 
the proband inherited rare ARHGAP31 variant [c.2623G > A (p.Glu875Lys)] and a 
rare FBLN1 variant [c.1649G > A (p.Arg550His)] from one of her asymptomatic 
parents, respectively. Given FBLN1 variation has also been linked to syndactyly, 
we suspected that the two genes together contributed to the TTLD phenotype and 
explored their possible roles in vitro. Mutant FBLN1 showed reduced expression 
resulted from impaired protein stability, whereas ARHGAP31 protein expression 
was unaltered by mutation. Functional assays showed that only in the 
co-transfected group of two mutants cell viability was decreased, cell 
proliferation was impaired, and apoptosis was activated. Cdc42 activity was 
declined by both ARHGAP31 mutation and FBLN1 mutation alone, and the two 
together. Furthermore, the MAPK/ERK pathway was only activated by two mutants 
co-transfected group compared with two wild-type transfections. Conclusion: We 
report a case carrying two rare variants of limb defects associated genes, 
ARHGAP31 and FBLN1, and provide in vitro evidence that synergistic disruption of 
cellular functions attributed by the two mutants may potentiate the penetrance 
of clinical manifestations, expanding our knowledge of clinical complexity of 
causal gene interactions in TTLD and other genetic disorders.

Copyright Â© 2022 Tian, Chu, Li, Xu, Li and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.946854
PMCID: PMC9513373
PMID: 36176297

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.