1. Food Sci Nutr. 2022 Apr 29;10(9):3106-3116. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.2909.
eCollection  2022 Sep.

Interactive effects of the low-carbohydrate diet score and genetic risk score on 
Hypo-HDL-cholesterolemia among Korean adults: A cross-sectional analysis from 
the Ansan and Ansung Study of the Korean Genome and Epidemiology Study.

Park S(1), Jang MJ(2), Park MY(3), Kim JM(2), Shin S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition Chung-Ang University Gyeonggi-do Korea.
(2)Department of Animal Science and Technology Chung-Ang University Gyeonggi-do 
Korea.
(3)Department of Molecular Pathobiology NYU College of Dentistry New York New 
York USA.

This cross-sectional study investigated the interaction between the genetic risk 
score (GRS) and abnormal high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol lipid 
levels, which are modified by low-carbohydrate diets (LCDs) and their effects on 
the prevalence of hypo-HDL-cholesterolemia (hypo-HDL-C) in Korean adults. 
Baseline data were obtained from the Ansan and Ansung study of the Korean Genome 
and Epidemiology Study (KoGES), conducted from 2001 to 2002, that targeted 8,314 
Korean adults aged 40-69 years, including old men (47.6%) and women (52.4%), and 
whole genomic single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping was performed. We 
identified 18 SNPs significantly associated with hypo-HDL-C in the proximity of 
several genes, including LPL, APOA5, LIPC, and CETP, and calculated the GRS. The 
low-carbohydrate diet score (LCDS) was calculated on the basis of energy intake 
information from food frequency questionnaires. Furthermore, we performed 
multivariable-adjusted logistic modeling to examine the odds ratio (OR) for 
hypo-HDL-C across tertiles of LCDS and GRS, adjusted for several covariates. 
Among participants in the highest GRS tertile, those in the highest tertile of 
the LCDS had a significantly lower risk of hypo-HDL-C (OR: 0.759, 95% CI 
(confidence interval): 0.625-0.923) than those in the lowest tertile of the 
LCDS. In the joint effect model, the group with the lowest GRS and highest LCDS 
was found to have the lowest risk of hypo-HDL-C prevalence. This study suggests 
that individuals with a high genetic risk for low HDL concentrations may have a 
beneficial effect on a lower intake of carbohydrates.

© 2022 The Authors. Food Science & Nutrition published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.2909
PMCID: PMC9469851
PMID: 36171780

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.