1. Immunology. 2023 Mar;168(3):459-472. doi: 10.1111/imm.13584. Epub 2022 Oct 13.

The common IL1A single nucleotide polymorphism rs17561 is a hypomorphic mutation 
that significantly reduces interleukin-1α release from human blood cells.

Wiggins KA(1), Pyrillou K(1), Humphry M(1), Butterworth AS(2), Clarke MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of CardioRespiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Cambridge, The Heart & Lung Research Institute, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Dept of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, The Heart & 
Lung Research Institute, Cambridge, UK.

Interleukin-1 alpha (IL-1α) is a powerful cytokine that drives inflammation and 
modulates adaptive immunity. Due to these powerful effects, IL-1α is controlled 
at multiple levels from transcription to cleavage and release from the cell. 
Genome-wide association studies can identify loci that drive important diseases, 
although often the functional effect of the variant on phenotype remains unknown 
or small, with most risk variants in non-coding regions. We find that the common 
variant rs17561 changes a conserved amino acid in the central region of IL-1α 
linking the pro piece to the cytokine domain. Using a recall-by-genotype study 
and whole blood stimulation, we find that minor allele homozygotes release ~50% 
less IL-1α than the major allele, with IL-1β release equivalent. IL-1α 
transcript level was identical between groups, implying a post-transcriptional 
effect, whilst cleavage of recombinant pro-IL-1α by multiple proteases was also 
equivalent for both forms. Importantly, transfected macrophages also release 
less minor allele IL-1α upon inflammasome activation, revealing that reduced 
secretion is directly caused by the missense amino acid substitution and more 
minor allele IL-1α was retained within the cell. Thus, rs17561 represents a very 
common hypomorphic mutation in IL-1α. We believe this novel data will be 
important for determining the potential contribution of IL-1α to disease and/or 
physiological processes, for example, by Mendelian randomisation, and may aid 
patient stratification when considering anti-IL-1 therapies.

© 2022 The Authors. Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.13584
PMCID: PMC11495263
PMID: 36175368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflicting interests, 
financial or otherwise.