1. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2022 Dec;27(4):283-290. doi: 10.1111/jns.12513. Epub
2022  Oct 5.

The diagnostic accuracy of the small fiber neuropathy symptoms inventory 
questionnaire (SFN-SIQ) for identifying pure small fiber neuropathy.

Galosi E(1), Falco P(1), Di Pietro G(1), Leone C(1), Esposito N(1), De Stefano 
G(1), Di Stefano G(1), Truini A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Neuroscience, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2023 Jun;28(2):286. doi: 10.1111/jns.12535.
    J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2023 Jun;28(2):287-288. doi: 10.1111/jns.12536.

A definite diagnosis of pure small fiber neuropathy (SFN) relies on specific 
diagnostic testing, such as skin biopsy, quantitative sensory testing (QST), and 
nociceptive evoked potentials, which require considerable resources that may not 
be widely available. Accordingly, diagnostic tools with easy implementation in 
non-specialist centers are warranted to identify patients who require 
second-level diagnostic tests. In this study, we aimed to test the accuracy of 
the Small Fiber Neuropathy Symptoms Inventory Questionnaire (SFN-SIQ) in 
diagnosing pure SFN. We enrolled 86 patients with suspected pure SFN. In these 
patients, we calculated the diagnostic accuracy of the SFN-SIQ using a 
combination of clinical examination, QST, and skin biopsy as a reference 
standard. We found that the SFN-SIQ showed an excellent ability to discriminate 
between patients with and without pure SFN, with 86% sensitivity and 70% 
specificity in the diagnosis of pure SFN. Our study providing the diagnostic 
yield of the SFN-SIQ for pure SFN diagnosis suggests that this questionnaire 
might be used to screen patients with suspected SFN and identify those requiring 
second-level diagnostic tests such as QST, skin biopsy, or nociceptive evoked 
potentials.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Journal of the Peripheral Nervous System published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of Peripheral Nerve Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jns.12513
PMCID: PMC10092576
PMID: 36175394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors whose names are listed immediately 
below certify that they have no conflicts of interest to declare that are 
relevant to the content of this article: Eleonora Galosi, Pietro Falco, Giuseppe 
Di Pietro, Caterina Leone, Nicoletta Esposito, Gianfranco De Stefano, Giulia Di 
Stefano, and Andrea Truini.