1. ACS Omega. 2022 Sep 16;7(38):34495-34505. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.2c04244. 
eCollection 2022 Sep 27.

Detection of Axitinib Using Multiwalled Carbon Nanotube-Fe(2)O(3)/Chitosan 
Nanocomposite-Based Electrochemical Sensor and Modeling with Density Functional 
Theory.

Cetinkaya A(1), Kaya SI(1)(2), Şenel P(3), Cini N(3), Atici EB(4), Ozkan SA(1), 
Yurtsever M(3), Gölcü A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ankara University, 
06560 Ankara, Turkiye.
(2)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Gulhane Faculty of Pharmacy, University 
of Health Sciences, 06010 Ankara, Turkiye.
(3)Chemistry Department, Science and Letters Faculty, Istanbul Technical 
University, Maslak, 34469 Istanbul, Turkiye.
(4)Research & Development Center, DEVA Holding A.S., 59520 Tekirdağ, Turkiye.

In this study, axitinib (AXI), a potent and selective inhibitor of vascular 
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) tyrosine kinase and used as a 
second-generation targeted drug, was investigated electrochemically under 
optimized conditions using multiwalled carbon nanotubes/iron(III) oxide 
nanoparticle-chitosan nanocomposite (MWCNT/Fe2O3@chitosan NC) modified on the 
glassy carbon electrode (GCE) surface. Characterization of the modified 
electrode was performed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The adsorptive stripping 
differential pulse voltammetric (AdSDPV) technique was used for the sensitive, 
rapid, and precise detection of AXI. The current peak obtained with the 
MWCNT/Fe2O3@chitosan NC modified electrode was 23 times higher compared to the 
bare electrode. The developed modified electrode showed excellent 
electrocatalytic activity in AXI oxidation. Under optimized conditions, the 
effect of supporting electrolyte and pH was investigated, and 0.1 M H2SO4 was 
chosen as the electrolyte with the highest peak current for the target analyte. 
In the concentration range of MWCNT/Fe2O3@chitosan NC/GCE, 6 × 10-9 and 1 × 10-6 
M, the limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) values were 
calculated to be 0.904 and 0.0301 pM, respectively. Tablet and serum samples 
were used for the applicability of the developed sensor, relative standard 
deviation (RSD) values for all samples were below 2%, and the recovery results 
were 99.23 and 101.84%, respectively. The MWCNT/Fe2O3@chitosan NC/GCE designed 
to determine AXI demonstrated the applicability, selectivity, precision, and 
accuracy of the sensor. The mechanism of electron transfer from the modified GCE 
surface to the analyte solution is studied via modeling the modified GCE surface 
by the density functional theory (DFT) method at B3LYP/6-311+g(d,p) and 
M062X/6-31g(d,p) levels. We observed that the iron oxide nanoparticles play an 
important role in channeling electron flow from the analyte solution to the 
MWCNT-coated GCE electrode surface. Adsorption of the nanocomposite material 
onto the GCE surface occurs via strong electrostatic interactions, including 
ionic and hydrogen bond formations. During the adsorption-controlled oxidation 
process of the axitinib, the electrons are transferred via the highest occupied 
molecular orbital (HOMO) localized on the iron oxide moiety to the lowest 
unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the MWCNT/GCE surface.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.2c04244
PMCID: PMC9520732
PMID: 36188240

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.