1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Sep 14;13:979087. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.979087. 
eCollection 2022.

Expression profiling of mRNA and functional network analyses of genes regulated 
by human papilloma virus E6 and E7 proteins in HaCaT cells.

Dai R(1), Tao R(2), Li X(1), Shang T(1), Zhao S(1), Ren Q(1).

Author information:
(1)The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, 
China.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Applied Anatomy, Department of Human Anatomy, School 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) oncogenes E6 and E7 are essential for HPV-related 
cancer development. Here, we developed a cell line model using lentiviruses for 
transfection of the HPV16 oncogenes E6 and E7 and investigated the differences 
in mRNA expression during cell adhesion and chemokine secretion. Subsequently, 
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis was performed to explore the differences in 
mRNA expression. Compared to levels in the control group, 2,905 differentially 
expressed mRNAs (1,261 downregulated and 1,644 upregulated) were identified in 
the HaCaT-HPV16E6E7 cell line. To predict the functions of these differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs) the Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes databases were used. Protein-protein interactions were established, and 
the hub gene was identified based on this network. Real-time quantitative-PCR 
(RT-qPCR) was conducted to confirm the levels of 14 hub genes, which were 
consistent with the RNA-seq data. According to this, we found that these DEGs 
participate in the extracellular matrix (ECM), cell adhesion, immune control, 
and cancer-related signaling pathways. Currently, an increasing number of 
clinicians depend on E6/E7mRNA results to make a comprehensive judgment of 
cervical precancerous lesions. In this study, 14 hub genes closely related to 
the expression of cell adhesion ability and chemokines were analyzed in 
HPV16E6E7-stably expressing cell lines, which will open up new research ideas 
for targeting E6E7 in the treatment of HPV-related cancers.

Copyright Â© 2022 Dai, Tao, Li, Shang, Zhao and Ren.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.979087
PMCID: PMC9515614
PMID: 36188003

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.