1. Front Public Health. 2022 Sep 14;10:957827. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.957827. 
eCollection 2022.

Detection rate of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in relation to isolation time and environmental 
surface type.

Sun W(1), Chen H(2), Tao S(2), Li N(3), Xu Y(4), Fang Y(4), Chen L(4), Liang 
W(1), Cao G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Ningbo First Hospital, Ningbo, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Medical School of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China.
(3)Laboratory Medical School, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu, China.
(4)School of Medicine, Medical School of Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.
(5)Department of Pain Clinic, Ningbo First Hospital, Ningbo, China.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) causes environmental 
contamination via respiratory droplets and persists on contaminants and 
environmental surfaces for anywhere from a few hours to 6 days. Therefore, it is 
particularly important to understand the transmission and containment of 
SARS-CoV-2 on the surface of objects within isolated environments. In this 
study, 356 environmental surface samples were collected and 79 tested positive, 
with the highest contamination rate (56.96%) in the wood category (bedside 
tables, wood floors, and walls). This study revealed differences in the 
detection rates of environmental surfaces in hospitalized and discharged rooms 
of patients with confirmed COVID-19 in 2 isolated settings (A: p = 0.001; B: p = 
0.505) and suggested that environmental contamination may be an important route 
of virus transmission, providing a reference to guide the enhancement of 
ventilation, the use of hotel isolation model, the advocacy of cotton masks, and 
the effective suppression of virus transmission.

Copyright Â© 2022 Sun, Chen, Tao, Li, Xu, Fang, Chen, Liang and Cao.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.957827
PMCID: PMC9515418
PMID: 36187635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.