1. Front Vet Sci. 2022 Sep 15;9:987667. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2022.987667.
eCollection  2022.

Epidemiological survey of PRRS and genetic variation analysis of the ORF5 gene 
in Shandong Province, 2020-2021.

Li P(1), Shen Y(1), Wang T(1), Li J(1), Li Y(2), Zhao Y(1), Liu S(1), Li B(1), 
Liu M(3), Meng F(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 
China.
(3)Division of Zoonoses Surveillance, China Animal Health and Epidemiology 
Center, Qingdao, China.
(4)Huayun (Shandong) Inspection and Quarantine Service Co., Ltd, Taian, China.

Since the rise of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) in 
China, mutations have occurred regularly. In particular, the emergence of 
HP-PRRSV has significantly improved the pathogenicity of PRRSV. It has brought 
huge economic losses to the Chinese pig farming industry. To understand the 
current prevalence and evolution of PRRSV in Shandong Province, 1,344 samples 
suspected of having PRRSV were collected from local hog farms of different 
sizes. Genetic variation in the isolated PRRSV ORF5 gene was analyzed using the 
RT-PCR method. The results showed that the detection rate of PRRSV in the 
collected samples was 25.44%. The predominant strain of PRRSV in Shandong 
Province is still NADC30-like. However, it cannot be ignored that NADC34-like is 
also starting to become a prevalent strain. Mutations in ORF5 amino acids 13, 
151 and neutralizing epitope (aa36-aa52) in some isolates can cause changes in 
virulence and ability to escape immunity. This study enriches the 
epidemiological data on PRRSV in Shandong Province, China. It provides an 
important reference for the development of new vaccines and for the prevention 
and control of PRRSV.

Copyright Â© 2022 Li, Shen, Wang, Li, Li, Zhao, Liu, Li, Liu and Meng.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2022.987667
PMCID: PMC9521713
PMID: 36187820

Conflict of interest statement: Author FM was employed by Huayun (Shandong) 
Inspection and Quarantine Service Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.