1. Front Mol Biosci. 2022 Sep 16;9:1016071. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.1016071. 
eCollection 2022.

Structural insights into the functional roles of 14-3-3 proteins.

Obsilova V(1), Obsil T(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Laboratory of 
Structural Biology of Signaling Proteins, Division BIOCEV, Vestec, Czechia.
(2)Department of Physical and Macromolecular Chemistry, Faculty of Science, 
Charles University, Prague, Czechia.

Signal transduction cascades efficiently transmit chemical and/or physical 
signals from the extracellular environment to intracellular compartments, 
thereby eliciting an appropriate cellular response. Most often, these signaling 
processes are mediated by specific protein-protein interactions involving 
hundreds of different receptors, enzymes, transcription factors, and signaling, 
adaptor and scaffolding proteins. Among them, 14-3-3 proteins are a family of 
highly conserved scaffolding molecules expressed in all eukaryotes, where they 
modulate the function of other proteins, primarily in a 
phosphorylation-dependent manner. Through these binding interactions, 14-3-3 
proteins participate in key cellular processes, such as cell-cycle control, 
apoptosis, signal transduction, energy metabolism, and protein trafficking. To 
date, several hundreds of 14-3-3 binding partners have been identified, 
including protein kinases, phosphatases, receptors and transcription factors, 
which have been implicated in the onset of various diseases. As such, 14-3-3 
proteins are promising targets for pharmaceutical interventions. However, 
despite intensive research into their protein-protein interactions, our 
understanding of the molecular mechanisms whereby 14-3-3 proteins regulate the 
functions of their binding partners remains insufficient. This review article 
provides an overview of the current state of the art of the molecular mechanisms 
whereby 14-3-3 proteins regulate their binding partners, focusing on recent 
structural studies of 14-3-3 protein complexes.

Copyright Â© 2022 Obsilova and Obsil.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.1016071
PMCID: PMC9523730
PMID: 36188227

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.