1. ACS Cent Sci. 2022 Sep 28;8(9):1238-1257. doi: 10.1021/acscentsci.1c01368.
Epub  2022 May 3.

Potent Virustatic Polymer-Lipid Nanomimics Block Viral Entry and Inhibit Malaria 
Parasites In Vivo.

Najer A(1)(2), Blight J(2), Ducker CB(2), Gasbarri M(3), Brown JC(4), Che J(1), 
Høgset H(1), Saunders C(1), Ojansivu M(5), Lu Z(1), Lin Y(1), Yeow J(1), 
Rifaie-Graham O(1), Potter M(1), Tonkin R(1), Penders J(1), Doutch JJ(6), 
Georgiadou A(4), Barriga HMG(5), Holme MN(5), Cunnington AJ(4), Bugeon L(2), 
Dallman MJ(2), Barclay WS(4), Stellacci F(3)(7), Baum J(2), Stevens MM(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials, Department of Bioengineering, and Institute of 
Biomedical Engineering, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, U.K.
(3)Institute of Materials, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease, Imperial College London, London, W2 1PG, 
U.K.
(5)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, ISIS Neutron and Muon Source, STFC, Didcot 
OX11 ODE, U.K.
(7)Institute of Bioengineering, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Infectious diseases continue to pose a substantial burden on global populations, 
requiring innovative broad-spectrum prophylactic and treatment alternatives. 
Here, we have designed modular synthetic polymer nanoparticles that mimic 
functional components of host cell membranes, yielding multivalent nanomimics 
that act by directly binding to varied pathogens. Nanomimic blood circulation 
time was prolonged by reformulating polymer-lipid hybrids. Femtomolar 
concentrations of the polymer nanomimics were sufficient to inhibit herpes 
simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) entry into epithelial cells, while higher doses 
were needed against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2). Given their observed virustatic mode of action, the nanomimics 
were also tested with malaria parasite blood-stage merozoites, which lose their 
invasive capacity after a few minutes. Efficient inhibition of merozoite 
invasion of red blood cells was demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo using a 
preclinical rodent malaria model. We envision these nanomimics forming an 
adaptable platform for developing pathogen entry inhibitors and as 
immunomodulators, wherein nanomimic-inhibited pathogens can be secondarily 
targeted to sites of immune recognition.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.1c01368
PMCID: PMC9092191
PMID: 36188342

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
financial interest(s): J.P. and M.M.S. have filed a patent application 
(1810010.7) and have a registered trademark (US Reg. No. 6088213) covering the 
name SPARTA and the techniques, described in the manuscript by Penders et al. 
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06397-6).