1. JACS Au. 2022 Aug 16;2(9):2098-2107. doi: 10.1021/jacsau.2c00365. eCollection 
2022 Sep 26.

Discovery and Characterization of the Metallopterin-Dependent Ergothioneine 
Synthase from Caldithrix abyssi.

Beliaeva MA(1)(2), Seebeck FP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 24a, 4002 Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)Molecular Systems Engineering, National Competence Center in Research (NCCR), 
4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Ergothioneine is a histidine derivative with a 2-mercaptoimidazole side chain 
and a trimethylated α-amino group. Although the physiological function of this 
natural product is not yet understood, the facts that many bacteria, some 
archaea, and most fungi produce ergothioneine and that plants and animals have 
specific mechanisms to absorb and distribute ergothioneine in specific tissues 
suggest a fundamental role in cellular life. The observation that ergothioneine 
biosynthesis has emerged multiple times in molecular evolution points to the 
same conclusion. Aerobic bacteria and fungi attach sulfur to the imidazole ring 
of trimethylhistidine via an O2-dependent reaction that is catalyzed by a 
mononuclear non-heme iron enzyme. Green sulfur bacteria and archaea use a 
rhodanese-like sulfur transferase to attach sulfur via oxidative polar 
substitution. In this report, we describe a third unrelated class of enzymes 
that catalyze sulfur transfer in ergothioneine production. The 
metallopterin-dependent ergothioneine synthase from Caldithrix abyssi contains 
an N-terminal module that is related to the tungsten-dependent acetylene 
hydratase and a C-terminal domain that is a functional cysteine desulfurase. The 
two modules cooperate to transfer sulfur from cysteine onto trimethylhistidine. 
Inactivation of the C-terminal desulfurase blocks ergothioneine production but 
maintains the ability of the metallopterin to exchange sulfur between 
ergothioneine and trimethylhistidine. Homologous bifunctional enzymes are 
encoded exclusively in anaerobic bacterial and archaeal species.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.2c00365
PMCID: PMC9516567
PMID: 36186560

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.