1. Int J Oncol. 2022 Dec;61(6):144. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2022.5434. Epub 2022 Oct 5.

TRIM35 ubiquitination regulates the expression of PKM2 tetramer and dimer and 
affects the malignant behaviour of breast cancer by regulating the Warburg 
effect.

Wu H(1), Guo X(1), Jiao Y(1), Wu Z(2), Lv Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.
(2)Laboratory of Pathology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.

Breast cancer has become the leading cause of death in females. After 
comprehensive treatment, the lives of patients are still threatened by tumor 
metastasis and recurrence. Therefore, there is an urgent requirement to find an 
effective treatment target for breast cancer. Tripartite motif‑containing 35 
(TRIM35) is a ubiquitin ligase that has an important role in the recurrence and 
metastasis of malignant tumors. However, the role of TRIM35 in breast cancer has 
thus far remained elusive. The expression of TRIM35 was examined in a 
bioinformatics database and the effects of TRIM35 on the malignant biological 
behavior of breast cancer were analyzed by Cell Counting Kit‑8, cell migration 
and invasion assays, flow cytometry and nude mouse xenograft experiments. It was 
determined that TRIM35 was downregulated in breast cancer tumor tissues and cell 
lines. Patients with low TRIM35 expression had shorter overall survival. 
Functional assays revealed that overexpression of TRIM35 inhibited the 
proliferation, migration and invasion, and promoted apoptosis of breast cancer 
cells. Furthermore, overexpression of TRIM35 was able to inhibit the Warburg 
effect in breast cancer cells. Mechanistic analyses indicated that TRIM35 
regulates the transition of tetramers and dimers of pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) 
through ubiquitination and thereby affects the Warburg effect. In conclusion, 
the present results indicated that TRIM35 regulates the tetramer and dimer 
transition of PKM2 through ubiquitination and affects the malignant biological 
behavior of breast cancer by modulating the Warburg effect.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2022.5434
PMCID: PMC9581112
PMID: 36196894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.