1. J Tissue Eng. 2022 Sep 29;13:20417314221119895. doi:
10.1177/20417314221119895.  eCollection 2022 Jan-Dec.

Microsphere incorporation as a strategy to tune the biological performance of 
bioinks.

Bonany M(1)(2)(3), Del-Mazo-Barbara L(1)(2)(3), Espanol M(1)(2)(3), Ginebra 
MP(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Biomaterials, Biomechanics and Tissue Engineering Group, Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Barcelona Research Centre in Multiscale Science and Engineering, UPC, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Biomedical Engineering Research Center (CREB), UPC, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.

Although alginate is widely used as a matrix in the formulation of cell-laden 
inks, this polymer often requires laborious processing strategies due to its 
lack of cell adhesion moieties. The main objective of the present work was to 
explore the incorporation of microspheres into alginate-based bioinks as a 
simple and tuneable way to solve the cell adhesion problems, while adding extra 
biological functionality and improving their mechanical properties. To this end, 
three types of microspheres with different mineral contents (i.e. gelatine with 
0% of hydroxyapatite, gelatine with 25 wt% of hydroxyapatite nanoparticles and 
100 wt% of calcium -deficient hydroxyapatite) were synthesised and incorporated 
into the formulation of cell-laden inks. The results showed that the addition of 
microspheres generally improved the rheological properties of the ink, favoured 
cell proliferation and positively affected osteogenic cell differentiation. 
Furthermore, this differentiation was found to be influenced by the type of 
microsphere and the ability of the cells to migrate towards them, which was 
highly dependent on the stiffness of the bioink. In this regard, Ca2+ 
supplementation in the cell culture medium had a pronounced effect on the 
relaxation of the stiffness of these cell-loaded inks, influencing the overall 
cell performance. In conclusion, we have developed a powerful and tuneable 
strategy for the fabrication of alginate-based bioinks with enhanced biological 
characteristics by incorporating microspheres into the initial ink formulation.

© The Author(s) 2022.

DOI: 10.1177/20417314221119895
PMCID: PMC9527984
PMID: 36199978

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.