1. Open Biol. 2022 Oct;12(10):220197. doi: 10.1098/rsob.220197. Epub 2022 Oct 5.

Polo-like kinase and Aurora B kinase phosphorylate and cooperate with the 
CIF1-CIF2 complex to promote cytokinesis initiation in Trypanosoma brucei.

Kurasawa Y(1), Lee KJ(1), Hu H(1), Pham KTM(1), Li Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Cytokinesis in eukaryotes is regulated by a Polo-like kinase-mediated and Aurora 
B kinase-mediated signalling pathway that promotes the assembly of the 
actomyosin contractile ring, a cytokinesis machinery conserved across evolution 
from yeast to humans. Trypanosoma brucei, an early divergent parasitic 
protozoan, employs an actomyosin-independent mechanism for its unusual 
cytokinesis that is controlled by a regulatory pathway comprising the Polo-like 
kinase TbPLK, the Aurora B kinase TbAUK1 and multiple trypanosomatid-specific 
regulators. However, whether any of these trypanosomatid-specific regulators 
function as substrates of TbPLK and/or TbAUK1 and how they cooperate with TbPLK 
and TbAUK1 to promote cytokinesis remain unknown. Here, we demonstrate that 
TbPLK and TbAUK1 phosphorylate the cytokinesis regulators CIF1 and CIF2 on 
multiple sites within their intrinsically disordered regions. We further show 
that TbPLK localization depends on its interaction with CIF1 from S/G2 phases, 
that TbPLK maintains CIF1 and CIF2 localization from G2 phase until early 
mitosis, and that TbAUK1 maintains CIF1 and CIF2 localization from late mitosis. 
Finally, we demonstrate that the cytokinesis regulators CIF4 and FPRC are not 
substrates of TbPLK and TbAUK1, and that they function upstream of TbPLK and 
TbAUK1 in the cytokinesis regulatory pathway. Together, these results provide 
insights into the functional interplay and the order of actions between the two 
protein kinases and the trypanosomatid-specific cytokinesis regulators in T. 
brucei.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.220197
PMCID: PMC9532997
PMID: 36196534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.