1. J Nanobiotechnology. 2022 Oct 8;20(1):442. doi: 10.1186/s12951-022-01647-8.

Intracellular mRNA phase separation induced by cationic polymers for tumor 
immunotherapy.

Xing Z(1), Xue J(1), Ma X(1), Han C(1), Wang Z(1), Luo S(1), Wang C(2), Dong 
L(3), Zhang J(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Avenue, Nanjing, 210093, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of 
Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa, 999078, Macau SAR, China. 
cmwang@umac.mo.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Avenue, Nanjing, 210093, China. 
leidong@nju.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Avenue, Nanjing, 210093, China. 
jfzhang@nju.edu.cn.

The formation of biomolecular condensates via liquid‒liquid phase separation 
(LLPS) is an advantageous strategy for cells to organize their subcellular 
compartments for diverse functions. Recent findings suggest that RNA or 
RNA-related LLPS techniques have potential for the development of new cellular 
regulation strategies. However, manipulating RNA LLPS in living cells has great 
challenges. Herein, we report that cationic polymers (CPs) have strong RNA 
LLPS-inducing activity. By introducing CPs into living cells or RNA solutions, 
significant RNA LLPS was verified through confocal imaging, turbidity assays, 
and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) tests. Among them, 
turbidity kinetics determinations indicated that the hydrophilic positively 
charged amino groups on the CPs play essential roles in RNA phase separation. 
Moreover, the LLPS induced by the cationic polymers dramatically changed the 
gene expression patterns in the cells. Interestingly, we found that TGFβ1 mRNA 
was highly encapsulated in the RNA droplets, which lowered the immunosuppressive 
capability of the tumor cells and triggered marked antitumor reactions in a 
mouse breast cancer model. Thus, we present here the CP-based modulation of RNA 
LLPS as a novel transcriptional manipulation method with potential for cancer 
immunotherapy drug development.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12951-022-01647-8
PMCID: PMC9548170
PMID: 36209170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.