1. Syst Parasitol. 2023 Feb;100(1):69-83. doi: 10.1007/s11230-022-10071-3. Epub 
2022 Oct 7.

Morphological and molecular characterisation of Alella igillimpethu n. sp. 
(Copepoda: Siphonostomatoida: Lernaeopodidae) parasitising the southern African 
endemic intertidal klipfish, Clinus superciliosus.

Erasmus A(1), Hadfield KA(2), Wepener V(2), Smit NJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Water Research Group, Unit for Environmental Sciences and Management, 
North-West University, Private Bag X6001, Potchefstroom, 2520, South Africa. 
23599235@student.g.nwu.ac.za.
(2)Water Research Group, Unit for Environmental Sciences and Management, 
North-West University, Private Bag X6001, Potchefstroom, 2520, South Africa.

Lernaeopodidae Milne Edwards, 1840, is an ecological and economically important 
fish parasite family of copepods (Crustacea: Copepoda), consisting of 48 genera 
with 334 valid species. To date, approximately 17 genera have been documented 
from both teleost and elasmobranch hosts from South African marine waters. As 
part of parasitological surveys targeting parasites of the endemic intertidal 
klipfish, Clinus superciliosus (Linnaeus) (Clinidae) along the South African 
coast, a species of Lernaeopodidae was discovered on the gills of this host. 
Alella igillimpethu n. sp. is described from Clinus superciliosus from Langebaan 
marina on the west coast of South Africa, with a prevalence of 42.1% and mean 
intensity of 2.9 (ranging from 1-13). Morphological identification was done 
using light and scanning electron microscopy and the species description was 
generated with the aid of DEscription Language for TAxonomy (DELTA) software. 
The mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (COI) region, as well as 
partial 18S and 28S ribosomal RNA genes confirmed the classification within the 
family Lernaeopodidae. This is the first report of Lernaeopodidae from 
C. superciliosus, or in fact any member of Clinidae, as well as the first 
molecular characterisation of any marine lernaeopodid infecting teleost fish 
from South Africa. This study contributes valuable genetic and morphological 
data for this copepod family, as well as new host and distribution records.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s11230-022-10071-3
PMID: 36205857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]