1. Biochem Biophys Rep. 2022 Sep 30;32:101345. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2022.101345. 
eCollection 2022 Dec.

Oxidized low-density lipoprotein causes ribosome reduction and inhibition of 
protein synthesis in retinal pigment epithelial cells.

Giorgianni F(1), Beranova-Giorgianni S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.

Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) are specialized multifunctional cells 
indispensable for maintenance of vision. Dysfunction and death of the RPE cells 
is implicated in the genesis and progression of age-related macular degeneration 
(AMD). Oxidative stress and resulting cellular damage plays a critical 
mechanistic role in AMD pathogenesis. Oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL), 
derived from LDL in a pro-oxidative environment, is found adjacent to the RPE as 
part of drusen, extracellular deposits that are a characteristic clinical 
feature of AMD. OxLDL is cytotoxic and oxLDL-induced oxidative damage may 
contribute to functional impairment of the RPE. Therefore, knowledge of how the 
RPE respond to oxLDL exposure is important to understand the mechanisms 
underlying RPE dysfunction and death associated with AMD. The objective of this 
study was to characterize alterations in the RPE proteome triggered by exposure 
to non-cytotoxic levels of oxLDL. Protein identification and quantification were 
performed with a high -resolution LC-MS/MS-based proteomics workflow. In total, 
out of the ca 3000 RPE proteins quantified, oxLDL treatment caused expression 
changes of 303 proteins. As revealed by protein functional analysis, oxLDL 
uptake caused a multifaceted molecular response that involved numerous 
biological pathways. This response included up-regulation of anti-oxidative 
stress proteins whose expression is mediated by the transcription factor nuclear 
factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2), confirming results of 
transcriptomics studies previously published by us and others. Significantly, 
and previously unreported, the oxLDL treatment induced down-regulation of 
ribosomal and translation initiation proteins, and up-regulation of proteins 
involved in autophagy, thus suggesting that a major cellular mechanism through 
which the RPE mitigate oxLDL-induced damage involves inhibition of protein 
synthesis and removal of misfolded proteins.

Â© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2022.101345
PMCID: PMC9530482
PMID: 36204727

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.