1. Biomed Res Int. 2022 Sep 28;2022:2016006. doi: 10.1155/2022/2016006.
eCollection  2022.

Differentiating Glioblastoma Multiforme from Brain Metastases Using 
Multidimensional Radiomics Features Derived from MRI and Multiple Machine 
Learning Models.

Bijari S(1), Jahanbakhshi A(2), Hajishafiezahramini P(3), Abdolmaleki P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Physics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Stem Cell and Regenerative Research Center, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Jalal AleAhmad, Nasr, P.O. Box 14115-111, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.

Due to different treatment strategies, it is extremely important to 
differentiate between glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and brain metastases (MET). 
It often proves difficult to distinguish between GBM and MET using MRI due to 
their similar appearance on the imaging modalities. Surgical methods are still 
necessary for definitive diagnosis, despite the importance of magnetic resonance 
imaging in detecting, characterizing, and monitoring brain tumors. We introduced 
an accurate, convenient, and user-friendly method to differentiate between GBM 
and MET through routine MRI sequence and radiomics analyses. We collected 91 
patients from one institution, including 50 with GBM and 41 with MET, which were 
proven pathologically. The tumors separately were segmented on all MRI images 
(T1-weighted imaging (T1WI), contrast-enhanced T1-weighted imaging (T1C), 
T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)) to 
form the volume of interest (VOI). Eight ML models and feature reduction 
strategies were evaluated using routine MRI sequences (T1W, T2W, T1-CE, and 
FLAIR) in two methods with (second model) and without wavelet transform (first 
model) radiomics. The optimal model was selected based on each model's accuracy, 
AUC-roc, and F1-score values. In this study, we have achieved the result of 
0.98, 0.99, and 0.98 percent for accuracy, AUC-roc, and F1-score, respectively, 
which have yielded a better result than the first model. In most investigated 
models, there were significant improvements in the multidimensional wavelets 
model compared to the non-multidimensional wavelets model. Multidimensional 
discrete wavelet transform can analyze hidden features of the MRI from a 
different perspective and generate accurate features which are highly correlated 
with the model accuracy.

Copyright Â© 2022 Salar Bijari et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/2016006
PMCID: PMC9534611
PMID: 36212721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.