1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Sep 21;9:949262. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.949262. 
eCollection 2022.

Dietary therapy in abdominal aortic aneurysm - Insights from clinical and 
experimental studies.

Yin L(1), Gregg AC(1), Riccio AM(1), Hoyt N(1)(2), Islam ZH(1), Ahn J(1), Le 
Q(1), Patel P(1), Zhang M(1), He X(1), McKinney M(1), Kent E(1), Wang B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA, United States.
(2)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, George Washington University, 
Washington, DC, United States.

Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a prevalent vascular disease with high 
mortality rates upon rupture. Despite its prevalence in elderly populations, 
there remain limited treatment options; invasive surgical repair, while risky, 
is the only therapeutic intervention with proven clinical benefits. Dietary 
factors have long been suggested to be closely associated with AAA risks, and 
dietary therapies recently emerged as promising avenues to achieve non-invasive 
management of a wide spectrum of diseases. However, the role of dietary 
therapies in AAA remains elusive. In this article, we will summarize the recent 
clinical and pre-clinical efforts in understanding the therapeutic and 
mechanistic implications of various dietary patterns and therapeutic approaches 
in AAA.

Copyright Â© 2022 Yin, Gregg, Riccio, Hoyt, Islam, Ahn, Le, Patel, Zhang, He, 
McKinney, Kent and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.949262
PMCID: PMC9532600
PMID: 36211542

Conflict of interest statement: Author BW is the corresponding author, the 
coordinator for this research topic, and has recused from the peer-review and 
editorial processes. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.