1. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2023 Feb;22(2):127-144. doi: 10.1038/s41573-022-00571-8. 
Epub 2022 Oct 10.

Drugging p53 in cancer: one protein, many targets.

Hassin O(1), Oren M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel. moshe.oren@weizmann.ac.il.

Mutations in the TP53 tumour suppressor gene are very frequent in cancer, and 
attempts to restore the functionality of p53 in tumours as a therapeutic 
strategy began decades ago. However, very few of these drug development 
programmes have reached late-stage clinical trials, and no p53-based 
therapeutics have been approved in the USA or Europe so far. This is probably 
because, as a nuclear transcription factor, p53 does not possess typical drug 
target features and has therefore long been considered undruggable. 
Nevertheless, several promising approaches towards p53-based therapy have 
emerged in recent years, including improved versions of earlier strategies and 
novel approaches to make undruggable targets druggable. Small molecules that can 
either protect p53 from its negative regulators or restore the functionality of 
mutant p53 proteins are gaining interest, and drugs tailored to specific types 
of p53 mutants are emerging. In parallel, there is renewed interest in gene 
therapy strategies and p53-based immunotherapy approaches. However, major 
concerns still remain to be addressed. This Review re-evaluates the efforts made 
towards targeting p53-dysfunctional cancers, and discusses the challenges 
encountered during clinical development.

Â© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41573-022-00571-8
PMCID: PMC9549847
PMID: 36216888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.O. consults for Quintrigen.