1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Sep 23;13:962800. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.962800. eCollection 2022.

Comparison of diagnostic efficacy of (18)F-FDG PET/CT and (68)Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT 
in ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone syndrome.

Zhang B(1), He Q(1), Long Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang X(1), Chen Z(1), Liu J(1), 
Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: Fluorine-18 (18F)-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission 
tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) and gallium-68 (68Ga)-somatostatin 
analog (SSA) PET/CT imaging have been increasingly used in ectopic 
adrenocorticotropic hormone syndrome (EAS); however, the diagnostic efficacies 
of these two methods in patients with EAS remain unclear. Our study aimed to 
compare the diagnostic efficacies of 18F-FDG PET/CT and 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT in 
EAS.
METHODS: The clinical and imaging data of 68 patients with EAS who underwent 
18F-FDG PET/CT and 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT examinations from December 2016 to April 
2021 were analyzed retrospectively, and the diagnostic efficacies of these 
methods were compared.
RESULTS: In 37 cases, imaging was performed to locate the primary tumor lesion 
(localization group), and in 31 to evaluate tumor load or metastasis (staging 
group). Primary tumors were detected in 48.65% (18/37) of the localization group 
patients. According to scan-based analysis, the tumor lesion detection rates and 
false positive rates of 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging and 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT imaging 
were 18.92% vs. 45.95% (p < 0.05) and 21.62% vs. 2.70% (p < 0.05) respectively. 
For lesion-based analysis, the tumor lesion detection rates and false positive 
rates were 24.13% vs. 58.62% (p >0.05) and 31.04% vs. 3.45% (p < 0.05). In 
90.32% (28/31) of the staging group patients, 286 of 292 lesions were confirmed 
as tumor lesions. Based on scan analysis, the detection rates and false positive 
rates of 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging and 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT imaging were 83.87% vs. 
67.74% (p > 0.05) and 12.90% vs. 9.68% (p > 0.05) respectively. Based on lesion 
analysis, the detection rate and false positive rates were 93.84% vs. 54.80% (p 
< 0.05) and 1.37% vs. 1.03%(p > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT imaging may be more suitable than 18F-FDG PET/CT 
for identifying the primary tumor in patients with EAS, while 18F-FDG PET/CT may 
be more advantageous than 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT for patients with suspected 
metastasis.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zhang, He, Long, Zhang, Wang, Chen, Liu and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.962800
PMCID: PMC9538925
PMID: 36213295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.