1. Andrologia. 2022 Dec;54(11):e14611. doi: 10.1111/and.14611. Epub 2022 Oct 10.

Impact of tobacco smoking in association with H2BFWT, PRM1 and PRM2 genes 
variants on male infertility.

Amor H(1), Jankowski PM(1), Dahadhah FW(1), Al Zoubi MS(2), Hammadeh ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Saarland University, Homburg, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Yarmouk 
University, Irbid, Jordan.

Tobacco's genotoxic components can cause a wide range of gene defects in 
spermatozoa such as single- or double-strand DNA breaks, cross-links, 
DNA-adducts, higher frequencies of aneuploidy and chromosomal abnormalities. The 
aim in this study was to determine the correlation between sperm quality 
determined by standard parameters, sperm DNA maturity tested by Chromomycin A3 
(CMA3) staining, sperm DNA fragmentation tested by TUNEL assay and tobacco 
smoking in association with the single nucleotides polymorphisms (SNP) of three 
nuclear protein genes in spermatozoa (H2BFWT, PRM1 and PRM2). In this study, 
semen samples of 167 male patients were collected and divided into 54 
non-smokers and 113 smokers. The target sequences in the extracted sperm DNA 
were amplified by PCR followed by Sanger sequencing. The results showed the 
presence of three variants: rs7885967, rs553509 and rs578953 in H2BFWT gene in 
the study population. Only one variant rs737008 was detected in PRM1 gene, and 
three variants were detected in the PRM2 gene: rs2070923, rs1646022 and 
rs424908. No significant association was observed between the concentration, 
progressive motility, morphology and the occurrence of H2BFWT, PRM1 and PRM2 
SNPs. However, sperm parameters were significantly lower in heavy smokers 
compared to controls (p < 0.01) (sperm count: 46.00 vs. 78.50 mill/ml, 
progressive motility: 15.00% vs. 22.00%, and morphology 4.00% vs. 5.00%, 
respectively). Moreover, the heavy smoker individuals exhibited a considerable 
increase in CMA3 positivity and sDF compared to non-smokers (p < 0.01) (29.50% 
vs. 20.50% and 24.50% vs. 12.00%, respectively). In conclusion, smoking altered 
sperm parameters and sperm DNA integrity, but did not show a linkage with 
genetic variants in H2BFWT, and protamine genes (PRM1 and PRM2).

© 2022 The Authors. Andrologia published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/and.14611
PMID: 36217675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]