1. Clin Cancer Res. 2022 Dec 15;28(24):5343-5358. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-1914.

The Mutational Landscape of Cancer's Vulnerability to Ionizing Radiation.

Gopal P(#)(1), Yard BD(#)(2), Petty A(#)(2), Lal JC(2), Bera TK(1), Hoang TQ(1), 
Buhimschi AD(1), Abazeed ME(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Department of Translational Hematology Oncology Research, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, Illinois.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    1078-0432. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-28-24-HI.

PURPOSE: Large-scale sequencing efforts have established that cancer-associated 
genetic alterations are highly diverse, posing a challenge to the identification 
of variants that regulate complex phenotypes like radiation sensitivity. The 
impact of the vast majority of rare or common genetic variants on the 
sensitivity of cancers to radiotherapy remains largely unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We developed a scalable gene editing and irradiation 
platform to assess the role of categories of variants in cells. Variants were 
prioritized on the basis of genotype-phenotype associations from a previously 
completed large-scale cancer cell line radiation profiling study. Altogether, 
488 alleles (396 unique single-nucleotide variants) from 92 genes were generated 
and profiled in an immortalized lung cell line, BEAS-2B. We validated our 
results in other cell lines (TRT-HU1 and NCI-H520), in vivo via the use of both 
cell line and patient-derived murine xenografts, and in clinical cohorts.
RESULTS: We show that resistance to radiation is characterized by substantial 
inter- and intra-gene allelic variation. Some genes (e.g., KEAP1) demonstrated 
significant intragenic allelic variation in the magnitude of conferred 
resistance and other genes (e.g., CTNNB1) displayed both resistance and 
sensitivity in a protein domain-dependent manner. We combined results from our 
platform with gene expression and metabolite features and identified the 
upregulation of amino acid transporters that facilitate oxidative reductive 
capacity and cell-cycle deregulation as key regulators of radiation sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal new insights into the genetic determinants of 
tumor sensitivity to radiotherapy and nominate a multitude of cancer mutations 
that are predicted to impact treatment efficacy.

Â©2022 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-1914
PMCID: PMC9751780
PMID: 36222846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]