1. Vet Res. 2022 Oct 12;53(1):83. doi: 10.1186/s13567-022-01088-z.

Baicalin acts as an adjuvant to potentiate the activity of azithromycin against 
Staphylococcus saprophyticus biofilm: an in vitro, in vivo, and molecular study.

Wang J(1), Li S(1), Meng J(1), Zhu J(1), Qiu T(1), Wang W(1), Ding J(1), Liu 
Z(1), Li K(1), Lqbal M(2), Wang D(1), Wu Y(3), Liu J(4).

Author information:
(1)MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety 
and Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine Research Center, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Cholistan University of Veterinary and Animal 
Sciences (CUVAS), Bahawalpur, 63100, Pakistan.
(3)MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety 
and Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine Research Center, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China. 
wuyi2001cn@163.com.
(4)MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety 
and Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine Research Center, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China. 
liujiaguo@njau.edu.cn.

Staphylococcus saprophyticus is frequently involved in various 
difficult-to-treat infections due to the formation of biofilms. To identify 
useful antibiofilm strategies, this study explored the efficacy and mechanism of 
baicalin in enhancing the ability of azithromycin against multidrug-resistant 
Staphylococcus saprophyticus-Liu-2016-Liyang, China-francolin (MDRSS) biofilms 
in vitro and in vivo. When azithromycin was used in combination with baicalin, 
the minimum inhibitory concentration in biofilm (MICB) for azithromycin 
decreased 4- to 512-fold. Compared with the azithromycin and baicalin groups, 
the combination of azithromycin and baicalin could not reduce the biofilm 
biomass, but the dispersion rates of biofilm were decreased and the bactericidal 
ability was increased. Furthermore, the relative transcript levels of WalK/R 
system-related genes were upregulated by the addition of baicalin or 
azithromycin plus baicalin compared with that of the azithromycin and blank 
control groups. The strong correlation relationship between the WalK/R system 
and the bactericidal index demonstrated that baicalin enhanced the bactericidal 
effect of azithromycin on MDRSS biofilms by modulating the WalK/R system. In the 
mouse cutaneous infection model, the combination of azithromycin and baicalin 
succeeded in eradicating MDRSS and decreasing pathological injuries. This study 
indicated that baicalin has the potential to be an adjuvant to enhance the 
antimicrobial activity of azithromycin against MDRSS in the biofilm form by 
modulating the WalK/R system.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13567-022-01088-z
PMCID: PMC9558388
PMID: 36224607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.