1. Parasit Vectors. 2022 Oct 13;15(1):365. doi: 10.1186/s13071-022-05500-7.

Molecular insights into the heat shock proteins of the human parasitic blood 
fluke Schistosoma mansoni.

Aguoru NA(1), Kirk RS(1), Walker AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Parasitology Laboratory, School of Life Sciences, Pharmacy and 
Chemistry, Kingston University, Penrhyn Road, Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE, 
Surrey, UK.
(2)Molecular Parasitology Laboratory, School of Life Sciences, Pharmacy and 
Chemistry, Kingston University, Penrhyn Road, Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE, 
Surrey, UK. t.walker@kingston.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are evolutionarily conserved proteins, 
produced by cells in response to hostile environmental conditions, that are 
vital to organism homeostasis. Here, we undertook the first detailed molecular 
bioinformatic analysis of these important proteins and mapped their tissue 
expression in the human parasitic blood fluke, Schistosoma mansoni, one of the 
causative agents of the neglected tropical disease human schistosomiasis.
METHODS: Using bioinformatic tools we classified and phylogenetically analysed 
HSP family members in schistosomes, and performed transcriptomic, 
phosphoproteomic, and interactomic analysis of the S. mansoni HSPs. In addition, 
S. mansoni HSP protein expression was mapped in intact parasites using 
immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Fifty-five HSPs were identified in S. mansoni across five HSP families; 
high conservation of HSP sequences were apparent across S. mansoni, Schistosoma 
haematobium and Schistosoma japonicum, with S. haematobium HSPs showing greater 
similarity to S. mansoni than those of S. japonicum. For S. mansoni, 
differential HSP gene expression was evident across the various parasite life 
stages, supporting varying roles for the HSPs in the different stages, and 
suggesting that they might confer some degree of protection during life stage 
transitions. Protein expression patterns of HSPs were visualised in intact S. 
mansoni cercariae, 3 h and 24 h somules, and adult male and female worms, 
revealing HSPs in the tegument, cephalic ganglia, tubercles, testes, ovaries as 
well as other important organs. Analysis of putative HSP protein-protein 
associations highlighted proteins that are involved in transcription, 
modification, stability, and ubiquitination; functional enrichment analysis 
revealed functions for HSP networks in S. mansoni including protein export for 
HSP 40/70, and FOXO/mTOR signalling for HSP90 networks. Finally, a total of 76 
phosphorylation sites were discovered within 17 of the 55 HSPs, with 30 
phosphorylation sites being conserved with those of human HSPs, highlighting 
their likely core functional significance.
CONCLUSIONS: This analysis highlights the fascinating biology of S. mansoni HSPs 
and their likely importance to schistosome function, offering a valuable and 
novel framework for future physiological investigations into the roles of HSPs 
in schistosomes, particularly in the context of survival in the host and with 
the aim of developing novel anti-schistosome therapeutics.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-022-05500-7
PMCID: PMC9559072
PMID: 36229862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AJW is a member of the editorial board of 
Parasites and Vectors. The other authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.