1. Molecules. 2022 Oct 5;27(19):6609. doi: 10.3390/molecules27196609.

Anti-Ovarian Cancer Conotoxins Identified from Conus Venom.

Ju S(1), Zhang Y(1), Guo X(1), Yan Q(1), Liu S(1), Ma B(2), Zhang M(2), Bao 
J(1), Luo S(1)(3), Fu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Biological Resources of Ministry of Education, 
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hainan University, Haikou 570228, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Organic Materials Testing Technology & Quality 
Evaluation, Institute of Analysis and Testing, Beijing Academy of Science and 
Technology, Beijing 100094, China.
(3)Medical School, Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, China.

Conotoxins constitute a treasury of drug resources and have attracted widespread 
attention. In order to explore biological candidates from the marine cone snail, 
we isolated and identified three novel conopeptides named as Vi14b, Vi002, 
Vi003, three conotoxin variants named as Mr3d.1, Mr3e.1, Tx3a.1, and three known 
conotoxins (Vi15a, Mr3.8 and TCP) from crude venoms of Conus virgo, Conus 
marmoreus and Conus texile. Mr3.8 (I-V, II-VI, III-IV) and Tx3a.1 (I-III, II-VI, 
IV-V) both showed a novel pattern of disulfide connectivity, different from that 
previously established for the µ- and ψ-conotoxins. Concerning the effect on 
voltage-gated sodium channels, Mr3e.1, Mr3.8, Tx3a.1, TCP inhibited Nav1.4 or 
Nav1.8 by 21.51~24.32% of currents at semi-activated state (TP2) at 10 μmol/L. 
Certain anti-ovarian cancer effects on ID-8 cells were exhibited by Tx3a.1, 
Mr3e.1 and Vi14b with IC50 values of 24.29 µM, 54.97 µM and 111.6 µM, 
respectively. This work highlights the role of conotoxin libraries in subsequent 
drug discovery for ovarian cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27196609
PMCID: PMC9573077
PMID: 36235146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.