1. J Clin Med. 2022 Sep 21;11(19):5542. doi: 10.3390/jcm11195542.

Circulating Neuroendocrine Tumor Biomarkers: Past, Present and Future.

Komarnicki P(1), Musiałkiewicz J(1), Stańska A(1), Maciejewski A(1), Gut P(1), 
Mastorakos G(2), Ruchała M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Diseases, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, 60-355 Poznań, Poland.
(2)Unit of Endocrinology, Diabetes Mellitus and Metabolism, Aretaieion 
University Hospital, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, 157 72 Athens, Greece.

Neuroendocrine tumors are a heterogeneous group of neoplasms originating from 
the diffuse endocrine system. Depending on primary location and hormonal status, 
they range in terms of clinical presentation, prognosis and treatment. 
Functional tumors often develop symptoms indicating an excess of hormones 
produced by the neoplasm (exempli gratia insulinoma, glucagonoma and VIPoma) and 
can be diagnosed using monoanalytes. For non-functional tumors (inactive or 
producing insignificant amounts of hormones), universal biomarkers have not been 
established. The matter remains an important unmet need in the field of 
neuroendocrine tumors. Substances researched over the years, such as 
chromogranin A and neuron-specific enolase, lack the desired sensitivity and 
specificity. In recent years, the potential use of Circulating Tumor Cells or 
multianalytes such as a circulating microRNA and NETest have been widely 
discussed. They offer superior diagnostic parameters in comparison to 
traditional biomarkers and depict disease status in a more comprehensive way. 
Despite a lot of promise, no international standards have yet been developed 
regarding their routine use and clinical application. In this literature review, 
we describe the analytes used over the years and cover novel biomarkers that 
could find a use in the future. We discuss their pros and cons while showcasing 
recent advances in the field of neuroendocrine tumor biomarkers.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11195542
PMCID: PMC9570647
PMID: 36233409

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.