1. Nutrients. 2022 Oct 9;14(19):4202. doi: 10.3390/nu14194202.

FTO Common Obesity SNPs Interact with Actionable Environmental Factors: Physical 
Activity, Sugar-Sweetened Beverages and Wine Consumption.

Chermon D(1), Birk R(1).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Department, Health Science Faculty, Ariel University, Ariel 40700, 
Israel.

Genetic background is estimated to play >50% in common obesity etiology. FTO 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are strongly associated with BMI, 
typically in European cohorts. We investigated the interaction of common FTO 
SNPs with actionable environmental factors, namely physical activity, 
sugar-sweetened beverages (SSB) and wine consumption, and verified FTO common 
SNPs predisposition to obesity in the Israeli population. Adults’ (>18 years 
old, n = 1720) FTO common SNPs data and lifestyle and nutrition habits 
questionnaires were analyzed using binary logistic regression models, adjusted 
for confounding variables (age, sex) assuming dominant, recessive and additive 
genetic models. Eighteen FTO SNPs were associated with significant increased 
obesity risk and interacted with physical activity (p < 0.001), wine consumption 
(p < 0.014) and SSB consumption (p < 0.01). Inactive rs9939609 risk-allele 
carriers had significantly higher obesity risk compared to their active 
counterparts (OR = 2.54, 95% CI 1.91−3.39 and OR = 3.77, 95% CI 2.47−5.75; p < 
0.001 with 3.1 and 3.5 BMI increment for heterozygotes and homozygotes, 
respectively). SSB consumption (≥1 serving/day) significantly raised obesity 
risk and wine consumption (1−3 drinks/weekly) significantly lowered obesity risk 
for rs9939609 risk-allele carriers (OR = 1.54, 95% CI 1.05−2.27; p = 0.028 and 
OR = 0.61, 95% CI 0.47−0.79; p < 0.001, respectively). Our findings demonstrate 
that actionable lifestyle factors modify the common FTO obesity risk in 
predisposed carriers, and they have personal and public health implications.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14194202
PMCID: PMC9572787
PMID: 36235854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.B. is a scientific consultant of MyGenes. D.C. 
declares no conflict of interest.