1. Materials (Basel). 2022 Sep 30;15(19):6785. doi: 10.3390/ma15196785.

Metal Knitting: A New Strategy for Cold Gas Spray Additive Manufacturing.

Vaz RF(1), Albaladejo-Fuentes V(1), Sanchez J(1), Ocaña U(1), Corral ZG(1), 
Canales H(2), Cano IG(1).

Author information:
(1)Thermal Spray Centre CPT, Universitat de Barcelona, Carrer Martí i Franques 
1, 7a planta, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Cátedras CONACyT-Centro de Ingeniería y Desarrollo Industrial (CIDESI), Av. 
Playa Pie de la Cuesta No. 702, Desarrollo San Pablo, Santiago de Querétaro C.P. 
76125, Mexico.

Cold Spray Additive Manufacturing (CSAM) is an emergent technique to produce 
parts by the additive method, and, like other technologies, it has pros and 
cons. Some advantages are using oxygen-sensitive materials to make parts, such 
as Ti alloys, with fast production due to the high deposition rate, and lower 
harmful residual stress levels. However, the limitation in the range of the 
parts' geometries is a huge CSAM con. This work presents a new conceptual 
strategy for CSAM spraying. The controlled manipulation of the robot arm 
combined with the proper spraying parameters aims to optimize the deposition 
efficiency and the adhesion of particles on the part sidewalls, resulting in 
geometries from thin straight walls, less than 5 mm thick, up to large bulks. 
This new strategy, Metal Knitting, is presented regarding its fundamentals and 
by comparing the parts' geometries produced by Metal Knitting with the 
traditional strategy. The Metal Knitting described here made parts with vertical 
sidewalls, in contrast to the 40 degrees of inclination obtained by the 
traditional strategy. Their mechanical properties, microstructures, hardness, 
and porosity are also compared for Cu, Ti, Ti6Al4V, 316L stainless steel, and 
Al.

DOI: 10.3390/ma15196785
PMCID: PMC9572054
PMID: 36234127

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.