1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Sep 28;13:988298. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.988298. 
eCollection 2022.

Cryoelectron microscopy structures of a human neutralizing antibody bound to 
MERS-CoV spike glycoprotein.

Zhang S(1), Jia W(2)(3), Zeng J(1), Li M(2)(3), Wang Z(1), Zhou H(1), Zhang 
L(2)(3), Wang X(1).

Author information:
(1)The Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Protein Science, Beijing Advanced 
Innovation Center for Structural Biology, Beijing Frontier Research Center for 
Biological Structure, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Comprehensive AIDS Research Center and Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for 
Structural Biology, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(3)NexVac Research Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

Neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against highly pathogenic 
coronaviruses represent promising candidates for clinical intervention. Here, we 
isolated a potent neutralizing monoclonal antibody, MERS-S41, from a yeast 
displayed scFv library using the S protein as a bait. To uncover the 
neutralization mechanism, we determined structures of MERS-S41 Fab in complex 
with the trimeric spike glycoprotein by cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM). We 
observed four distinct classes of the complex structure, which showed that the 
MERS-S41 Fab bound to the "up" receptor binding domain (RBD) with full 
saturation and also bound to an accessible partially lifted "down" RBD, 
providing a structural basis for understanding how mAbs bind to trimeric spike 
glycoproteins. Structure analysis of the epitope and cell surface staining 
assays demonstrated that virus entry is blocked predominantly by direct 
competition with the host receptor, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4).

Copyright Â© 2022 Zhang, Jia, Zeng, Li, Wang, Zhou, Zhang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.988298
PMCID: PMC9554411
PMID: 36246239

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.