1. Sci Rep. 2022 Oct 14;12(1):17267. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-21598-2.

Identification of in vivo roles of ErbB4-JMa and its direct nuclear signaling 
using a novel isoform-specific knock out mouse.

Doherty R(1)(2), MacLeod BL(1), Nelson MM(1)(2), Ibrahim MMH(1), Borges BC(1), 
Jaradat NW(1), Finneran MC(2)(3), Giger RJ(2)(3), Corfas G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kresge Hearing Research 
Institute, University of Michigan Medical School, Medical Sciences I Building, 
Rm. 5428, 1150 West Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-5616, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kresge Hearing Research 
Institute, University of Michigan Medical School, Medical Sciences I Building, 
Rm. 5428, 1150 West Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-5616, USA. 
corfas@med.umich.edu.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2022 Dec 1;12(1):20748. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-25021-8.

Like all receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), ErbB4 signals through a canonical 
signaling involving phosphorylation cascades. However, ErbB4 can also signal 
through a non-canonical mechanism whereby the intracellular domain is released 
into the cytoplasm by regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) and translocates 
to the nucleus where it regulates transcription. These different signaling 
mechanisms depend on the generation of alternative spliced isoforms, a RIP 
cleavable ErbB4-JMa and an uncleavable ErbB4-JMb. Non-canonical signaling by 
ErbB4-JMa has been implicated in the regulation of brain, heart, mammary gland, 
lung, and immune cell development. However, most studies on non-canonical ErbB4 
signaling have been performed in vitro due to the lack of an adequate mouse 
model. We created an ErbB4-JMa specific knock out mouse and demonstrate that 
RIP-dependent, non-canonical signaling by ErbB4-JMa is required for the 
regulation of GFAP expression during cortical development. We also show that 
ErbB4-JMa signaling is not required for the development of the heart, mammary 
glands, sensory ganglia. Furthermore, we identify genes whose expression during 
cortical development is regulated by ErbB4, and show that the expression of 
three of them, CRYM and DBi, depend on ErbB4-JMa whereas WDFY1 relies on 
ErbB4-JMb. Thus, we provide the first animal model to directly study the roles 
of ErbB4-JMa and non-canonical ErbB4 signaling in vivo.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-21598-2
PMCID: PMC9568506
PMID: 36241655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: G.C. is a scientific founder of Decibel 
Therapeutics, has an equity interest in and has received compensation for 
consulting, but the company was not involved in this study. The other authors 
have no competing interests.