1. J Immunol Res. 2022 Sep 20;2022:2713869. doi: 10.1155/2022/2713869.
eCollection  2022.

Polymorphisms in the ASAP1 and SP110 Genes and Its Association with the 
Susceptibility to Pulmonary Tuberculosis in a Mongolian Population.

Cui X(1)(2), Yuan T(1)(2), Ning P(1)(2), Han J(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Feng J(1)(2), 
Lian F(3), Hao M(3), Dong L(1)(2), Hao J(4), Xing L(1)(2), Wu C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Lab of Medical Molecular Cell Biology of Shanxi Province, Taiyuan 030006, 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of 
Education; Shanxi Provincial Key Laboratory for Major Infectious Disease 
Response, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, 
China.
(3)The Second People's Hospital in Hulunbuir, Zaerdong 162650, China.
(4)Baotou Medical College, Inner Mongolia University of Science and Technology, 
No. 31, Jianshe Road, Donghe District, Baotou 014060, China.

Tuberculosis (TB) remains one of the deadliest infectious diseases in the world. 
Previous genome-wide association studies suggested that single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in some genes could indicate the susceptibility to TB in 
some populations. Herein, we studied the association of SNPs in the 
immunity-related genes, i.e., ASAP1 and SP110 genes with the susceptibility to 
TB in a Mongolian population in China. A case-control study was performed with 
197 TB patients and 217 healthy controls. Six SNPs in ASAP1 and six SNPs in 
SP110 were selected for genotyping test by second-generation sequencing 
technique. A SNP in SP110 gene (rs722555) was identified to be associated with 
susceptibility to TB in the Mongolian population (p < 0.05). The T allele of 
rs722555 in SP110 gene was associated with a 36% increase of risk at TB (OR 
1.36, 95% CI 1.03-1.81), and the CT+TT genotype of rs722555 was associated with 
a 74% increase of risk at TB (OR 1.74, 95% CI 1.16-2.60) in the dominant genetic 
model. None of SNPs in ASAP1 gene tested in this study were significantly 
associated with TB susceptibility, while some individuals with SNPs (rs10956514, 
rs4733781, rs2033059, rs12680942, rs1017281, rs1469288, and rs17285138) in the 
ASAP1 gene tended to have a reduced risk at TB. In conclusion, this study 
suggested that the rs722555 SNP in SP110 gene might be a risk factor for TB in a 
Mongolian population.

Copyright Â© 2022 Xiaogang Cui et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/2713869
PMCID: PMC9557252
PMID: 36249417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.