1. Blood. 2023 Mar 23;141(12):1411-1424. doi: 10.1182/blood.2021015330.

Aberrant function of pathogenic STAT3 mutant proteins is linked to altered 
stability of monomers and homodimers.

Kasembeli MM(1), Kaparos E(1), Bharadwaj U(1), Allaw A(1), Khouri A(1), Acot 
B(1), Tweardy DJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Infection Control and Employee Health, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2023 Dec 14;142(24):2125. doi: 10.1182/blood.2023022785.

STAT3 mutations, predominantly in the DNA-binding domain (DBD) and Src-homology 
2 domain (SH2D), cause rare cases of immunodeficiency, malignancy, and 
autoimmunity. The exact mechanisms by which these mutations abrogate or enhance 
STAT3 function are not completely understood. Here, we examined how 
loss-of-function (LOF) and gain-of-function (GOF) STAT3 mutations within the DBD 
and SH2D affect monomer and homodimer protein stability as well as their effect 
on key STAT3 activation events, including recruitment to phosphotyrosine (pY) 
sites within peptide hormone receptors, tyrosine phosphorylation at Y705, 
dimerization, nuclear translocation, and DNA binding. The DBD LOF mutants showed 
reduced DNA binding when homodimerized, whereas the DBD GOF mutants showed 
increased DNA binding. DBD LOF and GOF mutants showed minimal changes in other 
STAT3 functions or in monomer or homodimer protein stability. However, SH2D LOF 
mutants demonstrated reduced conformational stability as either monomers or 
homodimers, leading to decreased pY-peptide recruitment, tyrosine 
phosphorylation, dimerization, nuclear localization, and DNA binding. In 
contrast, cancer-causing SH2D GOF mutants showed increased STAT3 homodimer 
stability, which increased their DNA binding. Of note, a small-molecule 
inhibitor of STAT3 that targets the tyrosine phosphopeptide-binding pocket 
within the STAT3 SH2D potently inhibited cell proliferation driven by STAT3 SH2D 
GOF mutants. These findings indicate that the stability of STAT3 protein monomer 
and homodimer is critical for the pathogenesis of diseases caused by SH2D LOF 
and GOF mutations and suggest that agents that modulate STAT3 monomer and/or 
homodimer protein stability may have therapeutic value in diseases caused by 
these mutations.

© 2023 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2021015330
PMCID: PMC10651785
PMID: 36240433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: Baylor College 
of Medicine, with D.J.T. as inventor, filed patents covering the use of TTI-101, 
a small-molecule inhibitor of STAT3 used in this study. These patents are 
exclusively licensed to Tvardi Therapeutics, Inc. D.J.T. receives compensation 
as a member of Tvardi Therapeutics’ scientific advisory board and holds equity 
in the company. The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center has an 
institutional financial conflict of interest with Tvardi Therapeutics, Inc 
related to the research being reported in this manuscript. D.J.T., Division Head 
of Internal Medicine, also has a financial interest with Tvardi Therapeutics. 
Because MD Anderson is committed to the protection of human subjects and the 
effective management of its financial conflicts of interest in relation to its 
research activities, MD Anderson has implemented an Institutional Conflict of 
Interest Management and Monitoring Plan (Plan) to manage and monitor the 
conflict of interest with respect to MD Anderson’s conduct of this research. The 
remaining authors declare no competing financial interests.