1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Sep 30;13:997598. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.997598. 
eCollection 2022.

Natural products of traditional Chinese medicine treat atherosclerosis by 
regulating inflammatory and oxidative stress pathways.

Meng T(1), Li X(1), Li C(1), Liu J(1), Chang H(2), Jiang N(1), Li J(1), Zhou 
Y(3), Liu Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School, Heilongjiang University of Chinese Medicine, Harbin, 
Heilongjiang, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Baotou Medical College, Baotou, Inner Mongolia, 
China.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Heilongjiang University of Chinese Medicine, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.
(4)Respiratoy Disease Department, First Affiliated Hospital of Heilongjiang 
University of Chinese Medicine, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.

Atherosclerosis (AS) is a prevalent arteriosclerotic vascular disease that forms 
a pathological basis for coronary heart disease, stroke, and other diseases. 
Inflammatory and oxidative stress responses occur throughout the development of 
AS. Treatment for AS over the past few decades has focused on administering 
high-intensity statins to reduce blood lipid levels, but these inevitably damage 
liver and kidney function over the long term. Natural medicines are widely used 
to prevent and treat AS in China because of their wide range of beneficial 
effects, low toxicity, and minimal side effects. We searched for relevant 
literature over the past 5 years in databases such as PubMed using the keywords, 
"atherosclerosis," "traditional Chinese medicine," "natural medicines," 
"inflammation," and "oxidative stress." We found that the PI3K/AKT, TLR4, 
JAK/STAT, Nrf2, MAPK, and NF-κB are the most relevant inflammatory and oxidative 
stress pathways in AS. This review summarizes studies of the natural alkaloid, 
flavonoid, polyphenol, saponin, and quinone pathways through which natural 
medicines used to treat AS. This study aimed to update and summarize progress in 
understanding how natural medicines treat AS via inflammatory and oxidative 
stress-related signaling pathways. We also planned to create an information base 
for the development of novel drugs for future AS treatment.

Copyright © 2022 Meng, Li, Li, Liu, Chang, Jiang, Li, Zhou and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.997598
PMCID: PMC9563010
PMID: 36249778

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.