1. Syst Rev. 2022 Oct 15;11(1):220. doi: 10.1186/s13643-022-02090-4.

Suboptimal blood pressure control and its associated factors among people living 
with diabetes mellitus in sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Akalu Y(1), Yeshaw Y(2)(3), Tesema GA(3), Tiruneh SA(4), Teshale AB(3), Angaw 
DA(3), Gebrie M(5), Dagnew B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, University of Gondar, P. O. Box 196, Gondar, Ethiopia. 
yonasakalu21@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, University of Gondar, P. O. Box 196, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Institute of Public Health, 
College of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Gondar, P. O. Box 196, 
Gondar, Ethiopia.
(4)Department of Public Health, College of Health Sciences, Debre Tabor 
University, Debre Tabor, Ethiopia.
(5)Department of Human Anatomy, School of Medicine, College of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, University of Gondar, P. O. Box 196, Gondar, Ethiopia.

BACKGROUND: Suboptimal blood pressure control among people living with diabetes 
mellitus (DM) is one of the primary causes of cardiovascular complications and 
death in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). However, there is a paucity of evidence on 
the prevalence and associated factors of suboptimal blood pressure control in 
SSA. Therefore, this review aimed to estimate its pooled prevalence and 
associated factors among people living with DM in SSA.  METHODS: We 
systematically searched PubMed, African Journals OnLine, HINARI, ScienceDirect, 
Google Scholar, and direct Google to access observational studies conducted in 
SSA. Microsoft Excel spreadsheet was used to extract the data, which was 
exported into STATA/MP version 16.0 for further analyses. Heterogeneity across 
studies was checked using Cochran's Q test statistics and I2 test, and small 
study effect was checked using Funnel plot symmetry and Egger's statistical test 
at a 5% significant level. A random-effects model was used to estimate the 
pooled prevalence and associated factors of suboptimal blood pressure control at 
a 95% confidence interval (CI) and significance level of p < 0.05.
RESULTS: Of the 7329 articles retrieved, 21 articles were eligible for the 
meta-analysis. After performing random-effects model, the pooled prevalence of 
suboptimal blood pressure control was 69.8% (95% CI: 63.43, 76.25%). Poor 
adherence to antihypertensive treatment (OR = 1.7; 95% CI: 1.03-2.80, I2 = 0.0%, 
p = 0.531) and overweight (OR = 2.4, 95% CI: 1.57-3.68, I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.47) 
were significantly associated with suboptimal blood pressure control.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of suboptimal blood pressure control among diabetic 
patients in SSA was high, and poor adherence to antihypertensive treatment and 
overweight were significantly associated with suboptimal blood pressure control. 
Hence, there is an urgent need for initiatives to improve and control 
hypertension, and preventive measures should concentrate on modifiable risk 
factors.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42020187901.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13643-022-02090-4
PMCID: PMC9569048
PMID: 36243876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.