1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Sep 29;13:1012115. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1012115. 
eCollection 2022.

CRISPR/Cas9 RNP-assisted validation of palmarumycin biosynthetic gene cluster in 
Lophiotrema sp. F6932.

Gakuubi MM(1)(2), Ching KC(1), Munusamy M(1), Wibowo M(1), Lim CT(1), Ma GL(2), 
Liang ZX(2), Kanagasundaram Y(1), Ng SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Singapore Institute of Food and Biotechnology Innovation (SIFBI), Agency for 
Science, Technology and Research (ASTAR), Singapore, Singapore.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 
Singapore.

Lophiotrema is a genus of ascomycetous fungi within the family 
Lophiotremataceae. Members of this genus have been isolated as endophytes from a 
wide range of host plants and also from plant debris within terrestrial and 
marine habitats, where they are thought to function as saprobes. Lophiotrema sp. 
F6932 was isolated from white mangrove (Avicennia officinalis) in Pulau Ubin 
Island, Singapore. Crude extracts from the fungus exhibited strong antibacterial 
activity, and bioassay-guided isolation and structure elucidation of bioactive 
constituents led to the isolation of palmarumycin C8 and a new analog 
palmarumycin CP30. Whole-genome sequencing analysis resulted in the 
identification of a putative type 1 iterative PKS (iPKS) predicated to be 
involved in the biosynthesis of palmarumycins. To verify the involvement of 
palmarumycin (PAL) gene cluster in the biosynthesis of these compounds, we 
employed ribonucleoprotein (RNP)-mediated CRISPR-Cas9 to induce targeted 
deletion of the ketosynthase (KS) domain in PAL. Double-strand breaks (DSBs) 
upstream and downstream of the KS domain was followed by homology-directed 
repair (HDR) with a hygromycin resistance cassette flanked by a 50 bp of 
homology on both sides of the DSBs. The resultant deletion mutants displayed 
completely different phenotypes compared to the wild-type strain, as they had 
different colony morphology and were no longer able to produce palmarumycins or 
melanin. This study, therefore, confirms the involvement of PAL in the 
biosynthesis of palmarumycins, and paves the way for implementing a similar 
approach in the characterization of other gene clusters of interest in this 
largely understudied fungal strain.

Copyright Â© 2022 Gakuubi, Ching, Munusamy, Wibowo, Lim, Ma, Liang, 
Kanagasundaram and Ng.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1012115
PMCID: PMC9556985
PMID: 36246293

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.