1. Hum Mutat. 2022 Dec;43(12):1780-1794. doi: 10.1002/humu.24486. Epub 2022 Oct
31.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) and RET specific modifications of the 
ACMG/AMP variant classification guidelines and impact on the MEN2 RET database.

Margraf RL(1), Alexander RZ(2), Fulmer ML(1)(3), Miller CE(1), Coupal E(1), Mao 
R(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology®, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, USA.
(2)OhioHealth Genetic Counseling Program, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, Utah, USA.

The Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) RET proto-oncogene database, 
originally published in 2008, is a comprehensive repository of all publicly 
available RET gene variations associated with MEN2 syndromes. The 
variant-specific genotype/phenotype information, age of earliest reported 
medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) onset, and relevant references with a brief 
summary of findings are cataloged. The ACMG/AMP 2015 consensus statement on 
variant classification was modified specifically for MEN2 syndromes and RET 
variants using ClinGen sequence variant interpretation working group 
recommendations and ClinGen expert panel manuscripts, as well as manuscripts 
from the American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force on Medullary Thyroid 
Carcinoma and other MEN2 RET literature. The classifications for the 166 single 
unique variants in the MEN2 RET database were reanalyzed using the MEN2 RET 
specifically modified ACMG/AMP classification guidelines (version 1). Applying 
these guidelines added two new variant classifications to the database (likely 
benign and likely pathogenic) and resulted in clinically significant 
classification changes (e.g., from pathogenic to uncertain) in 15.7% (26/166) of 
the original variants. Of those clinically significant changes, the highest 
percentage of changes, 46.2% (12/26), were changes from uncertain to benign or 
likely benign. The modified ACMG/AMP criteria with MEN2 RET specifications will 
optimize and standardize RET variant classifications.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24486
PMID: 36251279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]