1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Sep 29;9:1008585. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.1008585. 
eCollection 2022.

Follow-up of young adult monozygotic twins after simultaneous critical 
coronavirus disease 2019: A case report.

de Castro MV(1), Silva MVR(1), Soares FB(1)(2), Cória VR(1), Naslavsky MS(1)(2), 
Scliar MO(1)(2), Castelli EC(3), de Oliveira JR(4)(5), Sasahara GL(5), Santos 
KS(4)(5)(6), Cunha-Neto E(4)(5)(6), Kalil J(4)(5)(6), Zatz M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Human Genome and Stem Cell Research Center, University of São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Biosciences Institute, 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Molecular Genetics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Experimental Research Unit 
(Unipex), School of Medicine, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, 
Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Clínica Médica, Disciplina de Alergia e Imunologia Clínica, 
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Imunologia, Instituto do Coração (InCor), LIM 19, Hospital das 
Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, (HCFMUSP), São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Instituto de Investigação em Imunologia-Instituto Nacional de Ciências e 
Tecnologia-iii-INCT, São Paulo, Brazil.

Erratum in
    Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Apr 28;10:1185833. doi: 
10.3389/fmed.2023.1185833.

BACKGROUND: The influence of the host genome on coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19) susceptibility and severity is supported by reports on monozygotic 
(MZ) twins where both were infected simultaneously with similar disease 
outcomes, including several who died due to the SARS-CoV-2 infection within days 
apart. However, successive exposures to pathogens throughout life along with 
other environmental factors make the immune response unique for each individual, 
even among MZ twins.
CASE PRESENTATION AND METHODS: Here we report a case of a young adult 
monozygotic twin pair, who caught attention since both presented simultaneously 
severe COVID-19 with the need for oxygen support despite age and good health 
conditions. One of the twins, who spent more time hospitalized, reported 
symptoms of long-COVID even 7 months after infection. Immune cell profile and 
specific responses to SARS-CoV-2 were evaluated as well as whole exome 
sequencing.
CONCLUSION: Although the MZ twin brothers shared the same genetic mutations 
which may be associated with their increased risk of developing severe COVID-19, 
their clinical progression was different, reinforcing the role of both immune 
response and genetics in the COVID-19 presentation and course. Besides, 
post-COVID syndrome was observed in one of them, corroborating an association 
between the duration of hospitalization and the occurrence of long-COVID 
symptoms.

Copyright © 2022 de Castro, Silva, Soares, Cória, Naslavsky, Scliar, Castelli, 
de Oliveira, Sasahara, Santos, Cunha-Neto, Kalil and Zatz.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.1008585
PMCID: PMC9558815
PMID: 36250103

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.