1. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2022 Nov;38(8):e3581. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.3581. Epub
2022  Oct 25.

Clinical application guidelines for blood glucose monitoring in China (2022 
edition).

Bao Y(1), Zhu D(2); Chinese Diabetes Society.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital 
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing, China.

Glucose monitoring is an important component of diabetes management. The Chinese 
Diabetes Society (CDS) has been producing evidence-based guidelines on the 
optimal use of glucose monitoring since 2011. In recent years, new technologies 
in glucose monitoring and more clinical evidence, especially those derived from 
Chinese populations, have emerged. In this context, the CDS organised experts to 
revise the Clinical application guidelines for blood glucose monitoring in China 
in 2021. In this guideline, we focus on four methods of glucose monitoring that 
are commonly used in clinical practice, including capillary glucose monitoring, 
glycated haemoglobin A1c, glycated albumin, and continuous glucose monitoring. 
We describe the definitions and technical characteristics of these methods, the 
factor that may interfere with the measurement, the advantages and caveats in 
clinical practice, the interpretation of glucose metrics, and the relevant 
supporting evidence. The recommendations for the use of these methods are also 
provided. The various methods of glucose monitoring have their strengths and 
limitations and cannot be replaced by one another. We hope that these guidelines 
could aid in the optimal application of common methods of glucose monitoring in 
clinical practice for better diabetes care.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Diabetes/Metabolism Research and Reviews published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/dmrr.3581
PMCID: PMC9786627
PMID: 36251516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.