1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 Dec;26(6):356. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12872. Epub 2022 Oct
20.

Placental proteome in late‑onset of fetal growth restriction.

Gęca T(1), Stupak A(1), Nawrot R(2), Goździcka-Józefiak A(2), Kwaśniewska A(1), 
Kwaśniewski W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Pathology of Pregnancy, Medical University of 
Lublin, 20‑081 Lublin, Poland.
(2)Department of Molecular Virology, Institute of Experimental Biology, Adam 
Mickiewicz University in Poznań, 61‑614 Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Gynecology, Medical University of 
Lublin, 20‑081 Lublin, Poland.

Fetal growth restriction (FGR) occurs when the fetus does not reach its 
genetically programmed intrauterine potential for growth and affects ~5‑10% of 
pregnancies. This condition is one of the leading causes of perinatal mortality 
and morbidity associated with obstetric and neonatal complications. Placental 
dysfunction in FGR causes an impairment in the transfer of nutrients and oxygen 
from the mother to the developing fetus. Maternal adaptations to placental 
insufficiency may also play a role in the pathophysiology of FGR. The present 
study aimed to compare the proteome of the placentas of 18 women with the 
physiological course of pregnancy and eutrophic fetus [estimated fetal weight 
(EFW) >10th percentile; control group] and 18 women with late FGR (EFW <10th 
percentile) diagnosed after 32 weeks of pregnancy, according to the Delphi 
consensus (study group). The U. Mann‑Whitney test was used to compare two 
independent groups. The R. Spearman correlation coefficient significance test 
was used to assess the existence of a relationship between the analyzed 
measurable parameters. P<0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically 
significant difference. The tests showed the presence of 356 different proteins 
which were responsible for the regulation of gene transcription control, 
inhibiting the activity of proteolytic enzymes, regulation of trophoblast 
proliferation and angiogenesis and inflammatory response. In the FGR placental 
proteome, other detected proteins were mostly involved in response to oxidative 
stress, cellular oxidation and detoxication, apoptosis, hemostatic and catabolic 
processes, energy transduction protein interactions, cell proliferation, 
differentiation and intracellular signaling. The present study used 
chromatographic mass‑spectrometry to compare the placental proteome profiles in 
pregnancies complicated by late‑onset FGR and normal pregnancy. Comparative 
analysis of proteomes from normal and FGR placentas showed significant 
differences. Further research is needed to clarify maternal and fetal 
adaptations to FGR.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12872
PMCID: PMC9608316
PMID: 36263610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.