1. Brain Res Bull. 2022 Dec;191:61-68. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2022.10.012. 
Epub 2022 Oct 21.

Opto-extinction of a threat memory in mice.

Park S(1), Jung JH(2), Karimi SA(3), Jacob AD(4), Josselyn SA(5).

Author information:
(1)Program in Neurosciences &amp; Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 
University Ave., Toronto, ON M5G 1×8, Canada. Electronic address: 
psungmo@gmail.com.
(2)Program in Neurosciences &amp; Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 
University Ave., Toronto, ON M5G 1×8, Canada. Electronic address: 
junghoon.jung@sickkids.ca.
(3)Program in Neurosciences &amp; Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 
University Ave., Toronto, ON M5G 1×8, Canada. Electronic address: 
asad_karimi_128@yahoo.com.
(4)Program in Neurosciences &amp; Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 
University Ave., Toronto, ON M5G 1×8, Canada; Dept. of Psychology, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5G 1×8, Canada. Electronic address: 
alex.jacob.account@gmail.com.
(5)Program in Neurosciences &amp; Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 
University Ave., Toronto, ON M5G 1×8, Canada; Dept. of Psychology, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5G 1×8, Canada; Dept. of Physiology, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada. Electronic address: 
sheena.josselyn@sickkids.ca.

Memories of past experiences guide future behaviour. Sparse ensembles of 
neurons, known as engrams, are thought to store memories in the brain. Neurons 
involved in a particular engram ("engram neurons") are necessary for subsequent 
memory expression as memory retrieval is thought to be initiated by an external 
sensory cue reactivating engram neurons. However, conditions or environments are 
dynamic, such that future behaviour should be flexible. The role of engrams in 
mediating flexible behaviour is not understood. Here we examined this question 
using one type of flexible behaviour, extinction of a threat response. An 
initially neutral tone is first paired with an aversive footshock such that the 
tone alone induces defensive freezing. After subsequent repeated tone 
presentations without the footshock, rodents no longer freeze to the tone. 
Because the tone cue is thought to reactivate the engram to induce memory 
retrieval, we examined whether it is possible to induce an extinction-like 
behavioural effect by optogenetically reactivating the lateral amygdala 
component of the engram alone (without tone re-exposure). Similar to 
tone-induced extinction, mice showed decreased freezing to optogenetic 
stimulation of the lateral amygdala engram in the "extinction training" session. 
Moreover, "opto-extinguished" mice showed decreased freezing to the tone when 
subsequently tested for retrieval of the extinction training in the same 
context, suggesting that the opto-extinction transferred to the actual sensory 
stimulus. However, unlike tone extinction, in which mice showed renewal of 
tone-induced freezing when tested in a novel context, opto-extinguished mice 
continued to show a deficit in tone-induced freezing. Extinction has been 
characterized as new learning that inhibits the original memory or a phenomenon 
in which the original memory is "unlearned". Our findings suggest that 
opto-extinction may silence the original engram to "unlearn" the original 
memory.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2022.10.012
PMCID: PMC9661654
PMID: 36279984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]