1. Breed Sci. 2022 Apr;72(2):141-149. doi: 10.1270/jsbbs.21057. Epub 2022 Mar 10.

Fine mapping of Rf5 region for a sorghum fertility restorer gene and 
microsynteny analysis across grass species.

Kiyosawa A(1), Yonemaru JI(2), Mizuno H(2), Kanamori H(2), Wu J(2), Kawahigashi 
H(2), Goto K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Nagano Animal Industry Experiment Station, 10931-1 Kataoka, Shiojiri, Nagano 
399-0711, Japan.
(2)Institute of Crop Science, National Agriculture and Food Research 
Organization, 2-1-2 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8602, Japan.
(3)Nagano Agricultural Development Public Corporation, Kami-Ina Branch, 3497 
Arai, Ina, Nagano 396-8666, Japan.

Cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) is widely used to control pollination in the 
production of commercial F1 hybrid seed in sorghum. So far, 6 major fertility 
restorer genes, Rf1 to Rf6, have been reported in sorghum. Here, we fine-mapped 
the Rf5 locus on sorghum chromosome 5 using descendant populations of a 'Nakei 
MS-3A' × 'JN43' cross. The Rf5 locus was narrowed to a 140-kb region in BTx623 
genome (161-kb in JN43) with 16 predicted genes, including 6 homologous to the 
rice fertility restorer Rf1 (PPR.1 to PPR.6). These 6 homologs have tandem 
pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) motifs. Many Rf genes encode PPR proteins, which 
bind RNA transcripts and modulate gene expression at the RNA level. No PPR genes 
were detected at the Rf5 locus on the corresponding homologous chromosome of 
rice, foxtail millet, or maize, so this gene cluster may have originated by 
chromosome translocation and duplication after the divergence of sorghum from 
these species. Comparison of the sequences of these genes between fertile and 
CMS lines identified PPR.4 as the most plausible candidate gene for Rf5.

Copyright © 2022 by JAPANESE SOCIETY OF BREEDING.

DOI: 10.1270/jsbbs.21057
PMCID: PMC9522528
PMID: 36275935