1. Mar Drugs. 2022 Sep 30;20(10):626. doi: 10.3390/md20100626.

Bioactive Peptides from Skipjack Tuna Cardiac Arterial Bulbs: Preparation, 
Identification, Antioxidant Activity, and Stability against Thermal, pH, and 
Simulated Gastrointestinal Digestion Treatments.

Cai WW(1), Hu XM(1), Wang YM(1), Chi CF(2), Wang B(1).

Author information:
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center of Marine 
Biomedical Products, School of Food and Pharmacy, Zhejiang Ocean University, 
Zhoushan 316022, China.
(2)National and Provincial Joint Laboratory of Exploration, Utilization of 
Marine Aquatic Genetic Resources, National Engineering Research Center of Marine 
Facilities Aquaculture, School of Marine Science and Technology, Zhejiang Ocean 
University, Zhoushan 316022, China.

Cardiac arterial bulbs of Skipjack tuna (Katsuwonus pelamis) are rich in 
elastin, and its hydrolysates are high quality raw materials for daily 
cosmetics. In order to effectively utilizing Skipjack tuna processing 
byproducts-cardiac arterial bulbs and to prepare peptides with high antioxidant 
activity, pepsin was selected from six proteases for hydrolyzing proteins, and 
the best hydrolysis conditions of pepsin were optimized. Using ultrafiltration 
and chromatographic methods, eleven antioxidant peptides were purified from 
protein hydrolysate of tuna cardiac arterial bulbs. Four tripeptides (QGD, PKK, 
GPQ and GLN) were identified as well as seven pentapeptides (GEQSN, GEEGD, 
YEGGD, GEGER, GEGQR, GPGLM and GDRGD). Three out of them, namely the tripeptide 
PKK and the pentapeptides YEGGD and GPGLM exhibited the highest radical 
scavenging activities on 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), hydroxyl, 
2,2'-azino-bis-3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid (ABTS) and superoxide 
anion assays. They also showed to protect plasmid DNA and HepG2 cells against 
H2O2-induced oxidative stress. Furthermore, they exhibited high stability under 
temperature ranged from 20-100 Â°C, pH values ranged from 3-11, and they 
simulated gastrointestinal digestion for 240 min. These results suggest that the 
prepared eleven antioxidant peptides from cardiac arterial bulbs, especially the 
three peptides PKK, YEGGD, and GPGLM, could serve as promising candidates in 
health-promoting products due to their high antioxidant activity and their 
stability.

DOI: 10.3390/md20100626
PMCID: PMC9604775
PMID: 36286450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.