1. Neoplasia. 2023 Jan;35:100840. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2022.100840. Epub 2022 Oct
23.

The kinetics of blast clearance are associated with copy number alterations in 
childhood B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Urbańska Z(1), Lejman M(2), Taha J(1), Madzio J(1), Ostrowska K(1), 
Miarka-Walczyk K(1), Wypyszczak K(1), Styka B(2), Jakubowska J(1), Sędek Ł(3), 
Szczepański T(3), Stańczak M(4), Fendler W(5), Młynarski W(1), Pastorczak A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oncology and Hematology, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Genetic Diagnostics, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of 
Silesia, Zabrze, Poland.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Translational Medicine, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(5)Department of Biostatistics and Translational Medicine, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland; Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Oncology and Hematology, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland. Electronic address: agata.pastorczak@umed.lodz.pl.

We analyzed the pattern of whole-genome copy number alterations (CNAs) and their 
association with the kinetics of blast clearance during the induction treatment 
among 195 pediatric patients with B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
(BCP-ALL) who displayed intermediate or high levels of minimal residual disease 
(MRD). Using unsupervised hierarchical clustering of CNAs > 5 Mbp, we dissected 
three clusters of leukemic samples with distinct kinetics of blast clearance [A 
- early slow responders (n=105), B - patients with persistent leukemia (n=24), C 
- fast responders with the low but detectable disease at the end of induction 
(n=66)] that corresponded with the patients' clinical features, the 
microdeletion profile,the presence of gene fusions and patients survival. Low 
incidence of large CNAs and chromosomal numerical aberrations occurred in 
cluster A which included ALL samples showing recurrent microdeletions within the 
genes encoding transcription factors (i.e., IKZF1, PAX5, ETV6, and ERG), DNA 
repair genes (XRCC3 and TOX), or harboring chromothriptic pattern of CNAs. Low 
hyperdiploid karyotype with trisomy 8 or hypodiploidy was predominantly observed 
in cluster B. Whereas cluster C included almost exclusively high-hyperdiploid 
ALL samples with concomitant mutations in RAS pathway genes. The pattern of CNAs 
influences the kinetics of leukemic cell clearance and selected aberrations 
affecting DNA repair genes may contribute to BCP-ALL chemoresistance.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neo.2022.100840
PMCID: PMC9593738
PMID: 36288679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the 
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of 
the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results.