1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Sep 27;13(10):1748. doi: 10.3390/genes13101748.

Combining Gene Mutation with Expression of Candidate Genes to Improve Diagnosis 
of Escobar Syndrome.

Najjar D(1), Chikhaoui A(1), Zarrouk S(2), Azouz S(2), Kamoun W(1), Nassib N(3), 
Bouchoucha S(3), Yacoub-Youssef H(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biomedical Genomics and Oncogenetics (LR16IPT05), Institut 
Pasteur de Tunis, Université Tunis El Manar, Tunis 1002, Tunisia.
(2)Genomics Platform, Institut Pasteur de Tunis (IPT), Tunis-Belvédère, Tunis 
1002, Tunisia.
(3)Service Orthopédie Pédiatrique, Hôpital d'Enfant Béchir Hamza, Tunis 1000, 
Tunisia.

Escobar syndrome is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder that affects the 
musculoskeletal system and the skin. Mutations in the CHRNG and TPM2 genes are 
associated with this pathology. In this study, we conducted a clinical and 
genetic investigation of five patients and also explored via in silico and gene 
expression analysis their phenotypic variability. In detail, we identified a 
patient with a novel composite heterozygous variant of the CHRNG gene and two 
recurrent mutations in both CHRNG and TPM2 in the rest of the patients. As for 
the clinical particularities, we reported a list of modifier genes in a patient 
suffering from myopathy. Moreover, we identified decreased expression of IGF-1, 
which could be related to the short stature of Escobar patients, and increased 
expression of POLG1 specific to patients with TPM2 mutation. Through this study, 
we identified the genetic spectrum of Escobar syndrome in the Tunisian 
population, which will allow setting up genetic counseling and prenatal 
diagnosis for families at risk. In addition, we highlighted relevant biomarkers 
that could differentiate between patients with different genetic defects.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13101748
PMCID: PMC9601381
PMID: 36292632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.