1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2022 Oct 13;15(10):1260. doi: 10.3390/ph15101260.

Optimization of Resveratrol Used as a Scaffold to Design Histone Deacetylase 
(HDAC-1 and HDAC-2) Inhibitors.

Urias BS(1), Pavan AR(1)(2), Albuquerque GR(1), Prokopczyk IM(1), Alves TMF(1), 
de Melo TRF(1), Sartori GR(3)(4), da Silva JHM(3), Chin CM(1), Santos JLD(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, São Paulo State University (UNESP), 
Araraquara 14800-903, SP, Brazil.
(2)Institute of Chemistry, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Araraquara 
14800-060, SP, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Structural and Functional Biology Applied to 
Biopharmaceuticals, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), Eusébio 61773-270, CE, 
Brazil.
(4)Postgraduate Program in Computational and Systems Biology, Oswaldo Cruz 
Foundation (Fiocruz), Rio de Janeiro 21040-222, RJ, Brazil.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are epigenetic enzymes responsible for repressing 
gene expression through the deacetylation of histone lysine residues. Therefore, 
inhibition of HDACs has become an interesting approach for the treatment of 
several diseases, including cancer, hematology, neurodegenerative, immune 
diseases, bacterial infections, and more. Resveratrol (RVT) has pleiotropic 
effects, including pan-inhibition of HDAC isoforms; however, its ability to 
interfere with membranes requires additional optimization to eliminate 
nonspecific and off-target effects. Thus, to explore RVT as a scaffold, we 
designed a series of novel HDAC-1 and -2 inhibitors containing the 
2-aminobenzamide subunit. Using molecular modeling, all compounds, except 
unsaturated compounds (4) and (7), exhibited a similar mode of interaction at 
the active sites of HDAC 1 and 2. The docking score values obtained from the 
study ranged from -12.780 to -10.967 Kcal/mol. All compounds were synthesized, 
with overall yields ranging from 33% to 67.3%. In an initial screening, 
compounds (4), (5), (7), and (20)-(26), showed enzymatic inhibitory effects 
ranging from 1 to 96% and 6 to 93% against HDAC-1 and HDAC-2, respectively. 
Compound (5), the most promising HDAC inhibitor in this series, was selected for 
IC50 assays, resulting in IC50 values of 0.44 µM and 0.37 µM against HDAC-1 and 
HDAC-2, respectively. In a panel of selectivity against HDACs 3-11, compound (5) 
presented selectivity towards Class I, mainly HDAC-1, 2, and 3. All compounds 
exhibited suitable physicochemical and ADMET properties as determined using in 
silico simulations. In conclusion, the optimization of the RVT structure allows 
the design of selective HDAC inhibitors, mainly targeting HDAC-1 and HDAC-2 
isoforms.

DOI: 10.3390/ph15101260
PMCID: PMC9611521
PMID: 36297372

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.