1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Oct 21;23(20):12693. doi: 10.3390/ijms232012693.

Sex Difference Leads to Differential Gene Expression Patterns and Therapeutic 
Efficacy in Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA Murine Model Receiving AAV8 Gene Therapy.

Piechnik M(1)(2), Amendum PC(1), Sawamoto K(1), Stapleton M(1)(2)(3), Khan S(1), 
Fnu N(1), √Ålvarez V(1), Pachon AMH(1), Danos O(4), Bruder JT(4), 
Karumuthil-Melethil S(4), Tomatsu S(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Nemours/Alfred I. DuPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE 19803, USA.
(2)Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 
19107, USA.
(3)Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19131, USA.
(4)REGENXBIO Inc., Rockville, MD 20850, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Shimane University, Izumo 693-8501, Shimane, Japan.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector-based therapies can effectively correct some 
disease pathology in murine models with mucopolysaccharidoses. However, 
immunogenicity can limit therapeutic effect as immune responses target capsid 
proteins, transduced cells, and gene therapy products, ultimately resulting in 
loss of enzyme activity. Inherent differences in male versus female immune 
response can significantly impact AAV gene transfer. We aim to investigate sex 
differences in the immune response to AAV gene therapies in mice with 
mucopolysaccharidosis IVA (MPS IVA). MPS IVA mice, treated with different AAV 
vectors expressing human N-acetylgalactosamine 6-sulfate sulfatase (GALNS), 
demonstrated a more robust antibody response in female mice resulting in 
subsequent decreased GALNS enzyme activity and less therapeutic efficacy in 
tissue pathology relative to male mice. Under thyroxine-binding globulin 
promoter, neutralizing antibody titers in female mice were approximately 
4.6-fold higher than in male mice, with GALNS enzyme activity levels 
approximately 6.8-fold lower. Overall, male mice treated with AAV-based gene 
therapy showed pathological improvement in the femur and tibial growth plates, 
ligaments, and articular cartilage as determined by contrasting differences in 
pathology scores compared to females. Cardiac histology revealed a failure to 
normalize vacuolation in females, in contrast, to complete correction in male 
mice. These findings promote the need for further determination of sex-based 
differences in response to AAV-mediated gene therapy related to developing 
treatments for MPS IVA.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232012693
PMCID: PMC9604118
PMID: 36293546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.T. and K.S. declare competing financial 
interests: they have U.S. Provisional Patent Application nos. 62/711,238, 
62/756,880, and 62/799,834. The patent applications cover the underlying 
concept.