1. Pharmaceutics. 2022 Oct 8;14(10):2138. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14102138.

Enhanced Production of ECM Proteins for Pharmaceutical Applications Using 
Mammalian Cells and Sodium Heparin Supplementation.

Garcia-Pardo J(1), Montané S(1), Avilés FX(1), Tanco S(1), Lorenzo J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina and Departament de Bioquímica i 
Biologia Molecular, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, 
Barcelona, Spain.

The yields of soluble ECM proteins recombinantly produced with mammalian cells 
can be significantly enhanced by exploiting the stabilizing properties of 
heparin. Here, we propose a simple and straightforward scalable protocol for the 
mammalian cell production of ECM proteins with affinity for heparin, using 
heparin as a supplement. As proof of concept, we have demonstrated the 
high-level expression of four biomedically relevant human enzymes such as 
carboxypeptidase Z (CPZ), carboxypeptidase A6 (CPA6), beta-galactoside 
alpha-2,6-sialyltransferase 2 (ST6GAL1) and thrombin-activable fibrinolysis 
inhibitor (TAFI). We found a strong linear correlation between the isoelectric 
point (pI) of a protein and the improvement in protein expression levels upon 
heparin addition, providing a reference for selecting novel protein targets that 
would benefit from heparin supplementation. Finally, we demonstrated the 
compatibility of this approach with a three-step purification strategy that 
includes an initial heparin affinity purification step. Using CPZ as a 
representative example, we performed a preparative purification of this enzyme. 
The purified protein is enzymatically active and can be used for pharmaceutical 
applications as well as for high-throughput functional and structural studies.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14102138
PMCID: PMC9609459
PMID: 36297573

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.