1. Molecules. 2022 Oct 12;27(20):6831. doi: 10.3390/molecules27206831.

Assembly of Biologically Functional Structures by Nucleic Acid Templating: 
Implementation of a Strategy to Overcome Inhibition by Template Excess.

Lawler MM(1), Kurnick JT(2), Fagundes St Pierre L(1), Newton EE(1), Rose 
LB(1)(2), Dunn IS(1).

Author information:
(1)TriBiotica LLC, 100 Cummings Center, Suite 424-J, Beverly, MA 01915, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, 
USA.

Delivery of therapeutic molecules to pathogenic cells is often hampered by 
unintended toxicity to normal cells. In principle, this problem can be 
circumvented if the therapeutic effector molecule is split into two inactive 
components, and only assembled on or within the target cell itself. Such an in 
situ process can be realized by exploiting target-specific molecules as 
templates to direct proximity-enhanced assembly. Modified nucleic acids carrying 
inert precursor fragments can be designed to co-hybridize on a target-specific 
template nucleic acid, such that the enforced proximity accelerates assembly of 
a functional molecule for antibody recognition. We demonstrate the in vitro 
feasibility of this adaptation of nucleic acid-templated synthesis (NATS) using 
oligonucleotides bearing modified peptides ("haplomers"), for templated assembly 
of a mimotope recognized by the therapeutic antibody trastuzumab. Enforced 
proximity promotes mimotope assembly via traceless native chemical ligation. 
Nevertheless, titration of participating haplomers through template excess is a 
potential limitation of trimolecular NATS. In order to overcome this problem, we 
devised a strategy where haplomer hybridization can only occur in the presence 
of target, without being subject to titration effects. This generalizable NATS 
modification may find future applications in enabling directed targeting of 
pathological cells.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27206831
PMCID: PMC9610079
PMID: 36296424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.M.L., J.T.K., and I.S.D. all have shares in 
TriBiotica LLC. J.T.K. receives royalties paid to MGH from sales of Vedoluzumab 
(Entyvioâ„¢) from Takeda Pharmaceuticals Co.