1. Biomolecules. 2022 Oct 20;12(10):1520. doi: 10.3390/biom12101520.

Copper-Dependent Kinases and Their Role in Cancer Inception, Progression and 
Metastasis.

Vitaliti A(1), De Luca A(2), Rossi L(2).

Author information:
(1)PhD Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, 
University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Via della Ricerca Scientifica 1, 00133 Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Via della Ricerca 
Scientifica 1, 00133 Rome, Italy.

In recent years, copper function has been expanded beyond its consolidated role 
as a cofactor of enzyme catalysis. Recent papers have demonstrated a new dynamic 
role for copper in the regulation of cell signaling pathways through direct 
interaction with protein kinases, modulating their activity. The activation of 
these pathways is exacerbated in cancer cells to sustain the different steps of 
tumor growth and dissemination. This review will focus on a novel proposed role 
for the transition metal copper as a regulator of cell signaling pathways 
through direct interaction with known protein kinases, which exhibit binding 
domains for this metal. Activation of these pathways in cancer cells supports 
both tumor growth and dissemination. In addition to the description of the 
results recently reported in the literature on the subject, relevance will be 
given to the possibility of controlling the cellular levels of copper and its 
homeostatic regulators. Overall, these findings may be of central relevance in 
order to propose copper and its homeostatic regulators as possible targets for 
novel therapies, which may act synergistically to those already existing to 
control cancer growth and dissemination.

DOI: 10.3390/biom12101520
PMCID: PMC9599708
PMID: 36291728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.