1. Biomolecules. 2022 Oct 7;12(10):1434. doi: 10.3390/biom12101434.

Aberrant Ganglioside Functions to Underpin Dysregulated Myelination, Insulin 
Signalling, and Cytokine Expression: Is There a Link and a Room for Therapy?

Svirin E(1)(2)(3), de Munter J(1), Umriukhin A(2), Sheveleva E(2)(3), Kalueff 
AV(4)(5)(6), Svistunov A(2), Morozov S(3), Walitza S(7), Strekalova 
T(1)(2)(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Neuroplast BV, 6222 NK Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Psychiatric Neurobiology, Institute of Molecular Medicine and 
Department of Normal Physiology, Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, 
119048 Moscow, Russia.
(3)Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, 125315 Moscow, Russia.
(4)Research Laboratory for Advanced Studies in Petrochemistry, Chemical 
Technology and Biotechnology, Ural Federal University, 620002 Yekaterinburg, 
Russia.
(5)Neuroscience Program, Sirius University of Science and Technology, 354340 
Sochi, Russia.
(6)School of Biological and Medical Physics, Moscow Institute of Physics and 
Technology, 141701 Moscow, Russia.
(7)Department for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
of Zurich, University Hospital of Psychiatry, 8008 Zurich, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, School for Mental Health and 
Neuroscience (MHeNS), Maastricht University, 6200 MD Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.

Gangliosides are molecules widely present in the plasma membranes of mammalian 
cells, participating in a variety of processes, including protein organization, 
transmembrane signalling and cell adhesion. Gangliosides are abundant in the 
grey matter of the brain, where they are critically involved in postnatal neural 
development and function. The common precursor of the majority of brain 
gangliosides, GM3, is formed by the sialylation of lactosylceramide, and four 
derivatives of its a- and b-series, GM1, GD1a, GD1b and GT1b, constitute 95% of 
all the brain gangliosides. Impairments in ganglioside metabolism due to genetic 
abnormalities of GM-synthases are associated with severe neurological disorders. 
Apart from that, the latest genome-wide association and translational studies 
suggest a role of genes involved in brain ganglioside synthesis in less 
pervasive psychiatric disorders. Remarkably, the most recent animal studies 
showed that abnormal ganglioside functions result in dysregulated 
neuroinflammation, aberrant myelination and altered insulin receptor signalling. 
At the same time, these molecular features are well established as accompanying 
developmental psychiatric disorders such as attention-deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorders (ASD). This led us to hypothesize 
a role of deficient ganglioside function in developmental neuropsychiatric 
disorders and warrants further gene association clinical studies addressing this 
question. Here, we critically review the literature to discuss this hypothesis 
and focus on the recent studies on ST3GAL5-deficient mice. In addition, we 
elaborate on the therapeutic potential of various anti-inflammatory remedies for 
treatment of developmental neuropsychiatric conditions related to aberrant 
ganglioside functions.

DOI: 10.3390/biom12101434
PMCID: PMC9599472
PMID: 36291644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.