1. J Pers Med. 2022 Sep 20;12(10):1544. doi: 10.3390/jpm12101544.

Integrating Genetic Alterations and the Hippo Pathway in Head and Neck Squamous 
Cell Carcinoma for Future Precision Medicine.

Ando T(1), Okamoto K(2), Shintani T(1), Yanamoto S(2), Miyauchi M(3), Gutkind 
JS(4)(5), Kajiya M(1).

Author information:
(1)Center of Oral Clinical Examination, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima 
734-8551, Japan.
(2)Department of Oral Oncology, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health 
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathobiology, Graduate School of 
Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.
(4)Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, 
USA.

Genetic alterations and dysregulation of signaling pathways are indispensable 
for the initiation and progression of cancer. Understanding the genetic, 
molecular, and signaling diversities in cancer patients has driven a dynamic 
change in cancer therapy. Patients can select a suitable molecularly targeted 
therapy or immune checkpoint inhibitor based on the driver gene alterations 
determined by sequencing of cancer tissue. This "precision medicine" approach 
requires detailed elucidation of the mechanisms connecting genetic alterations 
of driver genes and aberrant downstream signaling pathways. The regulatory 
mechanisms of the Hippo pathway and Yes-associated protein/transcriptional 
co-activator with PDZ binding motif (YAP/TAZ) that have central roles in cancer 
cell proliferation are not fully understood, reflecting their recent discovery. 
Nevertheless, emerging evidence has shown that various genetic alterations 
dysregulate the Hippo pathway and hyperactivate YAP/TAZ in cancers, including 
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Here, we summarize the latest 
evidence linking genetic alterations and the Hippo pathway in HNSCC, with the 
aim of contributing to the continued development of precision medicine.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm12101544
PMCID: PMC9604790
PMID: 36294681

Conflict of interest statement: J.S.G. is a member of the advisory board of 
Oncoceutics, Domain Therapeutics and Vividion. The authors declare no conflict 
of interest.