1. Pathogens. 2022 Oct 11;11(10):1174. doi: 10.3390/pathogens11101174.

Consumption of Galactose by Trypanosoma cruzi Epimastigotes Generates Resistance 
against Oxidative Stress.

Lobo-Rojas Á(1), Quintero-Troconis E(1), Rondón-Mercado R(1), Pérez-Aguilar 
MC(1), Concepción JL(1), Cáceres AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Enzimología de Parásitos, Departamento de Biología, Facultad 
de Ciencias, Universidad de Los Andes, Mérida 5101, Venezuela.

In this study, we demonstrate that Trypanosoma cruzi epimastigotes previously 
grown in LIT medium supplemented with 20 mM galactose and exposed to sub-lethal 
concentrations of hydrogen peroxide (100 μM) showed two-fold and five-fold 
viability when compared to epimastigotes grown in LIT medium supplemented with 
two different glucose concentrations (20 mM and 1.5 mM), respectively. Similar 
results were obtained when exposing epimastigotes from all treatments to 
methylene blue 30 μM. Additionally, through differential centrifugation and the 
selective permeabilization of cellular membranes with digitonin, we found that 
phosphoglucomutase activity (a key enzyme in galactose metabolism) occurs 
predominantly within the cytosolic compartment. Furthermore, after partially 
permeabilizing epimastigotes with digitonin (0.025 mg × mg-1 of protein), intact 
glycosomes treated with 20 mM galactose released a higher hexose phosphate 
concentration to the cytosol in the form of glucose-1-phosphate, when compared 
to intact glycosomes treated with 20 mM glucose, which predominantly released 
glucose-6-phosphate. These results shine a light on T. cruzi's galactose 
metabolism and its interplay with mechanisms that enable resistance to oxidative 
stress.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens11101174
PMCID: PMC9611177
PMID: 36297231

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the study’s design, in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data, the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.