1. Dokl Biochem Biophys. 2022 Oct;506(1):202-205. doi: 10.1134/S160767292205012X.
 Epub 2022 Oct 27.

Geldanamycin Enhances the Radioprotective Effect of Peroxyredoxin 6 in 
Irradiated 3T3 Fibroblasts.

Novoselova EG(1), Glushkova OV(2), Sharapov MG(2), Khrenov MO(2), Parfenyuk 
SB(2), Lunin SM(2), Novoselova TV(2), Mubarakshina AK(2), Goncharov RG(2), 
Fesenko EE(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow 
oblast, Russia. elenanov_06@mail.ru.
(2)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow 
oblast, Russia.

The aim of the study was to evaluate the possibility of increasing the 
radioprotective potential of peroxiredoxin 6 (Prdx6) and its mutant form S32A by 
their combined use with geldanamycin (GA) for 3T3 fibroblasts irradiated with 
X-rays at a dose of 6 Gy. The mutant enzyme S32A, which does not have 
phospholipase activity, exhibits a more pronounced radioprotective activity when 
combined with GA. The use of this combination of radioprotective drugs 
completely abolishes the peak of NF-κB activity in irradiated 3T3 cells. Another 
transcription factor, p53, which is an indicator of the level of cell apoptosis 
and increases upon irradiation, is also reduced by S32A in combination with GA. 
The low-molecular-weight protein p21, which is a marker of cell senescence and 
whose production increases upon irradiation, is also normalized when S32A is 
used in combination with GA. In addition, the use of this combination of 
radioprotective drugs significantly reduces the stress response of 3T3 cells to 
X-ray irradiation.

© 2022. Pleiades Publishing, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1134/S160767292205012X
PMID: 36303052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]