1. aBIOTECH. 2021 Jul 30;2(3):276-288. doi: 10.1007/s42994-021-00058-x.
eCollection  2021 Sep.

Amorpha-4,11-diene synthase: a key enzyme in artemisinin biosynthesis and 
engineering.

Huang JQ(1), Fang X(2).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, Institute of Plant 
Physiology and Ecology/CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200032 People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, 
Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, 650204 Yunnan 
People's Republic of China.

Amorpha-4,11-diene synthase (ADS) catalyzes the first committed step in the 
artemisinin biosynthetic pathway, which is the first catalytic reaction 
enzymatically and genetically characterized in artemisinin biosynthesis. The 
advent of ADS in Artemisia annua is considered crucial for the emergence of the 
specialized artemisinin biosynthetic pathway in the species. Microbial 
production of amorpha-4,11-diene is a breakthrough in metabolic engineering and 
synthetic biology. Recently, numerous new techniques have been used in ADS 
engineering; for example, assessing the substrate promiscuity of ADS to 
chemoenzymatically produce artemisinin. In this review, we discuss the discovery 
and catalytic mechanism of ADS, its application in metabolic engineering and 
synthetic biology, as well as the role of sesquiterpene synthases in the 
evolutionary origin of artemisinin.

Â© The Author(s) 2021, corrected publication 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s42994-021-00058-x
PMCID: PMC9590458
PMID: 36303880

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interestAll the authors report no 
conflicts of interest.