1. Front Oncol. 2022 Oct 12;12:929960. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.929960. eCollection
 2022.

A novel melanoma prognostic model based on the ferroptosis-related long 
non-coding RNA.

Rao Y(1), Zhu J(1), Zheng H(1), Dong W(2), Lin Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Eastern Hepatobilliary Surgery Hospital, The Second 
Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Ferroptosis is an iron-dependent programmed cell death related to the biological 
process of many kinds of tumors. Long noncoding RNAs (LncRNA) have been found to 
play essential roles in the tumor, and their functions in the ferroptosis of 
tumor cells have been partially discovered. However, there is no summary of 
ferroptosis-related LncRNA and its functions in melanoma. In the present study, 
we aim to explore the expression profile of ferroptosis-related LncRNA genes and 
their value in melanoma prognosis by bioinformatics analysis. The expression of 
ferroptosis-related gene (FRG) from melanoma clinical data was extracted based 
on the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. By screening the RNA expression data 
of 472 cases of melanoma and 810 cases of normal skin, eighteen 
ferroptosis-related differential genes were found to be related to the overall 
survival rate. Furthermore, 384 ferroptosis-related LncRNAs were discovered 
through constructing the mRNA-LncRNA co-expression network, and ten of them were 
found with prognostic significance in melanoma by multivariate Cox analysis. 
Risk assessment showed that the high expression of LncRNA00520 is associated 
with poor prognosis, while the increased expression of the other LncRNA is 
beneficial to the prognosis of patients with melanoma. From univariate and 
multivariate Cox regression analysis, there were ten ferroptosis-related LncRNA 
risk models towards to be significant independent prognostic factors for 
patients with melanoma and valuable predictive factors for overall survival 
(OS)(P<0.05). The ROC curve further suggested that the risk score has relatively 
reliable predictive ability (AUC=0.718). The protein level of 
ferroptosis-related genes was verified by the HPA database and IHC test, leading 
to the discovery that the expressions of ALOX5, PEBP1, ACSL4, and ZEB1 proteins 
up-regulated in tumor tissues, and existed differences between tumor tissues and 
normal tissues. In conclusion, we identified ten ferroptosis-related LncRNA and 
constructed a prognosis model base.

Copyright Â© 2022 Rao, Zhu, Zheng, Dong and Lin.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.929960
PMCID: PMC9598429
PMID: 36313708

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.