1. Elife. 2022 Nov 1;11:e74998. doi: 10.7554/eLife.74998.

Suppressed prefrontal neuronal firing variability and impaired social 
representation in IRSp53-mutant mice.

Kim W(1), Shin JJ(2), Jeong YJ(3), Kim K(1)(2), Bae JW(1), Noh YW(1), Lee S(1), 
Choi W(4), Paik SB(4), Jung MW(1)(2), Lee E(3), Kim E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Center for Synaptic Brain Dysfunctions, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, Yonsei University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Social deficit is a major feature of neuropsychiatric disorders, including 
autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder, but its neural mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we examined neuronal 
discharge characteristics in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) of 
IRSp53/Baiap2-mutant mice, which show social deficits, during social approach. 
We found a decrease in the proportion of IRSp53-mutant excitatory mPFC neurons 
encoding social information, but not that encoding non-social information. In 
addition, the firing activity of IRSp53-mutant neurons was less differential 
between social and non-social targets. IRSp53-mutant excitatory mPFC neurons 
displayed an increase in baseline neuronal firing, but decreases in the 
variability and dynamic range of firing as well as burst firing during social 
and non-social target approaches compared to wild-type controls. Treatment of 
memantine, an NMDA receptor antagonist that rescues social deficit in 
IRSp53-mutant mice, alleviates the reduced burst firing of IRSp53-mutant 
pyramidal mPFC neurons. These results suggest that suppressed neuronal activity 
dynamics and burst firing may underlie impaired cortical encoding of social 
information and social behaviors in IRSp53-mutant mice.

Â© 2022, Kim et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.74998
PMCID: PMC9662818
PMID: 36317872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: WK, JS, YJ, KK, JB, YN, SL, WC, SP, MJ, EL No 
competing interests declared, EK Reviewing editor, eLife