1. J Gastric Cancer. 2022 Oct;22(4):273-305. doi: 10.5230/jgc.2022.22.e35.

Molecular Pathology of Gastric Cancer.

Kim M(1), Seo AN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, 
Kyungpook National University Chilgok Hospital, Daegu, Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, 
Kyungpook National University Chilgok Hospital, Daegu, Korea. 
san_0729@naver.com.

Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common lethal malignant neoplasms 
worldwide, with limited treatment options for both locally advanced and/or 
metastatic conditions, resulting in a dismal prognosis. Although the widely used 
morphological classifications may be helpful for endoscopic or surgical 
treatment choices, they are still insufficient to guide precise and/or 
personalized therapy for individual patients. Recent advances in genomic 
technology and high-throughput analysis may improve the understanding of 
molecular pathways associated with GC pathogenesis and aid in the classification 
of GC at the molecular level. Advances in next-generation sequencing have 
enabled the identification of several genetic alterations through single 
experiments. Thus, understanding the driver alterations involved in gastric 
carcinogenesis has become increasingly important because it can aid in the 
discovery of potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets. In this article, we 
review the molecular classifications of GC, focusing on The Cancer Genome Atlas 
(TCGA) classification. We further describe the currently available 
biomarker-targeted therapies and potential biomarker-guided therapies. This 
review will help clinicians by providing an inclusive understanding of the 
molecular pathology of GC and may assist in selecting the best treatment 
approaches for patients with GC.

Copyright Â© 2022. Korean Gastric Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.5230/jgc.2022.22.e35
PMCID: PMC9633931
PMID: 36316106

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.