1. Front Immunol. 2022 Oct 14;13:1030831. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1030831. 
eCollection 2022.

Metabolic reprogramming of the tumor immune microenvironment in ovarian cancer: 
A novel orientation for immunotherapy.

Lin Y(1), Zhou X(1), Ni Y(1), Zhao X(1), Liang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Key Laboratory of Obstetrics & 
Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth Defects of Ministry of Education, 
Development and Related Diseases of Women and Children Key Laboratory of Sichuan 
Province, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic tumor, with the highest mortality 
rate. Numerous studies have been conducted on the treatment of ovarian cancer in 
the hopes of improving therapeutic outcomes. Immune cells have been revealed to 
play a dual function in the development of ovarian cancer, acting as both tumor 
promoters and tumor suppressors. Increasingly, the tumor immune microenvironment 
(TIME) has been proposed and confirmed to play a unique role in tumor 
development and treatment by altering immunosuppressive and cytotoxic responses 
in the vicinity of tumor cells through metabolic reprogramming. Furthermore, 
studies of immunometabolism have provided new insights into the understanding of 
the TIME. Targeting or activating metabolic processes of the TIME has the 
potential to be an antitumor therapy modality. In this review, we summarize the 
composition of the TIME of ovarian cancer and its metabolic reprogramming, its 
relationship with drug resistance in ovarian cancer, and recent research 
advances in immunotherapy.

Copyright Â© 2022 Lin, Zhou, Ni, Zhao and Liang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1030831
PMCID: PMC9613923
PMID: 36311734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.