1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Oct 13;13:1024439. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1024439. 
eCollection 2022.

Monomethyl lithospermate alleviates ischemic stroke injury in middle cerebral 
artery occlusion mice in vivo and protects oxygen glucose 
deprivation/reoxygenation induced SHSY-5Y cells in vitro via activation of 
PI3K/Akt signaling.

Yang F(1), Chen ZR(2), Yang XH(1), Xu Y(1), Ran NJ(1), Liu MJ(1), Jin SG(1), Jia 
HN(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, 
China.
(2)School of Medical and Life Sciences, Chengdu University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China.

Stroke is a fatal neurological disease, which seriously threatens human health 
and life. Ischemic stroke (IS) is the most common type of stroke in clinic. Its 
pathogenesis is very complex, mainly caused by nerve damage caused by brain 
blood supply disorder. Previous studies have confirmed that natural products 
play important roles in improving neurological disorders. Furthermore, our 
previous results also suggested that Shenxiong Tongmai granule, a clinically 
used herbal medicines' prescription, has a good ameliorating effect on IS. In 
the present study, we found that Monomethyl lithospermate (MOL), a constituent 
of Shenxiong Tongmai granule, significantly improved the neurological damage in 
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rats. MOL can significantly improve the 
neurological deficit score of MCAO rats, and improve the damage of hippocampal 
neurons caused by ischemia-reperfusion (IR). At the same time, we also found 
that MOL could reduce the level of oxidative stress in the brain tissues of MCAO 
rats. Furthermore, the oxygen and glucose deprivation/Reoxygenation 
(OGD/R)-induced SHSY-5Y cell model was established in vitro to investigate the 
pharmacological activity and molecular mechanisms of MOL in improving the nerve 
injury of IS rats. The results showed that MOL could increase the cell viability 
of SHSY-5Y cells, inhibit the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMOP) collapse 
and suppress apoptosis. In addition, MOL also ameliorated the elevated oxidative 
stress level caused by OGR/R treatment in SHSY-5Y cells. Further mechanistic 
studies showed that MOL could activate the PI3K/AKT pathway via promoting the 
phosphorylation of PI3K and AKT in MCAO rats and OGR/R-induced SHSY-5Y cells, 
which could be partially blocked by addition of PI3K/AKT pathway inhibitor of 
LY294002. Taken together, our current study suggested that MOL exerts a 
protective effect against neural damage caused by IS in vivo and in vitro by 
activating the PI3K/AKT pathway.

Copyright Â© 2022 Yang, Chen, Yang, Xu, Ran, Liu, Jin, Jia and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1024439
PMCID: PMC9606694
PMID: 36313310

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.