1. RSC Adv. 2022 Oct 4;12(43):28264-28278. doi: 10.1039/d2ra05209a. eCollection 
2022 Sep 28.

Calcium hydroxide recycled from waste eggshell resources for the effective 
recovery of fluoride from wastewater.

Chen W(1), Wu Y(1), Xie Z(1), Li Y(1), Tang W(1), Yu J(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Resources and Environment, Chengdu University of Information 
Technology No.24 Xuefu Road, Shuangliu District Chengdu 610225 China 
wenjingchen88@126.com +86 28 85966913 +86 28 85966913.

In the hunt of waste recovery pathways, eggshells emerged as a potential 
adsorbent for fluoride because they contain plenty of calcium. However, as the 
main component, calcite has weak interaction with fluoride. In this study, 
calcium hydroxide was derived from waste eggshells successfully by an aging 
treatment with moisture for fluoride recovery from water. The X-ray diffraction 
(XRD) and infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) analyses indicate that CaO in calcined 
egg shells (AEG900) is completely converted to calcium hydroxide. The adsorption 
experiments showed that the adsorption capacity of AEG900 for fluoride was 
improved by nearly 29.21% compared with the calcined eggshells without the aging 
treatment. In the batch experiment, the temperature effect is the most 
significant for the adsorption process, and nearly a half increment of removal 
rate is achieved by increasing the temperature by 30 °C. Further research 
revealed that the adsorption process fitted well with the pseudo-second order 
model and the Langmuir-Freundlich isotherm model, with a maximum adsorption 
capacity of 370.15 mg g-1. Moreover, precipitation was regarded as the main step 
for fluoride removal mechanism based on the calculated results of the surface 
complexation model. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results showed that 
the stable fluorite formed in situ of AEG900 avoids calcium loss in water. 
Finally, AEG900 was applied in fluoride removal with real-life groundwater and 
industrial wastewater, and the results showed that the final fluoride 
concentration could meet the WHO requirement and industrial wastewater discharge 
standard.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d2ra05209a
PMCID: PMC9531252
PMID: 36320256

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.