1. iScience. 2022 Oct 13;25(11):105351. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.105351. 
eCollection 2022 Nov 18.

Elements of the ERAD ubiquitin ligase Doa10 regulating sequential 
poly-ubiquitylation of its targets.

Mehrtash AB(1), Hochstrasser M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, & Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, 06520 CT, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06520, USA.

In ER-associated degradation (ERAD), misfolded ER proteins are degraded by the 
proteasome after undergoing ubiquitylation. Yeast Doa10 (human MARCHF6/TEB4) is 
a membrane-embedded E3 ubiquitin ligase that functions with E2s Ubc6 and Ubc7. 
Ubc6 attaches a single ubiquitin to substrates, which is extended by Ubc7 to 
form a polyubiquitin chain. We show the conserved C-terminal element (CTE) of 
Doa10 promotes E3-mediated Ubc6 activity. Doa10 substrates undergoing an 
alternative ubiquitylation mechanism are still degraded in CTE-mutant cells. 
Structure prediction by AlphaFold2 suggests the CTE binds near the catalytic 
RING-CH domain, implying a direct role in substrate ubiquitylation, and we 
confirm this interaction using intragenic suppression. Truncation analysis 
defines a minimal E2-binding region of Doa10; structural predictions suggest 
that Doa10 forms a retrotranslocation channel and that E2s bind within the 
cofactor-binding region defined here. These results provide mechanistic insight 
into how Doa10, and potentially other ligases, interact with their cofactors and 
mediate ERAD.

Â© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2022.105351
PMCID: PMC9619350
PMID: 36325070

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.