1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2023 Nov;41(19):9503-9522. doi: 
10.1080/07391102.2022.2142846. Epub 2022 Nov 3.

Computational study of the potential impact of AURKC missense SNPs on 
AURKC-INCENP interaction and their correlation to macrozoospermia.

Redouane S(1)(2), Charoute H(3), Harmak H(1), Malki A(2), Barakat A(1), Rouba 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genomics and Human Genetics, Institut Pasteur du Maroc, 
Casablanca, Morocco.
(2)Laboratory of Physiopathology and Molecular Genetics, Department of Biology, 
Faculty of Sciences Ben M'Sik, Hassan II University, Casablanca, Morocco.
(3)Research Unit of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Institut 
Pasteur du Maroc, Casablanca, Morocco.

Aurora Kinase C (AURKC) is considered an important element in Chromosome 
Passenger Complex (CPC), its interaction with Inner Centromere Protein (INCENP) 
plays a critical role in the establishment and the recruitment of a stable CPC 
during spermatogenesis. Genetic variations of AURKC gene are susceptible to 
impact AURKC-INCENP interaction, which may affect CPC stability and predispose 
male subjects to macrozoospermia. In this study, we systematically applied 
computational approaches using different bioinformatic tools to predict the 
effect of missense SNPs reported on AURKC gene, we selected the deleterious ones 
and we introduced their corresponding amino acid substitutions on AURKC protein 
structure. Then we did a protein-protein docking between AURKC variants and 
INCENP followed by a structural assessment of each resulting complex using 
PRODIGY server, Yassara view, Ligplot + and we choose the complexes of the most 
impactful variants for molecular dynamics (MD) simulation study. Seventeen 
missense SNPs of AURKC were identified as deleterious between all reported ones. 
All of them were located on relatively conserved positions on AURKC protein 
according to Consurf server. Only the four missense SNPs; E91K, D166V, D221Y and 
G235V were ranked as the most impactful ones and were chosen for MD simulation. 
D221Y and G235V were responsible for the most remarkable changes on AURKC-INCENP 
structural stability, therefore, they were selected as the most deleterious 
ones. Experimental studies are recommended to test the actual effect of these 
two variants and their actual impact on the morphology of sperm 
cells.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2022.2142846
PMID: 36326488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]