1. Genes Dev. 2022 Sep 1;36(17-18):1031-1042. doi: 10.1101/gad.349717.122. Epub 
2022 Nov 3.

A synthetic KLHL20 ligand to validate CUL3(KLHL20) as a potent E3 ligase for 
targeted protein degradation.

Farrell BM(#)(1), Gerth F(#)(1), Yang CR(1), Yeh JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Targeted protein degradation (TPD) has risen as a promising therapeutic 
modality. Leveraging the catalytic nature of the ubiquitin-proteasome enzymatic 
machinery, TPD exhibits higher potency to eliminate disease-causing target 
proteins such as oncogenic transcription factors that may otherwise be difficult 
to abrogate by conventional inhibitors. However, there are challenges that 
remain. Currently, nearly all degraders engage CUL4CRBN or CUL2VHL as the E3 
ligase for target ubiquitination. While their immediate efficacies are evident, 
the narrowed E3 ligase options make TPD vulnerable to potential drug resistance. 
In addition, E3 ligases show differential tissue expression and have intrinsic 
limitations in accessing varying types of disease-relevant targets. As the 
success of TPD is closely associated with the ability of E3 ligases to 
efficiently polyubiquitinate the target of interest, the long-term outlook of 
TPD drug development will depend on whether E3 ligases such as CUL4CRBN and 
CUL2VHL are accessible to the targets of interest. To overcome these potential 
caveats, a broad collection of actionable E3 ligases is required. Here, we 
designed a macrocyclic degrader engaging CUL3KLHL20 for targeting BET proteins 
and validated CUL3KLHL20 as an E3 ligase system suitable for TPD. This work thus 
contributes to the expansion of usable E3 ligases for potential drug 
development.

Â© 2022 Farrell et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.349717.122
PMCID: PMC9732910
PMID: 36328355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]