1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Oct 19;13:1006304. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1006304. 
eCollection 2022.

A perspective on oligonucleotide therapy: Approaches to patient customization.

Thakur S(1), Sinhari A(1), Jain P(2), Jadhav HR(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute 
of Technology and Sciences Pilani, Pilani, RJ, India.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Delhi Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research University, New Delhi, India.

It is estimated that the human genome encodes 15% of proteins that are 
considered to be disease-modifying. Only 2% of these proteins possess a 
druggable site that the approved clinical candidates target. Due to this 
disparity, there is an immense need to develop therapeutics that may better 
mitigate the disease or disorders aroused by non-druggable and druggable 
proteins or enzymes. The recent surge in approved oligonucleotide therapeutics 
(OT) indicates the imminent potential of these therapies. Oligonucleotide-based 
therapeutics are of intermediate size with much-improved selectivity towards the 
target and fewer off-target effects than small molecules. The OTs include 
Antisense RNAs, MicroRNA (MIR), small interfering RNA (siRNA), and aptamers, 
which are currently being explored for their use in neurodegenerative disorders, 
cancer, and even orphan diseases. The present review is a congregated effort to 
present the past and present of OTs and the current efforts to make OTs for 
plausible future therapeutics. The review provides updated literature on the 
challenges and bottlenecks of OT and recent advancements in OT drug delivery. 
Further, this review deliberates on a newly emerging approach to personalized 
treatment for patients with rare and fatal diseases with OT.

Copyright Â© 2022 Thakur, Sinhari, Jain and Jadhav.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1006304
PMCID: PMC9626821
PMID: 36339619

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.