1. Heliyon. 2022 Oct 21;8(10):e11199. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e11199. 
eCollection 2022 Oct.

Synthesis of a novel diaquabis(1,10-phenanthroline)copper(II)chloride complex 
and its voltammetric application for detection of amoxicillin in pharmaceutical 
and biological samples.

Debalke A(1), Kassa A(1)(2), Asmellash T(1), Beyene Y(1), Amare M(1), Tigineh 
GT(1), Abebe A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, Bahir Dar University, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Chemistry, College of Natural and Computational Sciences, Debre 
Markos University, Ethiopia.

A one step facile synthesis of the novel 
diaquabis(1,10-phenanthroline)copper(II)chloride (A2P2CuC) complex is 
demonstrated. Cyclic voltammetric and electrochemical impedance spectroscopic 
results revealed potentiodynamic deposition of a conductive electroactive 
poly(A2P2CuC) film on the glassy carbon electrode surface increasing its 
effective surface area. In contrast to the unmodified glassy carbon electrode, 
appearance of an oxidative peak at a reduced potential with over two fold 
current for amoxicillin at poly(A2P2CuC)/GCE demonstrated its electrocatalytic 
property attributed to reduce charge transfer resistance and the improved 
surface area of the electrode surface. Better correlation of the oxidative peak 
current with square root of scan rate (R2 = 0.99779) than with scan rate (R2 = 
0.96953) supplemented by slope of 0.58 for log(current) versus log(scan rate) 
confirmed diffusion controlled irreversible oxidation of amoxicillin. At 
optimized solution and SWV parameters, current response of poly(A2P2CuC)/GCE 
showed linear dependence on concentration of amoxicillin (2.0-100.0 μM) with LoD 
0.0115 μM. While no amoxicillin was detected in the human blood serum sample, an 
amount 89.40-100.55% of the nominal level was detected in the analyzed eight 
tablet brands. Spike recovery in tablet samples (98.90-101.95%) and blood serum 
sample (102.20-101.37%); interference with an error (%RSD) of 0.00-4.51% in 
tablet and 0.00-2.10% in serum samples; excellent stability and reproducible 
results, added with the wide dynamic range and low LoD validated the method for 
amoxicillin determination in pharmaceutical formulations and human urine 
samples.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e11199
PMCID: PMC9626942
PMID: 36339986

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.