1. IUCrdata. 2020 Oct 30;5(Pt 10):x201228. doi: 10.1107/S2414314620012286. 
eCollection 2020 Oct.

Ethyl 3,4-bis-(acet-yloxy)-2-(4-meth-oxy-phen-yl)pyrrol-idine-1-carboxyl-ate.

Dallasta Pedroso S(1), Caracelli I(2), Zukerman-Schpector J(1), Soto-Monsalve 
M(3), De Almeida Santos RH(3), Correia CRD(4), Llanes Garcia AL(4), Tiekink 
ERT(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Cristalografia, Esterodinâmica e Modelagem Molecular, 
Departamento de Química, Universidade Federal de São Carlos, 13565-905 São 
Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(2)Departmento de Física, Universidade Federal de São Carlos, 13565-905 São 
Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Química de São Carlos, Universidade de São Paulo, São Carlos, 
SP, Brazil.
(4)Instituto de Química, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, UNICAMP, CP 6154, 
CEP 13084-917 Campinas, Brazil.
(5)Research Centre for Crystalline Materials, School of Science and Technology, 
Sunway University, 47500 Bandar Sunway, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia.

The title pyrrolidine compound, C18H23NO7, is a tetra-substituted species in 
which the five-membered ring has a twisted conformation with the twist occurring 
in the C-C bond bearing the adjacent acet-yloxy substituents; the Cm-Ca-Ca-Cp 
torsion angle is -40.76 (18)° [m = methyl-ene, a = acet-yloxy and p = phen-yl]. 
The N atom, which is sp 2-hybridized [sum of bond angles = 359.4°], bears an 
ethyl-carboxyl-ate substitutent and is connected to a methyl-ene-C atom on one 
side and a carbon atom bearing a 4-meth-oxy-phenyl group on the other side. 
Minor disorder is noted in the ethyl-carboxyl-ate substituent as well as in one 
of the acet-yloxy groups; the major components of the disorder have site 
occupancies of 0.729 (9) and 0.62 (3), respectively. The most notable feature of 
the mol-ecular packing is the formation of helical, supra-molecular chains 
aligned along the b-axis direction whereby the carbonyl-O atom not involved in a 
disordered residue accepts C-H⋯O inter-actions from methyl-ene-H and two-C atom 
separated methine-H atoms to form a six-membered {⋯HCCCH⋯O} synthon.

© Dallasta Pedroso et al. 2020.

DOI: 10.1107/S2414314620012286
PMCID: PMC9462159
PMID: 36339024