1. Front Pediatr. 2022 Oct 18;10:1012825. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.1012825. 
eCollection 2022.

Case Report: A rare case of young adult progressive familial intrahepatic 
cholestasis-type 3 with a novel heterozygous pathogenic variant of ABCB4.

Zhu H(1), Wang S(2), Li L(1), Geng W(1), Wan X(3), Hua R(1), Wang D(2), Gao 
P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, 
China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, 
China.
(3)Department of Interventional Therapy, The First Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.

Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 (PFIC-3) is a rare 
autosomal recessive disorder with poor prognosis. It is caused by pathogenic 
variants of the ATP binding cassette subfamily B member 4 (ABCB4) gene and 
usually progresses from chronic cholestasis with or without jaundice to portal 
hypertension and end-stage liver disease within the first to second decade of 
life. Few reported PFIC-3 patients presented with atypical clinical symptoms, 
therefore, often misdiagnosed if without family history. Herein, we report a 
16-year-old male who was admitted to our hospital due to acute episodes of 
jaundice and intense pruritus, subsequently progressed to end-stage liver 
disease. Laboratory examinations showed no evidence of liver injury caused by 
viral, autoimmune, drug or liver tumors. Ursodeoxycholic acid and dexamethasone 
did not relieve his symptoms and he underwent liver transplantation 
successfully. Targeted next-generation sequencing identified that the patient 
was a compound heterozygote for two missense mutations (c.959C > T/c.1429C > A) 
in the ABCB4 gene. The mutation c.1429C > A (p.Q477K) is a novel heterozygous 
mutation. We constructed a three-dimensional model of this novel pathogenic 
variant using the SWISS MODEL program and found that the patient's ABCB4 protein 
is an ATP hydrolysis deficient mutant. The postoperative pathological diagnosis 
showed intrahepatic cholestasis with progression to cirrhosis. Negative liver 
tissue immunohistochemistry of MDR3 was found in the explanted liver. The 
patient was diagnosed with PFIC-3, and his symptoms improved dramatically with 
liver transplantation. In conclusion, for young patients with acute cholestasis, 
pruritus, jaundice, growth retardation, and enlargement of the liver and spleen, 
the possibility of inherited metabolic liver diseases should be considered, 
detailed medical and family history should be collected, and metabolic screening 
tests as well as gene tests are necessary for correct diagnosis. Increasing the 
coverage of PFIC3 is meaningful and thus can improve the current understanding 
of this disease.

© 2022 Zhu, Wang, Li, Geng, Wan, Hua, Wang and Gao.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.1012825
PMCID: PMC9622764
PMID: 36330364

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.