1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Oct 21;13:1017364. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1017364. 
eCollection 2022.

Synergistic association of resveratrol and histone deacetylase inhibitors as 
treatment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Parrella E(1), Porrini V(1), Scambi I(2), Gennari MM(1), Gussago C(1), Bankole 
O(2), Benarese M(1), Mariotti R(2), Pizzi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, 
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Section of Anatomy and Histology, Department of Neuroscience, Biomedicine and 
Movement Sciences, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease 
associated with motor neuron degeneration, progressive paralysis and finally 
death. Despite the research efforts, currently there is no cure for ALS. In 
recent years, multiple epigenetic mechanisms have been associated with 
neurodegenerative diseases. A pathological role for histone hypoacetylation and 
the abnormal NF-κB/RelA activation involving deacetylation of lysines, with the 
exclusion of lysine 310, has been established in ALS. Recent findings indicate 
that the pathological acetylation state of NF-κB/RelA and histone 3 (H3) 
occurring in the SOD1(G93A) murine model of ALS can be corrected by the 
synergistic combination of low doses of the AMP-activated kinase (AMPK)-sirtuin 
1 pathway activator resveratrol and the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors 
MS-275 (entinostat) or valproate. The combination of the epigenetic drugs, by 
rescuing RelA and the H3 acetylation state, promotes a beneficial and sexually 
dimorphic effect on disease onset, survival and motor neurons degeneration. In 
this mini review, we discuss the potential of the epigenetic combination of 
resveratrol with HDAC inhibitors in the ALS treatment.

Copyright © 2022 Parrella, Porrini, Scambi, Gennari, Gussago, Bankole, Benarese, 
Mariotti and Pizzi.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1017364
PMCID: PMC9633661
PMID: 36339574

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.