1. ACS Omega. 2022 Oct 21;7(43):39019-39027. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.2c04767. 
eCollection 2022 Nov 1.

Facile Synthesis of Metal Oxide Decorated Carbonized Bamboo Fibers with Wideband 
Microwave Absorption.

Li W(1), Guo F(1), Zhao Y(1), Liu Y(1), Du Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Jinzhong University, 
Jinzhong030619, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jinzhong University, 
Jinzhong030619, P.R. China.

Aiming at the disadvantages of high cost, complex processes, low yield, and 
narrow bandwidth of carbon-based microwave absorbing materials, this paper 
provides a novel and efficient method for synthesizing metal oxide/carbonized 
bamboo fibers using renewable natural bamboo fibers as a carbon source. The 
results suggested that the metal oxides such as NiO and Fe3O4 were uniformly 
dispersed on the carbonized bamboo fibers and proved that the dielectric 
component NiO and magnetic component Fe3O4 can significantly improve the 
microwave absorption performance of the carbonized bamboo fibers. As expected, 
the NiO/carbonized bamboo fibers showed excellent microwave absorption 
performance due to the appropriate complex permittivity, high impedance 
matching, and attenuation coefficient. A wide effective bandwidth of 6.4 GHz 
with 2.2 mm thickness is achieved, covering the entire Ku-band. Remarkably, the 
reflection loss (RL) values less than -10 dB covered the whole X-band at a 
thickness of 3.0 mm. This work reveals the potential of carbonized bamboo 
fibers-based composite as an economic and broadband microwave absorbent and 
offers a new strategy for designing promising microwave absorption materials.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.2c04767
PMCID: PMC9631727
PMID: 36340137

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.