1. Int Microbiol. 2023 May;26(2):243-255. doi: 10.1007/s10123-022-00282-5. Epub 
2022 Nov 11.

From degrader to producer: reversing the gallic acid metabolism of Pseudomonas 
putida KT2440.

Dias FMS(1)(2)(3), Pantoja RK(4), Gomez JGC(4), Silva LF(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of 
São Paulo, São Paulo, 05508-900, Brazil. felipe.morillo@crg.eu.
(2)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona, 08003, Spain. felipe.morillo@crg.eu.
(3)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain. felipe.morillo@crg.eu.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of 
São Paulo, São Paulo, 05508-900, Brazil.

Erratum in
    Int Microbiol. 2023 May;26(2):435-437. doi: 10.1007/s10123-023-00344-2.

Gallic acid is a powerful antioxidant with multiple therapeutic applications, 
usually obtained from the acidic hydrolysis of tannins produced by many plants. 
As this process generates a considerable amount of toxic waste, the use of 
tannases or tannase-producing microorganisms has become a greener alternative 
over the last years. However, their high costs still impose some barriers for 
industrial scalability, requiring solutions that could be both greener and 
cost-effective. Since Pseudomonas putida KT2440 is a powerful degrader of gallic 
acid, its metabolism offers pathways that can be engineered to produce it from 
cheap and renewable carbon sources, such as the crude glycerol generated in 
biodiesel units. In this study, a synthetic operon with the heterologous genes 
aroG4, quiC and pobA* was developed and expressed in P. putida, based on an in 
silico analysis of possible metabolic routes, resulting in no production. Then, 
the sequences pcaHG and galTAPR were deleted from the genome of this strain to 
avoid the degradation of gallic acid and its main intermediate, the 
protocatechuic acid. This mutant was transformed with the vector containing the 
synthetic operon and was finally able to convert glycerol into gallic acid. 
Production assays in shaker showed a final concentration of 346.7 ± 0.004 mg L-1 
gallic acid after 72 h.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10123-022-00282-5
PMCID: PMC9649394
PMID: 36357545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.