1. Cells. 2022 Oct 25;11(21):3358. doi: 10.3390/cells11213358.

Multifaceted Roles of Retromer in EGFR Trafficking and Signaling Activation.

Yang Z(1), Feng Z(1), Li Z(1), Teasdale RD(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.

Mammalian retromer complex contributes to multiple early endosome-associated 
trafficking pathways whose origins are dependent on which sorting nexin (SNX) 
they are complexed with. In an attempt to dissect out the contribution of 
individual retromer-SNX complexes, we examined the trafficking of EGFR in detail 
within a series of KO cell line models. We demonstrated that the depletion of 
retromer subunit Vps35 leads to decreased EGFR protein levels in resting cells 
with enhanced association of EGFR with lysosomal compartments. Compared to 
control cells, the addition of EGF to Vps35 KO cells resulted in a reduced rate 
of EGFR degradation; AKT activation and cell prolferation rates were elevated, 
while ERK activation remained relatively unchanged. These observations are 
consistent with a prolonged temporal association of EGFR within early endosomes 
due to the inefficiency of early endosome-associated protein trafficking 
pathways or organelle maturation due to retromer absence. We did not fully 
delineate the discrete contributions from retromer-associated SNXs to the 
phenotypes observed from retromer Vps35 depletion. While each of the knock-outs 
of SNX1/2, SNX3, or SNX27 promotes the enhanced association of EGFR with early 
endosomal compartments, only the decreased EGF-mediated EGFR degradation was 
observed in SNX1/2 dKO cells, while the enhanced AKT activation was only 
increased in SNX3 KO or SNX27 KO cells. Despite this, each of the knock-outs 
showed increased EGF-stimulated cell proliferation rates.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11213358
PMCID: PMC9658596
PMID: 36359754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.