1. Biomedicines. 2022 Nov 8;10(11):2843. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10112843.

Immunotherapy against the Cystine/Glutamate Antiporter xCT Improves the Efficacy 
of APR-246 in Preclinical Breast Cancer Models.

Barutello G(1), Di Lorenzo A(1), Gasparetto A(1), Galiazzi C(1), Bolli E(1), 
Conti L(1), Cavallo F(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biotechnology Center "Guido Tarone", Department of Molecular 
Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Turin, Via Nizza 52, 10126 
Turin, Italy.

Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer in women. Despite recent clinical 
advances, new therapeutic approaches are still required. The cystine-glutamate 
antiporter xCT, encoded by the SLC7A11 gene, which imports cystine in exchange 
with glutamate, is a potentially new target for breast cancer therapy, being 
involved in tumor cell redox balance and resistance to therapies. xCT expression 
is regulated by the oncosuppressor p53, which is mutated in many breast cancers. 
Indeed, mutant p53 (mut-p53) can induce xCT post-transcriptional down 
modulation, rendering mut-p53 tumors susceptible to oxidative damage. 
Interestingly, the drug APR-246, developed to restore the wild-type function of 
p53 in tumors harboring its mutation, alters the cell redox balance in a 
p53-independent way, possibly rendering the cells more sensitive to xCT 
inhibition. Here, we propose a combinatorial treatment based on xCT 
immunetargeting and APR-246 treatment as a strategy for tackling breast cancer. 
We demonstrate that combining the inhibition of xCT with the APR-246 drug 
significantly decreased breast cancer cell viability in vitro and induced 
apoptosis and affected cancer stem cells' self-renewal compared to the single 
treatments. Moreover, the immunetargeting of xCT through DNA vaccination in 
combination with APR-246 treatment synergistically hinders tumor progression and 
prevents lung metastasis formation in vivo. These effects can be mediated by the 
production of anti-xCT antibodies that are able to induce the antibody dependent 
cellular cytotoxicity of tumor cells. Overall, we demonstrate that DNA 
vaccination against xCT can synergize with APR-246 treatment and enhance its 
therapeutic effect. Thus, APR-246 treatment in combination with xCT 
immunetargeting may open new perspectives in the management of breast cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10112843
PMCID: PMC9688020
PMID: 36359363

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.