1. Biomolecules. 2022 Nov 9;12(11):1664. doi: 10.3390/biom12111664.

Atypical Substrates of the Organic Cation Transporter 1.

Redeker KM(1), Jensen O(1), Gebauer L(1), Meyer-Tönnies MJ(2), Brockmöller J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, University Medical Centre Göttingen, 
37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Department of General Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology, Centre of Drug 
Absorption and Transport (C-DAT), University Medical Centre Greifswald, 17487 
Greifswald, Germany.

The human organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1) is expressed in the liver and 
mediates hepatocellular uptake of organic cations. However, some studies have 
indicated that OCT1 could transport neutral or even anionic substrates. This 
capability is interesting concerning protein-substrate interactions and the 
clinical relevance of OCT1. To better understand the transport of neutral, 
anionic, or zwitterionic substrates, we used HEK293 cells overexpressing 
wild-type OCT1 and a variant in which we changed the putative substrate binding 
site (aspartate474) to a neutral amino acid. The uncharged drugs trimethoprim, 
lamivudine, and emtricitabine were good substrates of hOCT1. However, the 
uncharged drugs zalcitabine and lamotrigine, and the anionic levofloxacin, and 
prostaglandins E2 and F2α, were transported with lower activity. Finally, we 
could detect only extremely weak transport rates of acyclovir, ganciclovir, and 
stachydrine. Deleting aspartate474 had a similar transport-lowering effect on 
anionic substrates as on cationic substrates, indicating that aspartate474 might 
be relevant for intra-protein, rather than substrate-protein, interactions. 
Cellular uptake of the atypical substrates by the naturally occurring frequent 
variants OCT1*2 (methionine420del) and OCT1*3 (arginine61cysteine) was similarly 
reduced, as it is known for typical organic cations. Thus, to comprehensively 
understand the substrate spectrum and transport mechanisms of OCT1, one should 
also look at organic anions.

DOI: 10.3390/biom12111664
PMCID: PMC9687798
PMID: 36359014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.