1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Nov 7;23(21):13643. doi: 10.3390/ijms232113643.

Interplay between Autophagy and Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1: ICP34.5, One of the 
Main Actors.

Ripa I(1)(2), Andreu S(1)(2), López-Guerrero JA(1)(2), Bello-Morales R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Edificio de Biología, Universidad 
Autónoma de Madrid, Darwin 2, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is a neurotropic virus that occasionally may 
spread to the central nervous system (CNS), being the most common cause of 
sporadic encephalitis. One of the main neurovirulence factors of HSV-1 is the 
protein ICP34.5, which although it initially seems to be relevant only in 
neuronal infections, it can also promote viral replication in non-neuronal 
cells. New ICP34.5 functions have been discovered during recent years, and some 
of them have been questioned. This review describes the mechanisms of ICP34.5 to 
control cellular antiviral responses and debates its most controversial 
functions. One of the most discussed roles of ICP34.5 is autophagy inhibition. 
Although autophagy is considered a defense mechanism against viral infections, 
current evidence suggests that this antiviral function is only one side of the 
coin. Different types of autophagic pathways interact with HSV-1 impairing or 
enhancing the infection, and both the virus and the host cell modulate these 
pathways to tip the scales in its favor. In this review, we summarize the recent 
progress on the interplay between autophagy and HSV-1, focusing on the intricate 
role of ICP34.5 in the modulation of this pathway to fight the battle against 
cellular defenses.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232113643
PMCID: PMC9655901
PMID: 36362429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.