1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Oct 28;19(21):14093. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph192114093.

Determination of Biological and Molecular Attributes Related to Polystyrene 
Microplastic-Induced Reproductive Toxicity and Its Reversibility in Male Mice.

Liu T(1), Hou B(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Public Health, 
Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China.

Microplastics exist not only in the natural environment, but also in human 
tissue such as blood and even placenta. Polystyrene microplastic exposure can 
cause abnormal sperm quality in mice; however, the mechanism is unclear, and 
whether sperm abnormalities can be restored has not been reported. ICR mice were 
exposed to 5 Î¼m polystyrene microplastics through the drinking water. After one 
spermatogenic cycle, mitochondrial damage was observed to explain the possible 
cause of sperm damage. After 1-2 spermatogenic cycles of recovery, whether the 
damaged sperm could be recovered was observed. The results show that polystyrene 
microplastics caused a decrease in the mitochondrial membrane potential, an 
imbalance of kinetic homeostasis, a change in genetic characteristics, 
mitophagy, and a decrease in the ATP content in mouse testicular tissue. 
Oxidative stress may be the cause of mitochondrial damage. After 1-2 
spermatogenic cycles, mitochondrial damage was restored and sperm quality was 
improved. This study explored the mitochondrial causes of reproductive toxicity 
of polystyrene microplastics and the reversibility of reproductive toxicity, 
providing data for further research on the toxicity of microplastics and the 
prevention and treatment of its harm.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph192114093
PMCID: PMC9656262
PMID: 36360968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.