1. Foods. 2022 Oct 29;11(21):3434. doi: 10.3390/foods11213434.

Processing Alaska Pollock Protein (Theragra chalcogramma) into Kamaboko Protein 
Mitigates Elevated Serum Cholesterol and Postprandial Glucose Levels in Obese 
Zucker fa/fa Rats.

Takada N(1), Hosomi R(2), Fukunaga K(2).

Author information:
(1)Technical Research Department, Ichimasa Kamaboko Co., Ltd., 7-77, Tsushimaya, 
Higashi-ward, Niigata City 950-8735, Niigata, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry, Materials, and Bioengineering, Kansai University, 
3-3-35, Yamate-cho, Suita City 564-8680, Osaka, Japan.

Fish paste products such as kamaboko (KB) are traditional Japanese foods 
prepared from fish meat. The health-promoting properties of fish proteins and 
their lysates include improving glucose and lipid metabolism. Although the KB 
manufacturing process and quality have been examined, limited studies have 
reported the health-promoting function of KB. This study aimed to evaluate the 
effects of processing Alaska pollock protein (APP) into KB protein (KBP) on 
serum lipids levels and postprandial glucose tolerance. Obese male Zucker fa/fa 
rats were fed on different diets for 4 weeks as follows: APP group, fed on a 
diet in which APP constituted 25% of total protein intake; KBP group, fed on a 
diet with APP-processed protein as the protein source; control group, fed on a 
diet with 100% casein as the protein source. Compared with those in the control 
group, the serum total cholesterol (TC) level was reduced and the elevated 
postprandial blood glucose level was mitigated during the high-carbohydrate meal 
tolerance test in the APP and KBP groups. Further, KBP exerted significantly 
higher effects on serum TC levels and glucose tolerance than APP.

DOI: 10.3390/foods11213434
PMCID: PMC9653929
PMID: 36360046

Conflict of interest statement: N.T. is an employee of Ichimasa Kamaboko Co., 
Ltd., which supplied kamaboko. The other authors have no conflicts of interest 
to declare.