1. Polymers (Basel). 2022 Nov 6;14(21):4753. doi: 10.3390/polym14214753.

Chitosan-Boric Acid Scaffolds for Doxorubicin Delivery in the Osteosarcoma 
Treatment.

Dornjak L(1), Kovačić M(1), Ostojić K(2), Angaits A(3), Szpunar J(3), Urlić 
I(2), Rogina A(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Technology, University of Zagreb, Trg 
Marka Marulića 19, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Horvatovac 102a, 10000 Zagreb, 
Croatia.
(3)Institute of Analytical and Physical Chemistry for the Environment and 
Materials (IPREM), UMR 5254, CNRS-University of Pau, Hélioparc, 2, Av. Pr. 
Angot, 64053 Pau, France.

Biologically compatible chitosan-based scaffolds have been considered a 
promising platform for tissue regeneration, tumor treatment, and targeted drug 
delivery. Chitosan-based scaffolds can be utilized as pH-sensitive drug carriers 
with targeted drug delivery resulting in less invasive tumor treatments. Further 
improvement with bioactive ions, such as borate ions, can result in the dual 
functionality of chitosan carriers provided by simultaneous antitumor efficacy 
and tissue regeneration. Here, boric acid-containing crosslinked chitosan 
scaffolds were prepared as delivery systems of doxorubicin, a chemotherapy drug 
used in the treatment of osteosarcoma. The encapsulation of boric acid was 
indicated by FTIR spectroscopy, while the ICP-MS analysis indicated the rapid 
release of boron in phosphate buffer (pH 6.0) and phosphate-buffered saline 
solution (pH 7.4). The obtained chitosan-boric acid scaffolds exhibit a highly 
porous and interconnected structure responsible for high swelling capacity, 
while enzymatic degradation indicated good scaffolds stability during four weeks 
of incubation at pH 6.0 and 7.4. Furthermore, the release of doxorubicin 
investigated in phosphate buffers indicated lower doxorubicin concentrations at 
pH 7.4 with respect to pH 6.0. Finally, the cytotoxicity of prepared 
doxorubicin-encapsulated scaffolds was evaluated on human sarcoma cells 
indicating the scaffolds' potential as cytostatic agents.

DOI: 10.3390/polym14214753
PMCID: PMC9656110
PMID: 36365746

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.