1. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2022 Jan-Dec;36:3946320221139262. doi: 
10.1177/03946320221139262.

Integrated analysis of the genomic and transcriptional profile of gliomas with 
isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 and tumor protein 53 mutations.

Liu HQ(1), Li WX(2), An YW(1), Wu T(3), Jiang GY(2), Dong Y(2), Chen WX(1), Wang 
JC(1), Wang C(2), Song S(1).

Author information:
(1)Central Laboratory, 560852Shenzhen Samii Medical Center, Shenzhen, P.R. 
China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, 560852Shenzhen Samii Medical Center, Shenzhen, 
P.R. China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, 74573Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, 
Shenzhen, P.R. China.

Background: The gene mutation of isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 (IDH1) is commonly 
found in LGG and some GBM patients and usually carries tumor protein 53 (TP53) 
mutations. However, the underlying mechanisms on both mutations of glioma 
patients in IDH1 and TP53 are still unclear. Aim: To find the potential target 
markers in GBM and LGG patients with IDH1 and TP53 mutation.Method: A total of 
1122 glioma patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas were enrolled and divided as 
wild-type (without IDH1 and TP53 mutations) or both mutant (both IDH1 and TP53 
mutations). The data of clinicopathological characteristics, mRNA, mutations, 
and copy number alteration were analyzed. Results: IDH1 and TP53 mutations, not 
gene expression, affect the survival probability of GBM and LGG patients, which 
might be related to neuron function, immune function, tumor invasion, and 
metastasis. The effects of the selected gene (EMILIN3, SAA1, VSTM2A, HAMP, 
IFT80, and CHIC2) on glioma patients could be regulated by IDH1 and TP53 
mutations and had a higher survival possibility in these patients. Conclusions: 
The selected genes in GBM and LGG patients with IDH1 and TP53 mutations could be 
a potential prognosis marker in the future.

DOI: 10.1177/03946320221139262
PMCID: PMC9669701
PMID: 36377597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.