1. Transl Cancer Res. 2022 Oct;11(10):3895-3902. doi: 10.21037/tcr-22-1050.

Efficacy of osimertinib in a metastatic lung adenocarcinoma patient harboring 
somatic EGFR delL747_S752 and germline BIM deletion polymorphism: a case report 
and literature review.

Zheng W(1), Niu N(1), Zeng J(1), Ke X(1), Jin S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center/National Clinical 
Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital & Shenzhen Hospital, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Shenzhen, China.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) exon 19 deletion (19del) and 
the exon 21 L858R point mutation are the most established predictive factors for 
the efficacy of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) in patients with non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). To date, more than 50 subtypes of EGFR 19dels have 
been documented in NSCLC. Evidence suggests that different subtypes of 19dels 
exhibit different survival outcomes to EGFR-TKI treatment. Whether patients 
harboring EGFR Leu747_Ser752 deletion (delL747_S752) as an uncommon subtype of 
19dels benefit from EGFR-TKIs has not been investigated. BIM (B-cell chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma-like 1) deletion polymorphism is common in East 
Asian with EGFR-mutant NSCLC. Currently, the predictive role of BIM deletion 
polymorphism in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC treated with osimertinib remains 
debatable.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 34-year-old female patient was diagnosed with stage IV lung 
adenocarcinoma (LUAD) harboring somatic EGFR del L747_S752 and germline BIM 
deletion polymorphism in August 2018. She obtained benefit from the front-line 
treatment of osimertinib lasting for 8 months. After progression from 
osimertinib, the patient received bevacizumab combined with platinum-doublet 
chemotherapy, stereotactic radiosurgery plus osimertinib and crizotinib, 
anlotinib, and a programmed cell death-1 inhibitor sintilimab plus bevacizumab 
and docetaxel. She succumbed to her disease in June 2020 with an overall 
survival of 23 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work suggests that osimertinib might be a compromised treatment 
option for NSCLC patients with somatic EGFR delL747_S752 and germline BIM 
deletion polymorphism. Development of more effective regimens are needed for 
this small subset of NSCLCs.

2022 Translational Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tcr-22-1050
PMCID: PMC9641130
PMID: 36388025

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://tcr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tcr-22-1050/coif). SJ declares 
that this study was supported by the project from the Shenzhen Science and 
Technology Program (Grant No. RCJC20200714114436049) and Cancer Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Shenzhen Center/Shenzhen Cancer Hospital 
Research Project (No. SZ2020ZD006). The other authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.