1. Cell Rep. 2022 Nov 15;41(7):111649. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111649.

Developmental spontaneous activity promotes formation of sensory domains, 
frequency tuning and proper gain in central auditory circuits.

Kersbergen CJ(1), Babola TA(1), Rock J(2), Bergles DE(3).

Author information:
(1)The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Genentech, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA; Kavli Neuroscience Discovery Institute, 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: 
dbergles@jhmi.edu.

Neurons that process sensory information exhibit bursts of electrical activity 
during development, providing early training to circuits that will later encode 
similar features of the external world. In the mammalian auditory system, this 
intrinsically generated activity emerges from the cochlea prior to hearing 
onset, but its role in maturation of auditory circuitry remains poorly 
understood. We show that selective suppression of cochlear supporting cell 
spontaneous activity disrupts patterned burst firing of central auditory neurons 
without affecting cell survival or acoustic thresholds. However, neurons in the 
inferior colliculus of these mice exhibit enhanced acoustic sensitivity and 
broader frequency tuning, resulting in wider isofrequency laminae. Despite this 
enhanced neural responsiveness, total tone-responsive regions in the auditory 
cortex are substantially smaller. Thus, disruption of pre-hearing cochlear 
activity causes profound changes in neural encoding of sound, with important 
implications for restoration of hearing in individuals who experience reduced 
activity during this critical developmental period.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111649
PMCID: PMC9730452
PMID: 36384119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests D.E.B. is a paid 
consultant of Decibel Therapeutics.