1. Elife. 2022 Nov 17;11:e78133. doi: 10.7554/eLife.78133.

Three-dimensional flagella structures from animals' closest unicellular 
relatives, the Choanoflagellates.

Pinskey JM(1), Lagisetty A(1), Gui L(1), Phan N(1), Reetz E(1), Tavakoli A(1), 
Fu G(1), Nicastro D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, United States.

In most eukaryotic organisms, cilia and flagella perform a variety of 
life-sustaining roles related to environmental sensing and motility. 
Cryo-electron microscopy has provided considerable insight into the morphology 
and function of flagellar structures, but studies have been limited to less than 
a dozen of the millions of known eukaryotic species. Ultrastructural information 
is particularly lacking for unicellular organisms in the Opisthokonta clade, 
leaving a sizeable gap in our understanding of flagella evolution between 
unicellular species and multicellular metazoans (animals). Choanoflagellates are 
important aquatic heterotrophs, uniquely positioned within the opisthokonts as 
the metazoans' closest living unicellular relatives. We performed cryo-focused 
ion beam milling and cryo-electron tomography on flagella from the 
choanoflagellate species Salpingoeca rosetta. We show that the axonemal dyneins, 
radial spokes, and central pair complex in S. rosetta more closely resemble 
metazoan structures than those of unicellular organisms from other 
suprakingdoms. In addition, we describe unique features of S. rosetta flagella, 
including microtubule holes, microtubule inner proteins, and the flagellar vane: 
a fine, net-like extension that has been notoriously difficult to visualize 
using other methods. Furthermore, we report barb-like structures of unknown 
function on the extracellular surface of the flagellar membrane. Together, our 
findings provide new insights into choanoflagellate biology and flagella 
evolution between unicellular and multicellular opisthokonts.

Â© 2022, Pinskey et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.78133
PMCID: PMC9671500
PMID: 36384644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JP, AL, LG, NP, ER, AT, GF, DN No competing 
interests declared