1. PLoS One. 2022 Nov 16;17(11):e0272474. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0272474. 
eCollection 2022.

Characterization of hepatitis B viral forms from patient plasma using velocity 
gradient: Evidence for an excess of capsids in fractions enriched in Dane 
particles.

Pronier C(1), Bomo J(2), Besombes J(1), Genet V(2), Laperche S(3)(4), Gripon 
P(2), Thibault V(1).

Author information:
(1)Univ Rennes, CHU Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset (Institut de recherche en 
santé, environnement et travail) UMR_S 1085, Rennes, France.
(2)Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset (Institut de recherche en santé, 
environnement et travail) UMR_S 1085, Rennes, France.
(3)Department of Blood-Borne Agents, National Reference Center of Infectious 
Risks in Blood Transfusion, Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, Paris, 
France.
(4)Etablissement Français du Sang, La Plaine-Saint-Denis, France.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) morphogenesis is characterized by a large 
over-production of subviral particles and recently described new forms in 
parallel of complete viral particles (VP). This study was designed to depict 
circulating viral forms in HBV infected patient plasmas, using velocity 
gradients and most sensitive viral markers. Plasmas from chronic hepatitis B 
(CHB) patients, HBeAg positive or negative, genotype D or E, were fractionated 
on velocity and equilibrium gradients with or without detergent treatment. 
Antigenic and molecular markers were measured in plasma and in each collected 
fraction. Fast Nycodenz velocity gradients revealed good reproducibility and 
provided additional information to standard equilibrium sucrose gradients. 
HBV-RNAs circulated as enveloped particles in all plasmas, except one, and at 
lesser concentrations than VP. Calculations based on standardized measurements 
and relative virion and subviral particle molecular stoichiometry allowed to 
refine the experimental approach. For the HBeAg-positive plasma, VP were 
accompanied by an overproduction of enveloped capsids, either containing HBs, 
likely corresponding to empty virions, or for the main part, devoid of this 
viral envelope protein. Similarly, in the HBeAg-negative sample, HBs enveloped 
capsids, likely corresponding to empty virions, were detected and the presence 
of enveloped capsids devoid of HBs protein was suspected but not clearly 
evidenced due to the presence of contaminating high-density subviral particles. 
While HBeAg largely influences HBcrAg measurement and accounts for two-thirds of 
HBcrAg reactivity in HBeAg-positive patients, it remains a 10 times more 
sensitive marker than HBsAg to characterize VP containing fractions. Using 
Nycodenz velocity gradients and standardized biomarkers, our study proposes a 
detailed characterization of circulating viral forms in chronically HBV infected 
patients. We provide evidence for an excess of capsids in fractions enriched in 
Dane particles, likely due to the presence of empty virions but also by capsids 
enveloped by an HBs free lipid layer. Identification of this new circulating 
viral particle sets the basis for studies around the potential role of these 
entities in hepatitis B pathogeny and their physiological regulation.

Copyright: © 2022 Pronier et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0272474
PMCID: PMC9668129
PMID: 36383523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.