1. Open Biol. 2022 Nov;12(11):220066. doi: 10.1098/rsob.220066. Epub 2022 Nov 16.

Cis- and trans-regulation by histone H4 basic patch R17/R19 in metazoan 
development.

Zhang X(1), Wu X(1), Peng J(1), Sun A(1), Guo Y(1), Fu P(1), Gao G(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 393 Middle 
Huaxia Road, Pudong, Shanghai 201210, People's Republic of China.

The histone H4 basic patch is critical for chromatin structure and regulation of 
the chromatin machinery. However, the biological roles of these positively 
charged residues and the mechanisms by which they regulate gene expression 
remain unclear. In this study, we used histone mutagenesis to investigate the 
physiological function and downstream regulatory genes of H4 residues R17 and 
R19 in Drosophila. We found all histone mutations including R17A/E/H and 
R19A/E/H (R17 and R19 of H4 are substituted by A, E and H respectively) result 
in a range of growth defects and abnormalities in chromosomal high-order 
structures, whereas R17E mutation is embryonic lethal. RNA-seq demonstrates that 
downregulated genes in both R17A and R19A show significant overlap and are 
enriched in development-related pathways. In addition, Western and cytological 
analyses showed that the R17A mutation resulted in a significant reduction in 
H4K16 acetylation and male offspring, implying that the R17 may be involved in 
male dosage compensation mechanisms. R19 mutation on the other hand strongly 
affect Gpp (Dot1 homologue in flies)-mediated H3K79 methylation, possibly 
through histone crosstalk. Together these results provide insights into the 
differential impacts of positive charges of H4 basic patch R17/R19 on regulation 
of gene transcription during developmental processes.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.220066
PMCID: PMC9667139
PMID: 36382370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.