1. Inorg Chem. 2022 Dec 5;61(48):19524-19542. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.2c03451.
 Epub 2022 Nov 16.

Design Principles of Responsive Relaxometric (19)F Contrast Agents: Evaluation 
from the Point of View of Relaxation Theory and Experimental Data.

Zalewski M(1), Janasik D(1), Wierzbicka A(1), Krawczyk T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Organic Technology and Petrochemistry, Faculty of 
Chemistry, Silesian University of Technology, Krzywoustego 4, 44-100Gliwice, 
Poland.

19F magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a promising tool in medical diagnostics. 
An important class of 19F MRI contrast agents is based on paramagnetic resonance 
enhancement. This effect allows an improvement in sensitivity by increasing the 
number of scans per unit of time or facilitates the development of responsive 
contrast agents that are based on changes in relaxation rates as a detection 
principle. In this work, Bloch-Redfield-Wangsness relaxation theory was used to 
predict the relaxation properties of existing lanthanoid and transition metal 
complexes of fluoroorganic ligands and to evaluate several design strategies for 
responsive contrast agents. Electron-nucleus dipole-dipole, Curie relaxation, 
and contact interactions were included in the model. Potential significance of 
chemical shift anisotropy-anisotropic dipolar shielding cross-correlation was 
discussed. The calculated and experimental results were well aligned. The 
presented model, along with the optimized field-dependent values of electronic 
relaxation times, could be used for the preliminary selection of the optimal 
metal ion for applications in 19F MRI. The results indicate potential advantages 
of other metal ions in addition to Gd3+ particularly Cu2+, Mn2+, Ni2+, Fe3+, and 
other lanthanoids as a part of 19F contrast agents.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.2c03451
PMCID: PMC9727736
PMID: 36384024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.