1. World J Clin Cases. 2022 Nov 6;10(31):11652-11657. doi: 
10.12998/wjcc.v10.i31.11652.

Unexplained septic shock after colonoscopy with polyethylene glycol preparation 
in a young adult: A case report.

Song JJ(1), Wu CJ(1), Dong YY(1), Ma C(1), Gu Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, Zhejiang Province, 
China.
(2)Department of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, Zhejiang Province, 
China. 21318037@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Colonoscopy has become a routine physical examination as people's 
health awareness has increased. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is greatly used in 
bowel preparation before colonoscopy due to its price and safety advantages. 
Septic shock after colonoscopy with PEG preparation is extremely rare, with only 
very few cases in critically ill patients. Herein, we describe a case of septic 
shock in a healthy young adult immediately following colonoscopy with PEG 
preparation.
CASE SUMMARY: A 33-year-old young adult presented to our hospital for 
colonoscopy with PEG bowel preparation due to recurrent diarrhea for 7 years. 
The male's previous physical examination showed no abnormal indicators, and 
colonoscopy results were normal; however, he exhibited septic shock and markedly 
elevated white blood cell, C-reactive protein, and procalcitonin levels on the 
second day after colonoscopy. Immediate resuscitation and intensive care with 
appropriate antibiotics improved his condition. However, the blood and stool 
cultures did not detect the pathogen.
CONCLUSION: Septic shock after colonoscopy is rare, especially in young adults. 
The authors considered the possibility of opportunistic infections after PEG 
bowel preparation, and clinicians should monitor patients for the possibility of 
such complications.

Â©The Author(s) 2022. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i31.11652
PMCID: PMC9649567
PMID: 36387829

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest to disclose.