1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Nov 11;101(45):e31685. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000031685.

Relationship of muscle power and bone mineral density with the α-actinin-3 R577X 
polymorphism in Japanese female athletes from different sport types: An 
observational study.

Kobayashi T(1), Seki S(1), Hwang I(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Health and Sport Science, Nippon Sport Science University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Sport Science, Nippon Sport Science University, Kanagawa, Japan.

The aim of this study was to clarify the relationships between muscle power and 
bone mineral density (BMD) and the α-actinin-3 (ACTN3) R577X polymorphism in 
Japanese female collegiate athletes participating in sports with various 
mechanical-load characteristics. This study included 260 female collegiate 
athletes involved in 10 competitive sports and 26 controls (mean ages, 
19.2 ± 1.2 and 19.7 ± 1.3 years, respectively). The sports were classified into 
3 categories (low-impact, multidirectional, and high-impact) based on the 
exercise load characteristics. Data on sports participation and competition 
experience were obtained through a questionnaire-type survey. The maximum 
anaerobic power (MAnP) test was performed to measure muscle power. The total 
body BMD was measured using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. The ACTN3 R577X 
polymorphism (rs1815739) was analyzed using a TaqMan® assay. The 
multidirectional sports participants with the RR genotype of the ACTN3 R577X 
polymorphism had a higher BMD than those with the RX and RX + XX genotypes 
(P = .018 and P = .003, respectively). The RR genotype was also associated with 
a higher MAnP than those with the RX + XX genotypes (P = .035). No other 
variables related to BMD and MAnP were significantly different. Our results 
suggests that the RR genotype may confer high trainability for BMD and muscle 
power in Japanese female collegiate athletes participating in multidirectional 
sport types. However, these associations were not found in the athletes 
participating in the low- and high-impact sport types.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000031685
PMCID: PMC9666200
PMID: 36397442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.