1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Nov 11;50(20):11895-11915. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1048.

Phosphorylation of the smooth muscle master splicing regulator RBPMS regulates 
its splicing activity.

Barnhart MD(1), Yang Y(1), Nakagaki-Silva EE(1), Hammond TH(1), Pizzinga M(2), 
Gooding C(1), Stott K(1), Smith CWJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QW, UK.
(2)MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

We previously identified RBPMS as a master regulator of alternative splicing in 
differentiated smooth muscle cells (SMCs). RBPMS is transcriptionally 
downregulated during SMC dedifferentiation, but we hypothesized that RBPMS 
protein activity might be acutely downregulated by post-translational 
modifications. Publicly available phosphoproteomic datasets reveal that Thr113 
and Thr118 immediately adjacent to the RRM domain are commonly both 
phosphorylated. An RBPMS T113/118 phosphomimetic T/E mutant showed decreased 
splicing regulatory activity both in transfected cells and in a cell-free in 
vitro assay, while a non-phosphorylatable T/A mutant retained full activity. 
Loss of splicing activity was associated with a modest reduction in RNA affinity 
but significantly reduced RNA binding in nuclear extract. A lower degree of 
oligomerization of the T/E mutant might cause lower avidity of multivalent RNA 
binding. However, NMR analysis also revealed that the T113/118E peptide acts as 
an RNA mimic which can loop back and antagonize RNA-binding by the RRM domain. 
Finally, we identified ERK2 as the most likely kinase responsible for 
phosphorylation at Thr113 and Thr118. Collectively, our data identify a 
potential mechanism for rapid modulation of the SMC splicing program in response 
to external signals during the vascular injury response and atherogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac1048
PMCID: PMC9723635
PMID: 36408906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]