1. Nat Commun. 2022 Nov 18;13(1):7084. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-34742-3.

An atlas of amyloid aggregation: the impact of substitutions, insertions, 
deletions and truncations on amyloid beta fibril nucleation.

Seuma M(1), Lehner B(2)(3)(4)(5), Bolognesi B(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), The Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac 10-12, 08028, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003, Barcelona, Spain. ben.lehner@crg.eu.
(3)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain. ben.lehner@crg.eu.
(4)ICREA, Pg. Lluís Companys 23, Barcelona, 08010, Spain. ben.lehner@crg.eu.
(5)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK. 
ben.lehner@crg.eu.
(6)Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), The Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac 10-12, 08028, Barcelona, Spain. 
bbolognesi@ibecbarcelona.eu.

Multiplexed assays of variant effects (MAVEs) guide clinical variant 
interpretation and reveal disease mechanisms. To date, MAVEs have focussed on a 
single mutation type-amino acid (AA) substitutions-despite the diversity of 
coding variants that cause disease. Here we use Deep Indel Mutagenesis (DIM) to 
generate a comprehensive atlas of diverse variant effects for a disease protein, 
the amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide that aggregates in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and is 
mutated in familial AD (fAD). The atlas identifies known fAD mutations and 
reveals that many variants beyond substitutions accelerate Aβ aggregation and 
are likely to be pathogenic. Truncations, substitutions, insertions, single- and 
internal multi-AA deletions differ in their propensity to enhance or impair 
aggregation, but likely pathogenic variants from all classes are highly enriched 
in the polar N-terminal region of Aβ. This comparative atlas highlights the 
importance of including diverse mutation types in MAVEs and provides important 
mechanistic insights into amyloid nucleation.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-34742-3
PMCID: PMC9674652
PMID: 36400770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.