1. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2023 Jan;32(1):106892. doi: 
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2022.106892. Epub 2022 Nov 17.

Neuroprotective effect of meglumine cyclic adenylate against 
ischemia/reperfusion injury via STAT3-Ser727 phosphorylation.

Niu XQ(1), Li DD(1), Bao YJ(1), Yang Q(1), Liu YK(1), Lu F(1), Yan JZ(1), Yin 
XH(1), Li C(2).

Author information:
(1)jiangsu Key Laboratory of Brain Disease Bio-information, Xuzhou Medical 
University, 209 Tongshan Road, Xuzhou 221004, Jiangsu, China; Research Center 
for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Xuzhou Medical University, 209 Tongshan 
Road, Xuzhou 221004, Jiangsu, China.
(2)jiangsu Key Laboratory of Brain Disease Bio-information, Xuzhou Medical 
University, 209 Tongshan Road, Xuzhou 221004, Jiangsu, China; Research Center 
for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Xuzhou Medical University, 209 Tongshan 
Road, Xuzhou 221004, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: lichong@xzhmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: Ischemia/reperfusion can induce neuronal apoptosis in the brain and 
lead to function deficits. The activation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKA) is neuroprotective against transient 
cerebral ischemia. The neuroprotective mechanisms of PKA mainly involve the 
regulation of gene transcription via the PKA/CREB pathway. The present study 
aims to investigate the neuroprotective effect of meglumine cyclic adenylate, an 
activator of PKA, under a rat model of global cerebral ischemia/reperfusion and 
to reveal the underlying mechanism involving signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3 (STAT3)-Ser727 phosphorylation and mitochondrion modulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to 15 min global 
cerebral ischemia, and meglumine cyclic adenylate was treated through tail 
intravenous injection 30 min before ischemia. Cresyl violet staining was used to 
evaluate neuron injury at 5 d of reperfusion. Western blotting was used to 
detect p-Ser727-STAT3, total STAT3, cytochrome c (Cyt c) and active caspase-3 in 
the tissues of hippocampal CA1 region at 6 h of reperfusion. STAT3-S727A was 
overexpressed in HT22 cells to reveal the significance of STAT3-Ser727 
phosphorylation in the neuroprotective effect of meglumine cyclic adenylate.
RESULTS: Pretreatment with meglumine cyclic adenylate not only significantly 
ameliorated neuron loss in CA1 region after global cerebral ischemia but also 
enhanced STAT3-Ser727 phosphorylation, increased mitochondrial STAT3, and 
decreased cytosolic Cyt c and active caspase-3. Overexpression of STAT3-S727A in 
HT22 cells eliminated meglumine cyclic adenylate-induced increase of 
p-Ser727-STAT3, mitochondrial STAT3, cytosolic Cyt c and active caspase-3.
CONCLUSION: Meglumine cyclic adenylate protects neurons against 
ischemia/reperfusion injury via promoting p-Ser727-STAT3-associated 
mitochondrion modulation and inhibiting apoptosis pathway.

Copyright Â© 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2022.106892
PMID: 36402093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.