1. Methods Mol Biol. 2023;2587:387-407. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-2772-3_20.

Exon-Skipping for a Pathogenic COL6A1 Variant in Ullrich Congenital Muscular 
Dystrophy.

Aguti S(1), Guirguis F(1)(2), Bönnemann C(2), Muntoni F(1)(3), Bolduc V(4), Zhou 
H(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)The Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, Molecular Neurosciences Section, 
Developmental Neurosciences Research and Teaching Department, Great Ormond 
Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK.
(2)Neuromuscular and Neurogenetic Disorders of Childhood Section, National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)NIHR Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK.
(4)Neuromuscular and Neurogenetic Disorders of Childhood Section, National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA. veronique.bolduc@nih.gov.
(5)NIHR Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK. 
haiyan.zhou@ucl.ac.uk.
(6)Genetics and Genomic Medicine Research and Teaching Department, Great Ormond 
Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK. 
haiyan.zhou@ucl.ac.uk.

Single nucleotide variants that alter splice sites or splicing regulatory 
elements can lead to the skipping of exons, retention of introns, or insertion 
of pseudo-exons (PE) into the mature mRNA transcripts. When translated, these 
changes can disrupt the function of the synthesized protein. Splice-switching 
antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are synthetic, modified nucleic acids that can 
correct these aberrant splicing events. They are currently in active clinical 
development for a number of conditions and have been approved by regulatory 
agencies for the treatment of neuromuscular disorders such as Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy and spinal muscular atrophy. We have previously reported that 
splice-switching ASOs effectively skip a pathogenic PE that causes Ullrich 
congenital muscular dystrophy (UCMD). This erroneous PE insertion is caused by a 
deep-intronic variant located within intron 11 of COL6A1 (c.930+189 C>T). Here, 
we describe the detailed protocols and workflow that our labs have used to 
assess the efficacy of ASOs to skip this PE in vitro. The protocols include 
designing ASOs; isolating, culturing, and transfecting fibroblasts; extracting 
RNA and protein; and validating splicing correction at the mRNA and protein 
levels using quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) and western blot 
assays, respectively.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-2772-3_20
PMID: 36401040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]