1. Front Nutr. 2022 Nov 2;9:1038740. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2022.1038740. eCollection 
2022.

Cordyceps guangdongensis lipid-lowering formula alleviates fat and lipid 
accumulation by modulating gut microbiota and short-chain fatty acids in 
high-fat diet mice.

Wang G(1), Sun C(1), Xie B(1), Wang T(2), Liu H(2), Chen X(3), Huang Q(1), Zhang 
C(1), Li T(1), Deng W(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Microbial Culture Collection and 
Application, State Key Laboratory of Applied Microbiology Southern China, 
Institute of Microbiology, Guangdong Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory for Synthetic Biology of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Hunan University of Medicine, Huaihua, China.

Obesity has caused serious health and economic problems in the world. Cordyceps 
guangdongensis is a high-value macrofungus with broad application potential in 
the food and bio-medicine industry. This current study aimed to estimate the 
role of C. guangdongensis lipid-lowering compound formula (CGLC) in regulating 
fat and lipid accumulation, gut microbiota balance, short-chain fatty acid 
(SCFA) contents, and expression levels of genes involved in fat and lipid 
metabolism in high-fat diet (HFD) mice. The results showed that CGLC 
intervention markedly reduced body weights and fat accumulation in HFD mice, 
improved glucose tolerance and blood lipid levels, and decreased lipid droplet 
accumulation and fat vacuole levels in the liver. CGLC decreased the ratio of 
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes and increased the relative abundances of 
Bacteroides (B. acidifaciens) and Bifidobacterium (B. pseudolongum). In 
addition, CGLC treatment significantly promoted the production of SCFAs and 
regulated the relative expression levels of genes involved in fat and lipid 
metabolism in liver. Association analysis showed that several species of 
Bacteroides and most of SCFAs were significantly associated with serum lipid 
indicators. These results suggested that CGLC is a novel candidate formulation 
for treating obesity and non-alcohol fatty liver by regulating gut microbiota, 
SCFAs, and genes involved in fat and lipid metabolism.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wang, Sun, Xie, Wang, Liu, Chen, Huang, Zhang, Li and Deng.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2022.1038740
PMCID: PMC9667106
PMID: 36407511

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.