1. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2023 Jan;55(1):18-31. doi: 10.1007/s11239-022-02732-3. 
Epub 2022 Nov 19.

Incidence and outcomes of splanchnic vein thrombosis after diagnosis of COVID-19 
or COVID-19 vaccination: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zheng X(#)(1)(2), Gao F(#)(1)(3), Wang L(#)(1)(2), Meng Y(1)(4), Ageno W(5), Qi 
X(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, General Hospital of Northern Theater Command, 
No. 83 Wenhua Road, Shenyang, 110840, Liaoning, China.
(2)Postgraduate College, China Medical University, Shenyang, 110122, China.
(3)Department of Life Sciences and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical 
University, Shenyang, 110016, China.
(4)Postgraduate College, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116000, China.
(5)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, General Hospital of Northern Theater Command, 
No. 83 Wenhua Road, Shenyang, 110840, Liaoning, China. xingshunqi@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and COVID-19 vaccination may cause 
splanchnic vein thrombosis (SVT), which is potentially fatal. The present study 
aims to pool the incidence and outcomes of SVT patients with COVID-19 or having 
received COVID-19 vaccines. The PubMed, EMBASE, and Cochrane databases were 
searched. Based on the data from cohort studies, meta-analyses were performed to 
evaluate the incidence of SVT in COVID-19 patients or people having received 
COVID-19 vaccines. Pooled proportions were calculated. Based on the individual 
data from case reports, logistic regression analyses were performed to identify 
factors associated with death in SVT patients. Odds ratios (ORs) were 
calculated. Among 654 papers initially identified, 135 were included. Based on 
12 cohort studies, the pooled incidence of SVT in COVID-19 patients was 0.6%. 
Data were insufficient to estimate the incidence of SVT after COVID-19 
vaccination. Based on 123 case reports, the mortality was 14% (9/64) in SVT 
patients with COVID-19 and 25% (15/59) in those who received COVID-19 vaccines. 
Univariate analyses demonstrated that age (OR = 1.061; p = 0.017), diabetes 
mellitus (OR = 14.00; p = 0.002), anticoagulation (OR = 0.098; p = 0.004), and 
bowel resection (OR = 16.00; p = 0.001) were significantly associated with death 
in SVT patients with COVID-19; and anticoagulation (OR = 0.025; p = 0.003) and 
intravenous immunoglobulin (OR = 0.175; p = 0.046) were significantly associated 
with death in SVT patients who received COVID-19 vaccines. Multivariate analyses 
did not identify any independent factor for death in both patients. SVT in 
COVID-19 patients and in subjects who received COVID-19 vaccines carries a high 
mortality, but may be improved by anticoagulation. PROSPERO Identifier 
CRD42022315254.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11239-022-02732-3
PMCID: PMC9676885
PMID: 36402911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest in this study.