1. Hist Philos Life Sci. 2022 Nov 22;44(4):66. doi: 10.1007/s40656-022-00545-4.

Humanising and dehumanising pigs in genomic and transplantation research.

Lowe JWE(1).

Author information:
(1)Science, Technology and Innovation Studies, University of Edinburgh, Old 
Surgeons' Hall, High School Yards, Edinburgh, EH1 1LZ, UK. 
jwelowe1985@gmail.com.

Biologists who work on the pig (Sus scrofa) take advantage of its similarity to 
humans by constructing the inferential and material means to traffic data, 
information and knowledge across the species barrier. Their research has been 
funded due to its perceived value for agriculture and medicine. Improving 
selective breeding practices, for instance, has been a driver of genomics 
research. The pig is also an animal model for biomedical research and practice, 
and is proposed as a source of organs for cross-species transplantation: 
xenotransplantation. Genomics research has informed transplantation biology, 
which has itself motivated developments in genomics. Both have generated models 
of correspondences between the genomes of pigs and humans. Concerning genomics, 
I detail how researchers traverse species boundaries to develop representations 
of the pig genome, alongside ensuring that such representations are sufficiently 
porcine. In transplantation biology, the representations of the genomes of 
humans and pigs are used to detect and investigate immunologically-pertinent 
differences between the two species. These key differences can then be removed, 
to 'humanise' donor pigs so that they can become a safe and effective source of 
organs. In both of these endeavours, there is a tension between practices that 
'humanise' the pig (or representations thereof) through using resources from 
human genomics, and the need to 'dehumanise' the pig to maintain distinctions 
for legal, ethical and scientific reasons. This paper assesses the ways in which 
this tension has been managed, observing the differences between its 
realisations across comparative pig genomics and transplantation biology, and 
considering the consequences of this.

Â© 2022. Crown.

DOI: 10.1007/s40656-022-00545-4
PMCID: PMC9684229
PMID: 36417007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]