1. Biophys Rep (N Y). 2022 Sep 16;2(4):100079. doi: 10.1016/j.bpr.2022.100079. 
eCollection 2022 Dec 14.

Deciphering the conformational dynamics of gephyrin-mediated collybistin 
activation.

Imam N(1), Choudhury S(2), Hemmen K(2), Heinze KG(2), Schindelin H(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Würzburg, Rudolf Virchow Center for Integrative and 
Translational Bioimaging, Institute of Structural Biology, Würzburg, Germany.
(2)University of Würzburg, Rudolf Virchow Center for Integrative and 
Translational Bioimaging, Molecular Microscopy, Würzburg, Germany.

Efficient neuronal signaling depends on the proper assembly of the postsynaptic 
neurotransmitter machinery. The majority of inhibitory synapses feature 
γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors. The function of these GABAergic 
synapses is controlled by the scaffolding protein gephyrin and collybistin, a 
Dbl family guanine nucleotide exchange factor and neuronal adaptor protein. 
Specifically, collybistin interacts with small GTPases, cell adhesion proteins, 
and phosphoinositides to recruit gephyrin and GABAA receptors to postsynaptic 
membrane specializations. Collybistin usually contains an N-terminal SH3 domain 
and exists in closed/inactive or open/active states. Here, we elucidate the 
molecular basis of the gephyrin-collybistin interaction with newly designed 
collybistin Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) sensors. Using fluorescence 
lifetime-based FRET measurements, we deduce the affinity of the 
gephyrin-collybistin complex, thereby confirming that the C-terminal 
dimer-forming E domain binds collybistin, an interaction that does not require E 
domain dimerization. Simulations based on fluorescence lifetime and sensor 
distance distributions reveal at least a two-state equilibrium of the SH3 domain 
already in the free/unbound collybistin, thereby illustrating the accessible 
volume of the SH3 domain. Finally, our data provide strong evidence for a 
tightly regulated collybistin-gephyrin interplay, where, unexpectedly, switching 
of collybistin from closed/inactive to open/active states is efficiently 
triggered by gephyrin.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpr.2022.100079
PMCID: PMC9680708
PMID: 36425671

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.