1. Gels. 2022 Nov 16;8(11):743. doi: 10.3390/gels8110743.

Influence of Copper-Strontium Co-Doping on Bioactivity, Cytotoxicity and 
Antibacterial Activity of Mesoporous Bioactive Glass.

Anand A(1)(2), Sengupta S(1)(2), Kaňková H(1), Švančárková A(1), Beltrán AM(3), 
Galusek D(1), Boccaccini AR(2), Galusková D(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Functional and Surface Functionalized Glass, Alexander Dubček 
University of Trenčín, 911 50 Trenčín, Slovakia.
(2)Institute of Biomaterials, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91058 Erlangen, 
Germany.
(3)Departamento de Ingenieria y Ciencia de los Materiales y del Transporte, 
Escuela Politécnica Superior, Universidad de Sevilla, 41011 Seville, Spain.

Mesoporous bioactive glass (MBG) is an extensively studied biomaterial used for 
the healing of bone defects. Its biological applications can be tailored by 
introducing metallic ions, such as strontium (Sr) and copper (Cu), which can 
enhance its functionalities, including osteogenetic, angiogenetic and 
antibacterial functionalities. In this study, Cu and Sr ions were co-doped 
(ratio 1:1) with x = 0.5, 1 and 2 mol% each in glass with an intended nominal 
composition of 80SiO2-(15-2x)CaO-5P2O5-xCuO-xSrO and synthesized with an 
evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA)-based sol-gel technique. XRD confirmed 
the amorphous nature of the glass, while compositional analysis using ICP-OES 
confirmed the presence of dopant ions with the required amounts. A TEM study of 
the MBG powders showed fringes that corresponded to the formation of a highly 
ordered mesoporous structure. The Cu-Sr-doped MBG showed a positive effect on 
apatite formation when immersed in SBF, although the release of Cu and Sr ions 
was relatively slow for 1 mol% of each co-dopant, which signified a stable 
network structure in the glass. The impact of the Cu and Sr ions on the 
osteoblast-like cell line MG-63 was assessed. At the particle concentrations of 
1 wt./vol.% or lower, the cell viability was above 50%. An antibacterial test 
was conducted against Gram-negative E. coli and Gram-positive S. aureus 
bacteria. With a sequential increase in the co-doped ion content in the glass, 
the zone of inhibition for bacteria increased. The results suggest that the 
doping of MBG with Cu and Sr ions at up to 2 mol% can result in tailored 
sustained release of ions to enhance the applicability of the studied glass as a 
functional biomaterial for bone regeneration applications.

DOI: 10.3390/gels8110743
PMCID: PMC9689600
PMID: 36421565

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.