1. J Phys Chem B. 2022 Dec 8;126(48):10034-10044. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.2c06235. 
Epub 2022 Nov 25.

Path Sampling Simulations Reveal How the Q61L Mutation Alters the Dynamics of 
KRas.

Roet S(1)(2), Hooft F(1), Bolhuis PG(1), Swenson DWH(1)(3), Vreede J(1).

Author information:
(1)Van't Hoff Institute for Molecular Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Science 
Park 904, 1098 XHAmsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
(NTNU), NO-7491Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Laboratoire de Physique and Centre Blaise Pascal, CNRS, Univ Lyon, ENS de 
Lyon, Univ Claude Bernard, 69007Lyon, France.

Flexibility is essential for many proteins to function, but can be difficult to 
characterize. Experiments lack resolution in space and time, while the time 
scales involved are prohibitively long for straightforward molecular dynamics 
simulations. In this work, we present a multiple state transition path sampling 
simulation study of a protein that has been notoriously difficult to 
characterize in its active state. The GTPase enzyme KRas is a signal 
transduction protein in pathways for cell differentiation, growth, and division. 
When active, KRas tightly binds guanosine triphosphate (GTP) in a rigid state. 
The protein-GTP complex can also visit more flexible states, in which it is not 
active. KRas mutations can affect the conversion between these rigid and 
flexible states, thus prolonging the activation of signal transduction pathways, 
which may result in tumor formation. In this work, we apply path sampling 
simulations to investigate the dynamic behavior of KRas-4B (wild type, WT) and 
the oncogenic mutant Q61L (Q61L). Our results show that KRas visits several 
conformational states, which are the same for WT and Q61L. The multiple state 
transition path sampling (MSTPS) method samples transitions between the 
different states in a single calculation. Tracking which transitions occur shows 
large differences between WT and Q61L. The MSTPS results further reveal that for 
Q61L, a route to a more flexible state is inaccessible, thus shifting the 
equilibrium to more rigid states. The methodology presented here enables a 
detailed characterization of protein flexibility on time scales not accessible 
with brute-force molecular dynamics simulations.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.2c06235
PMCID: PMC9743084
PMID: 36427204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.