1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2022 Nov 11;12(11):2764. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics12112764.

IDH Mutations Are Potentially the Intrinsic Genetic Link among the Multiple 
Neoplastic Lesions in Ollier Disease and Maffucci Syndrome: A Clinicopathologic 
Analysis from a Single Institute in Shanghai, China.

Chen C(1), Li J(2)(3), Jiang T(1), Tang J(1), Zhang Z(4), Luo Y(1), Wang X(5), 
Sun K(1), Jiang Z(1), Zhou J(1), Liu Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen 
518036, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Oncogenomics, Peking University Shenzhen 
Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China.
(5)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Cheeloo College of 
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China.

BACKGROUND: This study aims to investigate isocitrate dehydrogenase gene 
mutations in patients with the non-hereditary skeletal disorders of Ollier 
disease and Maffucci syndrome, particularly in the extraosseous tumours.
METHODS: A total of 16 tumours from three patients with Ollier disease and three 
patients with Maffucci syndrome were collected. Sanger sequencing was applied to 
determine the hotspot mutations of IDH1 and IDH2 genes in multiple neoplastic 
tissues.
RESULTS: A majority of the tumours displayed an IDH1 mutation (p.R132C in 11 
tumours including the paediatric ovarian tumour from one patient with Ollier 
disease, 4 cutaneous haemangiomas from three patients with Maffucci syndrome, 5 
enchondromas and 1 chondrosarcoma; p.R132H in 2 cartilaginous tumours from one 
patient).
CONCLUSIONS: IDH1 mutations were demonstrated in multiple cartilaginous tumours 
and extraskeletal neoplasms in this case series. Specifically, identical IDH1 
mutations were confirmed in the separate lesions of each patient. These results 
are in concordance with findings that have been reported. However, here, we 
additionally reported the first case of Ollier disease with an ovarian tumour, 
which harboured the identical IDH1 mutation with the corresponding cartilaginous 
tumour. We further provided evidence that IDH mutations are the potential 
genetic links among the multiple neoplastic lesions of Ollier disease and 
Maffucci syndrome.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics12112764
PMCID: PMC9689145
PMID: 36428825

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.