1. Clin Biomech (Bristol). 2022 Dec;100:105822. doi: 
10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2022.105822. Epub 2022 Nov 22.

Investigating the association between COL1A1 and COL3A1 gene variants and knee 
joint laxity and ligament measurements.

Beckley S(1), Dey R(2), Stinton S(3), van der Merwe W(4), Branch T(3), September 
AV(5), Posthumus M(6), Collins M(7).

Author information:
(1)Health through Physical Activity, Lifestyle and Sport Research Centre 
(HPALS), Department of Human Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa.
(2)Division of Biomedical Engineering and Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)End Range of Motion Improvement, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(4)Health through Physical Activity, Lifestyle and Sport Research Centre 
(HPALS), Department of Human Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa; International Federation of Sports Medicine (FIMS) Collaborative Centre 
of Sports Medicine, Cape Town, South Africa; Sports Science Orthopaedic Clinic, 
Sports Science Institute of South Africa, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Health through Physical Activity, Lifestyle and Sport Research Centre 
(HPALS), Department of Human Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa; International Federation of Sports Medicine (FIMS) Collaborative Centre 
of Sports Medicine, Cape Town, South Africa.
(6)Health through Physical Activity, Lifestyle and Sport Research Centre 
(HPALS), Department of Human Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa; International Federation of Sports Medicine (FIMS) Collaborative Centre 
of Sports Medicine, Cape Town, South Africa; Sports Science Institute of South 
Africa, Cape Town, South Africa.
(7)Health through Physical Activity, Lifestyle and Sport Research Centre 
(HPALS), Department of Human Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa; International Federation of Sports Medicine (FIMS) Collaborative Centre 
of Sports Medicine, Cape Town, South Africa. Electronic address: 
malcolm.collins@uct.ac.za.

BACKGROUND: Joint laxity is a multifactorial phenotype with a heritable 
component. Type I collagen gene (COL1A1) mutations cause connective tissue 
disorders with joint hypermobility as a clinical feature, while variants within 
COL1A1 and type III collagen gene (COL3A1) are associated with musculoskeletal 
injuries. The aim of this study was to investigate whether COL1A1 and COL3A1 
variants are associated with measurements of non-dominant knee joint laxity and 
computed ligament length changes.
METHODS: 106 moderately active uninjured participants were assessed for genu 
recurvatum, anterior-posterior tibial translation, external-internal tibial 
rotation and calculated ligament length changes during knee rotation. 
Participants were genotyped for COL1A1 rs1107946, rs1800012 and COL3A1 
rs1800255.
FINDINGS: The COL1A1 rs1107946 GG genotype had significantly larger external 
rotation [GG: 5.7° (4.9°;6.4°) vs GT: 4.6° (4.2°;5.5°), adjusted P = 0.014], 
internal rotation [GG: 5.9° (5.3°;6.6°) vs GT: 5.4° (4.7°;6.2°), adjusted 
P = 0.014], and slack [GG: 18.2° ± 3.2° vs GT: 16.1° ± 3.1°, adjusted 
P = 0.014]. The GG genotype at both COL1A1 variants had significantly larger 
active displacement [GG + GG: 6.0 mm (3.8 mm;8.0 mm) vs other genotype 
combinations: 4.0 mm (2.5 mm;6.0 mm), P < 0.001] and maximum displacement 
[GG + GG: 8.0 mm (6.9 mm;10.6 mm) vs other genotype combinations: 6.0 mm 
(5.0 mm;9.0 mm), P = 0.003]. COL1A1 rs1107946 significantly contributed to 
increased external and internal rotation in multilinear regression models, while 
both COL1A1 variants, significantly contributed to increased active displacement 
and slack. Larger medial and lateral cruciate ligament length changes were 
reported in participants with GG genotypes at both COL1A1 variants.
INTERPRETATION: These findings suggest that the COL1A1 variants are associated 
with knee rotational laxity and changes in ligament length.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2022.105822
PMID: 36436321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The RKT was 
provided by ErmiLLC. Dr. Shaun Stinton (Director of Research and Development), 
Dr. Thomas Branch (CEO) and Dr. Samantha Beckley (Clinical Research Manager) are 
employees at this company. Dr. Beckley was only employed after completion of 
this study. For the remaining authors no conflicts of interest are declared.