1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Nov 9;13:1010492. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1010492. 
eCollection 2022.

In vivo structural modification of type II arabinogalactans with fungal 
endo-β-1, 6-galactanase in Arabidopsis.

Kikuchi A(1), Hara K(1), Yoshimi Y(1)(2), Soga K(3), Takahashi D(1), Kotake 
T(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama 
University, Saitama, Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka Metropolitan 
University, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Green Bioscience Research Center, Saitama University, Saitama, Japan.

Arabinogalactan-proteins (AGPs) are mysterious extracellular glycoproteins in 
plants. Although AGPs are highly conserved, their molecular functions remain 
obscure. The physiological importance of AGPs has been extensively demonstrated 
with β-Yariv reagent, which specifically binds to AGPs and upon introduction 
into cells, causes various deleterious effects including growth inhibition and 
programmed cell death. However, structural features of AGPs that determine their 
functions have not been identified with β-Yariv reagent. It is known that AGPs 
are decorated with large type II arabinogalactans (AGs), which are necessary for 
their functions. Type II AGs consist of a β-1,3-galactan main chain and 
β-1,6-galactan side chains with auxiliary sugar residues such as L-arabinose and 
4-O-methyl-glucuronic acid. While most side chains are short, long side chains 
such as β-1,6-galactohexaose (β-1,6-Gal6) also exist in type II AGs. To gain 
insight into the structures important for AGP functions, in vivo structural 
modification of β-1,6-galactan side chains was performed in Arabidopsis. We 
generated transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing a fungal 
endo-β-1,6-galactanase, Tv6GAL, that degrades long side chains specifically 
under the control of dexamethasone (Dex). Two of 6 transgenic lines obtained 
showed more than 40 times activity of endo-β-1,6-galactanase when treated with 
Dex. Structural analysis indicated that long side chains such as β-1,6-Gal5 and 
β-1,6-Gal6 were significantly reduced compared to wild-type plants. Tv6GAL 
induction caused retarded growth of seedlings, which had a reduced amount of 
cellulose in cell walls. These results suggest that long β-1,6-galactan side 
chains are necessary for normal cellulose synthesis and/or deposition as their 
defect affects cell growth in plants.

Copyright © 2022 Kikuchi, Hara, Yoshimi, Soga, Takahashi and Kotake.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1010492
PMCID: PMC9682044
PMID: 36438144

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.