1. Front Public Health. 2022 Nov 10;10:994620. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.994620. 
eCollection 2022.

The influence and mechanism of health expenditures on investment of financial 
assets decisions: A case study of China's economy.

Shao Z(1), Dou L(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Finance, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
(2)School of Statistics and Big Data, Henan University of Economics and Law, 
Henan, China.

Policymakers worldwide have been actively involved in the past few decades to 
ensure that human diseases are kept to a minimum. A new econometric technique, 
dynamic ARDL simulations, was used in this study to estimate and model the 
influence of health expenditures on investment in non-financial assets in China 
from 1990 to 2019. An economic growth framework, gross capital formation, 
information and communication technologies, foreign direct investment, and 
carbon emissions are all considered in the empirical model-the analysis produced 
interesting results. First, the estimates show that health expenditures and 
foreign direct investment have a significant long-run decreasing impact on 
non-financial assets in China by 0.451 and 0.234%. Second, economic growth and 
gross capital formation significantly affect the economy's non-financial assets. 
Likewise, ICT and carbon emissions also positively correlate with an explained 
variable in China. The findings show that the economy is becoming less 
investment-intensive as health spending and foreign direct investment rise. The 
study develops important policy implications for the selected country to achieve 
desired targets based on the empirical results.

Copyright Â© 2022 Shao and Dou.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.994620
PMCID: PMC9687099
PMID: 36438236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.