1. Sci Rep. 2022 Nov 27;12(1):20406. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-24376-2.

Monocyte-to-lymphocyte ratio is significantly associated with positive 
QuantiFERON-TB Gold-In-Tube and adult survival: an observational study.

Hua HB(1), Wang HJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Tuberculosis Department, Affiliated Hangzhou Chest Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, No. 208 East Huancheng Road, Hangzhou, 310003, 
Zhejiang, China.
(2)Tuberculosis Department, Affiliated Hangzhou Chest Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, No. 208 East Huancheng Road, Hangzhou, 310003, 
Zhejiang, China. fuxiaoshenjian1@163.com.

This study aimed to find significant factors associated with tuberculosis (TB) 
infection and disease development. The participants were from National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) and National Death Index (NDI). The 
tuberculosis infection was defined as a positive QuantiFERON-TB Gold-In-Tube 
(QFT-GIT). The Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) model was 
used to screen variables associated with QFT-GIT among 23 laboratory measures. 
Then the logistic regression analyses were performed to assess the independent 
factors, followed by a comprehensive nomogram model construction. Receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) and Decision Curve (DCA) analyses were used to 
assess the performance of comprehensive model on QFT-GIT result and death risk. 
Of 5256 individuals included, 521 individuals had positive QFT-GIT. LASSO 
analysis indicated that 11 variables were associated with QFT-GIT result, and 
logistic regression analyses further found sodium and monocyte-to-lymphocyte 
ratio (MLR) were independent factors. After adjusting for potential confounders, 
the correlation of sodium and MLR with QFT-GIT result was still observed. The 
comprehensive model based on sodium, MLR, and important clinical characteristics 
can predict 0.8 probability of positive QFT-GIT and achieve more clinical net 
benefit. ROC analysis by training and validation sets showed the favorable 
prediction performance. Comprehensive model also presented favorable performance 
in evaluating the death risk of individuals with positive QFT-GIT. We also found 
MLR rather than sodium was independently related to the death risk. Both MLR 
itself and comprehensive model were all significantly related to the positive 
QFT-GIT and death risk, which might participate in the initiation and 
progression of tuberculosis infection.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-24376-2
PMCID: PMC9701699
PMID: 36437261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.