1. Nutrients. 2022 Nov 18;14(22):4887. doi: 10.3390/nu14224887.

Vitamin D and Ï‰-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids towards a Personalized Nutrition 
of Youth Diabetes: A Narrative Lecture.

Cadario F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, University of Piemonte Orientale, 28100 Novara, 
Italy.
(2)Diabetes Research Institute Federation, Miami, FL 33163, USA.

After the discovery of insulin, nutrition has become central in the management 
of diabetes in order to limit glycemic rise after meals, optimize metabolic 
control, and prevent complications. Over the past one hundred years, 
international scientific societies have consecutively refined nutritional needs 
and optimized food intake for the treatment of diabetes. In particular, over the 
past century, nutrition applied with pumps for the administration of insulin and 
continuous glucose monitoring have allowed substantial advancement in the 
treatment of type 1 diabetes mellitus. The role of some substances, such as 
vitamin D and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, have been proposed without 
univocal conclusions, individually or in combination, or in the diet, to improve 
the nutrition of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. This second condition, which is 
highly associated with overweight, should be prevented from childhood onwards. 
Personalized nutrition could bypass the problem, reaching a scientific 
conclusion on the individual subject. This article focuses on childhood and 
adolescent diabetes, aims to provide a narrative summary of nutrition over the 
past century, and promotes the concept of personalized nutrition to 
pediatricians and pediatric diabetologists as a possible tool for the treatment 
of type 1 diabetes and the prevention of type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14224887
PMCID: PMC9699239
PMID: 36432570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.