1. Inflamm Regen. 2022 Nov 29;42(1):50. doi: 10.1186/s41232-022-00239-1.

Association of cellular immunity with severity of COVID-19 from the perspective 
of antigen-specific memory T cell responses and cross-reactivity.

Fujii SI(1)(2), Yamasaki S(3), Iyoda T(3), Shimizu K(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Immunotherapy, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences 
(IMS), 1-7-22, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan. 
shin-ichiro.fujii@riken.jp.
(2)Program for Drug Discovery and Medical Technology Platforms (DMP), RIKEN, 
Yokohama, Japan. shin-ichiro.fujii@riken.jp.
(3)Laboratory for Immunotherapy, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences 
(IMS), 1-7-22, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan.
(4)Program for Drug Discovery and Medical Technology Platforms (DMP), RIKEN, 
Yokohama, Japan.

Coronaviruses regularly cause outbreaks of zoonotic diseases characterized by 
severe pneumonia. The new coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has caused the global pandemic disease COVID-19 that 
began at the end of 2019 and spread rapidly owing to its infectious nature and 
rapidly progressing pneumonia. Although the infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 is high, 
indicated by the worldwide spread of the disease in a very short period, many 
individuals displayed only subclinical infection, and some of them transmitted 
the disease to individuals who then developed a severe symptomatic infection. 
Furthermore, there are differences in the severity of infection across 
countries, which can be attributed to factors such as the emergence of viral 
mutations in a short period of time as well as to the immune responses to viral 
factors. Anti-viral immunity generally consists of neutralizing antibodies that 
block viral infection and cytotoxic CD8+ T cells that eliminate the 
virus-infected cells. There is compelling evidence for the role of neutralizing 
antibodies in protective immunity in SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, the role of 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells after the viral entry is complex and warrants a 
comprehensive discussion. Here, we discuss the protection afforded by cellular 
immunity against initial infection and development of severe disease. The 
initial failure of cellular immunity to control the infection worsens the 
clinical outcomes and functional profiles that inflict tissue damage without 
effectively eliminating viral reservoirs, while robust T cell responses are 
associated with mild outcomes. We also discuss persistent long-lasting memory T 
cell-mediated protection after infection or vaccination, which is rather 
complicated as it may involve SARS-CoV-2-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes or 
cross-reactivity with previously infected seasonal coronaviruses, which are 
largely related to HLA genotypes. In addition, cross-reactivity with mutant 
strains is also discussed. Lastly, we discuss appropriate measures to be taken 
against the disease for immunocompromised patients. In conclusion, we provide 
evidence and discuss the causal relationship between natural infection- or 
vaccine-mediated memory T cell immunity and severity of COVID-19. This review is 
expected to provide a basis to develop strategies for the next generation of T 
cell-focused vaccines and aid in ending the current pandemic.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s41232-022-00239-1
PMCID: PMC9706959
PMID: 36447262

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.