1. Life Sci Alliance. 2022 Nov 29;6(2):e202201633. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201633. 
Print 2023 Feb.

Transcriptome analyses in infertile men reveal germ cell-specific expression and 
splicing patterns.

Siebert-Kuss LM(1), Krenz H(2), Tekath T(2), Wöste M(2), Di Persio S(1), Terwort 
N(1), Wyrwoll MJ(3), Cremers JF(4), Wistuba J(1), Dugas M(2)(5), Kliesch S(4), 
Schlatt S(1), Tüttelmann F(3), Gromoll J(1), Neuhaus N(1), Laurentino S(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Institute of Reproductive and 
Regenerative Biology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Informatics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Institute of Reproductive Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(4)Department of Clinical and Surgical Andrology, Centre of Reproductive 
Medicine and Andrology, University Hospital of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(5)Institute of Medical Informatics, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(6)Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Institute of Reproductive and 
Regenerative Biology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany 
Sandra.Laurentino@ukmuenster.de.

The process of spermatogenesis-when germ cells differentiate into sperm-is 
tightly regulated, and misregulation in gene expression is likely to be involved 
in the physiopathology of male infertility. The testis is one of the most 
transcriptionally rich tissues; nevertheless, the specific gene expression 
changes occurring during spermatogenesis are not fully understood. To better 
understand gene expression during spermatogenesis, we generated germ 
cell-specific whole transcriptome profiles by systematically comparing 
testicular transcriptomes from tissues in which spermatogenesis is arrested at 
successive steps of germ cell differentiation. In these comparisons, we found 
thousands of differentially expressed genes between successive germ cell types 
of infertility patients. We demonstrate our analyses' potential to identify 
novel highly germ cell-specific markers (TSPY4 and LUZP4 for spermatogonia; 
HMGB4 for round spermatids) and identified putatively misregulated genes in male 
infertility (RWDD2A, CCDC183, CNNM1, SERF1B). Apart from these, we found 
thousands of genes showing germ cell-specific isoforms (including SOX15, SPATA4, 
SYCP3, MKI67). Our approach and dataset can help elucidate genetic and 
transcriptional causes for male infertility.

© 2022 Siebert-Kuss et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202201633
PMCID: PMC9713473
PMID: 36446526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.