1. Front Immunol. 2022 Nov 14;13:935710. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.935710. 
eCollection 2022.

The mitochondrial gene-CMPK2 functions as a rheostat for macrophage homeostasis.

Arumugam P(1)(2), Chauhan M(1)(2), Rajeev T(1), Chakraborty R(1)(2), Bisht 
K(1)(2), Madan M(1)(2), Shankaran D(1)(2), Ramalingam S(1)(3), Gandotra S(1)(2), 
Rao V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Immunology and Infectious Disease Unit, Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research (CSIR)- Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, 
India.
(2)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (CSIR)- Human Resource Development Centre, Ghaziabad, 
India.
(3)Genomics and Molecular Medicine, Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research (CSIR)- Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, 
India.

In addition to their role in cellular energy production, mitochondria are 
increasingly recognized as regulators of the innate immune response of 
phagocytes. Here, we demonstrate that altering expression levels of the 
mitochondria-associated enzyme, cytidine monophosphate kinase 2 (CMPK2), 
disrupts mitochondrial physiology and significantly deregulates the resting 
immune homeostasis of macrophages. Both CMPK2 silenced and constitutively 
overexpressing macrophage lines portray mitochondrial stress with marked 
depolarization of their membrane potential, enhanced reactive oxygen species 
(ROS), and disturbed architecture culminating in the enhanced expression of the 
pro-inflammatory genes IL1β, TNFα, and IL8. Interestingly, the long-term 
modulation of CMPK2 expression resulted in an increased glycolytic flux of 
macrophages akin to the altered physiological state of activated M1 macrophages. 
While infection-induced inflammation for restricting pathogens is regulated, our 
observation of a total dysregulation of basal inflammation by bidirectional 
alteration of CMPK2 expression only highlights the critical role of this gene in 
mitochondria-mediated control of inflammation.

Copyright © 2022 Arumugam, Chauhan, Rajeev, Chakraborty, Bisht, Madan, 
Shankaran, Ramalingam, Gandotra and Rao.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.935710
PMCID: PMC9702992
PMID: 36451821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.