1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2022 Nov 15;16:998408. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2022.998408. 
eCollection 2022.

Single nuclei RNA sequencing investigation of the Purkinje cell and glial 
changes in the cerebellum of transgenic Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 mice.

Borgenheimer E(1), Hamel K(1), Sheeler C(1), Moncada FL(1), Sbrocco K(1), Zhang 
Y(1)(2), Cvetanovic M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United 
States.
(2)Minnesota Supercomputing Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 
United States.
(3)Institute for Translational Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, United States.

Glial cells constitute half the population of the human brain and are essential 
for normal brain function. Most, if not all, brain diseases are characterized by 
reactive gliosis, a process by which glial cells respond and contribute to 
neuronal pathology. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is a progressive 
neurodegenerative disease characterized by a severe degeneration of cerebellar 
Purkinje cells (PCs) and cerebellar gliosis. SCA1 is caused by an abnormal 
expansion of CAG repeats in the gene Ataxin1 (ATXN1). While several studies 
reported the effects of mutant ATXN1 in Purkinje cells, it remains unclear how 
cerebellar glia respond to dysfunctional Purkinje cells in SCA1. To address this 
question, we performed single nuclei RNA sequencing (snRNA seq) on cerebella of 
early stage Pcp2-ATXN1[82Q] mice, a transgenic SCA1 mouse model expressing 
mutant ATXN1 only in Purkinje cells. We found no changes in neuronal and glial 
proportions in the SCA1 cerebellum at this early disease stage compared to 
wild-type controls. Importantly, we observed profound non-cell autonomous and 
potentially neuroprotective reactive gene and pathway alterations in Bergmann 
glia, velate astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes in response to Purkinje cell 
dysfunction.

Copyright Â© 2022 Borgenheimer, Hamel, Sheeler, Moncada, Sbrocco, Zhang and 
Cvetanovic.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2022.998408
PMCID: PMC9706545
PMID: 36457352

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.