1. BMC Genomics. 2022 Nov 30;23(1):786. doi: 10.1186/s12864-022-09036-z.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies uncovers shared candidate genes 
across breeds for pig fatness trait.

Zeng H(1), Zhong Z(1), Xu Z(1), Teng J(1), Wei C(1), Chen Z(2), Zhang W(1), Ding 
X(3), Li J(1), Zhang Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-animal Genomics and Molecular Breeding, 
National Engineering Research Center for Breeding Swine Industry, College of 
Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, 510642, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Animal Science, College of Animal Science, Zhejiang University, 
310058, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding of the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Affairs, National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, College 
of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, 100193, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-animal Genomics and Molecular Breeding, 
National Engineering Research Center for Breeding Swine Industry, College of 
Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, 510642, Guangzhou, China. 
zhezhang@scau.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Average backfat thickness (BFT) is a critical complex trait in pig 
and an important indicator for fat deposition and lean rate. Usually, 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) was used to discover quantitative trait 
loci (QTLs) of BFT in a single population. However, the power of GWAS is limited 
by sample size in a single population. Alternatively, meta-analysis of GWAS 
(metaGWAS) is an attractive method to increase the statistical power by 
integrating data from multiple breeds and populations. The aim of this study is 
to identify shared genetic characterization of BFT across breeds in pigs via 
metaGWAS.  RESULTS: In this study, we performed metaGWAS on BFT using 15,353 
pigs (5,143 Duroc, 7,275 Yorkshire, and 2,935 Landrace) from 19 populations. We 
detected 40 genome-wide significant SNPs (Bonferroni corrected P < 0.05) and 
defined five breed-shared QTLs in across-breed metaGWAS. Markers within the five 
QTL regions explained 7 ~ 9% additive genetic variance and showed strong 
heritability enrichment. Furthermore, by integrating information from multiple 
bioinformatics databases, we annotated 46 candidate genes located in the five 
QTLs. Among them, three important (MC4R, PPARD, and SLC27A1) and seven 
suggestive candidate genes (PHLPP1, NUDT3, ILRUN, RELCH, KCNQ5, ITPR3, and U3) 
were identified.
CONCLUSION: QTLs and candidate genes underlying BFT across breeds were 
identified via metaGWAS from multiple populations. Our findings contribute to 
the understanding of the genetic architecture of BFT and the regulating 
mechanism underlying fat deposition in pigs.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-022-09036-z
PMCID: PMC9714057
PMID: 36451102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.