1. PLoS Genet. 2022 Dec 2;18(12):e1010518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010518. 
eCollection 2022 Dec.

Yeast-based evolutionary modeling of androgen receptor mutations and natural 
selection.

Zhang H(1)(2), Zhang L(1)(2), Chen S(3), Yao M(1)(2), Ma Z(4), Yuan Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems 
Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), Tianjin University, Tianjin, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 
People's Republic of China.
(3)Hematology-Oncology Division, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States 
of America.
(4)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 
People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2023 Feb;20(2):64. doi: 10.1038/s41585-022-00718-7.

Cancer progression is associated with the evolutionary accumulation of genetic 
mutations that are biologically significant. Mutations of the androgen receptor 
(AR) are associated with the development of prostate cancer (PCa) by responding 
to non-androgenic hormones, and the lack of annotations in their responsiveness 
to hormone ligands remains a daunting challenge. Here, we have used a yeast 
reporter system to quickly evaluate the responsiveness of all fifty clinical AR 
mutations to a variety of steroidal ligands including dihydrotestosterone (DHT), 
17β-estradiol (E2), progesterone (PROG), and cyproterone acetate (CPA). Based on 
an AR-driven reporter that synthesizes histidine, a basic amino acid required 
for yeast survival and propagation, the yeast reporter system enabling clonal 
selection was further empowered by combining with a random DNA mutagenesis 
library to simulate the natural evolution of AR gene under the selective 
pressures of steroidal ligands. In a time-frame of 1-2 weeks, 19 AR mutants were 
identified, in which 11 AR mutants were validated for activation by tested 
steroidal compounds. The high efficiency of our artificial evolution strategy 
was further evidenced by a sequential selection that enabled the discovery of 
multipoint AR mutations and evolution directions under the pressure of steroidal 
ligands. In summary, our designer yeast is a portable reporter module that can 
be readily adapted to streamline high-throughput AR-compound screening, used as 
a PCa clinical reference, and combined with additional bioassay systems to 
further extend its potential.

Copyright: © 2022 Zhang et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010518
PMCID: PMC9718406
PMID: 36459502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There is potential Competing Interest. A patent 
has been filed for the screening method presented in this study.