1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2022 Nov 21;2022:3415528. doi: 10.1155/2022/3415528. 
eCollection 2022.

p16(INK4a) Plays Critical Role in Exacerbating Inflammaging in High Fat Diet 
Induced Skin.

Liang Y(1), Gu T(1), Peng S(1), Lin Y(1), Liu J(2), Wang X(3), Huang X(1), Zhang 
X(3), Zhu J(3), Zhao L(3), Fan C(3), Wang G(3), Gu X(1)(3), Lin J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, The Affiliated Friendship Plastic Surgery 
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, The Affiliated Hospital of Jiangnan University, 
Wuxi, Jiangsu 214062, China.

BACKGROUND: Long term high fat diets (HFD) promote skin aging pathogenesis, but 
detailed mechanisms remain unclear especially for inflammaging, which has 
recently emerged as a pathway correlating aging and age-related disease with 
inflammation. p16INK4a (hereafter termed p16) inhibits the cell cycle, with p16 
deletion significantly inhibiting inflammaging. We observed that HFD-induced p16 
overexpression in the skin. Therefore, we investigated if p16 exacerbated 
inflammaging in HFD-induced skin and also if p16 deletion exerted protective 
effects against this process.
METHODS: Eight-week-old double knockout (KO) ApoE-/-p16-/- mice and ApoE-/- 
littermates were fed HFD for 12 weeks and their skin phenotypes were analyzed. 
We measured skin fibrosis, senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) 
levels, and integrin-inflammasome pathway activation using histopathological, 
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq), bioinformatics analysis, and molecular techniques.
RESULTS: We found that HFD contributed to inflammaging in the skin by activating 
the NLRP3 inflammasome pathway, increasing inflammatory infiltration, and 
promoting apoptosis by balancing expression between proapoptotic and 
antiapoptotic molecules. p16 knockout, when compared with the ApoE-/- phenotype, 
inhibited skin fibrosis by ameliorating inflammatory infiltration and 
proinflammatory factor expression (Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), Interleukin-6 (IL-6), 
and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)), and also alleviated inflammaging skin 
progress induced by HFD in the ApoE-/- mouse model. RNA-seq showed that p16 KO 
mice inhibited both integrin-inflammasome and NF-κB proinflammatory pathway 
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: p16 deletion or p16 positive cell clearance could be a novel 
strategy preventing long term HFD-induced skin aging.

Copyright © 2022 Yan Liang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/3415528
PMCID: PMC9706253
PMID: 36457728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.