1. J Biol Eng. 2022 Dec 1;16(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s13036-022-00312-w.

Microfluidic chip and isothermal amplification technologies for the detection of 
pathogenic nucleic acid.

Gao D(#)(1)(2), Guo X(#)(2), Yang Y(2), Shi H(2), Hao R(2), Wang S(3), Li ZJ(4), 
Zhao R(5), Song H(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(2)Chinese PLA Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.
(3)Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing, China. 
sqwang@bmi.ac.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, National 
Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China. lizhenjun@icdc.cn.
(5)Chinese PLA Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China. 
zhaorongtao1984@163.com.
(6)College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China. 
hongbinsong@263.net.
(7)Chinese PLA Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China. 
hongbinsong@263.net.
(#)Contributed equally

The frequency of outbreaks of newly emerging infectious diseases has increased 
in recent years. The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in late 2019 
has caused a global pandemic, seriously endangering human health and social 
stability. Rapid detection of infectious disease pathogens is a key prerequisite 
for the early screening of cases and the reduction in transmission risk. 
Fluorescence quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) is currently the most 
commonly used pathogen detection method, but this method has high requirements 
in terms of operating staff, instrumentation, venues, and so forth. As a result, 
its application in the settings such as poorly conditioned communities and 
grassroots has been limited, and the detection needs of the first-line field 
cannot be met. The development of point-of-care testing (POCT) technology is of 
great practical significance for preventing and controlling infectious diseases. 
Isothermal amplification technology has advantages such as mild reaction 
conditions and low instrument dependence. It has a promising prospect in the 
development of POCT, combined with the advantages of high integration and 
portability of microfluidic chip technology. This study summarized the 
principles of several representative isothermal amplification techniques, as 
well as their advantages and disadvantages. Particularly, it reviewed the 
research progress on microfluidic chip-based recombinase polymerase isothermal 
amplification technology and highlighted future prospects.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13036-022-00312-w
PMCID: PMC9714395
PMID: 36457138

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.