1. Front Nutr. 2022 Nov 15;9:1041026. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2022.1041026. eCollection
 2022.

Effects of an exogenous ketone ester using multi-omics in skeletal muscle of 
aging C57BL/6J male mice.

Roberts BM(1), Deemer SE(2), Smith DL Jr(3), Mobley JA(4), Musi N(5)(6), 
Plaisance EP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Studies, Division of Molecular and Translational 
Biomedicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(2)Department of Kinesiology, Health Promotion, and Recreation, University of 
North Texas, Denton, TX, United States.
(3)Department of Nutrition Sciences, Division of Molecular and Translational 
Biomedicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, Division of 
Molecular and Translational Biomedicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, United States.
(5)Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, University of Texas Health 
Science Center San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, United States.
(6)San Antonio Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, San Antonio, 
TX, United States.

Exogenous ketone ester supplementation provides a means to increase circulating 
ketone concentrations without the dietary challenges imposed by ketogenic diets. 
Our group has shown that oral R,S-1,3, butanediol diacetoacetate (BD-AcAc2) 
consumption results in body weight loss or maintenance with moderate increases 
in circulating ketones. We have previously shown a diet consisting of 25% 
BD-AcAc2 can maintain lean body mass (LBM) and induce fat mass (FM) loss in 
young, healthy male mice, but the underlying mechanisms are still unknown. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine if a diet consisting of 
25% BD-AcAc2 (ketone ester, KE) would alter body composition, transcriptional 
regulation, the proteome, and the lipidome of skeletal muscle in aged mice. We 
hypothesized that the KE group would remain weight stable with improvements in 
body composition compared to controls, resulting in a healthy aging phenotype. 
Male C57BL/6J mice (n = 16) were purchased from Jackson Laboratories at 72 weeks 
of age. After 1 week of acclimation, mice were weighed and randomly assigned to 
one of two groups (n = 8 per group): control (CON) or KE. A significant group by 
time interaction was observed for body weight (P < 0.001), with KE fed mice 
weighing significantly less than CON. FM increased over time in the control 
group but was unchanged in the KE group. Furthermore, LBM was not different 
between CON and KE mice despite KE mice weighing less than CON mice. 
Transcriptional analysis of skeletal muscle identified 6 genes that were 
significantly higher and 21 genes that were significantly lower in the KE group 
compared to CON. Lipidomic analysis of skeletal muscle identified no differences 
between groups for any lipid species, except for fatty acyl chains in 
triacylglycerol which was 46% lower in the KE group. Proteomics analysis 
identified 44 proteins that were different between groups, of which 11 were 
lower and 33 were higher in the KE group compared to CON. In conclusion, 
72-week-old male mice consuming the exogenous KE, BD-AcAc2, had lower 
age-related gains in body weight and FM compared to CON mice. Furthermore, 
transcriptional and proteomics data suggest a signature in skeletal muscle of 
KE-treated mice consistent with markers of improved skeletal muscle 
regeneration, improved electron transport chain utilization, and increased 
insulin sensitivity.

Copyright Â© 2022 Roberts, Deemer, Smith, Mobley, Musi and Plaisance.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2022.1041026
PMCID: PMC9707703
PMID: 36458175

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.