1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2022 Nov 17;10:934997. doi:
10.3389/fbioe.2022.934997.  eCollection 2022.

Evaluation of unsulfated biotechnological chondroitin in a knee osteoarthritis 
mouse model as a potential novel functional ingredient in nutraceuticals and 
pharmaceuticals.

Cimini D(1), Boccella S(2), Alfano A(2), Stellavato A(2), Paino S(2), Schiraldi 
C(2), Guida F(2), Perrone M(2), Donniacuo M(2), Tirino V(2), Desiderio V(2), 
Rinaldi B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and 
Technologies, University of Campania L. Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Biotechnology, Medical 
Histology and Molecular Biology Naples, University of Campania L. Vanvitelli, 
Naples, Italy.

Osteoarthritis is a very disabling disease that can be treated with both 
non-pharmacological and pharmacological approaches. In the last years, 
pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate (CS) and glucosamine emerged as 
symptomatic slow-acting molecules, effective in pain reduction and improved 
function in patients affected by osteoarthritis. CS is a sulfated 
glycosaminoglycan that is currently produced mainly by extraction from animal 
tissues, and it is commercialized as a pharmaceutical-grade ingredient and/or 
food supplement. However, public concern on animal product derivatives has 
prompted the search for alternative non-extractive production routes. Thus, 
different approaches were established to obtain animal-free natural identical 
CS. On the other hand, the unsulfated chondroitin, which can be obtained via 
biotechnological processes, demonstrated promising anti-inflammatory properties 
in vitro, in chondrocytes isolated from osteoarthritic patients. Therefore, the 
aim of this study was to explore the potential of chondroitin, with respect to 
the better-known CS, in an in vivo mouse model of knee osteoarthritis. Results 
indicate that the treatment with biotechnological chondroitin (BC), similarly to 
CS, significantly reduced the severity of mechanical allodynia in an MIA-induced 
osteoarthritic mouse model. Decreased cartilage damage and a reduction of 
inflammation- and pain-related biochemical markers were also observed. Overall, 
our data support a beneficial activity of biotechnological unsulfated 
chondroitin in the osteoarthritis model tested, thus suggesting BC as a 
potential functional ingredient in pharmaceuticals and nutraceuticals with the 
advantage of avoiding animal tissue extraction.

Copyright Â© 2022 Cimini, Boccella, Alfano, Stellavato, Paino, Schiraldi, Guida, 
Perrone, Donniacuo, Tirino, Desiderio and Rinaldi.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.934997
PMCID: PMC9714611
PMID: 36466352

Conflict of interest statement: DC and CS are inventors but not assignees of the 
patent WO/2010/136435, International Patent Application PCT/EP2010/057129. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.