1. Front Immunol. 2022 Nov 17;13:1035515. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1035515. 
eCollection 2022.

In silico and in vitro arboviral MHC class I-restricted-epitope signatures 
reveal immunodominance and poor overlapping patterns.

Lopes-Ribeiro Á(1)(2), Araujo FP(1)(2), Oliveira PM(1), Teixeira LA(1), Ferreira 
GM(1), Lourenço AA(1), Dias LCC(1), Teixeira CW(1), Retes HM(1), Lopes ÉN(3), 
Versiani AF(1)(4), Barbosa-Stancioli EF(1), da Fonseca FG(1), Martins-Filho 
OA(2), Tsuji M(5), Peruhype-Magalhães V(2), Coelho-Dos-Reis JGA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Virologia Básica e Aplicada, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, 
Departamento de Microbiologia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, Brazil.
(2)Grupo Integrado de Pesquisas em Biomarcadores, Instituto René Rachou, 
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(3)Laboratorio de Genética Celular e Molecular, Instituto de Ciências 
Biológicas, Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, Brazil.
(4)Department of Pathology da University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, 
United States.
(5)Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, Irving Medical School, Columbia 
University, New York City, NY, United States.

INTRODUCTION: The present work sought to identify MHC-I-restricted peptide 
signatures for arbovirus using in silico and in vitro peptide microarray tools.
METHODS: First, an in-silico analysis of immunogenic epitopes restricted to four 
of the most prevalent human MHC class-I was performed by identification of MHC 
affinity score. For that, more than 10,000 peptide sequences from 5 Arbovirus 
and 8 different viral serotypes, namely Zika (ZIKV), Dengue (DENV serotypes 
1-4), Chikungunya (CHIKV), Mayaro (MAYV) and Oropouche (OROV) viruses, in 
addition to YFV were analyzed. Haplotype HLA-A*02.01 was the dominant human MHC 
for all arboviruses. Over one thousand HLA-A2 immunogenic peptides were employed 
to build a comprehensive identity matrix. Intending to assess HLAA*02:01 
reactivity of peptides in vitro, a peptide microarray was designed and generated 
using a dimeric protein containing HLA-A*02:01.
RESULTS: The comprehensive identity matrix allowed the identification of only 
three overlapping peptides between two or more flavivirus sequences, suggesting 
poor overlapping of virus-specific immunogenic peptides amongst arborviruses. 
Global analysis of the fluorescence intensity for peptide-HLA-A*02:01 binding 
indicated a dose-dependent effect in the array. Considering all assessed 
arboviruses, the number of DENV-derived peptides with HLA-A*02:01 reactivity was 
the highest. Furthermore, a lower number of YFV-17DD overlapping peptides 
presented reactivity when compared to non-overlapping peptides. In addition, the 
assessment of HLA-A*02:01-reactive peptides across virus polyproteins 
highlighted non-structural proteins as "hot-spots". Data analysis supported 
these findings showing the presence of major hydrophobic sites in the final 
segment of non-structural protein 1 throughout 2a (Ns2a) and in nonstructural 
proteins 2b (Ns2b), 4a (Ns4a) and 4b (Ns4b).
DISCUSSION: To our knowledge, these results provide the most comprehensive and 
detailed snapshot of the immunodominant peptide signature for arbovirus with 
MHC-class I restriction, which may bring insight into the design of future 
virus-specific vaccines to arboviruses and for vaccination protocols in highly 
endemic areas.

Copyright © 2022 Lopes-Ribeiro, Araujo, Oliveira, Teixeira, Ferreira, Lourenço, 
Dias, Teixeira, Retes, Lopes, Versiani, Barbosa-Stancioli, da Fonseca, 
Martins-Filho, Tsuji, Peruhype-Magalhães and Coelho-dos-Reis.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1035515
PMCID: PMC9713826
PMID: 36466864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.