1. Sci Rep. 2022 Dec 3;12(1):20937. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-24732-2.

NGS-based targeted gene mutational profiles in Korean patients with pancreatic 
cancer.

Jung K(#)(1), Lee S(#)(2)(3), Na HY(#)(2), Kim JW(1), Lee JC(1), Hwang JH(1), 
Kim JW(4), Kim J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seoul National University College of Medicine, 82, Gumi-Ro 173 
Beon-GilGyeonggi-Do, Seongnam-Si, 13620, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology and Translational Medicine, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Precision Medicine Center, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seoul National University College of Medicine, 82, Gumi-Ro 173 
Beon-GilGyeonggi-Do, Seongnam-Si, 13620, Republic of Korea. kimjw05@snu.ac.kr.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seoul National University College of Medicine, 82, Gumi-Ro 173 
Beon-GilGyeonggi-Do, Seongnam-Si, 13620, Republic of Korea. drjaihwan@snu.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

According to molecular profiling studies, a considerable number of patients with 
pancreatic cancer harbor potentially actionable mutations. However, there are 
limited relevant data from the Korean population. We assessed the molecular 
profiles of patients with pancreatic cancer in Korea. This study collected 
molecular profiling data from patients with pancreatic cancer who visited Seoul 
National University Bundang Hospital between March 2018 and August 2020. 
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor specimens were sequenced using a 
targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) platform. Cancer-associated mutations 
were analyzed, and potentially actionable mutations were identified. Potentially 
actionable mutations were classified into "highly actionable" and "modifies 
options" based on the Know Your Tumor registry study. In total, 87 patients with 
NGS tumor panel data were identified. Sixty-one patients (70.1%) had metastatic 
disease at the time of tissue acquisition. Tissues were obtained from the 
primary tumors and metastatic sites in 41 (47.1%) and 46 (52.9%) patients, 
respectively. At least one pathogenic mutation was reported in 86 patients 
(98.9%). The frequencies of four common mutations in our cohort were similar to 
those in The Cancer Genome Atlas data. Potentially actionable mutations were 
identified in 27 patients (31.0%). Of these, mutations categorized as highly 
actionable and modifies options were identified in 12 (13.8%) and 18 patients 
(20.7%), respectively. The most frequent highly actionable mutations were 
located in DNA damage response genes, such as BRCA1, BRCA2, or ATM (n = 6, 
6.9%). Two patients with germline BRCA1 mutations received maintenance 
poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase inhibitor therapy. One patient has 
been receiving maintenance treatment for 18 months while remaining in 
radiologically complete remission. Mutational profiles using targeted NGS in 
Korean patients with pancreatic cancer were similar to those in Western 
patients. The present study supports the clinical potential and possible 
expanded clinical use of genetic profiling.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-24732-2
PMCID: PMC9719465
PMID: 36463295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.