1. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2022 Dec 2;23(1):91. doi: 10.1186/s40360-022-00627-w.

Potential antiviral peptides targeting the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.

Khater I(1), Nassar A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Biophysics Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt.
(2)Biophysics Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt. 
aaya_nassar@cu.edu.eg.
(3)Department of Clinical Research and Leadership, School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, George Washington University, Washington DC, USA. 
aaya_nassar@cu.edu.eg.

BACKGROUND: The coronavirus disease caused by the severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection became an international pandemic 
and created a public health crisis. The binding of the viral Spike glycoprotein 
to the human cell receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) initiates 
viral infection. The development of efficient treatments to combat coronavirus 
disease is considered essential.
METHODS: An in silico approach was employed to design amino acid peptide 
inhibitor against the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the SARS-CoV-2 spike 
protein. The designed inhibitor (SARS-CoV-2 PEP 49) consists of amino acids with 
the α1 helix and the β4 - β5 sheets of ACE2. The PEP-FOLD3 web tool was used to 
create the 3D structures of the peptide amino acids. Analyzing the interaction 
between ACE2 and the RBD of the Spike protein for three protein data bank 
entries (6M0J, 7C8D, and 7A95) indicated that the interacting amino acids were 
contained inside two regions of ACE2: the α1 helical protease domain (PD) and 
the β4 - β5 sheets.
RESULTS: Molecular docking analysis of the designed inhibitor demonstrated that 
SARS-CoV-2 PEP 49 attaches directly to the ACE2 binding site of the Spike 
protein with a binding affinity greater than the ACE2, implying that the 
SARS-CoV-2 PEP 49 model may be useful as a potential RBD binding blocker.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40360-022-00627-w
PMCID: PMC9716172
PMID: 36461109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.