1. Bioact Mater. 2023 May;23:438-470. doi: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.11.014. Epub 
2022 Dec 1.

Nanoformulations targeting immune cells for cancer therapy: mRNA therapeutics.

Yang W(1), Cao J(1), Cheng H(2), Chen L(2), Yu M(2), Chen Y(2), Cui X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University, 1665 Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, PR China.
(2)Materdicine Lab, School of Life Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 
200444, PR China.

The approved worldwide use of two messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines (BNT162b2 and 
mRNA-1273) in late 2020 has proven the remarkable success of mRNA therapeutics 
together with lipid nanoformulation technology in protecting people against 
coronaviruses during COVID-19 pandemic. This unprecedented and exciting dual 
strategy with nanoformulations and mRNA therapeutics in play is believed to be a 
promising paradigm in targeted cancer immunotherapy in future. Recent advances 
in nanoformulation technologies play a prominent role in adapting mRNA platform 
in cancer treatment. In this review, we introduce the biologic principles and 
advancements of mRNA technology, and chemistry fundamentals of intriguing mRNA 
delivery nanoformulations. We discuss the latest promising nano-mRNA 
therapeutics for enhanced cancer immunotherapy by modulation of targeted 
specific subtypes of immune cells, such as dendritic cells (DCs) at peripheral 
lymphoid organs for initiating mRNA cancer vaccine-mediated antigen specific 
immunotherapy, and DCs, natural killer (NK) cells, cytotoxic T cells, or 
multiple immunosuppressive immune cells at tumor microenvironment (TME) for 
reversing immune evasion. We highlight the clinical progress of advanced 
nano-mRNA therapeutics in targeted cancer therapy and provide our perspectives 
on future directions of this transformative integrated technology toward 
clinical implementation.

Â© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.11.014
PMCID: PMC9712057
PMID: 36471724

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.