1. Mater Today Bio. 2022 Nov 25;18:100505. doi: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100505. 
eCollection 2023 Feb.

GTKO rabbit: A novel animal model for preclinical assessment of decellularized 
xenogeneic grafts via in situ implantation.

Mu Y(1)(2), Zhang Y(3), Wei L(1), Chen L(1), Hao F(3), Shao A(1), Qu S(2), Xu 
L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Medical Device Control, National Institutes for Food and Drug 
Control, Beijing, 102629, China.
(2)School of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, 
Chengdu, 610031, China.
(3)Zhejiang Decellmatrix Biotech Co, Ltd, Hangzhou, 310016, China.

Wild type (WT) animals cannot be used to objectively assess the immunogenicity 
of animal tissue-derived biomaterials when used as recipients due to difference 
with human in α-Gal expression. The purpose of this study is to compare the 
differences of immunological responses between the GGTA1 gene-knockout (GTKO) 
rabbits and WT rabbits after implantation with animal tissue-derived 
biomaterials. The porcine-derived decellularized bone matrix (natural bone 
material, NBM) and fresh porcine cancellous bone (PCB) were implanted in GTKO 
rabbits and WT rabbits, respectively, and sham operation was used as control 
(Con). At 2- and 6-week post-implantation, the related immunological items 
including antibody levels, serum-mediated cell lysis, cytokines, lymphocyte 
subtypes, and histopathological changes were assessed. GTKO rabbits exhibited 
more sensitive immune responses than WT rabbits after PCB implantation, resulted 
from a significant increase of antibodies (except total antibodies) and 
cytokines levels, cell lysis ratios, CD4/CD8 proportions, and inflammatory cells 
infiltration. Immunological factors and inflammatory cells infiltrate in GTKO 
rabbits after NBM implantation were significantly lower than those in the PCB 
group. Among the three groups, the NBM group showed the highest contents of new 
bone formation elements. In conclusion, the GTKO rabbit is a more sensitive 
alternative model than WT rabbit for preclinical study of xenografts via in situ 
implantation. Studies on multiple gene-edited animals are also necessary for 
more comprehensively evaluating xenoimmunologen risks of animal tissue-derived 
biomaterials in the future. Additionally, the immunogenicity of NBM was 
remarkably decreased compared to PCB.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100505
PMCID: PMC9719100
PMID: 36471894

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.