1. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2022 Dec 6;22(1):527. doi: 10.1186/s12872-022-02955-5.

Organ damage evaluation in a temperature-controlled circulatory arrest rat 
model.

Xiong Y(1), Zheng Q(1), Wang C(1), Yan W(1), He W(2).

Author information:
(1)Extracorporeal Life Support Center of Cardiovascular Surgery, The Second 
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410011, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
410008, China. xy_heweidoctor@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (DHCA) is commonly used in adult 
aortic surgery and pediatric complex congenital heart disease, and is associated 
with pathophysiological changes and postoperative complications. Here, a 
temperature-controlled circulatory arrest model in rats was established to study 
the suitable temperature of circulatory arrest by investigating the damage to 
body organs under different temperatures.
METHODS: Thirty Sprague‒Dawley rats were randomly divided into 5 equal groups 
for DHCA experiments: I (15-20 °C), II (20-25 °C), III (25-30 °C), IV 
(normothermic cardiopulmonary bypass), and V (sham operation group). Blood gas 
analysis, homodynamic parameters, and intervals of cardiac recovery were 
measured at different time points in all groups. Morphological changes in 
intestinal tissue were observed under light and electron microscopes. Oxidative 
stress was measured by MPO activity, MDA, and SOD content. Tissue damage was 
confirmed by serum detection of ALT, AST, BUN, Cr, and LDH. To examine the 
inflammatory response, cytokines, including IL-1, IL-4, IL-10, IFN-γ, and TNF-α, 
were detected.
RESULTS: The extracorporeal circulation technique caused damage to the body; the 
degree of the damage caused by the circulatory arrest technique may be related 
to circulating temperature, with the least amount of damage occurring at 
20-25 °C compared to 15-20 °C and 25-30 °C. Ischemia and hypoxia can cause 
intestinal tissue damage, which manifests primarily as a loss of the intestinal 
mucosal barrier. Ischemic intestinal damage caused by DHCA was not associated 
with inflammation.
CONCLUSION: The study provides new insights into the pathophysiologic mechanisms 
of DHCA.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12872-022-02955-5
PMCID: PMC9724398
PMID: 36474159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.