1. BMC Plant Biol. 2022 Dec 9;22(1):572. doi: 10.1186/s12870-022-03961-7.

Comprehensive identification and expression analyses of the SnRK gene family in 
Casuarina equisetifolia in response to salt stress.

Ai D(1)(2), Wang Y(1), Wei Y(1), Zhang J(2), Meng J(1), Zhang Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Tropical Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry, 
Guangzhou, 510520, China.
(2)College of Landscape Architecture, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin, 
China.
(3)Research Institute of Tropical Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry, 
Guangzhou, 510520, China. zhangyongritf@caf.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Sucrose nonfermenting-1 (SNF1)-related protein kinases (SnRKs) play 
crucial roles in plant signaling pathways and stress adaptive responses by 
activating protein phosphorylation pathways. However, there have been no 
comprehensive studies of the SnRK gene family in the widely planted 
salt-tolerant tree species Casuarina equisetifolia. Here, we comprehensively 
analyze this gene family in C. equisetifolia using genome-wide identification, 
characterization, and profiling of expression changes in response to salt 
stress.
RESULTS: A total of 26 CeqSnRK genes were identified, which were divided into 
three subfamilies (SnRK1, SnRK2, and SnRK3). The intron-exon structures and 
protein‑motif compositions were similar within each subgroup but differed among 
groups. Ka/Ks ratio analysis indicated that the CeqSnRK family has undergone 
purifying selection, and cis-regulatory element analysis suggested that these 
genes may be involved in plant development and responses to various 
environmental stresses. A heat map was generated using quantitative real‑time 
PCR (RT-qPCR) data from 26 CeqSnRK genes, suggesting that they were expressed in 
different tissues. We also examined the expression of all CeqSnRK genes under 
exposure to different salt concentrations using RT-qPCR, finding that most 
CeqSnRK genes were regulated by different salt treatments. Moreover, 
co-expression network analysis revealed synergistic effects among CeqSnRK genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Several CeqSnRK genes (CeqSnRK3.7, CeqSnRK3.16, CeqSnRK3.17) were 
up-regulated following salt treatment. Among them, CeqSnRK3.16 expression was 
significantly up-regulated under various salt treatments, identifying this as a 
candidate gene salt stress tolerance gene. In addition, CeqSnRK3.16 showed 
significant expression change correlations with multiple genes under salt 
stress, indicating that it might exhibit synergistic effects with other genes in 
response to salt stress. This comprehensive analysis will provide a theoretical 
reference for CeqSnRK gene functional verification and the role of these genes 
in salt tolerance.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-022-03961-7
PMCID: PMC9733041
PMID: 36482301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.