1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Dec 2;23(23):15206. doi: 10.3390/ijms232315206.

Overexpression of a Cinnamyl Alcohol Dehydrogenase-Coding Gene, GsCAD1, from 
Wild Soybean Enhances Resistance to Soybean Mosaic Virus.

Xun H(1)(2), Qian X(2), Wang M(1), Yu J(1), Zhang X(1), Pang J(1), Wang S(1), 
Jiang L(1), Dong Y(2), Liu B(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of MOE, Northeast Normal University, 
Changchun 130024, China.
(2)Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Agricultural Biotechnology, Jilin Academy 
of Agricultural Sciences, Changchun 130033, China.

Soybean mosaic virus (SMV) is the most prevalent soybean viral disease in the 
world. As a critical enzyme in the secondary metabolism of plants, especially in 
lignin synthesis, cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) is widely involved in 
plant growth and development, and in defense against pathogen infestation. Here, 
we performed RNAseq-based transcriptome analyses of a highly SMV-resistant 
accession (BYO-15) of wild soybean (Glycine soja) and a SMV-susceptible soybean 
cultivar (Williams 82), also sequenced together with a resistant plant and a 
susceptible plant of their hybrid descendants at the F3 generation at 7 and 14 
days post-inoculation with SMV. We found that the expression of GsCAD1 (from G. 
soja) was significantly up-regulated in the wild soybean and the resistant F3 
plant, while the GmCAD1 from the cultivated soybean (G. max) did not show a 
significant and persistent induction in the soybean cultivar and the susceptible 
F3 plant, suggesting that GsCAD1 might play an important role in SMV resistance. 
We cloned GsCAD1 and overexpressed it in the SMV-susceptible cultivar Williams 
82, and we found that two independent GsCAD1-overexpression (OE) lines showed 
significantly enhanced SMV resistance compared with the non-transformed 
wild-type (WT) control. Intriguingly, the lignin contents in both OE lines were 
higher than the WT control. Further liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis showed 
that the contents of salicylic acid (SA) were significantly more improved in the 
OE lines than that of the wild-type (WT), coinciding with the up-regulated 
expression of an SA marker gene. Finally, we observed that GsCAD1-overexpression 
affected the accumulation of SMV in leaves. Collectively, our results suggest 
that GsCAD1 enhances resistance to SMV in soybeans, most likely by affecting the 
contents of lignin and SA.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232315206
PMCID: PMC9740156
PMID: 36499529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.