1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Nov 26;23(23):14808. doi: 10.3390/ijms232314808.

The Involvement of Long Non-Coding RNAs in Glutamine-Metabolic Reprogramming and 
Therapeutic Resistance in Cancer.

Roh J(1), Im M(1), Chae Y(1), Kang J(2), Kim W(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Science Education, Korea National University of Education, 
Cheongju-si 28173, Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute of 
Emory, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(3)Department of Biology Education, Korea National University of Education, 
Cheongju-si 28173, Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.

Metabolic alterations that support the supply of biosynthetic molecules 
necessary for rapid and sustained proliferation are characteristic of cancer. 
Some cancer cells rely on glutamine to maintain their energy requirements for 
growth. Glutamine is an important metabolite in cells because it not only links 
to the tricarboxylic acid cycle by producing Î±-ketoglutarate by glutaminase and 
glutamate dehydrogenase but also supplies other non-essential amino acids, fatty 
acids, and components of nucleotide synthesis. Altered glutamine metabolism is 
associated with cancer cell survival, proliferation, metastasis, and aggression. 
Furthermore, altered glutamine metabolism is known to be involved in therapeutic 
resistance. In recent studies, lncRNAs were shown to act on amino acid 
transporters and glutamine-metabolic enzymes, resulting in the regulation of 
glutamine metabolism. The lncRNAs involved in the expression of the transporters 
include the abhydrolase domain containing 11 antisense RNA 1, LINC00857, 
plasmacytoma variant translocation 1, Myc-induced long non-coding RNA, and opa 
interacting protein 5 antisense RNA 1, all of which play oncogenic roles. When 
it comes to the regulation of glutamine-metabolic enzymes, several lncRNAs, 
including nuclear paraspeckle assembly transcript 1, XLOC_006390, urothelial 
cancer associated 1, and thymopoietin antisense RNA 1, show oncogenic 
activities, and others such as antisense lncRNA of glutaminase, lincRNA-p21, and 
ataxin 8 opposite strand serve as tumor suppressors. In addition, 
glutamine-dependent cancer cells with lncRNA dysregulation promote cell 
survival, proliferation, and metastasis by increasing chemo- and 
radio-resistance. Therefore, understanding the roles of lncRNAs in glutamine 
metabolism will be helpful for the establishment of therapeutic strategies for 
glutamine-dependent cancer patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232314808
PMCID: PMC9738059
PMID: 36499136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.