1. J Clin Med. 2022 Dec 2;11(23):7176. doi: 10.3390/jcm11237176.

Lung Cancer Clinical Trials with a Seamless Phase II/III Design: Systematic 
Review.

Palermos D(1), Sergentanis TN(1)(2), Gavriatopoulou M(1), Malandrakis P(1), 
Psaltopoulou T(1), Terpos E(1), Ntanasis-Stathopoulos I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Therapeutics, School of Medicine, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11528 Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Public Health Policy, School of Public Health, University of 
West Attica, 11521 Athens, Greece.

Current lung cancer clinical research focuses on biomarkers and personalized 
treatment strategies. Adaptive clinical trial designs have gained significant 
ground due to their increased flexibility, compared to the conventional model of 
drug development from phase I to phase IV trials. One such adaptive approach is 
the seamless phase II/III design, which has been used to reduce the total sample 
size and drug development time. In this context, an algorithmic systematic 
search was conducted in MEDLINE (PUBMED), SCOPUS, EMBASE and Cochrane Central 
Register of Controlled Trials until 31 June 2022 in order to identify lung 
cancer trials of systematic treatments that have employed the seamless phase 
II/III methodology and to describe their characteristics. The search strategy 
yielded a total of 1420 records that were screened through their title and 
abstract; 28 eligible trials were included in the systematic review. Based on 
the study endpoints, the most common subtype included phase II/III trials with 
inefficacy/futility analyses (61%; 17/28), followed by dose escalation phase 
II/III trials (18%; 5/28), one multi-arm multi stage trial and 5 trials with 
other design (18%). Most eligible trials were open-label (71%; 20/27), included 
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (82%; 23/28), evaluated targeted 
therapies and/or immunotherapies (82%; 23/28) and recruited patients with 
advanced disease (89.3%; 25/28). In conclusion, the seamless phase II/III design 
is a feasible and suitable approach in lung cancer research, with distinct 
design subcategories according to study endpoints.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11237176
PMCID: PMC9739886
PMID: 36498749

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.