1. J Clin Med. 2022 Nov 28;11(23):7021. doi: 10.3390/jcm11237021.

The Effect of Bariatric Surgery on Circulating Levels of Monocyte 
Chemoattractant Protein-1: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Jamialahmadi T(1)(2), Abbasifard M(3)(4), Reiner Å½(5), Kesharwani P(6)(7), 
Sahebkar A(1)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Applied Biomedical Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Surgical Oncology Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Immunology of Infectious Diseases Research Center, Research Institute of 
Basic Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, 
Iran.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Ali-Ibn Abi-Talib Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Center Zagreb, 10000 
Zagreb, Croatia.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, 
Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi 110062, India.
(7)Center for Transdisciplinary Research, Department of Pharmacology, Saveetha 
Dental College, Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Science, Chennai 
602105, India.
(8)Biotechnology Research Center, Pharmaceutical Technology Institute, Mashhad 
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(9)Department of Biotechnology, School of Pharmacy, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

Background: MCP-1 (monocyte chemoattractant protein) plays an important role in 
early phases of atherogenesis as well as in plaque destabilization, which causes 
cardiovascular events to play an important role in low-grade inflammation. 
Obesity, particularly extreme obesity, is a pivotal risk factor for 
atherosclerosis and many other diseases. In the early stages, bariatric surgery 
might stop or slow atherogenesis by suppressing inflammation, but also in later 
stages, preventing plaque destabilization. The aim of this meta-analysis was to 
provide an answer as to whether bariatric surgery has a significant effect on 
circulating MCP-1 level or not. Methods: A systematic literature search in 
PubMed, Scopus, Embase, and Web of Science was performed from inception to 1 
January 2022. Meta-analysis was performed using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis 
(CMA) V2 software. In order to heterogeneity compensation of studies in terms of 
study design and treatment duration, the characteristics of the studied 
populations random-effects model and the generic inverse variance weighting 
method were used. To investigate the relationship with the estimated effect 
size, a random-effect meta-regression model was used. To assess the exitance of 
publication bias in the meta-analysis, the funnel plot, Begg's rank correlation, 
and Egger's weighted regression tests were used. Results: Meta-analysis of 25 
studies with 927 subjects included demonstrated a significant decrease of MCP-1 
concentration after bariatric surgery. The data of meta-regression did not 
indicate any association between the alterations in body mass index (BMI) and 
absolute difference in MCP-1 levels, but a linear relationship between the 
changes in MCP-1 and length of follow-up was proven. Conclusions: Bariatric 
surgery significantly decreases MCP-1 concentration, but there was no 
association between the changes in BMI and absolute difference in MCP-1 levels 
before and after the surgery.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11237021
PMCID: PMC9738353
PMID: 36498595

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.