1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Dec 2;23(23):15192. doi: 10.3390/ijms232315192.

Anti-Thymocyte Globulin (ATG)-Free Nonmyeloablative Haploidentical PBSCT Plus 
Post-Transplantation Cyclophosphamide Is a Safe and Efficient Treatment Approach 
for Pediatric Acquired Aplastic Anemia.

Chen RL(1), Ip PP(2), Shaw JJ(3), Wang YH(4), Fan LH(5), Shen YL(2), Joseph 
NA(2), Chen TE(2), Chen LY(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Koo Foundation Sun Yat-sen 
Cancer Center, Taipei 11259, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115024, Taiwan.
(3)School of Law, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu City 30093, 
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Tamkang University, Tamsui, New Taipei City 251301, 
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Koo Foundation Sun Yat-sen Cancer Center, Taipei 
11259, Taiwan.

Most cases of acquired aplastic anemia (AA) arise from autoimmune destruction of 
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA)-haploidentical nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT) plus post-transplantation cyclophosphamide (PTCy) is increasingly applied 
to salvage AA using bone marrow as graft and anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) in 
conditioning. Herein, we characterize a cohort of twelve AA patients clinically 
and molecularly, six who possessed other immunological disorders (including two 
also carrying germline SAMD9L mutations). Each patient with SAMD9L mutation also 
carried an AA-related rare BCORL1 variant or CTLA4 p.T17A GG genotype, 
respectively, and both presented short telomere lengths. Six of the ten patients 
analyzed harbored AA-risky HLA polymorphisms. All patients recovered upon 
non-HSCT (n = 4) or HSCT (n = 8) treatments. Six of the eight HSCT-treated 
patients were subjected to a modified PTCy-based regimen involving freshly 
prepared peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) as graft and exclusion of ATG. All 
patients were engrafted between post-transplantation days +13 and +18 and 
quickly reverted to normal life, displaying a sustained complete hematologic 
response and an absence of graft-versus-host disease. These outcomes indicate 
most AA cases, including of the SAMD9L-inherited subtype, are immune-mediated 
and the modified PTCy-based regimen we present is efficient and safe for 
salvage.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232315192
PMCID: PMC9739033
PMID: 36499545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.