1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Dec 6;23(23):15443. doi: 10.3390/ijms232315443.

Distinct Changes in Calpain and Calpastatin during PNS Myelination and 
Demyelination in Rodent Models.

Miller JA(1), Drouet DE(1), Yermakov LM(1), Elbasiouny MS(1), Bensabeur FZ(1), 
Bottomley M(2), Susuki K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Cell Biology, and Physiology, Boonshoft School of 
Medicine, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 
45435, USA.

Myelin forming around axons provides electrical insulation and ensures rapid and 
efficient transmission of electrical impulses. Disruptions to myelinated nerves 
often result in nerve conduction failure along with neurological symptoms and 
long-term disability. In the central nervous system, calpains, a family of 
calcium dependent cysteine proteases, have been shown to have a role in 
developmental myelination and in demyelinating diseases. The roles of calpains 
in myelination and demyelination in the peripheral nervous system remain 
unclear. Here, we show a transient increase of activated CAPN1, a major calpain 
isoform, in postnatal rat sciatic nerves when myelin is actively formed. 
Expression of the endogenous calpain inhibitor, calpastatin, showed a steady 
decrease throughout the period of peripheral nerve development. In the sciatic 
nerves of Trembler-J mice characterized by dysmyelination, expression levels of 
CAPN1 and calpastatin and calpain activity were significantly increased. In 
lysolecithin-induced acute demyelination in adult rat sciatic nerves, we show an 
increase of CAPN1 and decrease of calpastatin expression. These changes in the 
calpain-calpastatin system are distinct from those during central nervous system 
development or in acute axonal degeneration in peripheral nerves. Our results 
suggest that the calpain-calpastatin system has putative roles in myelination 
and demyelinating diseases of peripheral nerves.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232315443
PMCID: PMC9737575
PMID: 36499770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.