1. J Clin Med. 2022 Nov 26;11(23):6996. doi: 10.3390/jcm11236996.

Destroying the Shield of Cancer Stem Cells: Natural Compounds as Promising 
Players in Cancer Therapy.

Lo Iacono M(1), Gaggianesi M(2), Bianca P(1), Brancato OR(2), Muratore G(1), 
Modica C(2), Roozafzay N(1), Shams K(1), Colarossi L(3), Colarossi C(3), Memeo 
L(3), Turdo A(1), Veschi V(2), Di Franco S(2), Todaro M(1), Stassi G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Promotion Sciences, Internal Medicine and Medical 
Specialties (PROMISE), University of Palermo, 90127 Palermo, Italy.
(2)Department of Surgical, Oncological and Stomatological Sciences (DICHIRONS), 
University of Palermo, 90127 Palermo, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Oncology, Mediterranean Institute of Oncology, 
Viagrande, 95029 Catania, Italy.

In a scenario where eco-sustainability and a reduction in chemotherapeutic drug 
waste are certainly a prerogative to safeguard the biosphere, the use of natural 
products (NPs) represents an alternative therapeutic approach to counteract 
cancer diseases. The presence of a heterogeneous cancer stem cell (CSC) 
population within a tumor bulk is related to disease recurrence and therapy 
resistance. For this reason, CSC targeting presents a promising strategy for 
hampering cancer recurrence. Increasing evidence shows that NPs can inhibit 
crucial signaling pathways involved in the maintenance of CSC stemness and 
sensitize CSCs to standard chemotherapeutic treatments. Moreover, their limited 
toxicity and low costs for large-scale production could accelerate the use of 
NPs in clinical settings. In this review, we will summarize the most relevant 
studies regarding the effects of NPs derived from major natural sources, e.g., 
food, botanical, and marine species, on CSCs, elucidating their use in 
pre-clinical and clinical studies.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11236996
PMCID: PMC9737492
PMID: 36498571

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.