1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Nov 29;23(23):14966. doi: 10.3390/ijms232314966.

Impact of Four Ovine TMEM154 Haplotypes on Ewes during Multiyear Lentivirus 
Exposure.

Freking BA(1), Murphy TW(1), Chitko-McKown CG(1), Workman AM(1), Heaton MP(1).

Author information:
(1)USDA, ARS, Roman L. Hruska U.S. Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, NE 
68933, USA.

Polypeptide variation encoded by the ovine transmembrane protein 154 gene 
(TMEM154) is associated with susceptibility to ovine lentivirus, the causative 
agent of Ovine Progressive Pneumonia (OPP) and Visna/Maedi. Our aim was to 
compare the four most prevalent TMEM154 haplotypes on the incidence of infection 
and ewe productivity during natural multiyear virus exposure. Prospective cohort 
studies were designed to test gene action and estimate effects of TMEM154 
haplotypes encoding distinctive variant residues: K35 (“1”), I70 (“2”), 
ancestral (“3”), and A4del/M44 (“4”). Exposure consisted of co-mingling infected 
ewes at a rate greater than 30% with serological status evaluated every four 
months. For ewes with one or two copies of the highly susceptible haplotypes “2” 
and ”3”, the infection prevalence steadily increased to nearly 100% at 55 
months. Haplotypes “2” and “3” were equally susceptible and dominant to 
haplotype “1”. A difference was not detected (p < 0.53) in the magnitude of 
effect with haplotype combinations of “1” and ”4”. The ewe infection prevalence 
with “1,1”; “1,4”; and “4,4” was 10% to 40% at 55 months. The latter suggested 
that two copies of the K35 amino acid substitution (“1”) were as effective as a 
homozygous TMEM154 “knockout” with the frame-shift deletion mutation (“4”) in 
reducing infection susceptibility. When considering ewe reproductive 
performance, a difference was not detected when comparing haplotypes “2”, and 
“3” to each other, or “1” and “4” to each other. Our study indicated that ewes 
with two copies of the severely truncated versions of TMEM154 (“4,4”) had normal 
lamb productivity. Without complete understanding of the natural function of 
TMEM154 our recommendations to producers interested in using TMEM154 selection 
to reduce their flock’s genetic predisposition to OPP are encouraged to increase 
the frequency of TMEM154 haplotype K35 (“1”) since it encodes a full-length 
protein with minimal difference to the ancestral polypeptide.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232314966
PMCID: PMC9741230
PMID: 36499292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.