1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jan 11;51(1):84-98. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1155.

Unscheduled epigenetic modifications cause genome instability and sterility 
through aberrant R-loops following starvation.

Sun B(1), Sherrin M(1), Roy R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1B1, Canada.

During starvation, organisms modify both gene expression and metabolism to 
adjust to the energy stress. We previously reported that Caenorhabditis elegans 
lacing AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) exhibit transgenerational 
reproductive defects associated with abnormally elevated trimethylated histone 
H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4me3) levels in the germ line following recovery from acute 
starvation. Here, we show that these H3K4me3 marks are significantly increased 
at promoters, driving aberrant transcription elongation resulting in the 
accumulation of R-loops in starved AMPK mutants. DNA-RNA immunoprecipitation 
followed by high-throughput sequencing (DRIP-seq) analysis demonstrated that a 
significant proportion of the genome was affected by R-loop formation. This was 
most pronounced in the promoter-transcription start site regions of genes, in 
which the chromatin was modified by H3K4me3. Like H3K4me3, the R-loops were also 
found to be heritable, likely contributing to the transgenerational reproductive 
defects typical of these mutants following starvation. Strikingly, AMPK mutant 
germ lines show considerably more RAD-51 (the RecA recombinase) foci at sites of 
R-loop formation, potentially sequestering them from their roles at meiotic 
breaks or at sites of induced DNA damage. Our study reveals a previously 
unforeseen role of AMPK in maintaining genome stability following starvation. 
The downstream effects of R-loops on DNA damage sensitivity and germline stem 
cell integrity may account for inappropriate epigenetic modification that occurs 
in numerous human disorders, including various cancers.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac1155
PMCID: PMC9841415
PMID: 36504323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]