1. Clin Rheumatol. 2023 Feb;42(2):597-606. doi: 10.1007/s10067-022-06465-9. Epub 
2022 Dec 11.

Heme oxygenase-1 deficiency as an extremely rare cause of AA-type renal 
amyloidosis: Expanding the clinical features and review of the literature.

Dirim AB(1), Kalayci T(2), Safak S(3), Garayeva N(3), Gultekin B(3), Hurdogan 
O(4), Solakoglu S(5), Yazici H(3), Cefle K(2), Ozturk S(2), Yildiz A(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul Faculty of 
Medicine, Istanbul University, Capa, Fatih, 34093, Istanbul, Turkey. 
ahmetburakdirim@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul 
Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul Faculty of 
Medicine, Istanbul University, Capa, Fatih, 34093, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pathology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Histology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX-1) is an enzyme that regulates heme degradation. 
Antiinflammatory, antioxidant, and cytoprotective effects of HMOX-1 were also 
described. It is encoded by the HMOX1 gene, and biallelic mutations cause HMOX-1 
deficiency, which is a rare chronic multisystemic inflammatory disorder. This 
inflammatory status could lead to the development of secondary AA-type 
amyloidosis theoretically. Here, we report a 30-year-old male with AA-type renal 
amyloidosis due to a chronic inflammatory condition of unknown origin. Paternal 
consanguinity and dysmorphic features raised suspicion of a rare genetic 
disorder. Clinical exome sequencing (CES) confirmed the HMOX-1 deficiency 
diagnosis related to homozygous missense G139V mutation. To the best of our 
knowledge, our patient is the eleventh HMOX-1 deficiency case in the literature. 
Also, HMOX-1 deficiency-related systemic AA-type amyloidosis has not been 
reported before.

Â© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International League of 
Associations for Rheumatology (ILAR).

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-022-06465-9
PMID: 36502441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]