1. Plants (Basel). 2022 Dec 5;11(23):3390. doi: 10.3390/plants11233390.

Study on Flavonoids and Bioactivity Features of Pericarp of Citrus reticulata 
"Chachi" at Different Harvest Periods.

Liang S(1)(2), Zhang J(1), Liu Y(1), Wen Z(1), Liu X(1), Dang F(1), Xie T(1), 
Wang J(1), Wang Z(1), Wu H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Technology Research Center for Traditional Chinese Veterinary 
Medicine and Natural Medicine, College of Life Science, South China Agricultural 
University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
(2)Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou 510642, China.

Dry mature pericarp of Citrus reticulata "Chachi" (PCR), Pericarpium Citri 
Reticulatae Chachiensis, is a traditional Chinese medicine that displays 
characteristics of different usage at different harvest times in clinical use. 
The corresponding changes in the bioactive components in PCR from different 
harvest times remain unclear. Therefore, in this study, broadly targeted 
metabolomics technology was used to compare the differences in bioactive 
components among pericarps of PCR, which are the raw material of PCR at 
different growth stages. In the results, 210 kinds of flavonoid metabolites were 
detected. The content of hesperidin in red PCR harvested in December was higher 
than that in Citri Reticulatae Pericarpium Viride (CRPV) and reddish PCR 
harvested from July to November. Furthermore, the content of nobiletin, 
tangeretin, and 3,3',4',5,6,7,8-heptamethoxyflavone in CRPV from July to 
September was higher than that in the PCR harvested at other times. In addition, 
the result of cluster analysis and PCA showed that CRPV harvested from July to 
September had an obvious grouping pattern with the reddish PCR and the red PCR 
harvested from October to December. Differential metabolites in six comparison 
groups (A1 vs. A6, A1 vs. A2, A2 vs. A3, A3 vs. A4, A4 vs. A5, A5 vs. A6) were 
67, 48, 14, 51, 42, and 40, respectively. The common differential metabolite of 
four comparison groups was 3',4',7-trihydroxyflavone (A1 vs. A2, A2 vs. A3, A3 
vs. A4, A4 vs. A5). All the flavonoid differential metabolites screened were 
enriched in 16 metabolic pathways. Moreover, the results of the evaluation of 
the total antioxidant capacity indicated that CRPV in August was a suitable raw 
material for the production of antioxidants. Through molecular docking, the 
content of potential anti-SARS-CoV-2 components in the PCR in October was higher 
than that in the PCR in other periods. These results further proved that PCR at 
different harvest times was endowed with different efficacy and usage due to the 
difference in the accumulation of bioactive components.

DOI: 10.3390/plants11233390
PMCID: PMC9737822
PMID: 36501428

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.