1. Blood Adv. 2023 May 23;7(10):2271-2282. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2021006876.

Missense VKOR mutants exhibit severe warfarin resistance but lack VKCFD via 
shifting to an aberrantly reduced state.

Li S(1), Sun J(2), Liu S(1), Zhou F(1), Gross ML(2), Li W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO.

Missense vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR) mutations in patients cause 
resistance to warfarin treatment but not abnormal bleeding due to defective VKOR 
activity. The underlying mechanism of these phenotypes remains unknown. Here we 
show that the redox state of these mutants is essential to their activity and 
warfarin resistance. Using a mass spectrometry-based footprinting method, we 
found that severe warfarin-resistant mutations change the VKOR active site to an 
aberrantly reduced state in cells. Molecular dynamics simulation based on our 
recent crystal structures of VKOR reveals that these mutations induce an 
artificial opening of the protein conformation that increases access of small 
molecules, enabling them to reduce the active site and generating constitutive 
activity uninhibited by warfarin. Increased activity also compensates for the 
weakened substrate binding caused by these mutations, thereby maintaining normal 
VKOR function. The uninhibited nature of severe resistance mutations suggests 
that patients showing signs of such mutations should be treated by alternative 
anticoagulation strategies.

Â© 2023 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2021006876
PMCID: PMC10225482
PMID: 36508285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.