1. Nutrients. 2022 Nov 24;14(23):5003. doi: 10.3390/nu14235003.

The Role of Ketogenic Diet in the Treatment of Neurological Diseases.

Dy≈Ñka D(1), Kowalcze K(1), Paziewska A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, Siedlce 
University of Natural Sciences and Humanities, 08-110 Siedlce, Poland.
(2)Department of Neuroendocrinology, Centre of Postgraduate Medical Education, 
01-813 Warsaw, Poland.

Over a hundred years of study on the favourable effect of ketogenic diets in the 
treatment of epilepsy have contributed to a long-lasting discussion on its 
potential influence on other neurological diseases. A significant increase in 
the number of scientific studies in that field has been currently observed. The 
aim of this paper is a widespread, thorough analysis of the available scientific 
evidence in respect of the role of the ketogenic diet in the therapy of 
neurological diseases such as: epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's 
disease (PD), multiple sclerosis (MS) and migraine. A wide range of the 
mechanisms of action of the ketogenic diet has been demonstrated in neurological 
diseases, including, among other effects, its influence on the reduction in 
inflammatory conditions and the amount of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the 
restoration of the myelin sheath of the neurons, the formation and regeneration 
of mitochondria, neuronal metabolism, the provision of an alternative source of 
energy for neurons (ketone bodies), the reduction in glucose and insulin 
concentrations, the reduction in amyloid plaques, the induction of autophagy, 
the alleviation of microglia activation, the reduction in excessive neuronal 
activation, the modulation of intestinal microbiota, the expression of genes, 
dopamine production and the increase in glutamine conversion into GABA. The 
studies discussed (including randomised controlled studies), conducted in 
neurological patients, have stressed the effectiveness of the ketogenic diet in 
the treatment of epilepsy and have demonstrated its promising therapeutic 
potential in Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), multiple 
sclerosis (MS) and migraine. A frequent advantage of the diet was demonstrated 
over non-ketogenic diets (in the control groups) in the therapy of neurological 
diseases, with simultaneous safety and feasibility when conducting the 
nutritional model.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14235003
PMCID: PMC9739023
PMID: 36501033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.