1. Chem Sci. 2022 Nov 11;13(45):13600-13610. doi: 10.1039/d2sc05023d. eCollection
 2022 Nov 23.

Near-infrared electroluminescence beyond 940 nm in Pt(N^C^N)X complexes: 
influencing aggregation with the ancillary ligand X.

Salthouse RJ(1), Pander P(2)(3), Yufit DS(1), Dias FB(3), Williams JAG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Durham University South Road Durham DH1 3LE UK 
j.a.g.williams@durham.ac.uk.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry, Silesian University of Technology M. Strzody 9 Gliwice 
44-100 Poland piotr.pander@polsl.pl.
(3)Department of Physics, Durham University South Road Durham DH1 3LE UK 
f.m.b.dias@durham.ac.uk.

We present a study of aggregate excited states formed by complexes of the type 
Pt(N^C^N)X, where N^C^N represents a tridentate cyclometallating ligand, and X = 
SCN or I. These materials display near-infrared (NIR) photoluminescence in film 
and electroluminescence in NIR OLEDs with λ max EL = 720-944 nm. We demonstrate 
that the use of X = SCN or I modulates aggregate formation compared to the 
parent complexes where X = Cl. While the identity of the monodentate ligand 
affects the energy of Pt-Pt excimers in solution in only a subtle way, it 
strongly influences aggregation in film. Detailed calculations on aggregates of 
different sizes support the experimental conclusions from steady-state and 
time-resolved luminescence studies at variable temperatures. The use of X = I 
appears to limit aggregation to the formation of dimers, while X = SCN promotes 
the formation of larger aggregates, such as tetramers and pentamers, leading in 
turn to NIR photo- and electroluminescence > 850 nm. A possible explanation for 
the contrasting influence of the monodentate ligands is the lesser steric 
hindrance associated with the SCN group compared to the bulkier I ligand. By 
exploiting the propensity of the SCN complexes to form extended aggregates, we 
have prepared an NIR-emitting OLED that shows very long wavelength 
electroluminescence, with λ max EL = 944 nm and a maximum EQE = 0.3 ± 0.1%. Such 
data appear to be unprecedented for a device relying on a Pt(ii) complex 
aggregate as the emitter.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d2sc05023d
PMCID: PMC9682897
PMID: 36507161

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts to declare.