1. Cell Biol Int. 2023 Apr;47(4):731-741. doi: 10.1002/cbin.11977. Epub 2022 Dec 
13.

Study of frequency and inheritance model of ACE1 I/D and ACE2 rs2285666 
polymorphisms in COVID-19 patients with varying severity of lung involvement and 
its effect on serum cytokines levels.

Beyranvand S(1), Davoodian P(2), Alizade H(2), Gouklani H(2), Nejatizadeh A(3), 
Eftekhar E(4), Nikpoor AR(3).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences, Bandar 
Abbas, Iran.
(2)Infectious and Tropical Diseases Research Center, Hormozgan Health Institute, 
Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences, Bandar Abbas, Iran.
(3)Molecular Medicine Research Center, Hormozgan Health Institute, Hormozgan 
University of Medical Sciences, Bandar Abbas, Iran.
(4)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Hormozgan University of Medical 
Sciences, Bandar Abbas, Iran.

The angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) has been shown to play a role as a 
receptor for the COVID-19 virus. This virus usually gets into cells and infects 
them by attaching to their glycoprotein receptors, which are found on the ACE2 
receptor. The aim of this study was to evaluate the frequency and inheritance of 
ACE1 I/D and ACE2 rs2285666 polymorphisms in COVID-19 patients with varying 
severity of lung involvement and its effect on serum cytokines levels of 
interleukin (IL)-1 and IL-6 and laboratory parameters. One hundred 
eighty-five COVID-19 patients were grouped according to the severity of lung 
involvement. (I/D) polymorphism of the ACE1 gene and rs2285666 polymorphism of 
the ACE2 gene were determined by single specific primer-polymerase chain 
reaction and restriction fragment length reaction-polymerase chain 
reaction methods, respectively. Serum levels of IL-1 and IL-6 were also measured 
by the enzyme linked immunosorbent assay technique. No statistically significant 
association of ACE2 rs2285666 polymorphism genotypes and ACE1 I/D with the 
severity of lung involvement was noted. However, there was a statistically 
significant association between I/D ACE1 polymorphism genotypes and IL-6, white 
blood cells (WBC), and neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) levels. Also, there 
was no statistically significant association between rs2285666 polymorphism 
genotypes and patients' blood oxygen saturation level, IL-6, IL-1β, lactate 
dehydrogenase activity, WBC count, and NLR. In patients with COVID-19, the 
rs2285666 polymorphism of the ACE2 gene and the I/D polymorphism of the ACE1 
gene were not significantly associated with the severity of COVID-19 disease and 
serum IL-6 and IL-1 cytokine levels.

© 2022 International Federation for Cell Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/cbin.11977
PMCID: PMC9877702
PMID: 36511187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]