1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2022 Dec 14;18(12):e1010346. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010346. eCollection 2022 Dec.

Dissecting peripheral protein-membrane interfaces.

Tubiana T(1)(2), Sillitoe I(3), Orengo C(3), Reuter N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Computational Biology Unit, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.

Peripheral membrane proteins (PMPs) include a wide variety of proteins that have 
in common to bind transiently to the chemically complex interfacial region of 
membranes through their interfacial binding site (IBS). In contrast to 
protein-protein or protein-DNA/RNA interfaces, peripheral protein-membrane 
interfaces are poorly characterized. We collected a dataset of PMP domains 
representative of the variety of PMP functions: membrane-targeting domains 
(Annexin, C1, C2, discoidin C2, PH, PX), enzymes (PLA, PLC/D) and lipid-transfer 
proteins (START). The dataset contains 1328 experimental structures and 1194 
AphaFold models. We mapped the amino acid composition and structural patterns of 
the IBS of each protein in this dataset, and evaluated which were more likely to 
be found at the IBS compared to the rest of the domains' accessible surface. In 
agreement with earlier work we find that about two thirds of the PMPs in the 
dataset have protruding hydrophobes (Leu, Ile, Phe, Tyr, Trp and Met) at their 
IBS. The three aromatic amino acids Trp, Tyr and Phe are a hallmark of PMPs IBS 
regardless of whether they protrude on loops or not. This is also the case for 
lysines but not arginines suggesting that, unlike for Arg-rich membrane-active 
peptides, the less membrane-disruptive lysine is preferred in PMPs. Another 
striking observation was the over-representation of glycines at the IBS of PMPs 
compared to the rest of their surface, possibly procuring IBS loops a 
much-needed flexibility to insert in-between membrane lipids. The analysis of 
the 9 superfamilies revealed amino acid distribution patterns in agreement with 
their known functions and membrane-binding mechanisms. Besides revealing novel 
amino acids patterns at protein-membrane interfaces, our work contributes a new 
PMP dataset and an analysis pipeline that can be further built upon for future 
studies of PMPs properties, or for developing PMPs prediction tools using for 
example, machine learning approaches.

Copyright: Â© 2022 Tubiana et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010346
PMCID: PMC9797079
PMID: 36516231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.