1. STAR Protoc. 2023 Mar 17;4(1):101931. doi: 10.1016/j.xpro.2022.101931. Epub
2022  Dec 12.

Protocol for host volatile collection and mosquito behavior assays.

Zhang H(1), Zhu Y(2), Yu X(2), Cheng G(3).

Author information:
(1)Tsinghua University-Peking University Joint Center for Life Sciences, School 
of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China; Institute of Infectious 
Diseases, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518000, China. Electronic 
address: zhanghong19900301@126.com.
(2)Tsinghua University-Peking University Joint Center for Life Sciences, School 
of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China; Institute of Infectious 
Diseases, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518000, China.
(3)Tsinghua University-Peking University Joint Center for Life Sciences, School 
of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China; Institute of Infectious 
Diseases, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518000, China. Electronic 
address: gongcheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

The volatile collection step is important for insect behavior assays and 
in-depth component analysis. Here, we describe how to collect volatiles from 
animals, humans, and skin microbiota. Furthermore, we detail steps to improve 
behavioral devices adapted to the different collection techniques. This protocol 
provides a high-throughput and widely applicable approach to study the 
attracting or repelling effect of volatiles on mosquitoes. The volatile 
collection step is easily adaptable and time efficient. For complete details on 
the use and execution of this protocol, please refer to Zhang et al.1.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xpro.2022.101931
PMCID: PMC9762185
PMID: 36512448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.