1. Sci Rep. 2022 Dec 14;12(1):21584. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-26040-1.

Skeletal muscle transcriptome is affected by age in severely burned mice.

Song J(1), Widen SG(2), Wolf SE(1), El Ayadi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Medical Branch, 301 University 
Blvd., Galveston, TX, 77555-0644, USA. jusong@utmb.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.

Severe burn results in muscle wasting affecting quality of life in both children 
and adults. Biologic metabolic profiles are noticeably distinctive in childhood. 
We posit that muscle gene expression profiles are differentially regulated in 
response to severe burns in young animals. Twelve C57BL6 male mice, including 
young (5 weeks-old) and adults (11 weeks-old), received either scald burn, or 
sham procedure. Mouse muscle tissue was harvested 24 h later for Next Generation 
Sequence analysis. Our results showed 662 downregulated and 450 upregulated 
genes in gastrocnemius of young mice compared to adults without injury. After 
injury, we found 74/75 downregulated genes and 107/128 upregulated genes in both 
burned groups compared to respective uninjured age groups. VEGFA-VEGFR2, focal 
adhesion, and nuclear receptor meta-pathways were the top 3 gene pathways 
undergoing a differential change in response to age. Of note, the proteasome 
degradation pathway showed the most similar changes in both adult and young 
burned animals. This study demonstrates the characteristic profile of gene 
expression in skeletal muscle in young and adult burned mice. Prominent age 
effects were revealed in transcriptional levels with increased alterations of 
genes, miRNAs, pathways, and interactions.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-26040-1
PMCID: PMC9748408
PMID: 36517580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.