1. Clin Case Rep. 2022 Dec 8;10(12):e6689. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.6689. eCollection
2022  Dec.

CASQ1-related myopathy: The first report from China and the literature review.

Zhang KY(1), Zhang GJ(2), Duan HQ(1), Li QX(1), Huang K(1), Xu LQ(1), Yang H(1), 
Luo YB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital Central South University Changsha 
China.
(2)Department of Dermatology Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University 
Zunyi China.

Calsequestrin 1 (CASQ1) is the most crucial Ca2+ binding protein localized in 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) of skeletal muscle. With high capacity and low 
affinity for Ca2+, CASQ1 plays a significant role in maintaining a large amount 
of Ca2+ necessary for muscle contraction. However, only five mutations in CASQ1 
have been identified to date. Here, we report a 42-year-old Chinese female 
patient who presented with a 12 years history of slowly progressive upper limb 
weakness, predominantly affecting distal muscles, which was uncommon comparing 
to other CASQ1-related patients. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis 
revealed a novel heterozygous mutation (c.766G > A, p.Val256Met) in CASQ1. 
Functional studies confirmed the likely pathogenicity of this variant. Muscle 
histopathology revealed rare optically empty vacuoles in myofibers and atypical 
eosinophilic granules in the cytoplasm, which has not been observed before. We 
also performed a literature review on all the pathogenic mutations in CASQ1 and 
summarized their genetic and clinical characteristics. This is the first report 
on CASQ1-related myopathy from China, further expanding the mutation spectrum of 
CASQ1 gene and provides new insights into the function of CASQ1.

© 2022 The Authors. Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.6689
PMCID: PMC9731158
PMID: 36514469

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.