1. Protein Sci. 2023 Jan;32(1):e4542. doi: 10.1002/pro.4542.

The MECP2-TRD domain interacts with the DNMT3A-ADD domain at the H3-tail binding 
site.

Kunert S(1), Linhard V(2), Weirich S(1), Choudalakis M(1), Osswald F(1), Krämer 
L(1), Köhler AR(1), Bröhm A(1), Wollenhaupt J(3), Schwalbe H(2), Jeltsch A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry, University of 
Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)Center for Biomolecular Magnetic Resonance (BMRZ), Institute for Organic 
Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Macromolecular Crystallography Group, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.

The DNMT3A DNA methyltransferase and MECP2 methylation reader are highly 
expressed in neurons. Both proteins interact via their DNMT3A-ADD and MECP2-TRD 
domains, and the MECP2 interaction regulates the activity and subnuclear 
localization of DNMT3A. Here, we mapped the interface of both domains using 
peptide SPOT array binding, protein pull-down, equilibrium peptide binding 
assays, and structural analyses. The region D529-D531 on the surface of the ADD 
domain was identified as interaction point with the TRD domain. This includes 
important residues of the histone H3 N-terminal tail binding site to the ADD 
domain, explaining why TRD and H3 binding to the ADD domain is competitive. On 
the TRD domain, residues 214-228 containing K219 and K223 were found to be 
essential for the ADD interaction. This part represents a folded patch within 
the otherwise largely disordered TRD domain. A crystal structure analysis of ADD 
revealed that the identified H3/TDR lysine binding pocket is occupied by an 
arginine residue from a crystallographic neighbor in the ADD apoprotein 
structure. Finally, we show that mutations in the interface of ADD and TRD 
domains disrupt the cellular interaction of both proteins in NIH3T3 cells. In 
summary, our data show that the H3 peptide binding cleft of the ADD domain also 
mediates the interaction with the MECP2-TRD domain suggesting that this binding 
site may have a broader role also in the interaction of DNMT3A with other 
proteins leading to complex regulation options by competitive and PTM specific 
binding.

© 2022 The Authors. Protein Science published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.4542
PMCID: PMC9798253
PMID: 36519786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.