1. Lipids Health Dis. 2022 Dec 16;21(1):138. doi: 10.1186/s12944-022-01751-6.

PCSK9 inhibition and cholesterol homeostasis in insulin producing β-cells.

Päth G(1), Perakakis N(2)(3), Mantzoros CS(3)(4), Seufert J(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Department of Medicine II, Medical 
Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Germany, Hugstetter Str. 55, Freiburg, Germany. 
guenter.paeth@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Division of Metabolic and Vascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine 
III, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(4)Section of Endocrinology, VA Boston Healthcare System, MA, Jamaica Plain, 
USA.
(5)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Department of Medicine II, Medical 
Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Germany, Hugstetter Str. 55, Freiburg, Germany.

Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) plays a central role in the 
pathology of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. For decades, the gold 
standard for LDL-C lowering have been statins, although these drugs carry a 
moderate risk for the development of new-onset diabetes. The inhibitors of 
proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) have emerged in the last 
years as potential alternatives to statins due to their high efficiency and 
safety without indications for a diabetes risk so far. Both approaches finally 
eliminate LDL-C from bloodstream by upregulation of LDL receptor surface 
expression. Due to their low antioxidant capacity, insulin producing pancreatic 
β-cells are sensitive to increased lipid oxidation and related generation of 
reactive oxygen species. Thus, PCSK9 inhibition has been argued to promote 
diabetes like statins. Potentially, the remaining patients at risk will be 
identified in the future. Otherwise, there is increasing evidence that loss of 
circulating PCSK9 does not worsen glycaemia since it is compensated by local 
PCSK9 expression in β-cells and other islet cells. This review explores the 
situation in β-cells. We evaluated the relevant biology of PCSK9 and the effects 
of its functional loss in rodent knockout models, carriers of LDL-lowering gene 
variants and PCSK9 inhibitor-treated patients.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12944-022-01751-6
PMCID: PMC9756761
PMID: 36527064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.