1. ESMO Open. 2023 Feb;8(1):100746. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100746. Epub 2022 
Dec 15.

The association between UGT1A1 polymorphisms and treatment toxicities of 
liposomal irinotecan.

Su YY(1), Chiang NJ(2), Chang JS(3), Wang YW(4), Shen BN(4), Li YJ(3), Hwang 
DY(3), Shan YS(5), Chen LT(6).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, 
Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Oncology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, 
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan; Institute 
of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, 
Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan; School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)PharmaEngine, Inc., Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Surgery, National Cheng Kung 
University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan. Electronic address: ysshan@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
(6)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, 
Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Oncology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, 
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan; Department 
of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, College of 
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Center for Cancer 
Research, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
leochen@nhri.org.tw.

BACKGROUND: Initial dose adjustment is recommended for patients with known 
UGT1A1∗28 homozygosity for both conventional irinotecan and liposomal irinotecan 
(nal-IRI). A recent population pharmacokinetic (PK) study showed that Asian 
patients had a lower prevalence of UGT1A1∗28 homozygosity but a significantly 
higher maximum blood concentration of SN-38 (SN-38 Cmax) and a higher incidence 
of grade ≥3 neutropenia after nal-IRI administration than Caucasian patients. 
The current study investigated the association of UGT1A1 polymorphisms, 
including the Asian prevalent UGT1A1∗6, PK and toxicities of nal-IRI-based 
therapy in the Asian population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 162 patients with nal-IRI-based therapy and 
available UGT1A1∗6 and UGT1A1∗28 genotyping were included, with 82 Asian 
patients from six previous phase I or II studies of nal-IRI (cohort 1) and 
another 80 patients with nal-IRI + 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin every 2 weeks as 
real-world practice in a single institute in Taiwan (cohort 2).
RESULTS: The frequency of UGT1A1∗6 or UGT1A1∗28 homozygosity/compound 
heterozygosity was 9.3%, with UGT1A1∗6/∗6 in 2.5%, UGT1A1∗28/∗28 in 1.9% and 
UGT1A1∗6/∗28 in 4.9%. Among the 53 patients in cohort 1 with available PK data, 
all 7 patients with homozygosity/compound heterozygosity harbored UGT1A1∗6 and 
had a significantly higher level of median dose-normalized area under the 
concentration-time curve (AUC) and Cmax of SN-38 than those with single 
heterozygosity/wild type. Of the entire study population, the incidence of grade 
≥3 neutropenia and diarrhea was significantly higher in patients with 
homozygosity/compound heterozygosity than in those with single 
heterozygosity/wild type, 73.3% versus 38.1% (P = 0.012, Fisher's exact test) 
and 33.3% versus 9.5% (P = 0.018, Fisher's exact test), respectively.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that the recommendation of a lower starting dose 
of nal-IRI for patients with UGT1A1∗28 homozygosity should be extended to 
include patients with UGT1A1∗6 homozygosity/compound heterozygosity.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100746
PMCID: PMC10024091
PMID: 36527823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure YWW was employed by PharmaEngine, 
Inc. BNS is employed by PharmaEngine, Inc. All other authors have declared no 
conflicts of interest. Data sharing The datasets generated and analyzed during 
the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable 
request.