1. Am J Mens Health. 2022 Nov-Dec;16(6):15579883221143182. doi: 
10.1177/15579883221143182.

Sclerosing Adenosis of the Prostate-A Benign Lesion Similar to Prostate Cancer: 
A Case Report and Literature Review.

Yao H(1), Tang G(1), Cui Y(1), Wu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of Qingdao 
University, Yantai, Shandong, China.

Sclerosing adenosis of the prostate (SAP) is a rare benign non-neoplastic small 
acinar hyperplasia. Like sclerosing adenosis of the breast, which is confused 
with breast cancer, SAP is a trap in the pathological differential diagnosis of 
benign and malignant lesions of the prostate. We report such a case to help 
colleagues better distinguish and diagnose such diseases. A 75-year-old patient 
with SAP had a prostate specific antigen (PSA) level of 11.0 ng/mL, and he had 
been suffering from progressive dysuria for 3 years. The central glandular area 
and the right periphery of the prostate were found to have nodular low signals 
on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Prostate biopsy showed that basal cells 
were positive for P63 and P504s, few basal cells were positive for S-100, and 
the positive rate of Ki67 was approximately 2%. We consider that the possibility 
of SAP is high. The patient was treated conservatively and was discharged in 
good health, free of dysuria and other problems. SAP is a rare benign lesion 
that is easily misdiagnosed as prostate cancer. The prostatic gland tube has a 
complete basal cell layer surrounding it, as well as myoepithelial cell 
metaplasia of basal cells, which is a key trait in distinguishing it from 
prostate cancer. Although the latest research indicates that SAP does not 
require treatment, the question of whether it is a risk factor for prostate 
cancer remains unanswered.

DOI: 10.1177/15579883221143182
PMCID: PMC9768826
PMID: 36527372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.