1. J Cell Biol. 2023 Mar 6;222(3):e202205136. doi: 10.1083/jcb.202205136. Epub
2022  Dec 16.

Kinesin-1 autoinhibition facilitates the initiation of dynein cargo transport.

Qiu R(1), Zhang J(1), Xiang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, F. Edward Hébert School of Medicine, 
Bethesda, MA, USA.

The functional significance of Kinesin-1 autoinhibition has been unclear. 
Kinesin-1 transports multiple cargoes including cytoplasmic dynein to 
microtubule plus ends. From a genetic screen for Aspergillus mutants defective 
in dynein-mediated early endosome transport, we identified a kinesin-1 mutation 
kinAK895* at the C-terminal IAK motif involved in autoinhibition. The kinA∆IAK 
and kinAK895E mutants exhibited a similar defect in dynein-mediated early 
endosome transport, verifying the importance of kinesin-1 autoinhibition in 
dynein-mediated transport. Kinesin-1 autoinhibition is not critical for dynein 
accumulation at microtubule plus ends or for the secretory vesicle cargoes of 
kinesin-1 to reach the hyphal tip. However, it facilitates dynein to initiate 
early endosome transport. This is unrelated to a direct competition between 
dynein and kinesin-1 on early endosomes because kinesin-3 rather than kinesin-1 
drives the plus-end-directed early endosome movement. This effect of kinesin-1 
autoinhibition on dynein-mediated early endosome transport is related to cargo 
adapter-mediated dynein activation but at a step beyond the switching of dynein 
from its autoinhibited conformation.

This is a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection 
in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.202205136
PMCID: PMC9802684
PMID: 36524956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors declare no competing 
interests exist.