1. Amino Acids. 2023 Jan;55(1):75-88. doi: 10.1007/s00726-022-03205-w. Epub 2022 
Dec 17.

Characterization of thermostable serine hydroxymethyltransferase for β-hydroxy 
amino acids synthesis.

Ma'ruf IF(1), Restiawaty E(2), Syihab SF(3), Honda K(4), Akhmaloka(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Doctoral Program of Chemistry, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, 
Institut Teknologi Bandung, Bandung, Indonesia.
(2)Chemical Engineering Process Design and Development Research Group, Faculty 
of Industrial Technology, Institut Teknologi Bandung, Bandung, Indonesia.
(3)Faculty of Sports and Health Education, Universitas Pendidikan Indonesia, 
Bandung, Indonesia.
(4)International Center for Biotechnology, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(5)Biochemistry Research Group, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, 
Institut Teknologi Bandung, Bandung, Indonesia. loka@chem.itb.ac.id.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Computer, Universitas 
Pertamina, Jakarta, Indonesia. loka@chem.itb.ac.id.

β-hydroxy amino acids, such as serine, threonine, and phenylserine, are 
important compounds for medical purposes. To date, there has been only limited 
exploration of thermostable serine hydroxylmethyltransferase (SHMT) for the 
synthesis of these amino acids, despite the great potential that thermostable 
enzymes may offer for commercial use due to their high stability and catalytic 
efficiencies. ITBSHMT_1 (ITB serine hydroxylmethyltransferase clone number 1) 
from thermophilic and methanol-tolerant bacteria Pseudoxanthomonas taiwanensis 
AL17 was successfully cloned. Biocomputational analysis revealed that ITBSHMT_1 
contains Pyridoxal-3'-phosphate and tetrahydrofolatebinding residues. Structural 
comparisons show that ITBSHMT_1 has 5 additional residues VSRQG on loop near 
PLP-binding site as novel structural feature which distinguish this enzyme with 
other characterized SHMTs. In silico mutation revealed that the fragment might 
have very essential role in maintaining of PLP binding on structure of 
ITBSHMT_1. Recombinant protein was produced in Escherichia coli Rosetta 2(DE3) 
in soluble form and purified using NiNTA affinity chromatography. The purified 
protein demonstrated the best activity at 80 °C and pH 7.5 based on the retro 
aldol cleavage of phenylserine. Activity decreased significantly in the presence 
of 3 mM transition metal ions but increased in the presence of 30 mM 
β-mercaptoethanol. ITBSHMT_1 demonstrated Vmax, Km, Kcat, and Kcat/Km at 242 
U/mg, 23.26 mM, 186/s, and 8/(mM.s), respectively. The aldol condensation 
reaction showed the enzyme's best activity at 80 °C for serine, threonine, or 
phenylserine, with serine synthesis showing the highest specific activity. 
Biocomputational analysis revealed that high intramolecular interaction within 
the 3D structure of ITBSHMT_1 might be correlated with the enzyme's high thermal 
stability. The above data suggest that ITBSHMT_1 is a potential and novel enzyme 
for the production of various β-hydroxy amino acids.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-022-03205-w
PMCID: PMC9876860
PMID: 36528680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.