1. Sci Adv. 2022 Dec 16;8(50):eade7209. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.ade7209. Epub 2022
Dec  16.

Depolarization block in olfactory sensory neurons expands the dimensionality of 
odor encoding.

Tadres D(1)(2), Wong PH(1)(3), To T(1), Moehlis J(3), Louis M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology and Neuroscience 
Research Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Santa 
Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa 
Barbara, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2023 Feb 27;33(4):R146-R148. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2023.01.018.

Upon strong and prolonged excitation, neurons can undergo a silent state called 
depolarization block that is often associated with disorders such as epileptic 
seizures. Here, we show that neurons in the peripheral olfactory system undergo 
depolarization block as part of their normal physiological function. Typically, 
olfactory sensory neurons enter depolarization block at odor concentrations 
three orders of magnitude above their detection threshold, thereby defining 
receptive fields over concentration bands. The silencing of high-affinity 
olfactory sensory neurons produces sparser peripheral odor representations at 
high-odor concentrations, which might facilitate perceptual discrimination. 
Using a conductance-based model of the olfactory transduction cascade paired 
with spike generation, we provide numerical and experimental evidence that 
depolarization block arises from the slow inactivation of sodium channels-a 
process that could affect a variety of sensory neurons. The existence of 
ethologically relevant depolarization block in olfactory sensory neurons creates 
an additional dimension that expands the peripheral encoding of odors.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.ade7209
PMCID: PMC9757753
PMID: 36525486