1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2022 Dec 1;16:947732. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2022.947732. 
eCollection 2022.

Predicted molecules and signaling pathways for regulating seizures in the 
hippocampus in lithium-pilocarpine induced acute epileptic rats: A proteomics 
study.

Wang P(1), Yang L(2), Yang R(3), Chen Z(2), Ren X(2), Wang F(2), Jiao Y(2), Ding 
Y(3), Yang F(3), Sun T(4), Ma H(5).

Author information:
(1)Ningxia Key Laboratory of Cerebrocranial Diseases, College of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, China.
(2)Ningxia Key Laboratory of Cerebrocranial Diseases, Ningxia Medical 
University, Yinchuan, China.
(3)School of Clinical Medicine, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, China.
(4)Ningxia Key Laboratory of Cerebrocranial Diseases, Department of 
Neurosurgery, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Ningxia Medical 
University, Yinchuan, China.
(5)College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Ningxia Medical University, 
Yinchuan, China.

Seizures in rodent models that are induced by lithium-pilocarpine mimic human 
seizures in a highly isomorphic manner. The hippocampus is a brain region that 
generates and spreads seizures. In order to understand the early phases of 
seizure events occurring in the hippocampus, global protein expression levels in 
the hippocampus on day 1 and day 3 were analyzed in lithium-pilocarpine induced 
acute epileptic rat models using a tandem mass tag-based proteomic approach. Our 
results showed that differentially expressed proteins were likely to be enhanced 
rather than prohibited in modulating seizure activity on days 1 and 3 in 
lithium-pilocarpine induced seizure rats. The differentially regulated proteins 
differed on days 1 and 3 in the seizure rats, indicating that different 
molecules and pathways are involved in seizure events occurring from day 1 to 
day 3 following lithium-pilocarpine administration. In regard to subcellular 
distribution, the results suggest that post-seizure cellular function in the 
hippocampus is possibly regulated in a differential manner on seizure 
progression. Gene ontology annotation results showed that, on day 1 following 
lithium-pilocarpine administration, it is likely necessary to regulate 
macromolecular complex assembly, and cell death, while on day 3, it may be 
necessary to modulate protein metabolic process, cytoplasm, and protein binding. 
Protein metabolic process rather than macromolecular complex assembly and cell 
death were affected on day 3 following lithium-pilocarpine administration. The 
extracellular matrix, receptors, and the constitution of plasma membranes were 
altered most strongly in the development of seizure events. In a KEGG pathway 
enrichment cluster analysis, the signaling pathways identified were relevant to 
sustained angiogenesis and evading apoptosis, and complement and coagulation 
cascades. On day 3, pathways relevant to Huntington's disease, and tumor 
necrosis factor signaling were most prevalent. These results suggest that 
seizure events occurring in day 1 modulate macromolecular complex assembly and 
cell death, and in day 3 modulate biological protein metabolic process. In 
summary, our study found limited evidence for ongoing seizure events in the 
hippocampus of lithium-pilocarpine induced animal models; nevertheless, 
evaluating the global differential expression of proteins and their impacts on 
bio-function may offer new perspectives for studying epileptogenesis in the 
future.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wang, Yang, Yang, Chen, Ren, Wang, Jiao, Ding, Yang, Sun and 
Ma.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2022.947732
PMCID: PMC9751352
PMID: 36531133

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.