1. Front Physiol. 2022 Dec 2;13:1073307. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.1073307. 
eCollection 2022.

Critical periods in Drosophila neural network development: Importance to network 
tuning and therapeutic potential.

Coulson B(1), Hunter I(1), Doran S(1), Parkin J(1), Landgraf M(2), Baines RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, 
Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health 
Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Critical periods are phases of heightened plasticity that occur during the 
development of neural networks. Beginning with pioneering work of Hubel and 
Wiesel, which identified a critical period for the formation of ocular dominance 
in mammalian visual network connectivity, critical periods have been identified 
for many circuits, both sensory and motor, and across phyla, suggesting a 
universal phenomenon. However, a key unanswered question remains why these forms 
of plasticity are restricted to specific developmental periods rather than being 
continuously present. The consequence of this temporal restriction is that 
activity perturbations during critical periods can have lasting and significant 
functional consequences for mature neural networks. From a developmental 
perspective, critical period plasticity might enable reproducibly robust network 
function to emerge from ensembles of cells, whose properties are necessarily 
variable and fluctuating. Critical periods also offer significant clinical 
opportunity. Imposed activity perturbation during these periods has shown 
remarkable beneficial outcomes in a range of animal models of neurological 
disease including epilepsy. In this review, we spotlight the recent 
identification of a locomotor critical period in Drosophila larva and describe 
how studying this model organism, because of its simplified nervous system and 
an almost complete wired connectome, offers an attractive prospect of 
understanding how activity during a critical period impacts a neuronal network.

Copyright Â© 2022 Coulson, Hunter, Doran, Parkin, Landgraf and Baines.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2022.1073307
PMCID: PMC9757492
PMID: 36531164

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.