1. ACS Omega. 2022 Dec 2;7(49):45527-45534. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.2c06176. 
eCollection 2022 Dec 13.

TiO(2)-In-MIL-101(Cr) with Visible Light-Induced Peroxidase Activity for 
Colorimetric Detection of Blood Glucose.

Lin J(1)(2), Zhuang Y(1)(2), Chen J(1)(2), Han Z(1)(2), Chen J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou350122, P R China.
(2)Fujian Key Laboratory of Drug Target Discovery and Structural and Functional 
Research, Fuzhou350122, P R China.

In this work, metal-organic framework MIL-101(Cr) with regular morphology, 
stable structure, and good dispersion was prepared by the hydrothermal method. 
MIL-101(Cr) has two different sizes of pores, but after TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) 
were in situ prepared, the two pores disappear. The result demonstrates that 
TiO2 NPs were located in the pores of MIL-101(Cr). TiO2-decorated MIL-101(Cr) 
forms an inside type II heterojunction and the band gap energy is narrowed, 
which can promote electron-hole separation and enhance the light absorption. 
Therefore, the heterojunction shows a high visible light-induced peroxidase-like 
activity. Kinetic studies exhibit that the K m value of TiO2-in-MIL-101(Cr) to 
TMB is 0.17 mM, and the affinity of TiO2-in-MIL-101(Cr) is higher than that of 
natural horseradish peroxidase (HRP). Then, a "turn-on" colorimetric assay based 
on TiO2-in-MIL-101(Cr) was constructed for the detection of blood glucose. The 
detection range is 1-100 μM (R 2 = 0.9950) with a limit of detection (LOD) of 
1.17 μM. Compared with the clinical method, the constructed colorimetric method 
has accurate and reliable results for the clinical detection. The 
anti-interference experiment confirms that the method has high selectivity to 
glucose.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.2c06176
PMCID: PMC9753185
PMID: 36530260

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.