1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022 Dec 20;11(24):e027177. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.122.027177.
Epub  2022 Dec 19.

PVECs-Derived Exosomal microRNAs Regulate PASMCs via FoxM1 Signaling in 
IUGR-induced Pulmonary Hypertension.

Luo X(1), Hang C(1), Zhang Z(1), Le K(2), Ying Y(1), Lv Y(3), Yan L(4), Huang 
Y(1), Ye L(1), Xu X(5), Zhong Y(1), Du L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, The Children's Hospital Zhejiang University School 
of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health Hangzhou 
Zhejiang Province People's Republic of China.
(2)Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for 
Child Health Hangzhou Zhejiang Province People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Pediatric Health Care, The Children's Hospital Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child 
Health Hangzhou Zhejiang Province People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine Hangzhou Zhejiang Province People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Rheumatology Immunology & Allergy, The Children's Hospital 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for 
Child Health Hangzhou Zhejiang Province People's Republic of China.

Background Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) is closely related to systemic 
or pulmonary hypertension (PH) in adulthood. Aberrant crosstalk between 
pulmonary vascular endothelial cells (PVECs) and pulmonary arterial smooth 
muscle cells (PASMCs) that is mediated by exosomes plays an essential role in 
the progression of PH. FoxM1 (Forkhead box M1) is a key transcription factor 
that governs many important biological processes. Methods and Results 
IUGR-induced PH rat models were established. Transwell plates were used to 
coculture PVECs and PASMCs. Exosomes were isolated from PVEC-derived medium, and 
a microRNA (miRNA) screening was proceeded to identify effects of IUGR on small 
RNAs enclosed within exosomes. Dual-Luciferase assay was performed to validate 
the predicted binding sites of miRNAs on FoxM1 3' untranslated region. FoxM1 
inhibitor thiostrepton was used in IUGR-induced PH rats. In this study, we found 
that FoxM1 expression was remarkably increased in IUGR-induced PH, and PASMCs 
were regulated by PVECs through FoxM1 signaling in a non-contact way. An miRNA 
screening showed that miR-214-3p, miR-326-3p, and miR-125b-2-3p were 
downregulated in PVEC-derived exosomes of the IUGR group, which were associated 
with overexpression of FoxM1 and more significant proliferation and migration of 
PASMCs. Dual-Luciferase assay demonstrated that the 3 miRNAs directly targeted 
FoxM1 3' untranslated region. FoxM1 inhibition blocked the PVECs-PASMCs 
crosstalk and reversed the abnormal functions of PASMCs. In vivo, treatment with 
thiostrepton significantly reduced the severity of PH. Conclusions Transmission 
of exosomal miRNAs from PVECs regulated the functions of PASMCs via FoxM1 
signaling, and FoxM1 may serve as a potential therapeutic target in IUGR-induced 
PH.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.122.027177
PMCID: PMC9798821
PMID: 36533591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]