1. Front Genet. 2022 Nov 30;13:1000123. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1000123. 
eCollection 2022.

Using loop-primer mediated PCR to enhance the detection of poorly preserved DNA.

Xiang H(1), Wang Z(2), Yang L(1)(2), Zhang X(1)(2), Zhao X(2).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Molecular Design and Precise 
Breeding, School of Life Science and Engineering, Foshan University, Foshan, 
China.
(2)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, Key Laboratory of Animal 
Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing, China.

Ancient DNA is vitally important in evolutionary research, and obtaining 
authentic ancient DNA sequences is critical for a proper analysis. However, it 
is difficult to acquire amplicons accurately and efficiently from ancient DNA 
templates using current techniques. Here, we established a loop-primer-mediated 
amplification method (L-PCR) to obtain target ancient DNA sequences with high 
accuracy and efficiency. The method was tested using 66 ancient samples 
(including 27 pig bones or teeth and 39 chicken bones) and serially diluted 
modern animal DNA templates. Compared to nested PCR, L-PCR was proven to be more 
efficient and accurate and could obtain more amplicons from both ancient pig 
samples and chicken bones and detect as low as 10-3 ng/μl modern pig template 
DNA. The efficiency was at least 100-fold that of the nested PCR. The results 
suggest that L-PCR is advantageous for obtaining authentic DNA sequences from 
poorly preserved or recalcitrant ancient specimens.

Copyright © 2022 Xiang, Wang, Yang, Zhang and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1000123
PMCID: PMC9748472
PMID: 36531224

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.