1. Front Genet. 2022 Nov 30;13:1028081. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1028081. 
eCollection 2022.

Host genetics impact on SARS-CoV-2 vaccine-induced immunoglobulin levels and 
dynamics: The role of TP53, ABO, APOE, ACE2, HLA-A, and CRP genes.

Gemmati D(1)(2)(3), Longo G(1)(2), Gallo I(1)(2), Silva JA(1)(2), Secchiero 
P(1), Zauli G(4), Hanau S(5), Passaro A(1), Pellegatti P(6), Pizzicotti S(6), 
Serino ML(2), Singh AV(7), Tisato V(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(2)Centre Haemostasis & Thrombosis, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)University Centre for Gender Medicine Studies, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Research Department, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(5)Department of Neuroscience & Rehabilitation, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, 
Italy.
(6)Hospital-University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(7)Department of Chemical & Product Safety, German Federal Institute for Risk 
Assessment, Berlin, Germany.

Background: Development and worldwide availability of safe and effective 
vaccines against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) to 
fight severe symptoms of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and block the 
pandemic have been a great achievement and stimulated researchers on 
understanding the efficacy and duration of different vaccine types. Methods: We 
investigated the levels of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies (IgG) and neutralizing 
antibodies (NAbs) in 195 healthy adult subjects belonging to the staff of the 
University-Hospital of Ferrara (Italy) starting from 15 days up to 190 days 
(about 6 months) after the second dose of the BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech) 
mRNA-based vaccine (n = 128) or ChAdOx1 (AstraZeneca) adenovirus-based vaccine 
(n = 67) using a combined approach of serological and genomics investigations. 
Results: A strong correlation between IgG and NAb levels was detected during the 
190 days of follow-up (r 2 = 0.807; p < 0.0001) and was confirmed during the 
first 90 days (T1) after vaccination (r 2 = 0.789; p = 0.0001) and 91-190 days 
(T2) after vaccination (r 2 = 0.764; p = 0.0001) for both vaccine types (r 2 = 
0.842; p = 0.0001 and r 2 = 0.780; p = 0.0001 for mRNA- and adenovirus-based 
vaccine, respectively). In addition to age (p < 0.01), sex (p = 0.03), and type 
of vaccine (p < 0.0001), which partially accounted for the remarkable individual 
differences observed in the antibody levels and dynamics, interesting genetic 
determinants appeared as significant modifiers of both IgG and NAb responses 
among the selected genes investigated (TP53, rs1042522; APOE, rs7412/rs429358; 
ABO, rs657152; ACE2, rs2285666; HLA-A rs2571381/rs2499; CRP, rs2808635/rs876538; 
LZTFL1, rs35044562; OAS3, rs10735079; SLC6A20, rs11385942; CFH, rs1061170; and 
ACE1, ins/del, rs4646994). In detail, regression analysis and mean antibody 
level comparison yielded appreciable differences after genotype stratification 
(P1 and P2, respectively, for IgG and NAb distribution) in the whole cohort 
and/or in the mRNA-based vaccine in the following genes: TP53, rs1042522 (P1 = 
0.03; P2 = 0.04); ABO, rs657152 (P1 = 0.01; P2 = 0.03); APOE, rs7412/rs429358 
(P1 = 0.0018; P2 = 0.0002); ACE2, rs2285666 (P1 = 0.014; P2 = 0.009); HLA-A, 
rs2571381/rs2499 (P1 = 0.02; P2 = 0.03); and CRP, rs2808635/rs876538 (P1 = 0.01 
and P2 = 0.09). Conclusion: High- or low-responsive subjects can be identified 
among healthy adult vaccinated subjects after targeted genetic screening. This 
suggests that favorable genetic backgrounds may support the progression of an 
effective vaccine-induced immune response, though no definite conclusions can be 
drawn on the real effectiveness ascribed to a specific vaccine or to the 
different extent of a genotype-driven humoral response. The interplay between 
data from the polygenic predictive markers and serological screening stratified 
by demogeographic information can help to recognize the individual humoral 
response, accounting for ethnic and geographical differences, in both COVID-19 
and anti-SARS-CoV-2 vaccinations.

Copyright Â© 2022 Gemmati, Longo, Gallo, Silva, Secchiero, Zauli, Hanau, Passaro, 
Pellegatti, Pizzicotti, Serino, Singh and Tisato.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1028081
PMCID: PMC9748098
PMID: 36531241

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.