1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Feb;299(2):102813. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102813. Epub 2022
 Dec 20.

The 14-3-3γ isoform binds to and regulates the localization of endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) membrane protein TMCC3 for the reticular network of the ER.

Suhda S(1), Yamamoto Y(1), Wisesa S(1), Sada R(1), Sakisaka T(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Membrane Dynamics, Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, 
Kobe University School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
(2)Division of Membrane Dynamics, Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, 
Kobe University School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan. Electronic address: 
sakisaka@med.kobe-u.ac.jp.

The reticular network of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is formed by connecting 
ER tubules through three-way junctions and undergoes constant remodeling through 
formation and loss of the three-way junctions. Transmembrane and coiled-coil 
domain family 3 (TMCC3), an ER membrane protein localizing at three-way 
junctions, has been shown to positively regulate formation of the reticular ER 
network. However, elements that negatively regulate TMCC3 localization have not 
been characterized. In this study, we report that 14-3-3γ, a 
phospho-serine/phospho-threonine-binding protein involved in various signal 
transduction pathways, is a negative regulator of TMCC3. We demonstrate that 
overexpression of 14-3-3γ reduced localization of TMCC3 to three-way junctions 
and decreased the number of three-way junctions. TMCC3 bound to 14-3-3γ through 
the N terminus and had deduced 14-3-3 binding motifs. Additionally, we 
determined that a TMCC3 mutant substituting alanine for serine to be 
phosphorylated in the binding motif reduced binding to 14-3-3γ. The TMCC3 mutant 
was more prone than wildtype TMCC3 to localize at three-way junctions in the 
cells overexpressing 14-3-3γ. Furthermore, the TMCC3 mutant rescued the ER sheet 
expansion caused by TMCC3 knockdown less than wild-type TMCC3. Taken together, 
these results indicate that 14-3-3γ binding negatively regulates localization of 
TMCC3 to the three-way junctions for the proper reticular ER network, implying 
that the negative regulation of TMCC3 by 14-3-3γ would underlie remodeling of 
the reticular network of the ER.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102813
PMCID: PMC9860497
PMID: 36549645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest with the contents of the article.