1. J Immunother Cancer. 2022 Dec;10(12):e005436. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2022-005436.

Interleukin-10 induces expression of CD39 on CD8+T cells to potentiate anti-PD1 
efficacy in EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer.

Qiao M(1)(2), Zhou F(1), Liu X(1), Jiang T(1), Wang H(1), Jia Y(1), Li X(3), 
Zhao C(3), Cheng L(3), Chen X(1), Ren S(1), Liu H(4), Zhou C(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Lung Cancer and Immunology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China 
caicunzhou_dr@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Anti-PD-1(L1) therapies are less efficacious in patients with 
EGFR-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer. However, the underlying mechanism is 
poorly understood.
METHODS: The characteristics of T cells in EGFR-mutated and wild-type tumors 
were analyzed based on The Cancer Genome Atlas database and clinical samples. 
Plasma levels of 8 T-cell-related cytokines were evaluated and its association 
with immunotherapy efficacy were explored. Association between EGFR signaling 
pathway and IL-10 was examined through tumor cell lines and clinical tumor 
samples. In vitro restimulation model of human CD8+T cells isolated from 
peripheral blood was used to analyze the impact of IL-10 on T cells. 
Doxycycline-inducible transgenic EGFRL858R mouse models were used to investigate 
the efficacy of combining recombinant mouse IL-10 protein and PD-1 blockade and 
its underlying mechanism in vivo.
RESULTS: EGFR-mutated tumors showed a lack of CD8+T cell infiltration and 
impaired CD8+T cell cytotoxic function. The incompetent CD8+T cells in 
EGFR-mutated tumors were characterized as absence of CD39 expression, which 
defined hallmarks of cytotoxic and exhausted features and could not be 
reinvigorated by anti-PD-1(L1) treatment. Instead, CD39 expression defined 
functional states of CD8+T cells and was associated with the therapeutic 
response of anti-PD-1(L1) therapies. Mechanically, IL-10 upregulated CD39 
expression and was limited in EGFR-mutated tumors. IL-10 induced hallmarks of 
CD8+T cells immunity in CD39-dependent manner. Using autochthonous EGFR 
L858R-driven lung cancer mouse models, combining recombinant mouse IL-10 protein 
and PD-1 blockade optimized antitumor effects in EGFR-mutated lung tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggested that owing to low level of IL-10 to induce the 
expression of CD39 on CD8+T cells, fewer phenotypically cytotoxic and exhausted 
CD39+CD8+T cells in EGFR-mutated tumors could be potentially reinvigorated by 
anti-PD-1(L1) treatment. Hence, IL-10 could potentially serve as a 
cytokine-based strategy to enhance efficacy of anti-PD-1(L1) treatment in 
EGFR-mutated tumors.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2022-005436
PMCID: PMC9772697
PMID: 36543373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.