1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Dec 10;23(24):15658. doi: 10.3390/ijms232415658.

Quasispecies Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 of 15 Different Lineages during the First 
Year of the Pandemic Prompts Scratching under the Surface of Consensus Genome 
Sequences.

Bader W(1)(2), Delerce J(1), Aherfi S(1)(2)(3), La Scola B(1)(2)(3), Colson 
P(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)IHU Méditerranée Infection, 19-21 Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille, 
France.
(2)Microbes Evolution Phylogeny and Infections (MEPHI), Institut de Recherche 
pour le Développement (IRD), Aix-Marseille University, 27 Boulevard Jean Moulin, 
13005 Marseille, France.
(3)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille (AP-HM), 264 rue Saint-Pierre, 
13005 Marseille, France.

The tremendous majority of SARS-CoV-2 genomic data so far neglected intra-host 
genetic diversity. Here, we studied SARS-CoV-2 quasispecies based on data 
generated by next-generation sequencing (NGS) of complete genomes. SARS-CoV-2 
raw NGS data had been generated for nasopharyngeal samples collected between 
March 2020 and February 2021 by the Illumina technology on a MiSeq instrument, 
without prior PCR amplification. To analyze viral quasispecies, we designed and 
implemented an in-house Excel file (“QuasiS”) that can characterize intra-sample 
nucleotide diversity along the genomes using data of the mapping of NGS reads. 
We compared intra-sample genetic diversity and global genetic diversity 
available from Nextstrain. Hierarchical clustering of all samples based on the 
intra-sample genetic diversity was performed and visualized with the Morpheus 
web application. NGS mapping data from 110 SARS-CoV-2-positive respiratory 
samples characterized by a mean depth of 169 NGS reads/nucleotide position and 
for which consensus genomes that had been obtained were classified into 15 viral 
lineages were analyzed. Mean intra-sample nucleotide diversity was 0.21 ± 0.65%, 
and 5357 positions (17.9%) exhibited significant (>4%) diversity, in ≥2 genomes 
for 1730 (5.8%) of them. ORF10, spike, and N genes had the highest number of 
positions exhibiting diversity (0.56%, 0.34%, and 0.24%, respectively). Nine hot 
spots of intra-sample diversity were identified in the SARS-CoV-2 NSP6, NSP12, 
ORF8, and N genes. Hierarchical clustering delineated a set of six genomes of 
different lineages characterized by 920 positions exhibiting intra-sample 
diversity. In addition, 118 nucleotide positions (0.4%) exhibited diversity at 
both intra- and inter-patient levels. Overall, the present study illustrates 
that the SARS-CoV-2 consensus genome sequences are only an incomplete and 
imperfect representation of the entire viral population infecting a patient, and 
that quasispecies analysis may allow deciphering more accurately the viral 
evolutionary pathways.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232415658
PMCID: PMC9779826
PMID: 36555300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.