1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Dec 14;14(24):6180. doi: 10.3390/cancers14246180.

Age-Dependent Impact of Concomitant Radio-Chemotherapy and MGMT Promotor 
Methylation on PFS and OS in Patients with IDH Wild-Type Glioblastoma: The 
Real-Life Data.

Krigers A(1), Klingenschmid J(1), Cosar T(1), Moser P(2), Thomé C(1), Freyschlag 
CF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Medical University of Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, 
6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Department of Neuropathology, Tirol Kliniken, Anichstrasse 35, 6020 
Innsbruck, Austria.

Biological but not chronological age plus performance have more impact on 
decision making in glioblastoma patients. We investigated how progression-free 
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) in older patients with IDH wild-type 
glioblastoma were influenced by concomitant radio-chemotherapy and MGMT promotor 
methylation status in real-life settings. In total, 142 out of 273 (52%) 
evaluated patients were older than 65 years, and 77 (55%) of them received 
concomitant radio-chemotherapy. In senior patients, the initiation of 
concomitant radio-chemotherapy was associated with significantly better PFS: 
15.3 months (CI95: 11.7−18.9) vs. 7.0 months (CI95: 4.3−9.6; p = 0.002). The 
favorable influence on PFS was not related to MGMT promotor methylation status 
as it was in the younger cohort. In seniors, concomitant radio-chemotherapy was 
related to significantly better OS: 20.0 months (CI95: 14.3−26.7) vs. 4.9 months 
(CI95: 3.5−6.2), p < 0.001. MGMT promotor methylation was related to a more 
favorable OS only, if concomitant radio-chemotherapy was initiated. In 
conclusion, more than half of the glioblastoma cohort was older than 65 years of 
age. Even if PFS and OS were shorter than in the younger cohort, concomitant 
radio-chemotherapy provided a survival advantage. In real life, MGMT promotor 
methylation had a positive impact on OS only if the adjuvant therapy was 
applied.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14246180
PMCID: PMC9776384
PMID: 36551664

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.