1. Cells. 2022 Dec 15;11(24):4059. doi: 10.3390/cells11244059.

Male DAT Val559 Mice Exhibit Compulsive Behavior under Devalued Reward 
Conditions Accompanied by Cellular and Pharmacological Changes.

Stewart A(1)(2), Davis GL(1), Areal LB(1), Rabil MJ(1), Tran V(1), Mayer FP(1), 
Blakely RD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Florida Atlantic University, Jupiter, FL 
33458, USA.
(2)Stiles-Nicholson Brain Institute, Florida Atlantic University, Jupiter, FL 
33458, USA.

Identified across multiple psychiatric disorders, the dopamine (DA) transporter 
(DAT) Ala559Val substitution triggers non-vesicular, anomalous DA efflux (ADE), 
perturbing DA neurotransmission and behavior. We have shown that DAT Val559 mice 
display a waiting impulsivity and changes in cognitive performance associated 
with enhanced reward motivation. Here, utilizing a within-subject, 
lever-pressing paradigm designed to bias the formation of goal-directed or 
habitual behavior, we demonstrate that DAT Val559 mice modulate their nose poke 
behavior appropriately to match context, but demonstrate a perseverative 
checking behavior. Although DAT Val559 mice display no issues with the cognitive 
flexibility required to acquire and re-learn a visual pairwise discrimination 
task, devaluation of reward evoked habitual reward seeking in DAT Val559 mutants 
in operant tasks regardless of reinforcement schedule. The direct DA agonist 
apomorphine also elicits locomotor stereotypies in DAT Val559, but not WT mice. 
Our observation that dendritic spine density is increased in the dorsal medial 
striatum (DMS) of DAT Val559 mice speaks to an imbalance in striatal circuitry 
that might underlie the propensity of DAT Val559 mutants to exhibit compulsive 
behaviors when reward is devalued. Thus, DAT Val559 mice represent a model for 
dissection of how altered DA signaling perturbs circuits that normally balance 
habitual and goal-directed behaviors.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11244059
PMCID: PMC9777203
PMID: 36552823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.