1. Oncogene. 2023 Feb;42(9):638-650. doi: 10.1038/s41388-022-02578-2. Epub 2022
Dec  23.

Monitoring the 5'UTR landscape reveals isoform switches to drive translational 
efficiencies in cancer.

Weber R(1), Ghoshdastider U(1), Spies D(1), Duré C(1)(2), Valdivia-Francia 
F(1)(2), Forny M(1), Ormiston M(1), Renz PF(1), Taborsky D(1)(2), Yigit M(1)(2), 
Bernasconi M(1), Yamahachi H(1), Sendoel A(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Regenerative Medicine (IREM), University of Zurich, Wagistrasse 
12, CH-8952, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Life Science Zurich Graduate School, Molecular Life Science Program, 
University of Zurich/ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Institute for Regenerative Medicine (IREM), University of Zurich, Wagistrasse 
12, CH-8952, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland. ataman.sendoel@uzh.ch.

Transcriptional and translational control are key determinants of gene 
expression, however, to what extent these two processes can be collectively 
coordinated is still poorly understood. Here, we use Nanopore long-read 
sequencing and cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE-seq) to document the 
landscape of 5' and 3' untranslated region (UTR) isoforms and transcription 
start sites of epidermal stem cells, wild-type keratinocytes and squamous cell 
carcinomas. Focusing on squamous cell carcinomas, we show that a small cohort of 
genes with alternative 5'UTR isoforms exhibit overall increased translational 
efficiencies and are enriched in ribosomal proteins and splicing factors. By 
combining polysome fractionations and CAGE-seq, we further characterize two of 
these UTR isoform genes with identical coding sequences and demonstrate that the 
underlying transcription start site heterogeneity frequently results in 5' 
terminal oligopyrimidine (TOP) and pyrimidine-rich translational element (PRTE) 
motif switches to drive mTORC1-dependent translation of the mRNA. Genome-wide, 
we show that highly translated squamous cell carcinoma transcripts switch 
towards increased use of 5'TOP and PRTE motifs, have generally shorter 5'UTRs 
and expose decreased RNA secondary structures. Notably, we found that the two 
5'TOP motif-containing, but not the TOP-less, RPL21 transcript isoforms strongly 
correlated with overall survival in human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma 
patients. Our findings warrant isoform-specific analyses in human cancer 
datasets and suggest that switching between 5'UTR isoforms is an elegant and 
simple way to alter protein synthesis rates, set their sensitivity to the 
mTORC1-dependent nutrient-sensing pathway and direct the translational potential 
of an mRNA by the precise 5'UTR sequence.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-022-02578-2
PMCID: PMC9957725
PMID: 36550360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.