1. Metabolites. 2022 Dec 12;12(12):1252. doi: 10.3390/metabo12121252.

Supplementation of Methyl-Donor Nutrients to a High-Fat, High-Sucrose Diet 
during Pregnancy and Lactation Normalizes Circulating 
25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol Levels and Alleviates Inflammation in Offspring.

Teoh CM(1), Cooper A(1), Renteria KM(1), Lane M(1), Zhu J(1), Koh GY(1).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition and Foods Program, School of Family and Consumer Sciences, Texas 
State University, San Marcos, TX 78666, USA.

A Western-style diet that is high in fat and sucrose has been shown to alter DNA 
methylation and epigenetically modify genes related to health risk in offspring. 
Here, we investigated the effect of a methyl-donor nutrient (MS) supplemented to 
a high-fat, high-sucrose (HFS) diet during pregnancy and lactation on vitamin D 
(VD) status and inflammatory response in offspring. After mating, 10-week-old 
female Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (n = 10/group) were randomly assigned to one of 
the four dietary groups during pregnancy and lactation: (1) control diet (CON), 
(2) CON with MS (CON-MS), (3) HFS, and (4) HFS with MS (HFS-MS). Weanling 
offspring (three weeks old) were euthanized and sacrificed (n = 8-10/sex/group). 
The remaining offspring (n = 10/sex/group) were randomly assigned to either a 
CON or an HFS diet for 12 weeks and sacrificed at 15 weeks of age. Our results 
indicated that prenatal MS supplementation, but not postnatal diet, restored low 
vitamin D status and suppressed elevation of proinflammatory cytokine induced by 
maternal HFS in the offspring. Furthermore, both prenatal and postnatal diets 
modulated the abundance of Lactobacillus spp. and Bacteroides spp. in the 
offspring, a shift that was independent of vitamin D status. Collectively, our 
data support a role for MS in restoring the perturbation of VD status and 
normalizing maternal HFS-induced inflammation in the offspring. Further 
investigation is warranted to elucidate the methylation status of VD 
metabolism-related pathways in the offspring, as well as the immunomodulatory 
role of vitamin D during the progression of obesity.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo12121252
PMCID: PMC9783000
PMID: 36557290

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.