1. Nutrients. 2022 Dec 14;14(24):5305. doi: 10.3390/nu14245305.

Omics as a Tool to Help Determine the Effectiveness of Supplements.

Steg A(1), Oczkowicz M(1), Smo≈Çucha G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Molecular Biology, National Research Institute of Animal 
Production, ul. Krakowska 1, 32-083 Balice, Poland.

There has been considerable interest in dietary supplements in the last two 
decades. Companies are releasing new specifics at an alarming pace, while 
dietary supplements are one of the less-studied substances released for public 
consumption. However, access to state-of-the-art and high-throughput techniques, 
such as the ones used in omics, make it possible to check the impact of a 
substance on human transcriptome or proteome and provide answers to whether its 
use is reasonable and beneficial. In this review, the main domains of omics are 
briefly introduced. The review focuses on the three most widely used omics 
techniques: NGS, LC-MS, NMR, and their usefulness in studying dietary 
supplements. Examples of studies are described for some of the most commonly 
supplemented substances, such as vitamins: D, E, A, and plant extracts: 
resveratrol, green tea, ginseng, and curcumin extract. Techniques used in omics 
have proven to be useful in studying dietary supplements. NGS techniques are 
helpful in identifying pathways that change upon supplementation and determining 
polymorphisms or conditions that qualify for the necessity of a given 
supplementation. LC-MS techniques are used to establish the serum content of 
supplemented a compound and its effects on metabolites. Both LC-MS and NMR help 
establish the actual composition of a compound, its primary and secondary 
metabolites, and its potential toxicity. Moreover, NMR techniques determine what 
conditions affect the effectiveness of supplementation.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14245305
PMCID: PMC9784029
PMID: 36558464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.