1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Dec 12;14(24):6122. doi: 10.3390/cancers14246122.

Landscape of Savolitinib Development for the Treatment of Non-Small Cell Lung 
Cancer with MET Alteration-A Narrative Review.

Zhu X(1), Lu Y(2), Lu S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Shanghai Lung Cancer Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China.
(2)AstraZeneca China, Shanghai 201200, China.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is increasingly being treated with targeted 
therapies. Savolitinib (OrpathysÂ®) is highly selective mesenchymal epithelial 
transition (MET)-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), which is conditionally 
approved in China for advanced NSCLC with MET exon 14 skipping mutations 
(METex14). This article summarizes the clinical development of savolitinib, as a 
monotherapy in NSCLC with METex14 mutation and in combination with epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor in post EGFR-TKI resistance NSCLC due to 
MET-based acquired resistance. Preclinical models demonstrated anti-tumor 
activities in MET-driven cancer cell line and xenograft tumor models. The Phase 
Ia/Ib study established an optimized, recommended phase II dose in Chinese NSCLC 
patients, while TATTON study of savolitinib plus osimertinib in patients with 
EGFR mutant, MET-amplified and TKI-progressed NSCLC showed beneficial efficacy 
with acceptable safety profile. In a pivotal phase II study, Chinese patients 
with pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma, brain metastasis and other NSCLC subtype 
positive for METex14 mutation showed notable responses and acceptable safety 
profile with savolitinib. Currently, results from ongoing clinical trials are 
eagerly anticipated to confirm the efficacious and safety benefits of 
savolitinib as monotherapy and in combination with EGFR-TKI in acquired 
resistance setting in advanced NSCLC and its subtypes with MET alterations.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14246122
PMCID: PMC9776447
PMID: 36551608

Conflict of interest statement: Yao Lu is an employee of AstraZeneca and works 
as a medical advisor in AstraZeneca, China.