1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2022 Dec 5;12(12):3042. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12123042.

The Clinical Utility of Droplet Digital PCR for Profiling Circulating Tumor DNA 
in Breast Cancer Patients.

Gezer U(1), Bronkhorst AJ(2), Holdenrieder S(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Oncology, Department of Basic Oncology, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul 34093, Turkey.
(2)Munich Biomarker Research Center, Institute of Laboratory Medicine, German 
Heart Center Munich Technical University Munich, 80636 MÃ¼nchen, Germany.

Breast cancer is the most common cancer affecting women worldwide. It is a 
malignant and heterogeneous disease with distinct molecular subtypes, which has 
prognostic and predictive implications. Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA), cell-free 
fragmented tumor-derived DNA in blood plasma, is an invaluable source of 
specific cancer-associated mutations and holds great promise for the development 
of minimally invasive diagnostic tests. Furthermore, serial monitoring of ctDNA 
over the course of systemic and targeted therapies not only allows unparalleled 
efficacy assessments but also enables the identification of patients who are at 
risk of progression or recurrence. Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) is a powerful 
technique for the detection and monitoring of ctDNA. Due to its relatively high 
accuracy, sensitivity, reproducibility, and capacity for absolute 
quantification, it is increasingly used as a tool for managing cancer patients 
through liquid biopsies. In this review paper, we gauge the clinical utility of 
ddPCR as a technique for mutational profiling in breast cancer patients and 
focus on HER2, PIK3CA, ESR1, and TP53, which represent the most frequently 
mutated genes in breast cancers.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics12123042
PMCID: PMC9776872
PMID: 36553049

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.