1. Biomolecules. 2022 Dec 6;12(12):1820. doi: 10.3390/biom12121820.

Secondary Metabolites Diversity of Aspergillus unguis and Their Bioactivities: A 
Potential Target to Be Explored.

Domingos LTS(1), Martins RDS(2), Lima LM(2), Ghizelini AM(1), Ferreira-Pereira 
A(1), Cotinguiba F(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo de Góes, Universidade Federal do Rio de 
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro CEP 21941-902, Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Pesquisas de Produtos Naturais Walter Mors, Universidade Federal 
do Rio de Janeiro, Avenida Carlos Chagas Filho, 373, Bloco H, Cidade 
Universitária, Rio de Janeiro CEP 21941-902, Brazil.

Aspergillus unguis belongs to the Aspergillus section Nidulantes. This species 
is found in soils and organisms from marine environments, such as jellyfishes 
and sponges. The first chemical study reported in the literature dates from 
1970, with depsidones nidulin (1), nornidulin (2), and unguinol (3) being the 
first isolated compounds. Fifty-two years since this first study, the isolation 
and characterization of ninety-seven (97) compounds have been reported. These 
compounds are from different classes, such as depsides, depsidones, phthalides, 
cyclopeptides, indanones, diarylethers, pyrones, benzoic acid derivatives, 
orcinol/orsenillate derivatives, and sesterpenoids. In terms of biological 
activities, the first studies on isolated compounds from A. unguis came only in 
the 1990s. Considering the tendency for antiparasitic and antibiotics to become 
ineffective against resistant microorganisms and larvae, A. unguis compounds 
have also been extensively investigated and some compounds are considered very 
promising. In addition to these larvicidal and antimicrobial activities, these 
compounds also show activity against cancer cell lines, animal growth promotion, 
antimalarial and antioxidant activities. Despite the diversity of these 
compounds and reported biological activities, A. unguis remains an interesting 
target for studies on metabolic induction to produce new compounds, the 
determination of new biological activities, medicinal chemistry, structural 
modification, biotechnological approaches, and molecular modeling, which have 
yet to be extensively explored.

DOI: 10.3390/biom12121820
PMCID: PMC9775040
PMID: 36551248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.