1. Life (Basel). 2022 Nov 25;12(12):1972. doi: 10.3390/life12121972.

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers of Clinical Characteristics of Schizophrenia.

Mednova IA(1), Boiko AS(1), Kornetova EG(1)(2), Semke AV(1), Bokhan NA(1)(3), 
Ivanova SA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Mental Health Research Institute, Tomsk National Research Medical Center, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Aleutskaya Str. 4, Tomsk 634014, Russia.
(2)Hospital at Siberian State Medical University, Moskovsky Trakt 2, Tomsk 
634050, Russia.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Addictology and Psychotherapy, Siberian State 
Medical University, Moskovsky Trakt 2, Tomsk 634050, Russia.

Immune activation plays a major role in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia, as 
confirmed by many studies, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses. The important 
role of neuroinflammation in the formation of the relation between impaired 
neurobiological processes and schizophrenia psychopathology is being actively 
discussed. We quantified serum concentrations of 22 cytokines in 236 patients 
with schizophrenia and 103 mentally and somatically healthy individuals by a 
multiplex assay. We found higher TGF-α (p = 0.014), IFN-γ (p = 0.036), IL-5 (p < 
0.001), IL-6 (p = 0.047), IL-8 (p = 0.005), IL-10 (p <0.001), IL-15 (p = 0.007), 
IL-1RA (p = 0.007), and TNF-α (p < 0.001) levels in patients with schizophrenia 
than in healthy individuals. Subgroup analysis revealed a much greater number of 
statistically significant differences in cytokine levels among females than 
among males. Patients with a continuous course of schizophrenia showed 
statistically significantly higher levels of IL-12p70 (p = 0.019), IL-1α (p = 
0.046), and IL-1β (p = 0.035) compared with patients with an episodic course. 
Most cytokines were positively correlated with positive, general, and total 
PANSS scores. In patients with a duration of schizophrenia of 10 years or more, 
the level of IL-10 was higher than that in patients with a disease duration of 5 
years or less (p = 0.042). Thus, an imbalance in cytokines was revealed in 
patients with schizophrenia, depending on sex and clinical characteristics of 
the disease.

DOI: 10.3390/life12121972
PMCID: PMC9784438
PMID: 36556337

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.