1. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2022 Dec;12(12):4407-4423. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2022.05.009. 
Epub 2022 May 13.

Highly expressed SERCA2 triggers tumor cell autophagy and is a druggable 
vulnerability in triple-negative breast cancer.

Fan M(1)(2), Gao J(1), Zhou L(1), Xue W(1), Wang Y(1), Chen J(1), Li W(1), Yu 
Y(1), Liu B(3), Shen Y(1), Xu Q(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing Drum Tower 
Hospital, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China.
(2)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, 
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Prevention and Treatment of Tumor, Nanjing 210023, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Collaborative Innovation Center of Biotherapy, Chengdu 
610041, China.

Chemoresistance remains a major obstacle to successful treatment of triple 
negative breast cancer (TNBC). Identification of druggable vulnerabilities is an 
important aim for TNBC therapy. Here, we report that SERCA2 expression 
correlates with TNBC progression in human patients, which promotes TNBC cell 
proliferation, migration and chemoresistance. Mechanistically, SERCA2 interacts 
with LC3B via LIR motif, facilitating WIPI2-independent autophagosome formation 
to induce autophagy. Autophagy-mediated SERCA2 degradation induces SERCA2 
transactivation through a Ca2+/CaMKK/CREB-1 feedback. Moreover, we found that 
SERCA2-targeting small molecule RL71 enhances SERCA2-LC3B interaction and 
induces excessive autophagic cell death. The increase in SERCA2 expression 
predisposes TNBC cells to RL71-induced autophagic cell death in vitro and 
in vivo. This study elucidates a mechanism by which TNBC cells maintain their 
high autophagy activity to induce chemoresistance, and suggests increased SERCA2 
expression as a druggable vulnerability for TNBC.

© 2022 Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2022.05.009
PMCID: PMC9764070
PMID: 36561988