1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Jan 3;120(1):e2218630120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2218630120. Epub 2022 Dec 27.

Crystal structure of LGR ligand α2/β5 from Caenorhabditis elegans with 
implications for the evolution of glycoprotein hormones.

Gong Z(1), Wang W(1), El Omari K(2), Lebedev AA(3), Clarke OB(4)(5), Hendrickson 
WA(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10032.
(2)Diamond Light Source, Harwell Science & Innovation Campus, Didcot OX11 0DE, 
UK.
(3)CCP4, STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot OX11 0QX, UK.
(4)Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10032.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.

A family of leucine-rich-repeat-containing G-protein-coupled receptors (LGRs) 
mediate diverse physiological responses when complexed with their cognate 
ligands. LGRs are present in all metazoan animals. In humans, the LGR ligands 
include glycoprotein hormones (GPHs) chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), luteinizing 
hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone (hFSH), and thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(hTSH). These hormones are αβ heterodimers of cystine-knot protein chains. LGRs 
and their ligand chains have coevolved. Ancestral hormone homologs, present in 
both bilaterian animals and chordates, are identified as α2β5. We have used 
single-wavelength anomalous diffraction and molecular replacement to determine 
structures of the α2β5 hormone from Caenorhabditis elegans (Ceα2β5). Ceα2β5 is 
unglycosylated, as are many other α2β5 hormones. Both Hsα2β5, the human homolog 
of Ceα2β5, and hTSH activate the same receptor (hTSHR). Despite having little 
sequence similarity to vertebrate GPHs, apart from the cysteine patterns from 
core disulfide bridges, Ceα2β5 is generally similar in structure to these 
counterparts; however, its α2 and β5 subunits are more symmetric as compared 
with α and β of hCG and hFSH. This quasisymmetry suggests a hypothetical 
homodimeric antecedent of the α2β5 and αβ heterodimers. Known structures 
together with AlphaFold models from the sequences for other LGR ligands provide 
representatives for the molecular evolution of LGR ligands from early metazoans 
through the present-day GPHs. The experimental Ceα2β5 structure validates its 
AlphaFold model, and thus also that for Hsα2β5; and interfacial characteristics 
in a model for the Hsα2β5:hTSHR complex are similar to those found in an 
experimental hTSH:hTSHR structure.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2218630120
PMCID: PMC9910494
PMID: 36574673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have research support to disclose, 
NIH GM107462.