1. Cell Prolif. 2023 Apr;56(4):e13387. doi: 10.1111/cpr.13387. Epub 2022 Dec 29.

Smurf1 regulates ameloblast polarization by ubiquitination-mediated degradation 
of RhoA.

Niu H(1)(2), Bi F(1)(3), Zhao W(1)(2), Xu Y(1)(3), Han Q(1)(2), Guo W(1)(3), 
Chen Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Oral Pathology, West China School of Stomatology, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, West China School of Stomatology, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Cell polarity is essential for ameloblast differentiation and enamel formation. 
Smurf1 can mediate cell polarization through ubiquitination degradation of 
specific substrates. But it remains unclear whether Smurf1 could regulate 
ameloblast polarity and the underlying mechanism. Here, immuno-fluorescence 
staining and RT-qPCR were applied to detect the expression of Smurf1 and 
F-actin. A mouse lower incisor defect model was constructed. Scanning electron 
microscope, rat lower incisor culture, western blot, wound healing assay and 
trans-well migration assay were performed to detect the influence of Smurf1 
knockdown on ameloblast. IF double staining, western blot and 
co-immunoprecipitation were conducted to detect the interaction between Smurf1 
and RhoA. The in vivo experiment was also performed. We found that Smurf1 was 
mainly expressed in the membrane and cell cortex of ameloblast, similar to 
F-actin. Smurf1 expression increased along ameloblast polarization and 
differentiation. After knocking down Smurf1, the cytoskeleton and cell 
morphology changed and the cell polarity was damaged. Smurf1 regulated 
ameloblast polarity through ubiquitination degradation of activated RhoA in 
vitro. Local knockdown of Smurf1 in rat lower incisor ameloblast resulted in 
ameloblast polarity loss, enamel matrix secretion disorder and chalky enamel, 
but RhoA inhibitor Y-27632 could reverse this effect. Collectively, Smurf1 could 
regulate the polarization of ameloblast through ubiquitination degradation of 
activated RhoA, which contributed to the knowledge of tooth development and 
provided new research ideas for cell polarity.

© 2022 The Authors. Cell Proliferation published by Beijing Institute for Stem 
Cell and Regenerative Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cpr.13387
PMCID: PMC10068949
PMID: 36579844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.