1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Dec 8;13:1054917. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1054917. 
eCollection 2022.

Nudix hydrolase 14 influences plant development and grain chalkiness in rice.

Liu Y(1), Zhang W(1), Wang Y(1), Xie L(1), Zhang Q(1), Zhang J(1), Li W(1), Wu 
M(1), Cui J(1), Wang W(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-Bioresources, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular 
Breeding, College of Agriculture, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou, China.

Nudix hydrolases (NUDX) can hydrolyze a wide range of organic pyrophosphates and 
are widely distributed in various organisms. Previous studies have shown that 
NUDXs are extensively involved in biotic and abiotic stress responses in 
different plant species; however, the role of NUDXs in plant growth and 
development remains largely unknown. In the present study, we identified and 
characterized OsNUDX14 localized in the mitochondria in rice. Results showed 
that OsNUDX14 is constitutively expressed in various tissues and most strongly 
expressed in mature leaves. We used CRISPR/Cas9 introducing mutations that 
editing OsNUDX14 and its encoding product. OsNUDX14-Cas9 (nudx14) lines 
presented early flowering and a larger flag leaf angle during the reproductive 
stage. In addition, OsNUDX14 affected grain chalkiness in rice. Furthermore, 
transcript profile analysis indicated that OsNUDX14 is associated with lignin 
biosynthesis in rice. Six major haplotypes were identified by six OsNUDX14 
missense mutations, including Hap_1 to Hap_6. Accessions having the Hap_5 allele 
were geographically located mainly in South and Southeast Asia with a low 
frequency in the Xian/indica subspecies. This study revealed that OsNUDX14 is 
associated with plant development and grain chalkiness, providing a potential 
opportunity to optimize plant architecture and quality for crop breeding.

Copyright Â© 2022 Liu, Zhang, Wang, Xie, Zhang, Zhang, Li, Wu, Cui, Wang and 
Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.1054917
PMCID: PMC9773146
PMID: 36570941

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.