1. Virology. 2023 Jan;578:163-170. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2022.12.007. Epub 2022
Dec  22.

The impact of mutations affecting highly conserved amino acids in the simian 
immunodeficiency virus nucleocapsid protein on virion assembly, genomic RNA 
packaging and viral infectivity.

González SA(1), Affranchino JL(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Virología, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, 
Universidad de Belgrano (UB), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y 
Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic address: 
sagonzalez@conicet.gov.ar.
(2)Centro de Virología Humana y Animal (CEVHAN), Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Universidad Abierta 
Interamericana (UAI), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The nucleocapsid (NC) domain of the retroviral Gag polyproteins mediates the 
incorporation of the viral genomic RNA into virions. Although SIV is widely used 
as a model for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infections, the SIV 
NC has been the subject of few studies which have provided discrepant data on 
the relative contribution of the two NC zinc finger motifs to genomic RNA 
encapsidation. Here, we demonstrate that mutations affecting the first cysteine 
in the distal zinc finger motif (C33S) or the N-terminal NC basic domain 
(R7A/K8A) drastically impair virion assembly and viral RNA binding. By contrast, 
amino acid substitutions targeting the first cysteine of the proximal zinc 
finger (C12S) or the basic region connecting both zinc fingers (R29A/R30A) allow 
substantial particle production and genomic RNA encapsidation. Our results help 
define the relative contribution of the SIV NC zinc finger motifs and basic 
regions to the NC biological properties.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2022.12.007
PMID: 36580863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have influenced the work reported in this paper.