1. Case Rep Pediatr. 2022 Dec 23;2022:6059007. doi: 10.1155/2022/6059007. 
eCollection 2022.

Seizure-Induced Hemoptysis in a Pediatric Patient.

Nangia R(1), Kahwaty M(2), Sachdeva A(1), Kotwal N(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Interventional Pulmonology, Division of Pulmonary and Critical 
Care, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Maryland, Baltimore 22S Greene 
Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonology and Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Maryland, 737 W Lombard Street, Ste 314, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Hemoptysis can complicate seizures, albeit rarely. This unfamiliar presentation, 
reported infrequently in adults, can also affect children. This remains a rare 
clinical entity in pediatrics and we report one such case and its association 
with sterol carrier protein (SCP) gene mutation. We present a case of a 
16-year-old male with recurrent episodes of hemoptysis following seizures. The 
diagnostic workup for etiology of the hemoptysis was unrevealing and he was 
ultimately treated for neurogenic pulmonary edema as a diagnosis of exclusion. 
He achieved complete resolution with supportive care and diuretics. Our case 
report describes the clinical and radiological presentation and overall 
management of post-ictal pulmonary hemorrhage and edema in a pediatric patient. 
In addition, it reports a new finding of possible association with sterol 
carrier protein (SCP2) carrier status. It also highlights a rare but potentially 
life-threatening consequence of inadequate seizure control in pediatric 
patients.

Copyright Â© 2022 Ritika Nangia et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/6059007
PMCID: PMC9803558
PMID: 36588923

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no conflicts of 
interest.