1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Dec 15;13:989695. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.989695. eCollection 2022.

Ovarian gonadoblastoma with dysgerminoma in a girl with 46,XX karyotype 
17a-hydroxylase/17, 20-lyase deficiency: A case report and literature review.

Yin M(1), Yang J(1), Tian Q(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Clinical Research Center 
for Obstetric and Gynecologic Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China.

17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency (17-OHD), caused by mutations in the gene 
of the cytochrome P450 family 17 subfamily A member 1 (CYP17A1), is a rare type 
of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), usually characterized by cortisol and 
sex steroid deficiency combined with excessive mineralocorticoid. Gonadoblastoma 
is a relatively rare ovarian tumor that is frequently seen among patients with 
46,XY gonadal dysgenesis. Rarely have they been reported in female patients with 
normal 46,XX karyotype. Here, we report an interesting case of an 11-year-old 
Chinese girl who presented acute abdominal pain that was later attributed to 
tumor rupture of right ovarian gonadoblastoma with dysgerminoma. Further 
evaluations revealed hypertension and hypokalemia. Hormonal findings showed 
increased progesterone, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, and low cortisol levels. 
Her chromosome karyotype was 46,XX without Y chromosome material detected. 
Genetic analysis revealed that the patient had a homozygous pathogenic variant 
c.985_987delTACinsAA (p.Y329Kfs*90) in exon 6 of the CYP17A1 gene and that her 
parents were all heterozygous carriers of this pathogenic variant. Due to the 
variable clinical manifestations of 17-OHD, meticulous assessment including 
genetic analysis is necessary. Further study is warranted to unravel the 
mechanism of gonadoblastoma in a patient with normal karyotypes.

Copyright © 2022 Yin, Yang, Tian and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.989695
PMCID: PMC9797587
PMID: 36589847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor SL is 
currently organizing a research topic with the author QT.