1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Dec 16;13:1086883. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.1086883. eCollection 2022.

Gene mutations associated with fertilization failure after in vitro 
fertilization/intracytoplasmic sperm injection.

Xue Y(1), Cheng X(2), Xiong Y(2), Li K(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Assisted Reproduction Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sir Run 
Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,  China.
(2)Institute for Reproductive Health, School of Pharmacy, Hangzhou Medical 
College, Hangzhou,  China.
(3)Zhejiang Provincial Laboratory of Experimental Animal's & Nonclinical 
Laboratory Studies, Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou,  China.

Fertilization failure during assisted reproductive technologies (ART) is often 
unpredictable, as this failure is encountered only after in vitro fertilization 
(IVF) and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) have been performed. The 
etiology of fertilization failure remains elusive. More and more mutations of 
genes are found to be involved in human fertilization failure in infertile 
patients as high throughput sequencing techniques are becoming widely applied. 
In this review, the mutations of nine important genes expressed in sperm or 
oocytes, PLCZ1, ACTL7A, ACTL9, DNAH17, WEE2, TUBB8, NLRP5, ZP2, and TLE6, were 
summarized and discussed. These abnormalities mainly have shown Mendelian 
patterns of inheritance, including dominant and recessive inheritance, although 
de novo mutations were present in some cases. The review revealed the crucial 
roles of each reported gene in the fertilization process and summarized all 
known mutations and their corresponding phenotypes. The review suggested the 
mutations might become promising targets for precision treatments in 
reproductive medicine. Moreover, our work will provide some helpful clues for 
genetic counseling, risk prediction, and optimizing clinical treatments for 
human infertility by supplying the useful and timely information on the genetic 
causes leading to fertilization failure.

Copyright © 2022 Xue, Cheng, Xiong and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.1086883
PMCID: PMC9800785
PMID: 36589837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.