1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Dec 15;9:961991. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.961991. 
eCollection 2022.

Applying multi-omics techniques to the discovery of biomarkers for acute aortic 
dissection.

Hao X(1)(2), Cheng S(1)(2), Jiang B(1)(2), Xin S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of China 
Medical University, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Pathogenesis, Prevention and Therapeutics of Aortic 
Aneurysm, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.

Acute aortic dissection (AAD) is a cardiovascular disease that manifests 
suddenly and fatally. Due to the lack of specific early symptoms, many patients 
with AAD are often overlooked or misdiagnosed, which is undoubtedly catastrophic 
for patients. The particular pathogenic mechanism of AAD is yet unknown, which 
makes clinical pharmacological therapy extremely difficult. Therefore, it is 
necessary and crucial to find and employ unique biomarkers for Acute aortic 
dissection (AAD) as soon as possible in clinical practice and research. This 
will aid in the early detection of AAD and give clear guidelines for the 
creation of focused treatment agents. This goal has been made attainable over 
the past 20 years by the quick advancement of omics technologies and the 
development of high-throughput tissue specimen biomarker screening. The primary 
histology data support and add to one another to create a more thorough and 
three-dimensional picture of the disease. Based on the introduction of the main 
histology technologies, in this review, we summarize the current situation and 
most recent developments in the application of multi-omics technologies to AAD 
biomarker discovery and emphasize the significance of concentrating on 
integration concepts for integrating multi-omics data. In this context, we seek 
to offer fresh concepts and recommendations for fundamental investigation, 
perspective innovation, and therapeutic development in AAD.

Copyright Â© 2022 Hao, Cheng, Jiang and Xin.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.961991
PMCID: PMC9797526
PMID: 36588568

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.