1. Front Immunol. 2022 Dec 15;13:1075128. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1075128. 
eCollection 2022.

Oral administration of hepcidin and chitosan benefits growth, immunity, and gut 
microbiota in grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella).

Zhou J(1)(2), Feng M(1), Zhang W(1), Kuang R(1), Zou Q(2), Su J(1), Yuan G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Aquatic Animal Medicine, College of Fisheries, Huazhong 
Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(2)Wuhan DaBeiNong (DBN) Aquaculture Technology Co. LTD, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Intensive high-density culture patterns are causing an increasing number of 
bacterial diseases in fish. Hepcidin links iron metabolism with innate immunity 
in the process of resisting bacterial infection. In this study, the 
antibacterial effect of the combination of hepcidin (Cihep) and chitosan (CS) 
against Flavobacterium columnare was investigated. The dosing regimen was also 
optimized by adopting a feeding schedule of every three days and every seven 
days. After 56 days of feeding experiment, grass carp growth, immunity, and gut 
microbiota were tested. In vitro experiments, Cihep and CS can regulate iron 
metabolism and antibacterial activity, and that the combination of Cihep and CS 
had the best protective effect. In vivo experiments, Cihep and CS can improve 
the growth index of grass carp. After challenge with Flavobacterium columnare, 
the highest survival rate was observed in the Cihep+CS-3d group. By serum 
biochemical indicators assay and Prussian blue staining, Cihep and CS can 
increase iron accumulation and decrease serum iron levels. The contents of 
lysozyme and superoxide dismutase in Cihep+CS-3d group increased significantly. 
Meanwhile, Cihep and CS can significantly reduce the pathological damage of gill 
tissue. The 16S rRNA sequencing results showed that Cihep and CS can 
significantly increase the abundance and diversity of grass carp gut microbiota. 
These results indicated that the protective effect of consecutive 3-day feeding 
followed by a 3-day interval was better than that of consecutive 7-day feeding 
followed by a 7-day interval, and that the protective effect of Cihep in 
combination with chitosan was better than that of Cihep alone. Our findings 
optimize the feeding pattern for better oral administration of Cihep in 
aquaculture.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zhou, Feng, Zhang, Kuang, Zou, Su and Yuan.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1075128
PMCID: PMC9798086
PMID: 36591242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author JZ and QZ were employed by Wuhan 
DaBeiNong Aquaculture Technology Co. LTD, China. The remaining authors declare 
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.