1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2023 Apr;10(10):e2205487. doi: 10.1002/advs.202205487. Epub 
2023 Jan 4.

Steering Stem Cell Fate within 3D Living Composite Tissues Using 
Stimuli-Responsive Cell-Adhesive Micromaterials.

Kamperman T(1), Willemen NGA(1), Kelder C(1), Koerselman M(1), Becker M(1), Lins 
L(1), Johnbosco C(1), Karperien M(1), Leijten J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental BioEngineering, Faculty of Science and 
Technology, Technical Medical Centre, University of Twente, Drienerlolaan 5, 
Enschede, 7522NB, The Netherlands.

Engineered living microtissues such as cellular spheroids and organoids have 
enormous potential for the study and regeneration of tissues and organs. 
Microtissues are typically engineered via self-assembly of adherent cells into 
cellular spheroids, which are characterized by little to no cell-material 
interactions. Consequently, 3D microtissue models currently lack structural 
biomechanical and biochemical control over their internal microenvironment 
resulting in suboptimal functional performance such as limited stem cell 
differentiation potential. Here, this work report on stimuli-responsive 
cell-adhesive micromaterials (SCMs) that can self-assemble with cells into 3D 
living composite microtissues through integrin binding, even under serum-free 
conditions. It is demonstrated that SCMs homogeneously distribute within 
engineered microtissues and act as biomechanically and biochemically tunable 
designer materials that can alter the composite tissue microenvironment on 
demand. Specifically, cell behavior is controlled based on the size, stiffness, 
number ratio, and biofunctionalization of SCMs in a temporal manner via 
orthogonal secondary crosslinking strategies. Photo-based mechanical tuning of 
SCMs reveals early onset stiffness-controlled lineage commitment of 
differentiating stem cell spheroids. In contrast to conventional encapsulation 
of stem cell spheroids within bulk hydrogel, incorporating cell-sized SCMs 
within stem cell spheroids uniquely provides biomechanical cues throughout the 
composite microtissues' volume, which is demonstrated to be essential for 
osteogenic differentiation.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202205487
PMCID: PMC10074101
PMID: 36599686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.