1. Front Immunol. 2022 Dec 16;13:1058905. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1058905. 
eCollection 2022.

Pasteurella multocida toxin - lessons learned from a mitogenic toxin.

Kubatzky KF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, 
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.

The gram-negative, zoonotic bacterium Pasteurella multocida was discovered in 
1880 and found to be the causative pathogen of fowl cholera. Pasteurella-related 
diseases can be found in domestic and wild life animals such as buffalo, sheep, 
goat, deer and antelope, cats, dogs and tigers and cause hemorrhagic septicemia 
in cattle, rhinitis or pneumonia in rabbits or fowl cholera in poultry and 
birds. Pasteurella multocida does not play a major role in the immune-competent 
human host, but can be found after animal bites or in people with close contact 
to animals. Toxigenic strains are most commonly found in pigs and express a 
phage-encoded 146 kDa protein, the Pasteurella multocida toxin (PMT). 
Toxin-expressing strains cause atrophic rhinitis where nasal turbinate bones are 
destroyed through the inhibition of bone building osteoblasts and the activation 
of bone resorbing osteoclasts. After its uptake through receptor-mediated 
endocytosis, PMT specifically targets the alpha subunit of several 
heterotrimeric G proteins and constitutively activates them through deamidation 
of a glutamine residue to glutamate in the alpha subunit. This results in 
cytoskeletal rearrangement, proliferation, differentiation and survival of 
cells. Because of the toxin's mitogenic effects, it was suggested that it might 
have carcinogenic properties, however, no link between Pasteurella infections 
and cell transformation could be established, neither in tissue culture models 
nor through epidemiological data. In the recent years it was shown that the 
toxin not only affects bone, but also the heart as well as basically all cells 
of innate and adaptive immunity. During the last decade the focus of research 
shifted from signal transduction processes to understanding how the bacteria 
might benefit from a bone-destroying toxin. The primary function of PMT seems to 
be the modulation of immune cell activation which at the same time creates an 
environment permissive for osteoclast formation. While the disease is restricted 
to pigs, the implications of the findings from PMT research can be used to 
explore human diseases and have a high translational potential. In this review 
our current knowledge will be summarized and it will be discussed what can be 
learned from using PMT as a tool to understand human pathologies.

Copyright Â© 2022 Kubatzky.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1058905
PMCID: PMC9800868
PMID: 36591313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.