1. J Immunother Cancer. 2022 Dec;10(12):e005802. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2022-005802.

Anti-CD73 antibody activates human B cells, enhances humoral responses and 
induces redistribution of B cells in patients with cancer.

Miller RA(1), Luke JJ(2), Hu S(3), Mahabhashyam S(3), Jones WB(3), Marron T(4), 
Merchan JR(5), Hughes BGM(6)(7), Willingham SB(3).

Author information:
(1)Corvus Pharmaceuticals Inc, Burlingame, California, USA 
rmiller@corvuspharma.com.
(2)Department of Medicine, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.
(3)Corvus Pharmaceuticals Inc, Burlingame, California, USA.
(4)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miami, Florida, USA.
(6)Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Herston, Queensland, Australia.
(7)The University of Queensland Faculty of Medicine, Herston, Queensland, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: CD73 is widely expressed on immune cells playing a critical role in 
immunomodulatory functions including cell adhesion and migration, as a 
costimulatory molecule for T cells and in production of adenosine. The function 
of CD73 expressed on B cells has not been fully characterized. Mupadolimab is an 
anti-human CD73 antibody that activates B cells. We evaluated the 
characteristics of this antibody and its effects on immune cells in vitro and in 
vivo.
METHODS: Mupadolimab binding to CD73, inhibition of CD73 enzymatic activity, and 
effects on lymphocyte activation were evaluated in vitro by measuring changes in 
immunophenotype by flow cytometry. Cryogenic-transmission electron microscopy 
was used to determine epitope binding. Effects on human B cells in vivo were 
evaluated in immunodeficient NSG-SGM3 mice immunized with SARS-CoV-2 and 
influenza viral antigens. Safety and immune effects were evaluated in the 
completed dose escalation portion of a phase 1 trial conducted in patients with 
cancer.
RESULTS: Mupadolimab binds to a unique epitope on CD73POS B cells resulting in 
their activation and differentiation through B cell receptor signaling pathways. 
Mupadolimab induces expression of CD69, CD83, CD86 and MHC class II on B cells 
along with morphological transformation into plasmablasts and expression of 
CD27, CD38 and CD138. These effects are independent of adenosine. Mupadolimab 
binds to the N-terminal of CD73 in the closed position and competitively 
inhibits substrate binding. Mupadolimab enhanced antigen specific antibody 
response to SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and influenza hemagglutinin in humanized 
mouse models. Mupadolimab was evaluated as a monotherapy in a phase 1 trial 
(NCT03454451) in 34 patients with advanced cancer and demonstrated binding to 
CD73POS circulating cells and transient reduction in the number of B cells, with 
return of CD73NEG B cells with memory phenotype. No dose-limiting toxicities or 
changes in serum immunoglobulins were seen.
CONCLUSIONS: Mupadolimab activates B cells and stimulates the production of 
antigen specific antibodies. The effects in patients with cancer suggest that 
activated, CD69POS B cells redistribute to lymphoid tissues. Minor tumor 
regression was observed in several patients. These results support further 
investigation of mupadolimab as an immunotherapy for cancer and its potential 
use as a vaccine adjuvant.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT03454451.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2022-005802
PMCID: PMC9723961
PMID: 36600561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: RAM, SH, SM and WBJ are 
employees and shareholders of Corvus Pharmaceuticals. SBW is a shareholder of 
Corvus Pharmaceuticals. RAM and SBW are also named inventors on patents related 
to mupadolimab. JJL reports DSMB: Abbvie, Immutep, Evaxion; Scientific Advisory 
Board: (no stock) 7 Hills, Bright Peak, Fstar, Inzen, RefleXion, Xilio (stock) 
Actym, Alphamab Oncology, Arch Oncology, Kanaph, Mavu, NeoTx, Onc.AI, Pyxis, 
STipe, Tempest; Consultancy with compensation: Abbvie, Alnylam, Bayer, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Castle, Checkmate, Codiak, Crown, Day One, Duke St, EMD 
Serono, Endeavor, Flame, Genentech, Gilead, HotSpot, Kadmon, Janssen, Ikena, 
Immunocore, Incyte, Macrogenics, Merck, Mersana, Nektar, Novartis, Partner, 
Pfizer, Regeneron, Servier, STINGthera, Synlogic, Synthekine; Research Support: 
(all to institution for clinical trials unless noted) AbbVie, Astellas, 
Astrazeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb (IIT & industry), Corvus, Day One, EMD Serono, 
Fstar, Genmab, Ikena, Immatics, Incyte, Kadmon, KAHR, Macrogenics, Merck, 
Moderna, Nektar, Next Cure, Numab, Palleon, Pfizer (IIT & industry) Replimune, 
Rubius, Servier (IIT), Scholar Rock, Synlogic, Takeda, Trishula, Tizona, Xencor; 
Patents: (both provisional) Serial #15/612,657 (Cancer Immunotherapy), 
hPCT/US18/36052 (Microbiome Biomarkers for Anti-PD-1/PD-L1 Responsiveness: 
Diagnostic, Prognostic and Therapeutic Uses Thereof). TM reports having received 
research funding from Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck, and 
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. He has served on Advisory Boards and/or Data 
Safety Monitoring Boards for AstraZeneca, Atara, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celldex, 
Chimeric Therapeutics, Genentech, Regeneron, Surface, NGMbio, DBV Technologies, 
Glenmark Pharma and the Rockefeller University. JRM reports research support 
(institutional) for Corvus, Tizona Therapeutics, Trishula, Merck, Eisai, 
Genentech, Vyriad, Replimune, Silagen, Rubius Therapeutics, and BioNTech. BGMH 
reports advisory board member for Merck Sharpe and Dohme, Bristol Meyers Squibb, 
Roche, Pfizer, Astra Zeneca, Eisai, Takeda, Sanofi and institutional grant 
funding Amgen.