1. Nutrients. 2022 Dec 30;15(1):182. doi: 10.3390/nu15010182.

Phenolic Extract from Extra Virgin Olive Oil Induces Different 
Anti-Proliferative Pathways in Human Bladder Cancer Cell Lines.

Spagnuolo C(1), Moccia S(1), Tedesco I(1), Crescente G(1), Volpe MG(1), Russo 
M(1), Russo GL(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Food Sciences, National Research Council, 83100 Avellino, Italy.

Regular consumption of olive oil is associated with protection against 
chronic-degenerative diseases, such as cancer. Epidemiological evidence 
indicates an inverse association between olive oil intake and bladder cancer 
risk. Bladder cancer is among the most common forms of cancer; in particular, 
the transitional cell carcinoma histotype shows aggressive behavior. We 
investigated the anti-proliferative effects of a phenolic extract prepared from 
an extra virgin olive oil (EVOOE) on two human bladder cancer cell lines, namely 
RT112 and J82, representing the progression from low-grade to high-grade tumors, 
respectively. In RT112, the EVOOE reduced cell viability (IC50 = 240 μg/mL at 24 
h), triggering a non-protective form of autophagy, evidenced by the 
autophagosome formation and the increase in LC-3 lipidation. In J82, EVOOE 
induced a strong decrease in cell viability after 24 h of treatment (IC50 = 65.8 
μg/mL) through rapid and massive apoptosis, assessed by Annexin V positivity and 
caspase-3 and -9 activation. Moreover, in both bladder cancer cell lines, EVOOE 
reduced intracellular reactive oxygen species, but this antioxidant effect was 
not correlated with its anti-proliferative outcomes. Data obtained suggest that 
the mixture of phenolic compounds in extra virgin olive oil activates different 
anti-proliferative pathways.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15010182
PMCID: PMC9823665
PMID: 36615840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.