1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Dec 30;15(1):264. doi: 10.3390/cancers15010264.

Immunotherapy as a Promising Option for the Treatment of Advanced Chordoma: A 
Systemic Review.

Wang X(1), Chen Z(1), Li B(1), Fan J(1), Xu W(1), Xiao J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Oncology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military 
Medical University, #415 Fengyang Road, Shanghai 200003, China.

OBJECTIVE: To summarize the function and efficacy of immunotherapy as an 
adjunctive therapy in the treatment of advanced chordoma.
METHODS: Literature search was conducted by two reviewers independently. Case 
reports, case series and clinical trials of immunotherapy for chordoma were 
retrieved systematically from Pubmed, Web of Science, Scoupus and Cochrane 
Library. Clinical outcome data extracted from the literature included median 
progression-free survival (PFS), median overall survival (OS), clinical 
responses and adverse events (AEs).
RESULTS: All studies were published between 2015 and 2022. Twenty-two eligible 
studies were selected for systemic review. PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint 
inhibitors (ICIs) were the most common used immunotherapy agents in chordoma, 
among which Pembrolizumab was the most frequently prescribed. CTLA-4 antibody 
was only used as combination therapy in chordoma. Dose Limiting Toxicity (DLT) 
was not observed in any vaccine targeting brachyury, and injection site response 
was the most frequent AV. The response evaluation criteria in solid tumors 
(RECIST) were the most generally used evaluation standard in chordoma 
immunotherapy, and none of the included studies employed the Choi criteria.
CONCLUSIONS: No clinical data have demonstrated that CTLA-4 ICIs combined with 
PD-1/PD-L1 ICIs is more effective than ICIs monotherapy in treating chordoma, 
and ICIs in combination with other therapies exhibit more toxicity than 
monotherapy. PD-1/PD-L1 ICIs monotherapy is recommended as an immunotherapy in 
patients with advanced chordoma, which may even benefit PD-L1-negative patients. 
The brachyury vaccine has shown good safety in chordoma patients, and future 
clinical trials should focus on how to improve its therapeutic efficacy. The use 
of immunomodulatory agents is a promising therapeutic option, though additional 
clinical trials are required to evaluate their safety and effectiveness. RECIST 
does not seem to be an appropriate standard for assessing medications of 
intratumoral immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15010264
PMCID: PMC9818311
PMID: 36612259

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.