1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Dec 23;13:1099715. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.1099715. eCollection 2022.

Metadynamics simulations leveraged by statistical analyses and artificial 
intelligence-based tools to inform the discovery of G protein-coupled receptor 
ligands.

Salas-Estrada L(1), Fiorillo B(1), Filizola M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, United States.

G Protein-Coupled Receptors (GPCRs) are a large family of membrane proteins with 
pluridimensional signaling profiles. They undergo ligand-specific conformational 
changes, which in turn lead to the differential activation of intracellular 
signaling proteins and the consequent triggering of a variety of biological 
responses. This conformational plasticity directly impacts our understanding of 
GPCR signaling and therapeutic implications, as do ligand-specific kinetic 
differences in GPCR-induced transducer activation/coupling or GPCR-transducer 
complex stability. High-resolution experimental structures of ligand-bound GPCRs 
in the presence or absence of interacting transducers provide important, yet 
limited, insights into the highly dynamic process of ligand-induced activation 
or inhibition of these receptors. We and others have complemented these studies 
with computational strategies aimed at characterizing increasingly accurate 
metastable conformations of GPCRs using a combination of metadynamics 
simulations, state-of-the-art algorithms for statistical analyses of simulation 
data, and artificial intelligence-based tools. This minireview provides an 
overview of these approaches as well as lessons learned from them towards the 
identification of conformational states that may be difficult or even impossible 
to characterize experimentally and yet important to discover new GPCR ligands.

Copyright Â© 2022 Salas-Estrada, Fiorillo and Filizola.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.1099715
PMCID: PMC9816996
PMID: 36619585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.