1. Plants (Basel). 2022 Dec 27;12(1):130. doi: 10.3390/plants12010130.

Contribution to the Preclinical Safety Assessment of Lannea velutina and 
Sorindeia juglandifolia Leaves.

Malú Q(1), Lima K(1), Malmir M(1), Pinto R(1)(2), da Silva IM(1), Catarino L(3), 
Duarte MP(4), Serrano R(1), Rocha J(1), Lima BS(1), Silva O(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Universidade de Lisboa, 1649-003 Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Dr Joaquim Chaves Laboratório de Análises Clínicas, 2790-224 Carnaxide, 
Portugal.
(3)Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes, (cE3c) & 
CHANGE-Global Change and Sustainability Institute, Faculty of Sciences, 
Universidade de Lisboa, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal.
(4)MEtRICs/Chemical Department, Nova School of Science and Technology, 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.

Dried leaves of Lannea velutina A. Rich. and Sorindeia juglandifolia (A. Rich.) 
Planch. ex Oliv. (family Anacardiaceae) are used in African traditional 
medicine. Although these medicinal plants have widespread use in the treatment 
of inflammatory diseases, there is no scientific data concerning their 
preclinical or clinical safety. This work aimed to investigate the phytochemical 
properties of the leaves of both species using HPLC-UV/DAD, as well as the in 
vivo oral repeated-dose toxicity of 70% hydroethanolic leaf extract of S. 
juglandifolia and the in vitro genotoxicity of 70% hydroethanolic leaf extracts 
of L. velutina and S. juglandifolia. Clinical signs of toxicity, body weight 
variations, and changes in food consumption, mortality, and blood biochemical 
parameters were monitored. Genotoxicity was assessed using the bacterial reverse 
mutation assay (Ames test) with and without metabolic activation, according to 
OECD guidelines. The obtained results showed the presence of gallic acid and 
anacardic acid as the main marker constituents in both species. No significant 
changes in general body weight or food intake were observed; small significant 
changes with no critical relevance were observed in the blood biochemistry of 
animals treated with S. juglandifolia hydroethanolic extract (50, 400, and 1000 
mg/kg body weight) compared to those in the control group. No genotoxicity was 
observed in the bacterial reverse mutation assay with S. juglandifolia and L. 
velutina extracts (up to 5 mg/plate). The safety data obtained in vivo and lack 
of genotoxic potential in vitro points to the safe medicinal use of S. 
juglandifolia and L. velutina extracts.

DOI: 10.3390/plants12010130
PMCID: PMC9823897
PMID: 36616259

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.