1. ACS Chem Biol. 2023 Jan 20;18(1):49-58. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.2c00667. Epub 
2023 Jan 10.

Activity of Fatty Acid Biosynthesis Initiating Ketosynthase FabH with 
Acetyl/Malonyl-oxa/aza(dethia)CoAs.

Boram TJ(1), Benjamin AB(1), Silva de Sousa A(1), Stunkard LM(1), Stewart TA(1), 
Adams TJ(1), Craft NA(1), Vel√°zquez-Marrero KG(1), Ling J(1), Nice JN(1), Lohman 
JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, 175 S. University Street, West 
Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United States.

Fatty acid and polyketide biosynthetic enzymes exploit the reactivity of acyl- 
and malonyl-thioesters for catalysis. A prime example is FabH, which initiates 
fatty acid biosynthesis in many bacteria and plants. FabH performs an 
acyltransferase reaction with acetyl-CoA to generate an acetyl-S-FabH 
acyl-enzyme intermediate and subsequent decarboxylative Claisen-condensation 
with a malonyl-thioester carried by an acyl carrier protein (ACP). We envision 
that crystal structures of FabH with substrate analogues can provide insight 
into the conformational changes and enzyme/substrate interactions underpinning 
the distinct reactions. Here, we synthesize acetyl/malonyl-CoA analogues with 
esters or amides in place of the thioester and characterize their stability and 
behavior as Escherichia coli FabH substrates or inhibitors to inform structural 
studies. We also characterize the analogues with mutant FabH C112Q that mimics 
the acyl-enzyme intermediate allowing dissection of the decarboxylation 
reaction. The acetyl- and malonyl-oxa(dethia)CoA analogues undergo extremely 
slow hydrolysis in the presence of FabH or the C112Q mutant. Decarboxylation of 
malonyl-oxa(dethia)CoA by FabH or C112Q mutant was not detected. The amide 
analogues were completely stable to enzyme activity. In enzyme assays with 
acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA (rather than malonyl-ACP) as substrates, 
acetyl-oxa(dethia)CoA is surprisingly slightly activating, while 
acetyl-aza(dethia)CoA is a moderate inhibitor. The malonyl-oxa/aza(dethia)CoAs 
are inhibitors with Ki's near the Km of malonyl-CoA. For comparison, we 
determine the FabH catalyzed decomposition rates for acetyl/malonyl-CoA, 
revealing some fundamental catalytic traits of FabH, including hysteresis for 
malonyl-CoA decarboxylation. The stability and inhibitory properties of the 
substrate analogues make them promising for structure-function studies to reveal 
fatty acid and polyketide enzyme/substrate interactions.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.2c00667
PMCID: PMC10311946
PMID: 36626717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]