1. Neurobiol Sleep Circadian Rhythms. 2022 Dec 20;14:100088. doi: 
10.1016/j.nbscr.2022.100088. eCollection 2023 May.

Critical periods and Autism Spectrum Disorders, a role for sleep.

Medina E(1), Peterson S(1), Ford K(1), Singletary K(1), Peixoto L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine and Physiology, Sleep and Performance 
Research Center, Elson S. Floyd College of Medicine, Washington State 
University, Spokane, WA, United States.

Brain development relies on both experience and genetically defined programs. 
Time windows where certain brain circuits are particularly receptive to external 
stimuli, resulting in heightened plasticity, are referred to as "critical 
periods". Sleep is thought to be essential for normal brain development. 
Importantly, studies have shown that sleep enhances critical period plasticity 
and promotes experience-dependent synaptic pruning in the developing mammalian 
brain. Therefore, normal plasticity during critical periods depends on sleep. 
Problems falling and staying asleep occur at a higher rate in Autism Spectrum 
Disorder (ASD) relative to typical development. In this review, we explore the 
potential link between sleep, critical period plasticity, and ASD. First, we 
review the importance of critical period plasticity in typical development and 
the role of sleep in this process. Next, we summarize the evidence linking ASD 
with deficits in synaptic plasticity in rodent models of high-confidence ASD 
gene candidates. We then show that the high-confidence rodent models of ASD that 
show sleep deficits also display plasticity deficits. Given how important sleep 
is for critical period plasticity, it is essential to understand the connections 
between synaptic plasticity, sleep, and brain development in ASD. However, 
studies investigating sleep or plasticity during critical periods in ASD mouse 
models are lacking. Therefore, we highlight an urgent need to consider 
developmental trajectory in studies of sleep and plasticity in 
neurodevelopmental disorders.

Â© 2022 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbscr.2022.100088
PMCID: PMC9826922
PMID: 36632570

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial arrangements or 
connections to declare.