1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2023 Jun;44(6):1175-1190. doi: 10.1038/s41401-022-01045-8.
 Epub 2023 Jan 12.

MANF ameliorates DSS-induced mouse colitis via restricting Ly6C(hi)CX3CR1(int) 
macrophage transformation and suppressing CHOP-BATF2 signaling pathway.

Yang L(#)(1)(2), Shen WW(#)(1)(2), Shao W(1)(2), Zhao Q(1)(2), Pang GZ(1)(2), 
Yang Y(1)(2)(3), Tao XF(1)(2), Zhang WP(3), Mei Q(1)(2), Shen YX(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, 
China.
(2)Biopharmaceutical Institute, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China.
(3)First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China.
(4)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, 
China. shenyx@ahmu.edu.cn.
(5)Biopharmaceutical Institute, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China. 
shenyx@ahmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF), an endoplasmic 
reticulum stress-inducible secreting protein, has evolutionarily conserved 
immune-regulatory function that contributes to the negative regulation of 
inflammation in macrophages. In this study, we investigated the profiles of MANF 
in the macrophages of the patients with active inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) 
and the mice with experimental colitis, which was induced in both myeloid 
cell-specific MANF knockout mice and wild-type mice by 3% dextran sodium sulfate 
(DSS) for 7 days. We found that MANF expression was significantly increased in 
intestinal macrophages from both the mice with experimental colitis and patients 
with active IBD. DSS-induced colitis was exacerbated in myeloid cell-specific 
MANF knockout mice. Injection of recombinant human MANF (rhMANF, 10 mg·kg-1·d-1, 
i.v.) from D4 to D6 significantly ameliorated experimental colitis in 
DSS-treated mice. More importantly, MANF deficiency in myeloid cells resulted in 
a dramatic increase in the number of Ly6ChiCX3CRint proinflammatory macrophages 
in colon lamina propria of DSS-treated mice, and the proinflammatory cytokines 
and chemokines were upregulated as well. Meanwhile, we demonstrated that MANF 
attenuated Th17-mediated immunopathology by inhibiting BATF2-mediated innate 
immune response and downregulating CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11 and IL-12p40; MANF 
functioned as a negative regulator in inflammatory macrophages via inhibiting 
CHOP-BATF2 signaling pathway, thereby protecting against DSS-induced mouse 
colitis. These results suggest that MANF ameliorates colon injury by negatively 
regulating inflammatory macrophage transformation, which shed light on a 
potential therapeutic target for IBD.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41401-022-01045-8
PMCID: PMC10202914
PMID: 36635421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.