1. JIMD Rep. 2022 Nov 9;64(1):35-41. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12346. eCollection 2023
Jan.

Infantile primary carnitine deficiency: A severe cardiac presentation 
unresponsive to carnitine supplementation.

Louis L(1), Margaux G(2), Claire G(1), Delphine L(2), Sandrine R(2), Emmanuel 
R(1)(3), Cécile G(1)(3), Samir M(1), Isabelle RV(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie Pôle de Biologie et Pathologie, CHU de Bordeaux 
Bordeaux France.
(2)Hôpital Pédiatrique, Pôle Pédiatrique, CHU de Bordeaux Bordeaux France.
(3)INSERM BRIC U1312 Université de Bordeaux Bordeaux France.
(4)lNSERM MRGM U1211 Université de Bordeaux Bordeaux France.

Primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) is an inherited disease of fatty acid 
beta-oxidation with autosomal recessive inheritance. The disease manifests as 
metabolic decompensation with hypoketotic hypoglycaemia associated with 
cardiomyopathy, hepatomegaly, rhabdomyolysis, and seizures. Various outcomes are 
described from asymptomatic adults to dramatic sudden infant death syndrome 
cases. We present a severe case of PCD decompensation in an 18-week-old female. 
She presented with hypotonia, moaning, diarrhea, and vomiting at the pediatric 
emergency. Initially suspected as intracranial hypertension, the clinical 
condition evolved rapidly and caused a reversible cardiac arrest with profound 
hypoglycemia. Despite carnitine supplementation, she succumbed from cardiac 
arrhythmia and multivisceral failure 4 days after admission. The genetic 
analyses showed a PCD with biallelic pathogenic variants of SLC22A5 gene. The 
case report is notable for the severity of the cardiac damage possibly favored 
by maternal carnitine deficiency during pregnancy. The analysis of previously 
published PCD cases highlights (i) the importance of having large access to 
emergency biochemical tests for early therapeutic care although the disease has 
unpredictable severity and (ii) the fact that the clinical outcome remains 
unpredictable if carnitine treatment is initiated late.

© 2022 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12346
PMCID: PMC9830015
PMID: 36636599

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that there is no conflict of 
interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the research 
reported.