1. ACS Omega. 2022 Dec 30;8(1):190-207. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.2c07213.
eCollection  2023 Jan 10.

Current Update on Rotavirus in-Silico Multiepitope Vaccine Design.

Kuri PR(1), Goswami P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Guwahati, Assam 781039, India.

Rotavirus gastroenteritis is one of the leading causes of pediatric morbidity 
and mortality worldwide in infants and under-five populations. The World Health 
Organization (WHO) recommended global incorporation of the rotavirus vaccine in 
national immunization programs to alleviate the burden of the disease. 
Implementation of the rotavirus vaccination in certain regions of the world 
brought about a significant and consistent reduction of rotavirus-associated 
hospitalizations. However, the efficacy of licensed vaccines remains suboptimal 
in low-income countries where the incidences of rotavirus gastroenteritis 
continue to happen unabated. The problem of low efficacy of currently licensed 
oral rotavirus vaccines in low-income countries necessitates continuous 
exploration, design, and development of new rotavirus vaccines. Traditional 
vaccine development is a complex, expensive, labor-intensive, and time-consuming 
process. Reverse vaccinology essentially utilizes the genome and proteome 
information on pathogens and has opened new avenues for in-silico multiepitope 
vaccine design for a plethora of pathogens, promising time reduction in the 
complete vaccine development pipeline by complementing the traditional 
vaccinology approach. A substantial number of reviews on licensed rotavirus 
vaccines and those under evaluation are already available in the literature. 
However, a collective account of rotavirus in-silico vaccines is lacking in the 
literature, and such an account may further fuel the interest of researchers to 
use reverse vaccinology to expedite the vaccine development process. Therefore, 
the main focus of this review is to summarize the research endeavors undertaken 
for the design and development of rotavirus vaccines by the reverse vaccinology 
approach utilizing the tools of immunoinformatics.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.2c07213
PMCID: PMC9835168
PMID: 36643547

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.