1. Pharmacol Rep. 2023 Apr;75(2):423-441. doi: 10.1007/s43440-023-00447-7. Epub 
2023 Jan 17.

Interactions of fentanyl with blood platelets and plasma proteins: platelet 
sensitivity to prasugrel metabolite is not affected by fentanyl under in vitro 
conditions.

Bednarek R(1), Luzak B(2), Golański J(2), Boncler M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cytobiology and Proteomics, Chair of Biomedical Sciences, 
Medical University of Lodz, Ul. Mazowiecka 6/8, 92-215, Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of Haemostasis and Haemostatic Disorders, Chair of Biomedical 
Sciences, Medical University of Lodz, Ul. Mazowiecka 6/8, 92-215, Lodz, Poland.
(3)Department of Haemostasis and Haemostatic Disorders, Chair of Biomedical 
Sciences, Medical University of Lodz, Ul. Mazowiecka 6/8, 92-215, Lodz, Poland. 
magdalena.boncler@umed.lodz.pl.

BACKGROUND: Clinical trials indicate that fentanyl, like morphine, may impair 
intestinal absorption and thus decrease the efficacy of oral P2Y12 inhibitors, 
such as clopidogrel, ticagrelor, and prasugrel. However, the ability of fentanyl 
to directly negate or reduce the inhibitory effect of P2Y12 receptor antagonists 
on platelet function has not been established. A series of in vitro experiments 
was performed to investigate the ability of fentanyl to activate platelets, 
potentiate platelet response to ADP, and/or diminish platelet sensitivity to 
prasugrel metabolite (R-138727) in agonist-stimulated platelets. The selectivity 
and specificity of fentanyl toward major carrier proteins has been also studied.
METHODS: Blood was obtained from healthy volunteers (19 women and 12 men; mean 
age 40 ± 13 years). Platelet function was measured in whole blood, platelet-rich 
plasma and in suspensions of isolated platelets by flow cytometry, impedance and 
optical aggregometry. Surface plasmon resonance and molecular docking were 
employed to determine the binding kinetics of fentanyl to human albumin, 
α1-acid glycoprotein, apolipoprotein A-1 and apolipoprotein B-100.
RESULTS: When applied at therapeutic and supratherapeutic concentrations under 
various experimental conditions, fentanyl had no potential to stimulate platelet 
activation and aggregation, or potentiate platelet response to ADP, nor did it 
affect platelet susceptibility to prasugrel metabolite in ADP-stimulated 
platelets. In addition, fentanyl was found to interact with all the examined 
carrier proteins with dissociation constants in the order of 10-4 to 10-9 M.
CONCLUSIONS: It does not seem that the delayed platelet responsiveness to oral 
P2Y12 inhibitors, such as prasugrel, in patients undergoing percutaneous 
coronary intervention, results from direct interactions between fentanyl and 
blood platelets. Apolipoproteins, similarly to albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein, 
appear to be important carriers of fentanyl in blood.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s43440-023-00447-7
PMCID: PMC10060303
PMID: 36646965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.