1. Stem Cell Res. 2023 Mar;67:103028. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2023.103028. Epub 2023
Jan  13.

Generation of an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line from a patient with 
GEFS+ carrying a STX1B (p.Lys45delinsArgMetCysIleGlu and p.Leu46Met) mutation.

Haag C(1), Uysal B(2), Marquetand J(2), Löffler H(2), Mau-Holzmann UA(3), Lerche 
H(2), Schwarz N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Epileptology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tuebingen, Germany. Electronic address: 
carolin.fischer@uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)Department of Neurology and Epileptology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tuebingen, 
Germany.

The STX1B gene encodes the presynaptic protein syntaxin-1B, which plays a major 
role in regulating fusion of synaptic vesicles. Mutations in STX1B are known to 
cause epilepsy syndromes, such as genetic epilepsies with febrile seizures plus 
(GEFS+). Here, we reprogrammed skin fibroblasts from a female patient affected 
by GEFS+ to human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). The patient carries an 
InDel mutation (c.133_134insGGATGTGCATTG; p.Lys45delinsArgMetCysIleGlu and 
c.135_136AC > GA; p.Leu46Met), located in the regulatory Habc-domain of STX1B. 
Successful reprogramming of cells was confirmed by a normal karyotype, 
expression of several pluripotency markers and the potential to differentiate 
into all three germ layers.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2023.103028
PMID: 36652844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.