1. Anal Chem. 2023 Jan 31;95(4):2532-2539. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c04986.
Epub  2023 Jan 18.

Exploring an Alternative Cysteine-Reactive Chemistry to Enable Proteome-Wide PPI 
Analysis by Cross-Linking Mass Spectrometry.

Jiao F(1), Salituro LJ(2), Yu C(1), Gutierrez CB(1), Rychnovsky SD(2), Huang 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, California 92697, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California 
92697, United States.

The development of MS-cleavable cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has 
enabled the effective capture and identification of endogenous protein-protein 
interactions (PPIs) and their residue contacts at the global scale without cell 
engineering. So far, only lysine-reactive cross-linkers have been successfully 
applied for proteome-wide PPI profiling. However, lysine cross-linkers alone 
cannot uncover the complete PPI map in cells. Previously, we have developed a 
maleimide-based cysteine-reactive MS-cleavable cross-linker (bismaleimide 
sulfoxide (BMSO)) that is effective for mapping PPIs of protein complexes to 
yield interaction contacts complementary to lysine-reactive reagents. While 
successful, the hydrolysis and limited selectivity of maleimides at 
physiological pH make their applications in proteome-wide XL-MS challenging. To 
enable global PPI mapping, we have explored an alternative cysteine-labeling 
chemistry and thus designed and synthesized a sulfoxide-containing MS-cleavable 
haloacetamide-based cross-linker, Dibromoacetamide sulfoxide (DBrASO). Our 
results have demonstrated that DBrASO cross-linked peptides display the same 
fragmentation characteristics as other sulfoxide-containing MS-cleavable 
cross-linkers, permitting their unambiguous identification by MSn. In 
combination with a newly developed two-dimensional peptide fractionation method, 
we have successfully performed DBrASO-based XL-MS analysis of HEK293 cell 
lysates and demonstrated its capability to complement lysine-reactive reagents 
and expand PPI coverage at the systems-level.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c04986
PMCID: PMC10284117
PMID: 36652389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest