1. Nat Commun. 2023 Jan 17;14(1):276. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-35876-8.

DNA damage and somatic mutations in mammalian cells after irradiation with a 
nail polish dryer.

Zhivagui M(1)(2)(3), Hoda A(1), Valenzuela N(3), Yeh YY(2), Dai J(2), He 
Y(1)(2)(3), Nandi SP(1)(2)(3), Otlu B(1)(2)(3), Van Houten B(4), Alexandrov 
LB(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
92093, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
(3)Moores Cancer Center, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.
(4)UPMC-Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, 
USA.
(5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
92093, USA. L2alexandrov@health.ucsd.edu.
(6)Department of Bioengineering, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. 
L2alexandrov@health.ucsd.edu.
(7)Moores Cancer Center, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA. 
L2alexandrov@health.ucsd.edu.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2023 Mar 14;14(1):1424. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-37245-x.

Ultraviolet A light is commonly emitted by UV-nail polish dryers with recent 
reports suggesting that long-term use may increase the risk for developing skin 
cancer. However, no experimental evaluation has been conducted to reveal the 
effect of radiation emitted by UV-nail polish dryers on mammalian cells. Here, 
we show that irradiation by a UV-nail polish dryer causes high levels of 
reactive oxygen species, consistent with 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine damage and 
mitochondrial dysfunction. Analysis of somatic mutations reveals a 
dose-dependent increase of C:G>A:T substitutions in irradiated samples with 
mutagenic patterns similar to mutational signatures previously attributed to 
reactive oxygen species. In summary, this study demonstrates that radiation 
emitted by UV-nail polish dryers can both damage DNA and permanently engrave 
mutations on the genomes of primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts, human foreskin 
fibroblasts, and human epidermal keratinocytes.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-35876-8
PMCID: PMC9845303
PMID: 36650165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.B.A. is a compensated consultant and has 
equity interest in io9, LLC. All other authors declare no competing interests.