1. J Am Chem Soc. 2023 Feb 1;145(4):2322-2331. doi: 10.1021/jacs.2c10937. Epub
2023  Jan 18.

Engineering Metastability into a Virus-like Particle to Enable Triggered 
Dissociation.

Starr CA(1), Nair S(1), Huang SY(2), Hagan MF(3), Jacobson SC(2), Zlotnick A(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 
47405, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405, 
United States.
(3)Martin Fisher School of Physics, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 
02454, United States.

For a virus-like particle (VLP) to serve as a delivery platform, the VLP must be 
able to release its cargo in response to a trigger. Here, we use a chemical 
biology approach to destabilize a self-assembling capsid for a subsequent 
triggered disassembly. We redesigned the dimeric hepatitis B virus (HBV) capsid 
protein (Cp) with two differentially addressable cysteines, C150 for reversibly 
crosslinking the capsid and C124 to react with a destabilizing moiety. The 
resulting construct, Cp150-V124C, assembles into icosahedral, 120-dimer VLPs 
that spontaneously crosslink via the C-terminal C150, leaving C124 buried at a 
dimer-dimer interface. The VLP is driven into a metastable state when C124 is 
reacted with the bulky fluorophore, maleimidyl BoDIPY-FL. The resulting VLP is 
stable until exposed to modest, physiologically relevant concentrations of 
reducing agent. We observe dissociation with FRET relaxation of polarization, 
size exclusion chromatography, and resistive-pulse sensing. Dissociation is 
slow, minutes to hours, with a characteristic lag phase. Mathematical modeling 
based on the presence of a nucleation step predicts disassembly dynamics that 
are consistent with experimental observations. VLPs transfected into hepatoma 
cells show similar dissociation behavior. These results suggest a generalizable 
strategy for designing a VLP that can release its contents in an environmentally 
responsive reaction.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.2c10937
PMCID: PMC10018796
PMID: 36651799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]