1. Ther Adv Hematol. 2023 Jan 12;14:20406207221149245. doi: 
10.1177/20406207221149245. eCollection 2023.

Genetic lesions and targeted therapy in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Li Z(1), Mu W(1), Xiao M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Avenue, Hankou, Wuhan 430030, 
China.

Hodgkin lymphoma is a special type of lymphoma in which tumor cells frequently 
undergo multiple genetic lesions that are associated with accompanying pathway 
abnormalities. These pathway abnormalities are dominated by active signaling 
pathways, such as the JAK-STAT (Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of 
transcription) pathway and the NFκB (nuclear factor kappa-B) pathway, which 
usually result in hyperactive survival signaling. Targeted therapies often play 
an important role in hematologic malignancies, such as CAR-T therapy (chimeric 
antigen receptor T-cell immunotherapy) targeting CD19 and CD22 in diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma, while in Hodgkin lymphoma, the main targets of targeted 
therapies are CD30 molecules and PD1 molecules. Drugs targeting other molecules 
are also under investigation. This review summarizes the actionable genetic 
lesions, current treatment options, clinical trials for Hodgkin lymphoma and the 
potential value of those genetic lesions in clinical applications.

© The Author(s), 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/20406207221149245
PMCID: PMC9841868
PMID: 36654739

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.