1. Cells. 2023 Jan 13;12(2):302. doi: 10.3390/cells12020302.

The Role of CTGF in Liver Fibrosis Induced in 3D Human Liver Spheroids.

Trampuž SR(1)(2), van Riet S(1), Nordling Å(1), Ingelman-Sundberg M(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pharmacogenetics, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, 
Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Vrazov trg 2, 1000 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) is involved in the regulation of 
extracellular matrix (ECM) production. Elevated levels of CTGF can be found in 
plasma from patients with liver fibrosis and in experimental animal models of 
liver fibrosis, but the exact role of CTGF in, e.g., diet-induced human liver 
fibrosis is not entirely known. To address this question, we utilized a 3D human 
liver co-culture spheroid model composed of hepatocytes and non-parenchymal 
cells, in which fibrosis is induced by TGF-β1, CTGF or free fatty acids (FFA). 
Treatment of the spheroids with TGF-β1 or FFA increased COL1A1 deposition as 
well as the expression of TGF-β1 and CTGF. Recombinant CTGF, as well as 
angiotensin II, caused increased expression and/or production of CTGF, TGF-β1, 
COL1A1, LOX, and IL-6. In addition, silencing of CTGF reduced both TGF-β1- and 
FFA-induced COL1A1 deposition. Furthermore, we found that IL-6 induced CTGF, 
COL1A1 and TGF-β1 production, suggesting that IL-6 is a mediator in the pathway 
of CTGF-induced fibrosis. Taken together, our data indicate a specific role for 
CTGF and CTGF downstream signaling pathways for the development of liver 
inflammation and fibrosis in the human 3D liver spheroid model.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12020302
PMCID: PMC9857203
PMID: 36672237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Magnus Ingelman-Sundberg is a co-founder and 
co-owner of HepaPredict AB. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.