1. Molecules. 2023 Jan 15;28(2):878. doi: 10.3390/molecules28020878.

Antiviral Activity of Benzoheterocyclic Compounds from Soil-Derived Streptomyces 
jiujiangensis NBERC-24992.

Liu M(1), Ren M(2), Zhang Y(1), Wan Z(1), Wang Y(1), Wu Z(1), Wang K(1), Fang 
W(1), Yang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Hubei Biopesticide Engineering Research Centre, Hubei Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, No. 8, Nanhu Ave., Hongshan District, Wuhan 430064, China.
(2)Institute of Infection, Immunology and Tumor Microenvironment, Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Process, Department of Pharmacy, Hubei Province Key Laboratory of 
Occupational Hazard Identification and Control, School of Medicine, Wuhan 
University of Science and Technology, No. 2, Huangjiahu East Road, Hongshan 
District, Wuhan 430081, China.

Pseudorabies virus (PRV) is a pathogen that causes Aujeszky's disease (AD) in 
animals, leading to huge economic losses to swine farms. In order to discover 
anti-PRV compounds, we studied the extracts of the strain Streptomyces 
jiujiangensis NBERC-24992, which showed significant anti-PRV activity. Eight 
benzoheterocyclic secondary metabolites, including three new compounds (1-3, 
virantmycins D-G) and five known compounds (4-8, virantmycin, A-503451 D, 
A-503451 D acetylate, A-503451 A, and A-503451 B), were isolated from the broth 
of NBERC-24992. The structures of the new compounds were identified by using 
extensive spectroscopic data, including mass spectrometry (MS), nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR), and electronic circular dichroism (ECD). Compound 1 was found 
to be a novel heterocyclic compound with a tricyclic skeleton from natural 
product. All compounds were tested for antiviral activity, and 4 (virantmycin) 
showed an excellent effect against PRV and was better than ribavirin and 
acyclovir. Our study revealed that chlorine atom and tetrahydroquinoline 
skeleton were important active moiety for antiviral activity. Virantmycin could 
be a suitable leading compound for an antiviral drug against PRV.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28020878
PMCID: PMC9866866
PMID: 36677936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.