1. Molecules. 2023 Jan 10;28(2):692. doi: 10.3390/molecules28020692.

Identifying Potential Molecular Targets in Fungi Based on (Dis)Similarities in 
Binding Site Architecture with Proteins of the Human Pharmacolome.

Bedoya-Cardona JE(1), Rubio-Carrasquilla M(1)(2), Ramírez-Velásquez IM(1)(3), 
Valdés-Tresanco MS(1), Moreno E(1).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Ciencias Básicas, Universidad de Medellín, Medellin 050026, 
Colombia.
(2)Corporación para Investigaciones Biológicas, Medellin 050034, Colombia.
(3)Instituto Tecnológico Metropolitano, Medellin 050034, Colombia.

Invasive fungal infections represent a public health problem that worsens over 
the years with the increasing resistance to current antimycotic agents. 
Therefore, there is a compelling medical need of widening the antifungal drug 
repertoire, following different methods such as drug repositioning, 
identification and validation of new molecular targets and developing new 
inhibitors against these targets. In this work we developed a structure-based 
strategy for drug repositioning and new drug design, which can be applied to 
infectious fungi and other pathogens. Instead of applying the commonly accepted 
off-target criterion to discard fungal proteins with close homologues in humans, 
the core of our approach consists in identifying fungal proteins with active 
sites that are structurally similar, but preferably not identical to binding 
sites of proteins from the so-called "human pharmacolome". Using structural 
information from thousands of human protein target-inhibitor complexes, we 
identified dozens of proteins in fungal species of the genera Histoplasma, 
Candida, Cryptococcus, Aspergillus and Fusarium, which might be exploited for 
drug repositioning and, more importantly, also for the design of new 
fungus-specific inhibitors. As a case study, we present the in vitro experiments 
performed with a set of selected inhibitors of the human mitogen-activated 
protein kinases 1/2 (MEK1/2), several of which showed a marked cytotoxic 
activity in different fungal species.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28020692
PMCID: PMC9860719
PMID: 36677748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.