1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 5;24(2):1007. doi: 10.3390/ijms24021007.

Sperm DNA Fragmentation and Sperm-Borne miRNAs: Molecular Biomarkers of Embryo 
Development?

Conflitti AC(1), Cicolani G(1), Buonacquisto A(1), Pallotti F(1), Faja F(1), 
Bianchini S(1), Blaconà G(2), Bruno SM(2), Linari A(3), Lucarelli M(2)(4), 
Montanino D(3), Muzii L(3), Lenzi A(1), Lombardo F(1), Paoli D(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Seminology-Sperm Bank "Loredana Gandini", Department of 
Experimental Medicine, "Sapienza" University of Rome, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, "Sapienza" University of Rome, 00161 
Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Maternal Infantile and Urological Sciences, "Sapienza" 
University of Rome, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(4)Pasteur Institute, Cenci Bolognetti Foundation, 00161 Rome, Italy.

The evaluation of morpho-functional sperm characteristics alone is not enough to 
explain infertility or to predict the outcome of Assisted Reproductive 
Technologies (ART): more sensitive diagnostic tools are needed in clinical 
practice. The aim of the present study was to analyze Sperm DNA Fragmentation 
(SDF) and sperm-borne miR-34c-5p and miR-449b-5p levels in men of couples 
undergoing ART, in order to investigate any correlations with fertilization 
rate, embryo quality and development. Male partners (n = 106) were recruited. 
Semen analysis, SDF evaluation and molecular profiling analysis of miR-34c-5p 
and miR-449b-5p (in 38 subjects) were performed. Sperm DNA Fragmentation 
evaluation- a positive correlation between SDF post sperm selection and the 
percentage of low-quality embryos and a negative correlation with viable embryo 
were found. SDF > 2.9% increased the risk of obtaining a non-viable embryo by 
almost 4-fold. Sperm miRNAs profile—we found an association with both miRNAs and 
sperm concentration, while miR-449b-5p is positively associated with SDF. 
Moreover, the two miRNAs are positively correlated. Higher levels of miR-34c-5p 
compared to miR-449b-5p increases by 14-fold the probability of obtaining viable 
embryos. This study shows that SDF, sperm miR-34c-5p, and miR-449b-5p have a 
promising role as biomarkers of semen quality and ART outcome.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24021007
PMCID: PMC9864861
PMID: 36674527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.