1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jan 7;14(1):170. doi: 10.3390/genes14010170.

Association between Genetic Variants and Peripheral Neuropathy in Patients with 
NSCLC Treated with First-Line Platinum-Based Therapy.

de Jong C(1)(2), Herder GJM(3), van Haarlem SWA(4), van der Meer FS(5), van 
Lindert ASR(6), Ten Heuvel A(7), Brouwer J(8), Egberts TCG(1)(9), Deneer 
VHM(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Division of Laboratories, Pharmacy, and 
Biomedical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3508 GA Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, St. Antonius Hospital, 3430 EM Nieuwegein, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pulmonology, Meander Medical Center, 3813 TZ Amersfoort, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pulmonology, St Antonius Hospital, 3430 EM Nieuwegein, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pulmonology, Diakonessenhuis, 3582 KE Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pulmonology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3508 GA 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pulmonology, Groene Hart Hospital, 2803 HH Gouda, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Department of Pulmonology, Rivierenland Hospital, 4002 WP Tiel, The 
Netherlands.
(9)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute 
for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, 3584 CG Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.

Background: Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is a common, 
disabling side effect in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated 
with platinum-based therapy. There is increasing evidence for associations 
between genetic variants and susceptibility to CIPN. The aim of this study was 
to further explore genetic risk factors for CIPN by investigating previously 
reported genetic associations. Methods: A multicenter prospective follow-up 
study (PGxLUNG, NTR NL5373610015) in NSCLC patients (stage II-IV) treated with 
first-line platinum-based (cisplatin or carboplatin) chemotherapy was conducted. 
Clinical evaluation of neuropathy (CTCAE v4.03) was performed at baseline and 
before each cycle (four cycles, every three weeks) of chemotherapy and at three 
and six months after treatment initiation. The relationship between 34 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 26 genes and any grade (grade ≥ 1) and severe 
(grade ≥ 2) CIPN was assessed by using univariate and multivariate logistic 
regression modelling. Results: In total, 320 patients were included of which 
26.3% (n = 84) and 8.1% (n = 26) experienced any grade and severe CIPN, 
respectively. The GG-genotype (rs879207, A > G) of TRPV1, a gene expressed in 
peripheral sensory neurons, was observed in 11.3% (n = 36) of the patients and 
associated with an increased risk of severe neuropathy (OR 5.2, 95%CI 2.1−12.8, 
adjusted p-value 0.012). A quarter (25%, n = 9/36) of the patients with the 
GG-genotype developed severe neuropathy compared to 6% (n = 17/282) of the 
patients with the AG- or AA-genotype. Multivariate logistic regression analysis 
showed statistically significant associations between the GG-genotype (ORadj 
4.7, 95%CI 1.8−12.3) and between concomitant use of paclitaxel (ORadj 7.2, 95%CI 
2.5−21.1) and severe CIPN. Conclusions: Patients with the GG-genotype (rs879207) 
of TRPV1 have an almost 5-fold higher risk of developing severe neuropathy when 
treated with platinum-based therapy. Future studies should aim to validate these 
findings in an independent cohort and to further investigated the 
individualization of platinum-based chemotherapy in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14010170
PMCID: PMC9858836
PMID: 36672910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.