1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 12;24(2):1547. doi: 10.3390/ijms24021547.

Effect of Antibiotic Exposure on Staphylococcus epidermidis Responsible for 
Catheter-Related Bacteremia.

Pouget C(1), Chatre C(2), Lavigne JP(1), Pantel A(1), Reynes J(3), Dunyach-Remy 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Hospital Hygiene, Bacterial Virulence and 
Chronic Infections, INSERM U1047, CHU Nîmes Univiversity Montpellier, CEDEX 09, 
30029 Nîmes, France.
(2)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, CH Perpignan, 66000 
Perpignan, France.
(3)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, IRD UMI 233, INSERM U1175, 
CHU Montpellier, University Montpellier, CEDEX 5, 34295 Montpellier, France.

Coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS) and especially Staphylococcus 
epidermidis are responsible for health care infections, notably in the presence 
of foreign material (e.g., venous or central-line catheters). Catheter-related 
bacteremia (CRB) increases health care costs and mortality. The aim of our study 
was to evaluate the impact of 15 days of antibiotic exposure (ceftobiprole, 
daptomycin, linezolid and vancomycin) at sub-inhibitory concentration on the 
resistance, fitness and genome evolution of 36 clinical strains of S. 
epidermidis responsible for CRB. Resistance was evaluated by antibiogram, the 
ability to adapt metabolism by the Biofilm Ring test® and the in vivo nematode 
virulence model. The impact of antibiotic exposure was determined by 
whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and biofilm formation experiments. We observed 
that S. epidermidis strains presented a wide variety of virulence potential and 
biofilm formation. After antibiotic exposure, S. epidermidis strains adapted 
their fitness with an increase in biofilm formation. Antibiotic exposure also 
affected genes involved in resistance and was responsible for cross-resistance 
between vancomycin, daptomycin and ceftobiprole. Our data confirmed that 
antibiotic exposure modified bacterial pathogenicity and the emergence of 
resistant bacteria.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24021547
PMCID: PMC9863639
PMID: 36675063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.