1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jan 16;14(1):233. doi: 10.3390/genes14010233.

Clinical Evaluation of BioFire COVID-19 Test, BioFire Respiratory Panel 2.1, and 
Cepheid Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2 Assays for Sample-to-Answer Detection of 
SARS-CoV-2.

Park J(1)(2), Kim SY(3), Lee J(1)(2), Hong KH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Jeonbuk National University Medical School 
and Hospital, Jeonju 54907, Republic of Korea.
(2)Research Institute of Clinical Medicine of Jeonbuk National 
University-Biomedical Research Institute of Jeonbuk National University 
Hospital, Jeonju 54907, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Medical Center, Seoul 04564, 
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 
Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea.

Background: Due to the extreme infectivity of SARS-CoV-2, sample-to-answer 
SARS-CoV-2 reverse transcription (RT) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays are 
urgently needed in order to facilitate infectious disease surveillance and 
control. The purpose of this study was to evaluate three sample-to-answer 
SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR assays—BioFire COVID-19 Test, BioFire RP 2.1, and Cepheid 
Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2—using clinical samples. Methods: A total of 77 leftover 
nasopharyngeal swab (NP) swabs (36 positives and 41 negatives) confirmed by 
reference SARS-CoV-2 RT real-time (q) PCR assay were collected. The clinical 
sample concordance, as specified by their respective emergency use 
authorizations (EUAs), in comparison to the reference SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR assay, 
was assessed. Results: The results showed that all three sample-to-answer 
SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR assays provided perfectly concordant results consistent with 
the reference SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR assay. The BioFire COVID-19 Test exhibited the 
best turnaround time (TAT) compared to the other assays, regardless of the test 
results, using one-way analysis of variance followed by Scheffe’s post hoc test 
(p < 0.001). The Xpert Xpress SARS-CoV-2 showed a shorter average TAT (mean ± 
standard deviation, 49.9 ± 3.1 min) in the positive samples compared to that 
(55.7 ± 2.5 min) of the negative samples. Conclusions: Our evaluation 
demonstrates that the BioFire COVID-19 Test, BioFire RP 2.1, and Cepheid Xpert 
Xpress SARS-CoV-2 assays compare favorably to the reference SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR 
assay, along with a 100% concordance in assay results for clinical samples and 
an acceptable analytical performance at their guaranteed limits of detection. 
The addition of a widely used simultaneous sample-to-answer SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR 
assay will contribute to the number of medical laboratories able to test for 
COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14010233
PMCID: PMC9859140
PMID: 36672974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).