1. World J Gastroenterol. 2023 Jan 14;29(2):286-309. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i2.286.

Screening and interventions to prevent nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease/nonalcoholic steatohepatitis-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.

Cernea S(1)(2), Onișor D(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department M3/Internal Medicine I, George Emil Palade University of Medicine, 
Pharmacy, Science and Technology of Târgu Mureș, Târgu Mureş 540139, Romania.
(2)Diabetes, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases Outpatient Unit, Emergency County 
Clinical Hospital, Târgu Mureş 540136, Romania. simonacernea@yahoo.com.
(3)Department ME2/Internal Medicine VII, George Emil Palade University of 
Medicine, Pharmacy, Science, and Technology of Târgu Mureş, Târgu Mureş 540139, 
Romania.
(4)Gastroenterology Department, Mureș County Clinical Hospital, Târgu Mureș 
540072, Romania.

Liver cancer is the sixth most commonly diagnosed cancer worldwide, with 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) comprising most cases. Besides hepatitis B and C 
viral infections, heavy alcohol use, and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis 
(NASH)-associated advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis, several other risk factors for 
HCC have been identified (i.e. old age, obesity, insulin resistance, type 2 
diabetes). These might in fact partially explain the occurrence of HCC in 
non-cirrhotic patients without viral infection. HCC surveillance through 
effective screening programs is still an unmet need for many nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD) patients, and identification of pre-cirrhotic individuals 
who progress to HCC represents a substantial challenge in clinical practice at 
the moment. Patients with NASH-cirrhosis should undergo systematic HCC 
surveillance, while this might be considered in patients with advanced fibrosis 
based on individual risk assessment. In this context, interventions that 
potentially prevent NAFLD/ NASH-associated HCC are needed. This paper provided 
an overview of evidence related to lifestyle changes (i.e. weight loss, physical 
exercise, adherence to healthy dietary patterns, intake of certain dietary 
components, etc.) and pharmacological interventions that might play a protective 
role by targeting the underlying causative factors and pathogenetic mechanisms. 
However, well-designed prospective studies specifically dedicated to NAFLD/NASH 
patients are still needed to clarify the relationship with HCC risk.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i2.286
PMCID: PMC9846941
PMID: 36687124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare having no conflicts of interest regarding this paper.