1. Front Public Health. 2023 Jan 6;10:976686. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.976686. 
eCollection 2022.

SARS-CoV-2 delta (B.1.617.2) spike protein adjuvanted with Alum-3M-052 enhances 
antibody production and neutralization ability.

Huang H(1), Zhou Z(1), Xiong X(1), Liu Z(1), Zheng X(1), Quan Q(2), Yu M(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Male Reproduction and Genetics, Guangdong Provincial 
Reproductive Science Institute (Guangdong Provincial Fertility Hospital), 
Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Optimizing adjuvant is one of the critical methods to improve the 
vaccine. 3M-052, a novel TLR7/8 agonist which was designed for slow 
dissemination at the injection site, has a potential as adjuvant, but its 
performance as a vaccine adjuvant for SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.617.2) spike protein has 
not been studied. The present study aimed to evaluate the effect of Alum-3M-052 
as an adjuvant to improve mice serum antibody titers and pseudovirus 
neutralization efficiency.
METHOD: Female Balb/c mice were immunized 3 times at day 0, 7 and 21 
intramuscularly with SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.617.2) spike protein and adjuvant (Alum or 
Alum-3M-052). Mice serum was collected weekly since day 7. Antibody titers of 
mice serum anti-SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.617.2) IgG and IgM were detected by ELISA. 
Inhibition rates of mice serum blocking SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.617.2) spike protein 
binding to ACE2 were detected by SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.617.2) Inhibitor Screening Kit. 
Neutralization efficiencies of mice serum against both SARS-CoV-2 (BA.2.12.1) 
pseudovirus and SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.617.2) pseudovirus were detected by pseudovirus 
neutralizing assay.
RESULT: Serum of mice immunized by SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.617.2) spike protein 
adjuvanted with Alum-3M-052 had highest antibody titers and higher 
neutralization efficiency against both SARS-CoV-2 (BA.2.12.1) pseudovirus and 
SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.617.2) pseudovirus. Besides, neutralization efficiency of 
anti-SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.617.2) spike protein antibody against SARS-CoV-2 
(BA.2.12.1) pseudovirus was lower than that of SARS-CoV-2 (B.1.617.2) 
pseudovirus.
CONCLUSION: Alum-3M-052 rapidly increased the titer of anti-SARS-CoV-2 
(B.1.617.2) spike protein neutralizing antibodies and enhanced the 
neutralization ability against pseudoviruses and variants. This study provided 
evidence for the application of Alum-3M-052 as an adjuvant in COVID-19 vaccines 
production.

Copyright Â© 2023 Huang, Zhou, Xiong, Liu, Zheng, Quan and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.976686
PMCID: PMC9853420
PMID: 36684881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.