1. Front Genet. 2023 Jan 4;13:1058668. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1058668.
eCollection  2022.

Identification of extremely GC-rich micro RNAs for RT-qPCR data normalization in 
human plasma.

Baumann V(1), Athanasiou AT(1), Faridani OR(2)(3), Schwerdtfeger AR(4), Wallner 
B(5), Steinborn R(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Genomics Core Facility, VetCore, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, 
Austria.
(2)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Lowy Cancer Research Centre, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of New 
South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Institute of Psychology, Karl-Franzens-University Graz, Graz, Austria.
(5)Department of Behavioral and Cognitive Biology, University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.

Erratum in
    Front Genet. 2023 May 31;14:1216150. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1216150.

We aimed at extending the repertoire of high-quality miRNA normalizers for 
reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) of human plasma with special 
emphasis on the extremely guanine-cytosine-rich portion of the miRNome. For 
high-throughput selection of stable candidates, microarray technology was 
preferred over small-RNA sequencing (sRNA-seq) since the latter underrepresented 
miRNAs with a guanine-cytosine (GC) content of at least 75% (p = 0.0002, n = 2). 
miRNA abundances measured on the microarray were ranked for consistency and 
uniformity using nine normalization approaches. The eleven most stable sequences 
included miRNAs of moderate, but also extreme GC content (45%-65%: miR-320d, 
miR-425-5p, miR-185-5p, miR-486-5p; 80%-95%: miR-1915-3p, miR-3656-5p, 
miR-3665-5p, miR-3960-5p, miR-4488-5p, miR-4497 and miR-4787-5p). In contrast, 
the seven extremely GC-rich miRNAs were not found in the two plasma miRNomes 
screened by sRNA-seq. Stem-loop RT-qPCR was employed for stability verification 
in 32 plasma samples of healthy male Caucasians (age range: 18-55 years). In 
general, inter-individual variance of miRNA abundance was low or very low as 
indicated by coefficient of variation (CV) values of 0.6%-8.2%. miR-3665 and 
miR-1915-3p outperformed in this analysis (CVs: 0.6 and 2.4%, respectively). The 
eight most stable sequences included four extremely GC-rich miRNAs (miR-1915-3p, 
miR-3665, miR-4787-5p and miR-4497). The best-performing duo normalization 
factor (NF) for the condition of human plasma, miR-320d and miR-4787-5p, also 
included a GC-extreme miRNA. In summary, the identification of extremely 
guanine-cytosine-rich plasma normalizers will help to increase accuracy of 
PCR-based miRNA quantification, thus raise the potential that miRNAs become 
markers for psychological stress reactions or early and precise diagnosis of 
clinical phenotypes. The novel miRNAs might also be useful for orthologous 
contexts considering their conservation in related animal genomes.

Copyright © 2023 Baumann, Athanasiou, Faridani, Schwerdtfeger, Wallner and 
Steinborn.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1058668
PMCID: PMC9846067
PMID: 36685854

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.