1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Mar;299(3):102928. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.102928. Epub 2023
 Jan 19.

Inositol pyrophosphate profiling reveals regulatory roles of IP6K2-dependent 
enhanced IP(7) metabolism in the enteric nervous system.

Ito M(1), Fujii N(2), Kohara S(2), Hori S(3), Tanaka M(3), Wittwer C(4), Kikuchi 
K(5), Iijima T(6), Kakimoto Y(7), Hirabayashi K(8), Kurotaki D(5), Jessen HJ(4), 
Saiardi A(9), Nagata E(10).

Author information:
(1)Support Center for Medical Research and Education, Tokai University, Isehara, 
Japan. Electronic address: masa104-ito@tokai-u.jp.
(2)Department of Neurology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.
(3)Support Center for Medical Research and Education, Tokai University, Isehara, 
Japan.
(4)Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Laboratory of Chromatin Organization in Immune Cell Development, 
International Research Center for Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 
Kumamoto, Japan.
(6)Department of Molecular Life Science, Tokai University School of Medicine, 
Isehara, Japan.
(7)Department of Forensic Medicine, Tokai University School of Medicine, 
Isehara, Japan.
(8)Department of Pathology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.
(9)Medical Research Council Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University 
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(10)Department of Neurology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, 
Japan. Electronic address: enagata@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp.

Inositol pyrophosphates regulate diverse physiological processes; to better 
understand their functional roles, assessing their tissue-specific distribution 
is important. Here, we profiled inositol pyrophosphate levels in mammalian 
organs using an originally designed liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry 
(LC-MS) protocol and discovered that the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) contained 
the highest levels of diphosphoinositol pentakisphosphate (IP7) and its 
precursor inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6). Although their absolute levels in the 
GIT are diet dependent, elevated IP7 metabolism still exists under dietary 
regimens devoid of exogenous IP7. Of the major GIT cells, enteric neurons 
selectively express the IP7-synthesizing enzyme IP6K2. We found that 
IP6K2-knockout mice exhibited significantly impaired IP7 metabolism in the 
various organs including the proximal GIT. In addition, our LC-MS analysis 
displayed that genetic ablation of IP6K2 significantly impaired IP7 metabolism 
in the gut and duodenal muscularis externa containing myenteric plexus. Whole 
transcriptome analysis of duodenal muscularis externa further suggested that 
IP6K2 inhibition significantly altered expression levels of the gene sets 
associated with mature neurons, neural progenitor/stem cells, and glial cells, 
as well as of certain genes modulating neuronal differentiation and functioning, 
implying critical roles of the IP6K2-IP7 axis in developmental and functional 
regulation of the enteric nervous system. These results collectively reveal an 
unexpected role of mammalian IP7-a highly active IP6K2-IP7 pathway is conducive 
to the enteric nervous system.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.102928
PMCID: PMC9957762
PMID: 36681123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.