1. Onco Targets Ther. 2023 Jan 18;16:17-22. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S391766. eCollection
 2023.

A Primary Lung and Breast Cancer Patient with Germline EGFR R776H Mutation: A 
Case Report and Literature Review.

Li D(#)(1), Liu X(#)(1), Cui S(1), Yang D(1), Zhu Y(1), Pan E(2), Yang P(2), Dai 
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)The Second Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, The Second Hospital of 
Dalian Medical University, Dalian, People's Republic of China.
(2)Nanjing Geneseeq Technology Inc., Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

For advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with common epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations (exon 19 deletions or the exon 21 L858R 
mutation), tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are the standard therapies. 
However, EGFR germline mutations are extremely rare in lung cancer, and the 
effective therapy is unclear. This study reports a patient with primary breast 
and lung cancer carried rare germline EGFR R776H and somatic L861Q mutation, who 
benefit from EGFR TKIs. Her family cancer history review demonstrated that her 
three out of four sisters with lung cancer were positive for EGFR R776H. 
Interestingly, only her healthy sister had type O blood, different from other 
sisters with type B blood. Our study provides a meaningful insight into the 
potential treatment option for patients with germline EGFR R776H and somatic 
L861Q mutation and highlights the importance of next-generation sequencing (NGS) 
in discovering rare genetic alterations to guide the prevention of genetic 
disease.

Â© 2023 Li et al.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S391766
PMCID: PMC9868143
PMID: 36698436

Conflict of interest statement: Evenki Pan and Peng Yang are employed by Nanjing 
Geneseeq Technology Inc. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.