1. Metabolomics. 2023 Jan 24;19(2):7. doi: 10.1007/s11306-023-01971-6.

A metabolic readout of the urine metabolome of COVID-19 patients.

Marhuenda-Egea FC(1), Narro-Serrano J(2), Shalabi-Benavent MJ(3), Álamo-Marzo 
JM(3), Amador-Prous C(4), Algado-Rabasa JT(4), Garijo-Saiz AM(4), Marco-Escoto 
M(4).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Agroquímica y Bioquímica, Universidad de Alicante, Alicante, 
Spain. frutos@ua.es.
(2)Departamento de Química Física, Universidad de Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(3)Biochemical Laboratory, Hospital Marina Baixa, Villajoyosa, Spain.
(4)Hospital Marina Baixa, Villajoyosa, Spain.

Analysis of urine samples from COVID-19 patients by 1H NMR reveals important 
metabolic alterations due to SAR-CoV-2 infection. Previous studies have 
identified biomarkers in urine that reflect metabolic alterations in COVID-19 
patients. We have used 1H NMR to better define these metabolic alterations since 
this technique allows us to obtain a broad profile of the metabolites present in 
urine. This technique offers the advantage that sample preparation is very 
simple and gives us very complete information on the metabolites present. To 
detect these alterations, we have compared urine samples from COVID-19 patients 
(n = 35) with healthy people (n = 18). We used unsupervised (Robust PCA) and 
supervised (PLS-LDA) multivariate analysis methods to evaluate the differences 
between the two groups: COVID-19 and healthy controls. The differences focus on 
a group of metabolites related to energy metabolism (glucose, ketone bodies, 
glycine, creatinine, and citrate) and other processes related to bacterial flora 
(TMAO and formic acid) and detoxification (hippuric acid). The alterations in 
the urinary metabolome shown in this work indicate that SARS-CoV-2 causes a 
metabolic change from a normal situation of glucose consumption towards a 
gluconeogenic situation and possible insulin resistance.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11306-023-01971-6
PMCID: PMC9873393
PMID: 36694097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.