1. Mol Biol Cell. 2023 Mar 1;34(3):ar22. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E22-07-0261. Epub 2023 
Jan 25.

Targeting of Hmo1 to subcompartments of the budding yeast nucleolus.

Girke P(1), Seufert W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Regensburg, D-93040 Regensburg, 
Germany.

The nucleolus is a multilayered, membraneless organelle made up of liquidlike 
biogenesis compartments surrounding an array of ribosomal RNA genes (rDNA). 
Biogenesis factors accumulate in the outer compartments through RNA binding and 
phase separation promoted by intrinsically disordered protein regions. In 
contrast, the nucleolar localization of rDNA-binding proteins, which reside in 
the central chromatin compartment, is less well characterized. To gain 
mechanistic insight, we analyzed the localization, mitotic segregation, nucleic 
acid binding, and nuclear dynamics of the budding yeast rDNA-binding protein 
Hmo1. Deletion of the main DNA-binding domain, the HMG boxB, compromised Hmo1 
transfer to daughter cells in mitosis and transcription-independent rDNA 
association but still allowed nucleolar localization. The C-terminal lysine-rich 
region turned out to be a combined nuclear and nucleolar localization sequence 
(NLS-NoLS). Its integrity was required for maximal enrichment and efficient 
retention of Hmo1 in the nucleolus and nucleolar localization of the Î”boxB 
construct. Moreover, the NLS-NoLS region was sufficient to promote nucleolar 
accumulation and bound nucleic acids in vitro with some preference for RNA. 
Bleaching experiments indicated mobility of Hmo1 inside the nucleolus but little 
exchange with the nucleoplasm. Thus, a bilayered targeting mechanism secures 
proper localization of Hmo1 to the nucleolus.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E22-07-0261
PMCID: PMC10011721
PMID: 36696177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]