1. J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep. 2023 Jan-Dec;11:23247096221150637. doi: 
10.1177/23247096221150637.

Novel Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita Presentation in a Newborn With Pierpont 
Syndrome.

Pereira-Nunes J(1)(2), Vilan A(1)(2), Grangeia A(1)(2), d'Oliveira R(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Porto University, Porto, Portugal.

Pierpont syndrome is a rare and recently described multiple congenital anomaly 
syndrome, classically characterized by global developmental delay, distinctive 
facial dysmorphic features, and abnormal fat distribution in distal limbs. Only 
few cases were previously documented. We report a case of a term male neonate 
admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit because of feeding difficulties. 
Intrauterine growth restriction, microcephaly, and bilateral equinovarus foot 
were diagnosed in the second trimester, and prenatal array comparative genomic 
hybridization showed no abnormality. Physical examination revealed bilateral 
flexion deformities of wrists, elbows, knees and clubfoot, large hands and feet, 
deep palmar and plantar grooves, and calcaneo-plantar fat pads. Craniofacial 
dysmorphism, axial hypotonia, and hypoactivity were also observed. Due to the 
presence of congenital and non-progressive joint contractures, arthrogryposis 
multiplex congenita (AMC) was considered. A comprehensive diagnostic workup, 
including a Next Generation Sequencing target panel, was performed but did not 
establish a diagnosis. The clinical exome identified an heterozygous pathogenic 
variant in the TBL1XR1 gene (NM_001321194.1: c.1337A>G, p.[Tyr446Cys]), allowing 
Pierpont syndrome diagnosis. Our case stands out for reporting the novel AMC 
presentation in a Pierpont syndrome newborn. The broader and precocious genetic 
testing proved to be an essential clarifying diagnostic tool. Our patient 
supports the relation between the p.Tyr446Cys sequence variant in TBL1XR1 gene 
with this rare syndrome, reinforcing its association with a distinctive and 
recognizable phenotype, as well as expanding its clinical features to include 
AMC.

DOI: 10.1177/23247096221150637
PMCID: PMC9880567
PMID: 36691917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.