1. J Mol Biol. 2023 Mar 1;435(5):167973. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2023.167973. Epub
2023  Jan 20.

Fidelity of Ribonucleotide Incorporation by the SARS-CoV-2 Replication Complex.

Yin X(1), Popa H(1), Stapon A(1), Bouda E(1), Garcia-Diaz M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, State University of New York at Stony 
Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, State University of New York at Stony 
Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA. Electronic address: 
miguel.garcia-diaz@stonybrook.edu.

The SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus has caused a global pandemic. Despite the initial 
success of vaccines at preventing infection, genomic variation has led to the 
proliferation of variants capable of higher infectivity. Mutations in the 
SARS-CoV-2 genome are the consequence of replication errors, highlighting the 
importance of understanding the determinants of SARS-CoV-2 replication fidelity. 
The RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) is the central catalytic subunit for 
SARS-CoV-2 RNA replication and genome transcription. Here, we report the 
fidelity of ribonucleotide incorporation by SARS-CoV-2 RdRp (nsp12), along with 
its co-factors nsp7/nsp8, using steady-state kinetic analysis. Our analysis 
suggests that in the absence of the proofreading subunit (nsp14), the nsp12/7/8 
complex has a surprisingly low base substitution fidelity (10-1-10-3). This is 
orders of magnitude lower than the fidelity reported for other coronaviruses 
(10-6-10-7), highlighting the importance of proofreading for faithful SARS-CoV-2 
replication. We performed a mutational analysis of all reported SARS-CoV-2 
genomes and identified mutations in both nsp12 and nsp14 that appear likely to 
lower viral replication fidelity through mechanisms that include impairing the 
nsp14 exonuclease activity or its association with the RdRp. Our observations 
provide novel insight into the mechanistic basis of replication fidelity in 
SARS-CoV-2 and the potential effect of nsp12 and nsp14 mutations on replication 
fidelity, informing the development of future antiviral agents and SARS-CoV-2 
vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2023. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2023.167973
PMCID: PMC9854147
PMID: 36690070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]