1. Neurology. 2023 May 23;100(21):1020-1024. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206900. 
Epub 2023 Jan 25.

Pearls & Oy-sters: Harnessing New Diagnostic and Therapeutic Approaches to Treat 
a Patient With Genetic Drug-Resistant Focal Epilepsy.

Khan A(1), Middlebrooks EH(1), Javarayee P(1), Tatum WO(1), Sanchez Bolurate 
SS(1), Grewal SS(1), Feyissa AM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neurology (A.K., W.O.T., S.S.S.-B., A.M.F.) and 
Radiology (E.H.M.), Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL; Department of Pediatric 
Neurology (P.J.), Norton Children's Hospital, Louisville, KY; and Department of 
Neurosurgery (S.S.S.-B.), Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL.
(2)From the Departments of Neurology (A.K., W.O.T., S.S.S.-B., A.M.F.) and 
Radiology (E.H.M.), Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL; Department of Pediatric 
Neurology (P.J.), Norton Children's Hospital, Louisville, KY; and Department of 
Neurosurgery (S.S.S.-B.), Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL. 
feyissa.anteneh@mayo.edu.

Focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) is a congenital developmental malformation and is 
one of the leading causes of drug-resistant focal epilepsy (DRFE). Although 
focal epilepsies traditionally have been regarded as acquired disorders, 
increasing evidence suggests a substantial genetic contribution to the 
pathogenesis of focal structural epilepsies, including FCDs. Variations in the 
Dishevelled, Egl-10, and domain-containing protein 5 (DEPDC5) have recently 
emerged as a causative gene mutation in familial focal epilepsies associated 
with FCD type 2a, including bottom-of-sulcus dysplasia (BOSD). We present the 
case of a 20-year-old man with DRFE, positive for DEPDC5 c.1555C>T (p.GIn519*) 
heterozygous pathogenic variant. Initial 3T brain MRI was unrevealing, but 
subsequent 7T MRI including 7T edge-enhancing gradient echo revealed a left 
superior frontal sulcus BOSD concordant with the electroclinical data. The 
patient underwent treatment with MR-guided laser interstitial thermal ablation 
of the left frontal BOSD without intracranial EEG monitoring (skipped 
candidate), resulting in a seizure-free outcome of 9 months since the last 
follow-up. Our case highlights the real-world application of summative 
information obtained through advancements in epilepsy genetic testing, minimally 
invasive surgeries, and ultra-high field MRI, allowing us to provide a safe and 
effective treatment for a patient with a genetic DRFE.

Â© 2023 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206900
PMCID: PMC10238152
PMID: 36697241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go 
to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.