1. Elife. 2023 Jan 25;12:e85836. doi: 10.7554/eLife.85836.

Activation-pathway transitions in human voltage-gated proton channels revealed 
by a non-canonical fluorescent amino acid.

Suárez-Delgado E(1), Orozco-Contreras M(1), Rangel-Yescas GE(1), Islas LD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Universidad Nacional Autónoma 
de México, México City, Mexico.

Voltage-dependent gating of the voltage-gated proton channels (HV1) remains 
poorly understood, partly because of the difficulty of obtaining direct 
measurements of voltage sensor movement in the form of gating currents. To 
circumvent this problem, we have implemented patch-clamp fluorometry in 
combination with the incorporation of the fluorescent non-canonical amino acid 
Anap to monitor channel opening and movement of the S4 segment. Simultaneous 
recording of currents and fluorescence signals allows for direct correlation of 
these parameters and investigation of their dependence on voltage and the pH 
gradient (ΔpH). We present data that indicate that Anap incorporated in the S4 
helix is quenched by an aromatic residue located in the S2 helix and that motion 
of the S4 relative to this quencher is responsible for fluorescence increases 
upon depolarization. The kinetics of the fluorescence signal reveal the 
existence of a very slow transition in the deactivation pathway, which seems to 
be singularly regulated by ΔpH. Our experiments also suggest that the voltage 
sensor can move after channel opening and that the absolute value of the pH can 
influence the channel opening step. These results shed light on the complexities 
of voltage-dependent opening of human HV1 channels.

© 2023, Suárez-Delgado et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.85836
PMCID: PMC9925047
PMID: 36695566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ES, MO, GR No competing interests declared, LI 
Reviewing editor, eLife