1. Virol Sin. 2023 Apr;38(2):296-308. doi: 10.1016/j.virs.2023.01.008. Epub 2023 
Jan 23.

Identification of niclosamide as a novel antiviral agent against porcine 
epidemic diarrhea virus infection by targeting viral internalization.

Wang Y(1), Huang H(1), Li D(1), Zhao C(1), Li S(1), Qin P(1), Li Y(1), Yang 
X(1), Du W(2), Li W(3), Li Y(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, 
450002, China.
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, 3584 CL, the 
Netherlands.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China; Hubei Hongshan 
Laboratory, Wuhan, 430070, China. Electronic address: wentao@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, 
450002, China; Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, 3584 
CL, the Netherlands. Electronic address: yongtaole@126.com.

Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV), an enteropathogenic coronavirus, has 
catastrophic impacts on the global pig industry. However, there remain no 
effective drugs against PEDV infection. In this study, we utilized a recombinant 
PEDV expressing renilla luciferase (PEDV-Rluc) to screen potential anti-PEDV 
agents from an FDA-approved drug library in Vero cells. Four compounds were 
identified that significantly decreased luciferase activity of PEDV-Rluc. Among 
them, niclosamide was further characterized because it exhibited the most potent 
antiviral activity with the highest selectivity index. It can efficiently 
inhibit viral RNA synthesis, protein expression and viral progeny production of 
classical and variant PEDV strains in a dose-dependent manner. Time of addition 
assay showed that niclosamide exhibited potent anti-PEDV activity when added 
simultaneously with or after virus infection. Furthermore, niclosamide 
significantly inhibited the entry stage of PEDV infection by affecting viral 
internalization rather than viral attachment to cells. In addition, a 
combination with other small molecule inhibitors of endosomal acidification 
enhanced the anti-PEDV effect of niclosamide in vitro. Taken together, these 
findings suggested that niclosamide is a novel antiviral agent that might 
provide a basis for the development of novel drug therapies against PEDV and 
other related pathogenic coronavirus infections.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virs.2023.01.008
PMCID: PMC10176444
PMID: 36702255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.