1. Mol Microbiol. 2023 Apr;119(4):439-455. doi: 10.1111/mmi.15033. Epub 2023 Feb 
20.

Non-specific and specific DNA binding modes of bacterial histone, HU, separately 
regulate distinct physiological processes through different mechanisms.

Verma SC(1), Harned A(2), Narayan K(2), Adhya S(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Center for Molecular Microscopy, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer 
Research, Frederick, Maryland, USA.

The histone-like protein HU plays a diverse role in bacterial physiology from 
the maintenance of chromosome structure to the regulation of gene transcription. 
HU binds DNA in a sequence-non-specific manner via two distinct binding modes: 
(i) random binding to any DNA through ionic bonds between surface-exposed lysine 
residues (K3, K18, and K83) and phosphate backbone (non-specific); (ii) 
preferential binding to contorted DNA of given structures containing a pair of 
kinks (structure-specific) through conserved proline residues (P63) that induce 
and/or stabilize the kinks. First, we show here that the P63-mediated 
structure-specific binding also requires the three lysine residues, which are 
needed for a non-specific binding. Second, we demonstrate that substituting P63 
to alanine in HU had no impact on non-specific binding but caused differential 
transcription of diverse genes previously shown to be regulated by HU, such as 
those associated with the organonitrogen compound biosynthetic process, 
galactose metabolism, ribosome biogenesis, and cell adhesion. The 
structure-specific binding also helps create DNA supercoiling, which, in turn, 
may influence directly or indirectly the transcription of other genes. Our 
previous and current studies show that non-specific and structure-specific HU 
binding appear to have separate functions- nucleoid architecture and 
transcription regulation- which may be true in other DNA-binding proteins.

Published 2023. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.15033
PMCID: PMC10120378
PMID: 36708073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.