1. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2022 Jul 14;43(7):575-580. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2022.07.008.

[The expressional characteristics and diagnostic values of TRBC1 in mature 
T-cell lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhang NH(1), Chen X(1), Zhao SS(1), Qiao C(1), Liu L(1), Li JY(1), Wu YJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Jiangsu Provincial Hospital, Nanjing 210029, China.

Objective: To investigate the expression characteristics of TRBC1 protein in 
mature T-cell lymphoma (TCL) , and compare with T-cell receptor (TCR) -Vβ 
repertoire analysis and TCR gene rearrangement results, to explore the value of 
TRBC1 in the diagnosis of TCL. Methods: The expression of TRBC1 was detected by 
multi-parameter flow cytometry in 30 cases of TCL, 40 cases of normal controls 
and 50 cases of patients without T lymphocyte proliferative diseases (non-TCL) 
admitted to the Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University. The diagnostic value of TCRVβ repertoire analysis, 
TCR gene rearrangement and TRBC1 restricted expression detection in TCL was 
evaluated. Results: The positive rates of CD4(+)T and CD8(+)T cell subsets TRBC1 
in normal control group were (39.6±6.5) % and (39.3±4.4) %. The positive rates 
of CD4(+)T and CD8(+)T cell subsets TRBC1 in non-TCL were (39.1±3.8) % and 
(36.0±8.4) %. All 30 cases of TCL were CD3(+)TCRγδ(-), and the positive rate of 
TRBC1 was >92.3% or <12.7%. All cases showed restrictive expression pattern 
(monoclonal expression) , which was significantly different from those of the 
normal control and the non-TCL cases (P<0.001) . In terms of the diagnostic 
performance of T cell clonality, the sensitivity of TRBC1 was 100%, the positive 
detection rate of TCR gene rearrangement was 92.8%, and the sensitivity of TCRVβ 
detection was 94.1%. Kappa test showed high consistency among the three 
detective methods. Conclusion: Multi-parameter flow cytometry detection of TRBC1 
expression level can quickly and efficiently diagnose mature T-cell lymphoma, 
which has good clinical application value.

Publisher: 目的： 
分析TCRβ链恒定区结构域蛋白TRBC1在成熟T细胞淋巴瘤（TCL）中的表达特点，并与TCRVβ分析和TCR基因重排结果比较，探索TRBC1在TCL诊断中的价值。 
方法： 
通过多参数流式细胞术（FCM）检测南京医科大学第一附属医院血液科收治的30例TCL患者（TCL组）、40名正常对照和50例无T淋巴细胞增殖性疾病患者（非TCL组）TRBC1的表达特点，同时分析TCRVβ受体库检测、TCR基因重排与TRBC1限制性表达检测在TCL中的诊断价值。 
结果： 
正常对照组CD4(+)T和CD8(+)T细胞亚群TRBC1阳性表达率分别为（39.6±6.5）%和（39.3±4.4）%，非TCL组患者CD4(+)T和CD8(+)T细胞亚群TRBC1阳性表达率分别为（39.1±3.8）%和（36.0±8.4）%，TRBC1表达在两组中均呈双相表达模式。TCL组患者均为CD3(+)TCRγδ(-)，TRBC1阳性表达率>92.3%或<12.7%，所有病例均呈限制性表达模式（单克隆表达），与正常对照和非TCL组相比差异有统计学意义（P<0.001）。在T细胞克隆性检测效能方面，TRBC1灵敏性为100%，TCR基因重排阳性检出率为92.8%，TCRVβ流式试剂盒敏感性为94.1%，Kappa检验显示，三种检测方法一致性较高。 
结论： 多参数FCM检测TRBC1表达水平能够快速高效地诊断TCL，具有较好的临床应用价值。.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2022.07.008
PMCID: PMC9395569
PMID: 36709135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: 利益冲突 所有作者声明无利益冲突