1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Jan 10;9:1042015. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.1042015. 
eCollection 2022.

Moist exposed burn ointment accelerates diabetes-related wound healing by 
promoting re-epithelialization.

Gong Y(1)(2), Jiang Y(3), Huang J(4), He Z(5), Tang Q(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Hunan 
University of Chinese Medicine, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)Affiliated Hospital of Youjiang Medical University for Nationalities, Baise, 
China.
(3)West Guangxi Key Laboratory for Prevention and Treatment of High-Incidence 
Diseases, Youjiang Medical University for Nationalities, Baise, China.
(4)Graduate School, Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine, Nanning, China.
(5)Graduate School, YouJiang Medical University for Nationalities, Baise, China.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of diabetes-related wounds is widespread, and the 
treatment is challenging. We found that Moist Exposed Burn Ointment (MEBO) 
promotes the healing of diabetes-related wounds, but the mechanism is not clear.
METHODS: This study aimed to explore the mechanism of MEBO on diabetic wound 
healing, which may be related to the promotion of re-epithelialization. A 
full-thickness skin resection model was established in streptozotocin 
(STZ)-induced diabetic mice. MEBO and Kangfuxin (KFX) were applied to the wound 
area, and the wound healing rate was analyzed by photographing. The granulation 
tissue and epidermal thickness, the collagen remodeling rate, and the expression 
of cytokeratin 10 (CK10), cytokeratin 14 (CK14), Ki67, Collagen I, and Collagen 
III in the regenerated skin were detected by H&E staining, Masson staining, and 
immunofluorescence staining, respectively. MEBO and KFX were applied to human 
immortalized keratinocytes (HaCaT), mouse dermal fibrolasts (MDF) cells, and 
cell viability, cell migration, and differentiation were determined by CCK-8, 
scratching assay, RT-qPCR, and Western blot (WB), respectively.
RESULTS: We found that MEBO significantly promoted the formation of wound 
granulation tissue and collagen remodeling in diabetic mice. The application of 
MEBO to diabetic wounds not only promoted the formation of hair follicles and 
sebaceous glands but also promoted the expression of Ki67, CK10, and CK14 in 
epidermal cells. MEBO had no significant effect on the differentiation process 
of keratinocytes.
CONCLUSION: Our study further proved that MEBO plays a positive role in diabetic 
wound healing, and its excellent ability to promote re-epithelialization may be 
an important reason for promoting wound healing.

Copyright Â© 2023 Gong, Jiang, Huang, He and Tang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.1042015
PMCID: PMC9871640
PMID: 36703885

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.