1. Life Sci Alliance. 2023 Jan 30;6(4):e202201414. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201414. 
Print 2023 Apr.

FAM21 is critical for TLR2/CLEC4E-mediated dendritic cell function against 
Candida albicans.

Kulkarni R(1)(2), Kasani SK(1)(2), Tsai CY(2), Tung SY(2), Yeh KH(2), Yu CA(2), 
Chang W(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Academia 
Sinica and Graduate Institute of Life Science, National Defense Medical Center, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan 
mbwen@ccvax.sinica.edu.tw.

FAM21 (family with sequence similarity 21) is a component of the Wiskott-Aldrich 
syndrome protein and SCAR homologue (WASH) protein complex that mediates actin 
polymerization at endosomal membranes to facilitate sorting of cargo-containing 
vesicles out of endosomes. To study the function of FAM21 in vivo, we generated 
conditional knockout (cKO) mice in the C57BL/6 background in which FAM21 was 
specifically knocked out of CD11c-positive dendritic cells. BMDCs from those 
mice displayed enlarged early endosomes, and altered cell migration and 
morphology relative to WT cells. FAM21-cKO cells were less competent in 
phagocytosis and protein antigen presentation in vitro, though peptide antigen 
presentation was not affected. More importantly, we identified the TLR2/CLEC4E 
signaling pathway as being down-regulated in FAM21-cKO BMDCs when challenged 
with its specific ligand Candida albicans Moreover, FAM21-cKO mice were more 
susceptible to C. albicans infection than WT mice. Reconstitution of WT BMDCs in 
FAM21-cKO mice rescued them from lethal C. albicans infection. Thus, our study 
highlights the importance of FAM21 in a host immune response against a 
significant pathogen.

Â© 2023 Kulkarni et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202201414
PMCID: PMC9888482
PMID: 36717248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.