1. Vet Anim Sci. 2023 Jan 18;19:100287. doi: 10.1016/j.vas.2023.100287.
eCollection  2023 Mar.

Role of maternal variables on the development of neonatal hypoglycaemia and 
influence of neonatal hypoglycaemia on performance of goat kids.

Habibu B(1), Aluwong T(1), Makun HJ(2), Yaqub LS(1), Kawu MU(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria.
(2)National Animal Production Research Institute, Ahmadu Bello University, 
Zaria, Nigeria.

The study evaluated the influence of maternal variables (age, body weight and 
body mass index; BMI) during mating on the development of hypoglycaemia and 
investigated whether hypoglycaemia at birth impairs thermoregulation, 
metabolism, body weight gain and immunoglobulin concentration in neonatal goat 
kids. Post-kidding, the kids born with hypoglycaemia (n = 19) and normoglycaemia 
(n = 19) were immediately identified and postnatal blood samples, body weight 
and cardinal physiological variables were determined. Results revealed no 
significant (P < 0.05) difference in pre-mating maternal variables between dams 
that kidded hypoglycaemic and normoglycaemic kids. Kids born with hypoglycaemia 
had lower (P <0.05) blood glucose concentration from birth, until Day 2, when 
values became comparable between the two groups. Afternoon respiratory and pulse 
rates were markedly (P < 0.05) unstable in kids born with hypoglycaemia and the 
early postnatal rise (P < 0.05) in morning rectal temperature in both groups was 
accompanied by a decrease (P < 0.05) on day 20 in kids born with hypoglycaemia. 
Blood cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations were lower (P < 0.05) in 
hypoglycaemic kids and the normoglycaemic kids showed marked increase (P < 0.05) 
in circulating immunoglobulin concentration 24 h after birth, while age had no 
(P > 0.05) effect in hypoglycaemic kids. A more pronounced decrease (P < 0.05) 
in weekly weight gain was observed in hypoglycaemic kids. It was concluded that 
neonatal goat kids born with hypoglycaemia may have compromised 
thermoregulation, metabolism and body weight gain, and the cause of 
hypoglycaemia in kids may not be related to pre-mating maternal variables.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vas.2023.100287
PMCID: PMC9881376
PMID: 36712821

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.