1. Front Oncol. 2023 Jan 13;12:1060575. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.1060575.
eCollection  2022.

Case report: The treatment for olfactory neuroblastoma combined with 
leptomeningeal carcinomatosis via an ommaya reservoir.

Peng Y(1), Kang X(1), Jiang B(1), Chen F(1), Yang S(1), Kang Z(1), Wang C(1), 
Lin Y(1), Li S(1), Han J(1), Zhang B(1), Zhang W(1), Li W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuro-oncology, Cancer Center, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

Olfactory neuroblastoma is a rare neoplasm that usually presents in the upper 
nasal cavity. Although its prognosis is highly unfavorable, effective treatment 
options are still lacking. Moreover, there is no standard treatment for patients 
with olfactory neuroblastoma that progressed to leptomeningeal carcinomatosis. 
Here we report an uncommon case of a 59-year-old woman who was diagnosed with 
olfactory neuroblastoma and leptomeningeal carcinomatosis. For a direct delivery 
of the drugs to the tumor, and to avoid the impact of lumbar puncture on the 
patient's quality of life, the intravenous chemotherapy plus intrathecal 
administration of MTX via an Ommaya reservoir was chosen. The results were 
striking, with the disappearance of tumor cells in the cerebrospinal fluid and 
the relief of the patient's symptoms with PR. Our result indicates that 
chemotherapy via an Ommaya reservoir offers a new potential therapy for patients 
with meningeal metastases.

Copyright Â© 2023 Peng, Kang, Jiang, Chen, Yang, Kang, Wang, Lin, Li, Han, Zhang, 
Zhang and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.1060575
PMCID: PMC9880206
PMID: 36713576

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.