1. Front Oncol. 2023 Jan 12;12:1023833. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.1023833.
eCollection  2022.

A signature-based classification of lung adenocarcinoma that stratifies tumor 
immunity.

Zhang X(1), Jiang D(1), Li S(1), Zhang X(1), Zheng W(1), Cheng B(1).

Author information:
(1)Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong 
University, Jinan, China.

BACKGROUND: Immune-related subgroup classification in immune checkpoint blockade 
(ICB) therapy is largely inconclusive in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: First, the single-sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis 
(ssGSEA) and K-means algorithms were used to identify immune-based subtypes for 
the LUAD cohort based on the immunogenomic profiling of 29 immune signatures 
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database (n = 504). Second, we examined the 
prognostic and predictive value of immune-based subtypes using bioinformatics 
analysis. Survival analysis and additional COX proportional hazards regression 
analysis were conducted for LUAD. Then, the immune score, tumor-infiltrating 
immune cells (TIICs), and immune checkpoint expression of the three subtypes 
were analyzed. The Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes (KEGG) of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between three 
immune-based subtypes were subsequently analyzed for functional enrichment 
pathways.
RESULT: A total of three immune-based subtypes with distinct immune signatures 
have been identified for LUAD and designated as cluster 1 (C1), cluster 2 (C2), 
and cluster 3 (C3). Patients in C3 had higher stromal, immune, and ESTIMATE 
scores, whereas those in C1 had the opposite. Patients in C1 had an enrichment 
of macrophages M0 and activation of dendritic cells, whereas tumors in C3 had an 
enrichment of CD8+ T cells, activation of CD4+ memory T cells, and macrophages 
M1. C3 had a higher immune cell infiltration and a better survival prognosis 
than other subtypes. Furthermore, patients in C3 had higher expression levels of 
immune checkpoint proteins such as PD-L1, PD1, CTLA4, LAG3, IDO1, and HAVCR2. No 
significant differences were found in cluster TMB scores. We also found that 
immune-related pathways were enriched in C3.
CONCLUSION: LUAD subtypes based on immune signatures may aid in the development 
of novel treatment strategies for LUAD.

Copyright Â© 2023 Zhang, Jiang, Li, Zhang, Zheng and Cheng.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.1023833
PMCID: PMC9878554
PMID: 36713530

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.