1. J Appl Genet. 2023 May;64(2):303-317. doi: 10.1007/s13353-022-00742-8. Epub
2023  Jan 30.

Evidence for parent-of-origin effects in autism spectrum disorder: a narrative 
review.

Ryan NM(1), Heron EA(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychiatric Genetics Research Group, Department of Psychiatry, Trinity 
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Neuropsychiatric Genetics Research Group, Department of Psychiatry, Trinity 
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. eaheron@tcd.ie.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous group of early-onset 
neurodevelopmental disorders known to be highly heritable with a complex genetic 
architecture. Abnormal brain developmental trajectories that impact synaptic 
functioning, excitation-inhibition balance and brain connectivity are now 
understood to play a central role in ASD. Ongoing efforts to identify the 
genetic underpinnings still prove challenging, in part due to phenotypic and 
genetic heterogeneity.This review focuses on parent-of-origin effects (POEs), 
where the phenotypic effect of an allele depends on its parental origin. POEs 
include genomic imprinting, transgenerational effects, mitochondrial DNA, sex 
chromosomes and mutational transmission bias. The motivation for investigating 
these mechanisms in ASD has been driven by their known impacts on early brain 
development and brain functioning, in particular for the most well-documented 
POE, genomic imprinting. Moreover, imprinting is implicated in syndromes such as 
Angelman and Prader-Willi, which frequently share comorbid symptoms with ASD. In 
addition to other regions in the genome, this comprehensive review highlights 
the 15q11-q13 and 7q chromosomal regions as well as the mitochondrial DNA as 
harbouring the majority of currently identified POEs in ASD.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13353-022-00742-8
PMCID: PMC10076404
PMID: 36710277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.