1. J Exp Bot. 2023 Apr 18;74(8):2680-2691. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erad039.

Cell wall fucosylation in Arabidopsis influences control of leaf water loss and 
alters stomatal development and mechanical properties.

Panter PE(1), Seifert J(2), Dale M(1)(3), Pridgeon AJ(3), Hulme R(1), Ramsay 
N(1), Contera S(2), Knight H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Durham University, South Road, Durham, UK.
(2)Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, UK.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

The Arabidopsis sensitive-to-freezing8 (sfr8) mutant exhibits reduced cell wall 
(CW) fucose levels and compromised freezing tolerance. To examine whether CW 
fucosylation also affects the response to desiccation, we tested the effect of 
leaf excision in sfr8 and the allelic mutant mur1-1. Leaf water loss was 
strikingly higher than in the wild type in these, but not other, fucosylation 
mutants. We hypothesized that reduced fucosylation in guard cell (GC) walls 
might limit stomatal closure through altering mechanical properties. 
Multifrequency atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements revealed a reduced 
elastic modulus (E'), representing reduced stiffness, in sfr8 GC walls. 
Interestingly, however, we discovered a compensatory mechanism whereby a 
concomitant reduction in the storage modulus (E'') maintained a wild-type 
viscoelastic time response (tau) in sfr8. Stomata in intact leaf discs of sfr8 
responded normally to a closure stimulus, abscisic acid, suggesting that the 
time response may relate more to closure properties than stiffness does. sfr8 
stomatal pore complexes were larger than those of the wild type, and GCs lacked 
a fully developed cuticular ledge, both potential contributors to the greater 
leaf water loss in sfr8. We present data that indicate that 
fucosylation-dependent dimerization of the CW pectic domain 
rhamnogalacturonan-II may be essential for normal cuticular ledge development 
and leaf water retention.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erad039
PMCID: PMC10112686
PMID: 36715637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts to declare.