1. Commun Biol. 2023 Jan 31;6(1):127. doi: 10.1038/s42003-023-04489-8.

TRPM8 thermosensation in poikilotherms mediates both skin colour and locomotor 
performance responses to cold temperature.

Malik HR(1), Bertolesi GE(2), McFarlane S(3).

Author information:
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute and Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, 
Canada.
(2)Hotchkiss Brain Institute and Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, 
Canada. gbertole@ucalgary.ca.
(3)Hotchkiss Brain Institute and Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, 
Canada. smcfarla@ucalgary.ca.

Thermoregulation is a homeostatic process to maintain an organism's internal 
temperature within a physiological range compatible with life. In poikilotherms, 
body temperature fluctuates with that of the environment, with both 
physiological and behavioral responses employed to modify body temperature. 
Changing skin colour/reflectance and locomotor activity are both well-recognized 
temperature regulatory mechanisms, but little is known of the participating 
thermosensor/s. We find that Xenopus laevis tadpoles put in the cold exhibit a 
temperature-dependent, systemic, and rapid melanosome aggregation in 
melanophores, which lightens the skin. Cooling also induces a reduction in the 
locomotor performance. To identify the cold-sensor, we focus on transient 
receptor potential (trp) channel genes from a Trpm family. mRNAs for several 
Trpms are present in Xenopus tails, and Trpm8 protein is present in skin 
melanophores. Temperature-induced melanosome aggregation is mimicked by the 
Trpm8 agonist menthol (WS12) and blocked by a Trpm8 antagonist. The degree of 
skin lightening induced by cooling is correlated with locomotor performance, and 
both responses are rapidly regulated in a dose-dependent and correlated manner 
by the WS12 Trpm8 agonist. We propose that TRPM8 serves as a cool thermosensor 
in poikilotherms that helps coordinate skin lightening and behavioural locomotor 
performance as adaptive thermoregulatory responses to cold.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-023-04489-8
PMCID: PMC9889708
PMID: 36721039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.