1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2023;21(3):482-490. doi:
10.2174/1570159X21666230201151016.

Overexpression of mTOR in Leukocytes from ALS8 Patients.

Gomes NA(1), das Chagas Lima E Silva F(1), de Oliveira Volpe CM(1), 
Villar-Delfino PH(1), de Sousa CF(1), Rocha-Silva F(1), Nogueira-Machado JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação Stricto Sensu em Medicina/Biomedicina, Faculdade 
Santa Casa de BH, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The mutated VAPBP56S (vesicle B associated membrane protein - P56S) 
protein has been described in a Brazilian family and classified as Amyotrophic 
Lateral Sclerosis type 8 (ALS8).
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to study altered biochemical and immunological parameters in 
cells from ALS8 patients to identify possible biomarkers or therapeutic targets.
METHODS: Wild-type VAPB, VAPBP56S, mTOR, proinflammatory cytokines, and 
oxidant/reducing levels in serum, leucocytes, and cellular lysate from ALS8 
patients and health Controls were performed by ELISA, fluorimetry, and 
spectrophotometry.
RESULTS: Our results showed similar levels of mutant and wild-type VAPB in serum 
and intracellular lysate (p > 0.05) when ALS8 patients and Controls were 
compared. IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-18 levels in patients and Controls showed no 
difference, suggesting an absence of peripheral inflammation (p > 0.05). 
Oxidative metabolic response, assessed by mitochondrial ROS production, and 
reductive response by MTT reduction, were higher in the ALS8 group compared to 
Controls (p < 0.05), although not characterizing typical oxidative stress in 
ALS8 patients. Total mTOR levels (phosphorylated or non-phosphorylated) of ALS8 
patients were significantly lower in serum and higher in intracellular lysate 
than the mean equivalents in Controls (p < 0.05). A similar result was observed 
when we quantified the phosphorylated protein (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate the possibility of using these biochemical and 
immunological parameters as potential therapeutic targets or biomarkers. 
Furthermore, by hypothesis, we suggest a hormetic response in which both VAPB 
forms could coexist in different proportions throughout life. The mutated 
VAPBP56S production would increase with aging and predominate over the wild-type 
VAPB levels, determining the onset of symptoms and aggravating the disease.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1570159X21666230201151016
PMCID: PMC10207909
PMID: 36722478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest, 
financial or otherwise.