1. Sci Adv. 2023 Feb 3;9(5):eade4361. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.ade4361. Epub 2023 Feb
3.

Cytidine deaminases catalyze the conversion of N(S,O)(4)-substituted pyrimidine 
nucleosides.

Urbelienė N(1), Tiškus M(1), Tamulaitienė G(2), Gasparavičiūtė R(1), Lapinskaitė 
R(1)(3), Jauniškis V(4), Sūdžius J(3), Meškienė R(1), Tauraitė D(1), Skrodenytė 
E(1), Urbelis G(1)(3), Vaitekūnas J(1), Meškys R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, Institute of 
Biochemistry, Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Saulėtekio av., 10257 
Vilnius, Lithuania.
(2)Department of Protein-DNA Interactions, Institute of Biotechnology, Life 
Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Saulėtekio av. 7, 10257 Vilnius, Lithuania.
(3)Department of Organic Chemistry, Center for Physical Sciences and Technology, 
Akademijos 7, LT-08412 Vilnius, Lithuania.
(4)UAB Biomatter Designs (Biomatter), Žirmūnų st. 139A, 09120 Vilnius, 
Lithuania.

Cytidine deaminases (CDAs) catalyze the hydrolytic deamination of cytidine and 
2'-deoxycytidine to uridine and 2'-deoxyuridine. Here, we report that 
prokaryotic homo-tetrameric CDAs catalyze the nucleophilic substitution at the 
fourth position of N4-acyl-cytidines, N4-alkyl-cytidines, and 
N4-alkyloxycarbonyl-cytidines, and S4-alkylthio-uridines and O4-alkyl-uridines, 
converting them to uridine and corresponding amide, amine, carbamate, thiol, or 
alcohol as leaving groups. The x-ray structure of a metagenomic CDA_F14 and the 
molecular modeling of the CDAs used in this study show a relationship between 
the bulkiness of a leaving group and the volume of the binding pocket, which is 
partly determined by the flexible β3α3 loop of CDAs. We propose that CDAs that 
are active toward a wide range of substrates participate in salvage and/or 
catabolism of variously modified pyrimidine nucleosides. This identified 
promiscuity of CDAs expands the knowledge about the cellular turnover of 
cytidine derivatives, including the pharmacokinetics of pyrimidine-based 
prodrugs.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.ade4361
PMCID: PMC9897663
PMID: 36735785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]