1. Mol Med Rep. 2023 Mar;27(3):59. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2023.12946. Epub 2023 Feb 3.

Genetic and phenotypic continuum of HOXA genes: A case with double HOXA9/HOXA13 
mutations.

Jaouadi H(1), Theron A(1), Norscini G(2), Avierinos JF(1), Zaffran S(1).

Author information:
(1)Marseille Medical Genetics, U1251, National Institute of Health and Medical 
Research (INSERM), School of Medicine, Aix Marseille University, 13005 
Marseille, France.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Public Assistance‑Hospitals of Marseille, La Timone 
Hospital, 13005 Marseille, France.

The HOXA genes cluster plays a key role in embryologic development. Mutations in 
HOXA genes have been linked to different human phenotypes, including 
developmental delay, limb anomalies, and urogenital malformations. The present 
study reported a clinical and genetic investigation of a female patient with 
polymalformative syndrome including left arm agenesis, bicornuate uterus and 
bicuspid aortic valve. Using whole exome sequencing, two heterozygous missense 
variants were identified. Of these, one was a novel variant in the HOXA13 gene 
[p.(Tyr290Ser)] and the second a heterozygous variant in the HOXA9 gene 
[p.(Ala102Pro)]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first association of 
HOXA9/HOXA13 point mutations linked to a syndromic case. In conclusion, the 
present study suggested that the phenotypic spectrum of vertebral anomalies, 
anal atresia, cardiac defects, tracheo‑esophageal fistula, renal anomalies and 
limb abnormalities/hand‑foot‑genital syndrome may be attributable to the 
combination of different HOXA variants, particularly in patients with a severe 
clinical presentation. The current report contributed as well to the molecular 
understanding of HOXA genes‑related phenotypes via the identification of novel 
variant and genes associations.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2023.12946
PMCID: PMC9936258
PMID: 36734258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.