1. J Clin Virol. 2023 Mar;160:105382. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2023.105382. Epub 2023
Jan  26.

Genotypic and predicted phenotypic analysis of SARS-COV-2 Omicron subvariants in 
immunocompromised patients with COVID-19 following tixagevimab-cilgavimab 
prophylaxis.

Ordaya EE(1), Vergidis P(2), Razonable RR(2), Yao JD(3), Beam E(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States of America. Electronic address: 
ordayaespinoza.eloy@mayo.edu.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States of America.
(3)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Tixagevimab-cilgavimab is used for pre-exposure prophylaxis of 
COVID-19 in immunocompromised patients, though in vitro data has shown reduced 
neutralizing activity against SARS-CoV-2 Omicron subvariants.
METHODS: We performed genomic sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 isolated from patients 
diagnosed with COVID-19 following tixagevimab-cilgavimab. Resistance-associated 
substitutions were used to generate a predicted phenotypic susceptibility 
analysis to tixagevimab-cilgavimab and bebtelovimab. Clinical data collected 
from these patients included SARS-CoV-2 immunization status, COVID-19-directed 
therapies, and outcomes.
RESULTS: SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing was performed in 25 patients. SARS-CoV-2 
Omicron BA.2 was the most common identified subvariant. All patients had viral 
isolates with spike codon substitutions associated with reduced susceptibility 
to tixagevimab-cilgavimab; their predicted phenotypic analysis showed a >2-fold 
reduced susceptibility to tixagevimab-cilgavimab. Two patients had viral 
isolates with spike codon substitutions (K444N and G446D) associated with highly 
reduced susceptibility to bebtelovimab, although all the viral isolates had 
<2-fold reduced susceptibility based on predicted phenotypic analysis. Sixteen 
patients received rescue therapy with bebtelovimab, but one patient with BA.2 
subvariant harboring K444N mutation died of COVID-19-related complications. Five 
patients received other COVID-19 therapies and survived. Four had mild or 
asymptomatic COVID-19 with an uncomplicated course despite not receiving any 
additional therapy.
DISCUSSION: Multiple SARS-CoV-2 Omicron spike codon substitutions that 
correlated with reduced susceptibility to tixagevimab-cilgavimab were identified 
in patients with COVID-19 after receiving this monoclonal antibody. Most 
patients had an uncomplicated course. The identification of spike codon 
substitutions conferring resistance to bebtelovimab highlights the importance of 
performing genomic surveillance to identify new resistant SARS-CoV-2 variants.

Copyright Â© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2023.105382
PMCID: PMC9877152
PMID: 36731147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Raymund R. 
Razonable has received grants from Regeneron, Roche, and Gilead for research not 
directly related to this study. Paschalis Vergidis has received research grants 
from Ansun, Scynexis, and Cidara and has served on the data and safety 
monitoring board for AbbVie, Vanda, and Algernon Pharmaceuticals (all fees paid 
to Mayo Clinic). All other authors report no potential conflicts of interest.