1. Pharmacol Res. 2023 Mar;189:106681. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2023.106681. Epub 2023
 Feb 4.

Quantitative assessment of translocator protein (TSPO) in the non-human primate 
brain and clinical translation of [(18)F]LW223 as a TSPO-targeted PET 
radioligand.

Tan Z(1), Haider A(2), Zhang S(1), Chen J(2), Wei J(1), Liao K(1), Li G(1), Wei 
H(1), Dong C(1), Ran W(1), Li Y(1), Li Y(3), Rong J(2), Li Y(2), Liang SH(4), Xu 
H(5), Wang L(6).

Author information:
(1)Center of Cyclotron and PET Radiopharmaceuticals, Department of Nuclear 
Medicine and PET/CT-MRI Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan 
University, Guangzhou 510630, China.
(2)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Emory University, 1364 Clifton 
Rd, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(3)Guangdong Landau Biotechnology Co. Ltd., Guangzhou 510555, China.
(4)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Emory University, 1364 Clifton 
Rd, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic address: steven.liang@emory.edu.
(5)Center of Cyclotron and PET Radiopharmaceuticals, Department of Nuclear 
Medicine and PET/CT-MRI Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan 
University, Guangzhou 510630, China. Electronic address: txh@jnu.edu.cn.
(6)Center of Cyclotron and PET Radiopharmaceuticals, Department of Nuclear 
Medicine and PET/CT-MRI Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan 
University, Guangzhou 510630, China. Electronic address: l_wang1009@jnu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: Translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO) positron emission tomography 
(PET) can be harnessed for the non-invasive detection of macrophage-driven 
inflammation. [18F]LW223, a newly reported TSPO PET tracer which was insensitive 
to rs6971 polymorphism, showed favorable performance characteristics in a recent 
imaging study involving a rat myocardial infarction model. To enable 
quantitative neuroimaging with [18F]LW223, we conducted kinetic analysis in the 
non-human primate (NHP) brain. Further, we sought to assess the utility of 
[18F]LW223-based TSPO imaging in a first-in-human study.
METHODS: Radiosynthesis of [18F]LW223 was accomplished on an automated module, 
whereas molar activities, stability in formulation, lipophilicity and unbound 
free fraction (fu) of the probe were measured. Brain penetration and target 
specificity of [18F]LW223 in NHPs were corroborated by PET-MR imaging under 
baseline and pre-blocking conditions using the validated TSPO inhibitor, 
(R)-PK11195, at doses ranging from 5 to 10 mg/kg. Kinetic modeling was performed 
using one-tissue compartment model (1TCM), two-tissue compartment model (2TCM) 
and Logan graphical analyses, using dynamic PET data acquisition, arterial blood 
collection and metabolic stability testing. Clinical PET scans were performed in 
two healthy volunteers (HVs). Regional brain standard uptake value ratio (SUVr) 
was assessed for different time intervals.
RESULTS: [18F]LW223 was synthesized in non-decay corrected radiochemical yields 
(n.d.c. RCYs) of 33.3 ± 6.5% with molar activities ranging from 
1.8 ± 0.7 Ci/µmol (n = 11). [18F]LW223 was stable in formulation for up to 4 h 
and LogD7.4 of 2.31 ± 0.13 (n = 6) and fu of 5.80 ± 1.42% (n = 6) were 
determined. [18F]LW223 exhibited good brain penetration in NHPs, with a peak SUV 
value of ca. 1.79 in the whole brain. Pre-treatment with (R)-PK11195 
substantially accelerated the washout and attenuated the area under the 
time-activity curve, indicating in vivo specificity of [18F]LW223 towards TSPO. 
Kinetic modeling demonstrated that 2TCM was the most suitable model for 
[18F]LW223-based neuroimaging. Global transfer rate constants (K1) and total 
volumes of distribution (VT) were found to be 0.10 ± 0.01 mL/cm3/min and 
2.30 ± 0.17 mL/cm3, respectively. Dynamic PET data analyses across distinct time 
windows revealed that the VT values were relatively stable after 60 min 
post-injection. In a preliminary clinical study with two healthy volunteers, 
[18F]LW223 exhibited good brain uptake and considerable tracer retention across 
all analyzed brain regions. Of note, an excellent correlation between SUVr with 
VT was obtained when assessing the time interval from 20 to 40 min post tracer 
injection (SUVr(20-40 min), R2 = 0.94, p < 0.0001), suggesting this time window 
may be suitable to estimate specific binding to TSPO in human brain.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that [18F]LW223 is suitable for quantitative 
TSPO-targeted PET imaging in higher species. Employing state-of-the-art kinetic 
modeling, we found that [18F]LW223 was effective in mapping TSPO throughout the 
NHP brain, with best model fits obtained from 2TCM and Logan graphical analyses. 
Overall, our results indicate that [18F]LW223 exhibits favorable tracer 
performance characteristics in higher species, and this novel imaging tool may 
hold promise to provide effective neuroinflammation imaging in patients with 
neurological disease.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2023.106681
PMID: 36746361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this 
paper.