1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Jan 23:2023.01.23.525242. doi: 
10.1101/2023.01.23.525242.

Direct Tests of Cytochrome Function in the Electron Transport Chain of Malaria 
Parasites.

Espino-Sanchez TJ(1), Wienkers H(1), Marvin RG(1), Nalder SA(1), Garc√≠a-Guerrero 
AE(1), VanNatta PE(2), Jami-Alahmadi Y(3), Blackwell AM(1), Whitby FG(1), 
Wohlschlegel JA(3), Kieber-Emmons MT(2), Hill CP(1), Sigala PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, UT, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United 
States.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, 
CA, United States.

Update in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 May 9;120(19):e2301047120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2301047120.

The mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) of Plasmodium malaria parasites 
is a major antimalarial drug target, but critical cytochrome functions remain 
unstudied and enigmatic. Parasites express two distinct cyt c homologs ( c and c 
-2) with unusually sparse sequence identity and uncertain fitness contributions. 
P. falciparum cyt c -2 is the most divergent eukaryotic cyt c homolog currently 
known and has sequence features predicted to be incompatible with canonical ETC 
function. We tagged both cyt c homologs and the related cyt c 1 for inducible 
knockdown. Translational repression of cyt c and cyt c 1 was lethal to 
parasites, which died from ETC dysfunction and impaired ubiquinone recycling. In 
contrast, cyt c -2 knockdown or knock-out had little impact on blood-stage 
growth, indicating that parasites rely fully on the more conserved cyt c for ETC 
function. Biochemical and structural studies revealed that both cyt c and c -2 
are hemylated by holocytochrome c synthase, but UV-vis absorbance and EPR 
spectra strongly suggest that cyt c -2 has an unusually open active site in 
which heme is stably coordinated by only a single axial amino-acid ligand and 
can bind exogenous small molecules. These studies provide a direct dissection of 
cytochrome functions in the ETC of malaria parasites and identify a highly 
divergent Plasmodium cytochrome c with molecular adaptations that defy a 
conserved role in eukaryotic evolution.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Mitochondria are critical organelles in eukaryotic cells 
that drive oxidative metabolism. The mitochondrion of Plasmodium malaria 
parasites is a major drug target that has many differences from human cells and 
remains poorly studied. One key difference from humans is that malaria parasites 
express two cytochrome c proteins that differ significantly from each other and 
play untested and uncertain roles in the mitochondrial electron transport chain 
(ETC). Our study revealed that one cyt c is essential for ETC function and 
parasite viability while the second, more divergent protein has unusual 
structural and biochemical properties and is not required for growth of 
blood-stage parasites. This work elucidates key biochemical properties and 
evolutionary differences in the mitochondrial ETC of malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.01.23.525242
PMCID: PMC9900762
PMID: 36747727