1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Feb 3;102(5):e32794. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000032794.

A bibliometric analysis of the global trends and hotspots for the ketogenic diet 
based on CiteSpace.

Ye R(1), Cheng Y, Ge Y, Xu G, Tu W.

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 
China.

The ketogenic diet (KD) is a potential nutritional therapy that is frequently 
utilized in various conditions. More and more studies are being done on KD in 
recent years. However, as far as we know, few studies have made an effort to 
offer a thorough synthesis and assessment of this topic. This paper aims to do a 
rigorous and thorough evaluation of the knowledge structure, development trend, 
and research hotspot of scientific outputs connected to KD. The bibliographic 
records connected to KD from January 1, 2001 to April 22, 2022 were collected 
using the core collection database of Web of Science. The complex data input, 
that consisted of the amount of publications, journals, authors, institutions, 
countries, keywords and cited references, was generated and analyzed visually 
using CiteSpace. A total of 2676 literatures on the KD were published between 
2001 and 2022. The most KD-related publications were found in Epilepsia and 
Epilepsia Research. The authors with the most KD-related papers are Kossoff EH 
and Rho J. The United States is the country with the most publications, and 
Johns Hopkins University, Johns Hopkins University Hospital, and Johns Hopkins 
Medical Institutions are the institutions with the most articles. The high 
frequency keywords are "KD," "ketone body," "children," "efficacy," "weight 
loss," "low carbohydrate diet," "metabolism," "epilepsy," "beta 
hydroxybutyrate," and "modified atkins diet." The 2018 study by Kossoff EH on 
epilepsia and the 2017 study by Puchalska P on ketone body metabolism earned 127 
and 114 citations, respectively. The results of this bibliometric analysis 
provide information on the state and trends in KD and may be used by researchers 
to pinpoint hot issues and discover new areas of study.

Copyright Â© 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000032794
PMCID: PMC9902013
PMID: 36749276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interests to 
disclose.