1. PeerJ. 2023 Jan 30;11:e14816. doi: 10.7717/peerj.14816. eCollection 2023.

A quantitative approach on environment-food nexus: integrated modeling and 
indices for cumulative impact assessment of farm management practices.

Jamshidi S(1), Naderi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Civil Engineering, University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Best management practices (BMPs) are promising solutions that can 
partially control pollution discharged from farmlands. These strategies, like 
fertilizer reduction and using filter strips, mainly control nutrient (N and P) 
pollution loads in basins. However, they have secondary impacts on nutrition 
production and ecosystem. This study develops a method to evaluate the 
cumulative environmental impacts of BMPs. It also introduces and calculates 
food's environmental footprint (FEF) for accounting the total environmental 
damages per nutrition production.
METHODS: This study combines the soil and water assessment tool (SWAT) for basin 
simulation with the indices of ReCiPe, a life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) 
method. By these means, the effectiveness of BMPs on pollution loads, production 
yields, and water footprints (WFs) are evaluated and converted as equivalent 
environmental damages. This method was verified in Zrebar Lake, western Iran. 
Here, water consumption, as WFs, and eutrophication are the main indices that 
are converted into equivalent health and ecological impairments. Two methods, 
entropy and environmental performance index (EPI), are used for weighting 
normalized endpoints in last step.
RESULTS: Results showed that using 25-50% less fertilizer and water for 
irrigation combined with vegetated filter strips reduce N and P pollution about 
34-60% and 8-21%, respectively. These can decrease ecosystem damages by 5-9% and 
health risks by 7-14%. Here, freshwater eutrophication is a more critical damage 
in ecosystem. However, using less fertilizer adversely reduces total nutrition 
production by 1.7-3.7%. It means that BMPs can decline total ecological damages 
and health risks, which threatens nutrition production. FEF presents a tool to 
solve this dilemma about the sustainability of BMPs. In the study area, a 4-9% 
decrease in FEF means that BMPs are more environmental friendly than nutrition 
menacing. Finally, this study concludes that SWAT-ReCiPe with FEF provides a 
quantitative framework for environment-food nexus assessment. However, due to 
the uncertainties, this method is recommended as a tool for comparing management 
strategies instead of reporting certain values.

Â© 2023 Jamshidi and Naderi.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.14816
PMCID: PMC9893910
PMID: 36743953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.