1. Elife. 2023 Feb 7;12:e83062. doi: 10.7554/eLife.83062.

Multiple polarity kinases inhibit phase separation of F-BAR protein Cdc15 and 
antagonize cytokinetic ring assembly in fission yeast.

Bhattacharjee R(1), Hall AR(2), Mangione MC(1), Igarashi MG(1), 
Roberts-Galbraith RH(1), Chen JS(1), Vavylonis D(2)(3), Gould KL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, United States.
(2)Department of Physics, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, United States.
(3)Center for Computational Biology, Flatiron Institute, New York, United 
States.

The F-BAR protein Cdc15 is essential for cytokinesis in Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe and plays a key role in attaching the cytokinetic ring (CR) to the plasma 
membrane (PM). Cdc15's abilities to bind to the membrane and oligomerize via its 
F-BAR domain are inhibited by phosphorylation of its intrinsically disordered 
region (IDR). Multiple cell polarity kinases regulate Cdc15 IDR phosphostate, 
and of these the DYRK kinase Pom1 phosphorylation sites on Cdc15 have been shown 
in vivo to prevent CR formation at cell tips. Here, we compared the ability of 
Pom1 to control Cdc15 phosphostate and cortical localization to that of other 
Cdc15 kinases: Kin1, Pck1, and Shk1. We identified distinct but overlapping 
cohorts of Cdc15 phosphorylation sites targeted by each kinase, and the number 
of sites correlated with each kinases' abilities to influence Cdc15 PM 
localization. Coarse-grained simulations predicted that cumulative IDR 
phosphorylation moves the IDRs of a dimer apart and toward the F-BAR tips. 
Further, simulations indicated that the overall negative charge of 
phosphorylation masks positively charged amino acids necessary for F-BAR 
oligomerization and membrane interaction. Finally, simulations suggested that 
dephosphorylated Cdc15 undergoes phase separation driven by IDR interactions. 
Indeed, dephosphorylated but not phosphorylated Cdc15 undergoes liquid-liquid 
phase separation to form droplets in vitro that recruit Cdc15 binding partners. 
In cells, Cdc15 phosphomutants also formed PM-bound condensates that recruit 
other CR components. Together, we propose that a threshold of Cdc15 
phosphorylation by assorted kinases prevents Cdc15 condensation on the PM and 
antagonizes CR assembly.

Â© 2023, Bhattacharjee et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.83062
PMCID: PMC9904764
PMID: 36749320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RB, AH, MM, MI, RR, JC, DV, KG No competing 
interests declared