1. Front Neurol. 2023 Jan 20;13:1035885. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1035885. 
eCollection 2022.

Association of BDNF gene missense polymorphism rs6265 (Val66Met) with three 
quantitative traits, namely, intelligence quotient, body mass index, and blood 
pressure: A genetic association analysis from North India.

Fatma R(1), Chauhan W(1), Shahi MH(2), Afzal M(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics and Toxicology Laboratory, Section of Genetics, Department of 
Zoology, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India.
(2)Interdisciplinary Brain Research Centre, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, 
India.

BACKGROUND: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a neurotransmitter 
modulator, plays a significant role in neuronal survival and growth and 
participates in neuronal plasticity, thus being essential for learning, memory, 
and the development of cognition. Additionally, it is crucial for appetite, 
weight, and metabolic control and plays a pivotal role in the cardiovascular 
system. The Val66Met polymorphism (rs6265) of the BDNF gene causes a decrease in 
BDNF secretion and plays a role in impairments in cognition, energy homeostasis, 
and cardiovascular events. The present study aimed to evaluate the association 
of polymorphism (rs6265) of the BDNF gene with three quantitative traits 
simultaneously, namely, intelligence quotient (IQ), body mass index (BMI), and 
blood pressure (BP).
METHODS: Psychometric, morphometric, and physiometric data of the total 
participants (N = 246) were collected. WASI-IIINDIA was used to measure 
cognitive ability. Genotyping was carried out using allele-specific PCR for the 
rs6265 polymorphism (C196T), and genotypes were determined. Statistical analyses 
were performed at p < 0.05 significance level using MS-Excel and SigmaPlot. The 
odds ratio models with a 95% confidence interval were used to test the 
associations. The used models are co-dominant, recessive, dominant, 
over-dominant, and additive.
RESULTS: The allelic frequencies of alleles C and T were 72 and 28%, 
respectively. Under the dominant genetic model, a significant susceptible 
association of minor allele T was observed with a lower average verbal 
comprehensive index (OR = 2.216, p = 0.003, CI (95%) =1.33-3.69), a lower 
average performance reasoning index (OR = 2.634, p < 0.001, CI (95%) = 
1.573-4.41), and a lower average full-scale IQ-4 (OR = 3.159, p < 0.001, CI 
(95%) = 1.873-5.328). Carriers of Met-alleles were found to have an increased 
body mass index (OR = 2.538, p < 0.001, CI (95%) = 1.507-4.275), decreased 
systolic blood pressure (OR = 2.051, p = 0.012, CI (95%) = 1.202-3.502), and 
decreased diastolic blood pressure (OR = 2.162, p = 0.006, CI (95%) = 
1.278-3.657). Under the recessive genetic model, several folds decrease in IQ 
and BP and an increase in BMI with the presence of the T allele was also 
detected.
CONCLUSION: This novel study may improve our understanding of genetic 
alterations to the traits and hence be helpful for clinicians and researchers to 
investigate the diagnostic and prognostic value of this neurotrophic factor.

Copyright Â© 2023 Fatma, Chauhan, Shahi and Afzal.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1035885
PMCID: PMC9894895
PMID: 36742047

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.