1. Front Mol Biosci. 2023 Jan 23;10:1119900. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.1119900. 
eCollection 2023.

Unraveling the impact of a germline heterozygous POLD1 frameshift variant in 
serrated polyposis syndrome.

Bonjoch L(1), Soares de Lima Y(1), Díaz-Gay M(2), Dotti I(3), Muñoz J(1), 
Moreira L(1), Carballal S(1), Ocaña T(1), Cuatrecasas M(4), Ortiz O(1), Castells 
A(1), Pellisé M(1), Balaguer F(1), Salas A(3), Alexandrov LB(2), Castellví-Bel 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology Department, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi 
i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 
Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine and Department of 
Bioengineering and Moores Cancer Center, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United 
States.
(3)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Unit, Gastroenterology Department, Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS) Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas 
(CIBERehd), Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Pathology Department, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i 
Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 
Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd) and Tumor Bank-Biobank, Hospital Clínic, 
Barcelona, Spain.

Serrated polyposis syndrome (SPS) is one of the most frequent polyposis 
syndromes characterized by an increased risk for developing colorectal cancer 
(CRC). Although SPS etiology has been mainly associated with environmental 
factors, germline predisposition to SPS could also be relevant for cases with 
familial aggregation or a family history of SPS/CRC. After whole-exome 
sequencing of 39 SPS patients from 16 families, we identified a heterozygous 
germline frameshift variant in the POLD1 gene (c.1941delG, p.(Lys648fs*46)) in a 
patient with SPS and CRC. Tumor presented an ultra-hypermutated phenotype and 
microsatellite instability. The POLD1 germline variant segregated in three 
additional SPS-affected family members. We attempted to create yeast and 
cellular models for this variant but were no viable. Alternatively, we generated 
patient-derived organoids (PDOs) from healthy rectal tissue of the index case, 
as well as from a control donor. Then, we challenged PDOs with a DNA-damaging 
agent to induce replication stress. No significant differences were observed in 
the DNA damage response between control and POLD1-Lys648fs PDOs, nor specific 
mutational signatures were observed. Our results do not support the 
pathogenicity of the analyzed POLD1 frameshift variant. One possible explanation 
is that haplosufficiency of the wild-type allele may be compensating for the 
absence of expression of the frameshift allele. Overall, future work is required 
to elucidate if functional consequences could be derived from POLD1 alterations 
different from missense variants in their proofreading domain. To our knowledge, 
our study presents the first organoid model for germline POLD1 variants and 
establishes the basis for its use as a model for disease in SPS, CRC and other 
malignancies.

Copyright © 2023 Bonjoch, Soares de Lima, Díaz-Gay, Dotti, Muñoz, Moreira, 
Carballal, Ocaña, Cuatrecasas, Ortiz, Castells, Pellisé, Balaguer, Salas, 
Alexandrov and Castellví-Bel.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.1119900
PMCID: PMC9900627
PMID: 36756361

Conflict of interest statement: LA is a compensated consultant and has equity 
interest in io9, LLC. His spouse is an employee of Biotheranostics, Inc. LA is 
an inventor of a U.S. Patent 10,776,718 and he also declares U.S. provisional 
patent applications with serial numbers: 63/289,601, 63/269,033, 63/412,835, 
63/366,392, and 63/367,846. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.