1. J Neuroinflammation. 2023 Feb 8;20(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s12974-022-02671-z.

Genetic models of cleavage-reduced and soluble TREM2 reveal distinct effects on 
myelination and microglia function in the cuprizone model.

Beckmann N(1), Neuhaus A(2), Zurbruegg S(2), Volkmer P(2), Patino C(2), Joller 
S(2), Feuerbach D(2), Doelemeyer A(1), Schweizer T(2), Rudin S(2), Neumann U(2), 
Berth R(2), Frieauff W(3), Gasparini F(2), Shimshek DR(4).

Author information:
(1)Musculoskeletal Diseases Area, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, 
Novartis Pharma AG, CH-4002, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Neuroscience, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Novartis Pharma 
AG, CH-4002, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Preclinical Safety, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Novartis 
Pharma AG, CH-4002, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Neuroscience, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Novartis Pharma 
AG, CH-4002, Basel, Switzerland. derya.shimshek@novartis.com.

Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) is a cell-surface 
immunoreceptor expressed on microglia, osteoclasts, dendritic cells and 
macrophages. Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in TREM2, including 
mutations enhancing shedding form the cell surface, have been associated with 
myelin/neuronal loss and neuroinflammation in neurodegenerative diseases, such 
as Alzheimer`s disease and Frontotemporal Dementia. Using the cuprizone model, 
we investigated the involvement of soluble and cleavage-reduced TREM2 on central 
myelination processes in cleavage-reduced (TREM2-IPD), soluble-only (TREM2-sol), 
knockout (TREM2-KO) and wild-type (WT) mice. The TREM2-sol mouse is a new model 
with selective elimination of plasma membrane TREM2 and a reduced expression of 
soluble TREM2. In the acute cuprizone model demyelination and remyelination 
events were reflected by a T2-weighted signal intensity change in magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), most prominently in the external capsule (EC). In 
contrast to WT and TREM2-IPD, TREM2-sol and TREM2-KO showed an additional 
increase in MRI signal during the recovery phase. Histological analyses of 
TREM2-IPD animals revealed no recovery of neuroinflammation as well as of the 
lysosomal marker LAMP-1 and displayed enhanced cytokine/chemokine levels in the 
brain. TREM2-sol and, to a much lesser extent, TREM2-KO, however, despite 
presenting reduced levels of some cytokines/chemokines, showed persistent 
microgliosis and astrocytosis during recovery, with both homeostatic (TMEM119) 
as well as activated (LAMP-1) microglia markers increased. This was accompanied, 
specifically in the EC, by no myelin recovery, with appearance of myelin debris 
and axonal pathology, while oligodendrocytes recovered. In the chronic model 
consisting of 12-week cuprizone administration followed by 3-week recovery 
TREM2-IPD displayed sustained microgliosis and enhanced remyelination in the 
recovery phase. Taken together, our data suggest that sustained microglia 
activation led to increased remyelination, whereas microglia without plasma 
membrane TREM2 and only soluble TREM2 had reduced phagocytic activity despite 
efficient lysosomal function, as observed in bone marrow-derived macrophages, 
leading to a dysfunctional phenotype with improper myelin debris removal, lack 
of remyelination and axonal pathology following cuprizone intoxication.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-022-02671-z
PMCID: PMC9909920
PMID: 36755323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are or have been employees and 
shareholders of Novartis Pharma AG, Basel Switzerland.