1. Biodivers Data J. 2023 Jan 10;11:e96066. doi: 10.3897/BDJ.11.e96066.
eCollection  2023.

Complete mitochondrial genome of Rectorisluxiensis (Teleostei, Cyprinidae): 
characterisation and phylogenetic implications.

Zhang M(1)(2), Zhou Q(1)(2), Xiang H(1), Wang J(1)(2), Lan X(1)(2), Luo Q(1)(2), 
Jiang W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Hunan Engineering Laboratory for Chinese Giant Salamander's Resource 
Protection and Comprehensive Utilization, and Key Laboratory of Hunan Forest 
Products and Chemical Industry Engineering, Jishou University, Zhangjiajie, 
China Hunan Engineering Laboratory for Chinese Giant Salamander's Resource 
Protection and Comprehensive Utilization, and Key Laboratory of Hunan Forest 
Products and Chemical Industry Engineering, Jishou University Zhangjiajie China.
(2)College of Biology and Environmental Sciences, Jishou University, Jishou, 
China College of Biology and Environmental Sciences, Jishou University Jishou 
China.

Mitochondrial genomes (mitogenomes) are widely used in scientific studies on 
phylogenetic relationships, molecular evolution and population genetics. Here, 
we sequenced and analysed the mitogenome of Rectorisluxiensis, a Yangtze River 
drainage endemic, but threatened cyprinid fish of Labeoninae. The complete 
mitogenome of R.luxiensis was 16,592 bp in length, encoding 13 protein coding 
genes (PCGs), 22 transfer RNA genes (tRNAs), two ribosomal RNA genes (rRNAs) and 
a control region. The mitogenome showed a high A+T content (58.2%) and a 
positive AT-skew (0.10) and negative GC-skew (-0.25) base composition pattern. 
All the 13 PCGs were found to start with ATG codons, except for the COXI, in 
which GTG was the start codon. The ratio of non-synonymous and synonymous 
substitutions (Ka/Ks) of all the 13 PCGs were less than 1, indicating negative 
or purifying selection evolved in these genes. Comparatively speaking, the 
evolutionary rate of ATP8 was the fastest and ND4L was the slowest. All tRNAs 
could fold into a typical cloverleaf secondary structure, except tRNASer1 that 
lacked a dihydrouridine arm. Phylogenetic relationships, based on the PCGs 
dataset of 91 mitogenomes of Labeoninae, showed that R.luxiensis grouped with 
Rectorisposehensis and they formed a monophyletic Rectoris. However, many 
non-monophyletic genera were revealed in labeoninae fishes, such as Cirrhinus, 
Decorus, Garra, Labeo and Pseudocrossocheilus, which indicated that the 
validities of some traditional genera required a further check. This study 
reported the complete mitogenome of R.luxiensis for the first time, which 
provided valuable data for future molecular evolution and conservation related 
studies of Rectoris and other species in Labeoninae.

Mingyao Zhang, Qiang Zhou, Hongmei Xiang, Jinxiu Wang, Xiangying Lan, Qinghua 
Luo, Wansheng Jiang.

DOI: 10.3897/BDJ.11.e96066
PMCID: PMC9846281
PMID: 36761086