1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Jan 25;14:1060675. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1060675. eCollection 2023.

Metabolic stress-induced human beta-cell death is mediated by increased 
intracellular levels of adenosine.

Ngamjariyawat A(1)(2), Cen J(1), Said R(1), Incedal C(1), Idevall-Hagren O(1), 
Welsh N(1).

Author information:
(1)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Division of Anatomy, Department of Preclinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
Thammasat University, Khlong Luang, Pathumthani, Thailand.

INTRODUCTION: High intracellular concentrations of adenosine and 
2'-deoxyadenosine have been suggested to be an important mediator of cell death. 
The aim of the present study was to characterize adenosine-induced death in 
insulin-producing beta-cells, at control and high glucose + palmitate-induced 
stress conditions.
METHODS: Human insulin-producing EndoC-betaH1 cells were treated with adenosine, 
2'-deoxyadenosine, inosine and high glucose + sodium palmitate, and death rates 
using flow cytometry were studied.
RESULTS: We observed that adenosine and the non-receptor-activating analogue 
2-deoxyadenosine, but not the adenosine deamination product inosine, promoted 
beta-cell apoptosis at concentrations exceeding maximal adenosine-receptor 
stimulating concentrations. Both adenosine and inosine were efficiently taken up 
by EndoC-betaH1 cells, and inosine counteracted the cell death promoting effect 
of adenosine by competing with adenosine for uptake. Both adenosine and 
2'-deoxyadenosine promptly reduced insulin-stimulated production of plasma 
membrane PI(3,4,5)P3, an effect that was reversed upon wash out of adenosine. In 
line with this, adenosine, but not inosine, rapidly diminished Akt 
phosphorylation. Both pharmacological Bax inhibition and Akt activation blocked 
adenosine-induced beta-cell apoptosis, indicating that 
adenosine/2'-deoxyadenosine inhibits the PI3K/Akt/BAD anti-apoptotic pathway. 
High glucose + palmitate-induced cell death was paralleled by increased 
intracellular adenosine and inosine levels. Overexpression of adenosine 
deaminase-1 (ADA1) in EndoC-betaH1 cells, which increased Akt phosphorylation, 
prevented both adenosine-induced apoptosis and high glucose + palmitate-induced 
necrosis. ADA2 overexpression not only failed to protect against adenosine and 
high glucose + palmitate-activated cell death, but instead potentiated the 
apoptosis-stimulating effect of adenosine. In line with this, ADA1 
overexpression increased inosine production from adenosine-exposed cells, 
whereas ADA2 did not. Knockdown of ADA1 resulted in increased cell death rates 
in response to both adenosine and high glucose + palmitate. Inhibition of 
miR-30e-3p binding to the ADA1 mRNA 3'-UTR promoted the opposite effects on cell 
death rates and reduced intracellular adenosine contents.
DISCUSSION: It is concluded that intracellular adenosine/2'-deoxyadenosine 
regulates negatively the PI3K pathway and is therefore an important mediator of 
beta-cell apoptosis. Adenosine levels are controlled, at least in part, by ADA1, 
and strategies to upregulate ADA1 activity, during conditions of metabolic 
stress, could be useful in attempts to preserve beta-cell mass in diabetes.

Copyright Â© 2023 Ngamjariyawat, Cen, Said, Incedal, Idevall-Hagren and Welsh.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1060675
PMCID: PMC9905624
PMID: 36761184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.