1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 19;24(3):2000. doi: 10.3390/ijms24032000.

Glial Cultures Differentiated from iPSCs of Patients with PARK2-Associated 
Parkinson's Disease Demonstrate a Pro-Inflammatory Shift and Reduced Response to 
TNFα Stimulation.

Gerasimova T(1)(2), Stepanenko E(2), Novosadova L(1)(2), Arsenyeva E(1)(2), 
Shimchenko D(1)(2), Tarantul V(2), Grivennikov I(1)(2), Nenasheva V(2), 
Novosadova E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Differentiation, Institute of Molecular Genetics of 
National Research Centre "Kurchatov Institute", Moscow 123182, Russia.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Neurogenetics and Innate Immunity, Institute of 
Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre "Kurchatov Institute", Moscow 
123182, Russia.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative diseases 
characterized by progressive loss of midbrain dopaminergic neurons in the 
substantia nigra. Mutations in the PARK2 gene are a frequent cause of familial 
forms of PD. Sustained chronic neuroinflammation in the central nervous system 
makes a significant contribution to neurodegeneration events. In response to 
inflammatory factors produced by activated microglia, astrocytes change their 
transcriptional programs and secretion profiles, thus acting as immunocompetent 
cells. Here, we investigated iPSC-derived glial cell cultures obtained from 
healthy donors (HD) and from PD patients with PARK2 mutations in resting state 
and upon stimulation by TNFα. The non-stimulated glia of PD patients 
demonstrated higher IL1B and IL6 expression levels and increased IL6 protein 
synthesis, while BDNF and GDNF expression was down-regulated when compared to 
that of the glial cells of HDs. In the presence of TNFα, all of the glial 
cultures displayed a multiplied expression of genes encoding inflammatory 
cytokines: TNFA, IL1B, and IL6, as well as IL6 protein synthesis, although PD 
glia responded to TNFα stimulation less strongly than HD glia. Our results 
demonstrated a pro-inflammatory shift, a suppression of the neuroprotective gene 
program, and some depletion of reactivity to TNFα in PARK2-deficient glia 
compared to glial cells of HDs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24032000
PMCID: PMC9916517
PMID: 36768317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.