1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 24;24(3):2302. doi: 10.3390/ijms24032302.

Knockdown of Amyloid Precursor Protein Increases Ion Channel Expression and 
Alters Ca(2+) Signaling Pathways.

Paschou M(1), Liaropoulou D(1), Kalaitzaki V(1)(2), Efthimiopoulos S(1), 
Papazafiri P(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Animal and Human Physiology, Department of Biology, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, 15784 Athens, Greece.
(2)Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, University of Zurich, 8952 Schlieren, 
Switzerland.

Although the physiological role of the full-length Amyloid Precursor Protein 
(APP) and its proteolytic fragments remains unclear, they are definitively 
crucial for normal synaptic function. Herein, we report that the downregulation 
of APP in SH-SY5Y cells, using short hairpin RNA (shRNA), alters the expression 
pattern of several ion channels and signaling proteins that are involved in 
synaptic and Ca2+ signaling. Specifically, the levels of GluR2 and GluR4 
subunits of the alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
glutamate receptors (AMPAR) were significantly increased with APP knockdown. 
Similarly, the expression of the majority of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) residing 
proteins, such as the ER Ca2+ channels IP3R (Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate 
Receptor) and RyR (Ryanodine Receptor), the Ca2+ pump SERCA2 (Sarco/endoplasmic 
reticulum Ca2+ ATPase 2) and the ER Ca2+ sensor STIM1 (Stromal Interaction 
Molecule 1) was upregulated. A shift towards the upregulation of p-AKT, p-PP2A, 
and p-CaMKIV and the downregulation of p-GSK, p-ERK1/2, p-CaMKII, and p-CREB was 
observed, interconnecting Ca2+ signal transduction from the plasma membrane and 
ER to the nucleus. Interestingly, we detected reduced responses to several 
physiological stimuli, with the most prominent being the ineffectiveness of 
SH-SY5Y/APP- cells to mobilize Ca2+ from the ER upon carbachol-induced Ca2+ 
release through IP3Rs and RyRs. Our data further support an emerging yet 
perplexing role of APP within a functional molecular network of membrane and 
cytoplasmic proteins implicated in Ca2+ signaling.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24032302
PMCID: PMC9917207
PMID: 36768625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.