1. Sensors (Basel). 2023 Jan 26;23(3):1373. doi: 10.3390/s23031373.

Silk Fibroin-Based Piezoelectric Sensor with Carbon Nanofibers for Wearable 
Health Monitoring Applications.

Rathinasamy SK(1), Maheswar R(2), Lorincz J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, KPR Institute of Engineering and 
Technology, Coimbatore 641407, India.
(2)Department of ECE, Centre for IoT and AI (CITI), KPR Institute of Engineering 
and Technology, Coimbatore 641407, India.
(3)Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Naval 
Architecture (FESB), University of Split, 21000 Split, Croatia.

The continuous real-time monitoring of human health using biomedical sensing 
devices has recently become a promising approach to the realization of distant 
health monitoring. In this paper, the piezoelectric characteristics of the silk 
fibroin (SF) natural polymer were analyzed as the material used for obtaining 
sensing information in the application of distance health monitoring. To enhance 
the SF piezoelectricity, this paper presents the development of a novel SF-based 
sensor realized by combining SF with different carbon nanofiber (CNF) densities, 
and for such newly developed SF-based sensors comprehensive performance analyses 
have been performed. Versatile methods including the scanning electron 
microscope, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, Raman and X-ray diffraction 
measurements and impedance analysis were used to study the morphologic, 
mechanical and electrical properties of the developed SF-based sensor. The SF 
with CNF samples was analyzed for three different pressure loads (40 N, 60 N and 
80 N) in 500 compression test cycles. The analyses thoroughly describe how 
combining natural polymer SF with different CNF densities impacts the 
piezoelectricity and mechanical strength of the proposed SF-based sensor. The 
developed piezoelectric SF-based sensors were further tested on humans in real 
medical applications to detect generated piezoelectric voltage in versatile body 
movements. The maximum piezoelectricity equal to 2.95 Â± 0.03 V was achieved for 
the jumping movement, and the SF sample with a CNF density equal to 0.4% was 
tested. Obtained results also show that the proposed SF-based sensor has an 
appropriate piezoelectric sensitivity for each of the analyzed body movement 
types, and that the proposed SF-based sensor can be applied in real medical 
applications as a biomedical sensing device. The proposed SF-based sensor's 
practical implementation is further confirmed by the results of cytotoxicity 
analyses, which show that the developed sensor has a non-toxic and biocompatible 
nature and can be efficiently used in skin contact for biomedical wearable 
health monitoring applications.

DOI: 10.3390/s23031373
PMCID: PMC9919155
PMID: 36772412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.