1. Front Genet. 2023 Jan 26;14:1027156. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1027156. 
eCollection 2023.

Molecular evolution and population genetics of glutamate decarboxylase acid 
resistance pathway in lactic acid bacteria.

Sezgin E(1)(2), Tekin B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Engineering, Izmir Institute of Technology, Urla, Izmir, 
Turkey.
(2)Biotechnology Interdisciplinary Program, Izmir Institute of Technology, Urla, 
Izmir, Turkey.

Glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) pathway (GDP) is a major acid resistance mechanism 
enabling microorganisms' survival in low pH environments. We aimed to study the 
molecular evolution and population genetics of GDP in Lactic Acid Bacteria (LAB) 
to understand evolutionary processes shaping adaptation to acidic environments 
comparing species where the GDP genes are organized in an operon structure 
(Levilactobacillus brevis) versus lack of an operon structure 
(Lactiplantibacillus plantarum). Within species molecular population genetic 
analyses of GDP genes in L. brevis and L. plantarum sampled from diverse 
fermented food and other environments showed abundant synonymous and 
non-synonymous nucleotide diversity, mostly driven by low frequency changes, 
distributed throughout the coding regions for all genes in both species. GAD 
genes showed higher level of replacement polymorphism compared to transporter 
genes (gadC and YjeM) for both species, and GAD genes that are outside of an 
operon structure showed even higher level of replacement polymorphism. 
Population genetic tests suggest negative selection against replacement changes 
in all genes. Molecular structure and amino acid characteristics analyses showed 
that in none of the GDP genes replacement changes alter 3D structure or charge 
distribution supporting negative selection against non-conservative amino acid 
changes. Phylogenetic and between species divergence analyses suggested adaptive 
protein evolution on GDP genes comparing phylogenetically distant species, but 
conservative evolution comparing closely related species. GDP genes within an 
operon structure showed slower molecular evolution and higher conservation. All 
GAD and transporter genes showed high codon usage bias in examined LAB species 
suggesting high expression and utilization of acid resistance genes. Substantial 
discordances between species, GAD, and transporter gene tree topologies were 
observed suggesting molecular evolution of GDP genes do not follow speciation 
events. Distribution of operon structure on the species tree suggested multiple 
independent gain or loss of operon structure in LABs. In conclusion, GDP genes 
in LABs exhibit a dynamic molecular evolutionary history shaped by gene loss, 
gene transfer, negative and positive selection to maintain its active role in 
acid resistance mechanism, and enable organisms to thrive in acidic 
environments.

Copyright Â© 2023 Sezgin and Tekin.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1027156
PMCID: PMC9909107
PMID: 36777729

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.