1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Jun 15:2023.02.01.526652. doi: 
10.1101/2023.02.01.526652.

Missense mutations in CRX homeodomain cause dominant retinopathies through two 
distinct mechanisms.

Zheng Y(1)(2), Sun C(2), Zhang X(2), Ruzycki PA(2)(3), Chen S(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetic and Genomics Graduate Program, Division of Biological and 
Biomedical Sciences, Washington University in St Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, 
USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University in St 
Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Washington University in St Louis, Saint Louis, 
Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University in St Louis, Saint 
Louis, Missouri, USA.

Update in
    Elife. 2023 Nov 14;12:RP87147. doi: 10.7554/eLife.87147.

Homeodomain transcription factors (HD TFs) are instrumental to vertebrate 
development. Mutations in HD TFs have been linked to human diseases, but their 
pathogenic mechanisms remain elusive. Here we use Cone-Rod Homeobox (CRX) as a 
model to decipher the disease-causing mechanisms of two HD mutations, p.E80A and 
p.K88N, that produce severe dominant retinopathies. Through integrated analysis 
of molecular and functional evidence in vitro and in knock-in mouse models, we 
uncover two novel gain-of-function mechanisms: p.E80A increases CRX-mediated 
transactivation of canonical CRX target genes in developing photoreceptors; 
p.K88N alters CRX DNA-binding specificity resulting in binding at ectopic sites 
and severe perturbation of CRX target gene expression. Both mechanisms produce 
novel retinal morphological defects and hinder photoreceptor maturation distinct 
from loss-of-function models. This study reveals the distinct roles of E80 and 
K88 residues in CRX HD regulatory functions and emphasizes the importance of 
transcriptional precision in normal development.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.02.01.526652
PMCID: PMC9915647
PMID: 36778408

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.