1. ACS Pharmacol Transl Sci. 2023 Jan 20;6(2):306-319. doi: 
10.1021/acsptsci.2c00223. eCollection 2023 Feb 10.

Pharmacologic Targeting of the C-Terminus of Heat Shock Protein 90 Improves 
Neuromuscular Function in Animal Models of Charcot Marie Tooth X1 Disease.

Kaur S(1), Zhang X(1), Patel S(1), Rodriguez YA(1), Luther KJ(1), Alghafli G(1), 
Lang RM(1), Abrams CK(2), Dobrowsky RT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas 66045, United States.
(2)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation and Biomedical Engineering, 
College of Medicine, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, 
United States.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth X1 (CMTX1) disease is an inherited peripheral neuropathy 
that arises from loss-of-function mutations in the protein connexin 32 (Cx32). 
CMTX1 currently lacks a pharmacologic approach toward disease management, and we 
have previously shown that modulating the expression of molecular chaperones 
using novologue therapy may provide a viable disease-modifying approach to treat 
metabolic and demyelinating neuropathies. Cemdomespib is an orally bioavailable 
novologue that manifests neuroprotective activity by modulating the expression 
of heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70). We examined if 1 to 5 months of daily 
cemdomespib therapy may improve neuropathic symptoms in three mouse models of 
CMTX1 (Cx32 deficient (Cx32def), T55I-Cx32def, and R75W-Cx32 mice). Daily drug 
therapy significantly improved motor nerve conduction velocity (MNCV) and grip 
strength in all three models, but the compound muscle action potential was only 
improved in Cx32def mice. Drug efficacy required Hsp70 as improvements in MNCV, 
and the grip strength was abrogated in Cx32def × Hsp70 knockout mice. Five 
months of novologue therapy was associated with improved neuromuscular junction 
morphology, femoral motor nerve myelination, reduction in foamy macrophages, and 
a decrease in Schwann cell c-jun levels. To determine if c-jun may be downstream 
of Hsp70 and necessary for drug efficacy, c-jun expression was specifically 
deleted in Schwann cells of Cx32def mice. While the deletion of c-jun worsened 
the neuropathy, cemdomespib therapy remained effective in improving MNCV and 
grip strength. Our data show that cemdomespib therapy improves CMTX1-linked 
neuropathy in an Hsp70-dependent but a c-jun-independent manner and without 
regard to the nature of the underlying Cx32 mutation.

© 2023 American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsptsci.2c00223
PMCID: PMC9926526
PMID: 36798471

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
financial interest(s): R.T.D. is a named inventor on US and foreign patents 
claiming cemdomespib and related compounds, which are among a series of patents 
and patent applications licensed to Reata Pharmaceuticals by the University of 
Kansas.