1. Mol Med Rep. 2023 Apr;27(4):77. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2023.12964. Epub 2023 Feb 17.

Discovery of microglia gonadotropin‑releasing hormone receptor and its potential 
role in polycystic ovarian syndrome.

Wang F(#)(1), Zhang Z(#)(2), Han J(3), Zheng J(4), Wang X(1), Wang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Provincial University Key Laboratory of Sport and Health Science, School of 
Physical Education and Sport Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian 
350007, P.R. China.
(2)Provincial Key Laboratory for Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, 
College of Life Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350007, P.R. 
China.
(3)Fujian Key Laboratory of Medical Measurement, Fujian Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Fuzhou, Fujian 350001, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Shengli 
Clinical College of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350001, P.R. 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

Hypothalamic inflammation is a pathophysiological basis of polycystic ovarian 
syndrome (PCOS), while overactivated and/or excess M1 polarized microglia are 
considered to be the main reason for the occurrence of hypothalamic 
inflammation. Therefore, in vitro and in vivo experiments were performed to 
assess the relationships between microglia‑mediated inflammatory reactions and 
endocrine functions in the PCOS hypothalamus. The expression of 
gonadotropin‑releasing hormone (GnRH) receptor (GnRHR) was demonstrated in 
hypothalamic microglia, and it was found that low concentration, GnRH agonist, 
leuprolide acetate accelerated the expression of M2 polarization marker CD206, 
while high concentration leuprolide acetate increased the expression of M1 
polarization marker CD86 in vitro. Furthermore, aerobic exercise not only 
reduced the levels of serum testosterone, luteinizing hormone and GnRH and the 
amount of overactivated microglia, but also increased the number of M2 microglia 
in the hypothalamus of letrozole‑induced PCOS rats. In combination, these 
results not only demonstrated the expression of GnRHR in hypothalamic microglia, 
but also demonstrated that GnRH can induce microglial polarization, while 
aerobic exercise may improve the microglia‑mediated inflammatory reaction by 
reducing the expression of GnRHR in the hypothalamic microglia of PCOS rats.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2023.12964
PMCID: PMC10018280
PMID: 36799164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.