1. G3 (Bethesda). 2023 May 2;13(5):jkad041. doi: 10.1093/g3journal/jkad041.

FLInt: single shot safe harbor transgene integration via Fluorescent Landmark 
Interference.

Malaiwong N(1), Porta-de-la-Riva M, Krieg M.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Ciències Fotòniques (ICFO), 08860 Castelldefels, Spain.

The stable incorporation of transgenes and recombinant DNA material into the 
host genome is a bottleneck in many bioengineering applications. Due to the low 
efficiency, identifying the transgenic animals is often a needle in the 
haystack. Thus, optimal conditions require efficient screening procedures, but 
also known and safe landing sites that do not interfere with host expression, 
low input material and strong expression from the new locus. Here, we leverage 
an existing library of ≈300 different loci coding for fluorescent markers that 
are distributed over all 6 chromosomes in Caenorhabditis elegans as safe harbors 
for versatile transgene integration sites using CRISPR/Cas9. We demonstrated 
that a single crRNA was sufficient for cleavage of the target region and 
integration of the transgene of interest, which can be easily followed by loss 
of the fluorescent marker. The same loci can also be used for extrachromosomal 
landing sites and as co-CRISPR markers without affecting body morphology or 
animal behavior. Thus, our method overcomes the uncertainty of transgene 
location during random mutagenesis, facilitates easy screening through 
fluorescence interference and can be used as co-CRISPR markers without further 
influence in phenotypes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/g3journal/jkad041
PMCID: PMC10151404
PMID: 36805659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest statement The authors 
identify no conflict of interest.