1. Nat Immunol. 2023 Apr;24(4):652-663. doi: 10.1038/s41590-023-01441-0. Epub
2023  Feb 20.

I-A(g7) β56/57 polymorphisms regulate non-cognate negative selection to CD4(+) T 
cell orchestrators of type 1 diabetes.

Stadinski BD(1), Cleveland SB(1), Brehm MA(2), Greiner DL(2), Huseby PG(1), 
Huseby ES(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Diabetes Center of Excellence, University 
of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA. eric.huseby@umassmed.edu.

Genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes is associated with homozygous 
expression of major histocompatibility complex class II alleles that carry 
specific beta chain polymorphisms. Why heterozygous expression of these major 
histocompatibility complex class II alleles does not confer a similar 
predisposition is unresolved. Using a nonobese diabetic mouse model, here we 
show that heterozygous expression of the type 1 diabetes-protective allele I-Ag7 
β56P/57D induces negative selection to the I-Ag7-restricted T cell repertoire, 
including beta-islet-specific CD4+ T cells. Surprisingly, negative selection 
occurs despite I-Ag7 β56P/57D having a reduced ability to present beta-islet 
antigens to CD4+ T cells. Peripheral manifestations of non-cognate negative 
selection include a near complete loss of beta-islet-specific CXCR6+ CD4+ T 
cells, an inability to cross-prime islet-specific glucose-6-phosphatase 
catalytic subunit-related protein and insulin-specific CD8+ T cells and disease 
arrest at the insulitis stage. These data reveal that negative selection on 
non-cognate self-antigens in the thymus can promote T cell tolerance and 
protection from autoimmunity.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41590-023-01441-0
PMCID: PMC10623581
PMID: 36807641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]