1. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2023 Jan;13(1):410-424. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2022.06.012.
Epub  2022 Jun 23.

Chlorella sp.-ameliorated undesirable microenvironment promotes diabetic wound 
healing.

Wu H(1), Yang P(1), Li A(1), Jin X(1)(2), Zhang Z(3)(4), Lv H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, 
China.
(2)The Affiliated Suqian First People's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 
Suqian 223800, China.
(3)Jiangsu Province Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanjing 210023, 
China.
(4)Affiliated Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, 
Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing 210028, China.

Chronic diabetic wound remains a critical challenge suffering from the 
complicated negative microenvironments, such as high-glucose, excessive reactive 
oxygen species (ROS), hypoxia and malnutrition. Unfortunately, few strategies 
have been developed to ameliorate the multiple microenvironments simultaneously. 
In this study, Chlorella sp. (Chlorella) hydrogels were prepared against 
diabetic wounds. In vitro experiments demonstrated that living Chlorella could 
produce dissolved oxygen by photosynthesis, actively consume glucose and deplete 
ROS with the inherent antioxidants, during the daytime. At night, Chlorella was 
inactivated in situ by chlorine dioxide with human-body harmless concentration 
to utilize its abundant contents. It was verified in vitro that the 
inactivated-Chlorella could supply nutrition, relieve inflammation and terminate 
the oxygen-consumption of Chlorella-respiration. The advantages of living 
Chlorella and its contents were integrated ingeniously. The abovementioned 
functions were proven to accelerate cell proliferation, migration and 
angiogenesis in vitro. Then, streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice were employed 
for further validation. The in vivo outcomes confirmed that Chlorella could 
ameliorate the undesirable microenvironments, including hypoxia, high-glucose, 
excessive-ROS and chronic inflammation, thereby synergistically promoting tissue 
regeneration. Given the results above, Chlorella is considered as a tailor-made 
therapeutic strategy for diabetic wound healing.

© 2022 Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2022.06.012
PMCID: PMC9939294
PMID: 36815029

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.