1. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2023 Feb 13;16:409-424. doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S397445. 
eCollection 2023.

Effects of Anterior Pituitary Adenomas' Hormones on Glucose Metabolism and Its 
Clinical Implications.

Li M(1)(2), Zhang J(1)(2), Yang G(1)(2), Zhang J(1)(2), Han M(1)(2), Zhang Y(3), 
Liu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, People's Republic of China.
(2)First Clinical Medical College, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, People's 
Republic of China.

Pituitary adenomas have recently become more common and their incidence is 
increasing yearly. Functional pituitary tumors commonly secrete prolactin, 
growth hormones, and adrenocorticotropic hormones, which cause diseases such as 
prolactinoma, acromegaly, and Cushing's disease, but rarely secrete luteinizing, 
follicle-stimulating, thyroid-stimulating, and melanocyte-stimulating hormones. 
In addition to the typical clinical manifestations of functional pituitary 
tumors caused by excessive hormone levels, some pituitary tumors are also 
accompanied by abnormal glucose metabolism. The effects of these seven hormones 
on glucose metabolism are important for the treatment of diabetes secondary to 
pituitary tumors. This review focuses on the effects of hormones on glucose 
metabolism, providing important clues for the diagnosis and treatment of related 
diseases.

Â© 2023 Li et al.

DOI: 10.2147/DMSO.S397445
PMCID: PMC9937076
PMID: 36816815

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.