1. Mater Today Bio. 2023 Jan 29;19:100566. doi: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2023.100566. 
eCollection 2023 Apr.

NIR responsive nanoenzymes via photothermal ablation and hypoxia reversal to 
potentiate the STING-dependent innate antitumor immunity.

Li Q(1)(2), Yang M(2), Sun X(2), Wang Q(2), Yu B(2), Gong A(2), Zhang M(2), Du 
F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, 
Jiangsu University 212013, PR. China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, Jiangsu 
University, Zhenjiang 212013, PR. China.

Despite advances in combined photothermal/immunotherapy of tumor, the 
therapeutic effect has been impaired due to hypoxic microenvironment and 
inadequate immune activation. Manganese ions directly activated the stimulator 
of interferon genes (STING) pathway and induced innate antitumor immunity. 
Herein, a near infrared light (NIR)-responsive nanoenzyme (PB-Mn/OVA NE) was 
constructed by doping manganese into the ovalbumin (OVA)-templated Prussian blue 
(PB) nanoparticles. The resultant PB-Mn/OVA NEs exhibited favorable catalase 
activity to produce oxygen, which was conducive to alleviate the tumor hypoxic 
microenvironment. Under 808 ​nm NIR irradiation, the PB-Mn/OVA NEs with 
outstanding photothermal conversion efficiency of 30% significantly destroyed 
tumor cells by inducing immunogenic cell death (ICD). Impressively, the 
PB-Mn/OVA NEs could activate the cGAS-STING pathway to promote the maturation 
and the antigen cross-presentation ability of dendritic cells (DCs), which 
further activated cytotoxic T lymphocytes and memory T lymphocytes. Overall, 
this work presents a powerful nanoenzyme formula to integrate photothermal 
ablation and hypoxic reversal for triggering robust innate and adaptive 
antitumor immune response.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2023.100566
PMCID: PMC9932208
PMID: 36816600

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.