1. Cell Rep Med. 2023 Feb 21;4(2):100946. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.100946.

Functional contribution of mesencephalic locomotor region nuclei to locomotor 
recovery after spinal cord injury.

Roussel M(1), Lafrance-Zoubga D(1), Josset N(1), Lemieux M(1), Bretzner F(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, CHUL-Neurosciences, 2705 Boul. Laurier, 
Québec, QC G1V 4G2, Canada.
(2)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, CHUL-Neurosciences, 2705 Boul. Laurier, 
Québec, QC G1V 4G2, Canada; Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry and 
Neurosciences, Université Laval, Québec, QC G1V 4G2, Canada. Electronic address: 
frederic.bretzner.1@ulaval.ca.

Spinal cord injury (SCI) results in a disruption of information between the 
brain and the spinal circuit. Electrical stimulation of the mesencephalic 
locomotor region (MLR) can promote locomotor recovery in acute and chronic SCI 
rodent models. Although clinical trials are currently under way, there is still 
debate about the organization of this supraspinal center and which anatomic 
correlate of the MLR should be targeted to promote recovery. Combining 
kinematics, electromyographic recordings, anatomic analysis, and mouse genetics, 
our study reveals that glutamatergic neurons of the cuneiform nucleus contribute 
to locomotor recovery by enhancing motor efficacy in hindlimb muscles, and by 
increasing locomotor rhythm and speed on a treadmill, over ground, and during 
swimming in chronic SCI mice. In contrast, glutamatergic neurons of the 
pedunculopontine nucleus slow down locomotion. Therefore, our study identifies 
the cuneiform nucleus and its glutamatergic neurons as a therapeutical target to 
improve locomotor recovery in patients living with SCI.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2023.100946
PMCID: PMC9975330
PMID: 36812893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.