1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2023 Apr 25;212(2):156-165. doi: 10.1093/cei/uxad028.

CRISPR-gene-engineered CYBB knock-out PLB-985 cells, a useful model to study 
functional impact of X-linked chronic granulomatous disease mutations: 
application to the G412E X91+-CGD mutation.

Beaumel S(1), Verbrugge L(1), Fieschi F(2)(3), Stasia MJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Grenoble Alpes, Pôle Biologie, CDiReC, 
Grenoble, France.
(2)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, UMR5075, Institut de Biologie Structurale, 
Grenoble, France.
(3)Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Ministère de l'Enseignement 
supérieur, de la Recherche et de l'Innovation, Paris, France.

Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a rare primary immune disorder caused by 
mutations in one of the five subunits of the NADPH oxidase complex expressed in 
phagocytes. Two-thirds of CGD cases are caused by mutations in CYBB that encodes 
NOX2 or gp91phox. Some rare X91+-CGD point mutations lead to a loss of function 
but with a normal expression of the mutated NOX2 protein. It is therefore 
necessary to ensure that this mutation is indeed responsible for the loss of 
activity in order to make a safe diagnosis for genetic counselling. We 
previously used the X-CGD PLB-985 cell model of M.C. Dinauer obtained by 
homologous recombination in the original PLB-985 human myeloid cell line, in 
order to study the functional impact of such mutations. Although the PLB-985 
cell line was originally described by K.A. Tucker et al. in1987 as a distinct 
cell line isolated from a patient with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia, it is 
actually identified as a subclone of the HL-60 cells. In order to use a cellular 
model that meets the quality standard for the functional study of X91+-CGD 
mutations in CGD diagnosis, we developed our own model using the CRISPR-Cas9 
technology in a certified PLB-985 cell line from DSMZ-German Collection of 
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures. Thanks to this new X-CGD model, we 
demonstrated that the G412E mutation in NOX2 found in a X91+-CGD patient 
prohibits access of the electron donor NADPH to its binding site explaining the 
absence of superoxide production in his neutrophils.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Immunology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cei/uxad028
PMCID: PMC10128165
PMID: 36827093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding 
author states that there are no conflicts of interest.