1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Feb 7;11:1096463. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1096463. 
eCollection 2023.

miR-514a promotes neuronal development in human iPSC-derived neurons.

Akaba Y(1)(2)(3), Takahashi S(3), Suzuki K(4)(5)(6), Kosaki K(7), Tsujimura 
K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Group of Brain Function and Development, Neuroscience Institute of the 
Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(2)Research Unit for Developmental Disorders, Institute for Advanced Research, 
Nagoya University, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, Hokkaido, 
Japan.
(4)Institute for Advanced Co-Creation Studies, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Graduate School of Frontier Bioscience, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Proper development and function of the central nervous system require precise 
regulation of gene expression. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a group of small non-coding 
RNAs that can negatively regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional 
level, are critical regulators of neuronal development, and dysregulation of 
microRNAs has been implicated in various neurological disorders. Changes in 
microRNA expression and repertoire are related to the emergence of social and 
behavioral variations in closely related primates, including humans, during 
evolution. MicroRNA-514a (miR-514a) is an X-linked miRNA that is conserved in 
species with higher social and cognitive functions, and frequent tandem 
duplications of miR-514a have been found in primate genomes. Here, we 
demonstrate that miR-514a plays a crucial role in neuronal development in 
neurons derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). 
Overexpression of miR-514a increased dendritic length, soma size, and activity 
levels of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling in induced pluripotent 
stem cell-derived neurons, whereas blocking of endogenous miR-514a inhibited 
neuronal development. Furthermore, we performed a functional analysis of the 
miR-514a variation found during primate evolution, to investigate the impact of 
miR-514a sequence variation and associated changes in expression on brain 
development during evolution. We found that mutation in miR-514a significantly 
reduced the expression of the mature form and abolished the effects observed 
when native miR-514a was expressed. Our findings provide new insights into the 
functional role of miR-514a in the regulation of neuronal development and 
evolution of primate brain development.

Copyright Â© 2023 Akaba, Takahashi, Suzuki, Kosaki and Tsujimura.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1096463
PMCID: PMC9941156
PMID: 36824367

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as potential conflicts of interest.