1. Toxins (Basel). 2023 Feb 10;15(2):145. doi: 10.3390/toxins15020145.

Antimicrobial Compounds from Skin Secretions of Species That Belong to the 
Bufonidae Family.

Ibarra-Vega R(1), Galván-Hernández AR(1), Salazar-Monge H(2), Zataraín-Palacios 
R(1), García-Villalvazo PE(1), Zavalza-Galvez DI(1), Valdez-Velazquez LL(1), 
Jiménez-Vargas JM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad de Colima, Coquimatlán 28040, 
Mexico.
(2)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Colima, Coquimatlán 28040, Mexico.
(3)Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (CONACYT), Mexico City 03940, 
Mexico.

Skin secretions of toads are a complex mixture of molecules. The substances 
secreted comprise more than 80 different compounds that show diverse 
pharmacological activities. The compounds secreted through skin pores and 
parotid glands are of particular interest because they help toads to endure in 
habitats full of pathogenic microbes, i.e., bacteria, fungi, viruses, and 
protozoa, due to their content of components such as bufadienolides, alkaloids, 
and antimicrobial peptides. We carried out an extensive literature review of 
relevant articles published until November 2022 in ACS Publications, Google 
Scholar, PubMed, and ScienceDirect. It was centered on research addressing the 
biological characterization of the compounds identified in the species of genera 
Atelopus, Bufo, Duttaphrynus, Melanophryniscus, Peltopryne, Phrynoidis, Rhaebo, 
and Rhinella, with antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, and antiparasitic 
activities; as well as studies performed with analogous compounds and skin 
secretions of toads that also showed these activities. This review shows that 
the compounds in the secretions of toads could be candidates for new drugs to 
treat infectious diseases or be used to develop new molecules with better 
properties from existing ones. Some compounds in this review showed activity 
against microorganisms of medical interest such as Staphylococcus aureus, 
Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Coronavirus varieties, HIV, Trypanosoma 
cruzi, Leishmania chagasi, Plasmodium falciparum, and against different kinds of 
fungi that affect plants of economic interest.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins15020145
PMCID: PMC9968139
PMID: 36828459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.