1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2023 Feb 1;12(2):344. doi: 10.3390/antiox12020344.

Comparative Study of Different H(2)S Donors as Vasodilators and Attenuators of 
Superoxide-Induced Endothelial Damage.

Marini E(1), Rolando B(1), Sodano F(1)(2), Blua F(1), Concina G(3), Guglielmo 
S(1), Lazzarato L(1), Chegaev K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Science and Technology, University of Turin, 10125 Turin, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, "Federico II" University of Naples, 80131 Naples, 
Italy.
(3)Rita Levi-Montalcini Department of Neuroscience, University of Turin, 10125 
Turin, Italy.

In the last years, research proofs have confirmed that hydrogen sulfide (H2S) 
plays an important role in various physio-pathological processes, such as 
oxidation, inflammation, neurophysiology, and cardiovascular protection; in 
particular, the protective effects of H2S in cardiovascular diseases were 
demonstrated. The interest in H2S-donating molecules as tools for biological and 
pharmacological studies has grown, together with the understanding of H2S 
importance. Here we performed a comparative study of a series of H2S donor 
molecules with different chemical scaffolds and H2S release mechanisms. The 
compounds were tested in human serum for their stability and ability to generate 
H2S. Their vasorelaxant properties were studied on rat aorta strips, and the 
capacity of the selected compounds to protect NO-dependent endothelium 
reactivity in an acute oxidative stress model was tested. H2S donors showed 
different H2S-releasing kinetic and produced amounts and vasodilating profiles; 
in particular, compound 6 was able to attenuate the dysfunction of relaxation 
induced by pyrogallol exposure, showing endothelial protective effects. These 
results may represent a useful basis for the rational development of promising 
H2S-releasing agents also conjugated with other pharmacophores.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox12020344
PMCID: PMC9951978
PMID: 36829903

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.