1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Feb 17:2023.02.17.528071. doi: 
10.1101/2023.02.17.528071.

Amino acid substitutions in norovirus VP1 dictate cell tropism via an attachment 
process dependent on membrane mobility.

Mills JT(1), Minogue SC(1), Snowden JS(1), Arden WKC(2), Rowlands DJ(1), 
Stonehouse NJ(1), Wobus CE(2), Herod MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular & 
Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, 
UK.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48130, USA.

Viruses interact with receptors on the cell surface to initiate and co-ordinate 
infection. The distribution of receptors on host cells can be a key determinant 
of viral tropism and host infection. Unravelling the complex nature of 
virus-receptor interactions is, therefore, of fundamental importance to 
understanding viral pathogenesis. Noroviruses are non-enveloped, icosahedral, 
positive-sense RNA viruses of global importance to human health, with no 
approved vaccine or antiviral agent available. Here we use murine norovirus as a 
model for the study of molecular mechanisms of virus-receptor interactions. We 
show that variation at a single amino acid residue in the major viral capsid 
protein had a key impact on the interaction between virus and receptor. This 
variation did not affect virion production or virus growth kinetics, but a 
specific amino acid was rapidly selected through evolution experiments, and 
significantly improved cellular attachment when infecting immune cells in 
suspension. However, reducing plasma membrane mobility counteracted this 
phenotype, providing insight into for the role of membrane fluidity and receptor 
recruitment in norovirus cellular attachment. When the infectivity of a panel of 
recombinant viruses with single amino acid variations was compared in vivo, 
there were significant differences in the distribution of viruses in a murine 
model, demonstrating a role in cellular tropism in vivo. Overall, these results 
highlight the importance of lipid rafts and virus-induced receptor recruitment 
in viral infection, as well as how capsid evolution can greatly influence 
cellular tropism, within-host spread and pathogenicity.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.02.17.528071
PMCID: PMC9949111
PMID: 36824911

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.