1. Cancer Lett. 2023 Apr 1;558:216093. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2023.216093. Epub
2023  Feb 21.

Tumor-targeted exosomes for delivery of anticancer drugs.

Raguraman R(1), Bhavsar D(1), Kim D(2), Ren X(3), Sikavitsas V(4), Munshi A(5), 
Ramesh R(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA; OU Health Stephenson Cancer Center, The 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA; OU Health Stephenson Cancer 
Center, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 
73104, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
(4)School of Chemical, Biological and Material Engineering, The University of 
Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, 73019, USA; OU Health Stephenson Cancer Center, The 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA; OU Health Stephenson Cancer Center, The 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA; OU Health Stephenson Cancer Center, The 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA; 
Graduate Program in Biomedical Sciences, The University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. Electronic address: 
rajagopal-ramesh@ouhsc.edu.

Exosomes are small phospholipid bilayer vesicles that are naturally produced by 
all living cells, both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The exosomes due to their 
unique size, reduced immunogenicity, and their ability to mimic synthetic 
liposomes in carrying various anticancer drugs have been tested as drug delivery 
vehicles for cancer treatment. An added advantage of developing exosomes as a 
drug carrier is the ease of manipulating their intraluminal content and their 
surface modification to achieve tumor-targeted drug delivery. In the past 
ten-years, there has been an exponential increase in the number of 
exosome-related studies in cancer. Preclinical studies demonstrate 
exosomes-mediated delivery of chemotherapeutics, biologicals and natural 
products produce potent anticancer activity both, in vitro and in vivo. In 
contrast, the number of exosome-based clinical trials are few due to challenges 
in the manufacturing and scalability related to large-scale production of 
exosomes and their storage and stability. Herein, we discuss recent advances in 
exosome-based drug delivery for cancer treatment in preclinical and clinical 
studies and conclude with challenges to be overcome for translating a larger 
number of exosome-based therapies into the clinic.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2023.216093
PMCID: PMC10025995
PMID: 36822543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.