1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Feb 18:2023.02.17.528952. doi: 
10.1101/2023.02.17.528952.

Spenito-dependent metabolic sexual dimorphism intrinsic to fat storage cells.

Diaz AV(1), Matheny T(2)(3), Stephenson D(2), Nemkov T(2), D'Alessandro A(2), 
Reis T(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, Department of Medicine, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.
(3)RNA Bioscience Initiative, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.

Update in
    Genetics. 2023 Nov 1;225(3):iyad164. doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyad164.

Metabolism in males and females is distinct. Differences are usually linked to 
sexual reproduction, with circulating signals (e.g. hormones) playing major 
roles. By contrast, sex differences prior to sexual maturity and intrinsic to 
individual metabolic tissues are less understood. We analyzed Drosophila 
melanogaster larvae and find that males store more fat than females, the 
opposite of the sexual dimorphism in adults. We show that metabolic differences 
are intrinsic to the major fat storage tissue, including many differences in the 
expression of metabolic genes. Our previous work identified fat storage roles 
for Spenito (Nito), a conserved RNA-binding protein and regulator of sex 
determination. Nito knockdown specifically in the fat storage tissue abolished 
fat differences between males and females. We further show that Nito is required 
for sex-specific expression of the master regulator of sex determination, 
Sex-lethal (Sxl). "Feminization" of fat storage cells via tissue-specific 
overexpression of a Sxl target gene made larvae lean, reduced the fat 
differences between males and females, and induced female-like metabolic gene 
expression. Altogether, this study supports a model in which Nito autonomously 
controls sexual dimorphisms and differential expression of metabolic genes in 
fat cells in part through its regulation of the sex determination pathway.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.02.17.528952
PMCID: PMC9949119
PMID: 36824729