1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2023 Feb 1;12(2):350. doi: 10.3390/antiox12020350.

Pleiotropic Roles of a KEAP1-Associated Deubiquitinase, OTUD1.

Oikawa D(1), Shimizu K(1), Tokunaga F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
Metropolitan University, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

Protein ubiquitination, which is catalyzed by ubiquitin-activating enzymes, 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, and ubiquitin ligases, is a crucial 
post-translational modification to regulate numerous cellular functions in a 
spatio-temporal-specific manner. The human genome encodes ~100 deubiquitinating 
enzymes (DUBs), which antagonistically regulate the ubiquitin system. OTUD1, an 
ovarian tumor protease (OTU) family DUB, has an N-terminal-disordered alanine-, 
proline-, glycine-rich region (APGR), a catalytic OTU domain, and a 
ubiquitin-interacting motif (UIM). OTUD1 preferentially hydrolyzes 
lysine-63-linked ubiquitin chains in vitro; however, recent studies indicate 
that OTUD1 cleaves various ubiquitin linkages, and is involved in the regulation 
of multiple cellular functions. Thus, OTUD1 predominantly functions as a tumor 
suppressor by targeting p53, SMAD7, PTEN, AKT, IREB2, YAP, MCL1, and AIF. 
Furthermore, OTUD1 regulates antiviral signaling, innate and acquired immune 
responses, and cell death pathways. Similar to Nrf2, OTUD1 contains a 
KEAP1-binding ETGE motif in its APGR and regulates the reactive oxygen species 
(ROS)-mediated oxidative stress response and cell death. Importantly, in 
addition to its association with various cancers, including multiple myeloma, 
OTUD1 is involved in acute graft-versus-host disease and autoimmune diseases 
such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and ulcerative 
colitis. Thus, OTUD1 is an important DUB as a therapeutic target for a variety 
of diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox12020350
PMCID: PMC9952104
PMID: 36829909

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.