1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Feb 9;24(4):3464. doi: 10.3390/ijms24043464.

A Highly Expressed Antennae Odorant-Binding Protein Involved in Recognition of 
Herbivore-Induced Plant Volatiles in Dastarcus helophoroides.

Yi SC(1), Wu YH(1), Yang RN(1), Li DZ(1)(2), Abdelnabby H(3), Wang MQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Hubei Insect Resources Utilization and Sustainable Pest Management Key 
Laboratory, College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan 430070, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Forest Protection of National Forestry and Grassland 
Administration, Ecology and Nature Conservation Institute, Chinese Academy of 
Forestry, Beijing 100091, China.
(3)Department of Plant Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, Benha University, 
Banha 13736, Qalyubia, Egypt.

Natural enemies such as parasitoids and parasites depend on sensitive olfactory 
to search for their specific hosts. Herbivore-induced plant volatiles (HIPVs) 
are vital components in providing host information for many natural enemies of 
herbivores. However, the olfactory-related proteins involved in the recognition 
of HIPVs are rarely reported. In this study, we established an exhaustive tissue 
and developmental expression profile of odorant-binding proteins (OBPs) from 
Dastarcus helophoroides, an essential natural enemy in the forestry ecosystem. 
Twenty DhelOBPs displayed various expression patterns in different organs and 
adult physiological states, suggesting a potential involvement in olfactory 
perception. In silico AlphaFold2-based modeling and molecular docking showed 
similar binding energies between six DhelOBPs (DhelOBP4, 5, 6, 14, 18, and 20) 
and HIPVs from Pinus massoniana. While in vitro fluorescence competitive binding 
assays showed only recombinant DhelOBP4, the most highly expressed in the 
antennae of emerging adults could bind to HIPVs with high binding affinities. 
RNAi-mediated behavioral assays indicated that DhelOBP4 was an essential 
functional protein for D. helophoroides adults recognizing two behaviorally 
attractive substances: p-cymene and Î³-terpinene. Further binding conformation 
analyses revealed that Phe 54, Val 56, and Phe 71 might be the key binding sites 
for DhelOBP4 interacting with HIPVs. In conclusion, our results provide an 
essential molecular basis for the olfactory perception of D. helophoroides and 
reliable evidence for recognizing the HIPVs of natural enemies from insect OBPs' 
perspective.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24043464
PMCID: PMC9962305
PMID: 36834874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.