1. Pharmaceutics. 2023 Feb 8;15(2):577. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics15020577.

Blockage of the IL-31 Pathway as a Potential Target Therapy for Atopic 
Dermatitis.

Orfali RL(1), Aoki V(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Dermatology and Immunodeficiencies (LIM-56), Department of 
Dermatology, Faculdade de Medicina FMUSP, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo 
01246-903, SP, Brazil.

Atopic dermatitis (AD), a pruritic, inflammatory chronic disease with 
multifactorial pathogenesis, has been a therapeutic challenge. Novel target 
treatments aim to reduce not only the immunologic dysfunction and microbiome 
dysbiosis but also the recovery of the damaged skin barrier. The current review 
focuses on the interleukin 31 (IL-31) pathway and AD and offers an overview of 
the current clinical studies with monoclonal antibodies blocking this cascade. 
Pruritus, the key symptom of AD, has substantial participation of the IL-31 
complex and activation of relevant signaling pathways. Epidermal keratinocytes, 
inflammatory cells, and cutaneous peripheral nerves express the interleukin-31 
receptor Î±-chain (IL-31RA), upregulated by Staphylococcus aureus toxins or Th2 
cytokines involved in AD. Nemolizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that 
antagonizes IL-31RA, inhibiting the IL-31 cascade and therefore contributing to 
reducing the pruritus and inflammation and recovering the damaged skin barrier 
in AD patients. Phases 2 and 3 clinical trials with nemolizumab in AD show a 
suitable safety profile, with a fast, efficient, and sustained reduction of 
pruritus and severity scores, especially when associated with topical treatment. 
Deciphering the full interplay of the IL-31 pathway and AD may expand the 
potential of nemolizumab as a targeted therapy for AD and other pruritic 
conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics15020577
PMCID: PMC9961325
PMID: 36839897

Conflict of interest statement: R.L.O. has been an investigator and/or 
consultant for Bayer, Eli Lilly; V.A. has been an investigator and/or consultant 
to Abbvie, Eli Lilly, Pfizer. These had no role in the design of the study; in 
the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results.