1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Feb 16;24(4):3966. doi: 10.3390/ijms24043966.

Alterations in the Level of Ergosterol in Candida albicans' Plasma Membrane 
Correspond with Changes in Virulence and Result in Triggering Diversed 
Inflammatory Response.

Derkacz D(1), Krasowska A(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, 50-383 Wroclaw, Poland.

Opportunistic pathogen Candida albicans possesses multiple virulence factors 
which enable colonization and infection of host tissues. Candida-related 
infections frequently occur in immunocompromised patients, which is related to 
an insufficient inflammatory response. Furthermore, immunosuppression and 
multidrug resistance of C. albicans clinical isolates make the treatment of 
candidiasis a challenge for modern medicine. The most common resistance 
mechanism of C. albicans to antifungals includes point mutations in the ERG11 
gene, which encodes target protein for azoles. We investigated whether the 
mutations or deletion of the ERG11 gene influence the pathogen-host 
interactions. We prove that both C. albicans erg11∆/∆ and ERG11K143R/K143R 
exhibit increased cell surface hydrophobicity. Additionally, C. albicans KS058 
has an impaired ability of biofilm and hyphae formation. Analysis of the 
inflammatory response of human dermal fibroblasts and vaginal epithelial cell 
lines revealed that altered morphology of C. albicans erg11∆/∆ results in a 
significantly weaker immune response. C. albicans ERG11K143R/K143R triggered 
stronger production of pro-inflammatory response. Analysis of genes encoding 
adhesins confirmed differences in the expression pattern of key adhesins for 
both erg11∆/∆ and ERG11K143R/K143R strains. Obtained data indicate that 
alterations in Erg11p consequence in resistance to azoles and affect the key 
virulence factors and inflammatory response of host cells.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24043966
PMCID: PMC9964392
PMID: 36835379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.