1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Feb 10;14(2):460. doi: 10.3390/genes14020460.

Complete Chloroplast Genome Sequence of the Long Blooming Cultivar Camellia 
'Xiari Qixin': Genome Features, Comparative and Phylogenetic Analysis.

Xu Y(1), Liu Y(1), Yu Z(1), Jia X(1).

Author information:
(1)Hainan Key Laboratory of Tropical Oil Crops Biology, Coconut Research 
Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Wenchang 571339, 
China.

The camellia flower is a famous woody plant with a long-cultivated history and 
high ornamental value. It is extensively planted and utilized around the world 
and owns a massive germplasm resource. Camellia 'Xiari Qixin' belongs to one of 
the typical cultivars in the four seasons camellia hybrids series. Due to its 
long flowering period, this kind of cultivar is identified as a precious 
resource of camellia flowers. In this study, the complete chloroplast genome 
sequence of C. 'Xiari Qixin' was first reported. Its whole chloroplast genome is 
157,039 bp in length with an overall GC content of 37.30%, composed of a large 
single copy region (LSC, 86,674 bp), a small single copy region (SSC, 18,281 
bp), and a pair of inverted repeat regions (IRs, 26,042 bp each). A total of 134 
genes were predicted in this genome, including 8 ribosomal RNA genes, 37 
transfer RNA genes, and 89 protein-coding genes. In addition, 50 simple sequence 
repeats (SSRs) and 36 long repeat sequences were detected. By comparing C. 
'Xiari Qixin' and seven Camellia species on the chloroplast genome, seven 
mutation hotspot regions were identified, including psbK, trnS (GCU)-trnG(GCC), 
trnG(GCC), petN-psbM, trnF(GAA)-ndhJ, trnP(UGG)-psaJ, and ycf1. Phylogenetic 
analysis of 30 chloroplast genomes showed that the genetic relationship between 
C. 'Xiari Qixin' and Camellia azalea is quite close in evolution. These results 
could not only provide a valuable database for determining the maternal origin 
of Camellia cultivars, but also contribute to the exploration of the 
phylogenetic relationship and utilization of germplasm resources for Camellia.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14020460
PMCID: PMC9956581
PMID: 36833387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflict of 
interest.