1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2023 Feb 9;11:1125544. doi:
10.3389/fbioe.2023.1125544.  eCollection 2023.

In vivo implementation of a synthetic metabolic pathway for the 
carbon-conserving conversion of glycolaldehyde to acetyl-CoA.

Wagner N(1), Bade F(1), Straube E(1), Rabe K(1), Frazão CJR(1), Walther T(1).

Author information:
(1)TU Dresden, Institute of Natural Materials Technology, Dresden, Germany.

Ethylene glycol (EG) derived from plastic waste or CO2 can serve as a substrate 
for microbial production of value-added chemicals. Assimilation of EG proceeds 
though the characteristic intermediate glycolaldehyde (GA). However, natural 
metabolic pathways for GA assimilation have low carbon efficiency when producing 
the metabolic precursor acetyl-CoA. In alternative, the reaction sequence 
catalyzed by EG dehydrogenase, d-arabinose 5-phosphate aldolase, d-arabinose 
5-phosphate isomerase, d-ribulose 5-phosphate 3-epimerase (Rpe), d-xylulose 
5-phosphate phosphoketolase, and phosphate acetyltransferase may enable the 
conversion of EG into acetyl-CoA without carbon loss. We investigated the 
metabolic requirements for in vivo function of this pathway in Escherichia coli 
by (over)expressing constituting enzymes in different combinations. Using 
13C-tracer experiments, we first examined the conversion of EG to acetate via 
the synthetic reaction sequence and showed that, in addition to heterologous 
phosphoketolase, overexpression of all native enzymes except Rpe was required 
for the pathway to function. Since acetyl-CoA could not be reliably quantified 
by our LC/MS-method, the distribution of isotopologues in mevalonate, a stable 
metabolite that is exclusively derived from this intermediate, was used to probe 
the contribution of the synthetic pathway to biosynthesis of acetyl-CoA. We 
detected strong incorporation of 13C carbon derived from labeled GA in all 
intermediates of the synthetic pathway. In presence of unlabeled co-substrate 
glycerol, 12.4% of the mevalonate (and therefore acetyl-CoA) was derived from 
GA. The contribution of the synthetic pathway to acetyl-CoA production was 
further increased to 16.1% by the additional expression of the native phosphate 
acyltransferase enzyme. Finally, we demonstrated that conversion of EG to 
mevalonate was feasible albeit at currently extremely small yields.

Copyright © 2023 Wagner, Bade, Straube, Rabe, Frazão and Walther.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2023.1125544
PMCID: PMC9947464
PMID: 36845174

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.