1. Front Nutr. 2023 Feb 9;10:1081263. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1081263. eCollection
 2023.

A rose flavor compound activating the NRF2 pathway in dendritic cells 
ameliorates contact hypersensitivity in mice.

Kodama N(1), Okada H(1), Hachisu M(1), Ando M(1), Ito N(1), Nagata K(1), 
Katagiri M(1), Yasuda Y(1), Hiroki I(1), Yashiro T(1), Ichihara G(2), Yamamoto 
M(3), Nishiyama C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Faculty of Advanced 
Engineering, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, Faculty of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

Dendritic cells (DCs), which are typical antigen-presenting cells, localize to 
various sites in the body, particularly the front line of infection as 
sentinels, and are involved in innate and adaptive immune responses. Although 
the functions of DCs, such as pathogen-induced cytokine production and 
antigen-specific T cell activation, are important for host defenses against 
infection and tumorigenesis, the hyper- and/or extended activation of DCs leads 
to inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. In the present study, β-damascone, a 
major ingredient of rose fragrance, was selected from an aroma library as a 
candidate compound that suppresses antigen-induced immune responses. β-Damascone 
inhibited the functions of DCs, including the antigen-dependent proliferation of 
T cells, DC-induced Th1 development, and the TLR ligand-induced production of 
inflammatory cytokines by DCs. The β-damascone treatment also increased the 
protein level of the transcription factor NF-E2-related factor 2 (NRF2), which 
plays key roles in antioxidant responses, and the transcription of Hmox1 and 
Nqo1, target genes of NRF2, in DCs. Nrf2 -/ - DCs induced Th1-development and 
produced large amount of IL-12p40 even in the presence of β-damascone, whereas 
these functions by Nrf2 +/- DCs were inhibited by β-damascone under the same 
conditions. The intake of β-damascone suppressed ear swelling in contact 
hypersensitivity (CHS) model mice, but not in CHS-induced Nrf2 -/ - mice. 
Collectively, the present results indicate the potential of the rose aroma 
compound β-damascone, which suppresses DC-mediated immune responses by 
activating the NRF2 pathway in DCs, for the prevention and/or attenuation of 
immune-mediated diseases.

Copyright © 2023 Kodama, Okada, Hachisu, Ando, Ito, Nagata, Katagiri, Yasuda, 
Hiroki, Yashiro, Ichihara, Yamamoto and Nishiyama.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1081263
PMCID: PMC9946980
PMID: 36845043

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.