1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2023 Feb 26;80(3):73. doi: 10.1007/s00018-023-04721-y.

Analysis of a rare progeria variant of Barrier-to-autointegration factor in 
Drosophila connects centromere function to tissue homeostasis.

Duan T(1)(2), Thyagarajan S(1), Amoiroglou A(3), Rogers GC(3), Geyer PK(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Iowa, 3135E 
MERF, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15232, USA.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, 85724, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Iowa, 3135E 
MERF, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA. pamela-geyer@uiowa.edu.

Barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF/BANF) is a nuclear lamina protein 
essential for nuclear integrity, chromatin structure, and genome stability. 
Whereas complete loss of BAF causes lethality in multiple organisms, the A12T 
missense mutation of the BANF1 gene in humans causes a premature aging syndrome, 
called Néstor-Guillermo Progeria Syndrome (NGPS). Here, we report the first in 
vivo animal investigation of progeroid BAF, using CRISPR editing to introduce 
the NGPS mutation into the endogenous Drosophila baf gene. Progeroid BAF adults 
are born at expected frequencies, demonstrating that this BAF variant retains 
some function. However, tissue homeostasis is affected, supported by studies of 
the ovary, a tissue that depends upon BAF for stem cell survival and continuous 
oocyte production. We find that progeroid BAF causes defects in germline stem 
cell mitosis that delay anaphase progression and compromise chromosome 
segregation. We link these defects to decreased recruitment of centromeric 
proteins of the kinetochore, indicating dysfunction of cenBAF, a localized pool 
of dephosphorylated BAF produced by Protein Phosphatase PP4. We show that DNA 
damage increases in progenitor germ cells, which causes germ cell death due to 
activation of the DNA damage transducer kinase Chk2. Mitotic defects appear 
widespread, as aberrant chromosome segregation and increased apoptosis occur in 
another tissue. Together, these data highlight the importance of BAF in 
establishing centromeric structures critical for mitosis. Further, these studies 
link defects in cenBAF function to activation of a checkpoint that depletes 
progenitor reserves critical for tissue homeostasis, aligning with phenotypes of 
NGPS patients.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-023-04721-y
PMCID: PMC9968693
PMID: 36842139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors confirm that the data supporting the 
findings are available within the article and raw data are available from the 
corresponding author upon reasonable request.