1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Feb 10;14:1109439. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1109439. eCollection 2023.

A user-friendly nomogram for predicting radioiodine refractory differentiated 
thyroid cancer.

Meng C(1)(2)(3)(4), Song J(5), Long W(6), Mu Z(2)(3), Sun Y(2)(3), Liang 
J(1)(4), Lin Y(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational 
Research (Ministry of Education/Beijing), Peking University Cancer Hospital & 
Institute, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and 
Rare Diseases, Peking Union Medical College (PUMC) Hospital, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences & PUMC, Beijing, China.
(3)Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Targeted Diagnosis and Therapy in Nuclear 
Medicine, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Peking University International Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Peking University International Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Nuclear Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South 
China, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of radioiodine refractory differentiated thyroid 
cancer (RAIR-DTC) is primarily based on clinical evolution and iodine uptake 
over the lesions, which is still time-consuming, thus urging a predictive model 
for timely RAIR-DTC informing. The aim of this study was to develop a nomogram 
model for RAIR prediction among DTC patients with distant metastases (DM).
METHODS: Data were extracted from the treatment and follow-up databases of 
Peking Union Medical College Hospital between 2010 and 2021. A total of 124 
patients were included and divided into RAIR (n=71) and non-RAIR (n=53) 
according to 2015 ATA guidelines. All patients underwent total thyroidectomy 
followed by at least two courses of RAI treatment. Serological markers and 
various clinical, pathological, genetic status, and imaging factors were 
integrated into this study. The pre-treatment stimulated Tg and pre- and 
post-treatment suppressed Tg at the first and second course RAI treatment were 
defined as s-Tg1, s-Tg2, sup-Tg1, and sup-Tg2, respectively. Δs-Tg denoted 
s-Tg1/s-Tg2, and Δs-TSH denoted s-TSH1/s-TSH2. Multivariate logistic regression 
and correlation analysis were utilized to determine the independent predictors 
of RAIR. The performance of the nomogram was assessed by internal validation and 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and benefit in clinical 
decision-making was assessed using decision curve.
RESULTS: In univariate logistic regression, nine possible risk factors were 
related to RAIR. Correlation analysis showed four of the above factors 
associated with RAIR. Through multivariate logistic regression, 
Δs-Tg/Δs-TSH<1.50 and age upon diagnosis were obtained to develop a convenient 
nomogram model for predicting RAIR. The model was internally validated and had 
good predictive efficacy with an AUC of 0.830, specificity of 0.830, and 
sensitivity of 0.755. The decision curve also showed that if the model is used 
for clinical decision-making when the probability threshold is between 0.23 and 
0.97, the net benefit of patients is markedly higher than that of the TreatAll 
and TreatNone control groups.By using 1.50 as a cut-off ofΔs-Tg/Δs-TSH, 
differing biochemical progression among the generally so-called RAIR can be 
further stratified as meaningfully rapidly or slowly progressive patients 
(P=0.012).
CONCLUSIONS: A convenient user-friendly nomogram model was developed with good 
predictive efficacy for RAIR. The progression of RAIR can be further stratified 
as rapidly or slowly progressive by using 1.50 as a cut-off value of 
Δs-Tg/Δs-TSH.

Copyright © 2023 Meng, Song, Long, Mu, Sun, Liang and Lin.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1109439
PMCID: PMC9950494
PMID: 36843580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.