1. iScience. 2023 Jan 31;26(3):106085. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.106085.
eCollection  2023 Mar 17.

Post-transplant cyclophosphamide prevents xenogeneic graft-versus-host disease 
while depleting proliferating regulatory T cells.

Ritacco C(1), Köse MC(1), Courtois J(1), Canti L(1), Beguin C(1), Dubois S(1), 
Vandenhove B(1), Servais S(1)(2), Caers J(1)(2), Beguin Y(1)(2), Ehx G(1), Baron 
F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Hematology Research Unit, Groupe Interdisciplinaire de Génoprotéomique 
Appliquée (GIGA)-I³, University of Liège, Liège 4000, Belgium.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, CHU of Liège, Liège 4000, 
Belgium.

Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) remains a serious limitation of allogeneic 
hematopoietic cell transplantation (allo-HCT). While post-transplant 
administration of cyclophosphamide (PTCy) is increasingly used as GVHD 
prophylaxis, its precise mechanisms of action and its impact on 
graft-versus-leukemia effects have remained debated. Here, we studied the 
mechanisms of xenogeneic GVHD (xGVHD) prevention by PTCy in different humanized 
mouse models. We observed that PTCy attenuated xGVHD. Using flow cytometry and 
single-cell RNA-sequencing, we demonstrated that PTCy depleted proliferative 
CD8+ and conventional CD4+ T cells but also proliferative regulatory T cells 
(Treg). Further, T-cell receptor β variable region sequencing (TCRVB) analyses 
demonstrated that highly xenoreactive T-cell clones were depleted by PTCy. 
Although Treg frequencies were significantly higher in PTCy-treated than in 
control mice on day 21, xGVHD attenuation by PTCy was not abrogated by Treg 
depletion. Finally, we observed that PTCy did not abrogate graft-versus-leukemia 
effects.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.106085
PMCID: PMC9947306
PMID: 36843851

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.