1. Russ J Bioorg Chem. 2023;49(2):367-375. doi: 10.1134/S1068162023020097. Epub 
2023 Feb 21.

Quaternary Ammonium Salt Strategy and Molecular Docking Studies of Novel 
5-Acyl-8-(Arylamino)-Quinolines by Acetyl and Methanesulfonyl Chloride for Dual 
Evaluation Bioactivity.

Feng Jin(1), Xueyong Qi(2).

Author information:
(1)232001 Huainan, China Medical College of Anhui University of Science and 
Technology.
(2)212013 Zhenjiang, China School of Pharmacy, Jiangsu University.

Six quinoline derivatives containing quaternary ammonium salts and acyl chloride 
groups were synthesized from ethyl 
8-chloro-[1,3]dioxolo[4,5-g]quinoline-7-carboxylate in several step. With 
berberine as the positive control, three human cancer cell lines (HCT-116, Hela 
and A549) and human normal liver L-02 cell lines were used to evaluate the 
cytotoxicity of the newly synthesized compounds in vitro. Compound (V-X) showed 
good antitumor activity, and the test result of compound (VII) was better than 
that of positive control group. In terms of antibacterial activity, compound 
(V-X) has obvious inhibitory effect on Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 29213) and 
Escherichia coli (ATCC 8739), and its antibacterial activity is about 1-4 times 
that of positive control amoxicillin and 1-2 times that of ciprofloxacin. Among 
them, the most effective compounds (VII) and (X) have 4-fold the antibacterial 
activity of amoxicillin and 2-fold the antibacterial activity of ciprofloxacin.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1134/S1068162023020097.

© Pleiades Publishing, Ltd. 2023, ISSN 1068-1620, Russian Journal of Bioorganic 
Chemistry, 2023, Vol. 49, No. 2, pp. 367–375. © Pleiades Publishing, Ltd., 
2023.ISSN 1068-1620, Russian Journal of Bioorganic Chemistry, 2023. © Pleiades 
Publishing, Ltd., 2023.

DOI: 10.1134/S1068162023020097
PMCID: PMC9945821
PMID: 36852388

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.