1. Sensors (Basel). 2023 Feb 6;23(4):1814. doi: 10.3390/s23041814.

Physical Layer Authentication in Wireless Networks-Based Machine Learning 
Approaches.

Alhoraibi L(1), Alghazzawi D(1), Alhebshi R(1), Rabie OBJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Computing and Information Technology, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.

The physical layer security of wireless networks is becoming increasingly 
important because of the rapid development of wireless communications and the 
increasing security threats. In addition, because of the open nature of the 
wireless channel, authentication is a critical issue in wireless communications. 
Physical layer authentication (PLA) is based on distinctive features to provide 
information-theory security and low complexity. However, although many 
researchers are interested in the PLA and how it might be used to improve 
wireless security, there is surprisingly little literature on the subject, with 
no systematic overview of the current state-of-the-art PLA and the main 
foundations involved. Therefore, this paper aims to determine and systematically 
compare existing studies in the physical layer authentication. This study showed 
whether machine learning approaches in physical layer authentication models 
increased wireless network security performance and demonstrated the latest 
techniques used in PLA. Moreover, it identified issues and suggested directions 
for future research. This study is valuable for researchers and security model 
developers interested in using machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) 
approaches for PLA in wireless communication systems in future research and 
designs.

DOI: 10.3390/s23041814
PMCID: PMC9958609
PMID: 36850412

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.