1. Viruses. 2023 Feb 4;15(2):435. doi: 10.3390/v15020435.

Successful Whole Genome Nanopore Sequencing of Swine Influenza A Virus (swIAV) 
Directly from Oral Fluids Collected in Polish Pig Herds.

Vereecke N(1)(2), Woźniak A(3), Pauwels M(2), Coppens S(2), Nauwynck H(1)(2), 
Cybulski P(4), Theuns S(1)(2), Stadejek T(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, 
9820 Merelbeke, Belgium.
(2)PathoSense BV, 2500 Lier, Belgium.
(3)Department of Pathology and Veterinary Diagnostic, Institute of Veterinary 
Medicine, Warsaw University of Life Sciences-SGGW, 02-776 Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Goodvalley Agro S.A., Dworcowa 25, 77-320 Przechlewo, Poland.

Influenza A virus (IAV) is a single-stranded, negative-sense RNA virus and a 
common cause of seasonal flu in humans. Its genome comprises eight RNA segments 
that facilitate reassortment, resulting in a great variety of IAV strains. To 
study these processes, the genetic code of each segment should be unraveled. 
Fortunately, new third-generation sequencing approaches allow for cost-efficient 
sequencing of IAV segments. Sequencing success depends on various factors, 
including proper sample storage and processing. Hence, this work focused on the 
effect of storage of oral fluids and swIAV sequencing. Oral fluids (n = 13) from 
2017 were stored at -22 °C and later transferred to -80 °C. Other samples (n = 
21) were immediately stored at -80 °C. A reverse transcription quantitative PCR 
(RT-qPCR) pre- and post-storage was conducted to assess IAV viral loads. Next, 
samples were subjected to two IAV long-read nanopore sequencing methods to 
evaluate success in this complex matrix. A significant storage-associated loss 
of swIAV loads was observed. Still, a total of 17 complete and 6 near-complete 
Polish swIAV genomes were obtained. Genotype T, (H1avN2, seven herds), P 
(H1N1pdm09, two herds), U (H1avN1, three herds), and A (H1avN1, 1 herd) were 
circulated on Polish farms. In conclusion, oral fluids can be used for long-read 
swIAV sequencing when considering appropriate storage and segment amplification 
protocols, which allows us to monitor swIAV in an animal-friendly and 
cost-efficient manner.

DOI: 10.3390/v15020435
PMCID: PMC9962634
PMID: 36851649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The funders played no role in the study design, 
data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for 
publication. S.T. and H.N. are co-founders and co-owners of PathoSense BV. N.V. 
is an employee at PathoSense BV.