1. Open Med (Wars). 2023 Feb 25;18(1):20230650. doi: 10.1515/med-2023-0650. 
eCollection 2023.

UHRF1-induced connexin26 methylation is involved in hearing damage triggered by 
intermittent hypoxia in neonatal rats.

Zhang X(1)(2), Zheng J(3), Xu H(3), Ma Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shanghai East 
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Pudong New Area, Shanghai, 
200120, China.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Ningbo Women and 
Children's Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang Province, 315012, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Ningbo Women and Children's Hospital, Ningbo, 
Zhejiang Province, 315012, China.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Pudong New Area, No. 150 Jimo Road, Shanghai, 200120, China.

Ubiquitin-like with plant homeodomain and ring finger domains 1 (UHRF1) promotes 
the maintenance of established patterns of DNA methylation in mammalian cells. 
Extensive methylation of connexin26 (COX26) during hearing impairment has been 
demonstrated. The present study aims to determine whether UHRF1 can induce the 
methylation of COX26 in cochlea damaged by intermittent hypoxia (IH). After the 
establishment of the cochlear injury model through IH treatment or isolation of 
the cochlea containing Corti's organ, pathological changes were observed via HE 
staining. Expressions of COX26 and UHRF1 were detected by quantitative 
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and Western blot. The effect of 
COX26 methylation levels was analyzed by methylation-specific PCR (MSP). 
Phalloidin/immunofluorescence staining was used to observe structural changes. 
The binding relationship between UHRF1 and COX26 was verified by chromatin 
immunoprecipitation. IH caused cochlear damage, accompanied by increased 
methylation of COX26 and expression of UHRF1 in the cochlea of neonatal rats. 
CoCl2 treatment caused the loss of cochlear hair cells, downregulation and 
hypermethylation of COX26, abnormal upregulation of UHRF1, and disordered 
expressions of apoptosis-related proteins. UHRF1 in cochlear hair cells binds to 
COX26, and its knockdown upregulated COX26 level. Overexpressed COX26 partially 
alleviated the CoCl2-caused cell damage. UHRF1 induces COX26 methylation and 
aggravates the cochlear damage caused by IH.

Â© 2023 the author(s), published by De Gruyter.

DOI: 10.1515/med-2023-0650
PMCID: PMC9971736
PMID: 36865496

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
there are no conflict of interest.