1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Oct 15:2023.02.20.529306. doi: 
10.1101/2023.02.20.529306.

Recognition and Cleavage of Human tRNA Methyltransferase TRMT1 by the SARS-CoV-2 
Main Protease.

D'Oliviera A(1), Dai X(2), Mottaghinia S(3), Olson S(1), Geissler EP(1), Etienne 
L(3), Zhang Y(2)(4), Mugridge JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 
19716.
(2)Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, NY 10003.
(3)CIRI (Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie), Univ Lyon, Inserm, 
U1111, Universit√© Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, UMR5308, ENS de Lyon, F-69007 
Lyon, France.
(4)Simons Center for Computational Physical Chemistry at New York University, 
New York, NY 10003.

Update in
    Elife. 2025 Jan 07;12:RP91168. doi: 10.7554/eLife.91168.

The SARS-CoV-2 main protease (Mpro, or Nsp5) is critical for the production of 
functional viral proteins during infection and, like many viral proteases, can 
also target host proteins to subvert their cellular functions. Here, we show 
that the human tRNA methyltransferase TRMT1 can be recognized and cleaved by 
SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. TRMT1 installs the N 2,N 2-dimethylguanosine (m2,2G) 
modification on mammalian tRNAs, which promotes global protein synthesis and 
cellular redox homeostasis. We find that Mpro can cleave endogenous TRMT1 in 
human cell lysate, resulting in removal of the TRMT1 zinc finger domain. TRMT1 
proteolysis results in elimination of TRMT1 tRNA methyltransferase activity and 
reduced tRNA binding affinity. Evolutionary analysis shows that the TRMT1 
cleavage site is highly conserved in mammals, except in Muroidea, where TRMT1 is 
likely resistant to cleavage. In primates, regions outside the cleavage site 
with rapid evolution could indicate adaptation to ancient viral pathogens. 
Furthermore, we determined the structure of a TRMT1 peptide in complex with 
Mpro, revealing a substrate binding conformation distinct from the majority of 
available Mpro-peptide complexes. Kinetic parameters for peptide cleavage show 
that the TRMT1(526-536) sequence is cleaved with comparable efficiency to the 
Mpro-targeted nsp8/9 viral cleavage site. Mutagenesis studies and molecular 
dynamics simulations together indicate that kinetic discrimination occurs during 
a later step of Mpro-mediated proteolysis that follows substrate binding. Our 
results provide new information about the structural basis for Mpro substrate 
recognition and cleavage, the functional roles of the TRMT1 zinc finger domain 
in tRNA binding and modification, and the regulation of TRMT1 activity by 
SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. These studies could inform future therapeutic design targeting 
Mpro and raise the possibility that proteolysis of human TRMT1 during SARS-CoV-2 
infection suppresses protein translation and oxidative stress response to impact 
viral pathogenesis.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Viral proteases can strategically target human proteins 
to manipulate host biochemistry during infection. Here, we show that the 
SARS-CoV-2 main protease (Mpro) can specifically recognize and cleave the human 
tRNA methyltransferase enzyme TRMT1, and that cleavage of TRMT1 cripples its 
ability to install a key modification on human tRNAs that is critical for 
protein translation. Our structural and functional analysis of the Mpro-TRMT1 
interaction shows how the flexible Mpro active site engages a conserved sequence 
in TRMT1 in an uncommon binding mode to catalyze its cleavage and inactivation. 
These studies provide new insights into substrate recognition by SARS-CoV-2 Mpro 
that could help guide future antiviral therapeutic development and show how 
proteolysis of TRMT1 during SARS-CoV-2 infection impairs both TRMT1 tRNA binding 
and tRNA modification activity to disrupt host translation and potentially 
impact COVID-19 pathogenesis or phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.02.20.529306
PMCID: PMC9980103
PMID: 36865253

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interest Statement: The authors 
declare no competing interest.