1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Feb 13;14:1101068. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1101068. 
eCollection 2023.

Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone pathway modulators in chronic kidney disease: A 
comparative review.

Alshahrani S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Jazan 
University, Jizan, Saudi Arabia.

Chronic kidney disease presents a health challenge that has a complex underlying 
pathophysiology, both acquired and inherited. The pharmacotherapeutic treatment 
options available today lower the progression of the disease and improve the 
quality of life but cannot completely cure it. This poses a challenge to the 
healthcare provider to choose, from the available options, the best way to 
manage the disease as per the presentation of the patient. As of now, the 
recommended first line of treatment to control the blood pressure in chronic 
kidney disease is the administration of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system 
modulators. These are represented mainly by the direct renin inhibitor, 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and angiotensin II receptor blockers. 
These modulators are varied in their structure and mechanisms of action, hence 
showing varying treatment outcomes. The choice of administration of these 
modulators is determined by the presentation and the co-morbidities of the 
patient, the availability and affordability of the treatment option, and the 
expertise of the healthcare provider. A direct head-to-head comparison between 
these significant renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system modulators is lacking, 
which can benefit healthcare providers and researchers. In this review, a 
comparison has been drawn between the direct renin inhibitor (aliskiren), 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and angiotensin II receptor blockers. 
This can be of significance for healthcare providers and researchers to find the 
particular loci of interest, either in structure or mechanism, and to intervene 
as per the case presentation to obtain the best possible treatment option.

Copyright Â© 2023 Alshahrani.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1101068
PMCID: PMC9970101
PMID: 36860293

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.