1. Clin Transl Radiat Oncol. 2023 Feb 8;40:100593. doi:
10.1016/j.ctro.2023.100593.  eCollection 2023 May.

Comparison of four-year toxicities and local control of ultra-hypofractionated 
vs moderate-hypofractionated image guided prostate radiation with HDR 
brachytherapy boost: A phase I-II single institution trial.

Beaudry MM(1), Carignan D(2), Foster W(1), Lavallee MC(1), Aubin S(1), Lacroix 
F(1), Poulin E(1), Lachance B(1), Després P(1)(2), Beaulieu L(1)(2), Vigneault 
E(1)(2), Martin AG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Service de radio-oncologie, Québec, QC, 
Canada.
(2)Centre de recherche sur le cancer, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES: To analyze the long term efficacy and safety of an 
ultra-hypofractionated (UHF) radiation therapy prostate treatment regimen with 
HDR brachytherapy boost (BB) and compare it to moderate-hypofractionated 
regimens (MHF).
MATERIALS/METHODS: In this single arm, prospective monocentric study, 28 
patients with intermediate risk prostate cancer were recruited in an 
experimental treatment arm of 25 Gy in 5 fractions plus a 15 Gy HDR BB. They 
were then compared to two historical control groups, treated with either 36 Gy 
in 12 fractions or 37.5 Gy in 15 fractions with a similar HDR BB. The control 
groups included 151 and 311 patients respectively. Patient outcomes were 
reported using the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) and Expanded 
Prostate Index Composite (EPIC-26) questionnaires at baseline and at each 
follow-up visit.
RESULTS: Median follow-up for the experimental arm was 48.5 months compared to 
47 months and 60 months compared to the 36/12 and 37,5/15 groups 
respectively. The IPSS and EPIC scores did not demonstrate any significant 
differences in the gastrointestinal or genitourinary domains between the three 
groups over time. No biochemical recurrence occurred in the UHF arm as defined 
by the Phoenix criterion.
CONCLUSION: The UHF treatment scheme with HDR BB seems equivalent to standard 
treatment arms in terms of toxicities and local control. Randomized control 
trials with larger cohorts are ongoing and needed to further confirm our 
findings.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctro.2023.100593
PMCID: PMC9974413
PMID: 36875870

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.