1. Nat Commun. 2023 Mar 6;14(1):1249. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36949-4.

Serum/glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1 deficiency induces NLRP3 inflammasome 
activation and autoinflammation of macrophages in a murine endolymphatic hydrops 
model.

Zhang DG(#)(1)(2)(3), Yu WQ(#)(1)(3), Liu JH(#)(1)(3), Kong LG(1)(2)(3), Zhang 
N(1)(3), Song YD(1)(2)(3), Li XF(1)(2)(3), Fan ZM(1)(2)(3), Lyu YF(1)(2)(3), Li 
N(4)(5), Wang HB(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shandong Provincial ENT 
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(2)Shandong Provincial Vertigo & Dizziness Medical Center, Jinan, Shandong, 
China.
(3)Laboratory of Vertigo Disease, Shandong Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Shandong Second Provincial General Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shandong Provincial ENT 
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China. linda831223@163.com.
(5)Laboratory of Vertigo Disease, Shandong Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Shandong Second Provincial General Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, China. 
linda831223@163.com.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shandong Provincial ENT 
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China. whboto11@163.com.
(7)Shandong Provincial Vertigo & Dizziness Medical Center, Jinan, Shandong, 
China. whboto11@163.com.
(8)Laboratory of Vertigo Disease, Shandong Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, 
Shandong Second Provincial General Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, China. 
whboto11@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Ménière's disease, a multifactorial disorder of the inner ear, is characterized 
by severe vertigo episodes and hearing loss. Although the role of immune 
responses in Ménière's disease has been proposed, the precise mechanisms remain 
undefined. Here, we show that downregulation of serum/glucocorticoid-inducible 
kinase 1 is associated with activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in 
vestibular-resident macrophage-like cells from Ménière's disease patients. 
Serum/glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1 depletion markedly enhances IL-1β 
production which leads to the damage of inner ear hair cells and vestibular 
nerve. Mechanistically, serum/glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1 binds to the PYD 
domain of NLRP3 and phosphorylates it at Serine 5, thereby interfering 
inflammasome assembly. Sgk-/- mice show aggravated audiovestibular symptoms and 
enhanced inflammasome activation in lipopolysaccharide-induced endolymphatic 
hydrops model, which is ameliorated by blocking NLRP3. Pharmacological 
inhibition of serum/glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1 increases the disease 
severity in vivo. Our studies demonstrate that serum/glucocorticoid-inducible 
kinase 1 functions as a physiologic inhibitor of NLRP3 inflammasome activation 
and maintains inner ear immune homeostasis, reciprocally participating in models 
of Ménière's disease pathogenesis.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-36949-4
PMCID: PMC9986248
PMID: 36872329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.