1. Front Vet Sci. 2023 Feb 16;10:1115501. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2023.1115501. 
eCollection 2023.

Usutu virus: An emerging flavivirus with potential threat to public health in 
Africa: Nigeria as a case study.

Akinsulie OC(1), Adesola RO(2), Bakre A(2), Adebowale OO(3), Adeleke R(4), 
Ogunleye SC(5), Oladapo IP(6).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 
United States.
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Oyo State, 
Nigeria.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Federal University of Agriculture, Abeokuta, 
Nigeria.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United 
States.
(5)College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi State University, Starkville, MS, 
United States.
(6)Department of Veterinary Parasitology, Universidade Federal de Parana, 
Curitiba, Brazil.

Usutu virus (USUV) is an arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) of the flaviviridae 
family (genus Flavivirus) which belong to the Japanese encephalitis virus 
complex. Culex mosquitoes have been implicated in the transmission of this 
pathogen. The major susceptible hosts of USUV are migratory birds, thereby 
potentiating its ability to spread from one region to another globally. Nigeria 
has the largest economy in Africa with a significant percentage of the gross 
domestic product relying on the agricultural and animal production industry. 
This review explores the zoonotic potentials of the virus in Africa, especially 
Nigeria, with special focus on the devastating sequelae this might lead to in 
the future if necessary precautionary policies are not enacted and adopted to 
bolster the surveillance system for mosquito-borne viruses.

Copyright Â© 2023 Akinsulie, Adesola, Bakre, Adebowale, Adeleke, Ogunleye and 
Oladapo.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2023.1115501
PMCID: PMC9980716
PMID: 36875996

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.