1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2023 Feb 11;28:366-384. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtm.2023.02.004. eCollection 2023 Mar 9.

A lentiviral vector B cell gene therapy platform for the delivery of the 
anti-HIV-1 eCD4-Ig-knob-in-hole-reversed immunoadhesin.

Vamva E(1), Ozog S(2)(3), Leaman DP(2), Yu-Hong Cheng R(1), Irons NJ(4), Ott 
A(1), Stoffers C(1), Khan I(1), Goebrecht GKE(2), Gardner MR(5), Farzan M(5), 
Rawlings DJ(1)(3)(6), Zwick MB(2), James RG(1)(3)(7), Torbett BE(1)(2)(3)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research 
Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, 
FL, USA.
(6)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(9)Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.

Barriers to effective gene therapy for many diseases include the number of 
modified target cells required to achieve therapeutic outcomes and host immune 
responses to expressed therapeutic proteins. As long-lived cells specialized for 
protein secretion, antibody-secreting B cells are an attractive target for 
foreign protein expression in blood and tissue. To neutralize HIV-1, we 
developed a lentiviral vector (LV) gene therapy platform for delivery of the 
anti-HIV-1 immunoadhesin, eCD4-Ig, to B cells. The EμB29 enhancer/promoter in 
the LV limited gene expression in non-B cell lineages. By engineering a 
knob-in-hole-reversed (KiHR) modification in the CH3-Fc eCD4-Ig domain, we 
reduced interactions between eCD4-Ig and endogenous B cell immunoglobulin G 
proteins, which improved HIV-1 neutralization potency. Unlike previous 
approaches in non-lymphoid cells, eCD4-Ig-KiHR produced in B cells promoted 
HIV-1 neutralizing protection without requiring exogenous TPST2, a tyrosine 
sulfation enzyme required for eCD4-Ig-KiHR function. This finding indicated that 
B cell machinery is well suited to produce therapeutic proteins. Lastly, to 
overcome the inefficient transduction efficiency associated with VSV-G LV 
delivery to primary B cells, an optimized measles pseudotyped LV packaging 
methodology achieved up to 75% transduction efficiency. Overall, our findings 
support the utility of B cell gene therapy platforms for therapeutic protein 
delivery.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2023.02.004
PMCID: PMC9984920
PMID: 36879849

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.