1. Open Life Sci. 2023 Mar 3;18(1):20220081. doi: 10.1515/biol-2022-0081. 
eCollection 2023.

Association between the VEGFR-2 -604T/C polymorphism (rs2071559) and type 2 
diabetic retinopathy.

Yuan Y(1), Shao C(1), Guan Y(1), Lu H(1), Wang D(1), Zhang S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
No. 12, Jian Kang Road, Shijiazhuang, 050019 Hebei, China.

This retrospective case-control study examined the association between the 
rs2071559 (-604T/C) single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the vascular 
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)-2 gene and the risk of diabetic 
retinopathy (DR) in Northern Han Chinese. This study included patients diagnosed 
with diabetes mellitus (DM) in Shijiazhuang between 07/2014 and 07/2016. The 
healthy controls were unrelated individuals who received routine physical 
examinations. The diabetic patients were grouped as DM (diabetes but no fundus 
examination abnormalities), proliferative DR (PDR), and non-proliferative DR 
(NPDR). Finally, 438 patients were included: 114 controls and 123, 105, and 96 
patients in the DM, NPDR, and PDR groups, respectively. In the multivariable 
analyses and all genetic models, the VEGFR-2 rs2071559 SNP was not associated 
with DR (among all diabetic patients) or with PDR (among the patients with DR) 
after adjustment for age, sex, duration of DM, blood glucose, systolic blood 
pressure, diastolic blood pressure, and body mass index (all P > 0.05). In 
conclusion, the VEGFR-2- 604T/C rs2071559 SNP is not associated with DR or PDR 
in the Han Chinese population of Shijiazhuang (China).

Â© 2023 Yazhen Yuan et al., published by De Gruyter.

DOI: 10.1515/biol-2022-0081
PMCID: PMC9985448
PMID: 36879648

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Authors state no conflict 
of interest.