1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Mar 6;11(2):e0491922. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.04919-22. 
Online ahead of print.

Functional Differentiation of Cyclins and Cyclin-Dependent Kinases in Giardia 
lamblia.

Kim J(#)(1), Park EA(#)(1), Shin MY(1), Park SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are serine/threonine kinases that control the 
eukaryotic cell cycle. Limited information is available on Giardia lamblia CDKs 
(GlCDKs), GlCDK1 and GlCDK2. After treatment with the CDK inhibitor 
flavopiridol-HCl (FH), division of Giardia trophozoites was transiently arrested 
at the G1/S phase and finally at the G2/M phase. The percentage of cells 
arrested during prophase or cytokinesis increased, whereas DNA synthesis was not 
affected by FH treatment. Morpholino-mediated depletion of GlCDK1 caused arrest 
at the G2/M phase, while GlCDK2 depletion resulted in an increase in the number 
of cells arrested at the G1/S phase and cells defective in mitosis and 
cytokinesis. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments with GlCDKs and the nine putative 
G. lamblia cyclins (Glcyclins) identified Glcyclins 3977/14488/17505 and 
22394/6584 as cognate partners of GlCDK1 and GlCDK2, respectively. 
Morpholino-based knockdown of Glcyclin 3977 or 22394/6584 arrested cells in the 
G2/M phase or G1/S phase, respectively. Interestingly, GlCDK1- and Glcyclin 
3977-depleted Giardia showed significant flagellar extension. Altogether, our 
results suggest that GlCDK1/Glcyclin 3977 plays an important role in the later 
stages of cell cycle control and in flagellar biogenesis. In contrast, GlCDK2 
along with Glcyclin 22394 and 6584 functions from the early stages of the 
Giardia cell cycle. IMPORTANCE Giardia lamblia CDKs (GlCDKs) and their cognate 
cyclins have not yet been studied. In this study, the functional roles of GlCDK1 
and GlCDK2 were distinguished using morpholino-mediated knockdown and 
coimmunoprecipitation. GlCDK1 with Glcyclin 3977 plays a role in flagellum 
formation as well as cell cycle control of G. lamblia, whereas GlCDK2 with 
Glcyclin 22394/6584 is involved in cell cycle control.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.04919-22
PMCID: PMC10100927
PMID: 36877015

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.