1. RMD Open. 2023 Mar;9(1):e002842. doi: 10.1136/rmdopen-2022-002842.

Difficult-to-treat rheumatoid arthritis (D2T RA): clinical issues at early 
stages of disease.

Leon L(1)(2), Madrid-Garcia A(3), Lopez-Viejo P(4), González-Álvaro I(5), 
Novella-Navarro M(6), Freites Nuñez D(4), Rosales Z(4), Fernandez-Gutierrez 
B(4), Abasolo L(3).

Author information:
(1)IdISSC and Rheumatology, Hospital Clinico Universitario San Carlos, Madrid, 
Spain lleon@salud.madrid.org.
(2)Health Sciences, Universidad Camilo Jose Cela, Villafranca del Castillo, 
Spain.
(3)IdISSC and Rheumatology, Hospital Clinico Universitario San Carlos, Madrid, 
Spain.
(4)Rheumatology, Hospital Clinico Universitario San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: Most studies on difficult-to-treat rheumatoid arthritis (D2T RA) 
have focused on established RA. Here, we analyse whether disease activity in the 
early stages of RA could influence progression to a D2T RA under real-life 
conditions. Other clinical and treatment-related factors were also analysed.
METHODS: A longitudinal multicentre study of patients with RA was conducted from 
2009 to 2018. Patients were followed up until January 2021. D2T RA was defined 
based on EULAR criteria (treatment failure, signs suggestive of currently 
active/progressive disease and management being perceived as problematic by the 
rheumatologist and/or patient). The main variable was disease activity in the 
early stages. The covariates were sociodemographic, clinical and 
treatment-related factors. We ran a multivariable logistic regression analysis 
to investigate risk factors associated with progression to D2T RA.
RESULTS: The study population comprised 631 patients and 35 (5.87%) developed 
D2T RA. At the time of diagnosis, the D2T RA group were younger, with a higher 
disability, 28-joint Disease Activity Score (DAS28) score, tender joint count 
and pain scores. In our final model, DAS28 was not statistically significantly 
associated with D2T RA. No differences were found between groups for therapy. 
Disability was independently associated with D2T RA (OR: 1.89; p=0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort of patients newly diagnosed with RA, our results do 
not allow us to prove the influence of active disease according to DAS28. 
However, we did find that younger patients and those with elevated initial 
disability scores are more likely to develop D2T RA regardless of other factors.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/rmdopen-2022-002842
PMCID: PMC10008455
PMID: 36889800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.