1. Life Sci Alliance. 2023 Mar 9;6(5):e202201714. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201714. 
Print 2023 May.

Preference of CAMSAP3 for expanded microtubule lattice contributes to 
stabilization of the minus end.

Liu H(1), Shima T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan tomohiro.shima@bs.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

CAMSAPs are proteins that show microtubule minus-end-specific localization, 
decoration, and stabilization. Although the mechanism for minus-end recognition 
via their C-terminal CKK domain has been well described in recent studies, it is 
unclear how CAMSAPs stabilize microtubules. Our several binding assays revealed 
that the D2 region of CAMSAP3 specifically binds to microtubules with the 
expanded lattice. To investigate the relationship between this preference and 
the stabilization effect of CAMSAP3, we precisely measured individual 
microtubule lengths and found that D2 binding expanded the microtubule lattice 
by ∼3%. Consistent with the notion that the expanded lattice is a common feature 
of stable microtubules, the presence of D2 slowed the microtubule 
depolymerization rate to ∼1/20, suggesting that the D2-triggered lattice 
expansion stabilizes microtubules. Combining these results, we propose that 
CAMSAP3 stabilizes microtubules by lattice expansion upon D2 binding, which 
further accelerates the recruitment of other CAMSAP3 molecules. Because only 
CAMSAP3 has D2 and the highest microtubule-stabilizing effect among mammalian 
CAMSAPs, our model also explains the molecular basis for the functional 
diversity of CAMSAP family members.

© 2023 Liu and Shima.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202201714
PMCID: PMC9998277
PMID: 36894175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.