1. PLoS One. 2023 Mar 9;18(3):e0282822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0282822. 
eCollection 2023.

Targeting nonsense-mediated RNA decay does not increase progranulin levels in 
the Grn R493X mouse model of frontotemporal dementia.

Smith DM(1)(2)(3), Niehoff ML(1)(4), Ling K(5), Jafar-Nejad P(5), Rigo F(5), 
Farr SA(1)(2)(3)(4), Wilkinson MF(6)(7), Nguyen AD(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Saint Louis University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(3)Institute for Translational Neuroscience, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, 
Missouri, United States of America.
(4)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of 
America.
(5)Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, California, United States of America.
(6)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University 
of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(7)Institute of Genomic Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, United States of America.

A common cause of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) are nonsense mutations in the 
progranulin (GRN) gene. Because nonsense mutations activate the 
nonsense-mediated RNA decay (NMD) pathway, we sought to inhibit this RNA 
turnover pathway as a means to increase progranulin levels. Using a knock-in 
mouse model harboring a common patient mutation, we tested whether either 
pharmacological or genetic inhibition of NMD upregulates progranulin in these 
GrnR493X mice. We first examined antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) targeting an 
exonic region in GrnR493X mRNA predicted to block its degradation by NMD. As we 
previously reported, these ASOs effectively increased GrnR493X mRNA levels in 
fibroblasts in vitro. However, following CNS delivery, we found that none of the 
8 ASOs we tested increased Grn mRNA levels in the brains of GrnR493X mice. This 
result was obtained despite broad ASO distribution in the brain. An ASO 
targeting a different mRNA was effective when administered in parallel to 
wild-type mice. As an independent approach to inhibit NMD, we examined the 
effect of loss of an NMD factor not required for embryonic viability: UPF3b. We 
found that while Upf3b deletion effectively perturbed NMD, it did not increase 
Grn mRNA levels in Grn+/R493X mouse brains. Together, our results suggest that 
the NMD-inhibition approaches that we used are likely not viable for increasing 
progranulin levels in individuals with FTD caused by nonsense GRN mutations. 
Thus, alternative approaches should be pursued.

Copyright: © 2023 Smith et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0282822
PMCID: PMC9997918
PMID: 36893203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: K.L., P.J.-N., and 
F.R. are paid employees of Ionis Pharmaceuticals. The authors declare no other 
competing financial interests. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials.