1. Cells. 2023 Mar 2;12(5):788. doi: 10.3390/cells12050788.

Transcriptional Regulation during Aberrant Activation of NF-κB Signalling in 
Cancer.

Deka K(1), Li Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences (SBS), Nanyang Technological University (NTU), 
60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), A*STAR, Singapore 138673, 
Singapore.

The NF-κB signalling pathway is a major signalling cascade involved in the 
regulation of inflammation and innate immunity. It is also increasingly 
recognised as a crucial player in many steps of cancer initiation and 
progression. The five members of the NF-κB family of transcription factors are 
activated through two major signalling pathways, the canonical and non-canonical 
pathways. The canonical NF-κB pathway is prevalently activated in various human 
malignancies as well as inflammation-related disease conditions. Meanwhile, the 
significance of non-canonical NF-κB pathway in disease pathogenesis is also 
increasingly recognized in recent studies. In this review, we discuss the 
double-edged role of the NF-κB pathway in inflammation and cancer, which depends 
on the severity and extent of the inflammatory response. We also discuss the 
intrinsic factors, including selected driver mutations, and extrinsic factors, 
such as tumour microenvironment and epigenetic modifiers, driving aberrant 
activation of NF-κB in multiple cancer types. We further provide insights into 
the importance of the interaction of NF-κB pathway components with various 
macromolecules to its role in transcriptional regulation in cancer. Finally, we 
provide a perspective on the potential role of aberrant NF-κB activation in 
altering the chromatin landscape to support oncogenic development.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12050788
PMCID: PMC10001244
PMID: 36899924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.