1. Life Sci Alliance. 2023 Mar 9;6(5):e202201670. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201670. 
Print 2023 May.

Analysis of context-specific KRAS-effector (sub)complexes in Caco-2 cells.

Ternet C(1)(2), Junk P(1)(2), Sevrin T(1)(2), Catozzi S(1)(2), Wåhlén E(3), 
Heldin J(3), Oliviero G(1), Wynne K(1)(4), Kiel C(5)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Systems Biology Ireland, School of Medicine, University College Dublin, 
Dublin 4, Ireland.
(2)UCD Charles Institute of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University College 
Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(4)Conway Institute of Biomolecular & Biomedical Research, University College 
Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy 
christina.kiel@unipv.it.

Ras is a key switch controlling cell behavior. In the GTP-bound form, Ras 
interacts with numerous effectors in a mutually exclusive manner, where 
individual Ras-effectors are likely part of larger cellular (sub)complexes. The 
molecular details of these (sub)complexes and their alteration in specific 
contexts are not understood. Focusing on KRAS, we performed affinity 
purification (AP)-mass spectrometry (MS) experiments of exogenously expressed 
FLAG-KRAS WT and three oncogenic mutants ("genetic contexts") in the human 
Caco-2 cell line, each exposed to 11 different culture media ("culture 
contexts") that mimic conditions relevant in the colon and colorectal cancer. We 
identified four effectors present in complex with KRAS in all genetic and growth 
contexts ("context-general effectors"). Seven effectors are found in KRAS 
complexes in only some contexts ("context-specific effectors"). Analyzing all 
interactors in complex with KRAS per condition, we find that the culture 
contexts had a larger impact on interaction rewiring than genetic contexts. We 
investigated how changes in the interactome impact functional outcomes and 
created a Shiny app for interactive visualization. We validated some of the 
functional differences in metabolism and proliferation. Finally, we used 
networks to evaluate how KRAS-effectors are involved in the modulation of 
functions by random walk analyses of effector-mediated (sub)complexes. 
Altogether, our work shows the impact of environmental contexts on network 
rewiring, which provides insights into tissue-specific signaling mechanisms. 
This may also explain why KRAS oncogenic mutants may be causing cancer only in 
specific tissues despite KRAS being expressed in most cells and tissues.

© 2023 Ternet et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202201670
PMCID: PMC9998658
PMID: 36894174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.