1. Neuroimage Rep. 2021 Dec;1(4):100059. doi: 10.1016/j.ynirp.2021.100059.

Evidence against altered excitatory/inhibitory balance in the posteromedial 
cortex of young adult APOE E4 carriers: A resting state (1)H-MRS study.

Costigan AG(1), Umla-Runge K(1), Evans CJ(1), Raybould R(2), Graham KS(1), 
Lawrence AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff University, Maindy Road, Cardiff, CF24 4HQ, UK.
(2)UK Dementia Research Institute, Cardiff, Hadyn Ellis Building, Maindy Road, 
Cardiff, CF24 4HQ, UK.

A strategy to gain insight into early changes that may predispose people to 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is to study the brains of younger cognitively healthy 
people that are at increased genetic risk of AD. The Apolipoprotein (APOE) E4 
allele is the strongest genetic risk factor for AD, and several neuroimaging 
studies comparing APOE E4 carriers with non-carriers at age ∼20-30 years have 
detected hyperactivity (or reduced deactivation) in posteromedial cortex (PMC), 
a key hub of the default network (DN), which has a high susceptibility to early 
amyloid deposition in AD. Transgenic mouse models suggest such early network 
activity alterations may result from altered excitatory/inhibitory (E/I) 
balance, but this is yet to be examined in humans. Here we test the hypothesis 
that PMC fMRI hyperactivity could be underpinned by altered levels of excitatory 
(glutamate) and/or inhibitory (GABA) neurotransmitters in this brain region. 
Forty-seven participants (20 APOE E4 carriers and 27 non-carriers) aged 18-25 
years underwent resting-state proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS), a 
non-invasive neuroimaging technique to measure glutamate and GABA in vivo. 
Metabolites were measured in a PMC voxel of interest and in a comparison voxel 
in the occipital cortex (OCC). There was no difference in either glutamate or 
GABA between the E4 carriers and non-carriers in either MRS voxel, or in the 
ratio of glutamate to GABA, a measure of E/I balance. Default Bayesian t-tests 
revealed evidence in support of this null finding. Our findings suggest that PMC 
hyperactivity in APOE E4 carriers is unlikely to be associated with, or possibly 
may precede, alterations in local resting-state PMC neurotransmitters, thus 
informing our understanding of the spatio-temporal sequence of early network 
alterations underlying APOE E4 related AD risk.

Crown Copyright © 2021 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ynirp.2021.100059
PMCID: PMC9986794
PMID: 36896169

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.