1. Animals (Basel). 2023 Mar 2;13(5):905. doi: 10.3390/ani13050905.

Improvement of the Seminal Characteristics in Rams Using Agri-Food By-Products 
Rich in Phytomelatonin.

Peña-Delgado V(1), Carvajal-Serna M(1), Fondevila M(2), Martín-Cabrejas 
MA(3)(4), Aguilera Y(3)(4), Álvarez-Rivera G(4), Abecia JA(1), Casao A(1), 
Pérez-Pe R(1).

Author information:
(1)Grupo BIOFITER-Instituto Universitario de Investigación en Ciencias 
Ambientales de Aragón (IUCA), Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad de Zaragoza, 
50013 Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Producción Animal y Ciencia de los Alimentos, Instituto 
Agroalimentario de Aragón (IA2), Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA, 50013 Zaragoza, 
Spain.
(3)Departamento de de Química Agrícola y Bromatología, Facultad de Ciencias, 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
(4)Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias de la Alimentación, Spanish National 
Research Council (CSIC)-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), 28049 Madrid, 
Spain.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of a phytomelatonin-rich diet, 
including by-products from the food industry, on ram sperm quality and seminal 
plasma composition. Melatonin content in several by-products before and after in 
vitro ruminal and abomasal digestion was determined by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS. Finally, 
20% of a mix of grape pulp with pomegranate and tomato pomaces was included in 
the rams' diet, constituting the phytomelatonin-rich diet. Feeding the rams with 
this diet resulted in an increase in seminal plasma melatonin levels compared 
with the control group (commercial diet) in the third month of the study. In 
addition, percentages higher than those in the control group of morphologically 
normal viable spermatozoa with a low content of reactive oxygen species were 
observed from the second month onwards. However, the antioxidant effect does not 
seem to be exerted through the modulation of the antioxidant enzymes since the 
analysis of the activities of catalase, glutathione reductase and glutathione 
peroxidase in seminal plasma revealed no significant differences between the two 
experimental groups. In conclusion, this study reveals, for the first time, that 
a phytomelatonin-rich diet can improve seminal characteristics in rams.

DOI: 10.3390/ani13050905
PMCID: PMC10000078
PMID: 36899762

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.