1. Front Neurosci. 2023 Feb 24;17:1047778. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1047778. 
eCollection 2023.

Blood-brain barrier endothelial cells in neurodegenerative diseases: Signals 
from the "barrier".

Yuan Y(1), Sun J(1), Dong Q(1)(2), Cui M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and Ministry of Education (MOE) 
Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

As blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption emerges as a common problem in the early 
stages of neurodegenerative diseases, the crucial roles of barrier-type brain 
endothelial cells (BECs), the primary part of the BBB, have been reported in the 
pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases. The mechanisms of how early 
vascular dysfunction contributes to the progress of neurodegeneration are still 
unclear, and understanding BEC functions is a promising start. Our understanding 
of the BBB has gone through different stages, from a passive diffusion barrier 
to a mediator of central-peripheral interactions. BECs serve two seemingly 
paradoxical roles: as a barrier to protect the delicate brain from toxins and as 
an interface to constantly receive and release signals, thus maintaining and 
regulating the homeostasis of the brain. Most previous studies about 
neurodegenerative diseases focus on the loss of barrier functions, and far too 
little attention has been paid to the active regulations of BECs. In this 
review, we present the current evidence of BEC dysfunction in neurodegenerative 
diseases and explore how BEC signals participate in the pathogenesis of 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright Â© 2023 Yuan, Sun, Dong and Cui.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1047778
PMCID: PMC9998532
PMID: 36908787

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.