1. J Clin Med. 2023 Feb 24;12(5):1820. doi: 10.3390/jcm12051820.

Tricalcium Phosphate as a Bone Substitute to Treat Massive Acetabular Bone 
Defects in Hip Revision Surgery: A Systematic Review and Initial Clinical 
Experience with 11 Cases.

Romagnoli M(1), Casali M(1), Zaffagnini M(2), Cucurnia I(1), Raggi F(2), Reale 
D(1), Grassi A(2), Zaffagnini S(2).

Author information:
(1)Ortopedia e Traumatologia Rizzoli Argenta, 44011 Argenta, FE, Italy.
(2)Clinica Ortopedica e Traumatologica 2, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 
40136 Bologna, BO, Italy.

The use of tricalcium phosphate (TCP) as a bone substitute is gaining increasing 
interest to treat severe acetabular bone defects in revision total hip 
arthroplasty (rTHA). The aim of this study was to investigate the evidence 
regarding the efficacy of this material. A systematic review of the literature 
was performed according to the PRISMA and Cochrane guidelines. The study quality 
was assessed using the modified Coleman Methodology Score (mCMS) for all 
studies. A total of eight clinical studies (230 patients) were identified: six 
on TCP used as biphasic ceramics composed of TCP and hydroxyapatite (HA), and 
two as pure-phase ceramics consisting of TCP. The literature analysis showed 
eight retrospective case series, of which only two were comparative studies. The 
mCMS showed an overall poor methodology (mean score 39.5). While the number of 
studies and their methodology are still limited, the available evidence suggests 
safety and overall promising results. A total of 11 cases that underwent rTHA 
with a pure-phase ceramic presented satisfactory clinical and radiological 
outcomes at initial short-term follow-up. Further studies at long-term 
follow-up, involving a larger number of patients, are needed before drawing more 
definitive conclusions on the potential of TCP for the treatment of patients who 
undergo rTHA.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12051820
PMCID: PMC10003370
PMID: 36902607

Conflict of interest statement: S.Z. has received institutional support from 
Fidia Farmaceutici, Cartiheal, IGEA Clinical Biophysics, Biomet, and Kensey 
Nash; grant support from I+; and royalties from Springer. The funders had no 
role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation 
of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the 
results. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.