1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Feb 24;15(5):1457. doi: 10.3390/cancers15051457.

Immune Microenvironment in Sporadic Early-Onset versus Average-Onset Colorectal 
Cancer.

Andric F(1), Al-Fairouzi A(2), Wettergren Y(2), Szeponik L(1), Bexe-Lindskog 
E(2)(3), Cusack JC Jr(4), Tumusiime G(5), Quiding-Järbrink M(1), Ljungman 
D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine, 
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, 
University of Gothenburg, 412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Surgery, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Region Västra 
Götaland, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, Uganda Christian University School of Medicine, Mukono 
P.O. Box 4, Uganda.

The incidence of left-sided colon and rectal cancer in young people are 
increasing worldwide, but its causes are poorly understood. It is not clear if 
the tumor microenvironment is dependent on age of onset, and little is known 
about the composition of tumor-infiltrating T cells in early-onset colorectal 
cancer (EOCRC). To address this, we investigated T-cell subsets and performed 
gene expression immune profiling in sporadic EOCRC tumors and matched 
average-onset colorectal cancer (AOCRC) tumors. Left-sided colon and rectal 
tumors from 40 cases were analyzed; 20 EOCRC (<45 years) patients were matched 
1:1 to AOCRC (70-75 years) patients by gender, tumor location, and stage. Cases 
with germline pathogenic variants, inflammatory bowel disease or 
neoadjuvant-treated tumors were excluded. For T cells in tumors and stroma, a 
multiplex immunofluorescence assay combined with digital image analysis and 
machine learning algorithms was used. Immunological mediators in the tumor 
microenvironment were assessed by NanoString gene expression profiling of mRNA. 
Immunofluorescence revealed no significant difference between EOCRC and AOCRC 
with regard to infiltration of total T cells, conventional CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells, regulatory T cells, or γδ T cells. Most T cells were located in the 
stroma in both EOCRC and AOCRC. Immune profiling by gene expression revealed 
higher expression in AOCRC of the immunoregulatory cytokine IL-10, the 
inhibitory NK cell receptors KIR3DL3 and KLRB1 (CD161), and IFN-a7 (IFNA7). In 
contrast, the interferon-induced gene IFIT2 was more highly expressed in EOCRC. 
However, in a global analysis of 770 tumor immunity genes, no significant 
differences could be detected. T-cell infiltration and expression of 
inflammatory mediators are similar in EOCRC and AOCRC. This may indicate that 
the immune response to cancer in left colon and rectum is not related to age of 
onset and that EOCRC is likely not driven by immune response deficiency.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15051457
PMCID: PMC10001362
PMID: 36900249

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.