1. Sensors (Basel). 2023 Mar 3;23(5):2776. doi: 10.3390/s23052776.

Comparison of Chemical and Electrochemical Approaches to Abacavir Oxidative 
Stability Testing.

Pražáková L(1), Fischer J(1), Taylor A(2), Kubíčková A(1).

Author information:
(1)Charles University, Faculty of Science, Department of Analytical Chemistry, 
Albertov 6, 12800 Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)FZU-Institute of Physics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Na Slovance 
1999/2, 18221 Prague, Czech Republic.

A novel electrochemical approach using two different electrode materials, 
platinum and boron-doped diamond (BDD), was employed to study the oxidative 
stability of the drug abacavir. Abacavir samples were subjected to oxidation and 
subsequently analysed using chromatography with mass detection. The type and 
amount of degradation products were evaluated, and results were compared with 
traditional chemical oxidation using 3% hydrogen peroxide. The effect of pH on 
the rate of degradation and the formation of degradation products were also 
investigated. In general, both approaches led to the same two degradation 
products, identified using mass spectrometry, and characterised by 319.20 and 
m/z 247.19. Similar results were obtained on a large-surface platinum electrode 
at a potential of +1.15 V and a BDD disc electrode at +4.0 V. Degradation of 20% 
of abacavir, the rate required for pharmaceutical stability studies, took only a 
few minutes compared to hours required for oxidation with hydrogen peroxide. 
Measurements further showed that electrochemical oxidation in ammonium acetate 
on both types of electrodes is strongly pHdependent. The fastest oxidation was 
achieved at pH 9. The pH also affects the composition of the products, which are 
formed in different proportions depending on the pH of the electrolyte.

DOI: 10.3390/s23052776
PMCID: PMC10007081
PMID: 36904979

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.