1. Sensors (Basel). 2023 Feb 23;23(5):2466. doi: 10.3390/s23052466.

Assessment of GNSS Galileo Contribution to the Modernization of CROPOS's 
Services.

Šugar D(1), Kliman A(2), Bačić Ž(1), Nevistić Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Geodesy, University of Zagreb, Kačićeva 26, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Communication and Navigation, 
Muenchener Str. 20, Oberpfaffenhofen, 82234 Wessling, Germany.

CROPOS, as the Croatian GNSS network, was modernized and upgraded to support the 
Galileo system in 2019. Two of CROPOS's services-VPPS (Network RTK service) and 
GPPS (post-processing service)-were assessed for the contribution of the Galileo 
system to their performance. A station used for field testing was previously 
examined and surveyed to determine the local horizon and to carry out a detailed 
mission planning. The whole day of observation was divided into several 
sessions, each with a different visibility of Galileo satellites. A special 
observation sequence was designed: VPPS (GPS-GLO-GAL), VPPS (GAL-only), and GPPS 
(GPS-GLO-GAL-BDS). All observations were taken on the same station with the same 
GNSS receiver, Trimble R12. Each static observation session was post-processed 
in Trimble Business Center (TBC) in two different ways: considering all 
available systems (GGGB) and considering GAL-only observations. A daily static 
solution based on all systems (GGGB) was considered as the reference for the 
accuracy assessment of all obtained solutions. The results obtained with VPPS 
(GPS-GLO-GAL) and VPPS (GAL-only) were analyzed and assessed; the results 
obtained with GAL-only have shown a slightly higher scatter. It was concluded 
that the inclusion of the Galileo system in CROPOS has contributed to the 
availability and reliability of solutions but not to their accuracy. By 
complying with the observation rules and taking redundant measurements, the 
accuracy of GAL-only results can be improved.

DOI: 10.3390/s23052466
PMCID: PMC10007464
PMID: 36904669

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.