1. Foods. 2023 Feb 28;12(5):1021. doi: 10.3390/foods12051021.

Genetic and Probiotic Characteristics of Urolithin A Producing Enterococcus 
faecium FUA027.

Xia M(1)(2)(3), Mu S(1)(2)(3), Fang Y(1)(2)(3), Zhang X(1)(2)(3), Yang G(1)(2), 
Hou X(1)(2)(3), He F(2)(3), Zhao Y(1)(2)(3), Huang Y(2)(3), Zhang W(2)(3), Shen 
J(4), Liu S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Co-Innovation Center of Jiangsu Marine Bio-Industry Technology, Jiangsu Ocean 
University, Lianyungang 222005, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Marine Bioresources and Environment/Jiangsu Key 
Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology, Jiangsu Ocean University, Lianyungang 
222005, China.
(3)School of Food Science and Engineering, Jiangsu Ocean University, Lianyungang 
222005, China.
(4)College of Food Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing 210095, China.

Enterococcus faecium FUA027 transforms ellagic acid (EA) to urolithin A (UA), 
which makes it a potential application in the preparation of UA by industrial 
fermentation. Here, the genetic and probiotic characteristics of E. faecium 
FUA027 were evaluated through whole-genome sequence analysis and phenotypic 
assays. The chromosome size of this strain was 2,718,096 bp, with a GC content 
of 38.27%. The whole-genome analysis revealed that the genome contained 18 
antibiotic resistance genes and seven putative virulence factor genes. E. 
faecium FUA027 does not contain plasmids and mobile genetic elements (MGEs), and 
so the transmissibility of antibiotic resistance genes or putative virulence 
factors should not occur. Phenotypic testing further indicated that E. faecium 
FUA027 is sensitive to clinically relevant antibiotics. In addition, this 
bacterium exhibited no hemolytic activity, no biogenic amine production, and 
could significantly inhibit the growth of the quality control strain. In vitro 
viability was >60% in all simulated gastrointestinal environments, with good 
antioxidant activity. The study results suggest that E. faecium FUA027 has the 
potential to be used in industrial fermentation for the production of urolithin 
A.

DOI: 10.3390/foods12051021
PMCID: PMC10001356
PMID: 36900537

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.