1. Front Plant Sci. 2023 Feb 22;14:1125529. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1125529. 
eCollection 2023.

Combating ozone stress through N fertilization: A case study of Indian bean 
(Dolichos lablab L.).

Sahoo A(1), Madheshiya P(1), Mishra AK(1), Tiwari S(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Ecotoxicology, Centre of Advanced Study in Botany, Institute of 
Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

The present study investigates the efficiency of nitrogen (N) amendments in the 
management of ozone (O3) stress in two varieties (Kashi Sheetal and Kashi 
Harittima) of Indian bean (Dolichos lablab L.). Two O3 concentrations, ambient 
(44.9 ppb) and elevated (74.64 ppb) were used, and each O3 concentration has 3 
nitrogen (N) dose treatments viz recommended (N1), 1.5 times recommended (N2), 2 
times recommended (N3) and no nitrogen, which served as control (C). The 
experiment concluded Kashi Sheetal as O3 tolerant, as compared to Kashi 
Harittima. N amendments were effective in the partial amelioration of O3 stress, 
with N2 being the most effective nitrogen dose, at both ambient and elevated O3 
concentrations. Kashi Sheetal has been determined to be O3 tolerant due to 
greater endogenous levels of H2O2 accumulation and enzymatic antioxidant 
contents with O3 exposure. The O3-sensitive variety, Kashi Harittima, responded 
more positively to N treatments, at both O3 concentrations. The positive effect 
of N amendments is attributed to the stimulated antioxidative enzyme activity, 
rather than the biophysical processes like stomatal conductance. Strengthened 
defense upon N amendments was attributed to the enhanced activities of APX and 
GR in Kashi Sheetal, while in Kashi Harittima, the two enzymes (APX and GR) were 
coupled by SOD and CAT as well, during the reproductive phase. Yield (weight of 
seeds plant-1) increments upon N (N2) amendments were higher in Kashi Harittima 
(O3 sensitive), as compared to Kashi Sheetal (O3 tolerant) at both ambient and 
elevated O3 concentration, due to higher antioxidant enzymatic response and 
greater rate of photosynthesis in the former.

Copyright Â© 2023 Sahoo, Madheshiya, Mishra and Tiwari.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1125529
PMCID: PMC9992209
PMID: 36909422

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.