1. Heliyon. 2023 Feb 28;9(3):e14145. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e14145. 
eCollection 2023 Mar.

Research on liquid biopsy for cancer: A bibliometric analysis.

Jiang S(1), Liu Y(1), Xu Y(1), Sang X(1), Lu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Liver Surgery, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, liquid biopsy has shown great potential for 
improving cancer diagnosis and treatment. This study aimed to explore the trends 
and prospects in liquid biopsy for cancer from a bibliometric perspective.
METHODS: Reviews and articles on liquid biopsy and cancer were collected from 
the Web of Science Core Collection (WoSCC). Key bibliometric characteristics 
were analyzed using CiteSpace. Co-occurrence analysis of keywords and 
co-citation analysis of references was performed.
RESULTS: A total of 6331 publications from 11 years of scientific research were 
retrieved. Ninety-five countries and 7004 institutions in liquid biopsy and 
cancer contributed. The United States (US) and China published the most 
articles. The institution with the most published articles was the University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. The most published journals were Cancer and 
Frontiers in Oncology. "Bettegowda (2014)" was the most cited reference with the 
highest burst strength in the last decade. Cluster analysis revealed that the 
recent hot topics were "circulating tumor cells," "cancer," and "exosomes."
CONCLUSIONS: This bibliometric analysis maps the basic knowledge structure of 
the field of liquid biopsy for cancer. The field is entering a phase of rapid 
development. The hot spots identified in this study deserve further 
investigation.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e14145
PMCID: PMC10006671
PMID: 36915518

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.