1. Virulence. 2023 Dec;14(1):2186336. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2023.2186336.

Methyltransferase K-D-K-E motif influences the intercellular transmission of 
Newcastle disease virus.

Li X(1), Zhao Y(1), Teng QY(1), Zhang XH(1), Xue J(1), Zhang GZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

We previously demonstrated that two methyltransferase motifs, K-D-K-E and G-G-D, 
affect the pathogenicity of Newcastle disease virus (NDV) by regulating mRNA 
translation and virus transmission. Here, we compared the infectious centre area 
produced by the NDV strain, rSG10, and methyltransferase motifs mutant rSG10 
strains in DF-1 cells. The results show that intercellular transmission was 
attenuated by methyltransferase motif mutations. We further determined the 
ability of mutant viruses to spread in cell-free and cell-to-cell situations. 
Cell-free transmission of rSG10-K1756A was not reduced, indicating that 
cell-to-cell transmission of rSG10-K1756A was decreased. Using a donor and 
target system, we demonstrated that NDV can spread from cell-to-cell directly. 
Furthermore, by comparing the protein distribution area of three strains when 
treated with 2% agar overlay, we found that rSG10-K1756A was defective in 
cell-to-cell transmission. Tunnelling nanotubes (TNTs) are an important mode for 
cell-to-cell transmission. Treatment of cells with cytochalasin D (CytoD) or 
nocodazole to inhibit the formation of TNTs, reduced protein levels in all 
strains, but rSG10-K1756A was the least affected. These results indicate that 
mutation of the K-D-K-E motif is likely to restricted the spread of NDV via 
TNTs. Finally, we observed that matrix protein (M) and fusion protein (F) 
promoted the formation of cellular extensions, which may be involved in the 
cell-to-cell spread of NDV. Our research reveals a novel mechanism by which 
methyltransferase motifs affect the cell-to-cell spread of NDV and provides 
insight into dissemination of paramyxoviruses.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2023.2186336
PMCID: PMC10026920
PMID: 36919461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.