1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Jun 5;32(12):2103-2116. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad043.

GWAS meta-analyses clarify the genetics of cervical phenotypes and inform risk 
stratification for cervical cancer.

Koel M(1), Võsa U(1), Jõeloo M(1), Läll K(1), Gualdo NP(1), Laivuori H(2)(3)(4), 
Lemmelä S(2); Estonian Biobank Research Team; FinnGen; Daly M(2), Palta P(1)(2), 
Mägi R(1), Laisk T(1).

Author information:
(1)Estonian Genome Centre, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu 
51010, Estonia.
(2)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, FIMM, HiLIFE, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki 00014, Finland.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Tampere University Hospital and Tampere University, Tampere 33520, 
Finland.
(4)Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University 
Hospital, Helsinki 00014, Finland.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have successfully identified associations 
for cervical cancer, but the underlying mechanisms of cervical biology and 
pathology remain uncharacterised. Our GWAS meta-analyses fill this gap, as we 
characterise the genetic architecture of cervical phenotypes, including cervical 
ectropion, cervicitis, cervical dysplasia, as well as up to 9229 cases and 
490 304 controls for cervical cancer from diverse ancestries. Leveraging the 
latest computational methods and gene expression data, we refine the association 
signals for cervical cancer and propose potential causal variants and genes at 
each locus. We prioritise PAX8/PAX8-AS1, LINC00339, CDC42, CLPTM1L, HLA-DRB1 and 
GSDMB as the most likely candidate genes for cervical cancer signals, providing 
insights into cervical cancer pathogenesis and supporting the involvement of 
reproductive tract development, immune response and cellular 
proliferation/apoptosis. We construct a genetic risk score (GRS) that is 
associated with cervical cancer [hazard ratios (HR) = 3.1 (1.7-5.6) for the top 
15% vs lowest 15% of individuals], and with other HPV- and immune-system-related 
diagnoses in a phenome-wide association study analysis. Our results propose 
valuable leads for further functional studies and present a GRS for cervical 
cancer that allows additional risk stratification and could potentially be used 
to personalise the conventional screening strategies for groups more susceptible 
to cervical cancer.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddad043
PMCID: PMC10244231
PMID: 36929174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.