1. ACS Synth Biol. 2023 Apr 21;12(4):1058-1071. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00530. 
Epub 2023 Mar 15.

Standard Intein Gene Expression Ramps (SIGER) for Protein-Independent Expression 
Control.

Fages-Lartaud M(1), Mueller Y(1), Elie F(1), Courtade G(1), Hohmann-Marriott 
MF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology, Trondheim N-7491, Norway.
(2)United Scientists CORE (Limited), Dunedin 9016, Aotearoa, New Zealand.

Coordination of multigene expression is one of the key challenges of metabolic 
engineering for the development of cell factories. Constraints on translation 
initiation and early ribosome kinetics of mRNA are imposed by features of the 
5'UTR in combination with the start of the gene, referred to as the "gene ramp", 
such as rare codons and mRNA secondary structures. These features strongly 
influence the translation yield and protein quality by regulating the ribosome 
distribution on mRNA strands. The utilization of genetic expression sequences, 
such as promoters and 5'UTRs in combination with different target genes, leads 
to a wide variety of gene ramp compositions with irregular translation rates, 
leading to unpredictable levels of protein yield and quality. Here, we present 
the Standard Intein Gene Expression Ramp (SIGER) system for controlling protein 
expression. The SIGER system makes use of inteins to decouple the translation 
initiation features from the gene of a target protein. We generated 
sequence-specific gene expression sequences for two inteins (DnaB and DnaX) that 
display defined levels of protein expression. Additionally, we used inteins that 
possess the ability to release the C-terminal fusion protein in vivo to avoid 
the impairment of protein functionality by the fused intein. Overall, our 
results show that SIGER systems are unique tools to mitigate the undesirable 
effects of gene ramp variation and to control the relative ratios of enzymes 
involved in molecular pathways. As a proof of concept of the potential of the 
system, we also used a SIGER system to express two difficult-to-produce 
proteins, GumM and CBM73.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00530
PMCID: PMC10127266
PMID: 36920366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.