1. Front Neurol. 2023 Feb 28;14:1137998. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1137998. 
eCollection 2023.

Pathophysiology of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody disease.

Corbali O(1)(2), Chitnis T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Ann Romney Center for 
Neurologic Diseases, Boston, MA, United States.

Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein Antibody Disease (MOGAD) is a spectrum of 
diseases, including optic neuritis, transverse myelitis, acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis, and cerebral cortical encephalitis. In addition to distinct 
clinical, radiological, and immunological features, the infectious prodrome is 
more commonly reported in MOGAD (37-70%) than NMOSD (15-35%). Interestingly, 
pediatric MOGAD is not more aggressive than adult-onset MOGAD, unlike in 
multiple sclerosis (MS), where annualized relapse rates are three times higher 
in pediatric-onset MS. MOGAD pathophysiology is driven by acute attacks during 
which T cells and MOG antibodies cross blood brain barrier (BBB). MOGAD lesions 
show a perivenous confluent pattern around the small veins, lacking the 
radiological central vein sign. Initial activation of T cells in the periphery 
is followed by reactivation in the subarachnoid/perivascular spaces by MOG-laden 
antigen-presenting cells and inflammatory CSF milieu, which enables T cells to 
infiltrate CNS parenchyma. CD4+ T cells, unlike CD8+ T cells in MS, are the 
dominant T cell type found in lesion histology. Granulocytes, 
macrophages/microglia, and activated complement are also found in the lesions, 
which could contribute to demyelination during acute relapses. MOG antibodies 
potentially contribute to pathology by opsonizing MOG, complement activation, 
and antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. Stimulation of peripheral 
MOG-specific B cells through TLR stimulation or T follicular helper cells might 
help differentiate MOG antibody-producing plasma cells in the peripheral blood. 
Neuroinflammatory biomarkers (such as MBP, sNFL, GFAP, Tau) in MOGAD support 
that most axonal damage happens in the initial attack, whereas relapses are 
associated with increased myelin damage.

Copyright Â© 2023 Corbali and Chitnis.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1137998
PMCID: PMC10011114
PMID: 36925938

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.