1. Cureus. 2023 Feb 11;15(2):e34876. doi: 10.7759/cureus.34876. eCollection 2023 
Feb.

IgA Vasculitis in Japanese Patients Harboring MEFV Mutations: A Case Report and 
Review of the Literature.

Yokoyama T(1), Sakumura N(1), Inoue N(1), Matsuda Y(1), Wada T(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, JPN.

Immunoglobulin A vasculitis (IgAV) is the most common vasculitis of childhood. 
However, its etiology remains unknown. In the Mediterranean region, 10% of 
patients with IgAV harbor homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations in the 
Mediterranean fever (MEFV) gene. Thus, such mutations may be involved in the 
development of IgAV. Herein, we present a five-year-old girl presented with 
IgAV. She experienced prolonged abdominal pain, which was steroid-resistant. 
When treatment with colchicine was started, her abdominal pain resolved 
immediately. The serum interleukin (IL)-18 levels of the patient and other 
patients with IgAV and familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) were evaluated using 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The serum IL-18 level of the patient was 
higher than that of other patients with IgAV and was similar to that of patients 
with FMF harboring M694I mutation. Moreover, all exons of the MEFV gene were 
analyzed using the Sanger sequencing and the patient presented with E148Q/M694I 
mutation. Further, a comprehensive search of Japanese patients with IgAV 
harboring MEFV gene mutations in PubMed, Ichushi-Web, and Medical Online was 
conducted to validate the clinical characteristics of Japanese patients with 
IgAV harboring MEFV gene mutation. In previous studies, only five patients 
presented with IgAV harboring MEFV gene mutation in Japan.  The prevalence of 
IgAV associated with MEFV gene mutation may be low in Japan. However, MEFV gene 
mutations should be suspected if the symptoms of IgAV are prolonged or if 
patients are refractory to treatment. In such case, IL-18 monitoring and 
colchicine treatment may be useful for IgAV with MEFV gene mutation.

Copyright © 2023, Yokoyama et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.34876
PMCID: PMC10010935
PMID: 36923179

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.