1. Front Psychiatry. 2023 Mar 2;14:1139451. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1139451. 
eCollection 2023.

Incorporating multi-stage diagnosis status to mine associations between genetic 
risk variants and the multi-modality phenotype network in major depressive 
disorder.

Zhang L(1)(2), Pang M(1), Liu X(3), Hao X(4), Wang M(2), Xie C(5), Zhang Z(5), 
Yuan Y(3), Zhang D(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing Forestry University, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics 
and Astronautics, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Psychosomatic and Psychiatry, Zhongda Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing, China.
(4)School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, 
China.
(5)Department of Neurology, ZhongDa Hospital, School of Medicine, Southeast 
University, Nanjing, China.

Depression (major depressive disorder, MDD) is a common and serious medical 
illness. Globally, it is estimated that 5% of adults suffer from depression. 
Recently, imaging genetics receives growing attention and become a powerful 
strategy for discoverying the associations between genetic variants (e.g., 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms, SNPs) and multi-modality brain imaging data. 
However, most of the existing MDD imaging genetic research studies conducted by 
clinicians usually utilize simple statistical analysis methods and only consider 
single-modality brain imaging, which are limited in the deeper discovery of the 
mechanistic understanding of MDD. It is therefore imperative to utilize a 
powerful and efficient technology to fully explore associations between genetic 
variants and multi-modality brain imaging. In this study, we developed a novel 
imaging genetic association framework to mine the multi-modality phenotype 
network between genetic risk variants and multi-stage diagnosis status. 
Specifically, the multi-modality phenotype network consists of voxel node 
features and connectivity edge features from structural magnetic resonance 
imaging (sMRI) and resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(rs-fMRI). Thereafter, an association model based on multi-task learning 
strategy was adopted to fully explore the relationship between the MDD risk SNP 
and the multi-modality phenotype network. The multi-stage diagnosis status was 
introduced to further mine the relation among the multiple modalities of 
different subjects. A multi-modality brain imaging data and genotype data were 
collected by us from two hospitals. The experimental results not only 
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method but also identify some 
consistent and stable brain regions of interest (ROIs) biomarkers from the node 
and edge features of multi-modality phenotype network. Moreover, four new and 
potential risk SNPs associated with MDD were discovered.

Copyright Â© 2023 Zhang, Pang, Liu, Hao, Wang, Xie, Zhang, Yuan and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1139451
PMCID: PMC10017727
PMID: 36937715

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.