1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2023 Mar 2;11:1118948. doi:
10.3389/fbioe.2023.1118948.  eCollection 2023.

Dynamic and balanced regulation of the thrABC operon gene for efficient 
synthesis of L-threonine.

Hao R(1), Wang S(1), Jin X(1), Yang X(1), Qi Q(1), Liang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Jinan, 
China.

L-threonine is an essential amino acid used widely in food, cosmetics, animal 
feed and medicine. The thrABC operon plays an important role in regulating the 
biosynthesis of L-theronine. In this work, we systematically analyzed the 
effects of separating thrAB and thrC in different proportions on strain growth 
and L-threonine production in Escherichia coli firstly. The results showed that 
higher expression of thrC than thrAB enhanced cell growth and L-threonine 
production; however, L-threonine production decreased when the thrC proportion 
was too high. The highest L-threonine production was achieved when the 
expression intensity ratio of thrAB to thrC was 3:5. Secondly, a stationary 
phase promoter was also used to dynamically regulate the expression of 
engineered thrABC. This strategy improved cell growth and shortened the 
fermentation period from 36 h to 24 h. Finally, the acetate metabolic overflow 
was reduced by deleting the ptsG gene, leading to a further increase in 
L-threonine production. With these efforts, the final strain P 2.1 -2901ΔptsG 
reached 40.06 g/L at 60 h fermentation, which was 96.85% higher than the initial 
control strain TH and the highest reported titer in shake flasks. The maximum 
L-threonine yield and productivity was obtained in reported fed-batch 
fermentation, and L-threonine production is close to the highest titer 
(127.30 g/L). In this work, the expression ratio of genes in the thrABC operon 
in E. coli was studied systematically, which provided a new approach to improve 
L-threonine production and its downstream products.

Copyright © 2023 Hao, Wang, Jin, Yang, Qi and Liang.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2023.1118948
PMCID: PMC10018013
PMID: 36937754