1. Front Sports Act Living. 2023 Mar 6;5:1147384. doi:
10.3389/fspor.2023.1147384.  eCollection 2023.

The effects of physical activity on glutamate neurotransmission in 
neuropsychiatric disorders.

Baskerville R(1), McGrath T(2), Castell L(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Green Templeton College, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Physical activity (PA) is an effective way of increasing cognitive and emotional 
health and counteracting many psychiatric conditions. Numerous neurobiological 
models for depression have emerged in the past 30 years but many struggle to 
incorporate the effects of exercise. The hippocampus and pre-frontal cortex 
(PFC) containing predominantly glutamate neurotransmission, are the centres of 
changes seen in depression. There is therefore increasing interest in 
glutamatergic systems which offers new paradigms of understanding mechanisms 
connecting physical activity, stress, inflammation and depression, not explained 
by the serotonin theories of depression. Similar hippocampal glutamate 
dysfunction is observed in many other neuropsychiatric conditions. Excitatory 
glutamate neurones have high functionality, but also high ATP requirements and 
are therefore vulnerable to glucocorticoid or pro-inflammatory stress that 
causes mitochondrial dysfunction, with synaptic loss, culminating in depressed 
mood and cognition. Exercise improves mitochondrial function, angiogenesis and 
synaptogenesis. Within the glutamate hypothesis of depression, the mechanisms of 
stress and inflammation have been extensively researched, but PA as a mitigator 
is less understood. This review examines the glutamatergic mechanisms underlying 
depression and the evidence of physical activity interventions within this 
framework. A dynamic glutamate-based homeostatic model is suggested whereby 
stress, neuroinflammation and PA form counterbalancing influences on hippocampal 
cell functionality, which manifests as depression and other neuropsychiatric 
conditions when homeostasis is disrupted.

Â© 2023 Baskerville, mcgrath and Castell.

DOI: 10.3389/fspor.2023.1147384
PMCID: PMC10025343
PMID: 36949894

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.