1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Jul 13:2023.03.07.531489. doi: 
10.1101/2023.03.07.531489.

Vaccination with mycobacterial lipid loaded nanoparticle leads to lipid antigen 
persistence and memory differentiation of antigen-specific T cells.

Morgun E(1), Zhu J(2), Almunif S(2), Bobbala S(2), Aguilar MS(3), Wang J(1), 
Conner K(1), Cui Y(1), Cao L(1), Seshadri C(3), Scott EA(1)(2), Wang CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 
USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, 
WA, USA.

Update in
    Elife. 2023 Oct 25;12:RP87431. doi: 10.7554/eLife.87431.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection elicits both protein and lipid 
antigen-specific T cell responses. However, the incorporation of lipid antigens 
into subunit vaccine strategies and formulations has been underexplored, and the 
characteristics of vaccine-induced Mtb lipid-specific memory T cells have 
remained elusive. Mycolic acid (MA), a major lipid component of the Mtb cell 
wall, is presented by human CD1b molecules to unconventional T cell subsets. 
These MA-specific CD1b-restricted T cells have been detected in the blood and 
disease sites of Mtb-infected individuals, suggesting that MA is a promising 
lipid antigen for incorporation into multicomponent subunit vaccines. In this 
study, we utilized the enhanced stability of bicontinuous nanospheres (BCN) to 
efficiently encapsulate MA for in vivo delivery to MA-specific T cells, both 
alone and in combination with an immunodominant Mtb protein antigen (Ag85B). 
Pulmonary administration of MA-loaded BCN (MA-BCN) elicited MA-specific T cell 
responses in humanized CD1 transgenic mice. Simultaneous delivery of MA and 
Ag85B within BCN activated both MA- and Ag85B-specific T cells. Notably, 
pulmonary vaccination with MA-Ag85B-BCN resulted in the persistence of MA, but 
not Ag85B, within alveolar macrophages in the lung. Vaccination of MA-BCN 
through intravenous or subcutaneous route, or with attenuated Mtb likewise 
reproduced MA persistence. Moreover, MA-specific T cells in MA-BCN-vaccinated 
mice differentiated into a T follicular helper-like phenotype. Overall, the BCN 
platform allows for the dual encapsulation and in vivo activation of lipid and 
protein antigen-specific T cells and leads to persistent lipid depots that could 
offer long-lasting immune responses.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.03.07.531489
PMCID: PMC10028924
PMID: 36945395

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Authors declare that they 
have no competing financial interests.