1. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2023 Jun;14(3):1337-1348. doi:
10.1002/jcsm.13211.  Epub 2023 Mar 21.

EXT418, a novel long-acting ghrelin, mitigates Lewis lung carcinoma induced 
cachexia in mice.

Kerr HL(1)(2), Krumm K(1)(2), Lee II(1)(2), Anderson B(1)(2), Christiani 
A(1)(2), Strait L(1)(2), Breckheimer BA(1)(2), Irwin B(1)(2), Jiang AS(1)(2), 
Rybachok A(1)(2), Chen A(1)(2), Caeiro L(1)(2), Dacek E(1)(2), Hall DB(3), 
Kostyla CH(3)(4), Hales LM(3), Soliman TM(3), Garcia JM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget 
Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Washington, Seattle, USA.
(3)Extend Biosciences, Inc., St. Newton, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Atalanta Therapeutics, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: Ghrelin is a potential therapy for cachexia due to its orexigenic 
properties and anabolic effects on muscle and fat. However, its clinical use is 
limited by the short half-life of active (acylated) ghrelin (~11 min in humans). 
EXT418 is a novel long-acting, constitutively active ghrelin analog created by 
covalently linking it to a vitamin D derivative. Here, we evaluated the effects 
and mechanisms of action of EXT418 on Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC)-induced 
cachexia in mice.
METHODS: Male C57BL/6J mice (5- to 7-month-old) were implanted with 1 × 106 
heat-killed (HK) or live LLC cells. When the tumour was palpable, mice were 
injected with vehicle (T + V) or EXT418 daily (T + 418 Daily, 0.25 mg/kg/day) or 
every other day (T + 418 EOD, 0.5 mg/kg/EOD) for up to 14 days, whereas 
HK-treated mice were given vehicle (HK + V). Subsets of T + 418 Daily or 
EOD-treated mice were pair-fed to the T + V group. Body composition and grip 
strength were evaluated before tumour implantation and at the end of the 
experiment. Molecular markers were probed in muscles upon termination.
RESULTS: In tumour-bearing mice, administration of EXT418 daily or EOD partially 
prevented weight loss (T + V vs. T + 418 Daily, P = 0.030; and vs. T + 418 EOD, 
P = 0.020). Similar effects were observed in whole body fat and lean body mass. 
Grip strength in tumour-bearing mice was improved by EXT418 daily (P = 0.010) or 
EOD (P = 0.008) administration compared with vehicle-treated mice. These effects 
of EXT418 on weight and grip strength were partially independent of food intake. 
EXT418 daily administration also improved type IIA (P = 0.015), IIB (P = 0.037) 
and IIX (P = 0.050) fibre cross-sectional area (CSA) in tibialis anterior (TA) 
and EXT418 EOD improved CSA of IIB fibres in red gastrocnemius (GAS; P = 0.005). 
In skeletal muscles, tumour-induced increases in atrogenes Fbxo32 and Trim63 
were ameliorated by EXT418 treatments (TA and GAS/plantaris, PL), which were 
independent of food intake. EXT418 administration decreased expression of the 
mitophagy marker Bnip3 (GAS/PL; P ≤ 0.010). Similar effects of EXT418 EOD were 
observed in p62 (GAS/PL; P = 0.039). In addition, EXT418 treatments ameliorated 
the tumour-induced elevation in muscle Il6 transcript levels (TA and GAS/PL), 
independently of food intake. Il-6 transcript levels in adipose tissue and 
circulating IL-10 were elevated in response to the tumour but these increases 
were not significant with EXT418 administration. Tumour mass was not altered by 
EXT418.
CONCLUSIONS: EXT418 mitigates LLC-induced cachexia by attenuating skeletal 
muscle inflammation, proteolysis, and mitophagy, without affecting tumour mass 
and partially independent of food intake.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Society on Sarcopenia, Cachexia and Wasting 
Disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/jcsm.13211
PMCID: PMC10235874
PMID: 36942661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Jose M. Garcia received research support from 
Aeterna Zentaris Inc., Helsinn Therapeutics, Inc. and Extend Biosciences. 
Haiming L. Kerr, Kora Krumm, Ian (In‐gi) Lee, Barbara Anderson, Anthony 
Christiani, Lena Strait, Beatrice A. Breckheimer, Brynn Irwin, Alice (Siyi) 
Jiang, Artur Rybachok, Amanda Chen, Lucas Caeiro, Elizabeth Dacek, Daniel B. 
Hall, Caroline H. Kostyla, Laura M. Hales, Tarik M. Soliman, Jose M. Garcia 
declare that they have no conflict of interest. Daniel B. Hall, Laura M. Hales, 
and Tarik M. Soliman are employees of Extend Biosciences, and Caroline H. 
Kostyla is a former employee of Extend Biosciences.