1. ACS Synth Biol. 2023 Apr 21;12(4):1119-1132. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00607. 
Epub 2023 Mar 21.

Design of Four Small-Molecule-Inducible Systems in the Yeast Chromosome, Applied 
to Optimize Terpene Biosynthesis.

Park JH(1), Bassalo MC(1), Lin GM(1), Chen Y(1), Doosthosseini H(1), Schmitz 
J(2), Roubos JA(2), Voigt CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Synthetic Biology Center, Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, 500 Technology Square, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, 
United States.
(2)DSM Science & Innovation, Biodata & Translational Sciences, P.O. Box 1, 2600 
MA Delft, The Netherlands.

The optimization of cellular functions often requires the balancing of gene 
expression, but the physical construction and screening of alternative designs 
are costly and time-consuming. Here, we construct a strain of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae that contains a "sensor array" containing bacterial regulators that 
respond to four small-molecule inducers (vanillic acid, xylose, aTc, IPTG). Four 
promoters can be independently controlled with low background and a 40- to 
5000-fold dynamic range. These systems can be used to study the impact of 
changing the level and timing of gene expression without requiring the 
construction of multiple strains. We apply this approach to the optimization of 
a four-gene heterologous pathway to the terpene linalool, which is a flavor and 
precursor to energetic materials. Using this approach, we identify bottlenecks 
in the metabolic pathway. This work can aid the rapid automated strain 
development of yeasts for the bio-manufacturing of diverse products, including 
chemicals, materials, fuels, and food ingredients.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00607
PMCID: PMC10127285
PMID: 36943773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.