1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2023 Jun 1;229:115238. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2023.115238. 
Epub 2023 Mar 20.

CESSAT: A chemical additive-enhanced single-step accurate CRISPR/Cas13 testing 
system for field-deployable ultrasensitive detection and genotyping of 
SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern.

Wang Y(1), Chen H(1), Gao H(2), Wei H(1), Wang Y(2), Mu K(1), Liu L(1), Dai 
E(3), Rong Z(4), Wang S(5).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Center of AMMS, Beijing, 100850, PR China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Fifth Hospital of Shijiazhuang, Hebei 
Medical University, Shijiazhuang, 050021, PR China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Fifth Hospital of Shijiazhuang, Hebei 
Medical University, Shijiazhuang, 050021, PR China. Electronic address: 
daieh2008@126.com.
(4)Bioinformatics Center of AMMS, Beijing, 100850, PR China. Electronic address: 
rongzhen0525@sina.com.
(5)Bioinformatics Center of AMMS, Beijing, 100850, PR China. Electronic address: 
sqwang@bmi.ac.cn.

The continued emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOCs) has raised 
great challenges for epidemic prevention and control. A rapid, sensitive, and 
on-site SARS-CoV-2 genotyping technique is urgently needed for individual 
diagnosis and routine surveillance. Here, a field-deployable ultrasensitive 
CRISPR-based diagnostics system, called Chemical additive-Enhanced Single-Step 
Accurate CRISPR/Cas13 Testing system (CESSAT), for simultaneous screening of 
SARS-CoV-2 and its five VOCs (Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, and Omicron) within 
40 min was reported. In this system, a single-step reverse transcription 
recombinase polymerase amplification-CRISPR/Cas13a assay was incorporated with 
optimized extraction-free viral lysis and reagent lyophilization, which could 
eliminate complicated sample processing steps and rigorous reagent storage 
conditions. Remarkably, 10% glycine as a chemical additive could improve the 
assay sensitivity by 10 times, making the limit of detection as low as 1 copy/μL 
(5 copies/reaction). A compact optic fiber-integrated smartphone-based device 
was developed for sample lysis, assay incubation, fluorescence imaging, and 
result interpretation. CESSAT could specifically differentiate the synthetic 
pseudovirus of SARS-CoV-2 and its five VOCs. The genotyping results for 40 
clinical samples were in 100% concordance with standard method. We believe this 
simple but efficient enhancement strategy can be widely incorporated with 
existing Cas13a-based assays, thus leading a substantial progress in the 
development and application of rapid, ultrasensitive, and accurate nucleic acid 
analysis technology.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2023.115238
PMCID: PMC10027308
PMID: 36958206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.