1. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad064. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad064.

Stop or Not: Genome-Wide Profiling of Reassigned Stop Codons in Ciliates.

Chen W(1)(2), Geng Y(3), Zhang B(1)(2), Yan Y(4), Zhao F(1)(2)(3), Miao M(1).

Author information:
(1)Savaid Medical School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Plant Reproductive Adaptation and Evolutionary 
Ecology, School of Ecology and Environmental Sciences, Yunnan University, 
Kunming, China.
(4)Institute of Evolution and Marine Biodiversity, Ocean University of China, 
Qingdao, China.

Bifunctional stop codons that have both translation and termination functions in 
the same species are important for understanding the evolution and function of 
genetic codes in living organisms. Considering the high frequency of 
bifunctional codons but limited number of available genomes in ciliates, we de 
novo sequenced seven representative ciliate genomes to explore the evolutionary 
history of stop codons. We further propose a stop codon reassignment 
quantification method (stopCR) that can identify bifunctional codons and measure 
their frequencies in various eukaryotic organisms. Using our newly developed 
method, we found two previously undescribed genetic codes, illustrating the 
prevalence of bifunctional stop codons in ciliates. Overall, evolutionary 
genomic analyses suggest that gain or loss of reassigned stop codons in ciliates 
is shaped by their living environment, the eukaryotic release factor 1, and 
suppressor tRNAs. This study provides novel clues about the functional diversity 
and evolutionary history of stop codons in eukaryotic organisms.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad064
PMCID: PMC10089648
PMID: 36952281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]