1. Oncotarget. 2023 Mar 24;14:243-257. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.28390.

Polyisoprenylated cysteinyl amide inhibitors deplete singly polyisoprenylated 
monomeric G-proteins in lung and breast cancer cell lines.

Tawfeeq N(#)(1)(2), Lazarte JMS(#)(1), Jin Y(1), Gregory MD(1), Lamango NS(1).

Author information:
(1)Florida A&M University College of Pharmacy Pharmaceutical Sciences, Institute 
of Public Health, Tallahassee, FL 32307, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Clinical Pharmacy, Imam 
Abdulrahman bin Faisal University, Dammam, Eastern Province, Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia.
(#)Contributed equally

Finding effective therapies against cancers driven by mutant and/or 
overexpressed hyperactive G-proteins remains an area of active research. 
Polyisoprenylated cysteinyl amide inhibitors (PCAIs) are agents that mimic the 
essential posttranslational modifications of G-proteins. It is hypothesized that 
PCAIs work as anticancer agents by disrupting polyisoprenylation-dependent 
functional interactions of the G-Proteins. This study tested this hypothesis by 
determining the effect of the PCAIs on the levels of RAS and related monomeric 
G-proteins. Following 48 h exposure, we found significant decreases in the 
levels of KRAS, RHOA, RAC1, and CDC42 ranging within 20-66% after NSL-YHJ-2-27 
(5 Î¼M) treatment in all four cell lines tested, A549, NCI-H1299, MDA-MB-231, and 
MDA-MB-468. However, no significant difference was observed on the G-protein, 
RAB5A. Interestingly, 38 and 44% decreases in the levels of the farnesylated and 
acylated NRAS were observed in the two breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-231, and 
MDA-MB-468, respectively, while HRAS levels showed a 36% decrease only in 
MDA-MB-468 cells. Moreover, after PCAIs treatment, migration, and invasion of 
A549 cells were inhibited by 72 and 70%, respectively while the levels of 
vinculin and fascin dropped by 33 and 43%, respectively. These findings 
implicate the potential role of PCAIs as anticancer agents through their direct 
interaction with monomeric G-proteins.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.28390
PMCID: PMC10038354
PMID: 36961909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Authors have no conflicts 
of interest to declare.