1. ACS Omega. 2023 Mar 9;8(11):10202-10213. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.2c07366. 
eCollection 2023 Mar 21.

Exploring the Mechanism of Bergamot Essential Oil against Asthma Based on 
Network Pharmacology and Experimental Verification.

Feng S(1), Xu G(1), Fu Y(1), Ding Q(2), Shi Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 
100029, China.
(2)Shenzhen Research Institute, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Shenzhen 
518118, China.

Asthma is a chronic respiratory disease. Bergamot essential oil (BEO) is 
extracted from the bergamot peel, which is widely used as a medicinal and food 
plant in China. Modern pharmacological studies have confirmed that BEO has 
anti-inflammatory properties, suggesting potential in treating asthma. First, 
the main active ingredients of BEO were detected and analyzed by gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). Network pharmacology methods were used 
to explore the possible core targets and main pathways of BEO in asthma 
treatment. Then ovalbumin (OVA)-induced in vivo and lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS)-induced in vitro models were established to investigate the antiasthmatic 
effects of BEO. BEO showed a good antiasthmatic effect by improving lung 
inflammation and inhibiting collagen deposition. Then, enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction 
(qPCR) were used to explore the possible mechanism of BEO in asthma treatment. 
Furthermore, experimental verification showed that BEO could suppress the 
release of inflammatory factors in vitro and inhibit the activation of MAPK and 
JAK-STAT signaling pathways. This study demonstrated the anti-inflammatory 
effects of BEO against asthma. Moreover, it supplies a theoretical basis for the 
clinical application of BEO.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.2c07366
PMCID: PMC10034984
PMID: 36969419

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.