1. PLOS Glob Public Health. 2022 Jun 17;2(6):e0000475. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pgph.0000475. eCollection 2022.

Contribution of genetic factors to high rates of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia on 
the Thailand-Myanmar border.

Bancone G(1)(2), Gornsawun G(1), Peerawaranun P(3), Penpitchaporn P(1), Paw 
MK(1), Poe DD(1), Win D(1), Cicelia N(1), Mukaka M(2)(3), Archasuksan L(1), 
Thielemans L(4), Nosten F(1)(2), White NJ(2)(3), McGready R(1)(2), Carrara 
VI(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(2)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Faculty of Tropical 
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Neonatology-Pediatrics Department, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, 
Belgium.
(5)Institute of Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, 
Geneva, Switzerland.

Very high unconjugated bilirubin plasma concentrations in neonates (neonatal 
hyperbilirubinaemia; NH) may cause neurologic damage (kernicterus). Both 
increased red blood cell turn-over and immaturity of hepatic glucuronidation 
contribute to neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia. The incidence of NH requiring 
phototherapy during the first week of life on the Thailand-Myanmar border is 
high (approximately 25%). On the Thailand-Myanmar border we investigated the 
contribution of genetic risk factors to high bilirubin levels in the first month 
of life in 1596 neonates enrolled in a prospective observational birth cohort 
study. Lower gestational age (<38 weeks), mutations in the genes encoding 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and uridine 
5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A1 were identified as the main 
independent risk factors for NH in the first week, and for prolonged jaundice in 
the first month of life. Population attributable risks (PAR%) were 61.7% for 
lower gestational age, 22.9% for hemi or homozygous and 9.9% for heterozygous 
G6PD deficiency respectively, and 6.3% for UGT1A1*6 homozygosity. In neonates 
with an estimated gestational age ≥ 38 weeks, G6PD mutations contributed PARs of 
38.1% and 23.6% for "early" (≤ 48 hours) and "late" (49-168 hours) NH 
respectively. For late NH, the PAR for UGT1A1*6 homozygosity was 7.7%. Maternal 
excess weight was also a significant risk factor for "early" NH while maternal 
mutations on the beta-globin gene, prolonged rupture of membranes, large 
haematomas and neonatal sepsis were risk factors for "late" NH. For prolonged 
jaundice during the first month of life, G6PD mutations and UGT1A1*6 mutation, 
together with lower gestational age at birth and presence of haematoma were 
significant risk factors. In this population, genetic factors contribute 
considerably to the high risk of NH. Diagnostic tools to identify G6PD 
deficiency at birth would facilitate early recognition of high risk cases.

Copyright: © 2022 Bancone et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgph.0000475
PMCID: PMC10021142
PMID: 36962413

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.