1. Sci Rep. 2023 Mar 25;13(1):4922. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-32022-8.

Increasing the melting temperature of VHH with the in silico free energy score.

Tomimoto Y(1), Yamazaki R(1), Shirai H(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Applied Research and Operations, Astellas Pharma Inc., Tsukuba city, Ibaraki, 
305-8585, Japan.
(2)Applied Research and Operations, Astellas Pharma Inc., Tsukuba city, Ibaraki, 
305-8585, Japan. hiroki.shirai@riken.jp.
(3)Riken Center for Computational Science, Nihonbashi 1-Chome Mitsui Building, 
15th floor, 1-4-1 Nihonbashi, Tsukuba, 103-0027, Japan. hiroki.shirai@riken.jp.

VHH, the antigen-binding fragment of a heavy chain-only antibody, is a useful 
component of antibody-based therapeutics. Thermal stability, represented by the 
melting temperature (Tm), is one of the key factors affecting the developability 
of antibody-based therapeutics. In this study, we examined whether the in silico 
free energy score dStability can be used to design mutants with improved Tm 
compared to the anti-lysozyme VHH, D3-L11. After verifying that exhaustive 
mutagenesis was inefficient for improving Tm, we performed a two-round rational 
approach that combined dStability calculations with a small number of 
experiments. This method improved the Tm by more than 5 °C in several single 
mutants including A79I. It reduced the affinity for the antigen by less than 
1.6-fold. We speculate that stabilization of A79I required exquisite 
compatibility among neighboring residues to fill in the internal cavity in the 
protein. Given that we identified only one mutation that could simultaneously 
improve Tm and almost maintain affinity, we concluded that achieving both is 
extremely difficult, even with single mutations that are not located in the 
paratope. Therefore, we recommend using a variety of approaches when trying to 
achieve such a feat. Our method will be a useful complementary approach to other 
existing methods.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-32022-8
PMCID: PMC10039853
PMID: 36966210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.