1. Biomolecules. 2023 Feb 24;13(3):433. doi: 10.3390/biom13030433.

Revealing Natural Intracellular Peptides in Gills of Seahorse Hippocampus reidi.

Correa CN(1)(2), Fiametti LO(1), de Barros GM(1)(2), de Castro LM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Bioscience Institute, 
Sao Paulo State University (UNESP), Sao Vicente 11330-900, SP, Brazil.
(2)Biodiversity of Coastal Environments Postgraduate Program, Department of 
Biological and Environmental Sciences, Bioscience Institute, Sao Paulo State 
University (UNESP), Sao Vicente 11330-900, SP, Brazil.

The seahorse is a marine teleost fish member of the Syngnathidae family that 
displays a complex variety of morphological and reproductive behavior 
innovations and has been recognized for its medicinal importance. In the 
Brazilian ichthyofauna, the seahorse Hippocampus reidi is among the three fish 
species most used by the population in traditional medicine. In this study, a 
protocol was performed based on fast heat inactivation of proteases plus liquid 
chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry to identify native peptides in gills 
of seahorse H. reidi. The MS/MS spectra obtained from gills allowed the 
identification of 1080 peptides, of which 1013 peptides were present in all 
samples and 67 peptide sequences were identified in an additional LC-MS/MS run 
from an alkylated and reduced pool of samples. The majority of peptides were 
fragments of the internal region of the amino acid sequence of the precursor 
proteins (67%), and N- and C-terminal represented 18% and 15%, respectively. 
Many peptide sequences presented ribosomal proteins, histones and hemoglobin as 
precursor proteins. In addition, peptide fragments from moronecidin-like 
protein, described with antimicrobial activity, were found in all gill samples 
of H. reidi. The identified sequences may reveal new bioactive peptides.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13030433
PMCID: PMC10046794
PMID: 36979368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.