1. Insects. 2023 Feb 28;14(3):245. doi: 10.3390/insects14030245.

Sericin Ser3 Ectopic Expressed in Posterior Silk Gland Affects Hemolymph Immune 
Melanization Response via Reducing Melanin Synthesis in Silkworm.

Wang Y(1)(2), Shi M(1), Yang J(1), Ma L(1), Chen X(1), Xu M(1), Peng R(1), Wang 
G(1), Pan Z(1)(2), Sima Y(1)(2), Xu S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biology and Basic Medical Sciences, Suzhou Medical College, Soochow 
University, Suzhou 215123, China.
(2)Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology & Ecology (IABE), Soochow University, 
Suzhou 215123, China.

The transgenesis of silkworms is an important way to innovate genetic resources 
and silk function. However, the silk-gland (SG) of transgenic silkworms, which 
is the most concerned target tissue of sericulture, often suffers from low 
vitality, stunting and other problems, and the reasons are still unknown. This 
study trans engineered recombinant Ser3, a middle silk gland (MSG) specific 
expression gene, in the posterior silk gland (PSG) of the silkworm, and studied 
hemolymph immune melanization response changes in mutant pure line SER 
(Ser3+/+). The results showed that although the mutant had normal vitality, the 
melanin content and phenoloxidase (PO) activity in hemolymph related to humoral 
immunity were significantly reduced, and caused significantly slower blood 
melanization and weaker sterilization ability. The mechanism investigation 
showed that the mRNA levels and enzymatic activities of phenylalanine 
hydroxylase (PAH), tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and dopamine decarboxylase (DDC) in 
the melanin synthesis pathway in mutant hemolymph, as well as the transcription 
levels of the PPAE, SP21 and serpins genes in the serine protease cascade were 
significantly affected. Moreover, the total antioxidant capacity, superoxide 
anion inhibition capacity and catalase (CAT) level related to the redox 
metabolic capacity of hemolymph were significantly increased, while the 
activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione reductase (GR), as well 
as the levels of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and glutathione (GSH), were 
significantly decreased. In conclusion, the anabolism of melanin in the 
hemolymph of PSG transgenic silkworm SER was inhibited, while the basic response 
level of oxidative stress was increased, and the hemolymph immune melanization 
response was decreased. The results will significantly improve the safe 
assessment and development of genetically modified organisms.

DOI: 10.3390/insects14030245
PMCID: PMC10051610
PMID: 36975930

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.