1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2023 Mar 3;12(3):513. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics12030513.

Characterization of Third Generation Cephalosporin- and Carbapenem-Resistant 
Aeromonas Isolates from Municipal and Hospital Wastewater.

Drk S(1), Puljko A(1), Dželalija M(2), Udiković-Kolić N(1).

Author information:
(1)Division for Marine and Environmental Research, Ruđer Bošković Institute, 
Bijenička 54, 10 002 Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Split, Ruđera 
Boškovića 33, 21 000 Split, Croatia.

Antibiotic resistance (AR) remains one of the greatest threats to global health, 
and Aeromonas species have the potential to spread AR in the aquatic 
environment. The spread of resistance to antibiotics important to human health, 
such as third-generation cephalosporins (3GCs) and carbapenems, is of great 
concern. We isolated and identified 15 cefotaxime (3GC)- and 51 
carbapenem-resistant Aeromonas spp. from untreated hospital and treated 
municipal wastewater in January 2020. The most common species were Aeromonas 
caviae (58%), A. hydrophila (17%), A. media (11%), and A. veronii (11%). Almost 
all isolates exhibited a multidrug-resistant phenotype and harboured a diverse 
plasmidome, with the plasmid replicons ColE, IncU, and IncR being the most 
frequently detected. The most prevalent carbapenemase gene was the 
plasmid-associated blaKPC-2 and, for the first time, the blaVIM-2, blaOXA-48, 
and blaIMP-13 genes were identified in Aeromonas spp. Among the 3GC-resistant 
isolates, the blaGES-5 and blaMOX genes were the most prevalent. Of the 10 
isolates examined, three were capable of transferring carbapenem resistance to 
susceptible recipient E. coli. Our results suggest that conventionally treated 
municipal and untreated hospital wastewater is a reservoir for 3GC- and 
carbapenem-resistant, potentially harmful Aeromonas spp. that can be introduced 
into aquatic systems and pose a threat to both the environment and public 
health.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics12030513
PMCID: PMC10044312
PMID: 36978380

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.