1. PLoS Pathog. 2023 Mar 27;19(3):e1011295. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011295. 
eCollection 2023 Mar.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus infection triggers autophagy 
via ER stress-induced calcium signaling to facilitate virus replication.

Diao F(1), Jiang C(1), Sun Y(1), Gao Y(1), Bai J(1)(2), Nauwynck H(3), Wang 
X(1)(2), Yang Y(1), Jiang P(1)(2), Liu X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Disease Diagnostics and Immunology, Ministry of 
Agriculture, MOE International Joint Collaborative Research Laboratory for 
Animal Health & Food Safety, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing, PR China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal 
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, PR China.
(3)Laboratory of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, 
Merelbeke, Belgium.

Calcium (Ca2+), a ubiquitous second messenger, plays a crucial role in many 
cellular functions. Viruses often hijack Ca2+ signaling to facilitate viral 
processes such as entry, replication, assembly, and egress. Here, we report that 
infection by the swine arterivirus, porcine reproductive and respiratory 
syndrome virus (PRRSV), induces dysregulated Ca2+ homeostasis, subsequently 
activating calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-II (CaMKII) mediated autophagy, 
and thus fueling viral replication. Mechanically, PRRSV infection induces 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and forms a closed ER-plasma membrane (PM) 
contacts, resulting the opening of store operated calcium entry (SOCE) channel 
and causing the ER to take up extracellular Ca2+, which is then released into 
the cytoplasm by inositol trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) channel. Importantly, 
pharmacological inhibition of ER stress or CaMKII mediated autophagy blocks 
PRRSV replication. Notably, we show that PRRSV protein Nsp2 plays a dominant 
role in the PRRSV induced ER stress and autophagy, interacting with stromal 
interaction molecule 1 (STIM1) and the 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein 78 
(GRP78). The interplay between PRRSV and cellular calcium signaling provides a 
novel potential approach to develop antivirals and therapeutics for the disease 
outbreaks.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Diao et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011295
PMCID: PMC10079224
PMID: 36972295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.