1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2023 Mar 20;35:100968. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.100968. 
eCollection 2023 Jun.

Ketogenic diet in action: Metabolic profiling of pyruvate dehydrogenase 
deficiency.

Ogawa E(1), Hishiki T(2), Hayakawa N(2)(3), Suzuki H(4), Kosaki K(4), Suematsu 
M(2)(5), Takenouchi T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Clinical and Translational Research Center, Keio University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Central Institute for Experimental Animals, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.

The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex serves as the main connection between 
cytosolic glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid cycle within mitochondria. An 
infant with pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency was treated with vitamin 
B1 supplementation and a ketogenic diet. These dietary modifications resolved 
the renal tubular reabsorption, central apnea, and transfusion-dependent anemia. 
A concurrent metabolome analysis demonstrated the resolution of the amino 
aciduria and an increased total amount of substrates in the tricarboxylic acid 
cycle, reflecting the improved mitochondrial energetics. Glutamate was first 
detected in the cerebrospinal fluid, accompanied by a clinical improvement, 
after the ketogenic ratio was increased to 3:1; thus, glutamate levels in 
cerebrospinal fluid may represent a biomarker for neuronal recovery. Metabolomic 
analyses of body fluids are useful for monitoring therapeutic effects in infants 
with inborn errors of carbohydrate metabolism.

Â© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.100968
PMCID: PMC10038782
PMID: 36974075

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest 
directly relevant to the content of this article.