1. Sci Rep. 2023 Mar 28;13(1):5032. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-32035-3.

Lonafarnib and everolimus reduce pathology in iPSC-derived tissue engineered 
blood vessel model of Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome.

Abutaleb NO(#)(1), Atchison L(#)(1), Choi L(1), Bedapudi A(1), Shores K(1), Gete 
Y(2), Cao K(2), Truskey GA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland, 
College Park, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 
george.truskey@duke.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is a rare, fatal genetic disease 
that accelerates atherosclerosis. With a limited pool of HGPS patients, clinical 
trials face unique challenges and require reliable preclinical testing. We 
previously reported a 3D tissue engineered blood vessel (TEBV) 
microphysiological system fabricated with iPSC-derived vascular cells from HGPS 
patients. HGPS TEBVs exhibit features of HGPS atherosclerosis including loss of 
smooth muscle cells, reduced vasoactivity, excess extracellular matrix (ECM) 
deposition, inflammatory marker expression, and calcification. We tested the 
effects of HGPS therapeutics Lonafarnib and Everolimus separately and together, 
currently in Phase I/II clinical trial, on HGPS TEBVs. Everolimus decreased 
reactive oxygen species levels, increased proliferation, reduced DNA damage in 
HGPS vascular cells, and improved vasoconstriction in HGPS TEBVs. Lonafarnib 
improved shear stress response of HGPS iPSC-derived endothelial cells (viECs) 
and reduced ECM deposition, inflammation, and calcification in HGPS TEBVs. 
Combination treatment with Lonafarnib and Everolimus produced additional 
benefits such as improved endothelial and smooth muscle marker expression and 
reduced apoptosis, as well as increased TEBV vasoconstriction and vasodilation. 
These results suggest that a combined trial of both drugs may provide 
cardiovascular benefits beyond Lonafarnib, if the Everolimus dose can be 
tolerated.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-32035-3
PMCID: PMC10050176
PMID: 36977745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.