1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Mar 10;15(6):1712. doi: 10.3390/cancers15061712.

The Driverless Triple-Wild-Type (BRAF, RAS, KIT) Cutaneous Melanoma: Whole 
Genome Sequencing Discoveries.

Pipek O(1), Vizkeleti L(2)(3), Doma V(4), Alpár D(5), Bödör C(5), Kárpáti S(4), 
Timar J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, 1053 
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Pathology, Forensic and Insurance Medicine, Semmelweis 
University, 1085 Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, Semmelweis University, 1085 Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Venerology and Dermatooncology, Semmelweis 
University, 1085 Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis 
University, 1085 Budapest, Hungary.

The genetic makeup of the triple-wild-type melanoma (BRAF, NRAS and NF1) has 
been known for some time, but those studies grouped together rare 
histopathological versions with common ones, as well as mucosal and even uveal 
ones. Here we used whole genome sequencing to genetically characterize the 
triple-wild-type melanoma (TWM), termed here as BRAF, RAS and KIT wild type (the 
most frequent oncogenic drivers of skin melanoma), using the most common 
histological forms and excluding rare ones. All these tumors except one were 
clearly induced by UV based on the mutational signature. The tumor mutational 
burden was low in TWM, except in the NF1 mutant forms, and a relatively high 
frequency of elevated LOH scores suggested frequent homologue recombination 
deficiency, but this was only confirmed by the mutation signature in one case. 
Furthermore, all these TWMs were microsatellite-stabile. In this driverless 
setting, we revealed rare oncogenic drivers known from melanoma or other cancer 
types and identified rare actionable tyrosine kinase mutations in NTRK1, RET and 
VEGFR1. Mutations of TWM identified genes involved in antitumor immunity 
(negative and positive predictors of immunotherapy), Ca++ and BMP signaling. The 
two regressed melanomas of this cohort shared a 17-gene mutation signature, 
containing genes involved in antitumor immunity and several cell surface 
receptors. Even with this comprehensive genomic approach, a few cases remained 
driverless, suggesting that unrecognized drivers are hiding among passenger 
mutations.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15061712
PMCID: PMC10046270
PMID: 36980598

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.