1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Mar 20;15(6):1851. doi: 10.3390/cancers15061851.

Neuropsychiatric Adverse Drug Reactions with Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in 
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors: An Analysis from the European Spontaneous 
Adverse Event Reporting System.

Barbieri MA(1), Sorbara EE(1), Russo G(1), Cicala G(1), Franchina T(2), 
Santarpia M(2), Silvestris N(2), Spina E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Messina, 
98125 Messina, Italy.
(2)Department of Human Pathology in Adulthood and Childhood Gaetano Barresi, 
University of Messina, 98125 Messina, Italy.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are widely used in gastrointestinal stromal 
tumors (GISTs). The aim of this study is to evaluate the reporting frequency of 
neuropsychiatric adverse drug reactions (ADRs) for TKIs through the analysis of 
European individual case safety reports (ICSRs). All ICSRs collected in 
EudraVigilance up to 31 December 2021 with one TKI having GISTs as an indication 
(imatinib (IM), sunitinib (SU), avapritinib (AVA), regorafenib (REG), and 
ripretinib (RIP)) were included. A disproportionality analysis was performed to 
assess the frequency of reporting for each TKI compared to all other TKIs. The 
number of analyzed ICSRs was 8512, of which 57.9% were related to IM. 
Neuropsychiatric ADRs were reported at least once in 1511 ICSRs (17.8%). A 
higher reporting probability of neuropsychiatric ADRs was shown for AVA. Most 
neuropsychiatric ADRs were known, except for a higher frequency of lumbar spinal 
cord and nerve root disorders (reporting odds ratio, ROR 4.46; confidence 
interval, CI 95% 1.58-12.54), olfactory nerve disorders (8.02; 2.44-26.33), and 
hallucinations (22.96; 8.45-62.36) for AVA. The analyses of European ICSRs 
largely confirmed the safety profiles of TKIs in GISTs, but some ADRs are worthy 
of discussion. Further studies are needed to increase the knowledge of the 
neuropsychiatric disorders of newly approved TKIs.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15061851
PMCID: PMC10046586
PMID: 36980737

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.