1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 14;24(6):5531. doi: 10.3390/ijms24065531.

Role of Stearoyl-CoA Desaturase 1 in Cardiovascular Physiology.

Balatskyi VV(1), Dobrzyn P(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medical Biochemistry, Nencki Institute of 
Experimental Biology of Polish Academy of Sciences, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase is a rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of 
monounsaturated fatty acids. Monounsaturated fatty acids limit the toxicity of 
exogenous saturated fats. Studies have shown that stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 is 
involved in the remodeling of cardiac metabolism. The loss of stearoyl-CoA 
desaturase 1 reduces fatty acid oxidation and increases glucose oxidation in the 
heart. Such a change is protective under conditions of a high-fat diet, which 
reduces reactive oxygen species-generating β-oxidation. In contrast, 
stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 deficiency predisposes individuals to atherosclerosis 
under conditions of hyperlipidemia but protects against apnea-induced 
atherosclerosis. Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 deficiency also impairs angiogenesis 
after myocardial infarction. Clinical data show a positive correlation between 
blood stearoyl-CoA Δ-9 desaturation rates and cardiovascular disease and 
mortality. Moreover, stearoyl-CoA desaturase inhibition is considered an 
attractive intervention in some obesity-associated pathologies, and the 
importance of stearoyl-CoA desaturase in the cardiovascular system might be a 
limitation for developing such therapy. This review discusses the role of 
stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 in the regulation of cardiovascular homeostasis and 
the development of heart disease and presents markers of systemic stearoyl-CoA 
desaturase activity and their predictive potential in the diagnosis of 
cardiovascular disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24065531
PMCID: PMC10059744
PMID: 36982607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.