1. Molecules. 2023 Mar 10;28(6):2536. doi: 10.3390/molecules28062536.

Possible Side Effects of Polyphenols and Their Interactions with Medicines.

Duda-Chodak A(1), Tarko T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Fermentation Technology and Microbiology, Faculty of Food 
Technology, University of Agriculture in Krakow, Al. Mickiewicza 21, 31-120 
Krak√≥w, Poland.

Polyphenols are an important component of plant-derived food with a wide 
spectrum of beneficial effects on human health. For many years, they have 
aroused great interest, especially due to their antioxidant properties, which 
are used in the prevention and treatment of many diseases. Unfortunately, as 
with any chemical substance, depending on the conditions, dose, and interactions 
with the environment, it is possible for polyphenols to also exert harmful 
effects. This review presents a comprehensive current state of the knowledge on 
the negative impact of polyphenols on human health, describing the possible side 
effects of polyphenol intake, especially in the form of supplements. The review 
begins with a brief overview of the physiological role of polyphenols and their 
potential use in disease prevention, followed by the harmful effects of 
polyphenols which are exerted in particular situations. The individual chapters 
discuss the consequences of polyphenols' ability to block iron uptake, which in 
some subpopulations can be harmful, as well as the possible inhibition of 
digestive enzymes, inhibition of intestinal microbiota, interactions of 
polyphenolic compounds with drugs, and impact on hormonal balance. Finally, the 
prooxidative activity of polyphenols as well as their mutagenic, carcinogenic, 
and genotoxic effects are presented. According to the authors, there is a need 
to raise public awareness about the possible side effects of polyphenols 
supplementation, especially in the case of vulnerable subpopulations.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28062536
PMCID: PMC10058246
PMID: 36985507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.