1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Mar 3;14(3):640. doi: 10.3390/genes14030640.

"What We Know and What We Do Not Know about Evolutionary Genetic Adaptation to 
High Altitude Hypoxia in Andean Aymaras".

Amaru R(1), Song J(2), Reading NS(2)(3), Gordeuk VR(4), Prchal JT(2).

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology Unit, School of Medicine, San Andres University, La Paz 0201, 
Bolivia.
(2)Division of Hematology, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84132, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology-ARUP Laboratories, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84132, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 61820, 
USA.

Three well-studied populations living at high altitudes are Tibetans, Andeans 
(Aymaras and Quechuas), and Ethiopians. Unlike Tibetans and Ethiopians who have 
similar hemoglobin (Hb) levels as individuals living at sea level, Aymara Hb 
levels increase when living at higher altitudes. Our previous whole genome study 
of Aymara people revealed several selected genes that are involved in 
cardiovascular functions, but their relationship with Hb levels was not 
elucidated. Here, we studied the frequencies of known evolutionary-selected 
variants in Tibetan and Aymara populations and their correlation with high Hb 
levels in Aymara. We genotyped 177 Aymaras at three different altitudes: 400 m 
(Santa Cruz), 4000 m (La Paz), and 5000 m (Chorolque), and correlated the 
results with the elevation of residence. Some of the Tibetan-selected variants 
also exist in Aymaras, but at a lower prevalence. Two of 10 Tibetan selected 
variants of EPAS1 were found (rs13005507 and rs142764723) and these variants did 
not correlate with Hb levels. Allele frequencies of 5 Aymara selected SNPs 
(heterozygous and homozygous) at 4000 m (rs11578671_BRINP3, rs34913965_NOS2, 
rs12448902_SH2B1, rs10744822_TBX5, and rs487105_PYGM) were higher compared to 
Europeans. The allelic frequencies of rs11578671_BRINP3, rs34913965_NOS2, and 
rs10744822_SH2B1 were significantly higher for Aymaras living at 5000 m than 
those at 400 m elevation. Variant rs11578671, close to the BRINP3 coding region, 
correlated with Hb levels in females. Variant rs34913965 (NOS2) correlated with 
leukocyte counts. Variants rs12448902 (SH2B1) and rs34913965 (NOS2) associated 
with higher platelet levels. The correlation of these SNPs with blood cell 
counts demonstrates that the selected genetic variants in Aymara influence 
hematopoiesis and cardiovascular effects.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14030640
PMCID: PMC10048644
PMID: 36980912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.