1. Plants (Basel). 2023 Mar 10;12(6):1262. doi: 10.3390/plants12061262.

Chemical Constituents from Leaves of Baccharis sphenophylla (Asteraceae) and 
Their Antioxidant Effects.

Retamozo MH(1), Silva CC(1), Tamayose CI(1), Carvalho JCS(1), Romoff P(2), 
Fávero OA(3), Ferreira MJP(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Botânica, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São 
Paulo, São Paulo 05508-090, SP, Brazil.
(2)São Bernardo College, São Bernardo do Campo 09715-020, SP, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Presbiteriana Mackenzie, São Paulo 01302-907, SP, Brazil.

Baccharis is one of the largest genera of Asteraceae and its species are used in 
folk medicine for several medicinal purposes due to the presence of bioactive 
compounds. We investigated the phytochemical composition of polar extracts of B. 
sphenophylla. Using chromatographic procedures, diterpenoids (ent-kaurenoic 
acid), flavonoids (hispidulin, eupafolin, isoquercitrin, quercitrin, biorobin, 
rutin, and vicenin-2), caffeic acid, and chlorogenic acid derivatives 
(5-O-caffeoylquinic acid and its methyl ester, 3,4-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid, 
4,5-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid, and 3,5-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid and its methyl 
ester) were isolated from polar fractions and are described. The extract, polar 
fractions, and fifteen isolated compounds were evaluated in relation to radical 
scavenging activity using two assays. Chlorogenic acid derivatives and flavonols 
exhibited higher antioxidant effects, confirming that B. sphenophylla is an 
important source of phenolic compounds with antiradical properties.

DOI: 10.3390/plants12061262
PMCID: PMC10051307
PMID: 36986952

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.