1. J Phys Chem B. 2023 Apr 13;127(14):3139-3150. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.2c08650. 
Epub 2023 Mar 29.

Conserved Conformational Dynamics Reveal a Key Dynamic Residue in the Gatekeeper 
Loop of Human Cyclophilins.

Ahmed F(1)(2), Yao XQ(1), Hamelberg D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 
30302-3965, United States.
(2)Agnes Scott College, Decatur, Georgia 30030, United States.

Cyclophilins are ubiquitous human enzymes that catalyze peptidyl-prolyl 
cis-trans isomerization in protein substrates. Of the 17 unique isoforms, five 
closely related isoforms (CypA-E) are found in various environments and 
participate in diverse cellular processes, yet all have similar structures and 
the same core catalytic function. The question is what key residues are behind 
the conserved function of these enzymes. Here, conformational dynamics are 
compared across these isoforms to detect conserved dynamics essential for the 
catalytic activity of cyclophilins. A set of key dynamic residues, defined by 
the most dynamically conserved positions, are identified in the gatekeeper 2 
region. The highly conserved glycine (Gly80) in this region is predicted to 
underlie the local flexibility, which is further tested by molecular dynamics 
simulations performed on mutants (G80A) of CypE and CypA. The mutation leads to 
decreased flexibility of CypE and CypA during substrate binding but increased 
flexibility during catalysis. Dynamical changes occur in the mutated region and 
a distal loop downstream of the mutation site in sequence. Examinations of the 
mutational effect on catalysis show that both mutated CypE and CypA exhibit 
shifted binding free energies of the substrate under distinct isomer 
conformations. The results suggest a loss of function in the mutated CypE and 
CypA. These catalytic changes by the mutation are likely independent of the 
substrate sequence, at least in CypA. Our work presents a method to identify 
function-related key residues in proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.2c08650
PMCID: PMC10108351
PMID: 36989346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.