1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 13;24(6):5505. doi: 10.3390/ijms24065505.

Influence of Lipidation Pattern of the KR12 Fragment of Peptide LL-37 on Its 
Antibacterial and Hemolytic Activities.

Kamysz E(1), Sikorska E(2), Bauer M(3), Sikora K(3), Neubauer D(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemistry of Biological Macromolecules, Department of Molecular 
Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdańsk, 80-308 Gdańsk, 
Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Structural Studies of Biopolymers, Department of Organic 
Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdańsk, 80-308 Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of 
Gdańsk, 80-210 Gdańsk, Poland.

Contemporary medicine has been confronted by multidrug resistance. Therefore, 
new antibiotics are sought to alleviate the problem. In this study, we estimated 
the effect of the positioning and extent of lipidation (mainly octanoic acid 
residue) in the KR12-NH2 molecule on antibacterial and hemolytic activities. The 
effect of the conjugation of benzoic acid derivatives (C6H5-X-COOH, where X: 
CH2, CH2-CH2, CH=CH, C≡C, and CH2-CH2-CH2) with the N-terminal part of KR12-NH2 
on biological activity was also studied. All analogs were tested against 
planktonic cells of ESKAPE bacteria and reference strains of Staphylococcus 
aureus. The effect of lipidation site on the helicity of the KR12-NH2 analogs 
was studied using CD spectroscopy. The ability of the selected peptides to 
induce the aggregation of POPG liposomes was evaluated with DLS measurements. We 
demonstrated that both the site and extent of peptide lipidation play an 
essential role in the bacterial specificity of the lipopeptides. Most of the 
C8α-KR12-NH2 (II) analogs that were more hydrophobic than the parent compound 
were also more hemolytic. A similar relationship was also found between the 
α-helical structure content in POPC and hemolytic activity. It is worth 
emphasizing that in our study, the highest selectivity against S. aureus strains 
with an SI value of at least 21.11 exhibited peptide XII obtained by the 
conjugation of the octanoic acid with the N-terminus of retro-KR12-NH2. All 
lipidated analogs with the highest net charge (+5) were the most selective 
toward pathogens. Therefore, the overall charge of KR12-NH2 analogs plays 
pivotal role in their biological activity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24065505
PMCID: PMC10053710
PMID: 36982579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.