1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Mar 26:2023.03.25.534233. doi: 
10.1101/2023.03.25.534233.

Activity-dependent subcellular compartmentalization of dendritic mitochondria 
structure in CA1 pyramidal neurons.

Virga DM(1)(2), Hamilton S(1)(2), Osei B(3), Morgan A(3)(4), Zamponi E(1)(2), 
Park NJ(1)(2), Hewitt VL(1)(2), Zhang D(1)(2), Gonzalez KC(1)(2), Bloss E(5), 
Polleux F(1)(2), Lewis TL Jr(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia Medical School, New York, NY- USA.
(2)Mortimer B. Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Columbia University, New 
York, NY- USA.
(3)Aging & Metabolism Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma 
City, OK, USA.
(4)Neuroscience, Oklahoma University Health Science Campus, Oklahoma City, OK, 
USA.
(5)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

Neuronal mitochondria play important roles beyond ATP generation, including Ca2+ 
uptake, and therefore have instructive roles in synaptic function and neuronal 
response properties. Mitochondrial morphology differs significantly in the axon 
and dendrites of a given neuronal subtype, but in CA1 pyramidal neurons (PNs) of 
the hippocampus, mitochondria within the dendritic arbor also display a 
remarkable degree of subcellular, layer-specific compartmentalization. In the 
dendrites of these neurons, mitochondria morphology ranges from highly fused and 
elongated in the apical tuft, to more fragmented in the apical oblique and basal 
dendritic compartments, and thus occupy a smaller fraction of dendritic volume 
than in the apical tuft. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this 
striking degree of subcellular compartmentalization of mitochondria morphology 
are unknown, precluding the assessment of its impact on neuronal function. Here, 
we demonstrate that this compartment-specific morphology of dendritic 
mitochondria requires activity-dependent, Camkk2-dependent activation of AMPK 
and its ability to phosphorylate two direct effectors: the pro-fission Drp1 
receptor Mff and the recently identified anti-fusion, Opa1-inhibiting protein, 
Mtfr1l. Our study uncovers a new activity-dependent molecular mechanism 
underlying the extreme subcellular compartmentalization of mitochondrial 
morphology in dendrites of neurons in vivo through spatially precise regulation 
of mitochondria fission/fusion balance.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.03.25.534233
PMCID: PMC10055421
PMID: 36993655