1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Mar 23:2023.03.23.533958. doi: 
10.1101/2023.03.23.533958.

An intracellular phosphorus-starvation signal activates the PhoB/PhoR 
two-component system in Salmonella enterica.

Bruna RE(1), Kendra CG(1), Pontes MH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Pennsylvania State College 
of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State College of 
Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, United States of America.

Update in
    mBio. 2024 Sep 11;15(9):e0164224. doi: 10.1128/mbio.01642-24.

Bacteria acquire P primarily as inorganic orthophosphate (Pi, PO43-). Once 
internalized, Pi is rapidly assimilated into biomass during the synthesis of 
ATP. Because Pi is essential, but excessive ATP is toxic, the acquisition of 
environmental Pi is tightly regulated. In the bacterium Salmonella enterica 
(Salmonella), growth in Pi-limiting environments activates the membrane sensor 
histidine kinase PhoR, leading to the phosphorylation of its cognate 
transcriptional regulator PhoB and subsequent transcription of genes involved in 
adaptations to low Pi. Pi limitation is thought to promote PhoR kinase activity 
by altering the conformation of a membrane signaling complex comprised by PhoR, 
the multicomponent Pi transporter system PstSACB and the regulatory protein 
PhoU. However, the identity of the low Pi signal and how it controls PhoR 
activity remain unknown. Here we characterize the PhoB-dependent and independent 
transcriptional changes elicited by Salmonella in response to P starvation, and 
identify PhoB-independent genes that are required for the utilization of several 
organic-P sources. We use this knowledge to identify the cellular compartment 
where the PhoR signaling complex senses the Pi-limiting signal. We demonstrate 
that the PhoB and PhoR signal transduction proteins can be maintained in an 
inactive state even when Salmonella is grown in media lacking Pi. Our results 
establish that PhoR activity is controlled by an intracellular signal resulting 
from P insufficiency.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.03.23.533958
PMCID: PMC10055408
PMID: 36993483