1. Front Oncol. 2023 Mar 14;13:1134151. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1134151.
eCollection  2023.

Response to selpercatinib in a patient with RET fusion-positive pulmonary 
large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma: A case report.

Arora A(1), Zaemes J(2), Ozdemirli M(3), Kim C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, MedStar Washington Hospital Center, Washington, DC, 
United States.
(2)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, 
United States.
(3)Department of Pathology, MedStar Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, 
DC, United States.

Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) is a rare subtype of non-small-cell 
lung cancer associated with a poor prognosis. LCNEC is genetically 
heterogeneous, and studies have revealed distinct molecular subtypes of LCNEC, 
which may have therapeutic implications. Herein, we present a case of a patient 
with stage IV LCNEC harboring a KIF5B-RET fusion whose disease responded to the 
selective RET inhibitor selpercatinib both extra- and intra-cranially, 
highlighting the importance of comprehensive molecular testing in LCNEC for 
selection of optimal treatment.

Copyright Â© 2023 Arora, Zaemes, Ozdemirli and Kim.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1134151
PMCID: PMC10046803
PMID: 36998440

Conflict of interest statement: CK served as a consultant or advisory board 
member for Novartis, Janssen, AstraZeneca, Sanofi, PierianDx, Diffuse 
Pharmaceuticals, Mirati, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Arcus Biosciences, Daiichi 
Sankyo, and Eisai, and received research funding to institution from 
AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Genentech, Janssen, Regeneron, 
Debiopharm, Karyopharm, and Daiichi Sankyo. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.