1. Viruses. 2023 Feb 28;15(3):644. doi: 10.3390/v15030644.

Genetic Diversity of Norovirus in Children with Acute Gastroenteritis in 
Southwest Nigeria, 2015-2017.

Arowolo KO(1)(2), Ayolabi CI(1), Adeleye IA(1), Lapinski BA(2), Santos JS(2), 
Raboni SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Lagos, Lagos 100213, Nigeria.
(2)Virology Laboratory, Infectious Diseases Division, Complexo Hospital de 
Clinicas, Universidade Federal do Paran√°, Curitiba 80060-900, PR, Brazil.

Norovirus (NoV) is a leading cause of viral gastroenteritis globally, especially 
in children below five years. Epidemiological studies on the diversity of NoV in 
middle- and low-income countries, including Nigeria, are limited. This study 
aimed to determine the genetic diversity of NoV in children below five years 
with acute gastroenteritis at three hospitals in Ogun State, Nigeria. A total of 
331 fecal samples were collected from February 2015 to April 2017, while 175 
were randomly selected and analyzed using RT-PCR, partial sequencing and 
phylogenetic analyses of both the polymerase (RdRp) and capsid (VP1) genes. NoV 
was detected in 5.1% (9/175; RdRp) and 2.3% (4/175; VP1) of samples, with 55.6% 
(5/9) co-infection with other enteric viruses. A diverse genotype distribution 
was identified, and GII.P4 was the dominant RdRp genotype detected (66.7%), with 
two genetic clusters, followed by GII.P31 (22.2%). The rare GII.P30 genotype 
(11.1%) was detected at a low rate for the first time in Nigeria. Based on the 
VP1 gene, GII.4 was the dominant genotype (75%), with two variants, Sydney 2012 
and possibly New Orleans 2009, co-circulating during the study. Interestingly, 
both intergenotypic, GII.12(P4) and GII.4 New Orleans(P31), and intra-genotypic, 
GII.4 Sydney(P4) and GII.4 New Orleans(P4), putative recombinant strains were 
observed. This finding suggests the first likely report of GII.4 New 
Orleans(P31) in Nigeria. In addition, GII.12(P4) was first described in Africa 
and globally in this study, to the best of our knowledge. This study provided 
insights into the genetic diversity of NoV circulating in Nigeria, which would 
be useful for ongoing and future vaccine design and monitoring of emerging 
genotypes and recombinant strains.

DOI: 10.3390/v15030644
PMCID: PMC10056664
PMID: 36992354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.