1. PLoS One. 2023 Mar 30;18(3):e0283804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0283804. 
eCollection 2023.

Prevalence of SARS-COV-2 and other respiratory pathogens among a Jordanian 
subpopulation during Delta-to-Omicron transition: Winter 2021/2022.

Khasawneh AI(1), Himsawi NM(1), Abu-Raideh JA(1), Sammour A(2), Abu Safieh H(1), 
Obeidat A(3), Azab M(1), Tarifi AA(4), Al Khawaldeh A(1), Al-Momani H(1), Al 
Shboul S(5), Saleh T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pathology, and Forensic Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, The Hashemite University, Zarqa, Jordan.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Physiology, and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, The 
Hashemite University, Zarqa, Jordan.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Irbid Specialty Hospital, Irbid, Jordan.
(4)Department of Specialized Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, The Hashemite 
University, Zarqa, Jordan.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, The 
Hashemite University, Zarqa, Jordan.

Acute respiratory tract infections (ARTIs) during the winter months are 
associated with higher morbidity and mortality compared to other seasons of the 
year, with children below five, elderly, and immunocompromised patients being 
the most susceptible. Influenza A and B viruses, rhinovirus, coronaviruses, 
respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, and parainfluenza viruses, are the most 
frequently identified causes of viral ARTIs. In addition, the emergence of 
SARS-CoV-2 in 2019 provided an additional viral cause of ARTIs. The aim of this 
study was to provide an overview of the epidemiological status of upper 
respiratory infections, their main causative agents, and reported clinical 
presentation in the winter months of 2021, during two important surges of 
COVID-19 in Jordan. Nasopharyngeal samples were collected from 339 symptomatic 
patients during the period from December 2021 to March 2022, followed by nucleic 
acid isolation using a Viral RNA/DNA extraction Kit. The causative virus species 
associated with the patient's respiratory symptoms was determined utilizing a 
multiplex real-time PCR targeting 21 viruses, 11 bacteria, and a single fungus. 
SARS-CoV-2 was identified in 39.2% of the patients (n = 133/339). A total of 15 
different pathogens were also identified as co-infections among these 133 
patients (n = 67/133). SARS-CoV-2-Bacterial coinfections (37.6%, n = 50/133) 
were the most frequent, with Bordetella species being the most common, followed 
by Staphylococcus aureus, and H.influenzae type B. Viral coinfection rate was 
27.8% (n = 37/133), with Influenza B virus and Human bocavirus being the most 
common. In Conclusion, Both SARS-CoV-2, influenza B virus, and Bordetella 
accounted for the majority of infections in patients with URTI during the winter 
months of 2021-2022. Interestingly, more than 50% of the patients with symptoms 
of URTIs were confirmed to have a coinfection with two or more respiratory 
pathogens, with SARS-CoV-2 and Bordetella coinfection being most predominant.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Khasawneh et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0283804
PMCID: PMC10062597
PMID: 36996148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.