1. Viruses. 2023 Feb 22;15(3):608. doi: 10.3390/v15030608.

Evaluation of Baculoviruses as Gene Therapy Vectors for Brain Cancer.

Garcia Fallit M(1)(2), Pidre ML(3), Asad AS(1), Peña Agudelo JA(1), Vera MB(4), 
Nicola Candia AJ(1), Sagripanti SB(1), Pérez Kuper M(1), Amorós Morales LC(3), 
Marchesini A(3), Gonzalez N(1), Caruso CM(1), Romanowski V(3), Seilicovich 
A(1)(4), Videla-Richardson GA(5), Zanetti FA(6), Candolfi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas (INBIOMED, UBA-CONICET), Facultad de 
Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones 
Científicas y Técnicas, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires C1121A6B, Argentina.
(2)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, 
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires C1428BFA, 
Argentina.
(3)Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular (IBBM, UNLP-CONICET), 
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata B1900, 
Argentina.
(4)Departamento de Biología Celular e Histología, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires 
C1121A6B, Argentina.
(5)Fundación Para la Lucha Contra las Enfermedades Neurológicas de la Infancia 
(FLENI), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires C1121A6B, Argentina.
(6)Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología ''Dr. Cesar Milstein", CONICET, Saladillo 
2468 (C1440FFX), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires C1428, Argentina.

We aimed to assess the potential of baculoviral vectors (BV) for brain cancer 
gene therapy. We compared them with adenoviral vectors (AdV), which are used in 
neuro-oncology, but for which there is pre-existing immunity. We constructed BVs 
and AdVs encoding fluorescent reporter proteins and evaluated their transduction 
efficiency in glioma cells and astrocytes. Naïve and glioma-bearing mice were 
intracranially injected with BVs to assess transduction and neuropathology. 
Transgene expression was also assessed in the brain of BV-preimmunized mice. 
While the expression of BVs was weaker than AdVs in murine and human glioma cell 
lines, BV-mediated transgene expression in patient-derived glioma cells was 
similar to AdV-mediated transduction and showed strong correlation with clathrin 
expression, a protein that interacts with the baculovirus glycoprotein GP64, 
mediating BV endocytosis. BVs efficiently transduced normal and neoplastic 
astrocytes in vivo, without apparent neurotoxicity. BV-mediated transgene 
expression was stable for at least 21 days in the brain of naïve mice, but it 
was significantly reduced after 7 days in mice systemically preimmunized with 
BVs. Our findings indicate that BVs efficiently transduce glioma cells and 
astrocytes without apparent neurotoxicity. Since humans do not present 
pre-existing immunity against BVs, these vectors may constitute a valuable tool 
for the delivery of therapeutic genes into the brain.

DOI: 10.3390/v15030608
PMCID: PMC10051617
PMID: 36992317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.