1. Viruses. 2023 Feb 24;15(3):622. doi: 10.3390/v15030622.

SIV Infection Regulates Compartmentalization of Circulating Blood Plasma miRNAs 
within Extracellular Vesicles (EVs) and Extracellular Condensates (ECs) and 
Decreases EV-Associated miRNA-128.

Kopcho S(1), McDew-White M(2), Naushad W(3), Mohan M(2), Okeoma CM(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Renaissance School of Medicine, Stony Brook 
University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8651, USA.
(2)Host Pathogen Interaction Program, Southwest National Primate Research 
Center, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX 78227-5302, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, New York Medical 
College, Valhalla, NY 10595-1524, USA.
(4)Lovelace Biomedical Institute, Albuquerque, NM 87108-5127, USA.

Background: This is Manuscript 1 of a two-part Manuscript of the same series. 
Here, we present findings from our first set of studies on the abundance and 
compartmentalization of blood plasma extracellular microRNAs (exmiRNAs) into 
extracellular particles, including blood plasma extracellular vesicles (EVs) and 
extracellular condensates (ECs) in the setting of untreated HIV/SIV infection. 
The goals of the study presented in this Manuscript 1 are to (i) assess the 
abundance and compartmentalization of exmiRNAs in EVs versus ECs in the healthy 
uninfected state, and (ii) evaluate how SIV infection may affect exmiRNA 
abundance and compartmentalization in these particles. Considerable effort has 
been devoted to studying the epigenetic control of viral infection, particularly 
in understanding the role of exmiRNAs as key regulators of viral pathogenesis. 
MicroRNA (miRNAs) are small (~20-22 nts) non-coding RNAs that regulate cellular 
processes through targeted mRNA degradation and/or repression of protein 
translation. Originally associated with the cellular microenvironment, 
circulating miRNAs are now known to be present in various extracellular 
environments, including blood serum and plasma. While in circulation, miRNAs are 
protected from degradation by ribonucleases through their association with lipid 
and protein carriers, such as lipoproteins and other extracellular particles-EVs 
and ECs. Functionally, miRNAs play important roles in diverse biological 
processes and diseases (cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, stress 
responses, inflammation, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, aging, neurological 
diseases, and HIV/SIV pathogenesis). While lipoproteins and EV-associated 
exmiRNAs have been characterized and linked to various disease processes, the 
association of exmiRNAs with ECs is yet to be made. Likewise, the effect of SIV 
infection on the abundance and compartmentalization of exmiRNAs within 
extracellular particles is unclear. Literature in the EV field has suggested 
that most circulating miRNAs may not be associated with EVs. However, a 
systematic analysis of the carriers of exmiRNAs has not been conducted due to 
the inefficient separation of EVs from other extracellular particles, including 
ECs. Methods: Paired EVs and ECs were separated from EDTA blood plasma of 
SIV-uninfected male Indian rhesus macaques (RMs, n = 15). Additionally, paired 
EVs and ECs were isolated from EDTA blood plasma of combination anti-retroviral 
therapy (cART) na√Øve SIV-infected (SIV+, n = 3) RMs at two time points (1- and 
5-months post infection, 1 MPI and 5 MPI). Separation of EVs and ECs was 
achieved with PPLC, a state-of-the-art, innovative technology equipped with 
gradient agarose bead sizes and a fast fraction collector that allows 
high-resolution separation and retrieval of preparative quantities of 
sub-populations of extracellular particles. Global miRNA profiles of the paired 
EVs and ECs were determined with RealSeq Biosciences (Santa Cruz, CA) custom 
sequencing platform by conducting small RNA (sRNA)-seq. The sRNA-seq data were 
analyzed using various bioinformatic tools. Validation of key exmiRNAs was 
performed using specific TaqMan microRNA stem-loop RT-qPCR assays. Results: We 
showed that exmiRNAs in blood plasma are not restricted to any type of 
extracellular particles but are associated with lipid-based carriers-EVs and 
non-lipid-based carriers-ECs, with a significant (~30%) proportion of the 
exmiRNAs being associated with ECs. In the blood plasma of uninfected RMs, a 
total of 315 miRNAs were associated with EVs, while 410 miRNAs were associated 
with ECs. A comparison of detectable miRNAs within paired EVs and ECs revealed 
19 and 114 common miRNAs, respectively, detected in all 15 RMs. Let-7a-5p, 
Let-7c-5p, miR-26a-5p, miR-191-5p, and let-7f-5p were among the top 5 detectable 
miRNAs associated with EVs in that order. In ECs, miR-16-5p, miR-451, 
miR-191-5p, miR-27a-3p, and miR-27b-3p, in that order, were the top detectable 
miRNAs in ECs. miRNA-target enrichment analysis of the top 10 detected common EV 
and EC miRNAs identified MYC and TNPO1 as top target genes, respectively. 
Functional enrichment analysis of top EV- and EC-associated miRNAs identified 
common and distinct gene-network signatures associated with various biological 
and disease processes. Top EV-associated miRNAs were implicated in 
cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, Th17 cell differentiation, IL-17 
signaling, inflammatory bowel disease, and glioma. On the other hand, top 
EC-associated miRNAs were implicated in lipid and atherosclerosis, Th1 and Th2 
cell differentiation, Th17 cell differentiation, and glioma. Interestingly, 
infection of RMs with SIV revealed that the brain-enriched miR-128-3p was 
longitudinally and significantly downregulated in EVs, but not ECs. This 
SIV-mediated decrease in miR-128-3p counts was validated by specific TaqMan 
microRNA stem-loop RT-qPCR assay. Remarkably, the observed SIV-mediated decrease 
in miR-128-3p levels in EVs from RMs agrees with publicly available EV miRNAome 
data by Kaddour et al., 2021, which showed that miR-128-3p levels were 
significantly lower in semen-derived EVs from HIV-infected men who used or did 
not use cocaine compared to HIV-uninfected individuals. These findings confirmed 
our previously reported finding and suggested that miR-128 may be a target of 
HIV/SIV. Conclusions: In the present study, we used sRNA sequencing to provide a 
holistic understanding of the repertoire of circulating exmiRNAs and their 
association with extracellular particles, such as EVs and ECs. Our data also 
showed that SIV infection altered the profile of the miRNAome of EVs and 
revealed that miR-128-3p may be a potential target of HIV/SIV. The significant 
decrease in miR-128-3p in HIV-infected humans and in SIV-infected RMs may 
indicate disease progression. Our study has important implications for the 
development of biomarker approaches for various types of cancer, cardiovascular 
diseases, organ injury, and HIV based on the capture and analysis of circulating 
exmiRNAs.

DOI: 10.3390/v15030622
PMCID: PMC10059597
PMID: 36992331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no biomedical financial 
interests or potential conflicts of interest.