1. Viruses. 2023 Feb 28;15(3):651. doi: 10.3390/v15030651.

IL-8 Secreted by Gastric Epithelial Cells Infected with Helicobacter pylori CagA 
Positive Strains Is a Chemoattractant for Epstein-Barr Virus Infected B 
Lymphocytes.

Domínguez-Martínez DA(1), Fontes-Lemus JI(1), García-Regalado A(1), 
Juárez-Flores Á(1)(2), Fuentes-Pananá EM(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit on Virology and Cancer, Children's Hospital of Mexico Federico 
Gómez, Mexico City 06720, Mexico.
(2)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Inmunoquímica, Hospital de Especialidades, 
Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Ciudad 
de México 06720, Mexico.

Helicobacter pylori and EBV are considered the main risk factors in developing 
gastric cancer. Both pathogens establish life-lasting infections and both are 
considered carcinogenic in humans. Different lines of evidence support that both 
pathogens cooperate to damage the gastric mucosa. Helicobacter pylori CagA 
positive virulent strains induce the gastric epithelial cells to secrete IL-8, 
which is a potent chemoattractant for neutrophils and one of the most important 
chemokines for the bacterium-induced chronic gastric inflammation. EBV is a 
lymphotropic virus that persists in memory B cells. The mechanism by which EBV 
reaches, infects and persists in the gastric epithelium is not presently 
understood. In this study, we assessed whether Helicobacter pylori infection 
would facilitate the chemoattraction of EBV-infected B lymphocytes. We 
identified IL-8 as a powerful chemoattractant for EBV-infected B lymphocytes, 
and CXCR2 as the main IL-8 receptor whose expression is induced by the EBV in 
infected B lymphocytes. The inhibition of expression and/or function of IL-8 and 
CXCR2 reduced the ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK signaling and the chemoattraction of 
EBV-infected B lymphocytes. We propose that IL-8 at least partially explains the 
arrival of EBV-infected B lymphocytes to the gastric mucosa, and that this 
illustrates a mechanism of interaction between Helicobacter pylori and EBV.

DOI: 10.3390/v15030651
PMCID: PMC10054738
PMID: 36992360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.