1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Mar 24:2023.03.23.533993. doi: 
10.1101/2023.03.23.533993.

Mapping the neutralizing specificity of human anti-HIV serum by deep mutational 
scanning.

Radford CE(1)(2), Schommers P(3)(4)(5), Gieselmann L(3)(4)(5), Crawford 
KHD(2)(6), Dadonaite B(2), Yu TC(1)(2), Dingens AS(2), Overbaugh J(7), Klein 
F(3)(4)(5), Bloom JD(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program, University of Washington, 
and Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutch Cancer Center, Seattle, Washington, 
98109, USA.
(2)Basic Sciences Division and Computational Biology Program, Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Center, Seattle, Washington, 98109, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, Institute of Virology, Faculty of 
Medicine and University Hospital of Cologne, University of Cologne, 50931 
Cologne, Germany.
(4)German Center for Infection Research, partner site Bonn-Cologne, 50931 
Cologne, Germany.
(5)Department I of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and University 
Hospital of Cologne, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.
(6)Department of Genome Sciences & Medical Scientist Training Program, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98109, USA.
(7)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, 
Washington, 98109, USA.
(8)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.

Update in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2023 Jul 12;31(7):1200-1215.e9. doi: 
10.1016/j.chom.2023.05.025.

Understanding the specificities of human serum antibodies that broadly 
neutralize HIV can inform prevention and treatment strategies. Here we describe 
a deep mutational scanning system that can measure the effects of combinations 
of mutations to HIV envelope (Env) on neutralization by antibodies and 
polyclonal serum. We first show that this system can accurately map how all 
functionally tolerated mutations to Env affect neutralization by monoclonal 
antibodies. We then comprehensively map Env mutations that affect neutralization 
by a set of human polyclonal sera known to target the CD4-binding site that 
neutralize diverse strains of HIV. The neutralizing activities of these sera 
target different epitopes, with most sera having specificities reminiscent of 
individual characterized monoclonal antibodies, but one sera targeting two 
epitopes within the CD4 binding site. Mapping the specificity of the 
neutralizing activity in polyclonal human serum will aid in assessing anti-HIV 
immune responses to inform prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.03.23.533993
PMCID: PMC10055425
PMID: 36993197

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests JDB is on the scientific 
advisory boards of Apriori Bio, Invivyd, Aerium Therapeutics, and the Vaccine 
Company. JDB, KHDC, BD, ASD, and CER receive royalty payments as inventors on 
Fred Hutch licensed patents related to viral deep mutational scanning. ASD is 
currently an employee of Apriori Bio, though his contributions to this 
manuscript were performed when he was an employee of the Fred Hutch before he 
started work at Apriori Bio. A patent application encompassing aspects of this 
work has been filed by the University of Cologne and lists P.S. and F.K. as 
inventors. P.S., and F.K. received payments from the University of Cologne for 
licensed antibodies.