1. J Clin Transl Sci. 2023 Feb 3;7(1):e60. doi: 10.1017/cts.2023.11. eCollection 
2023.

Preventing monkeypox outbreaks: Focus on diagnosis, care, treatment, and 
vaccination.

Ghaseminia M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology & Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University 
of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

The first human case of monkeypox virus (Mpox) was reported in 1970. In the 
years after 1970, human infection with Mpox and human-to-human transmission was 
not widely observed, and more cases were seen in endemic areas. In that year, 
Mpox spread was confirmed through the export of infected animals to other parts 
of the world. Every few years, sporadic infections were reported in different 
parts of the world from human contamination and human-to-human transmission. In 
recent years, with the slow decline of the COVID-19 pandemic, the outbreak of 
Mpox was observed in many countries of the world. To deal with the spread of 
this viral infection, we need to know the ways to diagnose the infection, treat 
the infection, care for the patients, and implement a wide program of 
vaccination. Currently, there are no specific drugs available for this virus, 
but according to previous studies related to smallpox, drugs such as 
tecovirimat, cidofovir, and brincidofovir, which were used for smallpox and 
other orthopoxviruses in the past, can be considered to deal with Mpox. Also, 
some vaccines such as JYNNEOS, IMVAMUNE, and MoVIHvax that have been used 
against smallpox can be useful to some extent in preventing Mpox.

Â© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1017/cts.2023.11
PMCID: PMC10052442
PMID: 37008622

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.