1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2023 Mar;73(3). doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.005810.

Roseomonas fluvialis sp. nov., an aerobic bacteriochlorophyll a-containing 
freshwater bacterium isolated from river epilithic biofilm.

Hirose S(1), Asano T(2), Hamada M(2), Morohoshi S(3), Kunihiro T(3), Hanada 
S(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1, 
Minami-Osawa, Hachioji, Tokyo, 192-0397, Japan.
(2)NITE Biological Resource Center (NBRC), National Institute of Technology and 
Evaluation (NITE), 2-5-8, Kazusakamatari, Kisarazu, Chiba, 292-0818, Japan.
(3)TechnoSuruga Laboratory Co. Ltd, 388-1 Nagasaki, Shimizu-ku, Shizuoka-shi, 
Shizuoka, 424-0065, Japan.
(4)Bioproduction Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial 
Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1, Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8566, 
Japan.

A strictly aerobic bacteriochlorophyll a-containing alphaproteobacterium, 
designated strain S08T, was isolated from a biofilm sampled at Tama River in 
Japan. The non-motile and rod-shaped cells formed pink-beige pigmented colonies 
on agar plates containing organic compounds and showed in vivo absorption maxima 
at 798 and 866 nm in the near-infrared region, typical for the presence of 
bacteriochlorophyll a. The new bacterial isolate is Gram-negative, 
oxidase-negative and catalase-positive. Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA 
gene sequences showed that strain S08T was closely related to species in the 
genus Roseomonas. The closest phylogenetic relative of strain S08T was 
Roseomonas lacus TH-G33T (98.2 % sequence similarity). The major cellular fatty 
acids were C16 : 0, C18 : 1 2-OH and summed feature 8 (C18 : 1  ω7c/C18 : 1 
 ω6c). The predominant respiratory quinone was ubiquinone-9. The major polar 
lipids contained diphosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidylglycerol, 
phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylcholine and an aminolipid. The G+C content 
of the genomic DNA was 70.6 mol%. The average nucleotide identity and digital 
DNA-DNA hybridization values between strain S08T and the related Roseomonas type 
strains were all far lower than the cut-off value for the delineation of 
species. The results of polyphasic comparisons showed that strain S08T was 
clearly distinguishable from other members of the genus Roseomonas. Therefore, 
we propose a new species in the genus Roseomonas, namely, Roseomonas fluvialis 
sp. nov. The type strain is S08T (=DSM 111902T=NBRC 112025T).

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.005810
PMID: 37009860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]