1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Mar 31;102(13):e33346. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000033346.

Multiple bioinformatics analysis identifies IGFBP1 as associated with the 
prognosis of stomach adenocarcinoma.

Luo XY(1), Zhang YP(2), Zheng F(1), Zhou L(3).

Author information:
(1)Surgical Department I, Hangzhou Lin'an TCM Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hangzhou Lin'an TCM Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.
(3)Surgical Department II, Hangzhou Lin'an TCM Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.

This study aimed to screen the hub gene for predicting the prognosis of patients 
with stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD). The RNA-sequencing expression data and 
clinical data of STAD were collected from the cancer genome atlas. The R package 
"limma" was performed to ascertain the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) 
between the relapse group and non-relapse group, and the DEGs between the 
survival dead status group and survival alive status group were screened. The 
overlapping genes between 2 DEGs sets were identified by the Venn diagram. Many 
different bioinformatics analysis methods were performed to analyze the 
importance of hub genes. One gene signature, IGFBP1, was extracted. The KM plot 
indicated that STAD patients with low IGFBP1 mRNA expression have a shorter 
overall survival time. The top 100 co-expression genes of IGFBP1 were mainly 
enriched in complement and coagulation cascades, epithelial cell signaling in 
Helicobacter pylori infection, and Wnt signaling pathway. Immune infiltration 
analysis indicated IGFBP1 may inhibit immune cell infiltration in tumors by 
infiltration and immune escape, leading to tumor metastasis and progression. The 
bioinformatics analysis results indicate that IGFBP1 can be used as a tool to 
evaluate the mortality risk of patients with STAD.

Copyright Â© 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000033346
PMCID: PMC10063289
PMID: 37000073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.