1. Front Immunol. 2023 Mar 15;14:1142394. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1142394. 
eCollection 2023.

Heterologous prime-boost immunisation with mRNA- and AdC68-based 2019-nCoV 
variant vaccines induces broad-spectrum immune responses in mice.

Li X(1), Liu J(1)(2), Li W(1), Peng Q(1), Li M(1), Ying Z(3), Zhang Z(1), Liu 
X(1), Wu X(1), Zhao D(1), Yang L(1), Cao S(1), Huang Y(1), Shi L(1), Xu H(1), 
Wang Y(1), Yue G(1), Suo Y(1), Nie J(4), Huang W(4), Li J(1), Li Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Arboviral Vaccine, National Institutes for Food and Drug 
Control, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu, 
China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Virus Vaccine, National Institutes for Food and 
Drug Control, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of HIV/AIDS and Sex-transmitted Virus Vaccines, National 
Institutes for Food and Drug Control, Beijing, China.

The ongoing evolution of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2 or 2019-nCoV) variants has been associated with the transmission and 
pathogenicity of COVID-19. Therefore, exploring the optimal immunisation 
strategy to improve the broad-spectrum cross-protection ability of COVID-19 
vaccines is of great significance. Herein, we assessed different heterologous 
prime-boost strategies with chimpanzee adenovirus vector-based COVID-19 vaccines 
plus Wuhan-Hu-1 (WH-1) strain (AdW) and Beta variant (AdB) and mRNA-based 
COVID-19 vaccines plus WH-1 strain (ARW) and Omicron (B.1.1.529) variant (ARO) 
in 6-week-old female BALB/c mice. AdW and AdB were administered intramuscularly 
or intranasally, while ARW and ARO were administered intramuscularly. Intranasal 
or intramuscular vaccination with AdB followed by ARO booster exhibited the 
highest levels of cross-reactive IgG, pseudovirus-neutralising antibody (PNAb) 
responses, and angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2)-binding inhibition rates 
against different 2019-nCoV variants among all vaccination groups. Moreover, 
intranasal AdB vaccination followed by ARO induced higher levels of IgA and 
neutralising antibody responses against live 2019-nCoV than intramuscular AdB 
vaccination followed by ARO. A single dose of AdB administered intranasally or 
intramuscularly induced broader cross-NAb responses than AdW. Th1-biased 
cellular immune response was induced in all vaccination groups. Intramuscular 
vaccination-only groups exhibited higher levels of Th1 cytokines than intranasal 
vaccination-only and intranasal vaccination-containing groups. However, no 
obvious differences were found in the levels of Th2 cytokines between the 
control and all vaccination groups. Our findings provide a basis for exploring 
vaccination strategies against different 2019-nCoV variants to achieve high 
broad-spectrum immune efficacy.

Copyright Â© 2023 Li, Liu, Li, Peng, Li, Ying, Zhang, Liu, Wu, Zhao, Yang, Cao, 
Huang, Shi, Xu, Wang, Yue, Suo, Nie, Huang, Li and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1142394
PMCID: PMC10050358
PMID: 37006275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.