1. J Med Chem. 2023 Apr 13;66(7):4588-4602. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c01448.
Epub  2023 Apr 3.

Expanding the Paradigm of Structure-Based Drug Design: Molecular Dynamics 
Simulations Support the Development of New Pyridine-Based Protein Kinase 
C-Targeted Agonists.

Lautala S(1), Provenzani R(2), Tarvainen I(3), Sirna K(2), Karhu ST(3), 
Grazhdankin E(2), Lehtinen AK(2), Sa'd H(1)(4), Koivuniemi A(1), Xhaard H(2), 
Tuominen RK(3), Talman V(3), Bunker A(1), Yli-Kauhaluoma J(2).

Author information:
(1)Drug Research Program, Division of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, University of 
Helsinki, P.O. Box 56 (Viikinkaari 5 E), FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Drug Research Program, Division of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology, 
University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 56 (Viikinkaari 5 E), FI-00014 Helsinki, 
Finland.
(3)Drug Research Program, Division of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy, 
University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 56 (Viikinkaari 5 E), FI-00014 Helsinki, 
Finland.
(4)School of Pharmacy, The University of Jordan, Queen Rania Street, 11942 
Amman, Jordan.

Protein kinase C (PKC) modulators hold therapeutic potential for various 
diseases, including cancer, heart failure, and Alzheimer's disease. Targeting 
the C1 domain of PKC represents a promising strategy; the available protein 
structures warrant the design of PKC-targeted ligands via a structure-based 
approach. However, the PKC C1 domain penetrates the lipid membrane during 
binding, complicating the design of drug candidates. The standard 
docking-scoring approach for PKC lacks information regarding the dynamics and 
the membrane environment. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with PKC, ligands, 
and membranes have been used to address these shortcomings. Previously, we 
observed that less computationally intensive simulations of just ligand-membrane 
interactions may help elucidate C1 domain-binding prospects. Here, we present 
the design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of new pyridine-based PKC 
agonists implementing an enhanced workflow with ligand-membrane MD simulations. 
This workflow holds promise to expand the approach in drug design for ligands 
targeted to weakly membrane-associated proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c01448
PMCID: PMC10108360
PMID: 37010933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.