1. J Med Chem. 2023 Apr 27;66(8):5873-5891. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.3c00149.
Epub  2023 Apr 3.

2-Aminobenzoxazole Derivatives as Potent Inhibitors of the 
Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Transporter Spinster Homolog 2 (Spns2).

Burgio AL(1), Shrader CW(1), Kharel Y(2), Huang T(2), Salamoun JM(1), Lynch 
KR(2), Santos WL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Virginia Tech Center for Drug Discovery, Virginia 
Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
22908, United States.

The S1P1 receptor is the target of four marketed drugs for the treatment of 
multiple sclerosis and ulcerative colitis. Targeting an S1P exporter, 
specifically Spns2, that is "upstream" of S1P receptor engagement is an 
alternate strategy that might recapitulate the efficacy of S1P receptor 
modulators without cardiac toxicity. We recently reported the first Spns2 
inhibitor SLF1081851 (16d) that has modest potency with in vivo activity. To 
develop more potent compounds, we initiated a structure-activity relationship 
study that identified 2-aminobenzoxazole as a viable scaffold. Our studies 
revealed SLB1122168 (33p), which is a potent inhibitor (IC50 = 94 Â± 6 nM) of 
Spns2-mediated S1P release. Administration of 33p to mice and rats resulted in a 
dose-dependent decrease in circulating lymphocytes, a pharmacodynamic indication 
of Spns2 inhibition. 33p provides a valuable tool compound to explore both the 
therapeutic potential of targeting Spns2 and the physiologic consequences of 
selective S1P export inhibition.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.3c00149
PMCID: PMC10167756
PMID: 37010497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]