1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Jul;191(7):1929-1934. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63200. Epub 
2023 Apr 5.

Expanding the phenotype of Seckel syndrome associated with biallelic 
loss-of-function variants in CEP63.

Pekkola Pacheco N(1), Pettersson M(1)(2), Lindstrand A(1)(2), Grigelioniene 
G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Seckel syndrome is an ultrarare autosomal recessive genetically heterogenous 
condition characterized by intrauterine and postnatal growth restriction, 
proportionate severe short stature, severe microcephaly, intellectual 
disability, and distinctive facial features including a prominent nose. Up to 
now, 40 patients with molecularly confirmed Seckel syndrome have been reported 
with biallelic variants in nine genes: ATR, CENPJ, CEP63, CEP152, DNA2, NIN, 
NSMCE2, RBBP8, and TRAIP. Homozygosity for nonsense variant (c.129G>A, p.43*) in 
CEP63 was described in three cousins with microcephaly, short stature, mild to 
moderate intellectual disability and diagnoses of Seckel syndrome. Here, we 
report a second family with three siblings who are compound heterozygous for 
loss-of-function variants in CEP63, c.1125T>G, p.(Tyr375*) and c.595del, 
p.(Glu199Asnfs*11). All siblings present with microcephaly, prominent nose, and 
intellectual disability but only one has severe short stature. Two siblings have 
aggressive behavior, a feature previously not reported in Seckel syndrome. This 
report adds two novel truncating variants in CEP63 and extends the clinical 
knowledge on CEP63-related conditions.

Â© 2023 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63200
PMID: 37017437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]