1. PLoS Biol. 2023 Apr 3;21(4):e3002073. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002073. 
eCollection 2023 Apr.

Activation of actin-depolymerizing factor by CDPK16-mediated phosphorylation 
promotes actin turnover in Arabidopsis pollen tubes.

Wang Q(1), Xu Y(1), Zhao S(2)(3), Jiang Y(1), Yi R(1), Guo Y(2), Huang S(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Plant Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, 
Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of 
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Plant Stress, Life Science College, Shandong Normal 
University, Jinan, China.

As the stimulus-responsive mediator of actin dynamics, actin-depolymerizing 
factor (ADF)/cofilin is subject to tight regulation. It is well known that 
kinase-mediated phosphorylation inactivates ADF/cofilin. Here, however, we found 
that the activity of Arabidopsis ADF7 is enhanced by CDPK16-mediated 
phosphorylation. We found that CDPK16 interacts with ADF7 both in vitro and in 
vivo, and it enhances ADF7-mediated actin depolymerization and severing in vitro 
in a calcium-dependent manner. Accordingly, the rate of actin turnover is 
reduced in cdpk16 pollen and the amount of actin filaments increases 
significantly at the tip of cdpk16 pollen tubes. CDPK16 phosphorylates ADF7 at 
Serine128 both in vitro and in vivo, and the phospho-mimetic mutant ADF7S128D 
has enhanced actin-depolymerizing activity compared to ADF7. Strikingly, we 
found that failure in the phosphorylation of ADF7 at Ser128 impairs its function 
in promoting actin turnover in vivo, which suggests that this phospho-regulation 
mechanism is biologically significant. Thus, we reveal that CDPK16-mediated 
phosphorylation up-regulates ADF7 to promote actin turnover in pollen.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Wang et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002073
PMCID: PMC10101649
PMID: 37011088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.