1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2023 Aug;24(8):849-865. doi: 10.1111/mpp.13331. Epub 2023
Apr  7.

BcTaf14 regulates growth and development, virulence, and stress responses in the 
phytopathogenic fungus Botrytis cinerea.

Han H(1), Lv F(1), Liu Z(1), Chen T(1), Xue T(1), Liang W(1), Liu M(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, 
Qingdao, 266109, China.

TATA box-binding protein (TBP)-associated factor 14 (Taf14), a 
transcription-associated factor containing a conserved YEATS domain and an 
extra-terminal (ET) domain, is a multifunctional protein in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. However, the role of Taf14 in filamentous phytopathogenic fungi is 
not well understood. In this study, the homologue of ScTaf14 in Botrytis cinerea 
(named BcTaf14), a destructive phytopathogen causing grey mould, was 
investigated. The BcTaf14 deletion strain (ΔBcTaf14) showed pleiotropic defects, 
including slow growth, abnormal colony morphology, reduced conidiation, abnormal 
conidial morphology, reduced virulence, and altered responses to various 
stresses. The ΔBcTaf14 strain also exhibited differential expression of numerous 
genes compared to the wild-type strain. BcTaf14 could interact with the 
crotonylated H3K9 peptide, and mutation of two key sites (G80 and W81) in the 
YEATS domain disrupted this interaction. The mutation of G80 and W81 affected 
the regulatory effect of BcTaf14 on mycelial growth and virulence but did not 
affect the production and morphology of conidia. The absence of the ET domain at 
the C-terminus rendered BcTaf14 unable to localize to the nucleus, and the 
defects of ΔBcTaf14 were not recovered to wild-type levels when BcTaf14 without 
the ET domain was expressed. Our results provide insight into the regulatory 
roles of BcTaf14 and its two conserved domains in B. cinerea and will be helpful 
for understanding the function of the Taf14 protein in plant-pathogenic fungi.

© 2023 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology published by British Society for 
Plant Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.13331
PMCID: PMC10346378
PMID: 37026690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial or 
nonfinancial interests.