1. Anim Biotechnol. 2023 Dec;34(9):4828-4836. doi: 10.1080/10495398.2023.2197468.
 Epub 2023 Apr 8.

The effect of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor gene single nucleotide 
polymorphism on growth and milk production traits in two native Indian tropical 
goat breeds.

Alex P(1), Kanakkaparambil R(2), Gopalakrishnan R(3), Ramasamy C(4), 
Thazhathuveettil A(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Applied Animal Production and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary 
and Animal Sciences, Kerala Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, Thrissur, 
India.
(2)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary and Animal 
Sciences, Kerala Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, Wayanad, India.
(3)Department of Animal Breeding, Genetics and Biostatistics, College of 
Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Thrissur, India.
(4)Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Veterinary College and Research 
Institute, Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, Salem, India.

Insulin like growth factor1(IGF-1) is an essential growth factor that mediates 
the growth-promoting functions of pituitary growth hormone. Insulin like growth 
factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) is a tyrosine kinase receptor that mediates the 
actions of IGF1. Therefore, IGF1R is a candidate gene for examining SNPs linked 
with growth and production traits. The objective of this study was to detect the 
c.546 + 179170A > T transversion in intron 2 of the gene encoding IGF1R in two 
goat breeds, Attappady Black and Malabari, and examine the association of this 
polymorphism with growth and milk production. For the identification of the SNP, 
the T-ARMS-PCR was utilized. All three genotypes were present in the two 
investigated breeds. The polymorphism was found to be significantly (p < 0.05) 
linked with growth traits. At birth, 3 and 6 months of age, Attappady goats with 
the AT genotype had significantly (p < 0.05) higher body weights than those with 
the AA and TT genotypes. Malabari goats with the AT genotype had significantly 
(p < 0.05) higher body weights at birth and at 3 months of age. The genotypes of 
the IGF1R gene had no effect on total or peak milk production. Therefore, this 
SNP could be used as a molecular marker in selection of meat-producing goat 
breeds.HIGHLIGHTSc.546 + 179170A > T IGF1R transversion was detected using 
T-ARMS-PCR in two indigenous goat breeds from Kerala.Attappady Black and 
Malabari goat breeds of Kerala possessed all the three genotypesIn these breeds, 
there was a significant correlation between this SNP, c.546 + 179170A > T IGF1R, 
and body weight.In both the breeds, there was no association between this SNP 
and milk production traits.

DOI: 10.1080/10495398.2023.2197468
PMID: 37029727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]