1. Genomics Inform. 2023 Mar;21(1):e8. doi: 10.5808/gi.22072. Epub 2023 Mar 31.

Prognostic biomarkers and molecular pathways mediating Helicobacter 
pylori-induced gastric cancer: a network-biology approach.

Kamarehei F(1), Saidijam M(2), Taherkhani A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Hamadan University of 
Medical Sciences, Hamadan 6517838678, Iran.
(2)Research Center for Molecular Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical 
Sciences, Hamadan 6517838678, Iran.

Cancer of the stomach is the second most frequent cancer-related death 
worldwide. The survival rate of patients with gastric cancer (GC) remains 
fragile. There is a requirement to discover biomarkers for prognosis approaches. 
Helicobacter pylori in the stomach is closely associated with the progression of 
GC. We identified the genes associated with poor/favorable prognosis in H. 
pylori-induced GC. Multivariate statistical analysis was applied on the Gene 
Expression Omnibus (GEO) dataset GSE54397 to identify differentially expressed 
miRNAs (DEMs) in gastric tissues with H. pylori-induced cancer compared with the 
H. pylori-positive with non-cancerous tissue. A protein interaction map (PIM) 
was built and subjected to DEMs targets. The enriched pathways and biological 
processes within the PIM were identified based on substantial clusters. 
Thereafter, the most critical genes in the PIM were illustrated, and their 
prognostic impact in GC was investigated. Considering p-value less than 0.01 and 
|Log2 fold change| as >1, five microRNAs demonstrated significant changes among 
the two groups. Gene functional analysis revealed that the ubiquitination 
system, neddylation pathway, and ciliary process are primarily involved in H. 
pylori-induced GC. Survival analysis illustrated that the overexpression of 
DOCK4, GNAS, CTGF, TGF-b1, ESR1, SELE, TIMP3, SMARCE1, and TXNIP was associated 
with poor prognosis, while increased MRPS5 expression was related to a favorable 
prognosis in GC patients. DOCK4, GNAS, CTGF, TGF-b1, ESR1, SELE, TIMP3, SMARCE1, 
TXNIP, and MRPS5 may be considered prognostic biomarkers for H. pylori-induced 
GC. However, experimental validation is necessary in the future.

DOI: 10.5808/gi.22072
PMCID: PMC10085735
PMID: 37037466

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.