1. Front Nutr. 2023 Mar 24;10:1020950. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1020950.
eCollection  2023.

The protective effects of flavonoids and carotenoids against diabetic 
complications-A review of in vivo evidence.

Jin Y(1), Arroo R(2).

Author information:
(1)Leicester School of Allied Health Sciences, Faculty of Health & Life 
Sciences, De Montfort University, Leicester, United Kingdom.
(2)Leicester School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health & Life Sciences, De Montfort 
University, Leicester, United Kingdom.

Diabetes mellitus is a chronic metabolic disorder caused either by inadequate 
insulin secretion, impaired insulin function, or both. Uncontrolled diabetes is 
characterized by hyperglycemia which over time leads to fatal damage to both 
macro-and microvascular systems, causing complications such as cardiovascular 
diseases, retinopathy and nephropathy. Diabetes management is conventionally 
delivered through modifications of diet and lifestyle and pharmacological 
treatment, using antidiabetic drugs, and ultimately insulin injections. However, 
the side effects and financial cost of medications often reduce patient 
compliance to treatment, negatively affecting their health outcomes. Natural 
phytochemicals from edible plants such as fruits and vegetables (F&V) and 
medicinal herbs have drawn a growing interest as potential therapeutic agents 
for treating diabetes and preventing the onset and progression of diabetic 
complications. Flavonoids, the most abundant polyphenols in the human diet, have 
shown antidiabetic effects in numerous in vitro and preclinical studies. The 
underlying mechanisms have been linked to their antioxidant, anti-inflammatory 
and immunomodulatory activities. Carotenoids, another major group of dietary 
phytochemicals, have also shown antidiabetic potential in recent in vitro and in 
vivo experimental models, possibly through a mechanism of action similar to that 
of flavonoids. However, scientific evidence on the efficacy of these 
phytochemicals in treating diabetes or preventing the onset and progression of 
its complications in clinical settings is scarce, which delays the translation 
of animal study evidence to human applications and also limits the knowledge on 
their modes of actions in diabetes management. This review is aimed to highlight 
the potential roles of flavonoids and carotenoids in preventing or ameliorating 
diabetes-related complications based on in vivo study evidence, i.e., an array 
of preclinical animal studies and human intervention trials. The current general 
consensus of the underlying mechanisms of action exerted by both groups of 
phytochemicals is that their anti-inflammatory action is key. However, other 
potential mechanisms of action are considered. In total, 50 in vivo studies were 
selected for a review after a comprehensive database search via PubMed and 
ScienceDirect from January 2002 to August 2022. The key words used for analysis 
are type-2 diabetes (T2DM), diabetic complications, flavonoids, carotenoids, 
antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, mechanisms of prevention and amelioration, 
animal studies and human interventions.

Copyright Â© 2023 Jin and Arroo.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1020950
PMCID: PMC10080163
PMID: 37032781

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.