1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 30;24(7):6524. doi: 10.3390/ijms24076524.

α7- and α9-Containing Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors in the Functioning of 
Immune System and in Pain.

Shelukhina I(1), Siniavin A(1), Kasheverov I(1), Ojomoko L(1), Tsetlin V(1), 
Utkin Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroimmune Signaling, Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov 
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, 117997 Moscow, 
Russia.

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) present as many different subtypes in 
the nervous and immune systems, muscles and on the cells of other organs. In the 
immune system, inflammation is regulated via the vagus nerve through the 
activation of the non-neuronal α7 nAChR subtype, affecting the production of 
cytokines. The analgesic properties of α7 nAChR-selective compounds are mostly 
based on the activation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway. The 
molecular mechanism of neuropathic pain relief mediated by the inhibition of 
α9-containing nAChRs is not fully understood yet, but the role of immune factors 
in this process is becoming evident. To obtain appropriate drugs, a search of 
selective agonists, antagonists and modulators of α7- and α9-containing nAChRs 
is underway. The naturally occurring three-finger snake α-neurotoxins and 
mammalian Ly6/uPAR proteins, as well as neurotoxic peptides α-conotoxins, are 
not only sophisticated tools in research on nAChRs but are also considered as 
potential medicines. In particular, the inhibition of the α9-containing nAChRs 
by α-conotoxins may be a pathway to alleviate neuropathic pain. nAChRs are 
involved in the inflammation processes during AIDS and other viral infections; 
thus they can also be means used in drug design. In this review, we discuss the 
role of α7- and α9-containing nAChRs in the immune processes and in pain.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24076524
PMCID: PMC10095066
PMID: 37047495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.