1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 4;24(7):6731. doi: 10.3390/ijms24076731.

Persistence of Immune Response Elicited by Three Doses of mRNA Vaccine against 
SARS-CoV-2 in a Cohort of Patients with Solid Tumors: A One-Year Follow-Up.

Lasagna A(1), Cassaniti I(2), Arena F(2), Bergami F(2), Percivalle E(2), Comolli 
G(2), Sarasini A(2), Ferrari A(2), Cicognini D(1), Schiavo R(3), Lo Cascio G(3), 
Pedrazzoli P(1)(4), Baldanti F(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 27100 Pavia, 
Italy.
(2)Microbiology and Virology Department, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
(3)Microbiology Unit, Hospital Guglielmo da Saliceto, 29121 Piacenza, Italy.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Therapy, University of Pavia, 
27100 Pavia, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical, Surgical, Diagnostics and Pediatric Sciences, 
University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

The role and durability of the immunogenicity of the BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine 
against severe acute respiratory virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), in cancer patients one 
year after receiving the third dose have to be elucidated. We have prospectively 
evaluated the long-term immunogenicity of the third dose of the SARS-CoV-2 
BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine in 55 patients undergoing active treatment. Neutralizing 
antibody (NT Ab) titers against Omicron variants and total anti-trimeric S IgG 
levels were measured one year after the third dose. Heparinized whole-blood 
samples were used for the assessment of the SARS-CoV-2 interferon-Î³ release 
assay (IGRA). Thirty-seven patients (67.3%) showed positive total anti-trimeric 
S IgG one year after the third dose. Looking at the T-cell response against the 
spike protein, the frequency of responder patients did not decrease 
significantly between six and twelve months after the third dose. Finally, less 
than 20% of cancer patients showed an undetectable NT Ab titer against BA.1 and 
BA.5 variants of concern (VOCs). Underlying therapies seem to not affect the 
magnitude or frequency of the immune response. Our work underlines the 
persistence of humoral and cellular immune responses against BNT162b2 in a 
cohort of cancer patients one year after receiving the third dose, regardless of 
the type of underlying therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24076731
PMCID: PMC10095115
PMID: 37047704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.