1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 30;24(7):6526. doi: 10.3390/ijms24076526.

Photodegradable by Yellow-Orange Light degFusionRed Optogenetic Module with 
Autocatalytically Formed Chromophore.

Chernov KG(1), Manoilov KY(2), Oliinyk OS(1), Shcherbakova DM(2), Verkhusha 
VV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Medicum, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, 
Finland.
(2)Department of Genetics and Gruss-Lipper Biophotonics Center, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Optogenetic systems driven by yellow-orange light are required for the 
simultaneous regulation of several cellular processes. We have engineered the 
red fluorescent protein FusionRed into a 26 kDa monomeric optogenetic module, 
called degFusionRed. Unlike other fluorescent protein-based optogenetic domains, 
which exhibit light-induced self-inactivation by generating reactive oxygen 
species, degFusionRed undergoes proteasomal degradation upon illumination with 
567 nm light. Similarly to the parent protein, degFusionRed has minimal 
absorbance at 450 nm and above 650 nm, making it spectrally compatible with blue 
and near-infrared-light-controlled optogenetic tools. The autocatalytically 
formed chromophore provides degFusionRed with an additional advantage over most 
optogenetic tools that require the binding of the exogenous chromophores, the 
amount of which varies in different cells. The degFusionRed efficiently 
performed in the engineered light-controlled transcription factor and in the 
targeted photodegradation of the protein of interest, demonstrating its 
versatility as the optogenetic module of choice for spectral multiplexed 
interrogation of various cellular processes.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24076526
PMCID: PMC10095432
PMID: 37047499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.