1. Front Physiol. 2023 Mar 28;14:1136561. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1136561. 
eCollection 2023.

Triple-gene deletion for osteocalcin significantly impairs the alignment of 
hydroxyapatite crystals and collagen in mice.

Xu Z(1)(2), Yang C(2), Wu F(2), Tan X(3), Guo Y(2), Zhang H(2), Wang H(2), Sui 
X(2), Xu Z(2), Zhao M(3), Jiang S(1), Dai Z(2), Li Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, 
Harbin, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Space Medicine Fundamentals and Application, China 
Astronaut Research and Training Center, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Pathology and Forensics, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 
China.

Osteocalcin (Ocn), also known as bone Gla protein, is synthesized by osteoblasts 
and thought to regulate energy metabolism, testosterone synthesis and brain 
development. However, its function in bone is not fully understood. Mice have 
three Ocn genes: Bglap, Bglap2 and Bglap3. Due to the long span of these genes 
in the mouse genome and the low expression of Bglap3 in bone, researchers 
commonly use Bglap and Bglap2 knockout mice to investigate the function of Ocn. 
However, it is unclear whether Bglap3 has any compensatory mechanisms when Bglap 
and Bglap2 are knocked out. Considering the controversy surrounding the role of 
Ocn in bone, we constructed an Ocn-deficient mouse model by knocking out all 
three genes (Ocn-/-) and analyzed bone quality by Raman spectroscopy (RS), 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy 
(FTIR) and MicroCT (μCT). The RS test showed that the alignment of 
hydroxyapatite crystals and collagen fibers was significantly poorer in Ocn-/- 
mice than in wild-type (WT) mice. Ocn deficiency resulted in a looser surface 
structure of bone particles and a larger gap area proportion. FTIR analysis 
showed few differences in bone mineral index between WT and Ocn-/- mice, while 
μCT analysis showed no significant difference in cortical and trabecular 
regions. However, under tail-suspension simulating bone loss condition, the 
disorder of hydroxyapatite and collagen fiber alignment in Ocn-/- mice led to 
more obvious changes in bone mineral composition. Collectively, our results 
revealed that Ocn is necessary for regulating the alignment of minerals parallel 
to collagen fibrils.

Copyright © 2023 Xu, Yang, Wu, Tan, Guo, Zhang, Wang, Sui, Xu, Zhao, Jiang, Dai 
and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1136561
PMCID: PMC10089303
PMID: 37057181

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.