1. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2023 Apr 13;23(1):248. doi: 
10.1186/s12884-023-05561-1.

Specific changes and clinical significance of plasma D-dimer during pregnancy 
and puerperium: a prospective study.

Xu Q(#)(1), Dai L(#)(1), Chen HQ(1), Xia W(1), Wang QL(1), Zhu CR(2), Zhou R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Center for Translational Medicine, 
Key Laboratory of Birth Defects and Related Diseases of Women and Children 
(Sichuan University), Ministry of Education, West China Second University 
Hospital, Sichuan University; NHC Key Laboratory of Chronobiology, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, West China School of Public 
Health and West China Fourth Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, 
China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Center for Translational Medicine, 
Key Laboratory of Birth Defects and Related Diseases of Women and Children 
(Sichuan University), Ministry of Education, West China Second University 
Hospital, Sichuan University; NHC Key Laboratory of Chronobiology, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, 610041, China. zhourong_hx@scu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Pregnant and puerperal women are high-risk populations for 
developing venous thromboembolism (VTE). Plasma D-dimer (D-D) is of good value 
in the diagnosis of exclusion of VTE in the nonpregnant population. Since there 
is no consensus reference range of plasma D-D applicable to pregnant and 
puerperal women, the application of plasma D-D is limited. To investigate the 
change characteristics and the reference range of plasma D-D levels during 
pregnancy and puerperium and to explore the pregnancy- and childbirth-related 
factors affecting plasma D-D levels and the diagnostic efficacy of plasma D-D 
for excluding VTE during early puerperium after caesarean section.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study was conducted with 514 pregnant and 
puerperal women (cohort 1), and 29 puerperal women developed VTE 24-48 h after 
caesarean section (cohort 2). In cohort 1, the effects of the pregnancy- and 
childbirth-related factors on the plasma D-D levels were analyzed by comparing 
the differences in plasma D-D levels between different groups and between 
different subgroups. The 95th percentiles were calculated to establish the 
unilateral upper limits of the plasma D-D levels. The plasma D-D levels at 
24-48 h postpartum were compared between normal singleton pregnant and puerperal 
women in cohort 2 and women from the cesarean section subgroup in cohort 1, 
binary logistic analysis was used to analyze the relevance between plasma D-D 
level and the risk of VTE developing 24-48 h after caesarean section, and a 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used to assess the diagnostic 
efficacy of plasma D-D for excluding VTE during early puerperium after caesarean 
section.
RESULTS: The 95% reference ranges of plasma D-D levels in the normal singleton 
pregnancy group were ≤ 1.01 mg/L in the first trimester, ≤ 3.17 mg/L in the 
second trimester, ≤ 5.35 mg/L in the third trimester, ≤ 5.47 mg/L at 24-48 h 
postpartum, and ≤ 0.66 mg/L at 42 days postpartum. The plasma D-D levels of the 
normal twin pregnancy group were significantly higher than those of the normal 
singleton pregnancy group during pregnancy (P < 0.05), the plasma D-D levels of 
the GDM group in the third trimester were significantly higher than those of the 
normal singleton pregnancy group (P < 0.05). The plasma D-D levels of the 
advanced age subgroup at 24-48 h postpartum were significantly higher than those 
of the nonadvanced age subgroup (P < 0.05), and the plasma D-D levels of the 
caesarean section subgroup at 24-48 h postpartum were significantly higher than 
those of the vaginal delivery subgroup (P < 0.05). The plasma D-D level was 
significantly correlated with the risk of VTE developing at 24-48 h after 
caesarean section (OR = 2.252, 95% CI: 1.611-3.149). The optimal cut-off value 
of plasma D-D for the diagnosis of exclusion of VTE during early puerperium 
after caesarean section was 3.24 mg/L. The negative predictive value for the 
diagnosis of exclusion of VTE was 96.1%, and the area under the curve (AUC) was 
0.816, P < 0.001.
CONCLUSIONS: The thresholds of plasma D-D levels in normal singleton pregnancy 
and parturient women were higher than those of nonpregnant women. Plasma D-D had 
good value in the diagnosis of exclusion of VTE occurring during early 
puerperium after caesarean section. Further studies are needed to validate these 
reference ranges and assess the effects of pregnancy- and childbirth-related 
factors on plasma D-D levels and the diagnostic efficacy of plasma D-D for 
excluding VTE during pregnancy and puerperium.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12884-023-05561-1
PMCID: PMC10099697
PMID: 37055718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interest to 
declare.