1. Neural Regen Res. 2023 Oct;18(10):2219-2228. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.369118.

Eph receptor A4 regulates motor neuron ferroptosis in spinal cord 
ischemia/reperfusion injury in rats.

Dong Y(1), Ai C(1), Chen Y(1), Zhang Z(1), Zhang D(1), Liu S(1), Tong X(1), Ma 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, the First Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China.

Previous studies have shown that the receptor tyrosine kinase Eph receptor A4 
(EphA4) is abundantly expressed in the nervous system. The EphA4 signaling 
pathway plays an important role in regulating motor neuron ferroptosis in motor 
neuron disease. To investigate whether EphA4 signaling is involved in 
ferroptosis in spinal cord ischemia/reperfusion injury, in this study we 
established a rat model of spinal cord ischemia/reperfusion injury by clamping 
the left carotid artery and the left subclavian artery. We found that spinal 
cord ischemia/reperfusion injury increased EphA4 expression in the neurons of 
anterior horn, markedly worsened ferroptosis-related indicators, substantially 
increased the number of mitochondria exhibiting features consistent with 
ferroptosis, promoted deterioration of motor nerve function, increased the 
permeability of the blood-spinal cord barrier, and increased the rate of motor 
neuron death. Inhibition of EphA4 largely rescued these effects. However, 
intrathecal administration of the ferroptosis inducer Erastin counteracted the 
beneficial effects conferred by treatment with the EphA4 inhibitor. Mass 
spectrometry and a PubMed search were performed to identify proteins that 
interact with EphA4, with the most notable being Beclin1 and Erk1/2. Our results 
showed that inhibition of EphA4 expression reduced binding to Beclin1, markedly 
reduced p-Beclin1, and reduced Beclin1-XCT complex formation. Inhibition of 
EphA4 also reduced binding to p-Erk1/2 and markedly decreased the expression of 
c-Myc, transferrin receptor 1, and p-Erk1/2. Additionally, we observed 
co-localization of EphA4 and p-Beclin1 and of EphA4 and p-ERK1/2 in neurons in 
the anterior horn. In conclusion, EphA4 participates in regulating ferroptosis 
of spinal motor neurons in the anterior horn in spinal cord ischemia/reperfusion 
injury by promoting formation of the Beclin1-XCT complex and activating the 
Erk1/2/c-Myc/transferrin receptor 1 axis.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.369118
PMCID: PMC10328289
PMID: 37056141

Conflict of interest statement: None