1. Plants (Basel). 2023 Mar 30;12(7):1511. doi: 10.3390/plants12071511.

Genome-Wide Analysis of Aquaporins in Japanese Morning Glory (Ipomoea nil).

Inden T(1), Hoshino A(2)(3), Otagaki S(1), Matsumoto S(1), Shiratake K(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya 
464-8601, Japan.
(2)National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki 444-8585, Japan.
(3)Department of Basic Biology, School of Life Science, SOKENDAI, Okazaki 
444-8585, Japan.

The aquaporin (AQP) family, also called water channels or major intrinsic 
proteins, facilitate water transport. AQPs also transport low-molecular-weight 
solutes, including boric acid, glycerol, urea, and ammonia. Since plants are 
sessile, water homeostasis is crucial. Therefore, plants have developed diverse 
AQP variants at higher expression levels than animals. For example, 35 and 33 
AQPs have been identified in Arabidopsis and rice, respectively. In the present 
study, we identified AQPs in morning glory (Ipomoea nil), which has been widely 
used as a model plant in research on flowering and floral morphology. The 
importance of AQPs in the opening of morning glory flowers has been reported. In 
the morning glory genome, 44 AQPs were identified, and their characteristics 
were analyzed. A phylogenetic analysis revealed five AQP subfamilies in morning 
glory: plasma membrane-intrinsic proteins (PIPs), tonoplast-intrinsic proteins 
(TIPs), nodulin 26-like intrinsic proteins (NIPs), small basic intrinsic 
proteins (SIPs), and X-intrinsic proteins (XIPs). Further, transport substrates 
of morning glory AQPs were estimated based on their homology to the known AQPs 
in other plant species and their corresponding amino acid motifs that possess 
permeability pores. It was expected that PIPs are likely to transport water, 
carbon dioxide, and hydrogen peroxide; TIPs are likely transport water, hydrogen 
peroxide, ammonia, urea, and boric acid; NIPs are likely transport water, boric 
acid, ammonia, glycerol, and formamide; and XIPs are likely to transport water, 
hydrogen peroxide, and glycerol. Overall, these results suggest that AQPs are 
involved in water and nutrient transport in Japanese morning glory. An in silico 
gene expression analysis suggested the importance of AQPs in flower opening, 
water or nutrient uptakes from the soil to roots, and photosynthesis in morning 
glory. Our findings provide fundamental information that enables further study 
into the importance of AQPs in morning glory, including their roles in flower 
opening and other physiological events.

DOI: 10.3390/plants12071511
PMCID: PMC10096635
PMID: 37050139

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.