1. Front Genet. 2023 Feb 1;14:1060504. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1060504.
eCollection  2023.

Clinical usefulness of NGS multi-gene panel testing in hereditary cancer 
analysis.

Anaclerio F(1), Pilenzi L(1), Dell'Elice A(1), Ferrante R(1), Grossi S(2), 
Ferlito LM(2), Marinelli C(2), Gildetti S(2), Calabrese G(3), Stuppia L(1), 
Antonucci I(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Studies and Technology (CAST), G.d'Annunzio University of 
Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
(2)Eusoma Breast Centre, "G. Bernabeo" Hospital, Ortona, Italy.
(3)UOSD Genetica Oncoematologica, Dipartimento di Oncologico-Ematologico, 
Pescara, Italy.

Introduction: A considerable number of families with pedigrees suggestive of a 
Mendelian form of Breast Cancer (BC), Ovarian Cancer (OC), or Pancreatic Cancer 
(PC) do not show detectable BRCA1/2 mutations after genetic testing. The use of 
multi-gene hereditary cancer panels increases the possibility to identify 
individuals with cancer predisposing gene variants. Our study was aimed to 
evaluate the increase in the detection rate of pathogenic mutations in BC, OC, 
and PC patients when using a multi-gene panel. Methods: 546 patients affected by 
BC (423), PC (64), or OC (59) entered the study from January 2020 to December 
2021. For BC patients, inclusion criteria were i) positive cancer family 
background, ii) early onset, and iii) triple negative BC. PC patients were 
enrolled when affected by metastatic cancer, while OC patients were all 
submitted to genetic testing without selection. The patients were tested using a 
Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) panel containing 25 genes in addition to 
BRCA1/2. Results: Forty-four out of 546 patients (8%) carried germline 
pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants (PV/LPV) on BRCA1/2 genes, and 46 (8%) 
presented PV or LPV in other susceptibility genes. Discussion: Our findings 
demonstrate the utility of expanded panel testing in patients with suspected 
hereditary cancer syndromes, since this approach increased the mutation 
detection rate of 15% in PC, 8% in BC and 5% in OC cases. In absence of 
multi-gene panel analysis, a considerable percentage of mutations would have 
been lost.

Copyright © 2023 Anaclerio, Pilenzi, Dell’Elice, Ferrante, Grossi, Ferlito, 
Marinelli, Gildetti, Calabrese, Stuppia and Antonucci.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1060504
PMCID: PMC10104445
PMID: 37065479

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.