1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Apr 11:2023.04.10.536331. doi: 
10.1101/2023.04.10.536331.

DNA Repair Function Scores for 2172 Variants in the BRCA1 Amino-Terminus.

Diabate M(1), Islam MM(1), Nagy G(1), Banerjee T(1), Dhar S(1), Smith N(2)(3), 
Adamovich AI(1), Starita LM(2)(3), Parvin JD(1).

Author information:
(1)The Ohio State University, Department of Biomedical Informatics, and The Ohio 
State University Comprehensive Center, Columbus, OH 43210.
(2)The University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences, Seattle, WA 
98195.
(3)Brotman Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle WA, 98195.

Update in
    PLoS Genet. 2023 Aug 14;19(8):e1010739. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010739.

Single nucleotide variants are the most frequent type of sequence changes 
detected in the genome and these are frequently variants of uncertain 
significance (VUS). VUS are changes in DNA for which disease risk association is 
unknown. Thus, methods that classify the functional impact of a VUS can be used 
as evidence for variant interpretation. In the case of the breast and ovarian 
cancer specific tumor suppressor protein, BRCA1, pathogenic missense variants 
frequently score as loss of function in an assay for homology-directed repair 
(HDR) of DNA double-strand breaks. We previously published functional results 
using a multiplexed assay for 1056 amino acid substitutions residues 2-192 in 
the amino terminus of BRCA1. In this study, we have re-assessed the data from 
this multiplexed assay using an improved analysis pipeline. These new analysis 
methods yield functional scores for more variants in the first 192 amino acids 
of BRCA1, plus we report new results for BRCA1 amino acid residues 193-302. We 
now present the functional classification of 2172 BRCA1 variants in BRCA1 
residues 2-302 using the multiplexed HDR assay. Comparison of the functional 
determinations of the missense variants with clinically known benign or 
pathogenic variants indicated 93% sensitivity and 100% specificity for this 
assay. The results from BRCA1 variants tested in this assay are a resource for 
clinical geneticists for evidence to evaluate VUS in BRCA1 .
AUTHOR SUMMARY: Most missense substitutions in BRCA1 are variants of unknown 
significance (VUS), and individuals with a VUS in BRCA1 cannot know from genetic 
information alone whether this variant predisposes to breast or ovarian cancer. 
We apply a multiplexed functional assay for homology directed repair of DNA 
double strand breaks to assess variant impact on this important BRCA1 protein 
function. We analyzed 2172 variants in the amino-terminus of BRCA1 and 
demonstrate that variants that are known as pathogenic have a loss of function 
in the DNA repair assay. Conversely, variants that are known to be benign are 
functionally normal in the multiplexed assay. We suggest that these functional 
determinations of BRCA1 variants can be used to augment the information that 
clinical cancer geneticists provide to patients who have a VUS in BRCA1 .

DOI: 10.1101/2023.04.10.536331
PMCID: PMC10120616
PMID: 37090572

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.