1. PLoS One. 2023 Apr 26;18(4):e0285053. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285053. 
eCollection 2023.

Daylights with high melanopsin stimulation appear reddish in fovea and greenish 
in periphery.

Higashi H(1), Okajima K(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Environment and Information Sciences, Yokohama National 
University, Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Environment and Information Sciences, Yokohama National 
University, Yokohama, Japan.

Melanopsin reportedly contributes to brightness and color appearance in photopic 
vision in addition to cone photoreceptor cells. However, the relationship 
between the contribution of melanopsin to color appearance and retinal location 
is unclear. Herein, we generated metameric daylights (5000 K/6500 K/8000 K) with 
different melanopsin stimulations while keeping the size and colorimetric values 
intact and measured the color appearance of the stimuli in the fovea and 
periphery. The experiment included eight participants with normal color vision. 
We found that with high melanopsin stimulation, the color appearance of the 
metameric daylight shifts to reddish at the fovea and greenish in the periphery. 
These results are the first to show that the color appearance of visual stimuli 
with high melanopsin stimulation can be completely different in the foveal and 
peripheral vision even when the spectral power distribution of visual stimuli in 
both visions is the same. Both colorimetric values and melanopsin stimulation 
must be considered when designing spectral power distributions for comfortable 
lighting and safe digital signage in photopic vision.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Higashi, Okajima. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285053
PMCID: PMC10132674
PMID: 37099533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.