1. PLoS One. 2023 Apr 25;18(4):e0284739. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0284739. 
eCollection 2023.

Effect of dietary branched chain amino acids on liver related mortality: Results 
from a large cohort of North American patients with advanced HCV infection.

Yu L(1), Paski SC(2), Dodge J(3), Bambha K(1), Biggins SW(1), Ioannou GN(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
United States of America.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Cedar Sinai School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Surgery, Division of Transplant Surgery, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(4)Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington, United 
States of America.

Branched chain amino acids (BCAA) supplementation may reduce the incidence of 
liver failure and hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with cirrhosis. We aimed 
to determine whether long-term dietary intake of BCAA is associated with 
liver-related mortality in a well-characterized cohort of North American 
patients with advanced fibrosis or compensated cirrhosis. We performed a 
retrospective cohort study using extended follow-up data from the Hepatitis C 
Antiviral Long-term Treatment against Cirrhosis (HALT-C) Trial. The analysis 
included 656 patients who completed two Food Frequency Questionnaires. The 
primary exposure was BCAA intake measured in grams (g) per 1000 kilocalories 
(kcal) of energy intake (range 3.0-34.8 g/1000 kcal). During a median follow-up 
of 5.0 years, the incidence of liver-related death or transplantation was not 
significantly different among the four quartiles of BCAA intake before and after 
adjustment of confounders (AHR 1.02, 95% CI 0.81-1.27, P-value for trend = 
0.89). There remains no association when BCAA was modeled as a ratio of BCAA to 
total protein intake or as absolute BCAA intake. Finally, BCAA intake was not 
associated with the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma, encephalopathy or clinical 
hepatic decompensation. We concluded that dietary BCAA intake was not associated 
with liver-related outcomes in HCV-infected patients with advanced fibrosis or 
compensated cirrhosis. The precise effect of BCAA in patients with liver disease 
warrants further study.

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be 
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise 
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the 
Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0284739
PMCID: PMC10128927
PMID: 37098004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.