1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2023 Apr 13;12(4):748. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics12040748.

Novel Mutations Conferring Amoxicillin Resistance in Helicobacter pylori in 
South Korea.

Park SY(1), Lee EH(1), Kim D(2), Song YG(1), Jeong SJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Gangnam 
Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 06273, Republic 
of Korea.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Research Institute of Bacterial 
Resistance, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
03722, Republic of Korea.

Helicobacter pylori is the primary causative agent of gastritis, gastric ulcers, 
duodenal ulcers, gastric cancer, and peripheral B-cell lymphoma. H. pylori 
eradication often fails due to elevated antibiotic resistance. However, no 
previous studies have thoroughly examined amoxicillin resistance. Here, the 
objective was to identify clinical strains of H. pylori with amoxicillin 
resistance and to analyze single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with 
amoxicillin resistance. From March 2015 to June 2019, genotypic and phenotypic 
amoxicillin resistance was analyzed using an E-test and whole-genome sequencing 
(WGS). Analysis of 368 clinical strains confirmed amoxicillin resistance in 31 
strains (resistance rate of 8.7%). The genomes were extracted from nine 
resistant (<0.125 mg/L) strains, and WGS was performed for genetic analysis. WGS 
analysis identified SNPs present in pbp1a, pbp2, nhaC, hofH, hofC, and hefC in 
all nine isolates. Some of these genes may be related to amoxicillin resistance. 
A total of six SNPs (A69V, V374L, S414R, T503I, A592D, and R435Q) were 
identified in PBP2 of H-8, the most resistant strain. We predict that these six 
SNPs are associated with high amoxicillin resistance. Amoxicillin resistance 
should be considered in the clinical setting for the treatment failure of H. 
pylori eradication.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics12040748
PMCID: PMC10135067
PMID: 37107110

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.