1. Forensic Sci Res. 2021 Jul 23;7(4):726-735. doi:
10.1080/20961790.2021.1895410.  eCollection 2022.

Regulatory variation within 3'UTR of STAT5A correlates with sudden cardiac death 
in Chinese populations.

Yu H(1), Guo Y(2), Yang Z(1), Zhang Q(1), Xu J(3), Yang Q(1), Qu Y(1), Tan R(1), 
Li L(1), He Y(4), Li C(5), Zhang S(5), Luo B(6), Gao Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Medical College of Soochow University, 
Suzhou, China.
(2)Department of Forensic Science, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Central 
South University, Changsha, China.
(3)Public Security Bureau of Taixing, Taizhou, China.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou, 
China.
(5)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Forensic Medicine, Academy of Forensic Science, 
Shanghai, China.
(6)Faculty of Forensic Medicine, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.

Definitive diagnosis to sudden cardiac death (SCD) is often challenging since 
the postmortem examination on SCD victims could hardly demonstrate an adequate 
cause of death. It is therefore important to uncover the inherited risk 
component to SCD. Signal transducer and activators of transcription 5 A (STAT5A) 
is a member of the STAT family and a transcription factor that is activated by 
many cell ligands and associated with various cardiovascular processes. In this 
study, we performed a systematic variant screening on the STAT5A to filter 
potential functional genetic variations. Based on the screening results, an 
insertion/deletion polymorphism (rs3833144) in 3'UTR of STAT5A was selected as 
the candidate variant. A total of 159 SCD cases and 668 SCD matched healthy 
controls was enrolled to perform a case-control study and evaluate the 
association between rs3833144 and SCD susceptibility in Chinese populations. 
Logistic regression analysis showed that the deletion allele of rs3833144 had 
significantly increased the SCD risk (odds ratio (OR) = 1.54; 95% confidence 
interval (CI) = 1.18-2.01; P = 0.000955). Further genotype-expression eQTL 
analysis showed that samples with deletion allele appeared to lower expression 
of STAT5A, and in silico prediction suggested the local 3 D structure changes of 
STAT5A mRNA caused by the variant. On the other hand, the bioinformatic analysis 
presented that promoters of RARA and PTGES3L-AARSD1 could interact with 
rs3833144, and eQTL analysis showed the higher expression of both genes in 
samples with deletion allele. Dual-luciferase activity assays also suggested the 
significant regulatory role of rs3833144 in gene transcription. Our current data 
thus suggested a possible involvement of rs3833144 to SCD predisposition in 
Chinese populations and rs3833144 with potential function roles may become a 
candidate marker for SCD diagnosis and prevention.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Taylor & Francis Group on behalf of the 
Academy of Forensic Science.

DOI: 10.1080/20961790.2021.1895410
PMCID: PMC9976584
PMID: 37101540

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.