1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2023 Mar 28;12(4):660. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics12040660.

Regulation of Host Defense Peptide Synthesis by Polyphenols.

Tobin I(1), Zhang G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal and Food Sciences, Oklahoma State University, 
Stillwater, OK 74078, USA.

The rise of antimicrobial resistance has created an urgent need for 
antibiotic-alternative strategies for disease control and prevention. Host 
defense peptides (HDPs), which have both antimicrobial and immunomodulatory 
properties, are an important component of the innate immune system. A 
host-directed approach to stimulate the synthesis of endogenous HDPs has emerged 
as a promising solution to treat infections with a minimum risk for developing 
antimicrobial resistance. Among a diverse group of compounds that have been 
identified as inducers of HDP synthesis are polyphenols, which are naturally 
occurring secondary metabolites of plants characterized by the presence of 
multiple phenol units. In addition to their well-known antioxidant and 
anti-inflammatory activities, a variety of polyphenols have been shown to 
stimulate HDP synthesis across animal species. This review summarizes both the 
in vitro and in vivo evidence of polyphenols regulating HDP synthesis. The 
mechanisms by which polyphenols induce HDP gene expression are also discussed. 
Natural polyphenols warrant further investigation as potential antibiotic 
alternatives for the control and prevention of infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics12040660
PMCID: PMC10135163
PMID: 37107022

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.