1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 21;24(8):7623. doi: 10.3390/ijms24087623.

Inhibition of BET Proteins Regulates Fcγ Receptor Function and Reduces 
Inflammation in Rheumatoid Arthritis.

Shankar D(1), Merchand-Reyes G(2), Buteyn NJ(3), Santhanam R(2), Fang H(2), 
Kumar K(2), Mo X(4), Ganesan LP(2), Jarjour W(2), Butchar JP(2), Tridandapani 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.
(3)Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, MI 49503, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

Overactivation of immune responses is a hallmark of autoimmune disease 
pathogenesis. This includes the heightened production of inflammatory cytokines 
such as Tumor Necrosis Factor α (TNFα), and the secretion of autoantibodies such 
as isotypes of rheumatoid factor (RF) and anticitrullinated protein antibody 
(ACPA). Fcγ receptors (FcγR) expressed on the surface of myeloid cells bind 
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) immune complexes. Recognition of autoantigen-antibody 
complexes by FcγR induces an inflammatory phenotype that results in tissue 
damage and further escalation of the inflammatory response. Bromodomain and 
extra-terminal protein (BET) inhibition is associated with reduced immune 
responses, making the BET family a potential therapeutic target for autoimmune 
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In this paper, we examined the BET 
inhibitor PLX51107 and its effect on regulating FcγR expression and function in 
RA. PLX51107 significantly downregulated expression of FcγRIIa, FcγRIIb, 
FcγRIIIa, and the common γ-chain, FcϵR1-γ, in both healthy donor and RA patient 
monocytes. Consistent with this, PLX51107 treatment attenuated signaling events 
downstream of FcγR activation. This was accompanied by a significant decrease in 
phagocytosis and TNFα production. Finally, in a collagen-induced arthritis 
model, PLX51107-treatment reduced FcγR expression in vivo accompanied by a 
significant reduction in footpad swelling. These results suggest that BET 
inhibition is a novel therapeutic approach that requires further exploration as 
a treatment for patients with RA.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24087623
PMCID: PMC10143512
PMID: 37108786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that no conflict of interest 
exists regarding this manuscript.