1. Insects. 2023 Apr 6;14(4):365. doi: 10.3390/insects14040365.

Intraspecific Variability in Proteomic Profiles and Biological Activities of the 
Honey Bee Hemolymph.

Elfar SA(1), Bahgat IM(1), Shebl MA(2), Lihoreau M(3), Tawfik MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Port Said University, Port Said 
42526, Egypt.
(2)Department of Plant Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, Suez Canal 
University, Ismailia 41522, Egypt.
(3)Research Center on Animal Cognition, Center for Integrative Biology, Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique, University Paul Sabatier, 31062 Toulouse, 
France.

Pollinator declines have raised major concerns for the maintenance of 
biodiversity and food security, calling for a better understanding of 
environmental factors that affect their health. Here we used hemolymph analysis 
to monitor the health status of Western honey bees Apis mellifera. We evaluated 
the intraspecific proteomic variations and key biological activities of the 
hemolymph of bees collected from four Egyptian localities characterized by 
different food diversities and abundances. Overall, the lowest protein 
concentrations and the weakest biological activities (cytotoxicity, 
antimicrobial and antioxidant properties) were recorded in the hemolymph of bees 
artificially fed sucrose solution and no pollen. By contrast, the highest 
protein concentrations and biological activities were recorded in bees that had 
the opportunity to feed on various natural resources. While future studies 
should expand comparisons to honey bee populations exposed to more different 
diets and localities, our results suggest hemolymph samples can be used as 
reliable indicators of bee nutrition.

DOI: 10.3390/insects14040365
PMCID: PMC10142140
PMID: 37103179

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.