1. Life (Basel). 2023 Apr 19;13(4):1045. doi: 10.3390/life13041045.

Regulation of Cell Proliferation and Nrf2-Mediated Antioxidant Defense: 
Conservation of Keap1 Cysteines and Nrf2 Binding Site in the Context of the 
Evolution of KLHL Family.

Shilovsky GA(1)(2)(3), Dibrova DV(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State University, 119192 Moscow, Russia.
(2)Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, 119234 Moscow, Russia.
(3)Russian Institute for Information Transmission Problems of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences (Kharkevich Institute), 127051 Moscow, Russia.

Keap1 (Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1) is one of the major negative 
regulators of the transcription factor Nrf2 (nuclear factor erythroid-2-related 
factor 2), which induces the expression of numerous proteins defending the cell 
against different stress conditions. Keap1 is generally negatively regulated by 
post-translational modification (mostly via its cysteine residues) and 
interaction with other proteins that compete with Nrf2 for binding. Cysteine 
residues in Keap1 have different effects on protein regulation, as basic 
residues (Lys, Arg, and His) in close proximity to them increase cysteine 
modification potential. In this paper, we present an evolutionary analysis of 
residues involved in both mechanisms of Keap1 regulation in the broader context 
of the KLHL protein family in vertebrates. We identified the typical domain 
structure of the KLHL protein family in several proteins outside of this family 
(namely in KBTBD proteins 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 12 and 14). We found several 
cysteines that are flanked by basic residues (namely, C14, C38, C151, C226, 
C241, C273, C288, C297, C319, and C613) and, therefore, may be considered more 
susceptible to regulatory modification. The Nrf2 binding site is completely 
conserved in Keap1 in vertebrates but is absent or located in nonaligned DA and 
BC loops of the Kelch domain within the KLHL family. The development of specific 
substrate binding regions could be an evolutionary factor of diversification in 
the KLHL protein family.

DOI: 10.3390/life13041045
PMCID: PMC10146909
PMID: 37109574

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.