1. Microorganisms. 2023 Mar 30;11(4):891. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11040891.

Use of Microbial Consortia in Bioremediation of Metalloid Polluted Environments.

Lashani E(1), Amoozegar MA(1), Turner RJ(2), Moghimi H(3).

Author information:
(1)Extremophiles Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, School of Biology and 
Center of Excellence in Phylogeny of Living Organisms, College of Science, 
University of Tehran, Tehran 14178-64411, Iran.
(2)Microbial Biochemistry Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, 
University of Calgary, 2500 University Dr. NW, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology, School of Biology, College of Science, University 
of Tehran, Tehran 14178-64411, Iran.

Metalloids are released into the environment due to the erosion of the rocks or 
anthropogenic activities, causing problems for human health in different world 
regions. Meanwhile, microorganisms with different mechanisms to tolerate and 
detoxify metalloid contaminants have an essential role in reducing risks. In 
this review, we first define metalloids and bioremediation methods and examine 
the ecology and biodiversity of microorganisms in areas contaminated with these 
metalloids. Then we studied the genes and proteins involved in the tolerance, 
transport, uptake, and reduction of these metalloids. Most of these studies 
focused on a single metalloid and co-contamination of multiple pollutants were 
poorly discussed in the literature. Furthermore, microbial communication within 
consortia was rarely explored. Finally, we summarized the microbial 
relationships between microorganisms in consortia and biofilms to remove one or 
more contaminants. Therefore, this review article contains valuable information 
about microbial consortia and their mechanisms in the bioremediation of 
metalloids.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms11040891
PMCID: PMC10143001
PMID: 37110315

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.