1. Molecules. 2023 Apr 14;28(8):3482. doi: 10.3390/molecules28083482.

Protective Effect of Ferulic Acid on Lipopolysaccharide-Induced BV2 Microglia 
Inflammation via AMPK/mTOR Signaling Pathway.

Chen X(1), Zhou X(1), Cheng X(1), Lin L(1), Wang Q(2), Zhan R(1)(3), Wu Q(1), 
Liu S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 
Guangzhou 510006, China.
(2)Science and Technology Innovation Center, Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou 510006, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Chinese Medicinal Resource from Lingnan, Guangzhou 
University of Chinese Medicine, Ministry of Education, Guangzhou 510006, China.

In neurodegenerative diseases, microglial activation and neuroinflammation are 
essential for the control and progression of neurodegenerative diseases. 
Mitigating microglium-induced inflammation is one strategy for hindering the 
progression of neurodegenerative diseases. Ferulic acid (FA) is an effective 
anti-inflammatory agent, but its potential role and regulation mechanism in 
neuroinflammatory reactions have not been fully studied. In this study, the 
neuroinflammation model was established by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and the 
inhibitory effect of FA on neuroinflammation of BV2 microglia was studied. The 
results showed that FA significantly reduced the production and expression of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), leukocyte-6 
(IL-6) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β). We further studied the mechanism of FA's 
regulation of LPS-induced BV2 neuroinflammation and found that FA can 
significantly reduce the expression of mTOR in BV2 microglia induced by LPS, and 
significantly increase the expression of AMPK, indicating that FA may have an 
anti-inflammatory effect by activating the AMPK/mTOR signaling pathway to 
regulate the release of inflammatory mediators (such as NLRP3, caspase-1 p20 and 
IL-1β). We further added an autophagy inhibitor (3-MA) and an AMPK inhibitor 
(compound C, CC) for reverse verification. The results showed that FA's 
inhibitory effects on TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β and its regulatory effect on 
AMPK/mTOR were destroyed by 3-MA and CC, which further indicated that FA's 
inhibitory effect on neuroinflammation is related to its activation of the 
AMPK/mTOR autophagy signaling pathway. In a word, our experimental results show 
that FA can inhibit LPS-induced neuroinflammation of BV2 microglia by activating 
the AMPK/mTOR signaling pathway, and FA may be a potential drug for treating 
neuroinflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28083482
PMCID: PMC10217031
PMID: 37110714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.