1. Mycobiology. 2023 Mar 21;51(2):94-108. doi: 10.1080/12298093.2023.2187614. 
eCollection 2023.

Culture Conditions for Mycelial Growth and Anti-Cancer Properties of 
Termitomyces.

Tharavecharak S(1)(2), D'Alessandro-Gabazza CN(2), Toda M(2), Yasuma T(2), 
Tsuyama T(1), Kamei I(1), Gabazza EC(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Agriculture, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.
(2)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Mie University, Tsu, Japan.

Termitomyces sp. that grow in symbiosis with fungus-farming Termites have 
medicinal properties. However, they are rare in nature, and their artificial 
culture is challenging. The expression of AXL receptor tyrosine kinase and 
immune checkpoint molecules favor the growth of cancer cells. The study 
evaluated the optimal conditions for the artificial culture of Termitomyces and 
their inhibitory activity on AXL and immune checkpoint molecules in lung 
adenocarcinoma and melanoma cell lines. The culture of 45 strains of 
Termitomyces was compared. Five strains with marked growth rates were selected. 
Four of the selected strains form a single cluster by sequence analysis. The 
mycelium of 4 selected strains produces more fungal mass in potato dextrose 
broth than in a mixed media. The bark was the most appropriate solid substrate 
for Termitomyces mycelia culture. The mycelium of all five selected strains 
showed a higher growth rate under normal CO2 conditions. The culture broth, 
methanol, and ethyl acetate of one selected strain (T-120) inhibited the mRNA 
relative expression of AXL receptor tyrosine kinase and immune checkpoint 
molecules in cancer cell lines. Overall, these results suggest the potential 
usefulness of Termitomyces extracts as a co-adjuvant therapy in malignant 
diseases.

Â© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & 
Francis Group on behalf of the Korean Society of Mycology.

DOI: 10.1080/12298093.2023.2187614
PMCID: PMC10142329
PMID: 37122680

Conflict of interest statement: E.C.G. and I.K. have a pending patent on the 
discovery reported in this article. Other authors declared no conflict of 
interest regarding this work.