1. Oncologist. 2023 Jul 5;28(7):e534-e541. doi: 10.1093/oncolo/oyad122.

Dramatic Response to Pyrotinib and T-DM1 in HER2-Negative Metastatic Breast 
Cancer With 2 Activating HER2 Mutations.

Tian H(1), Qu M(1), Zhang G(1), Yuan L(1), Shi Q(1), Wang Y(1), Yang Y(1), Zhang 
Y(1), Qi X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical 
University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.

HER2 signaling is activated in response to somatic HER2 mutations, which are 
often found in invasive lobular breast cancer (ILC) and are associated with poor 
prognosis. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have demonstrated considerable 
antitumor activity in patients with HER2-mutated advanced breast cancer (BC). 
Further, several clinical trials have indicated that HER2-targeted antibody-drug 
conjugates (ADCs) exhibit promising efficacy in lung cancer with HER2 mutations, 
and the efficacy of ADCs against HER2-mutated BC is currently being evaluated. 
Several preclinical studies have demonstrated that the therapeutic efficacy of 
ADCs in HER2-mutated cancer can be enhanced by the addition of irreversible 
TKIs, but the potential of such a combined treatment regimen for the treatment 
of HER2-mutated BC has not been reported. Herein, we describe a case in which a 
patient with estrogen receptor-positive/HER2-negative metastatic ILC with 2 
activating HER2 mutations (D769H and V777L) exhibited a significant and durable 
response to anti-HER2 treatment with pyrotinib (an irreversible TKI) in 
combination with ado-trastuzumab emtansine, which was administered after 
multiple lines of therapy that had resulted in disease progression. Further, 
based on the evidence from the present case, TKI plus ADC seems to be a 
promising combination anti-HER2 regimen for patients with 
HER2-negative/HER2-mutated advanced BC, although further rigorous studies are 
warranted to confirm these findings.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/oncolo/oyad122
PMCID: PMC10322140
PMID: 37120151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have disclosed that they have no 
financial interests, arrangements, or affiliations with the manufacturers of any 
products discussed in this article or their competitors.