1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2023 Jun 19;378(1879):20220170. doi: 
10.1098/rstb.2022.0170. Epub 2023 May 1.

Timing mechanisms to control heart rhythm and initiate arrhythmias: roles for 
intracellular organelles, signalling pathways and subsarcolemmal Ca(2).

Terrar DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, UK.

Rhythms of electrical activity in all regions of the heart can be influenced by 
a variety of intracellular membrane bound organelles. This is true both for 
normal pacemaker activity and for abnormal rhythms including those caused by 
early and delayed afterdepolarizations under pathological conditions. The 
influence of the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) on cardiac electrical activity is 
widely recognized, but other intracellular organelles including lysosomes and 
mitochondria also contribute. Intracellular organelles can provide a timing 
mechanism (such as an SR clock driven by cyclic uptake and release of Ca2+, with 
an important influence of intraluminal Ca2+), and/or can act as a Ca2+ store 
involved in signalling mechanisms. Ca2+ plays many diverse roles including 
carrying electric current, driving electrogenic sodium-calcium exchange (NCX) 
particularly when Ca2+ is extruded across the surface membrane causing 
depolarization, and activation of enzymes which target organelles and surface 
membrane proteins. Heart function is also influenced by Ca2+ mobilizing agents 
(cADP-ribose, nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate and inositol 
trisphosphate) acting on intracellular organelles. Lysosomal Ca2+ release exerts 
its effects via calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II to promote SR 
Ca2+ uptake, and contributes to arrhythmias resulting from excessive 
beta-adrenoceptor stimulation. A separate arrhythmogenic mechanism involves 
lysosomes, mitochondria and SR. Interacting intracellular organelles, therefore, 
have profound effects on heart rhythms and NCX plays a central role. This 
article is part of the theme issue 'The heartbeat: its molecular basis and 
physiological mechanisms'.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2022.0170
PMCID: PMC10150226
PMID: 37122228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I declare I have no competing interests.