1. Drug Deliv Transl Res. 2023 Aug;13(8):2183-2193. doi: 
10.1007/s13346-023-01344-5. Epub 2023 Apr 29.

Development of a HPLC fluorometric method for the quantification of enfuvirtide 
following in vitro releasing studies on thermosensitive in situ forming gel.

Li H(1), Anjani QK(1)(2), McGuckin MB(1), Himawan A(1)(3), Li M(1), Donnelly 
RF(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Queen's University Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast, BT9 
7BL, UK.
(2)Fakultas Farmasi, Universitas Megarezky, Jl. Antang Raya No. 43, Makassar, 
90234, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Universitas Hasanuddin, Makassar, 90245, Indonesia.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Queen's University Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast, BT9 
7BL, UK. r.donnelly@qub.ac.uk.

Due to the presence of peptidase and protease in the gastrointestinal tract, 
peptides are subjected to digestion and inactivation when administrated orally. 
To avoid degradation and maintain the desired efficacy of peptide drugs, there 
is a demand to develop transdermal and intradermal delivery systems. This 
requires efficient and specific analytical methods to separate and quantify the 
peptide drugs from the formulation and the skin matrix in the early stages of 
pharmaceutical development. A high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) 
system equipped with a fluorometric detector was used to quantify enfuvirtide, 
which is the first fusion inhibitor for HIV treatment. The HPLC method was 
developed and validated according to the ICH Q2(R1) guidelines. The viability of 
the method was demonstrated during in vitro studies, where samples were analysed 
following intradermal administration of a thermosensitive in situ forming gel. 
Compared with previously reported methods, this assay proved efficient, 
sensitive and accurate, with a detection limit of 0.74 μg/mL and a run time of 9 
min, mitigating the use of any internal standards and detergents. The addition 
of an organic solvent to the samples successfully solved the problem of low 
recovery caused by the adsorption of the drug to the plastic consumables in the 
sample treatment process. The amount of enfuvirtide releasing from the in situ 
gel through skin after 7 hours was 16.25 ± 7.08 μg, which was significantly 
lower than the reconstituted FUZEON® itself (26.68 ± 10.45 μg), showing a longer 
release profile. The results may be beneficial as a constructive input for 
future enfuvirtide quantification within a preclinical setting through in vitro 
release studies across the skin.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13346-023-01344-5
PMCID: PMC10315353
PMID: 37120679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.