1. Eur Heart J Suppl. 2023 Apr 26;25(Suppl C):C144-C154. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartjsupp/suad017. eCollection 2023 May.

Scarring/arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.

Corrado D(1), Zorzi A(1), Cipriani A(1), Bauce B(1), Bariani R(1), Brunetti 
G(1), Graziano F(1), De Lazzari M(1), Mattesi G(1), Migliore F(1), Pilichou 
K(1), Rigato I(1), Rizzo S(1), Thiene G(1), Perazzolo Marra M(1), Basso C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Sciences and Public Health, 
University of Padova, Via Giustiniani 2, 35121 Padova, Italy.

The designation of 'arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy' reflects the evolving concept 
of a heart muscle disease affecting not only the right ventricle (ARVC) but also 
the left ventricle (LV), with phenotypic variants characterized by a 
biventricular (BIV) or predominant LV involvement (ALVC). Herein, we use the 
term 'scarring/arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (S/ACM)' to emphasize that the 
disease phenotype is distinctively characterized by loss of ventricular 
myocardium due to myocyte death with subsequent fibrous or fibro-fatty scar 
tissue replacement. The myocardial scarring predisposes to potentially lethal 
ventricular arrhythmias and underlies the impairment of systolic ventricular 
function. S/ACM is an 'umbrella term' which includes a variety of conditions, 
either genetic or acquired (mostly post-inflammatory), sharing the typical 
'scarring' phenotypic features of the disease. Differential diagnoses include 
'non-scarring' heart diseases leading to either RV dilatation from left-to-right 
shunt or LV dilatation/dysfunction from a dilated cardiomyopathy. The 
development of 2020 upgraded criteria ('Padua criteria') for diagnosis of S/ACM 
reflected the evolving clinical experience with the expanding spectrum of S/ACM 
phenotypes and the advances in cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging. The 
Padua criteria aimed to improve the diagnosis of S/ACM by incorporation of CMR 
myocardial tissue characterization findings. Risk stratification of S/ACM 
patients is mostly based on arrhythmic burden and ventricular dysfunction 
severity, although other ECG or imaging parameters may have a role. Medical 
therapy is crucial for treatment of ventricular arrhythmias and heart failure. 
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is the only proven life-saving 
treatment, despite its significant morbidity because of device-related 
complications and inappropriate shocks. Selection of patients who can benefit 
the most from ICD therapy is one of the most challenging issues in clinical 
practice.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartjsupp/suad017
PMCID: PMC10132624
PMID: 37125320

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared.