1. Sci Adv. 2023 May 3;9(18):eadf0138. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adf0138. Epub 2023 May
 3.

Inter-organelle cross-talk supports acetyl-coenzyme A homeostasis and 
lipogenesis under metabolic stress.

Kuna RS(1)(2), Kumar A(1)(2), Wessendorf-Rodriguez KA(1)(2), Galvez H(1), Green 
CR(1)(2), McGregor GH(1)(2), Cordes T(1)(2)(3), Shaw RJ(1), Svensson RU(4), 
Metallo CM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093, USA.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics and Biochemistry, Braunschweig Integrated Centre 
of Systems Biology (BRICS), Technische Universit√§t Braunschweig, Braunschweig 
38106, Germany.
(4)Nimbus Therapeutics, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adf0115.

Proliferating cells rely on acetyl-CoA to support membrane biogenesis and 
acetylation. Several organelle-specific pathways are available for provision of 
acetyl-CoA as nutrient availability fluctuates, so understanding how cells 
maintain acetyl-CoA homeostasis under such stresses is critically important. To 
this end, we applied 13C isotope tracing cell lines deficient in these 
mitochondrial [ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY)]-, cytosolic [acetyl-CoA synthetase 
(ACSS2)]-, and peroxisomal [peroxisomal biogenesis factor 5 (PEX5)]-dependent 
pathways. ACLY knockout in multiple cell lines reduced fatty acid synthesis and 
increased reliance on extracellular lipids or acetate. Knockout of both ACLY and 
ACSS2 (DKO) severely stunted but did not entirely block proliferation, 
suggesting that alternate pathways can support acetyl-CoA homeostasis. Metabolic 
tracing and PEX5 knockout studies link peroxisomal oxidation of exogenous lipids 
as a major source of acetyl-CoA for lipogenesis and histone acetylation in cells 
lacking ACLY, highlighting a role for inter-organelle cross-talk in supporting 
cell survival in response to nutrient fluctuations.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adf0138
PMCID: PMC10156121
PMID: 37134162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]