1. Mol Oncol. 2023 Jun;17(6):950-963. doi: 10.1002/1878-0261.13446. Epub 2023 May
 15.

EML4-ALK biology and drug resistance in non-small cell lung cancer: a new phase 
of discoveries.

Elshatlawy M(1), Sampson J(1)(2), Clarke K(3), Bayliss R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biological Sciences, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
University of Leeds, UK.
(2)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, UK.
(3)Leeds Cancer Center, St.James' University Hospital, Leeds Teaching Hospitals 
NHS Trust, UK.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) can be driven to oncogenic activity by 
different types of mutational events such as point-mutations, for example F1174L 
in neuroblastoma, and gene fusions, for example with echinoderm 
microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4) in non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). EML4-ALK variants result from different breakpoints, generating fusions 
of different sizes and properties. The most common variants (Variant 1 and 
Variant 3) form cellular compartments with distinct physical properties. The 
presence of a partial, probably misfolded beta-propeller domain in variant 1 
confers solid-like properties to the compartments it forms, greater dependence 
on Hsp90 for protein stability and higher cell sensitivity to ALK tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (TKIs). These differences translate to the clinic because 
variant 3, on average, worsens patient prognosis and increases metastatic risk. 
Latest generation ALK-TKIs are beneficial for most patients with EML4-ALK 
fusions. However, resistance to ALK inhibitors can occur via point-mutations 
within the kinase domain of the EML4-ALK fusion, for example G1202R, reducing 
inhibitor effectiveness. Here, we discuss the biology of EML4-ALK variants, 
their impact on treatment response, ALK-TKI drug resistance mechanisms and 
potential combination therapies.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Molecular Oncology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1878-0261.13446
PMCID: PMC10257413
PMID: 37149843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.