1. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2023 May 4;22(1):104. doi: 10.1186/s12933-023-01845-0.

Liraglutide reduces plasma dihydroceramide levels in patients with type 2 
diabetes.

Denimal D(1)(2), Bergas V(3)(4), Pais-de-Barros JP(3)(4), Simoneau I(3)(5), 
Demizieux L(3), Passilly-Degrace P(3), Bouillet B(3)(5), Petit JM(3)(5), Rouland 
A(3)(5), Bataille A(3), Duvillard L(3)(6), Vergès B(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Burgundy, INSERM LNC UMR1231, 21000, Dijon, France. 
damien.denimal@u-bourgogne.fr.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, 21079, Dijon, France. 
damien.denimal@u-bourgogne.fr.
(3)University of Burgundy, INSERM LNC UMR1231, 21000, Dijon, France.
(4)Lipidomic Analytical Platform, University of Burgundy, 21000, Dijon, France.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, 21000, 
Dijon, France.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, 21079, Dijon, France.

BACKGROUND: Emerging evidence supports that dihydroceramides (DhCer) and 
ceramides (Cer) contribute to the pathophysiology of insulin resistance and 
liver steatosis, and that their circulating concentrations are independently 
associated with cardiovascular outcomes. Circulating DhCer levels are increased 
in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D). On the other hand, the GLP-1 receptor 
agonist liraglutide reduces major adverse cardiac events, insulin resistance and 
liver steatosis in T2D patients. The main purpose of the present study was 
therefore to investigate whether liraglutide decreases circulating levels of 
DhCer and Cer in T2D patients, which could be a mechanism involved in its 
cardiometabolic benefits. The secondary purpose was to assess the relationship 
between liraglutide-induced changes in DhCer/Cer levels and insulin resistance 
and liver steatosis.
METHODS: Plasma concentrations of 11 DhCer and 15 Cer species were measured by a 
highly-sensitive mass spectrometry system in 35 controls and 86 T2D patients 
before and after 6 months of liraglutide (1.2 mg/day). Insulin resistance was 
estimated by the triglyceride-glucose (TyG) index. Liver fat content (LFC) was 
assessed in 53 patients by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
RESULTS: Plasma levels of total DhCer, 7 DhCer and 7 Cer species were increased 
in T2D patients compared to controls. Liraglutide decreased total DhCer by 15.1% 
(p = 0.005), affecting 16:0 (p = 0.037), 18:0 (p < 0.0001), 18:1 (p = 0.0005), 
20:0 (p = 0.0003), 23:0 (p = 0.005) and 24:1 (p = 0.04) species. Total plasma 
Cer did not significantly change after liraglutide (p = 0.18), but 5 Cer species 
decreased significantly, i.e. 18:0 and 18:1 (both p < 0.0001), 19:0 and 24:1 
(both p < 0.01) and 26:1 (p = 0.04). In multivariate analysis, the reduction in 
DhCer after liraglutide was independently associated with the reduction in LFC 
(p = 0.0005) and in TyG index (p = 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Liraglutide reduces plasma levels of numerous DhCer and Cer species 
in T2D patients, which may contribute to the cardiovascular benefit observed in 
the LEADER trial. The independent association between the decrease in plasma 
DhCer level with the reduction in LFC and TyG index adds new insights regarding 
the relationship between DhCer, liver steatosis and insulin resistance. Trial 
registration ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02721888.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12933-023-01845-0
PMCID: PMC10158384
PMID: 37143040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors’ employer (University Hospital of 
Dijon, France) received funding from Novo Nordisk for this study. Novo Nordisk 
had no role in collection, analysis, and interpretation of data, in writing the 
paper, and in the decision to submit the paper for publication. Otherwise, no 
potential competing interests relevant to this article are reported.