1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2023 Jun 15;67(6):e0009823. doi: 
10.1128/aac.00098-23. Epub 2023 May 4.

α-Mangostin Exhibits a Therapeutic Effect on Spinal Cystic Echinococcosis by 
Affecting Glutamine Metabolism.

Wang S(1)(2), Sun H(2), Wang S(2), Ren Q(2), Dai Y(2), Zhu M(1), Zhang Y(1), 
Kang H(1), Li J(2), Xiao J(2), Dong Y(1), Wang W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Shihezi University, Shihezi City, Xinjiang 
Uygur Autonomous Region, China.

Erratum in
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2023 Oct 18;67(10):e0096023. doi: 
10.1128/aac.00960-23.

Spinal cystic echinococcosis, a severely neglected, rare disease, is 
characterized by high morbidity, disability, and mortality in prevalent regions. 
Due to the high-risk nature of surgical treatment and the ineffectiveness of 
conventional drugs, there is an unmet need for novel safe and effective drugs 
for the treatment of this disease. In this study, we examined the therapeutic 
effects of α-mangostin for spinal cystic echinococcosis, and explored its 
potential pharmacological mechanism. The repurposed drug exhibited a potent in 
vitro protoscolicidal effect and significantly inhibited the evolution of larval 
encystation. Moreover, it demonstrated a remarkable anti-spinal cystic 
echinococcosis effect in gerbil models. Mechanistically, we found that 
α-mangostin intervention led to intracellular depolarization of mitochondrial 
membrane potential and reactive oxygen species generation. In addition, we 
observed elevated expression of autophagic proteins, aggregation of autophagic 
lysosomes, activated autophagic flux, and disrupted larval microstructure in 
protoscoleces. Further metabolite profiling showed that glutamine was imperative 
for autophagic activation and anti-echinococcal effects mediated by α-mangostin. 
These results suggest that α-mangostin is a potentially valuable therapeutic 
option against spinal cystic echinococcosis through its effect on glutamine 
metabolism.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.00098-23
PMCID: PMC10269084
PMID: 37140388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.