1. Pain. 2023 Sep 1;164(9):1891-1911. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002910. Epub 
2023 May 5.

A systematic review of genome-wide association studies for pain, nociception, 
neuropathy, and pain treatment responses.

Li S(1), Brimmers A(1), van Boekel RLM(2), Vissers KCP(2), Coenen MJH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Coenen is now with the 
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Pain and Palliative Medicine, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Pain is the leading cause of disability worldwide, imposing an enormous burden 
on personal health and society. Pain is a multifactorial and multidimensional 
problem. Currently, there is (some) evidence that genetic factors could 
partially explain individual susceptibility to pain and interpersonal 
differences in pain treatment response. To better understand the underlying 
genetic mechanisms of pain, we systematically reviewed and summarized 
genome-wide association studies (GWASes) investigating the associations between 
genetic variants and pain/pain-related phenotypes in humans. We reviewed 57 
full-text articles and identified 30 loci reported in more than 1 study. To 
check whether genes described in this review are associated with (other) pain 
phenotypes, we searched 2 pain genetic databases, Human Pain Genetics Database 
and Mouse Pain Genetics Database. Six GWAS-identified genes/loci were also 
reported in those databases, mainly involved in neurological functions and 
inflammation. These findings demonstrate an important contribution of genetic 
factors to the risk of pain and pain-related phenotypes. However, replication 
studies with consistent phenotype definitions and sufficient statistical power 
are required to validate these pain-associated genes further. Our review also 
highlights the need for bioinformatic tools to elucidate the function of 
identified genes/loci. We believe that a better understanding of the genetic 
background of pain will shed light on the underlying biological mechanisms of 
pain and benefit patients by improving the clinical management of pain.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the International Association for the Study of Pain.

DOI: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002910
PMCID: PMC10436363
PMID: 37144689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
nonfinancial interests to disclose. All authors' conflicts of interest in the 
manuscript is in agreement with the COI statement on the ICJME forms submitted 
in the submission system. Sponsorships or competing interests that may be 
relevant to content are disclosed at the end of this article.