1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2023 Jun;107(11):3637-3651. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-023-12555-8. Epub 2023 May 5.

Polymorphism rs1057147 located in mesothelin gene predicts lymph node metastasis 
in patients with gastric cancer.

Shen K(#)(1), Cheng Q(#)(1), Xiao J(#)(1), Zhou X(#)(1), Wang Y(1), Liu K(1), Ni 
P(1), Fan H(1), Hu L(1), Xu Z(1), Yang L(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, Jiangsu Province, 
China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, Jiangsu Province, 
China. pwkyangli@njmu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Liyang People's Hospital, Liyang Branch 
Hospital of Jiangsu Province Hospital, Liyang, Jiangsu Province, China. 
pwkyangli@njmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Lymph node metastasis, a crucial factor in the spread of gastric cancer (GC), is 
strongly associated with a negative prognosis for patients. This study aimed to 
investigate the association of the mesothelin (MSLN) gene polymorphisms 
(rs3764247, rs3764246, rs12597489, rs1057147, and rs3765319) with the risk of 
lymph node metastasis of GC patients in a Chinese Han population. The PCR-LDR 
genotyping was used to detect the genotypes of MSLN polymorphisms in GC patients 
with lymph node metastasis (n = 610) or without (n = 356). Our research 
indicates that certain genetic markers, specifically rs3764247, rs3764246, 
rs12597489, and rs3765319, do not appear to be linked with an increased risk of 
lymph node metastasis in GC. However, we did observe that patients with the 
rs1057147 GA genotype exhibited a higher likelihood of lymph node metastasis in 
GC when compared to those with the GG genotype (OR = 1.33, 95% 
CI = 1.01 - 1.76, P = 0.045). Patients with rs1057147 GA + AA genotype were 
found to have a higher likelihood of lymph node involvement (OR = 1.35, 95% 
CI = 1.03 - 1.77, P = 0.029) when compared to those with GG genotype in the 
dominant model. The allelic model revealed that the A allele of rs1057147 
exhibited a stronger correlation with lymph node metastasis compared to the G 
allele (OR = 1.28, 95% CI = 1.02 - 1.60, P = 0.031). In addition, we found that 
rs1057147 polymorphism revealed a poor prognosis for GC patients with lymph node 
metastasis. Further stratified analysis revealed that the prognostic effect of 
rs1057147 was more pronounced in patients with GC who had lymph node metastasis 
and had a tumor size of 4 cm or greater, as well as more than 2 lymph node 
metastases. Bioinformatics studies showed that the binding mode of miR-3144-5p 
or miR-3619-3p to MSLN was altered by the mutation of rs1057147. Our study 
confirmed the important role of MSLN rs1057147 polymorphism locus in GC lymph 
node metastases and suggested a potential prognostic factor during GC 
progression. KEY POINTS: • Rs1057147 GA genotype had an increased risk of lymph 
node metastasis in gastric cancer. • The A allele of rs1057147 had a stronger 
association with lymph node metastasis than the G allele. • The binding mode of 
miR-3144-5p or miR-3619-3p to MSLN was altered by the mutation of rs1057147.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-023-12555-8
PMID: 37145159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]