1. Sci Rep. 2023 May 8;13(1):7450. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-34309-2.

Structural and functional features of a broad-spectrum prophage-encoded 
enzybiotic from Enterococcus faecium.

Premetis GE(1), Stathi A(2), Papageorgiou AC(3), Labrou NE(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Enzyme Technology, Department of Biotechnology, School of 
Applied Biology and Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, 75 Iera 
Odos Street, 11855, Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Microbiology, "Aghia Sophia" Children's Hospital, 11527, 
Athens, Greece.
(3)Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, 
20521, Turku, Finland.
(4)Laboratory of Enzyme Technology, Department of Biotechnology, School of 
Applied Biology and Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, 75 Iera 
Odos Street, 11855, Athens, Greece. Lambrou@aua.gr.

Multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria have become a growing threat to public 
health. The gram-positive Enterococcus faecium is classified by WHO as a 
high-priority pathogen among the global priority list of antibiotic-resistant 
bacteria. Peptidoglycan-degrading enzymes (PDEs), also known as enzybiotics, are 
useful bactericidal agents in the fight against resistant bacteria. In this 
work, a genome-based screening approach of the genome of E. faecium allowed the 
identification of a putative PDE gene with predictive amidase activity (EfAmi1; 
EC 3.5.1.28) in a prophage-integrated sequence. EfAmi1 is composed by two 
domains: a N-terminal Zn2+-dependent N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase-2 
(NALAA-2) domain and a C-terminal domain with unknown structure and function. 
The full-length gene of EfAmi1 was cloned and expressed as a 6xHis-tagged 
protein in E. coli. EfAmi1 was produced as a soluble protein, purified, and its 
lytic and antimicrobial activities were investigated using turbidity reduction 
and Kirby-Bauer disk-diffusion assays against clinically isolated bacterial 
pathogens. The crystal structure of the N-terminal amidase-2 domain was 
determined using X-ray crystallography at 1.97 Å resolution. It adopts a 
globular fold with several α-helices surrounding a central five-stranded 
β-sheet. Sequence comparison revealed a cluster of conserved amino acids that 
defines a putative binding site for a buried zinc ion. The results of the 
present study suggest that EfAmi1 displays high lytic and antimicrobial activity 
and may represent a promising new antimicrobial in the post-antibiotic era.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-34309-2
PMCID: PMC10167349
PMID: 37156923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.