1. Front Mol Biosci. 2023 Apr 19;10:1160063. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.1160063. 
eCollection 2023.

Proteomic profiling of eIF3a conditional knockout mice.

Zhuo W(1)(2), Chen J(3), Jiang S(3), Zheng J(1)(2), Huang H(1)(2), Xie P(1)(2), 
Li W(1)(2), Lei M(1)(2), Yin J(1)(2), Gao Y(1)(4), Liu Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Hunan Key Laboratory of 
Pharmacogenetics, National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, 
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(2)Engineering Research Center for Applied Technology of Pharmacogenomics of 
Ministry of Education, Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.
(3)Departments of Pharmacy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(4)Departments of Gerontology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit A (eIF3a) is the largest 
subunit of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 (eIF3). eIF3a plays an 
integral role in protein biosynthesis, hence impacting the onset, development, 
and treatment of tumors. The proteins regulated by eIF3a are still being 
explored in vivo. In this study, a Cre-loxP system was used to generate eIF3a 
conditional knockout mice. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling with LC-MS/MS analysis 
was used to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in fat, lungs, 
skin, and spleen tissue of the eIF3a knockout mice and controls. Bioinformatics 
analysis was then used to explore the functions and molecular signaling pathways 
of these protein landscapes. It was observed that eIF3a is essential for life 
sustenance. Abnormal tissue pathology was found in the lungs, fat, skin, spleen, 
and thymus. In total, 588, 210, 324, and 944 DEPs were quantified in the lungs, 
fat, skin, and spleen, respectively, of the eIF3a knockout mice as compared to 
the control. The quantified differentially expressed proteins were 
tissue-specific, except for eight proteins shared by the four tissues. A broad 
range of functions for eIF3a, including cellular signaling pathway, immune 
response, metabolism, defense response, phagocytes, and DNA replication, has 
been revealed using bioinformatics analysis. Herein, several pathways related to 
oxidative stress in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database, 
including nitrogen metabolism, peroxisome, cytochrome P450 drug metabolism, 
pyruvate metabolism, PPAR signaling pathway, phospholipase D signaling pathway, 
B-cell receptor signaling pathway, ferroptosis, and focal adhesion, have been 
identified. Collectively, this study shows that eIF3a is an essential gene for 
sustaining life, and its downstream proteins are involved in diverse novel 
functions beyond mRNA translational regulation.

Copyright Â© 2023 Zhuo, Chen, Jiang, Zheng, Huang, Xie, Li, Lei, Yin, Gao and 
Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.1160063
PMCID: PMC10154561
PMID: 37152897

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.