1. Nat Commun. 2023 May 8;14(1):2639. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-38362-3.

Structural mechanisms of TRPM7 activation and inhibition.

Nadezhdin KD(1), Correia L(2), Narangoda C(3), Patel DS(3), Neuberger A(1), 
Gudermann T(2)(4), Kurnikova MG(5), Chubanov V(6), Sobolevsky AI(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, USA.
(2)Walther-Straub Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, LMU Munich, Munich, 
Germany.
(3)Chemistry Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)Comprehensive Pneumology Center, German Center for Lung Research (DZL), 
Munich, Germany.
(5)Chemistry Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 
kurnikova@cmu.edu.
(6)Walther-Straub Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, LMU Munich, Munich, 
Germany. vladimir.chubanov@lrz.uni-muenchen.de.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, USA. as4005@cumc.columbia.edu.

The transient receptor potential channel TRPM7 is a master regulator of the 
organismal balance of divalent cations that plays an essential role in embryonic 
development, immune responses, cell mobility, proliferation, and 
differentiation. TRPM7 is implicated in neuronal and cardiovascular disorders, 
tumor progression and has emerged as a new drug target. Here we use cryo-EM, 
functional analysis, and molecular dynamics simulations to uncover two distinct 
structural mechanisms of TRPM7 activation by a gain-of-function mutation and by 
the agonist naltriben, which show different conformational dynamics and domain 
involvement. We identify a binding site for highly potent and selective 
inhibitors and show that they act by stabilizing the TRPM7 closed state. The 
discovered structural mechanisms provide foundations for understanding the 
molecular basis of TRPM7 channelopathies and drug development.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-38362-3
PMCID: PMC10167348
PMID: 37156763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.