1. Biomed Res Int. 2023 Apr 27;2023:8961372. doi: 10.1155/2023/8961372.
eCollection  2023.

HIV Virologic Failure among Patients with Persistent Low-Level Viremia in 
Nairobi, Kenya: It Is Time to Review the >1000 Virologic Failure Threshold.

Nzivo MM(1), Waruhiu CN(2), Kang'ethe JM(3), Budambula NLM(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and 
Technology, P.O. Box 62000-00200, Nairobi, Kenya.
(2)The Africa Genomics Centre and Consultancy Ltd., P.O. Box 381-00517, Nairobi, 
Kenya.
(3)Comprehensive Care Centre, Kenyatta National Hospital, P.O. Box 20723-00202, 
Nairobi, Kenya.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Embu, P.O. Box 6-60100, 
Embu, Kenya.

Persistent low-level viremia (PLLV) of 200-999 copies/ml has been reported as a 
risk factor for HIV virologic failure (VF). This retrospective study was aimed 
at characterizing patients with PLLV, determining factors associated with VF, 
and determining the effect of regimen change. Data were extracted from 
electronic medical records for HIV care and treatment. Patients' characteristics 
(N = 705) were as follows: a mean age of 42 years, majority female (55%), and 
51% married. A majority (78.7%) had a history of opportunistic infections in 
their ART lifetime. To determine factors associated with VF, 187 records on 
patients who maintained PLLV and 12 on deceased patients at the time of data 
review were eliminated from the analysis, leaving 506 patient records. Out of 
the 506, 89% (451/506) suppressed VL to nondetectable levels while 11% (55/506) 
had VF, and the difference was significant (P = 0.0001). Virologic failure was 
significantly associated with ages 10-30 years (P < 0.05). Baseline VL ≥ 1000 
(OR 3.929; P = 0.002) and 200-999 copies/ml (OR 4.062; P = 0.004) were 
associated with VF. During PLLV, factors associated with VF included the 
following: PLLV of 200-999 copies/ml (P < 0.05), viral blips (OR 4.545; P = 
0.0001), mean maximum VL (P < 0.05), and age (P = 0.043). Married marital status 
was inversely associated with VF (OR 0.318; P = 0.026). Regimen change was not 
significantly associated with virologic outcomes. However, patients who switched 
regimens to the second line had a high risk of VF (P = 0.028; OR 3.203). Regimen 
change was significantly high (P < 0.05) among adolescents and patients with a 
start regimen of 2NRTI+1NNRTI. Most of the PLLV patients (89%) achieved 
nondetectable VL after their continued ART monitoring for at least 12 months. 
Therefore, PLLV was not an indicator of VF. However, a consistent VL of ≥200-999 
copies/ml at baseline and more than 12 months of ART care and treatment were 
significantly associated with VF. Patients with VL 200-999 copies/ml, 
adolescents, and young adults require intensive ART monitoring and support.

Copyright © 2023 Mirriam M. Nzivo et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/8961372
PMCID: PMC10159743
PMID: 37152588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Cecilia Waruhiu is an employee of Africa 
Genomics Center and Consultancy, a commercial entity that is based in Nairobi, 
Kenya. The entity provides NGS and bioinformatic support. There was no 
sequencing in the current study. The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.