1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 May 16;120(20):e2221166120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2221166120. Epub 2023 May 8.

A tale of two copies: Evolutionary trajectories of moth pheromone receptors.

Li Z(1), Capoduro R(1), Bastin-Héline L(1)(2), Zhang S(3), Sun D(3), Lucas P(1), 
Dabir-Moghaddam D(1), François MC(1), Liu Y(3), Wang G(3), Jacquin-Joly E(1), 
Montagné N(1), Meslin C(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, Institut National de Recherche pour l'Agriculture, 
l'Alimentation et l'Environnement, CNRS, Institut de Recherche pour le 
Développement, Université Paris-Est-Créteil-Val-de-Marne, Université Paris Cité, 
Institut d'Ecologie et des Sciences de l'Environnement de Paris, Versailles 
78026, France.
(2)Laboratoire Reproduction et Développement des plantes, UMR 5667, Ecole 
Normale Supérieure de Lyon, CNRS, Lyon F-69364, France.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, 
Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 
100193, China.

Pheromone communication is an essential component of reproductive isolation in 
animals. As such, evolution of pheromone signaling can be linked to speciation. 
For example, the evolution of sex pheromones is thought to have played a major 
role in the diversification of moths. In the crop pests Spodoptera littoralis 
and S. litura, the major component of the sex pheromone blend is 
(Z,E)-9,11-tetradecadienyl acetate, which is lacking in other Spodoptera 
species. It indicates that a major shift occurred in their common ancestor. It 
has been shown recently in S. littoralis that this compound is detected with 
high specificity by an atypical pheromone receptor, named SlitOR5. Here, we 
studied its evolutionary history through functional characterization of 
receptors from different Spodoptera species. SlitOR5 orthologs in S. exigua and 
S. frugiperda exhibited a broad tuning to several pheromone compounds. We 
evidenced a duplication of OR5 in a common ancestor of S. littoralis and S. 
litura and found that in these two species, one duplicate is also broadly tuned 
while the other is specific to (Z,E)-9,11-tetradecadienyl acetate. By using 
ancestral gene resurrection, we confirmed that this narrow tuning evolved only 
in one of the two copies issued from the OR5 duplication. Finally, we identified 
eight amino acid positions in the binding pocket of these receptors whose 
evolution has been responsible for narrowing the response spectrum to a single 
ligand. The evolution of OR5 is a clear case of subfunctionalization that could 
have had a determinant impact in the speciation process in Spodoptera species.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2221166120
PMCID: PMC10193968
PMID: 37155838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.