1. Aging Dis. 2023 Aug 1;14(4):1292-1310. doi: 10.14336/AD.2022.1211.

Research Progress on the Etiology and Pathogenesis of Alzheimer's Disease from 
the Perspective of Chronic Stress.

Liu YS(1), Zhao HF(1), Li Q(1), Cui HW(2)(3), Huang GD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital/the First 
Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University Health Science Center, Shenzhen, 
China.
(2)The Central Laboratory, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital/the First 
Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University Health Science Center, Shenzhen, 
China.
(3)Central Laboratory, Shenzhen Samii Medical Center, Shenzhen, China.

Due to its extremely complex pathogenesis, no effective drugs to prevent, delay 
progression, or cure Alzheimer's disease (AD) exist at present. The main 
pathological features of AD are senile plaques composed of Î²-amyloid, 
neurofibrillary tangles formed by hyperphosphorylation of the tau protein, and 
degeneration or loss of neurons in the brain. Many risk factors associated with 
the onset of AD, including gene mutations, aging, traumatic brain injury, 
endocrine and cardiovascular diseases, education level, and obesity. Growing 
evidence points to chronic stress as one of the major risk factors for AD, as it 
can promote the onset and development of AD-related pathologies via a mechanism 
that is not well known. The use of murine stress models, including restraint, 
social isolation, noise, and unpredictable stress, has contributed to improving 
our understanding of the relationship between chronic stress and AD. This review 
summarizes the evidence derived from murine models on the pathological features 
associated with AD and the related molecular mechanisms induced by chronic 
stress. These results not only provide a retrospective interpretation for 
understanding the pathogenesis of AD, but also provide a window of opportunity 
for more effective preventive and identifying therapeutic strategies for 
stress-induced AD.

DOI: 10.14336/AD.2022.1211
PMCID: PMC10389837
PMID: 37163426

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.