1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jun 23;51(11):5883-5894. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad368.

Thermally controlled intein splicing of engineered DNA polymerases provides a 
robust and generalizable solution for accurate and sensitive molecular 
diagnostics.

Wang Y(1), Shi Y(1), Hellinga HW(1), Beese LS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

DNA polymerases are essential for nucleic acid synthesis, cloning, 
sequencing and molecular diagnostics technologies. Conditional intein splicing 
is a powerful tool for controlling enzyme reactions. We have engineered a 
thermal switch into thermostable DNA polymerases from two structurally distinct 
polymerase families by inserting a thermally activated intein domain into a 
surface loop that is integral to the polymerase active site, thereby blocking 
DNA or RNA template access. The fusion proteins are inactive, but retain their 
structures, such that the intein excises during a heat pulse delivered at 
70-80°C to generate spliced, active polymerases. This straightforward thermal 
activation step provides a highly effective, one-component 'hot-start' control 
of PCR reactions that enables accurate target amplification by minimizing 
unwanted by-products generated by off-target reactions. In one engineered 
enzyme, derived from Thermus aquaticus DNA polymerase, both DNA polymerase and 
reverse transcriptase activities are controlled by the intein, enabling 
single-reagent amplification of DNA and RNA under hot-start conditions. This 
engineered polymerase provides high-sensitivity detection for molecular 
diagnostics applications, amplifying 5-6 copies of the tested DNA and RNA 
targets with >95% certainty. The design principles used to engineer the inteins 
can be readily applied to construct other conditionally activated nucleic acid 
processing enzymes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad368
PMCID: PMC10287962
PMID: 37166959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]