1. iScience. 2023 Feb 26;26(5):106276. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.106276.
eCollection  2023 May 19.

An inventory of crosstalk between ubiquitination and other post-translational 
modifications in orchestrating cellular processes.

Barbour H(1)(2), Nkwe NS(3)(2), Estavoyer B(3)(2), Messmer C(4)(2), 
Gushul-Leclaire M(4)(2), Villot R(4)(2), Uriarte M(4)(2), Boulay K(2), Hlayhel 
S(2), Farhat B(4)(2), Milot E(2)(5), Mallette FA(4)(2)(5), Daou S(6), Affar 
EB(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Sciences Programs, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3C 3T5, 
Canada.
(2)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Montréal, QC H1T 2M4, Canada.
(3)Molecular Biology Programs, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3A 0G4, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Montreal, 
Montreal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Montréal, Montreal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada.
(6)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X5, Canada.

Ubiquitination is an important post-translational modification (PTM) that 
regulates a large spectrum of cellular processes in eukaryotes. Abnormalities in 
ubiquitin signaling underlie numerous human pathologies including cancer and 
neurodegeneration. Much progress has been made during the last three decades in 
understanding how ubiquitin ligases recognize their substrates and how 
ubiquitination is orchestrated. Several mechanisms of regulation have evolved to 
prevent promiscuity including the assembly of ubiquitin ligases in multi-protein 
complexes with dedicated subunits and specific post-translational modifications 
of these enzymes and their co-factors. Here, we outline another layer of 
complexity involving the coordinated access of E3 ligases to substrates. We 
provide an extensive inventory of ubiquitination crosstalk with multiple PTMs 
including SUMOylation, phosphorylation, methylation, acetylation, hydroxylation, 
prolyl isomerization, PARylation, and O-GlcNAcylation. We discuss molecular 
mechanisms by which PTMs orchestrate ubiquitination, thus increasing its 
specificity as well as its crosstalk with other signaling pathways to ensure 
cell homeostasis.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.106276
PMCID: PMC10165199
PMID: 37168555

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests with 
the content of this article.