1. Eur J Pediatr. 2023 Jul;182(7):3287-3291. doi: 10.1007/s00431-023-05016-x.
Epub  2023 May 9.

COVID-19 in neonates and infants younger than 6 months - a mild viral illness.

Khoury L(1), Pillar G(1)(2), Shehadeh S(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
(2)B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, 
Haifa, Israel.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. 
Shirinsh@clalit.org.il.
(4)B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, 
Haifa, Israel. Shirinsh@clalit.org.il.
(5)Pediatric Infectious Unit, Carmel Medical Center, 7 Michal St, 3436212, 
Haifa, Israel. Shirinsh@clalit.org.il.

A surge in pediatric COVID-19 cases was observed during the fifth wave (Omicron) 
of the COVID-19 pandemic. Little is known about the clinical features and 
disease course in neonates and young infants. To describe the clinical and 
laboratory features, disease course and complications of COVID-19 in neonates 
and infants younger than 6 months. A retrospective descriptive study in which 
data were collected from the electronic medical records of infants younger than 
6 months, with positive nasal swab tests for COVID-19. Fifty-two infants younger 
than 6 months who tested positive for COVID-19 were admitted to our pediatric 
ER/department during the omicron wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, between December 
2021 and December 2022. Twenty-one percent were discharged from the ER, while 
the others were hospitalized predominantly for observation or supportive 
treatment, with an average duration of hospitalization of 1.3 ± 0.7 days. No 
major complications were observed.   Conclusion: COVID-19 is a mild viral 
illness in young healthy infants with no major complications. What is Known: • 
Pediatric patients generally have a milder clinical presentation of COVID-19 but 
can also experience more severe symptoms and post-COVID phenomena. • Our 
knowledge of COVID-19 in neonates and young infants is limited, and guidelines 
for their diagnosis and management are lacking. What is New: • In neonates and 
young infants, COVID-19 infection is typically a mild viral illness with no 
major complications observed in the majority of cases. • Hospitalization may not 
be necessary for well-appearing infants with COVID-19, as long as their clinical 
and laboratory evaluations do not raise any concerns.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-023-05016-x
PMCID: PMC10169195
PMID: 37160430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.