1. J Am Acad Orthop Surg Glob Res Rev. 2023 May 10;7(5):e23.00043. doi: 
10.5435/JAAOSGlobal-D-23-00043. eCollection 2023 May 1.

Assessing the Risk of Postoperative Complications for Proximal Humeral Fractures 
Treated by Open Reduction and Internal Fixation in Patients With Diabetes and 
Chronic Kidney Disease.

Baker J(1), Manirajan A, Lewis J, Seidel H, Strelzow J.

Author information:
(1)From the Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, GA (Baker); 
The University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, IL (Manirajan, 
Ms. Lewis, and Mr. Seidel); and the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The 
University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL (Dr. Strelzow).

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM) and chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) has markedly risen over the past three decades. Patients with DM and CKD 
are at increased risk of infection, immune dysfunction, as well as bone and 
mineral disorders. Although we know that patients with DM and CKD have these 
risks, we do not know how these translate to proximal humeral fracture (PHF) 
healing. We sought to analyze whether these established comorbidities had 
increased rates of complications after open reduction and internal fixation 
(ORIF) for PHF treatment.
METHODS: Using a national insurance database, 72,365 patients with PHF managed 
with ORIF were identified using records from 2010 to 2022. Patients were 
initially split into those with DM and those without and were further stratified 
by the presence or absence of CKD. For our comparison baseline cohort, patients 
were not diagnosed with either DM or CKD. Post-ORIF complication rates were 
assessed looking specifically at nonunion, postoperative infection, and 
all-cause revision surgery. A logistic regression statistical analysis was also 
conducted.
RESULTS: Of the 72,365 patients with PHF treated by ORIF, 41,047 were non-DM 
without CKD (comparison); 17,025 had DM alone (no CKD); 11,729 had DM and CKD; 
and 2564 had CKD alone (non-DM). Multivariate analysis indicated that patients 
with DM and/or CKD were at increased risk of developing nonunion (odds ratio 
[OR] = 1.37, 1.48, 1.23) and all-cause revision surgery (OR = 1.21, 1.11, 1.18) 
after ORIF for PHF compared with our comparison cohort. In addition, all 
patients with DM alone (non-CKD) and DM with CKD had an increased risk of 
postoperative infection (OR = 1.39, 1.26).
CONCLUSION: The management of PHF is a controversial topic, particularly 
regarding the degree of intervention and optimal treatment choice. Regardless, 
using a pragmatic design and reviewing a national insurance database, this study 
provides information for patients in high-risk populations, specifically 
patients with DM and CKD, and may prove beneficial when selecting a 
patient-specific treatment plan. Additional studies are needed to assess varying 
stages of both DM and CKD in patients who sustain PHF treated by ORIF along with 
postoperative strategies to minimize complications.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf 
of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons.

DOI: 10.5435/JAAOSGlobal-D-23-00043
PMCID: PMC10174425
PMID: 37163414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]