1. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2023 Jun;212(3):231-240. doi:
10.1007/s00430-023-00765-w.  Epub 2023 May 13.

Phenotypic and genotypic identification of carbapenem resistance in Bacteroides 
fragilis clinical strains.

Kierzkowska M(1), Majewska A(2), Karłowicz K(1), Pituch H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland. anna.majewska@wum.edu.pl.

Bacteroides fragilis is an important etiological agent of serious infections in 
humans. Rapid methods, readily adaptable to use in medical laboratories, are 
needed to detect antibiotic resistance and decrease the likelihood of therapy 
failure. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of B. fragilis 
cfiA-positive isolates. The second purpose was to investigate the carbapenemase 
activity in B. fragilis strains by Carba NP test. In the study, 5.2% of B. 
fragilis isolates are phenotypically resistant to meropenem. The cfiA gene was 
identified in 6.1% of B. fragilis isolates. The MICs of meropenem were 
significantly higher in cfiA-positive strains. The presence of the cfiA gene 
along with the IS1186 was detected in one B. fragilis strain which was resistant 
to meropenem (MIC 1.5 mg/L). The Carba NP test results were positive for all the 
cfiA-positive strains, including those susceptible to carbapenems based on their 
MIC values. A review of the literature revealed that the rate of B. fragilis 
with the cfiA gene varies from 7.6 to 38.9% worldwide. Presented results are in 
line with the other European studies. Phenotypic testing with the Carba NP test, 
it seems to be a viable alternative for the cfiA gene detection in B. fragilis 
isolates. The positive result obtained is of greater clinical importance than 
the detection of the gene cfiA.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00430-023-00765-w
PMCID: PMC10293361
PMID: 37178261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.