1. Genetics. 2023 Jul 6;224(3):iyad086. doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyad086.

Genome-wide maps of UVA and UVB mutagenesis in yeast reveal distinct causative 
lesions and mutational strand asymmetries.

Laughery MF(1), Plummer DA(1), Wilson HE(1), Vandenberg BN(1), Mitchell D(1), 
Mieczkowski PA(2), Roberts SA(1)(3), Wyrick JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 
99164, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(3)Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 
99164, USA.

Ultraviolet (UV) light primarily causes C > T substitutions in lesion-forming 
dipyrimidine sequences. However, many of the key driver mutations in melanoma do 
not fit this canonical UV signature, but are instead caused by T > A, T > C, or 
C > A substitutions. To what extent exposure to the UVB or UVA spectrum of 
sunlight can induce these noncanonical mutation classes, and the molecular 
mechanism involved is unclear. Here, we repeatedly exposed wild-type or 
repair-deficient yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) to UVB or UVA light and 
characterized the resulting mutations by whole genome sequencing. Our data 
indicate that UVB induces C > T and T > C substitutions in dipyrimidines, and T 
> A substitutions that are often associated with thymine-adenine (TA) sequences. 
All of these mutation classes are induced in nucleotide excision 
repair-deficient cells and show transcriptional strand asymmetry, suggesting 
they are caused by helix-distorting UV photoproducts. In contrast, UVA exposure 
induces orders of magnitude fewer mutations with a distinct mutation spectrum. 
UVA-induced mutations are elevated in Ogg1-deficient cells, and the resulting 
spectrum consists almost entirely of C > A/G > T mutations, indicating they are 
likely derived from oxidative guanine lesions. These mutations show replication 
asymmetry, with elevated G > T mutations on the leading strand, suggesting there 
is a strand bias in the removal or bypass of guanine lesions during replication. 
Finally, we develop a mutation reporter to show that UVA induces a G > T 
reversion mutation in yeast that mimics the oncogenic NRAS Q61K mutation in 
melanoma. Taken together, these findings indicate that UVA and UVB exposure can 
induce many of the noncanonical mutation classes that cause driver mutations in 
melanoma.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Genetics Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyad086
PMCID: PMC10324949
PMID: 37170598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The author(s) declare no 
conflict of interest.