1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Apr 27;13(9):1573. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13091573.

Detection of SARS-CoV-2 Variants via Different Diagnostics Assays Based on 
Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism Analysis.

Specchiarello E(1), Matusali G(1), Carletti F(1), Gruber CEM(1), Fabeni L(1), 
Minosse C(1), Giombini E(1), Rueca M(1), Maggi F(1), Amendola A(1), Garbuglia 
AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute for Infectious Diseases (INMI) 
Lazzaro Spallanzani (IRCCS), 00149 Rome, Italy.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is characterized by 
fast evolution with the appearance of several variants. Next-Generation 
Sequencing (NGS) technology is considered the gold standard for monitoring known 
and new SARS-CoV-2 variants. However, the complexity of this technology renders 
this approach impracticable in laboratories located in areas with limited 
resources. We analyzed the capability of the ThermoFisher TaqPath COVID-19 
RT-PCR (TaqPath) and the Seegene Novaplex SARS-CoV-2 Variant assay (Novaplex) to 
detect Omicron variants; the Allplex VariantII (Allplex) was also evaluated for 
Delta variants. Sanger sequencing (SaS) was the reference method. The results 
obtained with n = 355 nasopharyngeal samples were: negative with TaqPath, 
although positive with other qualitative molecular assays (n = 35); undetermined 
(n = 40) with both the assays; negative for the ∆69/70 mutation and confirmed as 
the Delta variant via SaS (n = 100); positive for ∆69/70 and confirmed as 
Omicron BA.1 via SaS (n = 80); negative for ∆69/70 and typed as Omicron BA.2 via 
SaS (n = 80). Novaplex typed 27.5% of samples as undetermined with TaqPath, 
11.4% of samples as negative with TaqPath, and confirmed 100% of samples were 
Omicron subtypes. In total, 99/100 samples were confirmed as the Delta variant 
with Allplex with a positive per cent agreement (PPA) of 98% compared to SaS. As 
undermined samples with Novaplex showed RdRp median Ct values (Ct = 35.4) 
statistically higher than those of typed samples (median Ct value = 22.0; p < 
0.0001, Mann-Whitney test), the inability to establish SARS-CoV-2 variants was 
probably linked to the low viral load. No amplification was obtained with SaS 
among all 35 negative TaqPath samples. Overall, 20% of samples which were typed 
as negative or undetermined with TaqPath, and among them, twelve were not typed 
even by SaS, but they were instead correctly identified with Novaplex. Although 
full-genome sequencing remains the elected method to characterize new strains, 
our data show the high ability of a SNP-based assay to identify VOCs, also 
resolving samples typed as undetermined with TaqPath.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13091573
PMCID: PMC10177602
PMID: 37174964

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.