1. Cells. 2023 Apr 26;12(9):1258. doi: 10.3390/cells12091258.

Epigenetic Changes Associated with Different Types of Stressors and Suicide.

Dee G(1), Ryznar R(2), Dee C(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Osteopathic Medicine, Rocky Vista University, Parker, CO 80112, 
USA.
(2)Molecular Biology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Rocky Vista University, 
Parker, CO 80112, USA.
(3)College of Osteopathic Medicine, Des Moines University, Des Moines, IA 50312, 
USA.

Stress is associated with various epigenetic changes. Some stress-induced 
epigenetic changes are highly dynamic, whereas others are associated with 
lasting marks on the epigenome. In our study, a comprehensive narrative review 
of the literature was performed by investigating the epigenetic changes that 
occur with acute stress, chronic stress, early childhood stress, and traumatic 
stress exposures, along with examining those observed in post-mortem brains or 
blood samples of suicide completers and attempters. In addition, the 
transgenerational effects of these changes are reported. For all types of stress 
studies examined, the genes Nr3c1, OXTR, SLC6A4, and BDNF reproducibly showed 
epigenetic changes, with some modifications observed to be passed down to 
subsequent generations following stress exposures. The aforementioned genes are 
known to be involved in neuronal development and hormonal regulation and are all 
associated with susceptibility to mental health disorders including depression, 
anxiety, personality disorders, and PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder). 
Further research is warranted in order to determine the scope of epigenetic 
actionable targets in individuals suffering from the long-lasting effects of 
stressful experiences.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12091258
PMCID: PMC10177343
PMID: 37174656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.