1. J Equine Vet Sci. 2023 Aug;127:104563. doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2023.104563. Epub 
2023 May 12.

5'UTR Variant in KIT Associated With White Spotting in Horses.

McFadden A(1), Martin K(2), Foster G(2), Vierra M(2), Lundquist EW(2), Everts 
RE(2), Martin E(2), Volz E(2), McLoone K(2), Brooks SA(3), Lafayette C(2).

Author information:
(1)Etalon Inc, Menlo Park, CA. Electronic address: amcfadden@etalondx.com.
(2)Etalon Inc, Menlo Park, CA.
(3)Department of Animal Sciences, UF Genetics Institute University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL.

Mutations in KIT, a gene that influences melanoblast migration and pigmentation, 
often result in mammalian white spotting. As of February 2023, over 30 KIT 
variants associated with white spotting were documented in Equus caballus 
(horse). Here we report an association of increased white spotting on the skin 
and coat with a variant in the 5'UTR of KIT (rs1149701677: g.79,618,649A>C). 
Horses possessing at least one alternate allele demonstrate phenotypic 
characteristics similar to other KIT mutations: clear borders around unpigmented 
regions on the body, face, and limbs. Using a quantitative measure of 
depigmentation, we observed an average white score of 10.70 among individuals 
with rs1149701677, while the average score of the control, homozygous reference 
sample was 2.23 (P = 1.892e-11, n = 109, t-test). The rs1149701677 site has a 
cross-species conservation score of 3.4, one of the highest scores across the 
KIT 5'UTR, implying regulatory importance for this site. Ensembl also predicted 
a "moderately impactful" functional effect for the rs1149701677 variant. We 
propose that this single nucleotide variant likely alters the regulation of KIT, 
which in turn may disrupt melanoblast migration causing an increase in white 
spotting on the coat. Alternatively, the rs1149701677 variant may be in linkage 
with another nearby variant with an as-yet-undiscovered functional impact. We 
propose to term this new allele "Holiday White" or W35 based on conventional 
nomenclature.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jevs.2023.104563
PMID: 37182614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest AM, K.Martin, 
K.McLoone, MV, GF, EL, EV, RE, EM, and CL are affiliated with Etalon Diagnostics 
which offers diagnostic testing for white-spotting mutations.