1. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 2023 Apr 1;45(4):2908-2916. doi: 10.3390/cimb45040190.

The Case of an Endometrial Cancer Patient with Breast Cancer Who Has Achieved 
Long-Term Survival via Letrozole Monotherapy.

Ishikawa M(1), Nakayama K(1), Razia S(1), Yamashita H(1), Ishibashi T(1), Haraga 
H(1), Kanno K(1), Ishikawa N(2), Kyo S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane 
University, Izumo 693-8501, Shimane, Japan.
(2)Tokushukai Medical Corporation, Shonan Fujisawa Tokushukai Pathology Group, 
Fujisawa 251-0041, Kanagawa, Japan.

Herein, we present the successful treatment of a 92-year-old woman who 
experienced recurrent EC in the vaginal stump and para-aortic lymph nodes. The 
patient was first treated with paclitaxel and carboplatin for recurrent EC, 
which was abandoned after two cycles of chemotherapy because of G4 hematologic 
toxicity. Later, the patient was treated with letrozole for early-stage breast 
cancer, which was diagnosed simultaneously with EC recurrence. After four months 
of hormonal therapy, a partial response was observed not only in the lesions in 
the breast, but also those in the vaginal stump and para-aortic lymph nodes. She 
had no recurrence of breast cancer or EC, even after six years of treatment with 
letrozole-based hormonal therapy. Subsequent whole-exome sequencing using the 
genomic DNA isolated from the surgical specimen in the uterine tumor identified 
several genetic variants, including actionable mutations, such as CTNNB1 
(p.S37F), PIK3R1 (p.M582Is_10), and TP53 c.375 + 5G>T. These data suggest that 
the efficacy of letrozole is mediated by blocking the mammalian target of the 
rapamycin pathway. The findings of this study, substantiated via genetic 
analysis, suggest the possibility of long-term disease-free survival, even in 
elderly patients with recurrent EC, which was thought to be difficult to cure 
completely.

DOI: 10.3390/cimb45040190
PMCID: PMC10136412
PMID: 37185714

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.