1. Clin Case Rep. 2023 May 10;11(5):e7332. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.7332. eCollection
2023  May.

No, it is not mutually exclusive! A case report of a girl with two genetic 
diagnoses: Craniofrontonasal dysplasia and pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1B.

Ibrahim I(1), Scriver T(2), Basalom SA(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Health Studies, Elborn College Western University London Ontario 
Canada.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Royal University 
Hospital University of Saskatchewan Saskatoon Saskatchewan Canada.

KEY CLINICAL MESSAGE: Multiple genetic disorders can coexist in one patient. 
When the phenotype is not fully explained with one diagnosis, it is recommended 
to perform further genetic investigations in search for coexisting second 
diagnosis.
ABSTRACT: Craniofrontonasal dysplasia (CFND) (MIM: 304110) is an X-linked 
dominant disorder that shows paradoxically greater severity in heterozygous 
females than in hemizygous males. It is caused by a pathogenic variant in EFNB1. 
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1B (PCH1B) (MIM: 614678) is an extremely rare 
condition with over 100 individuals reported to date. It is caused by biallelic 
pathogenic variants in EXOSC3. This report presents the case of a girl who was 
diagnosed prenatally with CFND based on the findings on the prenatal imaging and 
the known diagnosis of CFND in her mother. She has severe global development 
delay that cannot be explained solely by the CFND diagnosis. Around the age of 
2 years, she was diagnosed with PCH1B following whole exome sequencing (WES) 
testing. The objective of this study is to highlight the importance of pursuing 
genetic investigation if the available genetic diagnosis cannot fully explain 
the clinical picture. This is a case report of one patient and review of the 
literature. Informed consent was obtained from the parents. WES was performed by 
a private lab using next-generation sequencing (NGS), DNA was sequenced on the 
NovaSeq 6000 using 2 × 150 bp paired-end read. WES identified the following: 
homozygous pathogenic variant in EXOSC3: C.395A>C, p.ASp132Ala, maternally 
inherited, likely pathogenic duplication at Xq13.1 (includes EFNB1) and 
paternally inherited 16p11.2 duplication that is classified as a variant of 
uncertain significance. Perusing more extensive genetic testing like: WES is 
indicated if the current genetic diagnosis cannot fully explain the phenotype in 
a patient.

© 2023 The Authors. Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.7332
PMCID: PMC10172455
PMID: 37180334

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.