1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Apr 27;14:1132770. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1132770. 
eCollection 2023.

Bacterial ACC deaminase: Insights into enzymology, biochemistry, genetics, and 
potential role in amelioration of environmental stress in crop plants.

Shahid M(1), Singh UB(1), Khan MS(2), Singh P(3), Kumar R(4), Singh RN(5), Kumar 
A(6), Singh HV(1).

Author information:
(1)Plant-Microbe Interaction and Rhizosphere Biology Lab, ICAR-National Bureau 
of Agriculturally Important Microorganisms (NBAIM), Mau, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Veer Kunwar Singh College of 
Agriculture, Bihar Agricultural University, Dumraon, India.
(4)Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Rohtas, Bihar Agricultural University, Bikramganj, 
Bihar, India.
(5)Directorate of Extension Education, Bihar Agricultural University, Bhagalpur, 
Bihar, India.
(6)Swamy Keshwanand Rajasthan Agriculture University, Bikaner, Rajasthan, India.

Growth and productivity of crop plants worldwide are often adversely affected by 
anthropogenic and natural stresses. Both biotic and abiotic stresses may impact 
future food security and sustainability; global climate change will only 
exacerbate the threat. Nearly all stresses induce ethylene production in plants, 
which is detrimental to their growth and survival when present at higher 
concentrations. Consequently, management of ethylene production in plants is 
becoming an attractive option for countering the stress hormone and its effect 
on crop yield and productivity. In plants, ACC 
(1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate) serves as a precursor for ethylene 
production. Soil microorganisms and root-associated plant growth promoting 
rhizobacteria (PGPR) that possess ACC deaminase activity regulate growth and 
development of plants under harsh environmental conditions by limiting ethylene 
levels in plants; this enzyme is, therefore, often designated as a "stress 
modulator." TheACC deaminase enzyme, encoded by the AcdS gene, is tightly 
controlled and regulated depending upon environmental conditions. Gene 
regulatory components of AcdS are made up of the LRP protein-coding regulatory 
gene and other regulatory components that are activated via distinct mechanisms 
under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. ACC deaminase-positive PGPR strains can 
intensively promote growth and development of crops being cultivated under 
abiotic stresses including salt stress, water deficit, waterlogging, temperature 
extremes, and presence of heavy metals, pesticides and other organic 
contaminants. Strategies for combating environmental stresses in plants, and 
improving growth by introducing the acdS gene into crop plants via bacteria, 
have been investigated. In the recent past, some rapid methods and cutting-edge 
technologies based on molecular biotechnology and omics approaches involving 
proteomics, transcriptomics, metagenomics, and next generation sequencing (NGS) 
have been proposed to reveal the variety and potential of ACC 
deaminase-producing PGPR that thrive under external stresses. Multiple 
stress-tolerant ACC deaminase-producing PGPR strains have demonstrated great 
promise in providing plant resistance/tolerance to various stressors and, 
therefore, it could be advantageous over other soil/plant microbiome that can 
flourish under stressed environments.

Copyright Â© 2023 Shahid, Singh, Khan, Singh, Kumar, Singh, Kumar and Singh.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1132770
PMCID: PMC10174264
PMID: 37180266

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer RK declared a 
shared affiliation with the authors MS, US, and HS to the handling editor at the 
time of review.