1. J Cell Biol. 2023 Jul 3;222(7):e202107027. doi: 10.1083/jcb.202107027. Epub
2023  May 15.

CLASPs stabilize the pre-catastrophe intermediate state between microtubule 
growth and shrinkage.

Lawrence EJ(1), Chatterjee S(1), Zanic M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.

Cytoplasmic linker-associated proteins (CLASPs) regulate microtubules in 
fundamental cellular processes. CLASPs stabilize dynamic microtubules by 
suppressing microtubule catastrophe and promoting rescue, the switch-like 
transitions between growth and shrinkage. How CLASPs specifically modulate 
microtubule transitions is not understood. Here, we investigate the effects of 
CLASPs on the pre-catastrophe intermediate state of microtubule dynamics, 
employing distinct microtubule substrates to mimic the intermediate state. 
Surprisingly, we find that CLASP1 promotes the depolymerization of stabilized 
microtubules in the presence of GTP, but not in the absence of nucleotide. This 
activity is also observed for CLASP2 family members and a minimal TOG2-domain 
construct. Conversely, we find that CLASP1 stabilizes unstable microtubules upon 
tubulin dilution in the presence of GTP. Strikingly, our results reveal that 
CLASP1 drives microtubule substrates with vastly different inherent stabilities 
into the same slowly depolymerizing state in a nucleotide-dependent manner. We 
interpret this state as the pre-catastrophe intermediate state. Therefore, we 
conclude that CLASPs suppress microtubule catastrophe by stabilizing the 
intermediate state between growth and shrinkage.

Â© 2023 Lawrence et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.202107027
PMCID: PMC10195879
PMID: 37184584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors declare no competing 
interests exist.