1. Chem Sci. 2023 Apr 11;14(18):4681-4696. doi: 10.1039/d3sc00166k. eCollection 
2023 May 10.

Unraveling the catalytic mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 papain-like protease with 
allosteric modulation of C270 mutation using multiscale computational 
approaches.

Shao Q(1)(2), Xiong M(1)(2), Li J(3), Hu H(4), Su H(1), Xu Y(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai 201203 China qshao@simm.ac.cn 
ycxu@simm.ac.cn.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing 100049 China.
(3)School of Chinese Materia Medica, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine 
Nanjing 210023 China.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Hangzhou Institute for 
Advanced Study, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Hangzhou 310024 China.

Papain-like protease (PLpro) is a promising therapeutic target against 
SARS-CoV-2, but its restricted S1/S2 subsites pose an obstacle in developing 
active site-directed inhibitors. We have recently identified C270 as a novel 
covalent allosteric site for SARS-CoV-2 PLpro inhibitors. Here we present a 
theoretical investigation of the proteolysis reaction catalyzed by the wild-type 
SARS-CoV-2 PLpro as well as the C270R mutant. Enhanced sampling MD simulations 
were first performed to explore the influence of C270R mutation on the protease 
dynamics, and sampled thermodynamically favorable conformations were then 
submitted to MM/PBSA and QM/MM MD simulations for thorough characterization of 
the protease-substrate binding and covalent reactions. The disclosed proteolysis 
mechanism of PLpro, as characterized by the occurrence of proton transfer from 
the catalytic C111 to H272 prior to the substrate binding and with deacylation 
being the rate-determining step of the whole proteolysis process, is not 
completely identical to that of the 3C-like protease, another key cysteine 
protease of coronaviruses. The C270R mutation alters the structural dynamics of 
the BL2 loop that indirectly impairs the catalytic function of H272 and reduces 
the binding of the substrate with the protease, ultimately showing an inhibitory 
effect on PLpro. Together, these results provide a comprehensive understanding 
at the atomic level of the key aspects of SARS-CoV-2 PLpro proteolysis, 
including the catalytic activity allosterically regulated by C270 modification, 
which is crucial to the follow-up inhibitor design and development.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d3sc00166k
PMCID: PMC10171076
PMID: 37181765

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.