1. Ther Adv Rare Dis. 2020 Jul 22;1:2633004020938061. doi: 
10.1177/2633004020938061. eCollection 2020 Jan-Dec.

Congenital cataract: a guide to genetic and clinical management.

Bell SJ(1), Oluonye N(1)(2), Harding P(3), Moosajee M(4)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, 
London, UK.
(3)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK.
(4)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology 11-43 Bath Street London EC1V 9EL, UK.

Worldwide 20,000-40,000 children with congenital or childhood cataract are born 
every year with varying degrees and patterns of lens opacification with a broad 
aetiology. In most cases of bilateral cataract, a causative genetic mutation can 
be identified, with autosomal dominant inheritance being most common in 44% of 
cases. Variants in genes involve lens-specific proteins or those that regulate 
eye development, thus giving rise to other associated ocular abnormalities. 
Approximately 15% of cases have systemic features, hence paediatric input is 
essential to minimise comorbidities and support overall development of children 
at high risk of visual impairment. In some metabolic conditions, congenital 
cataract may be the presenting sign, and therefore prompt diagnosis is important 
where there is an available treatment. Multidisciplinary management of children 
is essential, including ophthalmic surgeons, orthoptists, paediatricians, 
geneticists and genetic counsellors, and should extend beyond the medical team 
to include school and local paediatric visual support services. Early surgery 
and close follow up in ophthalmology is important to optimise visual potential 
and prevent amblyopia. Routine genetic testing is essential for the complete 
clinical management of patients, with next-generation sequencing of 115 genes 
shown to expedite molecular diagnosis, streamline care pathways and inform 
genetic counselling and reproductive options for the future.
LAY ABSTRACT: Childhood cataract: how to manage patients Cataract is a clouding 
of the lens in the eye. Cataract occurring in children has many different 
causes, which may include infections passed from mother to child during 
pregnancy, trauma, medications and exposure to radiation. In most cases of 
cataract occurring in both eyes, a genetic cause can be found which may be 
inherited from parents or occur sporadically in the developing baby itself while 
in the womb. Cataracts may occur on their own, with other eye conditions or be 
present with other disorders in the body as part of a syndrome. Genetic testing 
is important for all children with cataract as it can provide valuable 
information about cause, inheritance and risk to further children and signpost 
any other features of the disease in the rest of the body, permitting the 
assembly of the correct multidisciplinary care team. Genetic testing currently 
involves screening for mutations in 115 genes already known to cause cataract 
and has been shown to expedite diagnosis and help better manage children. 
Genetic counselling services can support families in understanding their 
diagnosis and inform future family planning. In order to optimise vision, early 
surgery for cataract in children is important. This is because the brain is 
still developing and an unobstructed pathway for light to reach the back of the 
eye is required for normal visual development. Any obstruction (such as 
cataract) if left untreated may lead to permanent sight impairment or blindness, 
even if it is removed later. A multidisciplinary team involved in the care of a 
child with cataract should include ophthalmic surgeons, orthoptists, 
paediatricians, geneticists and genetic counsellors, and should extend beyond 
the medical team to include school and local child visual support services. They 
will help to diagnose and manage systemic conditions, optimise vision potential 
and help patients and their families access best supportive care.

Â© The Author(s), 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/2633004020938061
PMCID: PMC10032449
PMID: 37180497

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.