1. Hortic Res. 2023 Mar 15;10(5):uhad046. doi: 10.1093/hr/uhad046. eCollection
2023  May.

Pepper mild mottle virus coat protein interacts with pepper chloroplast outer 
envelope membrane protein OMP24 to inhibit antiviral immunity in plants.

Han K(1)(2), Zheng H(1), Yan D(2), Zhou H(1), Jia Z(1), Zhai Y(1), Wu J(1), Lu 
Y(1), Wu G(1), Rao S(1), Chen J(1), Peng J(1), Qi R(2), Yan F(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agro-products, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, 
Ningbo, 315211, China.
(2)Institute of Plant Protection and Agro-Products Safety, Anhui Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Hefei, Anhui 230031, China.

Pepper mild mottle virus (PMMoV) is a devastating viral pathogen of pepper 
(Capsicum annuum) but it is unclear whether and how peppers protect against 
PMMoV infection. The expression of the chloroplast outer membrane protein 24 
(OMP24) of C. annuum was upregulated under PMMoV infection and it interacted 
with PMMoV coat protein (CP). Silencing of OMP24 in either C. annuum or 
Nicotiana benthamiana facilitated PMMoV infection, whereas overexpression of N. 
benthamiana OMP24 in transgenic plants inhibited PMMoV infection. Both C. annuum 
OMP24 (CaOMP24) and N. benthamiana OMP24 (NbOMP24) localized to the chloroplast 
and have a moderately hydrophobic transmembrane domain that is necessary for 
their localization. Overexpression of CaOMP24 induced stromules, perinuclear 
chloroplast clustering, and accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the 
typical defense responses of chloroplasts transferring the retrograde signaling 
to the nucleus to regulate resistance genes. The expression of PR1 and PR2 was 
also upregulated significantly in plants overexpressing OMP24. Self-interaction 
of OMP24 was demonstrated and was required for OMP24-mediated plant defense. 
Interaction with PMMoV CP interfered with the self-interaction of OMP24 and 
impaired OMP24-induced stromules, perinuclear chloroplast clustering and ROS 
accumulation. The results demonstrate the defense function of OMP24 in pepper 
during viral infection and suggest a possible mechanism by which PMMoV CP 
modulates the plant defense to facilitate viral infection.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nanjing 
Agricultural University.

DOI: 10.1093/hr/uhad046
PMCID: PMC10170409
PMID: 37180740

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.