1. Cell Insight. 2022 Dec 5;2(1):100075. doi: 10.1016/j.cellin.2022.100075. 
eCollection 2023 Feb.

Intertwined regulation between RNA m(6)A modification and cancer metabolism.

Liu J(1)(2), Huang H(2), Zhang M(2), Qing G(2), Liu H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Medical Research Institute, Zhongnan Hospital of 
Wuhan University, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Frontier Science Center of Immunology and Metabolism, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China.

Erratum in
    Cell Insight. 2024 Jan 30;3(1):100148. doi: 10.1016/j.cellin.2024.100148.

RNA N6-methyladenosine (m6A) has been identified as the most common, abundant 
and conserved internal modification in RNA transcripts, especially within 
eukaryotic messenger RNAs (mRNAs). Accumulating evidence demonstrates that RNA 
m6A modification exploits a wide range of regulatory mechanisms to control gene 
expression in pathophysiological processes including cancer. Metabolic 
reprogramming has been widely recognized as a hallmark of cancer. Cancer cells 
obtain metabolic adaptation through a variety of endogenous and exogenous 
signaling pathways to promote cell growth and survival in the microenvironment 
with limited nutrient supply. Recent emerging evidence reveals reciprocal 
regulation between the m6A modification and disordered metabolic events in 
cancer cells, adding more complexity in the cellular network of metabolic 
rewiring. In this review, we summarize the most recent advances of how RNA 
methylation affects tumor metabolism and the feedback regulation of m6A 
modification by metabolic intermediates. We aim to highlight the important 
connection between RNA m6A modification and cancer metabolism, and expect that 
studise of RNA m6A and metabolic reprogramming will lead to greater 
understanding of cancer pathology.

Â© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellin.2022.100075
PMCID: PMC10120304
PMID: 37192910