1. Neurology. 2023 Jul 11;101(2):e137-e150. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207387.
Epub  2023 May 17.

Global Burden, Risk Factor Analysis, and Prediction Study of Ischemic Stroke, 
1990-2030.

Fan J(1), Li X(2), Yu X(1), Liu Z(1), Jiang Y(1), Fang Y(1), Zong M(1), Suo 
C(2), Man Q(2), Xiong L(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Clinical Laboratory (J.F., X.Y., M.Z., Q.M.), 
Department of Thyroid, Breast and Vascular Surgery (X.L.), Department of 
Neurovascular Disease (Y.F.), and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative 
Medicine (L.X.), Shanghai Fourth People's Hospital Affiliated to Tongji 
University School of Medicine; State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and Development, School of Life 
Sciences (Z.L., Y.J.), Taizhou Institute of Health Sciences (Z.L., Y.J., C.S.), 
Human Phenome Institute (Z.L., Y.J.), Department of Epidemiology and Key 
Laboratory of Public Health Safety of Ministry of Education, School of Public 
Health (C.S.), and Shanghai Institute of Infectious Disease and Biosecurity 
(C.S.), Fudan University; Translational Research Institute of Brain and 
Brain-Like Intelligence (L.X.); and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Anesthesiology 
and Brain Functional Modulation (L.X.), China.
(2)From the Department of Clinical Laboratory (J.F., X.Y., M.Z., Q.M.), 
Department of Thyroid, Breast and Vascular Surgery (X.L.), Department of 
Neurovascular Disease (Y.F.), and Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative 
Medicine (L.X.), Shanghai Fourth People's Hospital Affiliated to Tongji 
University School of Medicine; State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and Development, School of Life 
Sciences (Z.L., Y.J.), Taizhou Institute of Health Sciences (Z.L., Y.J., C.S.), 
Human Phenome Institute (Z.L., Y.J.), Department of Epidemiology and Key 
Laboratory of Public Health Safety of Ministry of Education, School of Public 
Health (C.S.), and Shanghai Institute of Infectious Disease and Biosecurity 
(C.S.), Fudan University; Translational Research Institute of Brain and 
Brain-Like Intelligence (L.X.); and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Anesthesiology 
and Brain Functional Modulation (L.X.), China. lizexiong@tongji.edu.cn 
manqiuhong307@163.com suochen@fudan.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2023 Jul 11;101(2):55-56. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207517.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Ischemic stroke (IS), 1 of the 2 main subtypes of 
stroke, occurs because of brain ischemia caused by thrombosis of a cerebral 
blood vessel. IS is one of the most important neurovascular causes of death and 
disability. It is affected by many risk factors, such as smoking and a high body 
mass index (BMI), which are also critical in the preventive control of other 
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases. However, there are still few 
systematic analyses of the current and predicted disease burden and the 
attributable risk factors of IS.
METHODS: Based on the Global Burden of Disease 2019 database, we used 
age-standardized mortality rate and disability-adjusted life year to 
systematically present the geographical distribution and trends of IS disease 
burden worldwide from 1990 to 2019 by calculating the estimated annual 
percentage change and to analyze and predict the death number of IS accounted by 
7 major risk factors for 2020-2030.
RESULTS: Between 1990 and 2019, the global number of IS deaths increased from 
2.04 million to 3.29 million and is expected to increase further to 4.90 million 
by 2030. The downward trend was more pronounced in women, young people, and high 
sociodemographic index (SDI) regions. At the same time, a study of attributable 
risk factors of IS found that 2 behavioral factors, smoking and diet in high 
sodium, and 5 metabolic factors, including high systolic blood pressure, high 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, kidney dysfunction, high fasting plasma 
glucose, and a high BMI, are major contributors to the increased disease burden 
of IS now and in the future.
DISCUSSION: Our study provides the first comprehensive summary for the past 30 
years and the prediction of the global burden of IS and its attributable risk 
factors until 2030, providing detailed statistics for decision-making on the 
prevention and control of IS globally. An inadequate control of the 7 risk 
factors would lead to an increased disease burden of IS in young people, 
especially in low SDI regions. Our study identifies high-risk populations and 
helps public health professionals develop targeted preventive strategies to 
reduce the global disease burden of IS.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207387
PMCID: PMC10351546
PMID: 37197995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no disclosures relevant to 
the manuscript. Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.