1. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2023 Jun;52(2):347-362. doi: 
10.1016/j.gtc.2023.03.009. Epub 2023 Apr 7.

Obesity, Chronic Stress, and Stress Reduction.

Goens D(1), Virzi NE(2), Jung SE(3), Rutledge TR(3), Zarrinpar A(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, UC San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Psychology, San Diego State University/University of 
California, San Diego Joint Doctoral Program, 6363 Alvarado Court, San Diego, CA 
92120, USA.
(3)VA San Diego Health Sciences, 3350 La Jolla Village Drive, San Diego, CA 
92161, USA.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, UC San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA; VA San Diego Health Sciences, 3350 La Jolla Village Drive, San 
Diego, CA 92161, USA. Electronic address: azarrinp@ucsd.edu.

The obesity epidemic is caused by the misalignment between human biology and the 
modern food environment, which has led to unhealthy eating patterns and 
behaviors and an increase in metabolic diseases. This has been caused by the 
shift from a "leptogenic" to an "obesogenic" food environment, characterized by 
the availability of unhealthy food and the ability to eat at any time of day due 
to advances in technology. Binge Eating Disorder (BED) is the most commonly 
diagnosed eating disorder, characterized by recurrent episodes of binge eating 
and a sense of loss of control over eating, and is treated with 
cognitive-behavioral therapy-enhanced (CBT-E). Shift work, especially night 
shift work, can disrupt the body's natural circadian rhythms and increase the 
risk of obesity and other negative health consequences, such as cardiovascular 
disease and metabolic syndrome. One dietary approach to address circadian 
dysregulation is time-restricted eating (TRE), which involves restricting food 
intake to specific periods of the day to synchronize the body's internal clock 
with the external environment. TRE has been found to cause modest weight loss 
and improve metabolic outcomes such as insulin sensitivity and blood pressure, 
but the extent to which it is beneficial may depend on adherence and other 
factors such as caloric restriction.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gtc.2023.03.009
PMCID: PMC10746495
PMID: 37197878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]