1. Front Immunol. 2023 May 3;14:1170462. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1170462. 
eCollection 2023.

Effects of HLA single chain trimer design on peptide presentation and stability.

Finton KAK(1), Rupert PB(1), Friend DJ(1), Dinca A(2), Lovelace ES(1), Buerger 
M(1), Rusnac DV(1), Foote-McNabb U(1), Chour W(3), Heath JR(3), Campbell JS(2), 
Pierce RH(2), Strong RK(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Science, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (FHCC), 
Seattle, WA, United States.
(2)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA, 
United States.
(3)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, United States.

MHC class I "single-chain trimer" molecules, coupling MHC heavy chain, 
β2-microglobulin, and a specific peptide into a single polypeptide chain, are 
widely used in research. To more fully understand caveats associated with this 
design that may affect its use for basic and translational studies, we evaluated 
a set of engineered single-chain trimers with combinations of stabilizing 
mutations across eight different classical and non-classical human class I 
alleles with 44 different peptides, including a novel human/murine chimeric 
design. While, overall, single-chain trimers accurately recapitulate native 
molecules, care was needed in selecting designs for studying peptides longer or 
shorter than 9-mers, as single-chain trimer design could affect peptide 
conformation. In the process, we observed that predictions of peptide binding 
were often discordant with experiment and that yields and stabilities varied 
widely with construct design. We also developed novel reagents to improve the 
crystallizability of these proteins and confirmed novel modes of peptide 
presentation.

Copyright © 2023 Finton, Rupert, Friend, Dinca, Lovelace, Buerger, Rusnac, 
Foote-McNabb, Chour, Heath, Campbell, Pierce and Strong.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1170462
PMCID: PMC10189100
PMID: 37207206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.