1. PLoS One. 2023 May 18;18(5):e0285505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285505. 
eCollection 2023.

Characterization of an accessory plasmid of Sinorhizobium meliloti and its two 
replication-modules.

Luchetti A(1)(2), Castellani LG(2), Toscani AM(2), Lagares A(2), Del Papa MF(2), 
Torres Tejerizo G(2), Pistorio M(2).

Author information:
(1)Proteome and Metabolome Research, Faculty of Biology, Center for 
Biotechnology, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, IBBM 
(Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular), CCT-CONICET-La Plata, 
Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2025 Jan 24;20(1):e0318411. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0318411.

Rhizobia are Gram-negative bacteria known for their ability to fix atmospheric 
N2 in symbiosis with leguminous plants. Current evidence shows that rhizobia 
carry in most cases a variable number of plasmids, containing genes necessary 
for symbiosis or free-living, a common feature being the presence of several 
plasmid replicons within the same strain. For many years, we have been studying 
the mobilization properties of pSmeLPU88b from the strain Sinorhizobium meliloti 
LPU88, an isolate from Argentina. To advance in the characterization of 
pSmeLPU88b plasmid, the full sequence was obtained. pSmeLPU88b is 35.9 kb in 
size, had an average GC % of 58.6 and 31 CDS. Two replication modules were 
identified in silico: one belonging to the repABC type, and the other to the 
repC. The replication modules presented high DNA identity to the replication 
modules from plasmid pMBA9a present in an S. meliloti isolate from Canada. In 
addition, three CDS presenting identity with recombinases and with 
toxin-antitoxin systems were found downstream of the repABC system. It is 
noteworthy that these CDS present the same genetic structure in pSmeLPU88b and 
in other rhizobial plasmids. Moreover, in all cases they are found downstream of 
the repABC operon. By cloning each replication system in suicide plasmids, we 
demonstrated that each of them can support plasmid replication in the S. 
meliloti genetic background, but with different stability behavior. 
Interestingly, while incompatibility analysis of the cloned rep systems results 
in the loss of the parental module, both obtained plasmids can coexist together.

Copyright: © 2023 Luchetti et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285505
PMCID: PMC10194956
PMID: 37200389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.