1. Front Aging. 2023 May 5;4:1154005. doi: 10.3389/fragi.2023.1154005.
eCollection  2023.

PRPF19 modulates morphology and growth behavior in a cell culture model of human 
skin.

Kleissl L(1)(2)(3), Weinmüllner R(4)(5), Lämmermann I(4)(5), Dingelmaier-Hovorka 
R(2), Jafarmadar M(6), El Ghalbzouri A(7), Stary G(1)(2)(3), Grillari J(6)(4), 
Dellago H(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna, 
Austria.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and 
Life Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Christian Doppler Laboratory for Biotechnology of Skin Aging, Vienna, 
Austria.
(6)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Traumatology in cooperation with AUVA, Vienna, 
Austria.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
Netherlands.

The skin provides one of the most visual aging transformations in humans, and 
premature aging as a consequence of oxidative stress and DNA damage is a 
frequently seen effect. Cells of the human skin are continuously exposed to 
endogenous and exogenous DNA damaging factors, which can cause DNA damage in all 
phases of the cell cycle. Increased levels of DNA damage and/or defective DNA 
repair can, therefore, accelerate the aging process and/or lead to age-related 
diseases like cancer. It is not yet clear if enhanced activity of DNA repair 
factors could increase the life or health span of human skin cells. In previous 
studies, we identified and characterized the human senescence evasion factor 
(SNEV)/pre-mRNA-processing factor (PRPF) 19 as a multitalented protein involved 
in mRNA splicing, DNA repair pathways and lifespan regulation. Here, we show 
that overexpression of PRPF19 in human dermal fibroblasts leads to a 
morphological change, reminiscent of juvenile, papillary fibroblasts, despite 
simultaneous expression of senescence markers. Moreover, conditioned media of 
this subpopulation showed a positive effect on keratinocyte repopulation of 
wounded areas. Taken together, these findings indicate that PRPF19 promotes cell 
viability and slows down the aging process in human skin.

Copyright © 2023 Kleissl, Weinmüllner, Lämmermann, Dingelmaier-Hovorka, 
Jafarmadar, El Ghalbzouri, Stary, Grillari and Dellago.

DOI: 10.3389/fragi.2023.1154005
PMCID: PMC10196211
PMID: 37214773

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.