1. J Mol Biol. 2023 Aug 1;435(15):168154. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2023.168154. Epub
2023  May 19.

Structural Plasticity of NFU1 Upon Interaction with Binding Partners: Insights 
into the Mitochondrial [4Fe-4S] Cluster Pathway.

Da Vela S(1), Saudino G(2), Lucarelli F(3), Banci L(3), Svergun DI(1), 
Ciofi-Baffoni S(4).

Author information:
(1)EMBL Hamburg Site, c/o DESY, Notkestrasse 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Magnetic Resonance Center CERM, University of Florence, Via Luigi Sacconi 6, 
50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, Italy.
(3)Magnetic Resonance Center CERM, University of Florence, Via Luigi Sacconi 6, 
50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, Italy; Department of Chemistry, University of 
Florence, Via della Lastruccia 3, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, Italy.
(4)Magnetic Resonance Center CERM, University of Florence, Via Luigi Sacconi 6, 
50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, Italy; Department of Chemistry, University of 
Florence, Via della Lastruccia 3, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, Italy. 
Electronic address: ciofi@cerm.unifi.it.

In humans, the biosynthesis and trafficking of mitochondrial [4Fe-4S]2+ clusters 
is a highly coordinated process that requires a complex protein machinery. In a 
mitochondrial pathway among various proposed to biosynthesize nascent [4Fe-4S]2+ 
clusters, two [2Fe-2S]2+ clusters are converted into a [4Fe-4S]2+ cluster on a 
ISCA1-ISCA2 complex. Along this pathway, this cluster is then mobilized from 
this complex to mitochondrial apo recipient proteins with the assistance of 
accessory proteins. NFU1 is the accessory protein that first receives the 
[4Fe-4S]2+ cluster from ISCA1-ISCA2 complex. A structural view of the 
protein-protein recognition events occurring along the [4Fe-4S]2+ cluster 
trafficking as well as how the globular N-terminal and C-terminal domains of 
NFU1 act in such process is, however, still elusive. Here, we applied 
small-angle X-ray scattering coupled with on-line size-exclusion chromatography 
and paramagnetic NMR to disclose structural snapshots of ISCA1-, ISCA2- and 
NFU1-containing apo complexes as well as the coordination of [4Fe-4S]2+ cluster 
bound to the ISCA1-NFU1 complex, which is the terminal stable species of the 
[4Fe-4S]2+ cluster transfer pathway involving ISCA1-, ISCA2- and NFU1 proteins. 
The structural modelling of ISCA1-ISCA2, ISCA1-ISCA2-NFU1 and ISCA1-NFU1 apo 
complexes, here reported, reveals that the structural plasticity of NFU1 domains 
is crucial to drive protein partner recognition and modulate [4Fe-4S]2+ cluster 
transfer from the cluster-assembly site in the ISCA1-ISCA2 complex to a 
cluster-binding site in the ISCA1-NFU1 complex. These structures allowed us to 
provide a first rational for the molecular function of the N-domain of NFU1, 
which can act as a modulator in the [4Fe-4S]2+ cluster transfer.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2023.168154
PMCID: PMC10388178
PMID: 37211204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.