1. J Cell Commun Signal. 2023 Sep;17(3):1023-1038. doi:
10.1007/s12079-023-00754-x.  Epub 2023 May 22.

High glucose-induced IL-7/IL-7R upregulation of dermal fibroblasts inhibits 
angiogenesis in a paracrine way in delayed diabetic wound healing.

Gao R(1), Zhou P(1), Li Y(2), Li Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Huazhong University of Science and Technology Tongji Medical College First 
Clinical College: Wuhan Union Hospital, Wuhan, China.
(2)Huazhong University of Science and Technology Tongji Medical College First 
Clinical College: Wuhan Union Hospital, Wuhan, China. 15827526626@163.com.
(3)Huazhong University of Science and Technology Tongji Medical College First 
Clinical College: Wuhan Union Hospital, Wuhan, China. li_qin@hust.edu.cn.

It is widely acknowledged that diabetes leads to slow wound healing and 
ulceration, and severe serious diabetic foot ulceration may result in 
amputation. In recent years, much emphasis has been placed on exploring diabetic 
wound healing to protect patients from adverse events. We recently found 
interleukin-7 (IL-7), a growth factor for B-cells and T-cells, and its receptor 
was significantly upregulated in high glucose-induced fibroblasts and skin of 
diabetic mice. Moreover, IL-7 stimulated fibroblasts secreted ANGPTL4, which 
inhibited angiogenesis of endothelial cells resulting in delayed wound healing. 
In our previous study, fibroblasts, endothelial cells and keratinocytes were 
exposed to normal glucose (5.5 mM) or high glucose (30 mM) medium for 24 h, and 
RNA sequencing showed that IL-7 and IL-7R were significantly upregulated in 
fibroblasts. To remove the effect of high glucose and explore the influence of 
IL-7, exogenous rMuIL-7 used to treat normal mice led to delayed wound healing 
by inhibiting angiogenesis. Vitro experiments revealed that IL-7-induced 
fibroblasts inhibited endothelial cell proliferation, migration and 
angiogenesis. Further experiments showed that fibroblast angiopoietin-like-4 
(ANGPTL4) secretion exhibited the inhibitory effect which was blocked by culture 
with the corresponding neutralizing antibody. Overall, our study revealed 
signaling pathways associated with diabetic wound healing and provided the 
foothold for further studies on delayed wound healing in this patient 
population. Mechanism that high glucose activates IL-7-IL-7R-ANGPTL4 signal 
pathway in delayed wound healing. High glucose upregulates IL-7 and IL-7R in 
dermal fibroblasts. IL-7 stimulates dermal fibroblasts secreting Angptl4 which 
inhibits proliferation, migration and angiogenesis of endothelial cells in a 
paracrine way.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12079-023-00754-x
PMCID: PMC10409704
PMID: 37217704

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest relevant to this 
article were reported.