1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 May 11:2023.05.10.23289806. doi: 
10.1101/2023.05.10.23289806.

Molecular surveillance detects high prevalence of the neglected parasite 
Mansonella ozzardi in the Colombian Amazon.

Dahmer KJ(1), Palma-Cuero M(1)(2), Ciuoderis K(2)(3), Patiño C(3), Roitman S(4), 
Li Z(4), Sinha A(4), Hite JL(1), Bellido Cuellar O(5), Hernandez-Ortiz JP(2)(3), 
Osorio JE(1)(2), Christensen BM(1)(2), Carlow C(4), Zamanian M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI USA.
(2)University of Wisconsin Global Health Institute One Health Colombia, Madison, 
WI USA.
(3)Universidad Nacional de Colombia - UW-GHI One Health Colombia, Medellín, 
Colombia.
(4)New England Biolabs, 240 County Road, Ipswich, MA USA.
(5)Secretaría de Salud Departamental del Amazonas, Leticia, Colombia.

Update in
    J Infect Dis. 2023 Nov 11;228(10):1441-1451. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiad331.

Mansonellosis is an undermapped insect-transmitted disease caused by filarial 
nematodes that are estimated to infect hundreds of millions of people globally. 
Despite their prevalence, there are many outstanding questions regarding the 
general biology and health impacts of the responsible parasites. Historical 
reports suggest that the Colombian Amazon is endemic for mansonellosis and may 
serve as an ideal location to pursue these questions in the backdrop of other 
endemic and emerging pathogens. We deployed molecular and classical diagnostic 
approaches to survey Mansonella prevalence among adults belonging to indigenous 
communities along the Amazon River and its tributaries near Leticia, Colombia. 
Deployment of a loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) assay on blood 
samples revealed an infection prevalence of ∼40% for Mansonella ozzardi . This 
assay identified significantly more infections than blood smear microscopy or 
LAMP assays performed using plasma, likely reflecting greater sensitivity and 
the ability to detect low microfilaremias or occult infections. Mansonella 
infection rates increased with age and were higher among males compared to 
females. Genomic analysis confirmed the presence of M. ozzardi that clusters 
closely with strains sequenced in neighboring countries. We successfully 
cryopreserved and revitalized M. ozzardi microfilariae, advancing the prospects 
of rearing infective larvae in controlled settings. These data suggest an 
underestimation of true mansonellosis prevalence, and we expect that these 
methods will help facilitate the study of mansonellosis in endemic and 
laboratory settings.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.05.10.23289806
PMCID: PMC10197819
PMID: 37215049

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts CKSC, ZL, AS and SR are employed by 
New England Biolabs, a manufacturer and vendor of molecular biology reagents. 
This affiliation does not affect the authors’ impartiality, adherence to journal 
standards and policies or availability of data. All other authors report no 
potential conflicts of interest.