1. Front Oncol. 2023 May 9;13:1188641. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1188641.
eCollection  2023.

Vitamin D inhibits osteosarcoma by reprogramming nonsense-mediated RNA decay and 
SNAI2-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Capobianco E(1), McGaughey V(2), Seraphin G(2), Heckel J(2), Rieger S(2)(3), 
Lisse TS(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Farmington, CT, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, United States.
(3)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miller School of Medicine, University 
of Miami, Miami, FL, United States.
(4)iCURA DX, Malvern, PA, United States.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Mar 11:2023.01.04.522778. doi: 10.1101/2023.01.04.522778.

Osteosarcomas are immune-resistant and metastatic as a result of elevated 
nonsense-mediated RNA decay (NMD), reactive oxygen species (ROS), and 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Although vitamin D has anti-cancer 
effects, its effectiveness and mechanism of action against osteosarcomas are 
poorly understood. In this study, we assessed the impact of vitamin D and its 
receptor (VDR) on NMD-ROS-EMT signaling in in vitro and in vivo osteosarcoma 
animal models. Initiation of VDR signaling facilitated the enrichment of EMT 
pathway genes, after which 1,25(OH)2D, the active vitamin D derivative, 
inhibited the EMT pathway in osteosarcoma subtypes. The ligand-bound VDR 
directly downregulated the EMT inducer SNAI2, differentiating highly metastatic 
from low metastatic subtypes and 1,25(OH)2D sensitivity. Moreover, 
epigenome-wide motif and putative target gene analysis revealed the VDR's 
integration with NMD tumorigenic and immunogenic pathways. In an autoregulatory 
manner, 1,25(OH)2D inhibited NMD machinery genes and upregulated NMD target 
genes implicated in anti-oncogenic activity, immunorecognition, and cell-to-cell 
adhesion. Dicer substrate siRNA knockdown of SNAI2 revealed superoxide dismutase 
2 (SOD2)-mediated antioxidative responses and 1,25(OH)2D sensitization via 
non-canonical SOD2 nuclear-to-mitochondrial translocalization leading to overall 
ROS suppression. In a mouse xenograft metastasis model, the therapeutically 
relevant vitamin D derivative calcipotriol inhibited osteosarcoma metastasis and 
tumor growth shown for the first time. Our results uncover novel 
osteosarcoma-inhibiting mechanisms for vitamin D and calcipotriol that may be 
translated to human patients.

Copyright Â© 2023 Capobianco, McGaughey, Seraphin, Heckel, Rieger and Lisse.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1188641
PMCID: PMC10203545
PMID: 37228489

Conflict of interest statement: TL was employed by iCURA LLC.The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.