1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Jun 15;11(3):e0501322. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.05013-22. 
Epub 2023 May 24.

Transmission Dynamics of a Mycobacterium tuberculosis Complex Outbreak in an 
Indigenous Population in the Colombian Amazon Region.

Pérez-Llanos FJ(1), Dreyer V(1)(2), Barilar I(1)(2), Utpatel C(1)(2), Kohl 
TA(1)(2), Murcia MI(3), Homolka S(1), Merker M(#)(1)(2)(4), Niemann S(#)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Experimental Mycobacteriology, Research Center Borstel, 
Borstel, Germany.
(2)German Center for Infection Research, Hamburg-Lübeck-Borstel-Riems, Germany.
(3)Grupo MICOBAC-UN, Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Evolution of the Resistome, Research Center Borstel, Borstel, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Whole genome sequencing (WGS) has become the main tool for studying the 
transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) strains; however, the 
clonal expansion of one strain often limits its application in local MTBC 
outbreaks. The use of an alternative reference genome and the inclusion of 
repetitive regions in the analysis could potentially increase the resolution, 
but the added value has not yet been defined. Here, we leveraged short and long 
WGS read data of a previously reported MTBC outbreak in the Colombian Amazon 
Region to analyze possible transmission chains among 74 patients in the 
indigenous setting of Puerto Nariño (March to October 2016). In total, 90.5% 
(67/74) of the patients were infected with one distinct MTBC strain belonging to 
lineage 4.3.3. Employing a reference genome from an outbreak strain and highly 
confident single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in repetitive genomic regions, 
e.g., the proline-glutamic acid/proline-proline-glutamic-acid (PE/PPE) gene 
family, increased the phylogenetic resolution compared to a classical H37Rv 
reference mapping approach. Specifically, the number of differentiating SNPs 
increased from 890 to 1,094, which resulted in a more granular transmission 
network as judged by an increasing number of individual nodes in a maximum 
parsimony tree, i.e., 5 versus 9 nodes. We also found in 29.9% (20/67) of the 
outbreak isolates, heterogenous alleles at phylogenetically informative sites, 
suggesting that these patients are infected with more than one clone. In 
conclusion, customized SNP calling thresholds and employment of a local 
reference genome for a mapping approach can improve the phylogenetic resolution 
in highly clonal MTBC populations and help elucidate within-host MTBC diversity. 
IMPORTANCE The Colombian Amazon around Puerto Nariño has a high tuberculosis 
burden with a prevalence of 1,267/100,000 people in 2016. Recently, an outbreak 
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) bacteria among the indigenous 
populations was identified with classical MTBC genotyping methods. Here, we 
employed a whole-genome sequencing-based outbreak investigation in order to 
improve the phylogenetic resolution and gain new insights into the transmission 
dynamics in this remote Colombian Amazon Region. The inclusion of well-supported 
single nucleotide polymorphisms in repetitive regions and a de novo-assembled 
local reference genome provided a more granular picture of the circulating 
outbreak strain and revealed new transmission chains. Multiple patients from 
different settlements were possibly infected with at least two different clones 
in this high-incidence setting. Thus, our results have the potential to improve 
molecular surveillance studies in other high-burden settings, especially regions 
with few clonal multidrug-resistant (MDR) MTBC lineages/clades.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.05013-22
PMCID: PMC10269451
PMID: 37222610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.