1. Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992). 2023 May 19;69(5):e20221073. doi: 
10.1590/1806-9282.20221073. eCollection 2023.

Identification of novel variants in retinitis pigmentosa genes by whole-exome 
sequencing.

Kocaaga A(1), Aköz İÖ(2), Demir NU(2), Paksoy B(3).

Author information:
(1)Eskişehir City Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics - Eskişehir, Turkey.
(2)Eskişehir City Hospital, Department of Ophthalmology - Eskişehir, Turkey.
(3)Antalya Eğitim ve Araştırma Hastanesi, Department of Medical Genetics - 
Antalya, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Retinitis pigmentosa is an inherited degenerative disorder causing 
severe retinal dystrophy and visual impairment, mainly with onset in the first 
or second decades. The next-generation sequencing has become an efficient tool 
to identify disease-causing mutations in retinitis pigmentosa. The aim of this 
retrospective study was to investigate novel gene variants and evaluate the 
utility of whole-exome sequencing in patients with retinitis pigmentosa.
METHODS: The medical records of 20 patients with retinitis pigmentosa at 
Eskişehir City Hospital between September 2019 and February 2022 were analyzed 
retrospectively. Peripheral venous blood was obtained, followed by the 
extraction of genomic DNAs. The medical and ophthalmic histories were collected, 
and ophthalmological examinations were performed. Whole-exome sequencing was 
performed to determine the genetic etiology of the patients.
RESULTS: The proportion of genetically solved cases was 75% (15/20) in the 
patients with retinitis pigmentosa. Molecular genetic testing identified 13 
biallelic and 4 monoallelic mutations in known retinitis pigmentosa genes, 
including 11 novel variants. According to in silico prediction tools, nine 
variants were predicted as pathogenic or possibly pathogenic. We identified six 
previously reported mutations to be associated with retinitis pigmentosa. The 
age of onset of the patients ranged from 3 to 19, with a mean age of onset of 
11.6. All patients had a loss of central vision.
CONCLUSION: As the first study of the application of whole-exome sequencing 
among patients with retinitis pigmentosa in a Turkish cohort, our results may 
contribute to the characterization of the spectrum of variants related to 
retinitis pigmentosa in the Turkish population. Future population-based studies 
will enable us to reveal the detailed genetic epidemiology of retinitis 
pigmentosa.

DOI: 10.1590/1806-9282.20221073
PMCID: PMC10204840
PMID: 37222315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: the authors declare there 
is no conflicts of interest.