1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Apr 25;14(5):969. doi: 10.3390/genes14050969.

Transcriptome Characterization and Gene Changes Induced by Fusarium solani in 
Sweetpotato Roots.

Zhang C(1), Luo Q(1), Tang W(1), Ma J(1), Yang D(1), Chen J(1), Gao F(1), Sun 
H(1), Xie Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Sweetpotato Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Xuzhou Institute of Agricultural Sciences in Jiangsu Xuhuai Area, Key Laboratory 
of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Sweetpotato, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Xuzhou 221131, China.

Sweetpotato (Ipomoea batatas) is an important root crop that is infected by 
Fusarium solani in both seedling and root stages, causing irregular black or 
brown disease spots and root rot and canker. This study aims to use RNA 
sequencing technology to investigate the dynamic changes in root transcriptome 
profiles between control check and roots at 6 h, 24 h, 3 days, and 5 days 
post-inoculation (hpi/dpi) with F. solani. The results showed that the defense 
reaction of sweetpotato could be divided into an early step (6 and 24 hpi) 
without symptoms and a late step to respond to F. solani infection (3 and 5 
dpi). The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in response to F. solani 
infection were enriched in the cellular component, biological process, and 
molecular function, with more DEGs in the biological process and molecular 
function than in the cellular component. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG) pathway analysis showed that the main pathways were metabolic pathways, 
the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, and carbon metabolism. More 
downregulated genes were identified than upregulated genes in the plant-pathogen 
interaction and transcription factors, which might be related to the degree of 
host resistance to F. solani. The findings of this study provide an important 
basis to further characterize the complex mechanisms of sweetpotato resistance 
against biotic stress and identify new candidate genes for increasing the 
resistance of sweetpotato.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14050969
PMCID: PMC10218436
PMID: 37239329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.