1. Biosensors (Basel). 2023 Apr 30;13(5):515. doi: 10.3390/bios13050515.

Fluorescent Sensing Platforms for Detecting and Imaging the Biomarkers of 
Alzheimer's Disease.

Liu X(1), Liu Y(2)(3), Liu Q(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, 
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China.
(2)Longgang District Central Hospital of Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518116, China.
(3)Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of Brain Science, Shenzhen Fundamental Research 
Institutions, Shenzhen 518055, China.
(4)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology and Ecology, College of Life 
Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518055, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an irreversible neurodegenerative disease with 
clinical symptoms of memory loss and cognitive impairment. Currently, no 
effective drug or therapeutic method is available for curing this disease. The 
major strategy used is to identify and block AD at its initial stage. Thus, 
early diagnosis is very important for intervention of the disease and assessment 
of drug efficacy. The gold standards of clinical diagnosis include the 
measurement of AD biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission 
tomography imaging of the brain for amyloid-β (Aβ) deposits. However, these 
methods are difficult to apply to the general screening of a large aging 
population because of their high cost, radioactivity and inaccessibility. 
Comparatively, blood sample detection is less invasive and more accessible for 
the diagnosis of AD. Hence, a variety of assays based on fluorescence analysis, 
surface-enhanced Raman scattering, electrochemistry, etc., were developed for 
the detection of AD biomarkers in blood. These methods play significant roles in 
recognizing asymptomatic AD and predicting the course of the disease. In a 
clinical setting, the combination of blood biomarker detection with brain 
imaging may enhance the accuracy of early diagnosis. Fluorescence-sensing 
techniques can be used not only to detect the levels of biomarkers in blood but 
also to image biomarkers in the brain in real time due to their low toxicity, 
high sensitivity and good biocompatibility. In this review, we summarize the 
newly developed fluorescent sensing platforms and their application in detecting 
and imaging biomarkers of AD, such as Aβ and tau in the last five years, and 
discuss their prospects for clinical applications.

DOI: 10.3390/bios13050515
PMCID: PMC10216588
PMID: 37232876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.