1. Biochimie. 2023 Oct;213:130-138. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2023.05.014. Epub 2023 
May 23.

Possible cancer-causing capacity of COVID-19: Is SARS-CoV-2 an oncogenic agent?

Jahankhani K(1), Ahangari F(1), Adcock IM(2), Mortaz E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Airways Disease, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom; Immune Health Program at Hunter Medical Research 
Institute and the College of Health and Medicine at the University of Newcastle, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: emortaz@gmail.com.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has shown diverse 
life-threatening effects, most of which are considered short-term. In addition 
to its short-term effects, which has claimed many millions of lives since 2019, 
the long-term complications of this virus are still under investigation. Similar 
to many oncogenic viruses, it has been hypothesized that SARS-CoV-2 employs 
various strategies to cause cancer in different organs. These include leveraging 
the renin angiotensin system, altering tumor suppressing pathways by means of 
its nonstructural proteins, and triggering inflammatory cascades by enhancing 
cytokine production in the form of a "cytokine storm" paving the way for the 
emergence of cancer stem cells in target organs. Since infection with SARS-CoV-2 
occurs in several organs either directly or indirectly, it is expected that 
cancer stem cells may develop in multiple organs. Thus, we have reviewed the 
impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) on the vulnerability and 
susceptibility of specific organs to cancer development. It is important to note 
that the cancer-related effects of SARS-CoV-2 proposed in this article are based 
on the ability of the virus and its proteins to cause cancer but that the 
long-term consequences of this infection will only be illustrated in the long 
run.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie 
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2023.05.014
PMCID: PMC10202899
PMID: 37230238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.