1. Biology (Basel). 2023 May 16;12(5):729. doi: 10.3390/biology12050729.

Wnt Signaling in Brain Tumors: A Challenging Therapeutic Target.

Manfreda L(1)(2), Rampazzo E(1)(2), Persano L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women and Children's Health, University of Padova, Via 
Giustininani, 3, 35128 Padova, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Research Institute, Corso Stati Uniti, 4, 35127 Padova, Italy.

The involvement of Wnt signaling in normal tissue homeostasis and disease has 
been widely demonstrated over the last 20 years. In particular, dysregulation of 
Wnt pathway components has been suggested as a relevant hallmark of several 
neoplastic malignancies, playing a role in cancer onset, progression, and 
response to treatments. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge on 
the instructions provided by Wnt signaling during organogenesis and, 
particularly, brain development. Moreover, we recapitulate the most relevant 
mechanisms through which aberrant Wnt pathway activation may impact on brain 
tumorigenesis and brain tumor aggressiveness, with a particular focus on the 
mutual interdependency existing between Wnt signaling components and the brain 
tumor microenvironment. Finally, the latest anti-cancer therapeutic approaches 
employing the specific targeting of Wnt signaling are extensively reviewed and 
discussed. In conclusion, here we provide evidence that Wnt signaling, due to 
its pleiotropic involvement in several brain tumor features, may represent a 
relevant target in this context, although additional efforts will be needed to: 
(i) demonstrate the real clinical impact of Wnt inhibition in these tumors; (ii) 
overcome some still unsolved concerns about the potential systemic effects of 
such approaches; (iii) achieve efficient brain penetration.

DOI: 10.3390/biology12050729
PMCID: PMC10215617
PMID: 37237541

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.