1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 May 22;24(10):9088. doi: 10.3390/ijms24109088.

Parkinson's Disease: Exploring Different Animal Model Systems.

Khan E(1), Hasan I(2), Haque ME(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain P.O. Box 15551, United 
Arab Emirates.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Dhaka, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh.
(3)Zayed Center for Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain 
P.O. Box 15551, United Arab Emirates.

Disease modeling in non-human subjects is an essential part of any clinical 
research. To gain proper understanding of the etiology and pathophysiology of 
any disease, experimental models are required to replicate the disease process. 
Due to the huge diversity in pathophysiology and prognosis in different 
diseases, animal modeling is customized and specific accordingly. As in other 
neurodegenerative diseases, Parkinson's disease is a progressive disorder 
coupled with varying forms of physical and mental disabilities. The pathological 
hallmarks of Parkinson's disease are associated with the accumulation of 
misfolded protein called Î±-synuclein as Lewy body, and degeneration of 
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) area affecting 
the patient's motor activity. Extensive research has already been conducted 
regarding animal modeling of Parkinson's diseases. These include animal systems 
with induction of Parkinson's, either pharmacologically or via genetic 
manipulation. In this review, we will be summarizing and discussing some of the 
commonly employed Parkinson's disease animal model systems and their 
applications and limitations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24109088
PMCID: PMC10219045
PMID: 37240432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.