1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 May 19;24(10):9010. doi: 10.3390/ijms24109010.

Candidate SNP Markers Significantly Altering the Affinity of TATA-Binding 
Protein for the Promoters of Human Hub Genes for Atherogenesis, Atherosclerosis 
and Atheroprotection.

Bogomolov A(1), Filonov S(1)(2), Chadaeva I(1), Rasskazov D(1), Khandaev 
B(1)(2), Zolotareva K(1)(2), Kazachek A(1)(2), Oshchepkov D(1), Ivanisenko 
VA(1), Demenkov P(1), Podkolodnyy N(1)(3), Kondratyuk E(1), Ponomarenko P(1), 
Podkolodnaya O(1), Mustafin Z(1), Savinkova L(1), Kolchanov N(1), Tverdokhleb 
N(1), Ponomarenko M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of 
Sciences (SB RAS), Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.
(2)The Natural Sciences Department, Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk 
630090, Russia.
(3)Institute of Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Geophysics, 
Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.

Atherosclerosis is a systemic disease in which focal lesions in arteries promote 
the build-up of lipoproteins and cholesterol they are transporting. The 
development of atheroma (atherogenesis) narrows blood vessels, reduces the blood 
supply and leads to cardiovascular diseases. According to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of death, 
which has been especially boosted since the COVID-19 pandemic. There is a 
variety of contributors to atherosclerosis, including lifestyle factors and 
genetic predisposition. Antioxidant diets and recreational exercises act as 
atheroprotectors and can retard atherogenesis. The search for molecular markers 
of atherogenesis and atheroprotection for predictive, preventive and 
personalized medicine appears to be the most promising direction for the study 
of atherosclerosis. In this work, we have analyzed 1068 human genes associated 
with atherogenesis, atherosclerosis and atheroprotection. The hub genes 
regulating these processes have been found to be the most ancient. In silico 
analysis of all 5112 SNPs in their promoters has revealed 330 candidate SNP 
markers, which statistically significantly change the affinity of the 
TATA-binding protein (TBP) for these promoters. These molecular markers have 
made us confident that natural selection acts against underexpression of the hub 
genes for atherogenesis, atherosclerosis and atheroprotection. At the same time, 
upregulation of the one for atheroprotection promotes human health.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24109010
PMCID: PMC10219026
PMID: 37240358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.