1. Sci Rep. 2023 May 27;13(1):8647. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-35468-y.

RNA-Seq-based transcriptome analysis of corneal endothelial cells derived from 
patients with Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy.

Nakagawa T(#)(1), Tokuda Y(#)(2), Nakano M(2), Komori Y(1), Hanada N(1), Tourtas 
T(3), Schlötzer-Schrehardt U(3), Kruse F(3), Tashiro K(2), Koizumi N(1), Okumura 
N(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Life and Medical Sciences, 
Doshisha University, Kyotanabe, 610-0394, Japan.
(2)Department of Genomic Medical Sciences, Kyoto Prefectural University of 
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Life and Medical Sciences, 
Doshisha University, Kyotanabe, 610-0394, Japan. nokumura@mail.doshisha.ac.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is the most common inherited corneal 
disease. Fibrillar focal excrescences called guttae and corneal edema due to 
corneal endothelial cell death result in progressive vision loss. Multiple 
genetic variants have been reported, but the pathogenesis of FECD is not fully 
understood. In this study, we used RNA-Seq to analyze differential gene 
expression in the corneal endothelium obtained from patients with FECD. 
Differential expression analysis of transcriptomic profiles revealed that 
expression of 2366 genes (1092 upregulated and 1274 downregulated genes) was 
significantly altered in the corneal endothelium of patients with FECD compared 
to healthy subjects. Gene ontology analysis demonstrated an enrichment of genes 
involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) organization, response to oxidative 
stress, and apoptotic signaling. Several pathway analyses consistently indicated 
the dysregulation of ECM-associated pathways. Our differential gene expression 
findings support the previously proposed underlying mechanisms, including 
oxidative stress and apoptosis of endothelial cells, as well as the phenotypic 
clinical FECD hallmark of ECM deposits. Further investigation focusing on 
differentially expressed genes related to these pathways might be beneficial for 
elucidating mechanisms and developing novel therapies.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-35468-y
PMCID: PMC10224979
PMID: 37244951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Naoki Okumura and Noriko Koizumi are co-founders 
of ActualEyes Inc., which is currently developing a pharmaceutical therapy for 
treating Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy.