1. Front Genet. 2023 May 15;14:1186882. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1186882. 
eCollection 2023.

Association analysis and functional follow-up identified common variants of JAG1 
accounting for risk to biliary atresia.

Bai MR(1)(2)(3), Pei HY(2)(3), Zhou Y(1), Song HL(2)(3), Pan WH(1), Gong YM(1), 
Wu WJ(1), Yu WW(2)(3), Cui MM(2)(3), Gu BL(2)(3), Chu X(1)(2)(3), Cai 
W(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Xinhua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Institute of Pediatric Research, Shanghai, China.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, 
Shanghai, China.

Background: Biliary atresia (BA) is a destructive, obliterative cholangiopathy 
characterized by progressive fibro-inflammatory disorder and obliteration of 
intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts. The Jagged1 (JAG1) gene mutations have been 
found in some isolated BA cases. We aim to explore the association of common 
variants in JAG1 with isolated BA risk in the Chinese Han population. Methods: 
We genotyped 31 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms covering the JAG1 gene 
region in 333 BA patients and 1,665 healthy controls from the Chinese 
population, and performed case-control association analysis. The expression 
patterns of JAG1 homologs were investigated in zebrafish embryos, and the roles 
of jag1a and jag1b in biliary development were examined by morpholino knockdown 
in zebrafish. Results: Single nucleotide polymorphisms rs6077861 [P Allelic = 
1.74 × 10-4, odds ratio = 1.78, 95% confidence interval: 1.31-2.40] and 
rs3748478 (P Allelic = 5.77 × 10-4, odds ratio = 1.39, 95% confidence interval: 
1.15-1.67) located in the intron region of JAG1 showed significant associations 
with BA susceptibility. The JAG1 homologs, jag1a and jag1b genes were expressed 
in the developing hepatobiliary duct of zebrafish, especially at 72 and 96 h 
postfertilization. Knockdown of both jag1a and jag1b led to poor biliary 
secretion, sparse intrahepatic bile duct network and smaller or no gallbladders 
compared with control embryos in the zebrafish model. Conclusion: Common genetic 
variants of JAG1 were associated with BA susceptibility. Knockdown of JAG1 
homologs led to defective intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts in zebrafish. 
These results suggest that JAG1 might be implicated in the etiology of BA.

Copyright © 2023 Bai, Pei, Zhou, Song, Pan, Gong, Wu, Yu, Cui, Gu, Chu and Cai.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1186882
PMCID: PMC10225652
PMID: 37255715

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.