1. J Tehran Heart Cent. 2022 Jul;17(3):119-126. doi: 10.18502/jthc.v17i3.10844.

Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Genetic Variant Is Associated with in-Stent 
Restenosis after Percutaneous Coronary Intervention.

Asgarbeik S(1), Vahidi A(2), Hasanzad M(3)(4), Asadi M(5), Mohammad Amoli M(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disorders Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Molecular 
Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(2)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(3)Medical Genomics Research Center, Tehran Medical Sciences, Islamic Azad 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Personalized Medicine Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical 
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Metabolomics and Genomics Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: In-stent restenosis (ISR) is an inevitable complication of 
percutaneous coronary intervention, with genetic factors thought to play a role 
in its pathogenesis. The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene can have 
an inhibitory effect on ISR development. Accordingly, in the present study, we 
investigated the role of -2549 VEGF (insertion/deletion [I/D]) variants in ISR 
formation.
METHODS: Patients with ISR (ISR+) (n=53) and patients without ISR (ISR-) (n=67) 
were enrolled in this case-control study based on follow-up angiography 1 year 
after percutaneous coronary intervention between 2019 and 2020. The clinical 
characteristics of the patients were evaluated, and the frequencies of the 
alleles and genotypes of -2549 VEGF (I/D) variants were determined using 
polymerase chain reaction. The χ2 test was performed for the calculation of 
genotypes and alleles. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered the level of 
significance.
RESULTS: This study recruited 120 individuals at a mean age of 61.43±8.91 years 
in the ISR+ group and 62.09±7.94 years in the ISR- group. Women and men, 
respectively, comprised 26.4% and 73.6% of the ISR+ group and 43.3% and 56.7% of 
the ISR- group. A significant association was observed between the VEGF -2549 
genotype frequency and ISR. The frequency of the insertion/insertion (I/I) 
allele was significantly higher in the ISR+ group than in the ISR- group, while 
the frequency of the D/D allele was higher in the latter group.
CONCLUSION: Regarding ISR development, the I/I allele may be a risk allele and 
the D/D allele a protective allele.

Copyright © 2022 Tehran University of Medical Sciences. Published by Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.18502/jthc.v17i3.10844
PMCID: PMC10222935
PMID: 37252077