1. Behav Brain Funct. 2023 Jun 1;19(1):10. doi: 10.1186/s12993-023-00212-z.

Cumulative genetic score of KIAA0319 affects reading ability in Chinese 
children: moderation by parental education and mediation by rapid automatized 
naming.

Zhao J(1), Yang Q(2), Cheng C(2), Wang Z(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Shaanxi Normal University and Shaanxi Provincial Key 
Research Center of Child Mental and Behavioral Health, Yanta District, 199 South 
Chang'an Road, Xi'an, 710062, China. jingjing.zhao@snnu.edu.cn.
(2)School of Psychology, Shaanxi Normal University and Shaanxi Provincial Key 
Research Center of Child Mental and Behavioral Health, Yanta District, 199 South 
Chang'an Road, Xi'an, 710062, China.
(3)School of Psychology, Shaanxi Normal University and Shaanxi Provincial Key 
Research Center of Child Mental and Behavioral Health, Yanta District, 199 South 
Chang'an Road, Xi'an, 710062, China. zhling307@126.com.

KIAA0319, a well-studied candidate gene, has been shown to be associated with 
reading ability and developmental dyslexia. In the present study, we 
investigated whether KIAA0319 affects reading ability by interacting with the 
parental education level and whether rapid automatized naming (RAN), 
phonological awareness and morphological awareness mediate the relationship 
between KIAA0319 and reading ability. A total of 2284 Chinese children from 
primary school grades 3 and 6 participated in this study. Chinese character 
reading accuracy and word reading fluency were used as measures of reading 
abilities. The cumulative genetic risk score (CGS) of 13 SNPs in KIAA0319 was 
calculated. Results revealed interaction effect between CGS of KIAA0319 and 
parental education level on reading fluency. The interaction effect suggested 
that individuals with a low CGS of KIAA0319 were better at reading fluency in a 
positive environment (higher parental educational level) than individuals with a 
high CGS. Moreover, the interaction effect coincided with the differential 
susceptibility model. The results of the multiple mediator model revealed that 
RAN mediates the impact of the genetic cumulative effect of KIAA0319 on reading 
abilities. These findings provide evidence that KIAA0319 is a risk vulnerability 
gene that interacts with environmental factor to impact reading abilities and 
demonstrate the reliability of RAN as an endophenotype between genes and reading 
associations.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12993-023-00212-z
PMCID: PMC10234066
PMID: 37259151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.