1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2023 Jul;43(7):1234-1250. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.122.318904. Epub 2023 Jun 1.

CD47 Activation by Thrombospondin-1 in Lymphatic Endothelial Cells Suppresses 
Lymphangiogenesis and Promotes Atherosclerosis.

Singla B(1), Aithbathula RV(1), Pervaiz N(1), Kathuria I(1), Swanson M(1), 
Ekuban FA(1), Ahn W(2), Park F(1), Gyamfi M(1), Cherian-Shaw M(1)(2), Singh 
UP(1), Kumar S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, The University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis (B.S., R.V.A., N.P., I.K., M.S., 
F.A.E., F.P., M.G., U.P.S., S.K.).
(2)Vascular Biology Center, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University 
(W.A., M.C.-S.).

BACKGROUND: TSP1 (thrombospondin-1)-a well-known angiogenesis inhibitor-mediates 
differential effects via interacting with cell surface receptors including CD36 
(cluster of differentiation) and CD47. However, the role of TSP1 in regulating 
lymphangiogenesis is not clear. Our previous study suggested the importance of 
cell-specific CD47 blockade in limiting atherosclerosis. Further, our 
experiments revealed CD47 as a dominant TSP1 receptor in lymphatic endothelial 
cells (LECs). As the lymphatic vasculature is functionally linked to 
atherosclerosis, we aimed to investigate the effects of LEC TSP1-CD47 signaling 
inhibition on lymphangiogenesis and atherosclerosis.
METHODS: Murine atherosclerotic and nonatherosclerotic arteries were utilized to 
investigate TSP1 expression using Western blotting and immunostaining. 
LEC-specific knockout mice were used to determine the in vivo role of LEC Cd47 
in lymphangiogenesis and atherosclerosis. Various in vitro cell-based assays, in 
vivo Matrigel plug implantation, molecular biological techniques, and 
immunohistological approaches were used to evaluate the underlying signaling 
mechanisms.
RESULTS: Elevated TSP1 expression was observed in mouse atherosclerotic aortic 
tissue compared with nonatherosclerotic control tissue. TSP1 at pathological 
concentrations suppressed both in vitro and in vivo lymphangiogenesis. 
Mechanistically, TSP1 inhibited VEGF (vascular endothelial growth 
factor)-C-induced AKT and eNOS activation in LEC and attenuated NO (nitric 
oxide) production. Further, CD47 silencing in LEC prevented the effects of TSP1 
on lymphangiogenic AKT-eNOS signaling and lymphangiogenesis. Atheroprone AAV 
(adeno-associated virus) 8-PCSK9-injected LEC-specific Cd47 knockout mice 
(Cd47ΔLEC) had reduced atherosclerosis in both aorta and aortic root compared 
with control mice (Cd47ΔWT). However, no differences in metabolic parameters 
including body weight, plasma total cholesterol levels, and fasting blood 
glucose were observed. Additional immunostaining experiments performed on aortic 
root cross-sections indicated higher lymphatic vessel density in Cd47ΔLEC mice 
in comparison to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that TSP1 inhibits lymphangiogenesis via 
activation of CD47 in LEC, and loss of LEC Cd47 attenuates atherosclerotic 
lesion formation. Collectively, these results identify LEC CD47 as a potential 
therapeutic target in atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.122.318904
PMCID: PMC10281185
PMID: 37259865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures None.