1. Front Oncol. 2023 May 12;13:1167143. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1167143.
eCollection  2023.

Intragenic β-synuclein rearrangements in malignancy.

Xiao P(1), Chen N(2), Shao T(2), Bian X(1), Miao J(1), Zheng J(1), Lang X(2), 
Wang Y(2), Chen X(2), Jin L(2), Hu S(1), Xiao S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, 
China.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Suzhou Sano Precision Medicine Ltd, Suzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, United States.

The synuclein family, consisting of α-, β-, and γ-synuclein, is primarily 
expressed in neurons. Mutations of α- and β-synuclein have been linked to 
Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies, respectively. Recent studies 
have shown that synucleins are upregulated in various tumors, including breast, 
ovarian, meningioma, and melanoma, and high synuclein expression is associated 
with poor prognosis and drug resistance. We report a novel rearrangement of 
β-synuclein in a pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) case, 
where β-synuclein (SNCB) is fused in-frame with ETS variant transcription factor 
6 (ETV6), a gene frequently rearranged in acute leukemia including acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML), B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL), and T-ALL. An 
additional case of β-synuclein rearrangement was identified in a squamous cell 
carcinoma of the lung through analysis of the public TCGA database. Both 
rearrangements involve the C-terminal of β-synuclein. Since β-synuclein shares 
extensive amino acid similarities with α-synuclein and α-synuclein binds to 
14-3-3, an important regulator of apoptosis, the rearranged β-synuclein may 
contribute to tumorigenesis by deregulating apoptosis. In addition, 
overexpression of synucleins has been shown to increase cell proliferation, 
suggesting that the rearranged β-synuclein may also deregulate the cell cycle.

Copyright © 2023 Xiao, Chen, Shao, Bian, Miao, Zheng, Lang, Wang, Chen, Jin, Hu 
and Xiao.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1167143
PMCID: PMC10213389
PMID: 37251917

Conflict of interest statement: Authors NC, TS, XL, YW, XC and LJ were employed 
by Suzhou Sano Precision Medicine Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The 
reviewer CC declared a shared parent affiliation with the author SX to the 
handling editor at the time of review.