1. Eur J Pediatr. 2023 Aug;182(8):3785-3788. doi: 10.1007/s00431-023-05034-9.
Epub  2023 Jun 3.

Only one beer can be mortal: a case report of two sisters with cardiac arrest 
due to a homozygous mutation in PPA2 gene.

Manzanilla-Romero HH(1), Schermer E(2), Mayr A(3), Rudnik-Schöneborn S(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria.
(2)Pediatrics III (Cardiopulmonary Unit), Medical University of Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Clinic of Radiology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria. sabine.rudnik@i-med.ac.at.

We report the long way to the correct diagnosis in two teenage sisters who 
developed a cardiac arrest after consuming minimal amounts of alcohol. The older 
girl dramatically survived two cardiac arrests at the age of 14 and 15 years. 
She underwent an extensive examination that revealed isolated cardiac 
abnormalities including fibrosis, dilated cardiomyopathy and inflammation. The 
younger girl also had a cardiac arrest at the age of 15 and died suddenly after 
consuming 1-2 beers, 3 years after her sister´s first incident. Autopsy of the 
heart revealed acute myocarditis without structural alterations. Multigene panel 
analysis (not including PPA2) showed SCN5A and CACNA1D variants in both sisters 
and their healthy mother. Six years later duo exome allowed the diagnosis of an 
autosomal recessive PPA2-related mitochondriopathy. We discuss the molecular 
results and clinical picture of our patients compared to other PPA2-related 
cases. We highlight the diagnostic contribution of multigene panels and exome 
analysis. The genetic diagnosis is important for medical care and for everyday 
life, specifically because alcohol intake can result in cardiac arrest and 
should be strictly avoided.   Conclusion: Duo exome sequencing clarified the 
diagnosis of PPA2-related mitochondriopathy in two sisters with isolated cardiac 
features and sudden cardiac arrest triggered by minimal amounts of alcohol. What 
is Known: • Multigene-Panel or exome analysis is a valuable tool to identify 
genetic causes of hereditary cardiac arrhythmias. • Variants of unknown 
significance can lead to misinterpretation. PPA2-related mitochondriopathy is a 
very rare autosomal recessive condition that is normally fatal in infancy. What 
is New: • Duo exome analysis in two teeenage sisters with cardiac arrest 
revealed a homozygous mild PPA2 mutation as the underlying pathology restricted 
to the heart muscle.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-023-05034-9
PMCID: PMC10460352
PMID: 37269378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.