1. PLoS Pathog. 2023 Jun 2;19(6):e1011423. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011423. 
eCollection 2023 Jun.

HIV-1 capsid stability enables inositol phosphate-independent infection of 
target cells and promotes integration into genes.

Sowd GA(1), Shi J(1), Fulmer A(1), Aiken C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt Institute 
for Infection, Immunology, and Inflammation, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

The mature HIV-1 capsid is stabilized by host and viral determinants. The capsid 
protein CA binds to the cellular metabolites inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6) and 
its precursor inositol (1, 3, 4, 5, 6) pentakisphosphate (IP5) to stabilize the 
mature capsid. In target cells, capsid destabilization by the antiviral 
compounds lenacapavir and PF74 reveals a HIV-1 infectivity defect due to IP5/IP6 
(IP5/6) depletion. To test whether intrinsic HIV-1 capsid stability and/or host 
factor binding determines HIV-1 insensitivity to IP5/6 depletion, a panel of CA 
mutants was assayed for infection of IP5/6-depleted T cells and wildtype cells. 
Four CA mutants with unstable capsids exhibited dependence on host IP5/6 for 
infection and reverse transcription (RTN). Adaptation of one such mutant, Q219A, 
by spread in culture resulted in Vpu truncation and a capsid three-fold 
interface mutation, T200I. T200I increased intrinsic capsid stability as 
determined by in vitro uncoating of purified cores and partially reversed the 
IP5/6-dependence in target cells for each of the four CA mutants. T200I further 
rescued the changes to lenacapavir sensitivity associated with the parental 
mutation. The premature dissolution of the capsid caused by the IP5/6-dependent 
mutations imparted a unique defect in integration targeting that was rescued by 
T200I. Collectively, these results demonstrate that T200I restored other capsid 
functions after RTN for the panel of mutants. Thus, the hyperstable T200I 
mutation stabilized the instability defects imparted by the parental 
IP5/6-dependent CA mutation. The contribution of Vpu truncation to mutant 
adaptation was linked to BST-2 antagonization, suggesting that cell-to-cell 
transfer promoted replication of the mutants. We conclude that interactions at 
the three-fold interface are adaptable, key mediators of capsid stability in 
target cells and are able to antagonize even severe capsid instability to 
promote infection.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Sowd et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011423
PMCID: PMC10266667
PMID: 37267431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.