1. Sci Adv. 2023 Jun 2;9(22):eadg0478. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adg0478. Epub 2023 Jun
 2.

Activation of Piezo1 promotes osteogenic differentiation of aortic valve 
interstitial cell through YAP-dependent glutaminolysis.

Zhong G(1)(2)(3), Su S(1)(2)(3), Li J(1)(2)(3), Zhao H(1)(2)(3), Hu D(1)(2)(3), 
Chen J(1)(2)(3), Li S(1)(2)(3), Lin Y(1)(2)(3), Wen L(1)(2)(3), Lin X(1)(2)(3), 
Xian G(1)(2)(3), Xu D(1)(2)(3), Zeng Q(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Department of Cardiology, 
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Shock and Microcirculation, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(3)Bioland Laboratory (Guangzhou Regenerative Medicine and Health Guangdong 
Laboratory), Guangzhou, China.

Hemodynamic overload and dysregulation of cellular metabolism are involved in 
development of calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD). However, how mechanical 
stress relates to metabolic changes in CAVD remains unclear. Here, we show that 
Piezo1, a mechanosensitive ion channel, regulated glutaminase 1 (GLS1)-mediated 
glutaminolysis to promote osteogenic differentiation of valve interstitial cells 
(VICs). In vivo, two models of aortic valve stenosis were constructed by 
ascending aortic constriction (AAC) and direct wire injury (DWI). Inhibition of 
Piezo1 and GLS1 in these models respectively mitigated aortic valve lesion. In 
vitro, Piezo1 activation induced by Yoda1 and oscillatory stress triggered 
osteogenic responses in VICs, which were prevented by Piezo1 inhibition or 
knockdown. Mechanistically, Piezo1 activation promoted calcium-dependent 
Yes-associated protein (YAP) activation. YAP modulated GLS1-mediated 
glutaminolysis, which enhanced osteogenic differentiation through histone 
acetylation of runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) promoters. Together, 
our work provided a cross-talk between mechanotransduction and metabolism in the 
context of CAVD.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adg0478
PMCID: PMC10413650
PMID: 37267365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]