1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Jul;299(7):104887. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104887. Epub 2023
 Jun 3.

Src stimulates Abl-dependent phosphorylation of the guanine exchange factor 
Net1A to promote its cytosolic localization and cell motility.

Sprenger A(1), Carr HS(1), Ulu A(1), Frost JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, USA. Electronic address: 
jeffrey.a.frost@uth.tmc.edu.

The neuroepithelial cell transforming gene 1 (Net1) is a guanine nucleotide 
exchange factor for the small GTPase RhoA that promotes cancer cell motility and 
metastasis. Two isoforms of Net1 exist, Net1 and Net1A, both of which are 
sequestered in the nucleus in quiescent cells to prevent aberrant RhoA 
activation. Many cell motility stimuli drive cytosolic relocalization of Net1A, 
but mechanisms controlling this event are not fully understood. Here, we 
demonstrate that epithelial growth factor stimulates protein kinase Src- and 
Abl1-dependent phosphorylation of Net1A to promote its cytosolic localization. 
We show that Abl1 efficiently phosphorylates Net1A on Y373, and that 
phenylalanine substitution of Y373 prevents Net1A cytosolic localization. 
Furthermore, we found that Abl1-driven cytosolic localization of Net1A does not 
require S52, which is a phosphorylation site of a different kinase, c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase, that inhibits nuclear import of Net1A. However, we did find 
that MKK7-stimulated cytosolic localization of Net1A does require Y373. We also 
demonstrate that aspartate substitution at Y373 is sufficient to promote Net1A 
cytosolic accumulation, and expression of Net1A Y373D potentiates epithelial 
growth factor-stimulated RhoA activation, downstream myosin light chain 2 
phosphorylation, and F-actin accumulation. Moreover, we show that expression of 
Net1A Y373D in breast cancer cells also significantly increases cell motility 
and Matrigel invasion. Finally, we show that Net1A is required for 
Abl1-stimulated cell motility, which is rescued by expression of Net1A Y373D, 
but not Net1A Y373F. Taken together, this work demonstrates a novel mechanism 
controlling Net1A subcellular localization to regulate RhoA-dependent cell 
motility and invasion.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104887
PMCID: PMC10404680
PMID: 37271338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.