1. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2023 Jun 29;53(7):547-561. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyad052.

Current treatment strategies for EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer: from 
first line to beyond osimertinib resistance.

Araki T(1), Kanda S(2), Horinouchi H(3), Ohe Y(3).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Nagano, Japan.
(2)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Nagano, Japan.
(3)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Osimertinib, a third-generation EGFR TKI, is the standard therapy for previously 
untreated EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer patients following the 
landmark FLAURA study. However, resistance inevitably hinders patient prognosis, 
increasing the need for new therapeutic strategies beyond osimertinib. Frontline 
osimertinib-based combination strategies (platinum-based chemotherapy and 
angiogenesis inhibitors) are currently being tested primarily to prevent initial 
resistance. In the later-line setting after osimertinib, many next-line 
therapeutic candidates have been actively examined in clinical trials. Notably, 
several drugs with novel mechanisms of action, such as antibody-drug conjugates 
and EGFR -MET bispecific antibodies, have shown promising efficacy despite the 
resistance mechanisms and are close to clinical application. In addition, 
genotype-based target strategies have been investigated for a better 
understanding of osimertinib resistance mechanisms based on molecular profiling 
tests at relapse. The C797S mutation and MET gene alterations are commonly 
identified following osimertinib resistance, for which targeting strategies are 
actively tested. This review describes current pharmacotherapeutic strategies 
for EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer based on the results of clinical 
trials and the latest published data, broadly grouped into two sections: 1) EGFR 
TKIs-based combination therapy in the front-line setting and 2) novel 
therapeutic strategies after osimertinib resistance.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permission@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyad052
PMCID: PMC10311169
PMID: 37279591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No author has any conflicts of interest related 
to this article. Hidehito Horinouchi reports research funding from MSD, Abbvie, 
AstraZeneca, BMS, Ono, Merck Biopharma, Daiichi-Sankyo, Janssen, Genomic Helath, 
Chugai, Roche, Novartis; personal fees as speakers' bureau from AstraZeneca, 
MSD, Eli Lilly, Ono, BMS, Chugai, Roche, Amgen; personal fees as advisory role 
from AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, Chugai, Roche, ONO, BMS, outside the submitted 
work. Yuichiro Ohe reports research funding from AstraZeneca, Chugai, Lilly, 
ONO, BMS, Kyorin, Dainippon-Sumitomo, Pfizer, Taiho, Novartis, Takeda, Kissei, 
Daiichi-Sankyo, Janssen, LOXO; personal fees as expert testimony from 
AstraZeneca, Chugai, ONO, BMS, Kyorin, Celltrion, Amgen, Nippon Kayaku, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, AnHeart Therapeutics Inc; personal fees as speakers' 
bureau from AstraZeneca, Chugai, Eli Lilly, Ono, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Bayer, Pfizer, MSD, Taiho, Nippon Kayaku, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, outside the 
submitted work.