1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 May 18;11:1134304. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1134304. 
eCollection 2023.

Seminal cadmium affects human sperm motility through stable binding to the cell 
membrane.

Pappalardo C(1), Cosci I(2), Moro G(3), Stortini AM(3), Sandon A(4), De Angelis 
C(5), Galdiero G(5), Trifuoggi M(6), Pivonello R(5)(7), Pedrucci F(1), Di Nisio 
A(1), Foresta C(1), Ferlin A(1), De Toni L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Unit of Andrology and Reproductive Medicine, 
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(2)Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, Padova, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Sciences and Nanosystems, Ca' Foscari University of 
Venezia, Venezia, Italy.
(4)Department of Civil, Environmental and Architectural 
Engineering-ICEA-Laboratories, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Sezione di Endocrinologia, 
Unità di Andrologia e Medicina della Riproduzione e della Sessualità Maschile e 
Femminile (FERTISEXCARES), Università Federico II di Napoli, Naples, Italy.
(6)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università Federico II di Napoli, Naples, 
Italy.
(7)Staff of Unesco Chair for Health Education and Sustainable Development, 
Federico II University, Naples, Italy.

Environmental pollutants are claimed to be major factors involved in the 
progressive decline of the fertility rate worldwide. Exposure to the heavy metal 
Cadmium (Cd) has been associated with reproductive toxicity due to its ionic 
mimicry. However, the possible direct accumulation of Cd in human sperm cells 
has been poorly investigated. In this study, we aimed to clarify the possible 
direct effect of Cd exposure on sperm function through the analysis of its cell 
accumulation. Semen samples from 30 male subjects residing in high environmental 
impact areas and adhering to the "Exposoma e Plurifocalità nella Prevenzione 
Oncologica" campaign for testis cancer prevention were compared with semen 
samples from 15 males residing in low exposure areas. Semen levels and cell Cd 
content were quantified by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy. Cell 
Cd distribution was assessed by scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy 
dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS). The impact of Cd on sperm function was 
evaluated by the in vitro exposure to the heavy metal, whilst possible 
scavenging approaches/agents were assessed. In addition to higher values of 
semen Cd, exposed subjects showed a reduction in total motile sperm fraction 
compared to not-exposed controls (59.6% ± 13.6% vs. 66.3% ± 7.3%, p = 0.037). 
Semen Cd levels were also significantly correlated with SEM-EDS signals of Cd 
detected on the head and neck of sperm (respectively p = 0.738, p < 0.001 and ρ 
= 0.465, p < 0.001). A total of 2 h of in vitro exposure to 0.5 μM Cd was 
associated with a significant reduction of sperm progressive motility. 
Scavenging approaches with either hypo-osmotic swelling or 10 μM reduced 
glutathione were ineffective in blunting cell Cd and restoring motility. The 
reduction of exposure levels appears to be the main approach to reducing the 
reproductive issues associated with Cd.

Copyright © 2023 Pappalardo, Cosci, Moro, Stortini, Sandon, De Angelis, 
Galdiero, Trifuoggi, Pivonello, Pedrucci, Di Nisio, Foresta, Ferlin and De Toni.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1134304
PMCID: PMC10232869
PMID: 37274747

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.