1. PLoS Pathog. 2023 Jun 5;19(6):e1011438. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011438. 
eCollection 2023 Jun.

Two cold shock domain containing proteins trigger the development of infectious 
Trypanosoma brucei.

Toh JY(1), Nkouawa A(1), Dong G(2), Kolev NG(1), Tschudi C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public 
Health, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.
(2)Max Perutz Labs, Vienna Biocenter, Center for Medical Biochemistry, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Cold shock proteins are members of a family of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins 
with one or more evolutionarily conserved cold shock domain (CSD). These 
proteins have a wide variety of biological functions, including DNA-damage 
repair, mRNA stability, and regulation of transcription, splicing and 
translation. We previously identified two CSD containing proteins, CSD1 and 
CSD2, in the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei to be required for 
RBP6-driven metacyclic production, albeit at different steps of the 
developmental program. During metacyclogenesis T. brucei undergoes major 
morphological and metabolic changes that culminate in the establishment of 
quiescent metacyclic parasites and the acquisition of mammalian infectivity. To 
investigate the specific role of CSD1 and CSD2 in this process, we ectopically 
expressed CSD1 or CSD2 in non-infectious procyclic parasites and discovered that 
each protein is sufficient to produce infectious metacyclic parasites in 24 
hours. Domain truncation assays determined that the N-terminal domain, but not 
the C-terminal domain, of CSD1 and CSD2 was required for metacyclic development. 
Furthermore, conserved amino acid residues in the CSD of CSD1 and CSD2, known to 
be important for binding nucleic acids, were found to be necessary for 
metacyclic production. Using single-end enhanced crosslinking and 
immunoprecipitation (seCLIP) we identified the specific binding motif of CSD1 
and CSD2 as "ANACAU" and the bound mRNAs were enriched for biological processes, 
including lipid metabolism, microtubule-based movement and nucleocytoplasmic 
transport that are likely involved in the transition to bloodstream form-like 
cells.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Toh et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011438
PMCID: PMC10270622
PMID: 37276216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.