1. J Womens Health Dev. 2023;6(2):56-67. doi: 10.26502/fjwhd.2644-288400108. Epub
 2023 May 4.

Placental Fatty Acid Metabolism and Transport in a Rat Model of Gestational 
Diabetes Mellitus.

Mishra JS(1), Kumar S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine and Public 
Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(3)Endocrinology-Reproductive Physiology Program, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is a form of heightened insulin resistance 
triggered during gestation. This study examines how insulin resistance alters 
placental long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid (LCPUFA) transport and 
metabolism in a rat model of lean GDM. Pregnant Sprague Dawley rats were 
administered with S961, an insulin receptor antagonist (30 nmol/kg s.c. daily), 
or vehicle from gestational day (GD) 7 to 20. Daily maternal body weight, food, 
and water intake were measured. Blood pressure assessment and glucose tolerance 
test were done on GD20. Fetal plasma and placenta were collected on GD20 and 
processed for fatty acid measurement using LC-mass spectrometry. The expression 
of fatty acid metabolism-related genes in the placenta was assessed using RT2 
Profiler PCR arrays. The results were validated by qRT-PCR. Blockade of insulin 
receptors with S961 in pregnant rats resulted in glucose intolerance with 
increased fasting glucose and insulin levels. Maternal body weight gain and food 
and water intake were not affected; however, S961 significantly increased 
maternal blood pressure and heart rate. The placenta n3 and n6 LCPUFA 
concentrations were significantly decreased by 8% and 11%, respectively, but 
their levels in the fetal plasma were increased by 15% and 4%. RT2 profiler 
arrays revealed that placental expressions of 10 genes related to fatty acid 
β-oxidation (Acaa1a, Acadm, Acot2, Acox2, Acsbg1, Acsl4, Acsm5, Cpt1b, Eci2, 
Ehhadh) and 3 genes related to fatty acid transport pathway (Fabp2, Fabp3, 
Slc27a3) were significantly upregulated. In summary, lack of insulin action 
increased the expression of genes related to placental fatty acid β-oxidation 
and transport with an increased transfer of LCPUFA to the fetus. The increased 
lipid levels routed toward the fetus may lead to fat adiposity and later-life 
metabolic dysfunction.

DOI: 10.26502/fjwhd.2644-288400108
PMCID: PMC10246410
PMID: 37288271

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None