1. J Virol. 2023 Jun 29;97(6):e0049523. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00495-23. Epub 2023 Jun
8.

Interaction of Teleost Fish TRPV4 with DEAD Box RNA Helicase 1 Regulates 
Iridovirus Replication.

Luo Z(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhan Z(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Qin X(1)(2)(3)(4), Pan 
W(1)(2)(3)(4), Liang M(1)(2)(3)(4), Li C(1)(2)(3)(4), Weng S(1)(2)(3)(4), He 
J(1)(2)(3)(4), Guo C(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biocontrol, School of Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), School 
of Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of 
China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Marine Resources and Coastal 
Engineering, School of Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 
People's Republic of China.
(4)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for Aquatic Economic Animals, School of 
Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Viral diseases are a significant risk to the aquaculture industry. Transient 
receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4) has been reported to be involved in 
regulating viral activity in mammals, but its regulatory effect on viruses in 
teleost fish remains unknown. Here, the role of the TRPV4-DEAD box RNA helicase 
1 (DDX1) axis in viral infection was investigated in mandarin fish (Siniperca 
chuatsi). Our results showed that TRPV4 activation mediates Ca2+ influx and 
facilitates infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus (ISKNV) replication, 
whereas this promotion was nearly eliminated by an M709D mutation in TRPV4, a 
channel Ca2+ permeability mutant. The concentration of cellular Ca2+ increased 
during ISKNV infection, and Ca2+ was critical for viral replication. TRPV4 
interacted with DDX1, and the interaction was mediated primarily by the 
N-terminal domain (NTD) of TRPV4 and the C-terminal domain (CTD) of DDX1. This 
interaction was attenuated by TRPV4 activation, thereby enhancing ISKNV 
replication. DDX1 could bind to viral mRNAs and facilitate ISKNV replication, 
which required the ATPase/helicase activity of DDX1. Furthermore, the TRPV4-DDX1 
axis was verified to regulate herpes simplex virus 1 replication in mammalian 
cells. These results suggested that the TRPV4-DDX1 axis plays an important role 
in viral replication. Our work provides a novel molecular mechanism for host 
involvement in viral regulation, which would be of benefit for new insights into 
the prevention and control of aquaculture diseases. IMPORTANCE In 2020, global 
aquaculture production reached a record of 122.6 million tons, with a total 
value of $281.5 billion. Meanwhile, frequent outbreaks of viral diseases have 
occurred in aquaculture, and about 10% of farmed aquatic animal production has 
been lost to infectious diseases, resulting in more than $10 billion in economic 
losses every year. Therefore, an understanding of the potential molecular 
mechanism of how aquatic organisms respond to and regulate viral replication is 
of great significance. Our study suggested that TRPV4 enables Ca2+ influx and 
interactions with DDX1 to collectively promote ISKNV replication, providing 
novel insights into the roles of the TRPV4-DDX1 axis in regulating the proviral 
effect of DDX1. This advances our understanding of viral disease outbreaks and 
would be of benefit for studies on preventing aquatic viral diseases.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00495-23
PMCID: PMC10308943
PMID: 37289063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.