1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2023 May 16:rs.3.rs-2921796. doi: 
10.21203/rs.3.rs-2921796/v1.

Composite CYP3A (CYP3A4 and CYP3A5) phenotypes and influences on tacrolimus dose 
adjusted concentration in adult heart transplant recipients.

Hernandez S, Aquilante C(1), Deininger K, Lindenfeld J, Schlendorf K, Van Driest 
S, Liu M(2).

Author information:
(1)CUAN.
(2)Vanderbilt University Medical Center.

Update in
    Pharmacogenomics J. 2024 Feb 15;24(2):4. doi: 10.1038/s41397-024-00325-2.

CYP3A5 genetic variants are associated with tacrolimus metabolism. Controversy 
remains on whether CYP3A4 increased [* 1B (rs2740574), *1G (rs2242480)] and 
decreased function [*22 (rs35599367)] genetic variants provide additional 
information. This study aims to address whether tacrolimus dose-adjusted trough 
concentrations differ between combined CYP3A (CYP3A5 and CYP3A4) phenotype 
groups. Significant differences between CYP3A phenotype groups in tacrolimus 
dose-adjusted trough concentrations were found in the early postoperative period 
and continued to 6 months post-transplant. In CYP3A5 nonexpressers, carriers of 
CYP3A4*7Bor *7G variants (Group 3) compared to CYP3A4*1/*1 (Group 2) patients 
were found to have lower tacrolimus dose-adjusted trough concentrations at 2 
months. In addition, significant differences were found among CYP3A phenotype 
groups in the dose at discharge and time to therapeutic range while time in 
therapeutic range was not significantly different. A combined CYP3A phenotype 
interpretation may provide more nuanced genotype-guided TAC dosing in heart 
transplant recipients.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2921796/v1
PMCID: PMC10246090
PMID: 37292893

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: ML, SH, CLA, JL, KHS and 
SLV declare no relevant conflicts of interest. KMD was an employee of University 
of Colorado at the time of this work and is currently an employee of Amgen 
Pharmaceuticals. SLV was an employee of Vanderbilt University Medical Center at 
the time of this work and is currently an employee of the National Institutes of 
Health, Office of the Director, AH of Us Research Program.