1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 May 22:2023.05.22.541776. doi: 
10.1101/2023.05.22.541776.

Transcription start site heterogeneity and its role in RNA fate determination 
distinguish HIV-1 from other retroviruses and are mediated by core promoter 
elements.

Kharytonchyk S(1), Burnett C(1), Gc K(1), Telesnitsky A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-5620, USA.

Update in
    J Virol. 2023 Sep 28;97(9):e0081823. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00818-23.

HIV-1 uses heterogeneous transcription start sites (TSSs) to generate two RNA 5' 
isoforms that adopt radically different structures and perform distinct 
replication functions. Although these RNAs differ in length by only two bases, 
exclusively the shorter RNA is encapsidated while the longer RNA is excluded 
from virions and provides intracellular functions. The current study examined 
TSS usage and packaging selectivity for a broad range of retroviruses and found 
that heterogenous TSS usage was a conserved feature of all tested HIV-1 strains, 
but all other retroviruses examined displayed unique TSSs. Phylogenetic 
csomparisons and chimeric viruses' properties provided evidence that this 
mechanism of RNA fate determination was an innovation of the HIV-1 lineage, with 
determinants mapping to core promoter elements. Fine-tuning differences between 
HIV-1 and HIV-2, which uses a unique TSS, implicated purine residue positioning 
plus a specific TSS-adjacent dinucleotide in specifying multiplicity of TSS 
usage. Based on these findings, HIV-1 expression constructs were generated that 
differed from the parental strain by only two point mutations yet each expressed 
only one of HIV-1's two RNAs. Replication defects of the variant with only the 
presumptive founder TSS were less severe than those for the virus with only the 
secondary start site.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.05.22.541776
PMCID: PMC10245945
PMID: 37292892