1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 May 24:2023.05.24.541991. doi: 
10.1101/2023.05.24.541991.

PKCδ regulates chromatin remodeling and DNA repair through SIRT6.

Affandi T(1), Haas A(1), Ohm AM(1), Wright GM(2), Black JC(2), Reyland ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of 
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Update in
    Mol Cancer Res. 2024 Feb 1;22(2):181-196. doi: 
10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-23-0493.

Protein kinase C delta (PKCδ) is a ubiquitous kinase whose function is defined 
in part by localization to specific cellular compartments. Nuclear PKCδ is both 
necessary and sufficient for IR-induced apoptosis, while inhibition of PKCδ 
activity provides radioprotection in vivo. How nuclear PKCδ regulates DNA-damage 
induced cell death is poorly understood. Here we show that PKCδ regulates 
histone modification, chromatin accessibility, and double stranded break (DSB) 
repair through a mechanism that requires SIRT6. Overexpression of PKCδ promotes 
genomic instability and increases DNA damage and apoptosis. Conversely, 
depletion of PKCδ increases DNA repair via non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and 
homologous recombination (HR) as evidenced by more rapid formation of NHEJ 
(DNA-PK) and HR (Rad51) DNA damage foci, increased expression of repair 
proteins, and increased repair of NHEJ and HR fluorescent reporter constructs. 
Nuclease sensitivity indicates that PKCδ depletion is associated with more open 
chromatin, while overexpression of PKCδ reduces chromatin accessibility. 
Epiproteome analysis revealed that PKCδ depletion increases chromatin associated 
H3K36me2, and reduces ribosylation of KDM2A and chromatin bound KDM2A. We 
identify SIRT6 as a downstream mediator of PKCδ. PKCδ-depleted cells have 
increased expression of SIRT6, and depletion of SIRT6 reverses the changes in 
chromatin accessibility, histone modification and NHEJ and HR DNA repair seen 
with PKCδ-depletion. Furthermore, depletion of SIRT6 reverses radioprotection in 
PKCδ-depleted cells. Our studies describe a novel pathway whereby PKCδ 
orchestrates SIRT6-dependent changes in chromatin accessibility to increase DNA 
repair, and define a mechanism for regulation of radiation-induced apoptosis by 
PKCδ.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.05.24.541991
PMCID: PMC10245827
PMID: 37292592

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.