1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 May 28;15(11):2957. doi: 10.3390/cancers15112957.

Polygenic Risk Score Predicts Modified Risk in BRCA1 Pathogenic Variant 
c.4035del and c.5266dup Carriers in Breast Cancer Patients.

Berga-Švītiņa E(1)(2), Maksimenko J(2)(3), Miklaševičs E(2)(4), Fischer K(5)(6), 
Vilne B(1), Mägi R(5).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Lab, Rīga Stradiņš University, Dzirciema Street 16, LV-1007 
Riga, Latvia.
(2)Institute of Oncology, Rīga Stradiņš University, Pilsoņu Street 13, Block 13, 
LV-1002 Riga, Latvia.
(3)Pauls Stradiņš Clinical University Hospital, Pilsoņu Street 13, LV-1002 Riga, 
Latvia.
(4)Department of Biology and Microbiology, Rīga Stradiņš University, LV-1007 
Riga, Latvia.
(5)Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Riia 23b, 51010 Tartu, Estonia.
(6)Institute of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Tartu, Narva mnt 18, 
51009 Tartu, Estonia.

The aim of this study was to assess the power of the polygenic risk score (PRS) 
in estimating the overall genetic risk of women carrying germline BRCA1 
pathogenic variants (PVs) c.4035del or c.5266dup to develop breast (BC) or 
ovarian cancer (OC) due to additional genetic variations. In this study, PRSs 
previously developed from two joint models using summary statistics of 
age-at-onset (BayesW model) and case-control data (BayesRR-RC model) from a 
genome-wide association analysis (GWAS) were applied to 406 germline BRCA1 PV 
(c.4035del or c.5266dup) carriers affected by BC or OC, compared with unaffected 
individuals. A binomial logistic regression model was used to assess the 
association of PRS with BC or OC development risk. We observed that the 
best-fitting BayesW PRS model effectively predicted the individual's BC risk (OR 
= 1.37; 95% CI = 1.03-1.81, p = 0.02905 with AUC = 0.759). However, none of the 
applied PRS models was a good predictor of OC risk. The best-fitted PRS model 
(BayesW) contributed to assessing the risk of developing BC for germline BRCA1 
PV (c.4035del or c.5266dup) carriers and may facilitate more precise and timely 
patient stratification and decision-making to improve the current BC treatment 
or even prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15112957
PMCID: PMC10252024
PMID: 37296919

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.