1. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2023 Aug;24(8):1071-1087. doi: 
10.1007/s11864-023-01110-2. Epub 2023 Jun 10.

Interventional Cardio-Oncology: Unique Challenges and Considerations in a 
High-Risk Population.

Leiva O(1), Alam U(2), Bohart I(2), Yang EH(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, New York University Grossman 
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, UCLA Cardio-Oncology Program, 
University of California at Los Angeles, 100 Medical Plaza, Suite 630, Los 
Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. EHYANG@mednet.ucla.edu.

Patients with cancer are at risk of developing cardiovascular disease (CVD) 
including atherosclerotic heart disease (AHD), valvular heart disease (VHD), and 
atrial fibrillation (AF). Advances in percutaneous catheter-based treatments, 
including percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for AHD, percutaneous valve 
replacement or repair for VHD, and ablation and left atrial appendage occlusion 
devices (LAAODs) for AF, have provided patients with CVD significant benefit in 
the recent decades. However, trials and registries investigating outcomes of 
these procedures often exclude patients with cancer. As a result, patients with 
cancer are less likely to undergo these therapies despite their benefits. 
Despite the inclusion of cancer patients in randomized clinical trial data, 
studies suggest that cancer patients derive similar benefits of percutaneous 
therapies for CVD compared with patients without cancer. Therefore, percutaneous 
interventions for CVD should not be withheld in patients with cancer, as they 
may still benefit from these procedures.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-023-01110-2
PMCID: PMC10356652
PMID: 37296366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Orly Leiva declares that he has no conflict of 
interest. Usman Alam declares that he has no conflict of interest. Isaac Bohart 
declares that he has no conflict of interest. Eric Yang reports research grant 
funding from Bristol Myers Squibb, and consulting fees from Edwards 
Lifesciences.