1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 May 29;24(11):9424. doi: 10.3390/ijms24119424.

Investigating the Contribution of Major Drug-Metabolising Enzymes to 
Possum-Specific Fertility Control.

Chand RR(1), Nimick M(1), Cridge B(2), Rosengren RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Otago, Dunedin 9016, New Zealand.
(2)Science for Communities, Christchurch Science Centre, Christchurch 8041, New 
Zealand.

The potential to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of potential 
oestrogen-based oral contraceptives (fertility control) for possums was 
investigated by comparing the inhibitory potential of hepatic CYP3A and UGT2B 
catalytic activity using a selected compound library (CYP450 inhibitor-based 
compounds) in possums to that of three other species (mouse, avian, and human). 
The results showed higher CYP3A protein levels in possum liver microsomes 
compared to other test species (up to a 4-fold difference). Moreover, possum 
liver microsomes had significantly higher basal p-nitrophenol glucuronidation 
activity than other test species (up to an 8-fold difference). However, no 
CYP450 inhibitor-based compounds significantly decreased the catalytic activity 
of possum CYP3A and UGT2B below the estimated IC50 and 2-fold IC50 values and 
were therefore not considered to be potent inhibitors of these enzymes. However, 
compounds such as isosilybin (65%), ketoconazole (72%), and fluconazole (74%) 
showed reduced UGT2B glucuronidation activity in possums, mainly at 2-fold IC50 
values compared to the control (p < 0.05). Given the structural features of 
these compounds, these results could provide opportunities for future compound 
screening. More importantly, however, this study provided preliminary evidence 
that the basal activity and protein content of two major drug-metabolising 
enzymes differ in possums compared to other test species, suggesting that this 
could be further exploited to reach the ultimate goal: a potential 
target-specific fertility control for possums in New Zealand.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24119424
PMCID: PMC10253456
PMID: 37298375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest.