1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 May 29;24(11):9439. doi: 10.3390/ijms24119439.

Altered Tau Kinase Activity in rTg4510 Mice after a Single Interfaced CHIMERA 
Traumatic Brain Injury.

Cheng WH(1)(2), Cheung H(1)(2), Kang A(1)(2), Fan J(1)(2), Cooper J(1)(2), Anwer 
M(1)(2), Barron C(1)(2), Wilkinson A(1)(2), Hu G(1)(2), Yue J(3), Cripton 
PA(2)(4)(5), Vocadlo DJ(3), Wellington CL(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.
(2)Djavad Mowafaghian Centre for Brain Health, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, BC V5A 1S6, 
Canada.
(4)School of Biomedical Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.
(5)International Collaboration on Repair Discoveries, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1M9, 
Canada.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is an established risk factor for neurodegenerative 
diseases. In this study, we used the Closed Head Injury Model of Engineered 
Rotational Acceleration (CHIMERA) to investigate the effects of a single 
high-energy TBI in rTg4510 mice, a mouse model of tauopathy. Fifteen male 
rTg4510 mice (4 mo) were impacted at 4.0 J using interfaced CHIMERA and were 
compared to sham controls. Immediately after injury, the TBI mice showed 
significant mortality (7/15; 47%) and a prolonged duration of loss of the 
righting reflex. At 2 mo post-injury, surviving mice displayed significant 
microgliosis (Iba1) and axonal injury (Neurosilver). Western blotting indicated 
a reduced p-GSK-3β (S9):GSK-3β ratio in TBI mice, suggesting chronic activation 
of tau kinase. Although longitudinal analysis of plasma total tau suggested that 
TBI accelerates the appearance of tau in the circulation, there were no 
significant differences in brain total or p-tau levels, nor did we observe 
evidence of enhanced neurodegeneration in TBI mice compared to sham mice. In 
summary, we showed that a single high-energy head impact induces chronic white 
matter injury and altered GSK-3β activity without an apparent change in 
post-injury tauopathy in rTg4510 mice.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24119439
PMCID: PMC10253362
PMID: 37298388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.L.W. has leadership roles in the International 
Initiative on Traumatic Brain Injury Research, the Canadian Consortium for 
Traumatic Brain Injury Research, and the Canadian Concussion Network, none of 
which have conflicts of interest with the present study.