1. Front Physiol. 2023 May 24;14:1165196. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1165196. 
eCollection 2023.

Efficacy of closed cell wet-suit at various depths and gas mixtures for 
thermoprotection during military training dives.

Kelly KR(1), Palombo LJ(1)(2), Jensen AE(1)(2), Bernards JR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Applied Translational Exercise and Metabolic Physiology Team, Warfighter 
Performance, Naval Health Research Center, San Diego, CA, United States.
(2)Leidos, Inc., San Diego, CA, United States.

Purpose: To evaluate a closed-cell wet-suit for thermal protective capability 
during extreme cold water exposure at various depths. Methods: Thirteen (n = 13) 
elite military divers who were tasked with cold-water training, participated in 
this study. To mimic various depths, the Ocean Simulation Facility (OSF) at the 
Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) was pressurized to simulate dive depths of 
30, 50, and 75fsw. Water temperature remained at 1.8-2.0°C for all dives. Four 
divers dove each day and used the MK16 underwater breathing apparatus with gas 
mixes of either N202 (79:21) or HeO2 (88:12). Mean skin temperature (TSK) 
(Ramanathan, 1964), core temperature (Tc), hand and foot readings were obtained 
every 30 min for 30 and 50fsw and every 15 min during the 75fsw dive. Results: 
TC was significantly reduced across all dives (p = 0.004); however, was 
preserved above the threshold for hypothermia (post dive Tc = 36.5 ± 0.4). There 
was no effect of gas mix on TC. TSK significantly decreased (p < 0.001) across 
all dives independent of depth and gas. Hand and foot temperatures resulted in 
the termination of three of the dives. There were no significant main effects 
for depth or gas, but there were significant main effects for time on hand 
temperature (p < 0.001) and foot temperature (p < 0.001). Conclusion: Core 
temperature is maintained above threshold for hypothermia. Variatioins in TC and 
TSK are a function of dive duration independent of depth or gas for a 
closed-cell wet-suit in cold water at various depths. However, both hand and 
foot temperatures reached values at which dexterity is compromised.

At least a portion of this work is authored by Karen R. Kelly on behalf of the 
U.S. Government and as regards Dr. Kelly and the U.S. Government, is not subject 
to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign and other copyrights may 
apply.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1165196
PMCID: PMC10245272
PMID: 37293261

Conflict of interest statement: Authors LP, AJ, and JB were employed by the 
Leidos, Inc. The remaining author declares that the research was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.