1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 May 28;24(11):9403. doi: 10.3390/ijms24119403.

The Verticillium dahliae Small Cysteine-Rich Protein VdSCP23 Manipulates Host 
Immunity.

Wang J(1), Wang D(2), Ji X(2), Wang J(2), Klosterman SJ(3), Dai X(2)(4), Chen 
J(2)(4), Subbarao KV(3)(5), Hao X(1), Zhang D(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Plant Protection, Shanxi Agricultural University, Taigu, Jinzhong 
030801, China.
(2)The State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, 
Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 
100193, China.
(3)Crop Improvement and Protection Research Unit, United States Department of 
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Salinas, CA 93905, USA.
(4)Western Agricultural Research Center, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Changji 831100, China.
(5)Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis, c/o U.S. 
Agricultural Research Station, Salinas, CA 93905, USA.

Verticillium wilt caused by Verticillium dahliae is a notorious soil-borne 
fungal disease and seriously threatens the yield of economic crops worldwide. 
During host infection, V. dahliae secretes many effectors that manipulate host 
immunity, among which small cysteine-rich proteins (SCPs) play an important 
role. However, the exact roles of many SCPs from V. dahliae are unknown and 
varied. In this study, we show that the small cysteine-rich protein VdSCP23 
inhibits cell necrosis in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves, as well as the reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) burst, electrolyte leakage and the expression of 
defense-related genes. VdSCP23 is mainly localized in the plant cell plasma 
membrane and nucleus, but its inhibition of immune responses was independent of 
its nuclear localization. Site-directed mutagenesis and peptide truncation 
showed that the inhibition function of VdSCP23 was independent of cysteine 
residues but was dependent on the N-glycosylation sites and the integrity of 
VdSCP23 protein structure. Deletion of VdSCP23 did not affect the growth and 
development of mycelia or conidial production in V. dahliae. Unexpectedly, 
VdSCP23 deletion strains still maintained their virulence for N. benthamiana, 
Gossypium hirsutum and Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. This study demonstrates 
an important role for VdSCP23 in the inhibition of plant immune responses; 
however, it is not required for normal growth or virulence in V. dahliae.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24119403
PMCID: PMC10253731
PMID: 37298354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. All authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.