1. Plants (Basel). 2023 May 26;12(11):2109. doi: 10.3390/plants12112109.

Rapid Adaptation of Chimonobambusa opienensis Leaves to Crown-Thinning in Giant 
Panda Ecological Corridor, Niba Mountain.

Fang D(1), Xian J(1), Chen G(2), Zhang Y(3), Qin H(1)(4), Fu X(1), Lin L(1), Ai 
Y(1), Yang Z(1), Xu X(1), Yang Y(1), Cheng Z(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Environmental Sciences, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 
611130, China.
(2)College of Forestry, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070, China.
(3)Institute of Mountain Hazards and Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Chengdu 610041, China.
(4)School of Ecological and Environmental Sciences, East China Normal 
University, Shanghai 201100, China.

Leaf traits reflect the ecological strategy in heterogeneous contexts and are 
widely used to explore the adaption of plant species to environmental change. 
However, the knowledge of short-term effect of canopy management on understorey 
plant leaf traits is still limited. Here, we studied the short-term effect of 
crown-thinning on the leaf morphological traits of bamboo (Chimonobambusa 
opienensis), an important understorey plant and staple food for the giant panda 
(Ailuropoda melanoleuca) of Niba Mountain. Our treatments were two 
crown-thinnings (spruce plantation, CS, and deciduous broad-leaved forest, CB) 
and two controls (broad-leaved forest canopy, FC, and the bamboo grove of 
clearcutting, BC). The results showed that: the CS enhanced the annual leaf 
length, width, area, and thickness, CB decreased almost all annual leaf traits, 
and perennial leaf traits in CS and CB were the opposite. The log-transformed 
allometric relationships of length vs. width, biomass vs. area were 
significantly positive while those of specific leaf area vs. thickness were 
significantly negative, which varied largely in treatments and age. The leaf 
traits and allometric relationships suggested that the CS created a more 
suitable habitat for bamboo growth. This study highlighted that the understorey 
bamboo leaf traits could adapt the improved light environment induced by 
crown-thinning rapidly.

DOI: 10.3390/plants12112109
PMCID: PMC10255537
PMID: 37299088

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.