1. Front Microbiol. 2023 May 24;14:1201444. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1201444. 
eCollection 2023.

Ubiquitin E3 ligase activity of Ralstonia solanacearum effector RipAW is not 
essential for induction of plant defense in Nicotiana benthamiana.

Ouyang X(1), Chen J(1), Sun Z(2), Wang R(3), Wu X(1), Li B(3), Song C(1), Liu 
P(3), Zhang M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 
China.
(2)National Engineering Laboratory for Endangered Medicinal Resource Development 
in Northwest China, Key Laboratory of Medicinal Resources and Natural 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, 
Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Fujian Key Laboratory for Monitoring and Integrated Management of Crop Pests, 
Institute of Plant Protection, Fujian Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Fuzhou, 
China.

As one of the most destructive bacterial phytopathogens, Ralstonia solanacearum 
causes substantial annual yield losses of many important crops. Deciphering the 
functional mechanisms of type III effectors, the crucial factors mediating R. 
solanacearum-plant interactions, will provide a valuable basis for protecting 
crop plants from R. solanacearum. Recently, the NEL (novel E3 ligase) effector 
RipAW was found to induce cell death on Nicotiana benthamiana in a E3 ligase 
activity-dependent manner. Here, we further deciphered the role of the E3 ligase 
activity in RipAW-triggered plant immunity. We found that RipAWC177A, the E3 
ligase mutant of RipAW, could not induce cell death but retained the ability of 
triggering plant immunity in N. benthamiana, indicating that the E3 ligase 
activity is not essential for RipAW-triggered immunity. By generating truncated 
mutants of RipAW, we further showed that the N-terminus, NEL domain and 
C-terminus are all required but not sufficient for RipAW-induced cell death. 
Furthermore, all truncated mutants of RipAW triggered ETI immune responses in N. 
benthamiana, confirming that the E3 ligase activity is not essential for 
RipAW-triggered plant immunity. Finally, we demonstrated that RipAW- and 
RipAWC177A-triggered immunity in N. benthamiana requires SGT1 (suppressor of G2 
allele of skp1), but not EDS1 (enhanced disease susceptibility), NRG1 (N 
requirement gene 1), NRC (NLR required for cell death) proteins or SA (salicylic 
acid) pathway. Our findings provide a typical case in which the effector-induced 
cell death can be uncoupled with immune responses, shedding new light on 
effector-triggered plant immunity. Our data also provide clues for further 
in-depth study of mechanism underlying RipAW-induced plant immunity.

Copyright Â© 2023 Ouyang, Chen, Sun, Wang, Wu, Li, Song, Liu and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1201444
PMCID: PMC10244751
PMID: 37293211

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.