1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2023 Aug;10(23):e2207349. doi: 10.1002/advs.202207349. Epub 
2023 Jun 9.

YY2-DRP1 Axis Regulates Mitochondrial Fission and Determines Cancer Stem Cell 
Asymmetric Division.

Wei M(1)(2), Nurjanah U(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Luo X(1)(2), Hosea R(1)(2), Li 
Y(1)(2), Zeng J(3), Duan W(1)(2), Song G(1), Miyagishi M(4), Kasim V(1)(2)(5), 
Wu S(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Biorheological Science and Technology, Ministry of 
Education, College of Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, 
P. R. China.
(2)The 111 Project Laboratory of Biomechanics and Tissue Repair, College of 
Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Oncology, Chongqing University 
Cancer Hospital, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400030, P. R. China.
(4)Life Science Innovation, School of Integrative and Global Majors, University 
of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0006, Japan.
(5)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Translational Research for Cancer Metastasis and 
Individualized Treatment, Chongqing University Cancer Hospital, Chongqing 
University, Chongqing, 400030, P. R. China.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are associated with tumor progression, recurrence, and 
therapeutic resistance. To maintain their pool while promoting tumorigenesis, 
CSCs divide asymmetrically, producing a CSC and a highly proliferative, more 
differentiated transit-amplifying cell. Exhausting the CSC pool has been 
proposed as an effective antitumor strategy; however, the mechanism underlying 
CSC division remains poorly understood, thereby largely limiting its clinical 
application. Here, through cross-omics analysis, yin yang 2 (YY2) is identified 
as a novel negative regulator of CSC maintenance. It is shown that YY2 is 
downregulated in stem-like tumor spheres formed by hepatocarcinoma cells and in 
liver cancer, in which its expression is negatively correlated with disease 
progression and poor prognosis. Furthermore, it is revealed that YY2 
overexpression suppressed liver CSC asymmetric division, leading to depletion of 
the CSC pool and decreased tumor-initiating capacity. Meanwhile, YY2 knock-out 
in stem-like tumor spheres caused enrichment in mitochondrial functions. 
Mechanistically, it is revealed that YY2 impaired mitochondrial fission, and 
consequently, liver CSC asymmetric division, by suppressing the transcription of 
dynamin-related protein 1. These results unravel a novel regulatory mechanism of 
mitochondrial dynamic-mediated CSCs asymmetric division and highlight the role 
of YY2 as a tumor suppressor and a therapeutic target in antitumor treatment.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202207349
PMCID: PMC10427375
PMID: 37300334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.