1. Cancer Med. 2023 Jun;12(12):13415-13425. doi: 10.1002/cam4.6052. Epub 2023 Jun
 12.

Real-world outcomes among patients with EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer 
treated with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors versus immunotherapy or 
chemotherapy in the first-line setting.

Apple J(1), Shenolikar R(1), De Silva K(1), Sun P(1), Spira A(2).

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
(2)Virginia Cancer Specialists, Fairfax, Virginia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Despite national guideline recommendations, epidermal growth factor 
receptor mutated (EGFRm) metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (mNSCLC) patients 
may still receive suboptimal treatment in the first line (1L). This study 
evaluated 1L therapy initiation in relation to biomarker testing results and 
time to next-treatment or death (TTNTD) in patients receiving EGFR tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) versus immunotherapy (IO) or chemotherapy.
METHODS: Stage IV EGFRm mNSCLC adults that initiated 1L EGFR TKI (first, second, 
or third generation), IO ± chemotherapy (IO users), or chemotherapy alone from 
5/2017-12/2019 were identified from the Flatiron database. Logistic regression 
estimated the likelihood of initiating treatment before receiving testing 
results for each therapy. Median TTNTD was evaluated via Kaplan-Meier analysis. 
Adjusted hazards ratios (HRs) and 95% CI examining the association of 1L therapy 
with TTNTD were reported from multivariable Cox proportional-hazards models.
RESULTS: Among 758 EGFRm mNSCLC patients, EGFR TKI was used as 1L therapy for 
87.3% of patients (n = 662), IO in 8.3% (n = 63), and chemotherapy only in 4.4% 
(n = 33). The majority of IO (61.9%) and chemotherapy only patients (60.6%) 
initiated therapy before test results were available, compared to 9.7% of EGFR 
TKIs. The odds of initiating therapy before receiving test results were higher 
for IO (OR: 19.6, p < 0.001) and chemotherapy alone (OR: 14.1, p < 0.001) in 
comparison to EGFR TKIs. Compared to IO and chemotherapy, EGFR TKIs had longer 
median TTNTD (EGFR TKI: 14.8 months, 95% CI: 13.5-16.3; IO: 3.7 months, 95% CI 
2.8-6.2; chemotherapy: 4.4 months, 95% CI 3.1-6.8, p < 0.001). EGFR TKI patients 
had significantly lower risk of initiating second-line therapy or death compared 
to patients on 1L IO (HR: 0.33, p < 0.001) or 1L chemotherapy (HR: 0.34, 
p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: A portion of biomarker testing results were not used to guide 1L 
therapy. Patients initiating EGFR TKI as 1L therapy had longer TTNTD than IO or 
chemotherapy.

© 2023 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.6052
PMCID: PMC10315796
PMID: 37306623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]