1. Mol Breed. 2022 Aug 30;42(9):53. doi: 10.1007/s11032-022-01315-7. eCollection 
2022 Sep.

Introgression of the RppQ gene from field corn improves southern rust resistance 
in sweet corn.

Zhang N(1), Qi X(1), Li X(1), Li G(1), Li G(1), Hu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Crops Research Institute, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Crops Genetics and Improvement, Guangzhou, 510640 
China.

Southern rust, one of the most destructive foliar diseases of sweet corn (Zea 
mays convar. saccharata var. rugosa), is caused by Puccinia polysora Underw. and 
leads to enormous yield losses and reduced quality of sweet corn in China. 
Utilization of resistance genes is an effective and environmentally friendly 
strategy for improving southern rust resistance of sweet corn. However, 
improvement is hampered by a lack of resistance genes in Chinese sweet corn 
germplasm. In this study, we introgress the southern rust resistance gene RppQ 
from Qi319, an inbred line of southern rust-resistant field corn, into four 
elite sweet corn inbred lines (1401, 1413, 1434, and 1445) using marker-assisted 
backcross breeding. These are parental inbred lines of four popular sweet corn 
varieties: Yuetian 28, Yuetian 13, Yuetian 26, and Yuetian 27. We developed five 
RppQ-based markers (M0607, M0801, M0903, M3301, and M3402) and employed these 
markers for foreground selection; 92.3 to 97.9% of the recurrent parent genomes 
were recovered following three or four rounds of backcrossing. The four newly 
developed sweet corn lines all showed significant improvement of southern rust 
resistance compared with their respective parent lines. Meanwhile, there was no 
significant difference in phenotypic data for agronomic traits. In addition, 
reconstituted hybrids derived from the converted lines retained resistance to 
southern rust, while other agronomic traits and sugar content remained 
unchanged. Our study provides an example of successful development of southern 
rust-resistant sweet corn using a resistance gene from field corn.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1007/s11032-022-01315-7.

Â© The Author(s) 2022.

DOI: 10.1007/s11032-022-01315-7
PMCID: PMC10248694
PMID: 37309374

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing interests.