1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2023 May 25;11:1095926. doi: 
10.3389/fbioe.2023.1095926. eCollection 2023.

An immunoregulator nanomedicine approach for the treatment of tuberculosis.

Yang L(1), Chaves L(2), Kutscher HL(1), Karki S(1), Tamblin M(1), Kenney P(3), 
Reynolds JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical 
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, United States.

Introduction: A nanoparticle composed of a poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) 
core and a chitosan (CS) shell with surface-adsorbed 1,3 β-glucan (β-glucan) was 
synthesized. The exposure response of CS-PLGA nanoparticles (0.1 mg/mL) with 
surface-bound β-glucan at 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, or 25 ng or free β-glucan at 5, 10, 
15, 20, or 25 ng/mL in macrophage in vitro and in vivo was investigated. 
Results: In vitro studies demonstrate that gene expression for IL-1β, IL-6, and 
TNFα increased at 10 and 15 ng surface-bound β-glucan on CS-PLGA nanoparticles 
(0.1 mg/mL) and at 20 and 25 ng/mL of free β-glucan both at 24 h and 48 h. 
Secretion of TNFα protein and ROS production increased at 5, 10, 15, and 20 ng 
surface-bound β-glucan on CS-PLGA nanoparticles and at 20 and 25 ng/mL of free 
β-glucan at 24 h. Laminarin, a Dectin-1 antagonist, prevented the increase in 
cytokine gene expression induced by CS-PLGA nanoparticles with surface-bound 
β-glucan at 10 and 15 ng, indicating a Dectin-1 receptor mechanism. Efficacy 
studies showed a significant reduction in intracellular accumulation of 
mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) in monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) incubated 
with on CS-PLGA (0.1 mg/ml) nanoparticles with 5, 10, and 15 ng surface-bound 
β-glucan or with 10 and 15 ng/mL of free β-glucan. β-glucan-CS-PLGA 
nanoparticles inhibited intracellular Mtb growth more than free β-glucan alone 
supporting the role of β-glucan-CS-PLGA nanoparticles as stronger adjuvants than 
free β-glucan. In vivo studies demonstrate that oropharyngeal aspiration (OPA) 
of CS-PLGA nanoparticles with nanogram concentrations of surface-bound β-glucan 
or free β-glucan increased TNFα gene expression in alveolar macrophages and TNFα 
protein secretion in bronchoalveolar lavage supernatants. Discussion: Data also 
demonstrate no damage to the alveolar epithelium or changes in the murine sepsis 
score following exposure to β-glucan-CS-PLGA nanoparticles only, indicating 
safety and feasibility of this nanoparticle adjuvant platform to mice by OPA.

Copyright © 2023 Yang, Chaves, Kutscher, Karki, Tamblin, Kenney and Reynolds.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2023.1095926
PMCID: PMC10249870
PMID: 37304141

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.