1. Cureus. 2023 May 10;15(5):e38860. doi: 10.7759/cureus.38860. eCollection 2023 
May.

Novel Phenotype of LMNA Variant c.154C>G Affecting Heart, Liver, and Lipid and 
Iron Metabolism: A Case Report.

Finsterer J(1), Pölzl G(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurology, Neurology and Neurophysiology Center, Vienna, AUT.
(2)Internal Medicine, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, AUT.

Mutations in the LMNA gene cause heterogeneous phenotypes such as myopathy, 
progeroid syndromes, hereditary neuropathies, cardiomyopathies, or 
lipodystrophies. A specific LMNA mutation manifesting as dilated cardiomyopathy 
(dCMP), and iron metabolism disorder has not been reported. The patient is a 
50-year-old female with palpitations and fatigue since childhood, hyperlipidemia 
for 25 years, gastroesophageal reflux for 20 years, arterial hypertension for 
eight years, and iron deficiency for one year, requiring intravenous iron 
supplementation. Family history was positive for dCMP, malignant ventricular 
arrhythmias (MVAs), and sudden cardiac death (SCD). She was diagnosed with dCMP 
at the age of 49. Genetic workup revealed the variant c.154C>G (p.Leu52Val) 
in LMNA, which was also found in two female cousins. Because of ventricular 
tachycardia in the long-term ECG recordings, an implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) was implanted in addition to antiarrhythmic, 
antihypertensive, heart failure, and lipid-lowering treatment. With this 
therapy, the patient remained in stable condition during the one-year follow-up 
and was able to successfully carry out her job. In summary, this case shows that 
the variant c.154C>G (p.Leu52Val) in LMNA manifests not only with dCMP, but also 
with hyperlipidemia, steatosis, gastroesophageal reflux, arterial hypertension, 
and iron deficiency. Primary prophylaxis with an ICD and additional symptomatic 
treatment can stabilise the condition and eventually prevent familial SCD.

Copyright © 2023, Finsterer et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.38860
PMCID: PMC10256956
PMID: 37303410

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.