1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Jul;299(7):104916. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104916. Epub 2023
 Jun 12.

Disruption of Golgi markers by two RILP-directed shRNAs in neurons: A new role 
for RILP or a neuron-specific off-target phenotype?

Yap CC(1), Digilio L(2), McMahon L(2), Winckler B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, USA. Electronic address: cy5x@virginia.edu.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, USA. Electronic address: bwinckler@virginia.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Mar 09:2023.03.08.531742. doi: 10.1101/2023.03.08.531742.

In neurons, degradation of dendritic cargos requires RAB7 and dynein-mediated 
retrograde transport to somatic lysosomes. To test if the dynein adapter 
RAB-interacting lysosomal protein (RILP) mediated the recruitment of dynein to 
late endosomes for retrograde transport in dendrites, we obtained several 
knockdown reagents previously validated in non-neuronal cells. Striking 
endosomal phenotypes elicited by one shRILP plasmid were not reproduced by 
another one. Furthermore, we discovered a profound depletion of Golgi/TGN 
markers for both shRILP plasmids. This Golgi disruption was only observed in 
neurons and could not be rescued by re-expression of RILP. This Golgi phenotype 
was also not found in neurons treated with siRILP or gRILP/Cas9. Lastly, we 
tested if a different RAB protein that interacts with RILP, namely the 
Golgi-associated RAB34, might be responsible for the loss of Golgi markers. 
Expression of a dominant-negative RAB34 did indeed cause changes in Golgi 
staining in a small subset of neurons but manifested as fragmentation rather 
than loss of staining. Unlike in non-neuronal cells, interference with RAB34 did 
not cause dispersal of lysosomes in neurons. Based on multiple lines of 
experimentation, we conclude that the neuronal Golgi phenotype observed with 
shRILP is likely off-target in this cell type specifically. Any observed 
disruptions of endosomal trafficking caused by shRILP in neurons might thus be 
downstream of Golgi disruption. It would be interesting to identify the actual 
target for this neuronal Golgi phenotype. Cell type-specific off-target 
phenotypes therefore likely occur in neurons, necessitating revalidation of 
reagents that were previously validated in other cell types.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104916
PMCID: PMC10362152
PMID: 37315786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.