1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2023 May 31;11:1188119. doi: 
10.3389/fbioe.2023.1188119. eCollection 2023.

Conditional protein degradation in Yarrowia lipolytica using the auxin-inducible 
degron.

Han Z(1), Maruwan J(1), Tang Y(2), Su WW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences and Bioengineering, University of Hawai'i 
at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, United States.
(2)Department of Energy, Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Washington 
University, Saint Louis, MO, United States.

Conditional protein degradation is a powerful tool for controlled protein 
knockdown. The auxin-inducible degron (AID) technology uses a plant auxin to 
induce depletion of degron-tagged proteins, and it has been shown to be 
functional in several non-plant eukaryotes. In this study, we demonstrated 
AID-based protein knockdown in an industrially important oleaginous yeast 
Yarrowia lipolytica. Using the mini-IAA7 (mIAA7) degron derived from Arabidopsis 
IAA7, coupled with an Oryza sativa TIR1 (OsTIR1) plant auxin receptor F-box 
protein (expressed from the copper-inducible MT2 promoter), C-terminal 
degron-tagged superfolder GFP could be degraded in Yarrowia lipolytica upon 
addition of copper and the synthetic auxin 1-Naphthaleneacetic acid (NAA). 
However, leaky degradation of the degron-tagged GFP in the absence of NAA was 
also noted. This NAA-independent degradation was largely eliminated by replacing 
the wild-type OsTIR1 and NAA with the OsTIR1F74A variant and the auxin 
derivative 5-Ad-IAA, respectively. Degradation of the degron-tagged GFP was 
rapid and efficient. However, Western blot analysis revealed cellular 
proteolytic cleavage within the mIAA7 degron sequence, leading to the production 
of a GFP sub-population lacking an intact degron. The utility of the 
mIAA7/OsTIR1F74A system was further explored in controlled degradation of a 
metabolic enzyme, β-carotene ketolase, which converts β-carotene to 
canthaxanthin via echinenone. This enzyme was tagged with the mIAA7 degron and 
expressed in a β-carotene producing Y. lipolytica strain that also expressed 
OsTIR1F74A controlled by the MT2 promoter. By adding copper and 5-Ad-IAA at the 
time of culture inoculation, canthaxanthin production was found to be reduced by 
about 50% on day five compared to the control culture without adding 5-Ad-IAA. 
This is the first report that demonstrates the efficacy of the AID system in Y. 
lipolytica. Further improvement of AID-based protein knockdown in Y. lipolytica 
may be achieved by preventing proteolytic removal of the mIAA7 degron tag.

Copyright © 2023 Han, Maruwan, Tang and Su.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2023.1188119
PMCID: PMC10264656
PMID: 37324427

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.