1. Front Aging. 2023 May 31;4:1176451. doi: 10.3389/fragi.2023.1176451.
eCollection  2023.

Genetic association of mosaic loss of chromosome Y with prostate cancer in men 
of European and East Asian ancestries: a Mendelian randomization study.

Kobayashi T(1), Hachiya T(2), Ikehata Y(1), Horie S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Advanced Informatics for Genetic Diseases, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.

Background: Genomic instability is a significant hallmark of aging and has a 
major impact on aging biology. Mosaic loss of chromosome Y (mLOY) in blood cells 
is a common chromosomal abnormality in aging men and is considered an indicator 
of genomic instability. Previous studies have indicated a connection between 
mLOY and prostate cancer risk, but the causal relationship has not been fully 
established. Methods: To determine the causal effect of mLOY on prostate cancer, 
we conducted a Mendelian Randomization (MR) study in two ancestral groups. We 
utilized 125 and 42 mLOY-associated variants as instrumental variables (IVs) in 
European and East Asian GWAS of prostate cancer, respectively. Summary-level 
data on prostate cancer was obtained from the PRACTICAL consortium (79,148 cases 
and 61,106 controls of European ancestry) and the Biobank Japan consortium 
(5,408 cases and 103,939 controls of East Asian ancestry). A single population 
was used to assess the causal relationship in East Asian ancestry. Our main 
method for obtaining MR results was inverse-variance weighted (IVW), and we 
conducted sensitivity analyses to confirm the robustness of our results. 
Finally, we combined the estimates from both sources using a fixed-effects 
meta-analysis. Results: Our MR analysis using the IVW method showed that a 
one-unit increase in genetically predicted mLOY was associated with an increased 
risk of prostate cancer in the PRACTICAL consortium (OR = 1.09%, 95% CI: 
1.05-1.13, p = 1.2 × 10-5), but not in the Biobank Japan consortium (OR = 1.13%, 
95% CI: 0.88-1.45, p = 0.34). Sensitivity analyses robustly indicated increased 
odds ratios for prostate cancer with every one-unit increase in genetically 
predicted mLOY for the PRACTICAL consortium. Furthermore, mLOY was found to be 
associated with prostate cancer risk in a meta-analysis of both sources (OR = 
1.09%, 95% CI: 1.05-1.13, p = 8.0 × 10-6). Conclusion: Our MR study provides 
strong evidence that higher mLOY increases the risk of prostate cancer. 
Preventing mLOY may be a means of reducing the risk of developing prostate 
cancer.

Copyright © 2023 Kobayashi, Hachiya, Ikehata and Horie.

DOI: 10.3389/fragi.2023.1176451
PMCID: PMC10264619
PMID: 37323536

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.