1. ACS Catal. 2022 Feb 18;12(4):2381-2396. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.1c05508. Epub
2022  Feb 1.

In-depth Sequence-Function Characterization Reveals Multiple Pathways to Enhance 
Enzymatic Activity.

Trivedi VD(1), Chappell TC(1), Krishna NB(2), Shetty A(2), Sigamani GG(2), Mohan 
K(1), Ramesh A(1), Pravin KR(2), Nair NU(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, 
USA 02155.
(2)Kcat Enzymatic Private Limited, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India 560005.

Deep mutational scanning (DMS) has recently emerged as a powerful method to 
study protein sequence-function relationships but it has not been well-explored 
as a guide to enzyme engineering and identifying pathways by which their 
catalytic cycle may be improved. We report such a demonstration in this work 
using a Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL), which deaminates L-phenylalanine to 
trans-cinnamic acid and has widespread application in chemo-enzymatic synthesis, 
agriculture, and medicine. In particular, the PAL from Anabaena variabilis 
(AvPAL*) has garnered significant attention as the active ingredient in 
PegvaliaseÂ®, the only FDA-approved drug treating classical Phenylketonuria 
(PKU). Although an extensive body of literature exists on the structure, 
substrate-specificity, and catalytic cycle, protein-wide sequence determinants 
of function remain unknown, as do intermediate reaction steps that limit 
turnover frequency, all of which has hindered rational engineering of these 
enzymes. Here, we created a detailed sequence-function landscape of AvPAL* by 
performing DMS and revealed 112 mutations at 79 functionally relevant sites that 
affect a positive change in enzyme fitness. Using fitness values and 
structure-function analysis, we picked a subset of positions for comprehensive 
single- and multi-site saturation mutagenesis and identified combinations of 
mutations that led to improved reaction kinetics in cell-free and cellular 
contexts. We then performed QM/MM and MD to understand the mechanistic role of 
the most beneficial mutations and observed that different mutants confer 
improvements via different mechanisms, including stabilizing transition and 
intermediate states, improving substrate diffusion into the active site, and 
decreasing product inhibition. This work demonstrates how DMS can be combined 
with computational analysis to effectively identify significant mutations that 
enhance enzyme activity along with the underlying mechanisms by which these 
mutations confer their benefit.

DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.1c05508
PMCID: PMC10270700
PMID: 37325394

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS. Authors (N.U.N., V.D.T., 
T.C.C., K.M.) and Tufts University have applied for a patent on the workflow and 
enhanced activity variants. N.U.N., V.D.T., and T.C.C. are cofounders of Enrich 
Bio, Inc.