1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2023 May 30;13:1170763. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1170763. eCollection 2023.

Targeted and non-targeted proteomics to characterize the parasite proteins of 
Echinococcus multilocularis metacestodes.

Müller J(1), Preza M(1), Kaethner M(1)(2), Rufener R(1)(2), Braga S(3), Uldry 
AC(3), Heller M(3), Lundström-Stadelmann B(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Graduate School for Cellular and Biomedical Sciences (GCB), University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical 
Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Multidisciplinary Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.

The larval stage of the cestode Echinococcus multilocularis is the causative 
agent of alveolar echinococcosis. To investigate the biology of these stages and 
to test novel compounds, metacestode cultures represent a suitable in vitro 
model system. These metacestodes are vesicles surrounded by an envelope formed 
by the vesicle tissue (VT), which is formed by the laminated and germinal layer, 
and filled with vesicle fluid (VF). We analyzed the proteome of VF and VT by 
liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and identified a total 
of 2,954 parasite proteins. The most abundant protein in VT was the expressed 
conserved protein encoded by EmuJ_000412500, followed by the antigen B subunit 
AgB8/3a encoded by EmuJ_000381500 and Endophilin B1 (protein p29). In VF, the 
pattern was different and dominated by AgB subunits. The most abundant protein 
was the AgB8/3a subunit followed by three other AgB subunits. In total, the AgB 
subunits detected in VF represented 62.1% of the parasite proteins. In culture 
media (CM), 63 E. multilocularis proteins were detected, of which AgB subunits 
made up 93.7% of the detected parasite proteins. All AgB subunits detected in VF 
(encoded by EmuJ_000381100-700, corresponding to AgB8/2, AgB8/1, AgB8/4, 
AgB8/3a, AgB8/3b, and AgB8/3c) were also found in CM, except the subunit encoded 
by EmuJ_000381800 (AgB8/5) that was very rare in VF and not detected in CM. The 
relative abundance of the AgB subunits in VF and CM followed the same pattern. 
In VT, only the subunits EmuJ_000381500 (AgB8/3a) and EmuJ_000381200 (AgB8/1) 
were detected among the 20 most abundant proteins. To see whether this pattern 
was specific to VF from in vitro cultured metacestodes, we analyzed the proteome 
of VF from metacestodes grown in a mouse model. Here, the AgB subunits encoded 
by EmuJ_000381100-700 constituted the most abundant proteins, namely, 81.9% of 
total protein, with the same order of abundance as in vitro. Immunofluorescence 
on metacestodes showed that AgB is co-localized to calcareous corpuscles of E. 
multilocularis. Using targeted proteomics with HA-tagged EmuJ_000381200 (AgB8/1) 
and EmuJ_000381100 (AgB8/2), we could show that uptake of AgB subunits from CM 
into VF occurs within hours.

Copyright © 2023 Müller, Preza, Kaethner, Rufener, Braga, Uldry, Heller and 
Lundström-Stadelmann.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1170763
PMCID: PMC10266102
PMID: 37325510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.