1. Oncol Lett. 2023 Jun 2;26(1):310. doi: 10.3892/ol.2023.13896. eCollection 2023
 Jul.

Expression analysis of TRAF2‑ and NCK‑interacting protein kinase (TNIK) and 
phosphorylated TNIK in papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Li J(1), Lan L(2), Xu Y(2), Liu S(2), Liu M(2), Hu G(2), Wu G(2), Zhao Y(2), Shi 
J(2), Wang J(2), Sun Y(2), Wang Z(2), Zhao R(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Center, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050011, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated 
Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050011, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to evaluate the expression of TRAF2- and 
NCK-interacting kinase (TNIK) and the levels of the active form of TNIK, 
phosphorylated (p)-TNIK, in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), and to identify 
and compare the levels of TNIK and p-TNIK among PTC, benign thyroid tumors and 
normal tissues. The levels of TNIK and p-TNIK were examined by reverse 
transcription-quantitative (RT-q)PCR and immunohistochemical analysis (IHC) in 
PTC, benign thyroid tumors and normal tissues, and their association with 
clinicopathological features was evaluated. First, analysis of the Gene 
Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis and The Cancer Genome Atlas datasets 
suggested that the mRNA expression of TNIK was markedly increased in PTC tissues 
compared with that in normal tissues. RT-qPCR analyses then indicated that the 
relative mRNA expression of TNIK in PTC tissues was 4.47±6.16, which was 
significantly higher than that in adjacent tissues 2.57±5.83. The IHC results 
suggested that the levels of TNIK and p-TNIK in PTC tissues were markedly 
elevated compared with those in benign thyroid tumors and normal tissues. The 
levels of p-TNIK in patients with PTC were significantly associated with 
extrathyroidal extension (χ2=4.199, P=0.040). Positive staining for TNIK was 
observed in 187 out of 202 (92.6%) cases in the cytoplasm, nucleus or 
cytomembrane of PTC cells. Among the 187 positive cases, cytoplasm expression 
was identified in 162 cases (86.6%), nuclear expression in 17 cases (9.1%) and 
cytomembrane expression in 8 cases (4.3%). Positive staining for p-TNIK was 
observed in 179 out of 202 (88.6%) cases in the nuclei, cytoplasm or 
cytomembrane of PTC cells. In the 179 p-TNIK-positive cases, localization in the 
nuclei plus cytoplasm was identified in 142 cases (79.3%), nuclear localization 
in 9 cases (5.0%), presence in the cytoplasm in 21 cases (11.7%) and 
cytomembrane localization in 7 cases (3.9%). Both TNIK and p-TNIK were 
upregulated in PTC tissues and p-TNIK was significantly associated with 
extrathyroidal extension. It may act as a crucial oncogene to participate in PTC 
carcinogenesis and progression.

Copyright: © Li et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2023.13896
PMCID: PMC10272969
PMID: 37332335

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.