1. mBio. 2023 Aug 31;14(4):e0113723. doi: 10.1128/mbio.01137-23. Epub 2023 Jun
21.

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi uses two type 3 secretion systems to replicate 
in human macrophages and colonize humanized mice.

Hamblin M(1), Schade R(1), Narasimhan R(1), Monack DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine , Stanford, California, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jun 07:2023.06.06.543980. doi: 10.1101/2023.06.06.543980.

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi (S. Typhi) is a human-restricted pathogen that 
replicates in macrophages. In this study, we investigated the roles of the S. 
Typhi type 3 secretion systems (T3SSs) encoded on Salmonella pathogenicity 
islands (SPI)-1 (T3SS-1) and SPI-2 (T3SS-2) during human macrophage infection. 
We found that mutants of S. Typhi deficient for both T3SSs were defective for 
intramacrophage replication as measured by flow cytometry, viable bacterial 
counts, and live time-lapse microscopy. T3SS-secreted proteins PipB2 and SifA 
contributed to S. Typhi replication and were translocated into the cytosol of 
human macrophages through both T3SS-1 and T3SS-2, demonstrating functional 
redundancy for these secretion systems. Importantly, an S. Typhi mutant strain 
that is deficient for both T3SS-1 and T3SS-2 was severely attenuated in the 
ability to colonize systemic tissues in a humanized mouse model of typhoid 
fever. Overall, this study establishes a critical role for S. Typhi T3SSs during 
its replication within human macrophages and during systemic infection of 
humanized mice. IMPORTANCE Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi is a 
human-restricted pathogen that causes typhoid fever. Understanding the key 
virulence mechanisms that facilitate S. Typhi replication in human phagocytes 
will enable rational vaccine and antibiotic development to limit the spread of 
this pathogen. While S. Typhimurium replication in murine models has been 
studied extensively, there is limited information available about S. Typhi 
replication in human macrophages, some of which directly conflict with findings 
from S. Typhimurium murine models. This study establishes that both of S. 
Typhi's two type 3 secretion systems (T3SS-1 and T3SS-2) contribute to 
intramacrophage replication and virulence.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.01137-23
PMCID: PMC10470537
PMID: 37341487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.