1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2024 Jul;42(11):5607-5616. doi: 
10.1080/07391102.2023.2227713. Epub 2023 Jun 22.

The impacts of the mitochondrial myopathy-associated G58R mutation on the 
dynamic structural properties of CHCHD10.

Alici H(1), Uversky VN(2), Kang DE(3)(4), Woo JA(3), Coskuner-Weber O(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Sciences, Department of Physics, Zonguldak Bulent Ecevit 
University, Zonguldak, Turkey.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Research 
Institute, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, 
USA.
(3)School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, USA.
(4)Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center, Cleveland, USA.
(5)Molecular Biotechnology, Turkish-German University, Istanbul, Turkey.

The mitochondria are responsible for producing energy within the cell, and in 
mitochondrial myopathy, there is a defect in the energy production process. The 
CHCHD10 gene codes for a protein called coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix 
domain-containing protein 10 (CHCHD10), which is found in the mitochondria and 
is involved in the regulation of mitochondrial function. G58R mutation has been 
shown to disrupt the normal function of CHCHD10, leading to mitochondrial 
dysfunction and ultimately to the development of mitochondrial myopathy. The 
structures of G58R mutant CHCHD10 and how G58R mutation impacts the wild-type 
CHCHD10 protein at the monomeric level are unknown. To address this problem, we 
conducted homology modeling, multiple run molecular dynamics simulations and 
bioinformatics calculations. We represent herein the structural ensemble 
properties of the G58R mutant CHCHD10 (CHCHD10G58R) in aqueous solution. 
Moreover, we describe the impacts of G58R mutation on the structural ensembles 
of wild-type CHCHD10 (CHCHD10WT) in aqueous solution. The dynamics properties as 
well as structural properties of CHCHD10WT are impacted by the mitochondrial 
myopathy-related G58R mutation. Specifically, the secondary and tertiary 
structure properties, root mean square fluctuations, Ramachandran diagrams and 
results from principal component analysis demonstrate that the CHCHD10WT and 
CHCHD10G58R proteins possess different structural ensemble characteristics and 
describe the impacts of G58R mutation on CHCHD10WT. These findings may be 
helpful for designing new treatments for mitochondrial myopathy.Communicated by 
Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2023.2227713
PMID: 37349880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]