1. RSC Adv. 2023 Jun 20;13(27):18496-18510. doi: 10.1039/d3ra02344c. eCollection 
2023 Jun 15.

Anti-Alzheimer activity of new coumarin-based derivatives targeting 
acetylcholinesterase inhibition.

Kamel NN(1), Aly HF(1), Fouad GI(1), Abd El-Karim SS(1), Anwar MM(1), Syam 
YM(1), Elseginy SA(2), Ahmed KA(3), Booles HF(4), Shalaby MB(5), Khalil WKB(4), 
Sandhir R(6), Deshwal S(6), Rizk MZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutic Chemistry, National Research Centre 12262 
El-Bohouth St Cairo Egypt Hanan_abduallah@yahoo.com.
(2)Green Chemistry Department, Chemical Industries Research Division, National 
Research Centre P. O. Box 12622 Egypt.
(3)Pathology Departments, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Cairo University Giza 
12211 Egypt.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, National Research Centre 12262 El-Bohouth St 
Cairo Egypt.
(5)Toxicology Research Department, Research Institute of Medical Entomology 
(RIME), General Organization of Teaching Hospitals and Institutes (GOTHI), 
Ministry of Health and Population (MoHP) Dokki, P. O. Box 12311 Cairo Egypt.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Panjab University Chandigarh India.

New 2-oxo-chromene-7-oxymethylene acetohydrazide derivatives 4a-d were designed 
and synthesized with a variety of bioactive chemical fragments. The newly 
synthesized compounds were evaluated as acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors 
and antioxidant agents in comparison to donepezil and ascorbic acid, 
respectively. Compound 4c exhibited a promising inhibitory impact with an IC50 
value of 0.802 μM and DPPH scavenging activity of 57.14 ± 2.77%. Furthermore, 
biochemical and haematological studies revealed that compound 4c had no effect 
on the blood profile, hepatic enzyme levels (AST, ALT, and ALP), or total urea 
in 4c-treated rats compared to the controls. Moreover, the histopathological 
studies of 4c-treated rats revealed the normal architecture of the hepatic 
lobules and renal parenchyma, as well as no histopathological damage in the 
examined hepatic, kidney, heart, and brain tissues. In addition, an in vivo 
study investigated the amelioration in the cognitive function of AD-rats treated 
with 4c through the T-maze and beam balance behavioural tests. Also, 4c 
detectably ameliorated MDA and GSH, reaching 90.64 and 27.17%, respectively, in 
comparison to the standard drug (90.64% and 35.03% for MDA and GSH, 
respectively). The molecular docking study exhibited a good fitting of compound 
4c in the active site of the AChE enzyme and a promising safety profile. 
Compound 4c exhibited a promising anti-Alzheimer's disease efficiency compared 
to the standard drug donepezil.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d3ra02344c
PMCID: PMC10280131
PMID: 37346948

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.