1. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2023;10(3):513-522. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2023.37.

Association of Circulating Caprylic Acid with Risk of Mild Cognitive Impairment 
and Alzheimer's Disease in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) Cohort.

Fan L(1), Zhu X, Borenstein AR, Huang X, Shrubsole MJ, Dugan LL, Dai Q.

Author information:
(1)Qi Dai, M.D., Ph.D., Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, 2525 West End Avenue, Suite 800, Nashville, TN 37203-1738, USA, Phone: 
(615) 936-0707, Fax: (615) 343-5938, E-mail: qi.dai@vanderbilt.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) can rapidly cross the blood-brain 
barrier and provide an alternative energy source for the brain. This study aims 
to determine 1) whether plasma caprylic acid (C8:0) is associated with risk of 
incident mild cognitive impairment (MCI) among baseline cognitively normal (CN) 
participants, and incident Alzheimer's Disease (AD) among baseline MCI 
participants; and 2) whether these associations differ by sex, comorbidity of 
cardiometabolic diseases, apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 alleles, and ADAS-Cog 13.
METHODS: Within the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort, 
plasma C8:0 was measured at baseline in 618 AD-free participants aged 55 to 91. 
Logistic regression models were used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs 
with incident MCI and AD as dependent variables, separately.
RESULTS: The inverse association between circulating C8:0 and risk of incident 
MCI was of borderline significance. The inverse association between circulating 
levels of C8:0 and risk of incident MCI was significant among CN participants 
with ≥1 cardiometabolic diseases [OR (95% CI): 0.75 (0.58-0.98) (P=0.03)], those 
with one copy of APOE ε4 alleles [OR (95% CI): 0.43 (0.21-0.89) (P=0.02)], 
female [OR (95% CI): 0.60 (0.38-0.94) (P=0.02)], and ADAS-Cog 13 above the 
median [OR (95%CI): 0.69 (0.50-0.97)(P=0.03)] after adjusting for all 
covariates.
CONCLUSION: The inverse associations were present only among subgroups of CN 
participants, including female individuals, those with one or more 
cardiometabolic diseases, or one APOE ε4 allele, or higher ADAS-Cog 13 scores. 
If confirmed, this finding will facilitate precision prevention of MCI, in turn, 
AD among CN older adults.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2023.37
PMCID: PMC10442865
PMID: 37357292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have no conflicts of interest.