1. Neurobiol Dis. 2023 Aug;184:106210. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2023.106210. Epub 2023 
Jun 21.

NRF2 activation suppresses motor neuron ferroptosis induced by the SOD1(G93A) 
mutation and exerts neuroprotection in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Yang B(1), Pan J(2), Zhang XN(3), Wang H(3), He L(3), Rong X(3), Li X(4), Peng 
Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China; Department of Neurology, Guangdong Provincial 
Hospital of Chinese Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China; Shenshan Medical Center, Sun Yat-sen Memorial 
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Shanwei, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China; Shenshan Medical Center, Sun Yat-sen Memorial 
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Shanwei, China. Electronic address: 
lixiangp@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant 
Tumor Epigenetics and Gene Regulation, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: 
pengy2@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

The progressive neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is 
caused by a decline in motor neuron function, resulting in worsened motor 
impairments, malnutrition, respiratory failure and mortality, and there is a 
lack of effective clinical treatments. The exact mechanism of motor neuronal 
degeneration remains unclear. Previously, we reported that ferroptosis, which is 
characterized by the accumulation of lipid peroxide and glutathione depletion in 
an iron-dependent manner, contributed to motor neuronal death in ALS cell models 
with the hSOD1G93A (human Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase) gene mutation. In this 
study, we further explored the role of ferroptosis in motor neurons and its 
regulation in mutant hSOD1G93A cell and mouse models. Our results showed that 
ferroptosis was activated in hSOD1G93A NSC-34 cells and mouse models, which was 
accompanied by decreased nuclear retention of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related 
factor 2 (NRF2) and downregulation of solute carrier family 7 member 11 
(SLC7A11) and glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) levels. Moreover, RTA-408, an NRF2 
activator, inhibited ferroptosis in hSOD1G93A NSC-34 cells by upregulating the 
protein expression of SLC7A11 and GPX4. Moreover, hSOD1G93A mice treated with 
RTA-408 showed obvious improvements in body weight and motor function. Our study 
demonstrated that ferroptosis contributed to the toxicity of motor neurons and 
that activating NRF2 could alleviate neuronal degeneration in ALS with the 
hSOD1G93A mutation.

Copyright Â© 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2023.106210
PMID: 37352984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.