1. ACS Omega. 2023 Jun 6;8(24):21438-21449. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.2c08156. 
eCollection 2023 Jun 20.

Understanding the Structure-Activity Relationship through Density Functional 
Theory: A Simple Method Predicts Relative Binding Free Energies of Metalloenzyme 
Fragment-like Inhibitors.

Vasile S(1), Roos K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala 751 23, 
Sweden.

Despite being involved in several human diseases, metalloenzymes are targeted by 
a small percentage of FDA-approved drugs. Development of novel and efficient 
inhibitors is required, as the chemical space of metal binding groups (MBGs) is 
currently limited to four main classes. The use of computational chemistry 
methods in drug discovery has gained momentum thanks to accurate estimates of 
binding modes and binding free energies of ligands to receptors. However, exact 
predictions of binding free energies in metalloenzymes are challenging due to 
the occurrence of nonclassical phenomena and interactions that common force 
field-based methods are unable to correctly describe. In this regard, we applied 
density functional theory (DFT) to predict the binding free energies and to 
understand the structure-activity relationship of metalloenzyme fragment-like 
inhibitors. We tested this method on a set of small-molecule inhibitors with 
different electronic properties and coordinating two Mn2+ ions in the binding 
site of the influenza RNA polymerase PAN endonuclease. We modeled the binding 
site using only atoms from the first coordination shell, hence reducing the 
computational cost. Thanks to the explicit treatment of electrons by DFT, we 
highlighted the main contributions to the binding free energies and the 
electronic features differentiating strong and weak inhibitors, achieving good 
qualitative correlation with the experimentally determined affinities. By 
introducing automated docking, we explored alternative ways to coordinate the 
metal centers and we identified 70% of the highest affinity inhibitors. This 
methodology provides a fast and predictive tool for the identification of key 
features of metalloenzyme MBGs, which can be useful for the design of new and 
efficient drugs targeting these ubiquitous proteins.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.2c08156
PMCID: PMC10285960
PMID: 37360476

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.