1. Materials (Basel). 2023 Jun 15;16(12):4417. doi: 10.3390/ma16124417.

Structural, Magnetic, and Magneto-Optical Properties of Thin Films of BaM 
Hexaferrite Grown by Laser Molecular Beam Epitaxy.

Krichevtsov B(1), Korovin A(1), Suturin S(1), Levin AA(1), Lobov I(2), Telegin 
A(2), Badalyan A(1), Sakharov V(1), Serenkov I(1), Dorogov M(3), Sokolov N(1).

Author information:
(1)Ioffe Institute, Politechnicheskaya 26, 194021 St. Petersburg, Russia.
(2)M.N. Mikheev Institute of Metal Physics, 18 S. Kovalevskaya Str., 620108 
Ekaterinburg, Russia.
(3)Institute of Advanced Data Transfer Systems, ITMO University, Kronverksky Pr. 
49, 197101 St. Petersburg, Russia.

Thin films of BaM hexaferrite (BaFe12O19) were grown on α-Al2O3(0001) substrates 
by laser molecular beam epitaxy. Structural, magnetic, and magneto-optical 
properties were studied using medium-energy ion scattering, energy dispersive 
X-ray spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, X-ray diffraction, magneto-optical 
spectroscopy, and magnetometric techniques, and the dynamics of magnetization by 
ferromagnetic resonance method. It was shown that even a short time annealing 
drastically changes the structural and magnetic properties of films. Only 
annealed films demonstrate magnetic hysteresis loops in PMOKE and VSM 
experiments. The shape of hysteresis loops depends on thickness of films showing 
practically rectangular loops and high value of remnant magnetization 
(Mr/Ms~99%) for thin films (50 nm) and much broader and sloped loops in thick 
(350-500 nm) films. The magnitude of magnetization 4πMs ≈ 4.3 kG in thin films 
corresponds to that in bulk BaM hexaferrite. Photon energy and sign of bands in 
magneto-optical spectra of thin films correspond to ones observed earlier in 
bulk samples and films of BaM hexaferrite. FMR spectra of 50 nm films at 50 GHz 
consist of a number of narrow lines. The width of main line ΔH~20 Oe is lower 
than has been reported up to now.

DOI: 10.3390/ma16124417
PMCID: PMC10302779
PMID: 37374601

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.