1. Plants (Basel). 2023 Jun 8;12(12):2253. doi: 10.3390/plants12122253.

Plants' Response Mechanisms to Salinity Stress.

Balasubramaniam T(1), Shen G(2), Esmaeili N(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409, 
USA.
(2)Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China.

Soil salinization is a severe abiotic stress that negatively affects plant 
growth and development, leading to physiological abnormalities and ultimately 
threatening global food security. The condition arises from excessive salt 
accumulation in the soil, primarily due to anthropogenic activities such as 
irrigation, improper land uses, and overfertilization. The presence of Na‚Å∫, Cl-, 
and other related ions in the soil above normal levels can disrupt plant 
cellular functions and lead to alterations in essential metabolic processes such 
as seed germination and photosynthesis, causing severe damage to plant tissues 
and even plant death in the worst circumstances. To counteract the effects of 
salt stress, plants have developed various mechanisms, including modulating ion 
homeostasis, ion compartmentalization and export, and the biosynthesis of 
osmoprotectants. Recent advances in genomic and proteomic technologies have 
enabled the identification of genes and proteins involved in plant 
salt-tolerance mechanisms. This review provides a short overview of the impact 
of salinity stress on plants and the underlying mechanisms of salt-stress 
tolerance, particularly the functions of salt-stress-responsive genes associated 
with these mechanisms. This review aims at summarizing recent advances in our 
understanding of salt-stress tolerance mechanisms, providing the key background 
knowledge for improving crops' salt tolerance, which could contribute to the 
yield and quality enhancement in major crops grown under saline conditions or in 
arid and semiarid regions of the world.

DOI: 10.3390/plants12122253
PMCID: PMC10300796
PMID: 37375879

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.