1. Microorganisms. 2023 Jun 4;11(6):1495. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11061495.

Pangenome Reconstruction of Mycobacterium tuberculosis as a Guide to Reveal 
Genomic Features Associated with Strain Clinical Phenotype.

Negrete-Paz AM(1)(2), Vázquez-Marrufo G(2), Gutiérrez-Moraga A(3), 
Vázquez-Garcidueñas MS(1).

Author information:
(1)División de Estudios de Posgrado, Facultad de Ciencias Médicas y Biológicas 
"Dr. Ignacio Chávez", Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo, Morelia 
58020, Michoacán, Mexico.
(2)Centro Multidisciplinario de Estudios en Biotecnología, Facultad de Medicina 
Veterinaria y Zootecnia, Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo, 
Tarímbaro 58893, Michoacán, Mexico.
(3)Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Vicerrectoría de Investigación y 
Doctorados, Universidad Autónoma de Chile, Santiago 7500912, Chile.

Tuberculosis (TB) is one of the leading causes of human deaths worldwide caused 
by infectious diseases. TB infection by Mycobacterium tuberculosis can occur in 
the lungs, causing pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB), or in any other organ of the 
body, resulting in extrapulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB). There is no consensus on 
the genetic determinants of this pathogen that may contribute to EPTB. In this 
study, we constructed the M. tuberculosis pangenome and used it as a tool to 
seek genomic signatures associated with the clinical presentation of TB based on 
its accessory genome differences. The analysis carried out in the present study 
includes the raw reads of 490 M. tuberculosis genomes (PTB n = 245, EPTB n = 
245) retrieved from public databases that were assembled, as well as ten genomes 
from Mexican strains (PTB n = 5, EPTB n = 5) that were sequenced and assembled. 
All genomes were annotated and then used to construct the pangenome with Roary 
and Panaroo. The pangenome obtained using Roary consisted of 2231 core genes and 
3729 accessory genes. On the other hand, the pangenome resulting from Panaroo 
consisted of 2130 core genes and 5598 accessory genes. Associations between the 
distribution of accessory genes and the PTB/EPTB phenotypes were examined using 
the Scoary and Pyseer tools. Both tools found a significant association between 
the hspR, plcD, Rv2550c, pe_pgrs5, pe_pgrs25, and pe_pgrs57 genes and the PTB 
genotype. In contrast, the deletion of the aceA, esxR, plcA, and ppe50 genes was 
significantly associated with the EPTB phenotype. Rv1759c and Rv3740 were found 
to be associated with the PTB phenotype according to Scoary; however, these 
associations were not observed when using Pyseer. The robustness of the 
constructed pangenome and the gene-phenotype associations is supported by 
several factors, including the analysis of a large number of genomes, the 
inclusion of the same number of PTB/EPTB genomes, and the reproducibility of 
results thanks to the different bioinformatic tools used. Such characteristics 
surpass most of previous M. tuberculosis pangenomes. Thus, it can be inferred 
that the deletion of these genes can lead to changes in the processes involved 
in stress response and fatty acid metabolism, conferring phenotypic advantages 
associated with pulmonary or extrapulmonary presentation of TB. This study 
represents the first attempt to use the pangenome to seek gene-phenotype 
associations in M. tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms11061495
PMCID: PMC10300688
PMID: 37374997

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.