1. Biomolecules. 2023 May 23;13(6):877. doi: 10.3390/biom13060877.

MiRNA-Based Therapies for Lung Cancer: Opportunities and Challenges?

Yang H(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Chen L(1)(2), Zhao J(1)(2), Guo M(1)(2), Zhao 
X(1)(2), Wen Z(3), He Z(4), Chen C(1)(2), Xu L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Special Key Laboratory of Gene Detection and Therapy of Guizhou Province, 
Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi 563000, China.
(2)Department of Immunology, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi 563000, China.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Research, Soochow University, Soochow 563000, China.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center of Tissue Damage Repair and Regeneration 
Medicine of Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi 563000, China.

Lung cancer is a commonly diagnosed cancer and the leading cause of 
cancer-related deaths, posing a serious health risk. Despite new advances in 
immune checkpoint and targeted therapies in recent years, the prognosis for lung 
cancer patients, especially those in advanced stages, remains poor. MicroRNAs 
(miRNAs) have been shown to modulate tumor development at multiple levels, and 
as such, miRNA mimics and molecules aimed at regulating miRNAs have shown 
promise in preclinical development. More importantly, miRNA-based therapies can 
also complement conventional chemoradiotherapy, immunotherapy, and targeted 
therapies to reverse drug resistance and increase the sensitivity of lung cancer 
cells. Furthermore, small interfering RNA (siRNA) and miRNA-based therapies have 
entered clinical trials and have shown favorable development prospects. 
Therefore, in this paper, we review recent advances in miRNA-based therapies in 
lung cancer treatment as well as adjuvant therapy and present the current state 
of clinical lung cancer treatment. We also discuss the challenges facing 
miRNA-based therapies in the clinical application of lung cancer treatment to 
provide new ideas for the development of novel lung cancer therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13060877
PMCID: PMC10295928
PMID: 37371458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.