1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jun 12;14:1188253. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1188253. 
eCollection 2023.

The central inflammatory regulator IκBζ: induction, regulation and physiological 
functions.

Feng Y(1), Chen Z(1), Xu Y(1), Han Y(1), Jia X(2), Wang Z(2), Zhang N(2), Lv 
W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery & Pathophysiology, Institute of Neuroregeneration 
& Neurorehabilitation, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Geriatrics, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.

Erratum in
    Front Immunol. 2024 Apr 08;15:1398222. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1398222.

IκBζ (encoded by NFKBIZ) is the most recently identified IkappaB family protein. 
As an atypical member of the IkappaB protein family, NFKBIZ has been the focus 
of recent studies because of its role in inflammation. Specifically, it is a key 
gene in the regulation of a variety of inflammatory factors in the NF-KB 
pathway, thereby affecting the progression of related diseases. In recent years, 
investigations into NFKBIZ have led to greater understanding of this gene. In 
this review, we summarize the induction of NFKBIZ and then elucidate its 
transcription, translation, molecular mechanism and physiological function. 
Finally, the roles played by NFKBIZ in psoriasis, cancer, kidney injury, 
autoimmune diseases and other diseases are described. NFKBIZ functions are 
universal and bidirectional, and therefore, this gene may exert a great 
influence on the regulation of inflammation and inflammation-related diseases.

Copyright © 2023 Feng, Chen, Xu, Han, Jia, Wang, Zhang and Lv.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1188253
PMCID: PMC10291074
PMID: 37377955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.