1. Micromachines (Basel). 2023 Jun 12;14(6):1235. doi: 10.3390/mi14061235.

Modeling the Impact of Phonon Scattering with Strain Effects on the Electrical 
Properties of MoS(2) Field-Effect Transistors.

Chin HC(1), Hamzah A(1), Alias NE(1), Tan MLP(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Skudai 
81310, Johor, Malaysia.

Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) has distinctive electronic and mechanical properties 
which make it a highly prospective material for use as a channel in upcoming 
nanoelectronic devices. An analytical modeling framework was used to investigate 
the I-V characteristics of field-effect transistors based on MoS2. The study 
begins by developing a ballistic current equation using a circuit model with two 
contacts. The transmission probability, which considers both the acoustic and 
optical mean free path, is then derived. Next, the effect of phonon scattering 
on the device was examined by including transmission probabilities into the 
ballistic current equation. According to the findings, the presence of phonon 
scattering caused a decrease of 43.7% in the ballistic current of the device at 
room temperature when L = 10 nm. The influence of phonon scattering became more 
prominent as the temperature increased. In addition, this study also considers 
the impact of strain on the device. It is reported that applying compressive 
strain could increase the phonon scattering current by 13.3% at L = 10 nm at 
room temperature, as evaluated in terms of the electrons' effective masses. 
However, the phonon scattering current decreased by 13.3% under the same 
condition due to the existence of tensile strain. Moreover, incorporating a 
high-k dielectric to mitigate the impact of scattering resulted in an even 
greater improvement in device performance. Specifically, at L = 6 nm, the 
ballistic current was surpassed by 58.4%. Furthermore, the study achieved SS = 
68.2 mV/dec using Al2O3 and an on-off ratio of 7.75 Ã— 104 using HfO2. Finally, 
the analytical results were validated with previous works, showing comparable 
agreement with the existing literature.

DOI: 10.3390/mi14061235
PMCID: PMC10301306
PMID: 37374820

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.