1. Biomolecules. 2023 Jun 6;13(6):952. doi: 10.3390/biom13060952.

Ca(2+) Influx through TRPC Channels Is Regulated by Homocysteine-Copper 
Complexes.

Chen GL(1), Zeng B(1), Jiang H(1), Daskoulidou N(1), Saurabh R(1), Chitando 
RJ(1), Xu SZ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Atherothrombosis and Metabolic Disease, Hull York Medical School, 
University of Hull, Hull HU6 7RX, UK.
(2)Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hull York Medical School, University 
of Hull, Hull HU6 7RX, UK.

An elevated level of circulating homocysteine (Hcy) has been regarded as an 
independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease; however, the clinical 
benefit of Hcy lowering-therapy is not satisfying. To explore potential 
unrevealed mechanisms, we investigated the roles of Ca2+ influx through TRPC 
channels and regulation by Hcy-copper complexes. Using primary cultured human 
aortic endothelial cells and HEK-293 T-REx cells with inducible TRPC gene 
expression, we found that Hcy increased the Ca2+ influx in vascular endothelial 
cells through the activation of TRPC4 and TRPC5. The activity of TRPC4 and TRPC5 
was regulated by extracellular divalent copper (Cu2+) and Hcy. Hcy prevented 
channel activation by divalent copper, but monovalent copper (Cu+) had no effect 
on the TRPC channels. The glutamic acids (E542/E543) and the cysteine residue 
(C554) in the extracellular pore region of the TRPC4 channel mediated the effect 
of Hcy-copper complexes. The interaction of Hcy-copper significantly regulated 
endothelial proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis. Our results suggest that 
Hcy-copper complexes function as a new pair of endogenous regulators for TRPC 
channel activity. This finding gives a new understanding of the pathogenesis of 
hyperhomocysteinemia and may explain the unsatisfying clinical outcome of 
Hcy-lowering therapy and the potential benefit of copper-chelating therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13060952
PMCID: PMC10296383
PMID: 37371532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.