1. J Clin Med. 2023 Jun 20;12(12):4146. doi: 10.3390/jcm12124146.

CABG Patients Develop Global DNA Hypermethylation, That Negatively Affect the 
Mitochondrial Function and Promote Post-Surgical Cognitive Decline: A Proof of 
Concept in Small Cohort.

Boovarahan SR(1), Kale SB(2), Prem PN(1), Ravindran S(1), Arthanarisami A(1), 
Rengaraju J(1), Ali N(3), Ramalingam S(2), Mohany M(3), AlAsmari AF(3), 
Al-Rejaie SS(3), Waseem M(4), Kurian GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Vascular Biology Laboratory, SASTRA Deemed University, Thanjavur 613401, 
India.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, Meenakshi Hospital 
Tanjore, Thanjavur 613005, India.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, King Saud 
University, P.O. Box 55760, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, MD 21853, USA.

Global DNA hypermethylation and mitochondrial dysfunction are reported to be 
associated with the development of mild cognitive decline (MCI). The present 
study aims to generate preliminary data that connect the above association with 
post-surgical coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) cognitive decline in 
patients. Data were collected from 70 CABG patients and 25 age-matched controls. 
Cognitive function was assessed using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA) 
test on day 1 (before surgery) and on the day of discharge. Similarly, blood was 
collected before and one day after the CABG procedure for mitochondrial 
functional analysis and expression of DNA methylation genes. Test analysis score 
suggested 31 (44%) patients had MCI before discharge. These patients showed a 
significant decrease in complex I activity and an increase in malondialdehyde 
levels (p < 0.001) from the control blood samples. Post-surgical samples showed 
a significant reduction in blood MT-ND1 mRNA expression from control and from 
pre-surgical samples (p < 0.005), along with elevated DNMT1 gene expression (p < 
0.047), with an insignificant increase in TET1 and TET3 gene expression. 
Correlation analysis showed a significant positive relation between cognitive 
decline and elevated blood DNMT1 and declined blood complex I activity, 
signifying that cognitive decline experienced by post-surgical CABG patients is 
associated with increased DNMT1 expression and declined complex I activity. 
Based on the data, we conclude that both DNA hypermethylation and mitochondrial 
dysfunction are associated with post-CABG MCI, where the former is negatively 
correlated, and the latter is positively correlated with post-surgical MCI in 
CABG cases. Additionally, a multimarker approach that comprises MOCA, DNA 
methylation, DNMT, and NQR activities can be utilized to stratify the population 
that is sensitive to developing post-CABG MCI.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12124146
PMCID: PMC10299456
PMID: 37373839

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.