1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jun 16;24(12):10252. doi: 10.3390/ijms241210252.

The Link between Diabetes, Pancreatic Tumors, and miRNAs-New Players for 
Diagnosis and Therapy?

Kozłowska M(1), Śliwińska A(2).

Author information:
(1)Student Scientific Society of Civilization Diseases, Medical University of 
Lodz, 251 Pomorska, 92-213 Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of Nucleic Acid Biochemistry, Medical University of Lodz, Pomorska 
251, 92-213 Lodz, Poland.

Despite significant progress in medicine, pancreatic cancer is one of the most 
tardily diagnosed cancer and is consequently associated with a poor prognosis 
and a low survival rate. The asymptomatic clinical picture and the lack of 
relevant diagnostic markers for the early stages of pancreatic cancer are 
believed to be the major constraints behind an accurate diagnosis of this 
disease. Furthermore, underlying mechanisms of pancreatic cancer development are 
still poorly recognized. It is well accepted that diabetes increases the risk of 
pancreatic cancer development, however the precise mechanisms are weakly 
investigated. Recent studies are focused on microRNAs as a causative factor of 
pancreatic cancer. This review aims to provide an overview of the current 
knowledge of pancreatic cancer and diabetes-associated microRNAs, and their 
potential in diagnosis and therapy. miR-96, miR-124, miR-21, and miR-10a were 
identified as promising biomarkers for early pancreatic cancer prediction. 
miR-26a, miR-101, and miR-200b carry therapeutic potential, as they not only 
regulate significant biological pathways, including the TGF-β and PI3K/AKT, but 
their re-expression contributes to the improvement of the prognosis by reducing 
invasiveness or chemoresistance. In diabetes, there are also changes in the 
expression of microRNAs, such as in miR-145, miR-29c, and miR-143. These 
microRNAs are involved, among others, in insulin signaling, including IRS-1 and 
AKT (miR-145), glucose homeostasis (hsa-miR-21), and glucose reuptake and 
gluconeogenesis (miR-29c). Although, changes in the expression of the same 
microRNAs are observed in both pancreatic cancer and diabetes, they exert 
different molecular effects. For example, miR-181a is upregulated in both 
pancreatic cancer and diabetes mellitus, but in diabetes it contributes to 
insulin resistance, whereas in pancreatic cancer it promotes tumor cell 
migration, respectively. To conclude, dysregulated microRNAs in diabetes affect 
crucial cellular processes that are involved in pancreatic cancer development 
and progression.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241210252
PMCID: PMC10299694
PMID: 37373398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.