1. Plants (Basel). 2023 Jun 13;12(12):2304. doi: 10.3390/plants12122304.

Molecular Cues for Phenological Events in the Flowering Cycle in Avocado.

Ahsan MU(1), Barbier F(2), Hayward A(1), Powell R(2), Hofman H(3), Parfitt 
SC(3), Wilkie J(3), Beveridge CA(2), Mitter N(1).

Author information:
(1)Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation, The University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 
4072, Australia.
(3)Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Queensland Government, Bundaberg, 
QLD 4670, Australia.

Reproductively mature horticultural trees undergo an annual flowering cycle that 
repeats each year of their reproductive life. This annual flowering cycle is 
critical for horticultural tree productivity. However, the molecular events 
underlying the regulation of flowering in tropical tree crops such as avocado 
are not fully understood or documented. In this study, we investigated the 
potential molecular cues regulating the yearly flowering cycle in avocado for 
two consecutive crop cycles. Homologues of flowering-related genes were 
identified and assessed for their expression profiles in various tissues 
throughout the year. Avocado homologues of known floral genes FT, AP1, LFY, FUL, 
SPL9, CO and SEP2/AGL4 were upregulated at the typical time of floral induction 
for avocado trees growing in Queensland, Australia. We suggest these are 
potential candidate markers for floral initiation in these crops. In addition, 
DAM and DRM1, which are associated with endodormancy, were downregulated at the 
time of floral bud break. In this study, a positive correlation between CO 
activation and FT in avocado leaves to regulate flowering was not seen. 
Furthermore, the SOC1-SPL4 model described in annual plants appears to be 
conserved in avocado. Lastly, no correlation of juvenility-related miRNAs 
miR156, miR172 with any phenological event was observed.

DOI: 10.3390/plants12122304
PMCID: PMC10305662
PMID: 37375929

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.