1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2023 Oct;21(10):1952-1965. doi: 10.1111/pbi.14103. Epub
2023  Jun 28.

Efficient proteome-wide identification of transcription factors targeting Glu-1: 
A case study for functional validation of TaB3-2A1 in wheat.

Xie L(#)(1)(2), Liu S(#)(1), Zhang Y(1), Tian W(1)(3), Xu D(1), Li J(1), Luo 
X(1), Li L(1), Bian Y(1), Li F(1), Hao Y(1), He Z(1)(3), Xia X(1), Song X(2), 
Cao S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Crop Sciences, National Wheat Improvement Centre, Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, China.
(2)College of Agronomy, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi Province, 
China.
(3)International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) China Office, 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

High-molecular-weight glutenin subunits (HMW-GS), a major component of seed 
storage proteins (SSP) in wheat, largely determine processing quality. HMW-GS 
encoded by GLU-1 loci are mainly controlled at the transcriptional level by 
interactions between cis-elements and transcription factors (TFs). We previously 
identified a conserved cis-regulatory module CCRM1-1 as the most essential 
cis-element for Glu-1 endosperm-specific high expression. However, the TFs 
targeting CCRM1-1 remained unknown. Here, we built the first DNA pull-down plus 
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry platform in wheat and identified 31 TFs 
interacting with CCRM1-1. TaB3-2A1 as proof of concept was confirmed to bind to 
CCRM1-1 by yeast one hybrid and electrophoretic mobility shift assays. 
Transactivation experiments demonstrated that TaB3-2A1 repressed CCRM1-1-driven 
transcription activity. TaB3-2A1 overexpression significantly reduced HMW-GS and 
other SSP, but enhanced starch content. Transcriptome analyses confirmed that 
enhanced expression of TaB3-2A1 down-regulated SSP genes and up-regulated starch 
synthesis-related genes, such as TaAGPL3, TaAGPS2, TaGBSSI, TaSUS1 and TaSUS5, 
suggesting that it is an integrator modulating the balance of carbon and 
nitrogen metabolism. TaB3-2A1 also had significant effects on agronomic traits, 
including heading date, plant height and grain weight. We identified two major 
haplotypes of TaB3-2A1 and found that TaB3-2A1-Hap1 conferred lower seed protein 
content, but higher starch content, plant height and grain weight than 
TaB3-2A1-Hap2 and was subjected to positive selection in a panel of elite wheat 
cultivars. These findings provide a high-efficiency tool to detect TFs binding 
to targeted promoters, considerable gene resources for dissecting regulatory 
mechanisms underlying Glu-1 expression, and a useful gene for wheat improvement.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for 
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.14103
PMCID: PMC10502752
PMID: 37381172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.