1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2023 Jul;30(7):103703. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2023.103703. Epub
 2023 Jun 9.

Deciphering the enigma of RNA editing in the ATP1_alpha subunit of ATP synthase 
in Triticum aestivum.

Ibrahim MIM(1), Ramadan AM(2)(3), Amer M(1), Khan TK(2), Mohamed NG(1), Said 
OA(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Biotechnology, Misr University for Science and Technology (MUST), 
Egypt.
(2)Biological Science Department, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Princess Najla bint Saud Al-Saud Center for Excellence Research in 
Biotechnology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

There is evidence that RNA editing is related to plant cellular stress as well 
as electron transport organelles, such as mitochondria. The mitochondrial atp1 
gene encodes the alpha-subunit of Atp synthase. Control as well as two periods 
of drought stress treatments were analyzed in the cDNAs generated from the 
mitochondrial atp1 gene of two cultivars of Triticum aestivum [Giza 168 (G168) 
and Gemmiza 10 (GM10)]. Following RNA-seq data assembly, atp1 cDNAs from the 
control (acc. no. OQ129415), 2-hour (acc. no. OQ129416), and 12-hour (acc. no. 
OQ129417) time points of the T. aestivum cultivar G168 were obtained. Control 
(acc. no. OQ129419), 2-hour (acc. no. OQ129420), and 12-hour (acc. no. OQ129421) 
samples all included reconstructed atp1 transcripts from Gemmiza 10. Atp1 
transcripts were assembled using the wheat atp1 gene (acc. no. NC_036024). 
RNA-seq raw data was utilized to identify 11 RNA editing sites in atp1 in the 
tolerant cultivar Giza168 and 6 in the sensitive cultivar Gemmiza10. The 
significant difference in RNA editing observed between control and drought 
stress conditions in sites led to synonymous amino acids. This led to no change 
in tertiary structure between tolerant and sensitive cultivars. But the change 
was focused between produced protein and its correspondence sequence on DNA.

Â© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2023.103703
PMCID: PMC10300253
PMID: 37389198

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.