1. J Liver Cancer. 2023 Mar;23(1):127-142. doi: 10.17998/jlc.2022.12.30. Epub
2023  Feb 9.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease-related hepatocellular carcinoma.

Daher D(1), Dahan KSE(1), Singal AG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 
USA.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), one of the most common causes of 
liver disease, is an increasingly common cause of hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC). Several demographic, clinical, and genetic factors contribute to HCC risk 
in NAFLD patients, which may inform risk stratification scores. Proven 
efficacious approaches to primary prevention approach in patients with non-viral 
liver disease remain an area of need. Semi-annual surveillance is associated 
with improved early tumor detection and reduced HCC-related mortality; however, 
patients with NAFLD have several challenges to effective surveillance, including 
under-recognition of at-risk patients, low surveillance utilization in clinical 
practice, and lower sensitivity of current tools for early-stage HCC detection. 
Treatment decisions are best made in a multidisciplinary fashion and are 
informed by several factors including tumor burden, liver dysfunction, 
performance status, and patient preferences. Although patients with NAFLD often 
have larger tumor burden and increased comorbidities compared to counterparts, 
they can achieve similar post-treatment survival with careful patient selection. 
Therefore, surgical therapies continue to provide a curative treatment option 
for patients diagnosed at an early stage. Although there has been debate about 
the efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors in patients with NAFLD, current 
data are insufficient to change treatment selection based on liver disease 
etiology.

Â© 2023 The Korean Liver Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.17998/jlc.2022.12.30
PMCID: PMC10202236
PMID: 37384032

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Amit Singal has served as 
a consultant or on advisory boards for FujiFilm Medical Sciences, Exact 
Sciences, Roche, Glycotest, GRAIL, Freenome, Universal Dx, Genentech, 
AstraZeneca, Eisai, Bayer, Exelixis, TARGET RWE. None of the authors have any 
relevant conflicts of interest.