1. Sci Rep. 2023 Jun 28;13(1):10484. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-37307-6.

Genomic analysis of Anderson typing phages of Salmonella Typhimrium: towards 
understanding the basis of bacteria-phage interaction.

Mohammed M(1), Casjens SR(2)(3), Millard AD(4), Harrison C(4), Gannon L(4), 
Chattaway MA(5).

Author information:
(1)Genomics and Infectious Diseases Research Group, School of Life Sciences, 
University of Westminster, 115 New Cavendish Street, London, W1W 6UW, UK. 
m.mohammed@westminster.ac.uk.
(2)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pathology, University 
of Utah School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, USA.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, 
USA.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, 
University Road, Leicester, LE1 7RH, UK.
(5)Gastrointestinal Bacteria Reference Unit, UK Health Security Agency, London, 
UK.

The Anderson phage typing scheme has been successfully used worldwide for 
epidemiological surveillance of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. 
Although the scheme is being replaced by whole genome sequence subtyping 
methods, it can provide a valuable model system for study of phage-host 
interaction. The phage typing scheme distinguishes more than 300 definitive 
types of Salmonella Typhimurium based on their patterns of lysis to a unique 
collection of 30 specific Salmonella phages. In this study, we sequenced the 
genomes of 28 Anderson typing phages of Salmonella Typhimurium to begin to 
characterize the genetic determinants that are responsible for the differences 
in these phage type profiles. Genomic analysis of typing phages reveals that 
Anderson phages can be classified into three different groups, the P22-like, 
ES18-like and SETP3-like clusters. Most Anderson phages are short tailed 
P22-like viruses (genus Lederbergvirus); but phages STMP8 and STMP18 are very 
closely related to the lambdoid long tailed phage ES18, and phages STMP12 and 
STMP13 are related to the long noncontractile tailed, virulent phage SETP3. Most 
of these typing phages have complex genome relationships, but interestingly, two 
phage pairs STMP5 and STMP16 as well as STMP12 and STMP13 differ by a single 
nucleotide. The former affects a P22-like protein involved in DNA passage 
through the periplasm during its injection, and the latter affects a gene whose 
function is unknown. Using the Anderson phage typing scheme would provide 
insights into phage biology and the development of phage therapy for the 
treatment of antibiotic resistant bacterial infections.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-37307-6
PMCID: PMC10307801
PMID: 37380724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.