1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 May 29:2023.05.28.542683. doi: 
10.1101/2023.05.28.542683.

CARD-like domains mediate anti-phage defense in bacterial gasdermin systems.

Wein T(1), Johnson AG(2)(3), Millman A(1), Lange K(1), Yirmiya E(1), Hadary 
R(1), Garb J(1), Steinruecke F(4), Hill AB(3), Kranzusch PJ(2)(3)(5), Sorek 
R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
7610001, Israel.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Ma, USA.
(3)Deparment of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, MA, USA.

Caspase recruitment domains (CARDs) and pyrin domains are important facilitators 
of inflammasome activity and pyroptosis. Upon pathogen recognition by NLR 
proteins, CARDs recruit and activate caspases, which, in turn, activate 
gasdermin pore forming proteins to and induce pyroptotic cell death. Here we 
show that CARD-like domains are present in defense systems that protect bacteria 
against phage. The bacterial CARD is essential for protease-mediated activation 
of certain bacterial gasdermins, which promote cell death once phage infection 
is recognized. We further show that multiple anti-phage defense systems utilize 
CARD-like domains to activate a variety of cell death effectors. We find that 
these systems are triggered by a conserved immune evasion protein that phages 
use to overcome the bacterial defense system RexAB, demonstrating that phage 
proteins inhibiting one defense system can activate another. We also detect a 
phage protein with a predicted CARD-like structure that can inhibit the 
CARD-containing bacterial gasdermin system. Our results suggest that CARD 
domains represent an ancient component of innate immune systems conserved from 
bacteria to humans, and that CARD-dependent activation of gasdermins is 
conserved in organisms across the tree of life.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.05.28.542683
PMCID: PMC10312443
PMID: 37398489

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests R.S. is a scientific 
cofounder and advisor of BiomX and Ecophage. The rest of the authors declare no 
competing interests.