1. Pept Sci (Hoboken). 2023 Mar;115(2):e24298. doi: 10.1002/pep2.24298. Epub 2022
 Nov 12.

Targeting Peptide-Based Quorum Sensing Systems for the Treatment of 
Gram-Positive Bacterial Infections.

Milly TA(1), Tal-Gan Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Nevada, Reno, 1664 North Virginia 
Street, Reno, Nevada, 89557, United States.

Bacteria utilize a cell density-dependent communication system called quorum 
sensing (QS) to coordinate group behaviors. In Gram-positive bacteria, QS 
involves the production of and response to auto-inducing peptide (AIP) signaling 
molecules to modulate group phenotypes, including pathogenicity. As such, this 
bacterial communication system has been identified as a potential therapeutic 
target against bacterial infections. More specifically, developing synthetic 
modulators derived from the native peptide signal paves a new way to selectively 
block the pathogenic behaviors associated with this signaling system. Moreover, 
rational design and development of potent synthetic peptide modulators allows in 
depth understanding of the molecular mechanisms that drive QS circuits in 
diverse bacterial species. Overall, studies aimed at understanding the role of 
QS in microbial social behavior could result in the accumulation of significant 
knowledge of microbial interactions, and consequently lead to the development of 
alternative therapeutic agents to treat bacterial infectivity. In this review, 
we discuss recent advances in the development of peptide-based modulators to 
target QS systems in Gram-positive pathogens, with a focus on evaluating the 
therapeutic potential associated with these bacterial signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1002/pep2.24298
PMCID: PMC10312355
PMID: 37397504

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
competing interests.