1. Genes Dis. 2022 Apr 7;10(4):1242-1262. doi: 10.1016/j.gendis.2022.03.009. 
eCollection 2023 Jul.

Protein post-translational modification by lysine succinylation: Biochemistry, 
biological implications, and therapeutic opportunities.

Zhao G(1), Zhen J(2), Liu X(1), Guo J(1), Li D(1), Xie J(2), Xie L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Informatics, Bioinformatics Center, Henan Provincial 
Engineering Center for Tumor Molecular Medicine, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng, Henan 475004, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Eco-Environment and Bio-Resource of the 
Three Gorges Area, Key Laboratory of Eco-Environments in Three Gorges Reservoir 
Region, Institute of Modern Biopharmaceuticals, Ministry of Education, School of 
Life Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China.

Lysine succinylation (Ksuc) is a novel protein post-translational modification 
(PTM) wherein a succinyl group modifies a lysine residue. Ksuc leads to 
significant chemical and structural changes to the modified protein. Recent 
studies have shown that Ksuc might play an important role in organism physiology 
and some pathophysiological processes, such as tumorigenesis and metabolic 
diseases. To provide an understanding of the molecular mechanism and functions 
of Ksuc in different organisms, we reviewed the current literature about Ksuc, 
mainly summarizing the research advances in eukaryotes and prokaryotes based on 
both traditional study methods and site prediction tools. We also discussed 
inhibitors or activators associated with Ksuc that may contribute to proteomic 
studies and could be useful in future clinical practice. A deeper understanding 
of Ksuc may shed new light on life science at the protein level and could lead 
to novel therapeutic strategies for various diseases.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi 
Communications Co., Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gendis.2022.03.009
PMCID: PMC10310984
PMID: 37397549

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interests.