1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Jun 4:2023.05.31.23290613. doi: 
10.1101/2023.05.31.23290613.

A non-enzymatic test for SARS-CoV-2 RNA using DNA nanoswitches.

Vilcapoma J(1), Aliyeva A(1), Hayden A(1), Chandrasekaran AR(1), Zhou L(1), 
Punnoose JA(1), Yang D(2)(3)(4), Hansen C(2)(3)(4), Shiu SC(1), Russell A(5), 
George KS(5)(6), Wong WP(2)(3)(4), Halvorsen K(1).

Author information:
(1)The RNA Institute, University at Albany, State University of New York, 
Albany, NY 12222.
(2)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, MA 02115.
(3)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, 
Boston, MA 02115.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Blavatnik 
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.
(5)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of 
Health, Albany, NY 12208.
(6)Department of Biomedical Science, University at Albany, State University of 
New York, Albany, NY 12208.

The emergence of a highly contagious novel coronavirus in 2019 led to an 
unprecedented need for large scale diagnostic testing. The associated challenges 
including reagent shortages, cost, deployment delays, and turnaround time have 
all highlighted the need for an alternative suite of low-cost tests. Here, we 
demonstrate a diagnostic test for SARS-CoV-2 RNA that provides direct detection 
of viral RNA and eliminates the need for costly enzymes. We employ DNA 
nanoswitches that respond to segments of the viral RNA by a change in shape that 
is readable by gel electrophoresis. A new multi-targeting approach samples 120 
different viral regions to improve the limit of detection and provide robust 
detection of viral variants. We apply our approach to a cohort of clinical 
samples, positively identifying a subset of samples with high viral loads. Since 
our method directly detects multiple regions of viral RNA without amplification, 
it eliminates the risk of amplicon contamination and renders the method less 
susceptible to false positives. This new tool can benefit the COVID-19 pandemic 
and future emerging outbreaks, providing a third option between 
amplification-based RNA detection and protein antigen detection. Ultimately, we 
believe this tool can be adapted both for low-resource onsite testing as well as 
for monitoring viral loads in recovering patients.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.05.31.23290613
PMCID: PMC10312858
PMID: 37398235

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests K.H. and W.P.W were joint 
inventors of DNA nanoswitches and hold several patents on the core technology. 
A.R.C., L.Z., D.Y., and C.H. are also inventors on nanoswitch related patents.