1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Mar 10:2023.06.13.544884. doi: 
10.1101/2023.06.13.544884.

The molecular architecture of the desmosomal outer dense plaque by integrative 
structural modeling.

Pasani S(1), Menon KS(1), Viswanath S(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research, Bengaluru 560065, India.

Update in
    Protein Sci. 2024 Dec;33(12):e5217. doi: 10.1002/pro.5217.

Desmosomes mediate cell-cell adhesion and are prevalent in tissues under 
mechanical stress. However, their detailed structural characterization is not 
available. Here, we characterized the molecular architecture of the desmosomal 
outer dense plaque (ODP) using Bayesian integrative structural modeling via the 
Integrative Modeling Platform. Starting principally from the structural 
interpretation of an electron cryo-tomogram, we integrated information from 
X-ray crystallography, an immuno-electron microscopy study, biochemical assays, 
in-silico predictions of transmembrane and disordered regions, homology 
modeling, and stereochemistry information. The integrative structure was 
validated by information from imaging, tomography, and biochemical studies that 
were not used in modeling. The ODP resembles a densely packed cylinder with a 
PKP layer and a PG layer; the desmosomal cadherins and PKP span these two 
layers. Our integrative approach allowed us to localize disordered regions, such 
as N-PKP and PG-C. We refined previous protein-protein interactions between 
desmosomal proteins and provided possible structural hypotheses for defective 
cell-cell adhesion in several diseases by mapping disease-related mutations on 
the structure. Finally, we point to features of the structure that could confer 
resilience to mechanical stress. Our model provides a basis for generating 
experimentally verifiable hypotheses on the structure and function of desmosomal 
proteins in normal and disease states.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.06.13.544884
PMCID: PMC10312763
PMID: 37398295