1. Front Physiol. 2023 Jun 20;14:1205493. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1205493. 
eCollection 2023.

Variability of extracellular vesicle release during storage of red blood cell 
concentrates is associated with differential membrane alterations, including 
loss of cholesterol-enriched domains.

Ghodsi M(1), Cloos AS(1), Mozaheb N(2), Van Der Smissen P(1), Henriet P(1), 
Pierreux CE(1), Cellier N(3), Mingeot MP(2), Najdovski T(3), Tyteca D(1).

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology Unit and Platform for Imaging Cells and Tissues, de Duve 
Institute, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology Unit, Louvain Drug Research Institute, 
UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Service du Sang, Croix-Rouge de Belgique, Suarlée, Belgium.

Erratum in
    Front Physiol. 2023 Sep 18;14:1291218. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1291218.

Transfusion of red blood cell concentrates is the most common medical procedure 
to treat anaemia. However, their storage is associated with development of 
storage lesions, including the release of extracellular vesicles. These vesicles 
affect in vivo viability and functionality of transfused red blood cells and 
appear responsible for adverse post-transfusional complications. However, the 
biogenesis and release mechanisms are not fully understood. We here addressed 
this issue by comparing the kinetics and extents of extracellular vesicle 
release as well as red blood cell metabolic, oxidative and membrane alterations 
upon storage in 38 concentrates. We showed that extracellular vesicle abundance 
increased exponentially during storage. The 38 concentrates contained on average 
7 × 1012 extracellular vesicles at 6 weeks (w) but displayed a ∼40-fold 
variability. These concentrates were subsequently classified into 3 cohorts 
based on their vesiculation rate. The variability in extracellular vesicle 
release was not associated with a differential red blood cell ATP content or 
with increased oxidative stress (in the form of reactive oxygen species, 
methaemoglobin and band3 integrity) but rather with red blood cell membrane 
modifications, i.e., cytoskeleton membrane occupancy, lateral heterogeneity in 
lipid domains and transversal asymmetry. Indeed, no changes were noticed in the 
low vesiculation group until 6w while the medium and the high vesiculation 
groups exhibited a decrease in spectrin membrane occupancy between 3 and 6w and 
an increase of sphingomyelin-enriched domain abundance from 5w and of 
phosphatidylserine surface exposure from 8w. Moreover, each vesiculation group 
showed a decrease of cholesterol-enriched domains associated with a cholesterol 
content increase in extracellular vesicles but at different storage time points. 
This observation suggested that cholesterol-enriched domains could represent a 
starting point for vesiculation. Altogether, our data reveal for the first time 
that the differential extent of extracellular vesicle release in red blood cell 
concentrates did not simply result from preparation method, storage conditions 
or technical issues but was linked to membrane alterations.

Copyright © 2023 Ghodsi, Cloos, Mozaheb, Van Der Smissen, Henriet, Pierreux, 
Cellier, Mingeot, Najdovski and Tyteca.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1205493
PMCID: PMC10318158
PMID: 37408586

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.