1. Cells. 2023 May 13;12(10):1386. doi: 10.3390/cells12101386.

Aβ Oligomer Toxicity-Reducing Therapy for the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease: 
Importance of the Nrf2 and PPARγ Pathways.

Araki W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(2)Memory Clinic Ochanomizu, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Recent studies have revealed that soluble amyloid-β oligomers (AβOs) play a 
pathogenetic role in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Indeed, AβOs induce neurotoxic 
and synaptotoxic effects and are also critically involved in neuroinflammation. 
Oxidative stress appears to be a crucial event underlying these pathological 
effects of AβOs. From a therapeutic standpoint, new drugs for AD designed to 
remove AβOs or inhibit the formation of AβOs are currently being developed. 
However, it is also worth considering strategies for preventing AβO toxicity 
itself. In particular, small molecules with AβO toxicity-reducing activity have 
potential as drug candidates. Among such small molecules, those that can enhance 
Nrf2 and/or PPARγ activity can effectively inhibit AβO toxicity. In this review, 
I summarize studies on the small molecules that counteract AβO toxicity and are 
capable of activating Nrf2 and/or PPARγ. I also discuss how these interrelated 
pathways are involved in the mechanisms by which these small molecules prevent 
AβO-induced neurotoxicity and neuroinflammation. I propose that AβO 
toxicity-reducing therapy, designated ATR-T, could be a beneficial, 
complementary strategy for the prevention and treatment of AD.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12101386
PMCID: PMC10217070
PMID: 37408220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: W. Araki is a founder of Yupiark. Co., Ltd., 
Tokyo, Japan.