1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Jun 14;11:1155673. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1155673. 
eCollection 2023.

Human abdominal subcutaneous-derived active beige adipocytes carrying FTO 
rs1421085 obesity-risk alleles exert lower thermogenic capacity.

Vámos A(1)(2), Arianti R(1)(3), Vinnai BÁ(1)(2), Alrifai R(1)(2), Shaw A(1), 
Póliska S(4), Guba A(2)(5), Csősz É(5), Csomós I(6), Mocsár G(6), Lányi C(7), 
Balajthy Z(1), Fésüs L(1), Kristóf E(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biochemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
(2)Doctoral School of Molecular Cell and Immune Biology, University of Debrecen, 
Debrecen, Hungary.
(3)Universitas Muhammadiyah Bangka Belitung, Pangkalanbaru, Indonesia.
(4)Genomic Medicine and Bioinformatics Core Facility, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, 
Hungary.
(5)Proteomics Core Facility, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
(6)Department of Biophysics and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
(7)Laser Clinic, Budapest, Hungary.

Erratum in
    Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Aug 30;11:1249909. doi: 
10.3389/fcell.2023.1249909.

Introduction: White adipocytes store lipids, have a large lipid droplet and few 
mitochondria. Brown and beige adipocytes, which produce heat, are characterized 
by high expression of uncoupling protein (UCP) 1, multilocular lipid droplets, 
and large amounts of mitochondria. The rs1421085 T-to-C single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) of the human FTO gene interrupts a conserved motif for ARID5B 
repressor, resulting in adipocyte type shift from beige to white. Methods: We 
obtained abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue from donors carrying FTO 
rs1421085 TT (risk-free) or CC (obesity-risk) genotypes, isolated and 
differentiated their preadipocytes into beige adipocytes (driven by the PPARγ 
agonist rosiglitazone for 14 days), and activated them with dibutyryl-cAMP for 4 
hours. Then, either the same culture conditions were applied for additional 14 
days (active beige adipocytes) or it was replaced by a white differentiation 
medium (inactive beige adipocytes). White adipocytes were differentiated by 
their medium for 28 days. Results and Discussion: RNA-sequencing was performed 
to investigate the gene expression pattern of adipocytes carrying different FTO 
alleles and found that active beige adipocytes had higher brown adipocyte 
content and browning capacity compared to white or inactive beige ones when the 
cells were obtained from risk-free TT but not from obesity-risk CC genotype 
carriers. Active beige adipocytes carrying FTO CC had lower thermogenic gene 
(e.g., UCP1, PM20D1, CIDEA) expression and thermogenesis measured by proton leak 
respiration as compared to TT carriers. In addition, active beige adipocytes 
with CC alleles exerted lower expression of ASC-1 neutral amino acid transporter 
(encoded by SLC7A10) and less consumption of Ala, Ser, Cys, and Gly as compared 
to risk-free carriers. We did not observe any influence of the FTO rs1421085 SNP 
on white and inactive beige adipocytes highlighting its exclusive and critical 
effect when adipocytes were activated for thermogenesis.

Copyright © 2023 Vámos, Arianti, Vinnai, Alrifai, Shaw, Póliska, Guba, Csősz, 
Csomós, Mocsár, Lányi, Balajthy, Fésüs and Kristóf.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1155673
PMCID: PMC10321670
PMID: 37416800

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.