1. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2023 Jun;13(6):2795-2806. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2023.01.002. 
Epub 2023 Jan 10.

Manipulation of IME4 expression, a global regulation strategy for metabolic 
engineering in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Zhu J(1), An T(2), Zha W(1), Gao K(2), Li T(2), Zi J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of Natural 
Medicines, CAMS Key Laboratory of Enzyme and Biocatalysis of Natural Drugs, and 
NHC Key Laboratory of Biosynthesis of Natural Products, Institute of Materia 
Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing 100050, China.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.

Metabolic engineering has been widely used for production of natural medicinal 
molecules. However, engineering high-yield platforms is hindered in large part 
by limited knowledge of complex regulatory machinery of metabolic network. 
N6-Methyladenosine (m6A) modification of RNA plays critical roles in regulation 
of gene expression. Herein, we identify 1470 putatively m6A peaks within 1151 
genes from the haploid Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain. Among them, the 
transcript levels of 94 genes falling into the pathways which are frequently 
optimized for chemical production, are remarkably altered upon overexpression of 
IME4 (the yeast m6A methyltransferase). In particular, IME4 overexpression 
elevates the mRNA levels of the methylated genes in the glycolysis, acetyl-CoA 
synthesis and shikimate/aromatic amino acid synthesis modules. Furthermore, ACS1 
and ADH2, two key genes responsible for acetyl-CoA synthesis, are induced by 
IME4 overexpression in a transcription factor-mediated manner. Finally, we show 
IME4 overexpression can significantly increase the titers of isoprenoids and 
aromatic compounds. Manipulation of m6A therefore adds a new layer of metabolic 
regulatory machinery and may be broadly used in bioproduction of various 
medicinal molecules of terpenoid and phenol classes.

Â© 2023 Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2023.01.002
PMCID: PMC10326246
PMID: 37425036

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.