1. Cureus. 2023 Jun 8;15(6):e40124. doi: 10.7759/cureus.40124. eCollection 2023 
Jun.

Secondary Acute Myeloid Leukemia in Myelodysplastic Syndrome Patients Aged Over 
60 Years.

Chaudhuri D(1), Khan KI(1), Al Shouli R(2), Allakky A(3), Ferguson AA(4), Khan 
AI(1), Abuzainah B(5), Gutlapalli SD(3), Hamid P(6).

Author information:
(1)Research, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences & Psychology, 
Fairfield, USA.
(2)Pediatrics, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences & Psychology, 
Fairfield, USA.
(3)Internal Medicine, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences & 
Psychology, Fairfield, USA.
(4)Psychiatry, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences & Psychology, 
Fairfield, USA.
(5)General Practice, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences & 
Psychology, Fairfield, USA.
(6)Neurology, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences & Psychology, 
Fairfield, USA.

In myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), neoplastic cells originate in hematopoietic 
stem cells of the bone marrow, causing dysplasia in multiple cell lines. This 
may ultimately lead to cytopenia and anemia. MDS generally occurs in patients 
aged over 60 years, and if left unchecked, it can lead to secondary acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML), which has a worse prognosis than de novo AML. Hence, it 
is important to find methods to treat and manage MDS and prevent secondary AML. 
This review tries to point out the best methods to find out the best possible 
treatment for MDS, which can lead to its remission or possibly cure and prevent 
it from progressing into AML. In order to do this, the pathogenesis of MDS is 
taken into account, and it is clear that the various molecular mutations that 
lead to the hematologic neoplasms directly affect the different chemotherapy 
agents that can be used. The different common mutations leading to MDS and 
secondary AML have been reviewed along with the drugs best inclined to target 
them. Some mutations lead to a worse prognosis than others, and ongoing 
mutations can lead to drug-resistant neoplasms. Thus, drugs targeting the 
mutations need to be used. The feasibility of an allogeneic stem cell transplant 
is also taken into account, as this can lead to a total cure of MDS. Methods of 
decreasing post-transplant recovery time and complications have been looked 
into, and more studies need to be done on the matter. Currently, it is clear 
that a more personalized approach to each individual case with its own set of 
drug combinations is the best approach to treating MDS and secondary leukemia 
and increasing the overall survival (OS).

Copyright Â© 2023, Chaudhuri et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.40124
PMCID: PMC10329419
PMID: 37425516

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.