1. J Robot Surg. 2023 Oct;17(5):2361-2367. doi: 10.1007/s11701-023-01626-7. Epub 
2023 Jul 8.

Short learning curve in transition from laparoscopic to robotic-assisted rectal 
cancer surgery: a prospective study from a Finnish Tertiary Referral Centre.

Kolehmainen CSJ(1), Ukkonen MT(2)(3), Tomminen T(2)(3), Helavirta IM(2)(3), 
Laukkarinen JM(2)(3), Hyöty M(2)(3), Kotaluoto S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, Kauppi Campus, 
Arvo Building, Arvo Ylpön katu 34, 33520, Tampere, Finland. 
charlotta.kole@outlook.com.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, Kauppi Campus, 
Arvo Building, Arvo Ylpön katu 34, 33520, Tampere, Finland.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Alimentary Tract Surgery, Tampere 
University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

The narrow pelvis causes special challenges in surgery, and robotic-assisted 
surgery has been proven beneficial in these circumstances. While robotic surgery 
has some specific advantages in rectal cancer surgery, there is still limited 
evidence of the learning curve of the technique involved. The aim here was to 
study the transition from laparoscopic to robotic-assisted surgery among 
experienced laparoscopic surgeons. The data for this study were collected from a 
prospectively compiled register that includes patients operated on by the Da 
Vinci Xi robot in Tampere University Hospital. Each consecutive rectal cancer 
patient was included. The information on the surgical and oncological outcomes 
was analysed. The learning curve was assessed using cumulative sum (CUSUM) 
analysis. CUSUM already demonstrated an overall positively sloped curve at the 
beginning of the study, with neither the conversion rate nor morbidity reaching 
unacceptable thresholds. Conversions (4%) and postoperative complications 
(Clavien-Dindo III-IV 15%, no intraoperative complications) were rare. One 
patient died within one month and the death was not procedure-associated. While 
surgical and oncological outcomes were similar among all surgeons, the console 
times showed a decreasing trend and were shorter among those with more 
experience in laparoscopic rectal cancer surgery. Robotic-assisted rectal cancer 
surgery can be safely adapted by experienced laparoscopic colorectal surgeons.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11701-023-01626-7
PMCID: PMC10492689
PMID: 37421570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.