1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2023 Jul 3;18:3663-3694. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S414736. 
eCollection 2023.

How Nanotherapeutic Platforms Play a Key Role in Glioma? A Comprehensive Review 
of Literature.

Yang Y(#)(1), Cheng N(#)(1), Luo Q(1), Shao N(1), Ma X(1), Chen J(1), Luo L(1), 
Xiao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)The Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Molecular and Functional Imaging for Clinical 
Translation, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou, 
510632, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Glioblastoma (GBM), a highly aggressive form of brain cancer, is considered one 
of the deadliest cancers, and even with the most advanced medical treatments, 
most affected patients have a poor prognosis. However, recent advances in 
nanotechnology offer promising avenues for the development of versatile 
therapeutic and diagnostic nanoplatforms that can deliver drugs to brain tumor 
sites through the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Despite these breakthroughs, the 
use of nanoplatforms in GBM therapy has been a subject of great controversy due 
to concerns over the biosafety of these nanoplatforms. In recent years, 
biomimetic nanoplatforms have gained unprecedented attention in the biomedical 
field. With advantages such as extended circulation times, and improved immune 
evasion and active targeting compared to conventional nanosystems, 
bionanoparticles have shown great potential for use in biomedical applications. 
In this prospective article, we endeavor to comprehensively review the 
application of bionanomaterials in the treatment of glioma, focusing on the 
rational design of multifunctional nanoplatforms to facilitate BBB infiltration, 
promote efficient accumulation in the tumor, enable precise tumor imaging, and 
achieve remarkable tumor suppression. Furthermore, we discuss the challenges and 
future trends in this field. Through careful design and optimization of 
nanoplatforms, researchers are paving the way toward safer and more effective 
therapies for GBM patients. The development of biomimetic nanoplatform 
applications for glioma therapy is a promising avenue for precision medicine, 
which could ultimately improve patient outcomes and quality of life.

Â© 2023 Yang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S414736
PMCID: PMC10327925
PMID: 37427368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.