1. EMBO J. 2023 Sep 18;42(18):e113378. doi: 10.15252/embj.2022113378. Epub 2023
Jul  11.

Plant YTHDF proteins are direct effectors of antiviral immunity against an 
N6-methyladenosine-containing RNA virus.

Martínez-Pérez M(1), Aparicio F(1), Arribas-Hernández L(2), Tankmar MD(2), 
Rennie S(2), von Bülow S(2), Lindorff-Larsen K(2), Brodersen P(2), Pallas V(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas, Universitat Politècnica de València, Valencia, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2023 Sep 18;42(18):e115113. doi: 10.15252/embj.2023115113.

In virus-host interactions, nucleic acid-directed first lines of defense that 
allow viral clearance without compromising growth are of paramount importance. 
Plants use the RNA interference pathway as a basal antiviral immune system, but 
additional RNA-based mechanisms of defense also exist. The infectivity of a 
plant positive-strand RNA virus, alfalfa mosaic virus (AMV), relies on the 
demethylation of viral RNA by the recruitment of the cellular N6-methyladenosine 
(m6 A) demethylase ALKBH9B, but how demethylation of viral RNA promotes AMV 
infection remains unknown. Here, we show that inactivation of the Arabidopsis 
cytoplasmic YT521-B homology domain (YTH)-containing m6 A-binding proteins ECT2, 
ECT3, and ECT5 is sufficient to restore AMV infectivity in partially resistant 
alkbh9b mutants. We further show that the antiviral function of ECT2 is distinct 
from its previously demonstrated function in the promotion of primordial cell 
proliferation: an ect2 mutant carrying a small deletion in its intrinsically 
disordered region is partially compromised for antiviral defense but not for 
developmental functions. These results indicate that the m6 A-YTHDF axis 
constitutes a novel branch of basal antiviral immunity in plants.

© 2023 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.2022113378
PMCID: PMC10505913
PMID: 37431920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.