1. mBio. 2023 Aug 31;14(4):e0117123. doi: 10.1128/mbio.01171-23. Epub 2023 Jul
11.

Mrs4 loss of function in fungi during adaptation to the cystic fibrosis lung.

Murante D(1), Demers EG(1), Kurbessoian T(2), Ruzic M(1), Ashare A(1)(3), 
Stajich JE(2), Hogan DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth , Hanover, New Hampshire, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Plant Pathology and Institute for Integrative 
Genome Biology, University of California-Riverside , Riverside, California, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth Health , Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Apr 06:2023.04.05.535776. doi: 10.1101/2023.04.05.535776.

The genetic disease cystic fibrosis (CF) frequently leads to chronic lung 
infections by bacteria and fungi. We identified three individuals with CF with 
persistent lung infections dominated by Clavispora (Candida) lusitaniae. 
Whole-genome sequencing analysis of multiple isolates from each infection found 
evidence for selection for mutants in the gene MRS4 in all three distinct 
lung-associated populations. In each population, we found one or two unfixed, 
non-synonymous mutations in MRS4 relative to the reference allele found in 
multiple environmental and clinical isolates including the type strain. Genetic 
and phenotypic analyses found that all evolved alleles led to loss of function 
(LOF) of Mrs4, a mitochondrial iron transporter. RNA-seq analyses found that 
Mrs4 variants with decreased activity led to increased expression of genes 
involved in iron acquisition mechanisms in both low iron and replete iron 
conditions. Furthermore, surface iron reductase activity and intracellular iron 
were much higher in strains with Mrs4 LOF variants. Parallel studies found that 
a subpopulation of a CF-associated Exophiala dermatitidis infection also had a 
non-synonymous LOF mutation in MRS4. Together, these data suggest that MRS4 
mutations may be beneficial during chronic CF lung infections in diverse fungi, 
perhaps, for the purposes of adaptation to an iron-restricted environment with 
chronic infections. IMPORTANCE The identification of MRS4 mutations in 
Clavispora (Candida) lusitaniae and Exophiala dermatitidis in individuals with 
cystic fibrosis (CF) highlights a possible adaptive mechanism for fungi during 
chronic CF lung infections. The findings of this study suggest that loss of 
function of the mitochondrial iron transporter Mrs4 can lead to increased 
activity of iron acquisition mechanisms, which may be advantageous for fungi in 
iron-restricted environments during chronic infections. This study provides 
valuable information for researchers working toward a better understanding of 
the pathogenesis of chronic lung infections and more effective therapies to 
treat them.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.01171-23
PMCID: PMC10470810
PMID: 37432019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.