1. Cell Rep. 2023 Jul 25;42(7):112711. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112711. Epub
2023  Jul 11.

Improved HIV-1 neutralization breadth and potency of V2-apex antibodies by in 
silico design.

Holt GT(1), Gorman J(2), Wang S(3), Lowegard AU(1), Zhang B(2), Liu T(2), Lin 
BC(2), Louder MK(2), Frenkel MS(4), McKee K(2), O'Dell S(2), Rawi R(2), Shen 
CH(2), Doria-Rose NA(2), Kwong PD(5), Donald BR(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA; Program in 
Computational Biology & Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Program in Computational Biology & Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, 
NC, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(5)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: 
pdkwong@nih.gov.
(6)Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA; Department 
of Biochemistry, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA; Department of Mathematics, 
Duke University, Durham, NC, USA; Department of Chemistry, Duke University, 
Durham, NC, USA. Electronic address: brd+cell22@cs.duke.edu.

Broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs) against HIV can reduce viral 
transmission in humans, but an effective therapeutic will require unusually high 
breadth and potency of neutralization. We employ the OSPREY computational 
protein design software to engineer variants of two apex-directed bNAbs, PGT145 
and PG9RSH, resulting in increases in potency of over 100-fold against some 
viruses. The top designed variants improve neutralization breadth from 39% to 
54% at clinically relevant concentrations (IC80 < 1 μg/mL) and improve median 
potency (IC80) by up to 4-fold over a cross-clade panel of 208 strains. To 
investigate the mechanisms of improvement, we determine cryoelectron microscopy 
structures of each variant in complex with the HIV envelope trimer. 
Surprisingly, we find the largest increases in breadth to be a result of 
optimizing side-chain interactions with highly variable epitope residues. These 
results provide insight into mechanisms of neutralization breadth and inform 
strategies for antibody design and improvement.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112711
PMCID: PMC10528384
PMID: 37436900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests B.R.D. and M.S.F. are 
founders of Ten63 Therapeutics. B.R.D., S.W., A.U.L., G.T.H., M.S.F., P.D.K., 
J.G., and N.A.D. are inventors on a patent application filed by Duke University.