1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jun 27;24(13):10719. doi: 10.3390/ijms241310719.

Evaluation of the Antioxidant and Antiangiogenic Activity of a Pomegranate 
Extract in BPH-1 Prostate Epithelial Cells.

Consoli V(1)(2), Bur√≤ I(1), Gulisano M(1), Castellano A(3), D'Amico AG(1), 
D'Agata V(4), Vanella L(1)(2), Sorrenti V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug and Health Sciences, University of Catania, 95125 Catania, 
Italy.
(2)CERNUT-Research Centre for Nutraceuticals and Health Products, University of 
Catania, 95125 Catania, Italy.
(3)Mediterranean Nutraceutical Extracts (Medinutrex), Via Vincenzo Giuffrida 
202, 95128 Catania, Italy.
(4)Section of Anatomy, Histology and Movement Sciences, Department of Biomedical 
and Biotechnological Sciences, University of Catania, 95125 Catania, Italy.

Benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) is a noncancerous enlargement of the prostate 
gland that develops from hyper-proliferation of the stromal and epithelium 
region. Activation of pathways involving inflammation and oxidative stress can 
contribute to cell proliferation in BPH and tumorigenesis. 
Agricultural-waste-derived extracts have drawn the attention of researchers as 
they represent a valid and sustainable way to exploit waste production. Indeed, 
such extracts are rich in bioactive compounds and can provide health-promoting 
effects. In particular, extracts obtained from pomegranate wastes and 
by-products have been shown to exert antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects. 
This study focused on the evaluation of the anti-angiogenic effects and 
chemopreventive action of a pomegranate extract (PWE) in cellular models of BPH. 
In our experimental conditions, we observed that PWE was able to significantly 
(p < 0.001) reduce the proliferation and migration rates (up to 60%), together 
with the clonogenic capacity of BPH-1 cells concomitantly with the reduction in 
inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-6, PGE2) and pro-angiogenic factor (VEGF-ADMA) 
release. Additionally, we demonstrated the ability of PWE in reducing 
angiogenesis in an in vitro model of BPH consisting in transferring 
BPH-1-cell-conditioned media to human endothelial H5V cells. Indeed, PWE was 
able to reduce tube formation in H5V cells through VEGF level reduction even at 
low concentrations. Overall, we confirmed that inhibition of angiogenesis may be 
an alternative therapeutic option to prevent neovascularization in prostate 
tissue with BPH and its transformation into malignant prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241310719
PMCID: PMC10342071
PMID: 37445909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.