1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Jun 27;10:1200967. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1200967. 
eCollection 2023.

IFABP levels predict visceral malperfusion in the first hours after open 
thoracoabdominal aortic repair.

Doukas P(1), Bassett C(1), Krabbe H(1), Frankort J(1), Jacobs MJ(1), Elfeky 
M(1), Gombert A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, University Hospital Aachen, 
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Intestinal ischemia after open thoracoabdominal aortic repairs, is 
a rare but devastating complication, associated with high mortality. Notoriously 
challenging to diagnose, visceral malperfusion necessitates immediate surgical 
attention. Intestinal fatty acid-binding protein (IFABP) has been proposed as a 
biomarker for the diagnosis of intestinal wall damage. In this prospectively 
conducted, observational study we evaluated the diagnostic capacity of IFABP 
levels in patients' serum and their correlation with visceral malperfusion.
METHODS: 23 patients undergoing open thoracoabdominal aortic repairs were 
included in this study and 8 of them were diagnosed postoperatively with 
visceral malperfusion-defined as a partial or complete thrombotic occlusion of 
the superior mesenteric artery and/or the coeliac trunk. IFABP levels and 
laboratory parameters often associated with intestinal ischemia (leucocytes, 
CRP, PCT and lactate) were measured at baseline, directly postoperatively, and 
at 12, 24 and 48 h after surgery. Postoperative visceral malperfusion-as 
revealed in CT angiography-was assessed and the predictive ability of IFABP 
levels to detect visceral malperfusion was evaluated with receiver-operator 
curve analysis.
RESULTS: Patients with visceral malperfusion had a relevant risk for a fatal 
outcome (p = .001). IFABP levels were significantly elevated directly 
postoperatively and at 12 h after surgery in cases of visceral malperfusion. 
High IFABP concentrations in serum detected visceral malperfusion accurately 
during the first 12 h after surgery, with the maximum diagnostic ability 
achieved immediately after surgery (AUC 1, Sensitivity 100%, Specificity 100%, 
p < .001).
CONCLUSION: We conclude, that IFABP measurements during the first postoperative 
hours after open thoracoabdominal aortic surgery can be a valuable tool for 
reliable and timely detection of visceral malperfusion.

© 2023 Doukas, Bassett, Krabbe, Frankort, Jacobs, Elfeky and Gombert.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1200967
PMCID: PMC10333487
PMID: 37441698

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.