1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jun 28;14:1087691. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1087691. 
eCollection 2023.

Identification of biomarkers related to sepsis diagnosis based on bioinformatics 
and machine learning and experimental verification.

Wang Q(1)(2), Wang C(1), Zhang W(1)(2), Tao Y(1)(2), Guo J(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), 
Liu Z(1)(2), Liu D(1)(2), Mei J(2), Chen F(2).

Author information:
(1)Hebei University of Chinese Medicine, Shijiazhuang, China.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital ,Hebei University of Chinese Medicine, 
Shijiazhuang, China.

Sepsis is a systemic inflammatory response syndrome caused by bacteria and other 
pathogenic microorganisms. Every year, approximately 31.5 million patients are 
diagnosed with sepsis, and approximately 5.3 million patients succumb to the 
disease. In this study, we identified biomarkers for diagnosing sepsis analyzed 
the relationships between genes and Immune cells that were differentially 
expressed in specimens from patients with sepsis compared to normal controls. 
Finally, We verified its effectiveness through animal experiments. Specifically, 
we analyzed datasets from four microarrays(GSE11755、GSE12624、GSE28750、GSE48080) 
that included 106 blood specimens from patients with sepsis and 69 normal human 
blood samples. SVM-RFE analysis and LASSO regression model were carried out to 
screen possible markers. The composition of 22 immune cell components in 
patients with sepsis were also determined using CIBERSORT. The expression level 
of the biomarkers in Sepsis was examined by the use of qRT-PCR and Western Blot 
(WB). We identified 50 differentially expressed genes between the cohorts, 
including 2 significantly upregulated and 48 significantly downregulated genes, 
and KEGG pathway analysis identified Salmonella infection, human T cell leukemia 
virus 1 infection, Epstein-Barr virus infection, hepatitis B, lysosome and other 
pathways that were significantly enriched in blood from patients with sepsis. 
Ultimately, we identified COMMD9, CSF3R, and NUB1 as genes that could 
potentially be used as biomarkers to predict sepsis, which we confirmed by ROC 
analysis. Further, we identified a correlation between the expression of these 
three genes and immune infiltrate composition. Immune cell infiltration analysis 
revealed that COMMD9 was correlated with T cells regulatory (Tregs), T cells 
follicular helper, T cells CD8, et al. CSF3R was correlated with T cells 
regulatory (Tregs), T cells follicular helper, T cells CD8, et al. NUB1 was 
correlated with T cells regulatory (Tregs), T cells gamma delta, T cells 
follicular helper, et al. Taken together, our findings identify potential new 
diagnostic markers for sepsis that shed light on novel mechanisms of disease 
pathogenesis and, therefore, may offer opportunities for therapeutic 
intervention.

Copyright © 2023 Wang, Wang, Zhang, Tao, Guo, Liu, Liu, Liu, Mei and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1087691
PMCID: PMC10337583
PMID: 37449204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.