1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jun 22;24(13):10510. doi: 10.3390/ijms241310510.

An Update on MYBPC3 Gene Mutation in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.

Tudurachi BS(1)(2), Zăvoi A(2), Leonte A(2), Țăpoi L(1)(2), Ureche C(1)(2), 
Bîrgoan SG(2), Chiuariu T(2), Anghel L(1)(2), Radu R(1)(2), Sascău RA(1)(2), 
Stătescu C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Grigore T. Popa 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Iasi, 16 University Street, 700115 Iasi, 
Romania.
(2)Prof. Dr. George I.M. Georgescu Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Carol I 
Boulevard, No. 50, 700503 Iasi, Romania.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most prevalent genetically inherited 
cardiomyopathy that follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. The 
majority of HCM cases can be attributed to mutation of the MYBPC3 gene, which 
encodes cMyBP-C, a crucial structural protein of the cardiac muscle. The 
manifestation of HCM's morphological, histological, and clinical symptoms is 
subject to the complex interplay of various determinants, including genetic 
mutation and environmental factors. Approximately half of MYBPC3 mutations give 
rise to truncated protein products, while the remaining mutations cause 
insertion/deletion, frameshift, or missense mutations of single amino acids. In 
addition, the onset of HCM may be attributed to disturbances in the protein and 
transcript quality control systems, namely, the ubiquitin-proteasome system and 
nonsense-mediated RNA dysfunctions. The aforementioned genetic modifications, 
which appear to be associated with unfavorable lifelong outcomes and are largely 
influenced by the type of mutation, exhibit a unique array of clinical 
manifestations ranging from asymptomatic to arrhythmic syncope and even sudden 
cardiac death. Although the current understanding of the MYBPC3 mutation does 
not comprehensively explain the varied phenotypic manifestations witnessed in 
patients with HCM, patients with pathogenic MYBPC3 mutations can exhibit an 
array of clinical manifestations ranging from asymptomatic to advanced heart 
failure and sudden cardiac death, leading to a higher rate of adverse clinical 
outcomes. This review focuses on MYBPC3 mutation and its characteristics as a 
prognostic determinant for disease onset and related clinical consequences in 
HCM.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241310510
PMCID: PMC10341819
PMID: 37445689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.