1. Cells. 2023 Jun 23;12(13):1704. doi: 10.3390/cells12131704.

EpoR Activation Stimulates Erythroid Precursor Proliferation by Inducing 
Phosphorylation of Tyrosine-88 of the CDK-Inhibitor p27(Kip1).

Pegka F(1), Ben-Califa N(2), Neumann D(2), JÃ¤kel H(1), Hengst L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Biocenter, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, 
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Erythrocyte biogenesis needs to be tightly regulated to secure oxygen transport 
and control plasma viscosity. The cytokine erythropoietin (Epo) governs 
erythropoiesis by promoting cell proliferation, differentiation, and survival of 
erythroid precursor cells. Erythroid differentiation is associated with an 
accumulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27Kip1, but the 
regulation and role of p27 during erythroid proliferation remain largely 
unknown. We observed that p27 can bind to the erythropoietin receptor (EpoR). 
Activation of EpoR leads to immediate Jak2-dependent p27 phosphorylation of 
tyrosine residue 88 (Y88). This modification is known to impair its 
CDK-inhibitory activity and convert the inhibitor into an activator and assembly 
factor of CDK4,6. To investigate the physiological role of p27-Y88 
phosphorylation in erythropoiesis, we analyzed p27Y88F/Y88F knock-in mice, where 
tyrosine-88 was mutated to phenylalanine. We observed lower red blood cell 
counts, lower hematocrit levels, and a reduced capacity for colony outgrowth of 
CFU-Es (colony-forming unit-erythroid), indicating impaired cell proliferation 
of early erythroid progenitors. Compensatory mechanisms of reduced p27 and 
increased Epo expression protect from stronger dysregulation of erythropoiesis. 
These observations suggest that p27-Y88 phosphorylation by EpoR pathway 
activation plays an important role in the stimulation of erythroid progenitor 
proliferation during the early stages of erythropoiesis.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12131704
PMCID: PMC10340229
PMID: 37443738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.