1. Int J Bioprint. 2023 May 10;9(5):749. doi: 10.18063/ijb.749. eCollection 2023.

Swelling compensation of engineered vasculature fabricated by additive 
manufacturing and sacrifice-based technique using thermoresponsive hydrogel.

Yang X(1), Li S(2), Sun X(3), Ren Y(1), Qiang L(4), Liu Y(3), Wang J(3)(5), Dai 
K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, Southwest Jiaotong University, No. 144 Jiaoda Road, 
Chengdu 610031, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, No. 79 Qingchun Rd, Hangzhou 310003, People's Republic of 
China.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Orthopedic Implants, Department of Orthopedic 
Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, No. 639 Zhizaoju Rd, Shanghai 200011, People's Republic of China.
(4)School of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, 
No. 111 2nd Ring Rd, Chengdu 611756, People's Republic of China.
(5)Med-X Research Institute, School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, No. 1956 Huashan Rd, Shanghai 200030, People's Republic of 
China.

Engineered vasculature is widely employed to maintain the cell viability within 
in vitro tissues. A variety of fabrication techniques for engineered vasculature 
have been explored, with combination of additive manufacturing with a 
sacrifice-based technique being the most common approach. However, the size 
deformation of vasculature caused by the swelling of sacrificial materials 
remains unaddressed. In this study, Pluronic F-127 (PF-127), the most widely 
used sacrificial material, was employed to study the deformation of the 
vasculature. Then, a thermoresponsive hydrogel comprising 
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) and gelatin methacrylate (GelMA) was used 
to induce volume shrinkage at 37°C to compensate for the deformation of 
vasculature caused by the swelling of a three-dimensional (3D)-printed 
sacrificial template, and to generate vasculature of a smaller size than that 
after deformation. Our results showed that the vasculature diameter increased 
after the sacrificial template was removed, whereas it decreased to the designed 
diameter after the volume shrinkage. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells 
(HUVECs) formed an endothelial monolayer in the engineered vasculature. 
Osteosarcoma cells (OCs) were loaded into a hierarchical vasculature within the 
thermoresponsive hydrogel to investigate the interaction between HUVECs and OCs. 
New blood vessel infiltration was observed within the lumen of the engineered 
vasculature after in vivo subcutaneous implantation for 4 weeks. In addition, 
engineered vasculature was implanted in a rat ischemia model to further study 
the function of engineered vasculature for blood vessel infiltration. This study 
presents a small method aiming to accurately create engineered vasculature by 
additive manufacturing and a sacrificebased technique.

Copyright:© 2023, Yang X, Li S, Sun X, et al.

DOI: 10.18063/ijb.749
PMCID: PMC10339422
PMID: 37457939

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.