1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Jun 29;11:1207395. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1207395. 
eCollection 2023.

Mechanisms of platelet activation in cancer-associated thrombosis: a focus on 
myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Bekendam RH(1), Ravid K(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Hematologic Malignancies, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine and Biochemistry, Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute, 
Boston University Chobanian & Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United 
States.

Platelets are anucleate blood cells that play key roles in thrombosis and 
hemostasis. Platelets are also effector cells in malignancy and are known to 
home into the microenvironment of cancers. As such, these cells provide central 
links between the hemostatic system, inflammation and cancer progression. 
Activation of platelets by cancers has been postulated to contribute to 
metastasis and progression of local tumor invasion. Similarly, cancer-activated 
platelets can increase the risk of development of both arterial and venous 
thrombosis; a major contributor to cancer-associated morbidity. Platelet 
granules secretion within the tumor environment or the plasma provide a rich 
source of potential biomarkers for prediction of thrombotic risk or tumor 
progression. In the case of myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), which are 
characterized by clonal expansion of myeloid precursors and abnormal function 
and number of erythrocytes, leukocytes and platelets, patients suffer from 
thrombotic and hemorrhagic complications. The mechanisms driving this are likely 
multifactorial but remain poorly understood. Several mouse models developed to 
recapitulate MPN phenotype with one of the driving mutations, in JAK2 
(JAK2V617F) or in calreticulin (CALR) or myeloproliferative leukemia virus 
oncogene receptor (MPL), have been studied for their thrombotic phenotype. 
Variability and discrepancies were identified within different disease models of 
MPN, emphasizing the complexity of increased risk of clotting and bleeding in 
these pathologies. Here, we review recent literature on the role of platelets in 
cancer-associated arterial and venous thrombosis and use MPN as case study to 
illustrate recent advances in experimental models of thrombosis in a malignant 
phenotype. We address major mechanisms of tumor-platelet communication leading 
to thrombosis and focus on the role of altered platelets in promoting thrombosis 
in MPN experimental models and patients with MPN. Recent identification of 
platelet-derived biomarkers of MPN-associated thrombosis is also reviewed, with 
potential therapeutic implications.

Copyright Â© 2023 Bekendam and Ravid.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1207395
PMCID: PMC10342211
PMID: 37457287

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.