1. J Econ Entomol. 2023 Oct 10;116(5):1795-1803. doi: 10.1093/jee/toad143.

Characterization and fitness cost of bifenthrin resistance in Rhopalosiphum padi 
(Hemiptera: Aphididae).

Liu L(1), Wang S(1), Zuo J(1), Zhang X(1), Peng X(1), Wang K(1), Chen M(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, Key Laboratory of 
Plant Protection Resources and Pest Management of Ministry of Education, Key 
Laboratory of Integrated Pest Management on the Loess Plateau of Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs, College of Plant Protection, Northwest A&F 
University, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi, China.

Rhopalosiphum padi is an important global wheat pest. The pyrethroid insecticide 
bifenthrin is widely used in the control R. padi. We explored the resistance 
potential, cross-resistance, adaptive costs, and resistance mechanism of R. padi 
to bifenthrin using a bifenthrin-resistant strain (Rp-BIF) established in 
laboratory. The Rp-BIF strain developed extremely high resistance against 
bifenthrin (1033.036-fold). Cross-resistance analyses showed that the Rp-BIF 
strain had an extremely high level of cross-resistance to deltamethrin 
(974.483-fold), moderate levels of cross-resistance to chlorfenapyr 
(34.051-fold), isoprocarb (27.415-fold), imidacloprid (14.819-fold), and 
thiamethoxam (11.228-fold), whereas negative cross-resistance was observed to 
chlorpyrifos (0.379-fold). The enzymatic activity results suggested that P450 
played an important role in bifenthrin resistance. A super-kdr mutation (M918L) 
of voltage-gated sodium channel (VGSC) was found in the bifenthrin-resistant 
individuals. When compared with the susceptible strain (Rp-SS), the Rp-BIF 
strain was significantly inferior in multiple life table parameters, exhibiting 
a relative fitness of 0.69. Our toxicological and biochemical studies indicated 
that multiple mechanisms of resistance might be involved in the resistance 
trait. Our results provide insight into the bifenthrin resistance of R. padi and 
can contribute to improve management of bifenthrin-resistant R. padi in the 
field.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jee/toad143
PMID: 37478406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]