1. Front Genet. 2023 Jul 4;14:1224949. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1224949.
eCollection  2023.

Case report: splicing effect of a novel heterozygous variant of the NUS1 gene in 
a child with epilepsy.

Hu Y(1), Huang M(2), Wen J(1), Gao J(2), Long W(1), Shen Y(2), Zeng Q(1), Chen 
Y(1), Zhang T(1), Liao J(1), Liu Q(2), Li N(2), Lin S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shenzhen Children's Hospital, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Aegicare (Shenzhen) Technology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China.

NUS1 is responsible for encoding of the Nogo-B receptor (NgBR), which is a 
subunit of cis-prenyltransferase. Over 25 variants in NUS1 have been reported, 
and these variants have been found to be associated with various phenotypes, 
such as congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) and developmental and 
epileptic encephalopathy (DEE). We report on the case of a patient who presented 
with language and motor retardation, epilepsy, and electroencephalogram 
abnormalities. Upon conducting whole-exome sequencing, we discovered a novel 
pathogenic variant (chr6:118024873, NM_138459.5: c.791 + 6T>G) in NUS1, which 
was shown to cause Exon 4 to be skipped, resulting in a loss of 56 amino acids. 
Our findings strongly suggest that this novel variant of NUS1 is responsible for 
the development of neurological disorders, including epilepsy. It is believed 
that the truncation of Nogo-B receptor results in the loss of 
cis-prenyltransferase activity, which may be the underlying cause of the 
disease.

Copyright Â© 2023 Hu, Huang, Wen, Gao, Long, Shen, Zeng, Chen, Zhang, Liao, Liu, 
Li and Lin.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1224949
PMCID: PMC10352580
PMID: 37470039

Conflict of interest statement: Authors MH, JG, YS, QL, and NL were employed by 
Aegicare (Shenzhen) Technology Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.