1. J Rheum Dis. 2021 Oct 1;28(4):183-191. doi: 10.4078/jrd.2021.28.4.183.

Epidemiologic and Etiological Features of Korean Patients With Behçet's Disease.

Choi SH(1), Ba(1), Kim DY(2).

Author information:
(1)Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology Research Institute, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Behçet's disease (BD) is a multisystem disease in which environmental factors 
provoke an adverse immune response in patients with genetic susceptibility 
towards BD, subsequently leading to a cascade of dysregulated inflammation 
throughout the body. It is particularly prevalent in regions spanning the 
ancient Silk Road, including Korea, where the first known case of BD was 
reported in 1961. We summarize the history, epidemiology, and clinical 
presentation of BD in Korea, highlighting the clinical tendencies that are 
particularly seen in the Korean BD population as compared to European 
populations. Analysis of epidemiologic trends over the past three decades in 
Korea shows a decreasing prevalence of complete BD and a higher prevalence of 
intestinal BD. We also discuss the ever-evolving understanding of the 
pathogenesis of BD, noting the complex interplay among genetics, environment, 
and immunology. The HLA-B51 allele is the most significant known genetic risk 
factor in developing BD. We also discuss more recently studied associations 
between BD and immune factors such as IL-10, IL-23R-IL-12RB2, IL-1A-IL-1B, CCR1, 
ERAP1, and the GIMAP cluster, the last of which has been found to have an 
association with BD specifically in Korea. Environmental factors such as 
pollution and microbials are often the inciting event in developing BD, as they 
trigger an imbalanced immune response in genetically susceptible individuals, 
one that has been often found to exhibit an aberrant Th1/Th17 response. There 
would be value to further studying the pathogenesis and clinical characteristics 
of Korean BD.

Copyright © 2021 by The Korean College of Rheumatology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.4078/jrd.2021.28.4.183
PMCID: PMC10324907
PMID: 37476362

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.