1. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2023 Jul;81(7):656-669. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-1767819. Epub 
2023 Jul 24.

Anti-inflammatory strategies for hepatic encephalopathy: preclinical studies.

Santos RPC(1), Toscano ECB(2)(3), Rachid MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, 
Departamento de Patologia Geral, Laboratório de Patologia Celular e Molecular, 
Belo Horizonte MG, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Faculdade de Medicina, Departamento de 
Patologia, Laboratório Integrado de Pesquisa em Patologia, Juiz de Fora MG, 
Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal de Juiz e Fora, Faculdade de Medicina, Programa de 
Pós-Graduação em Saúde, Juiz de Fora MG, Brazil.

Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a potentially reversible neuropsychiatric 
syndrome. Often, HE causes cognitive and motor dysfunctions due to an acute or 
chronic insufficiency of the liver or a shunting between the hepatic portal vein 
and systemic vasculature. Liver damage induces peripheral changes, such as in 
the metabolism and peripheral inflammatory responses that trigger exacerbated 
neuroinflammation. In experimental models, anti-inflammatory strategies have 
demonstrated neuroprotective effects, leading to a reduction in HE-related 
cognitive and motor impairments. In this scenario, a growing body of evidence 
has shown that peripheral and central nervous system inflammation are promising 
preclinical targets. In this review, we performed an overview of FDA-approved 
drugs and natural compounds which are used in the treatment of other 
neurological and nonneurological diseases that have played a neuroprotective 
role in experimental HE, at least in part, through anti-inflammatory mechanisms. 
Despite the exciting results from animal models, the available data should be 
critically interpreted, highlighting the importance of translating the findings 
for clinical essays.

Publisher: A encefalopatia hepática (EH) é uma síndrome neuropsiquiátrica 
potencialmente reversível. Muitas vezes a EH causa disfunções cognitivas e 
motoras devido à insuficiência do fígado ou por um desvio entre a veia porta 
hepática e a vasculatura sistêmica. O dano no fígado provoca alterações 
periféricas, como no metabolismo e nas respostas inflamatórias periféricas, que 
desencadeiam uma neuroinflamação exacerbada. Em modelos experimentais, 
estratégias anti-inflamatórias têm demonstrado efeitos neuroprotetores, levando 
a uma redução dos prejuízos cognitivos e motores relacionados à EH. Neste 
cenário, evidências crescentes têm mostrado a inflamação periférica e no sistema 
nervoso central como um promissor alvo pré-clínico. Nesta revisão, abordamos uma 
visão geral de drogas e compostos naturais aprovados pelo FDA para o uso no 
tratamento de outras doenças neurológicas e não neurológicas, que tiveram papel 
neuroprotetor na EH experimental, pelo menos em parte, através de mecanismos 
anti-inflamatórios. Apesar dos resultados empolgantes em modelos animais, os 
dados avaliados devem ser criticamente interpretados, destacando a importância 
da tradução dos achados para ensaios clínicos.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, permitting 
copying and reproduction so long as the original work is given appropriate 
credit (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-1767819
PMCID: PMC10371400
PMID: 37487550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.