1. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2023 Aug;109:108513. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108513.
Epub  2023 Jul 20.

Primary sclerosing liposarcoma of the ovary: Case report and a review of the 
literature.

Dhanurjaya T(1), Hilary T(2), Mazibrada J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Addenbrooke's University Hospital, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Gynaecology, Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Pathology, Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, United 
Kingdom. Electronic address: jasenka.mazibrada@nnuh.nhs.uk.

INTRODUCTION: Primary soft tissue sarcoma of the ovary is uncommon, with most 
literature reports being in the format of a single case report or small case 
series.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: We report a case of a primary sclerosing liposarcoma of 
the ovary in a 67-year-old lady. She presented with a rapidly growing ovarian 
mass, which was surgically excised. Histologically, the lesion appeared nodular 
with alternating hypercellular and low-cellularity areas, with areas of 
necrosis. It comprised atypical spindled, oval and stellate cells set in 
abundant myxoid and fibrous hyalinised stroma. Immunohistochemistry showed 
expression of p16, CDK4, CD34, S-100 and MDM2. The case was sent to a referral 
centre where MDM2 gene amplification was detected by interphase fluorescent 
in-situ hybridisation (FISH) analysis, rendering a diagnosis of 
well-differentiated sclerosing liposarcoma with focal low-grade 
dedifferentiation.
DISCUSSION: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported example of 
a sclerosing variant of liposarcoma in the ovary. Differential diagnosis 
includes microcystic stromal tumour (MST), sclerosing stromal tumour (SST), 
atypical spindle cell lipoma, myxoid liposarcoma, myxofibosarcoma, solitary 
fibrous tumour and low grade fibromyxoid sarcoma.
CONCLUSION: Ovarian sarcomas are characterised by a rapid and aggressive 
clinical course, requiring multidisciplinary team input for ongoing management. 
Complete surgical resection with clear margins is the mainstay of treatment.

Crown Copyright Â© 2023. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108513
PMCID: PMC10369467
PMID: 37487352

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.