1. J Strength Cond Res. 2023 Aug 1;37(8):1660-1666. doi: 
10.1519/JSC.0000000000004439.

The Genetic Basis of Decathlon Performance: An Exploratory Study.

Remmel L(1), Ben-Zaken S(2), Meckel Y(2), Nemet D(3), Eliakim A(3), Jürimäe 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(2)Genetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, The Academic College at Wingate, 
Netanya, Israel; and.
(3)Child Health and Sports Center, Pediatric Department, Meir Medical Center, 
Kfar-Saba, Israel.

Remmel, L, Ben-Zaken, S, Meckel, Y, Nemet, D, Eliakim, A, and Jürimäe, J. The 
genetic basis of decathlon performance: an exploratory study. J Strength Cond 
Res 37(8): 1660-1666, 2023-Decathlon is a combined track and field competition 
consisting of 10 different events, most of which are anaerobic-type events. 
Therefore, it is assumed that an anaerobic genetic predisposition might be 
prevalent among decathletes. Yet, to the best of our knowledge, the genetic 
basis of decathlon performance had not been studied. Therefore, the aim of this 
study was to assess the prevalence genetic polymorphisms associated with power 
performance (AGT, rs699, Met235Thr T/C), speed (ACTN3, rs1815739 C1747T), 
aerobic endurance (PPARD, rs2016520 T294C), and lactate clearance (MCT1, 
rs1049434 A1470T) among decathletes. One hundred thirty-seven male track and 
field athletes (51 sprinters and jumpers, 59 long distance runners, and 27 
decathletes) participated in the study. Genomic DNA was extracted from buccal 
epithelial cells. Genotypes were determined using the Taqman allelic 
discrimination assay. Decathletes had a higher prevalence of the ACTN3 RR 
genotype, which is associated with speed ability, and a lower prevalence of the 
PPARD CC genotype, which is associated with endurance performance compared with 
long-distance runners. Decathletes had a higher prevalence of the AGT CC 
genotype associated with strength performance and a higher prevalence of the 
MCT1 TT genotype, which is associated with improved lactate transport compared 
with both sprinters and jumpers and long-distance runners. The results suggest 
that a favorable genetic polymorphism for strength-related capability might be 
advantageous for decathletes, whereas a genetic makeup favoring aerobic 
performance is not necessary.

Copyright © 2023 National Strength and Conditioning Association.

DOI: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000004439
PMID: 37494118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.