1. Sci Rep. 2023 Jul 26;13(1):12093. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-39282-4.

Immune cell identifier and classifier (ImmunIC) for single cell transcriptomic 
readouts.

Park SY(1), Ter-Saakyan S(1), Faraci G(1), Lee HY(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA. hayoun@usc.edu.

Single cell RNA sequencing has a central role in immune profiling, identifying 
specific immune cells as disease markers and suggesting therapeutic target genes 
of immune cells. Immune cell-type annotation from single cell transcriptomics is 
in high demand for dissecting complex immune signatures from multicellular blood 
and organ samples. However, accurate cell type assignment from single-cell RNA 
sequencing data alone is complicated by a high level of gene expression 
heterogeneity. Many computational methods have been developed to respond to this 
challenge, but immune cell annotation accuracy is not highly desirable. We 
present ImmunIC, a simple and robust tool for immune cell identification and 
classification by combining marker genes with a machine learning method. With 
over two million immune cells and half-million non-immune cells from 66 single 
cell RNA sequencing studies, ImmunIC shows 98% accuracy in the identification of 
immune cells. ImmunIC outperforms existing immune cell classifiers, categorizing 
into ten immune cell types with 92% accuracy. We determine peripheral blood 
mononuclear cell compositions of severe COVID-19 cases and healthy controls 
using previously published single cell transcriptomic data, permitting the 
identification of immune cell-type specific differential pathways. Our publicly 
available tool can maximize the utility of single cell RNA profiling by 
functioning as a stand-alone bioinformatic cell sorter, advancing cell-type 
specific immune profiling for the discovery of disease-specific immune 
signatures and therapeutic targets.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-39282-4
PMCID: PMC10372073
PMID: 37495649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.