1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Dec 6:2023.05.11.540329. doi: 
10.1101/2023.05.11.540329.

Transcriptomic changes in oligodendrocytes and precursor cells predicts clinical 
outcomes of Parkinson's disease.

Dehestani M(1)(2), Kozareva V(3), Blauwendraat C(4), Fraenkel E(3), Gasser 
T(1)(2), Bansal V(1).

Author information:
(1)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tuebingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurodegeneration, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Laboratory for Neurogenetics, National Institute of Health NIH, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.

Update in
    Mol Brain. 2024 Aug 13;17(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s13041-024-01128-z.

Several prior studies have proposed the involvement of various brain regions and 
cell types in Parkinson's disease (PD) pathology. Here, we performed snRNA-seq 
on the prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate regions from post-mortem control 
and PD brain tissue. We found a significant association of oligodendrocytes 
(ODCs) and oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) with PD-linked risk loci and 
report several dysregulated genes and pathways, including regulation of 
tau-protein kinase activity, regulation of inclusion body assembly and protein 
processing involved in protein targeting to mitochondria. In an independent PD 
cohort with clinical measures (681 cases and 549 controls), polygenic risk 
scores derived from the dysregulated genes significantly predicted Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)-, and Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II)-scores 
but not motor impairment (UPDRS-III). We extended our analysis of clinical 
outcome prediction by incorporating three separate datasets that were previously 
published by different laboratories. In the first dataset from the anterior 
cingulate cortex, we identified a correlation between ODCs and BDI-II. In the 
second dataset obtained from the substantia nigra (SN), OPCs displayed notable 
predictive ability for UPDRS-III. In the third dataset from the SN region, a 
distinct subtype of OPCs, labeled OPC_ADM, exhibited predictive ability for 
UPDRS-III. Intriguingly, the OPC_ADM cluster also demonstrated a significant 
increase in PD samples. These results suggest that by expanding our focus to 
glial cells, we can uncover region-specific molecular pathways associated with 
PD symptoms.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.05.11.540329
PMCID: PMC10370193
PMID: 37502982

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.