1. Biomedicines. 2023 Jul 20;11(7):2041. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11072041.

Metabolic Profiles Point Out Metabolic Pathways Pivotal in Two Glioblastoma 
(GBM) Cell Lines, U251 and U-87MG.

Martins F(1)(2), van der Kellen D(1)(2), Gonçalves LG(3), Serpa J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)iNOVA4Health, NOVA Medical School|Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade 
NOVA de Lisboa, Campo dos Mártires da Pátria, 130, 1169-056 Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil (IPOLFG), Rua 
Prof Lima Basto, 1099-023 Lisboa, Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Tecnológica (ITQB) António Xavier da 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. da República, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most lethal central nervous system (CNS) tumor, mainly 
due to its high heterogeneity, invasiveness, and proliferation rate. These 
tumors remain a therapeutic challenge, and there are still some gaps in the GBM 
biology literature. Despite the significant amount of knowledge produced by 
research on cancer metabolism, its implementation in cancer treatment has been 
limited. In this study, we explored transcriptomics data from the TCGA database 
to provide new insights for future definition of metabolism-related patterns 
useful for clinical applications. Moreover, we investigated the impact of key 
metabolites (glucose, lactate, glutamine, and glutamate) in the gene expression 
and metabolic profile of two GBM cell lines, U251 and U-87MG, together with the 
impact of these organic compounds on malignancy cell features. GBM cell lines 
were able to adapt to the exposure to each tested organic compound. Both cell 
lines fulfilled glycolysis in the presence of glucose and were able to produce 
and consume lactate. Glutamine dependency was also highlighted, and glutamine 
and glutamate availability favored biosynthesis observed by the increase in the 
expression of genes involved in fatty acid (FA) synthesis. These findings are 
relevant and point out metabolic pathways to be targeted in GBM and also 
reinforce that patients' metabolic profiling can be useful in terms of 
personalized medicine.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11072041
PMCID: PMC10377067
PMID: 37509679

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.