1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Jul 19;15(14):3667. doi: 10.3390/cancers15143667.

Clinical Trials of Cellular Therapies in Solid Tumors.

Secondino S(1), Canino C(2), Alaimo D(1)(2), Muzzana M(1)(2), Galli G(1), 
Borgetto S(1)(2), Basso S(3)(4), Bagnarino J(3), Pulvirenti C(3)(4), Comoli 
P(3)(4), Pedrazzoli P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Oncology Department, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 27100 Pavia, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Therapy, University of Pavia, 
27100 Pavia, Italy.
(3)Cell Factory, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
(4)Pediatric Oncoematology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 27100 
Pavia, Italy.

In the past years cancer treatments have drastically changed, mainly due to the 
development of immune checkpoint inhibitors capable of immune modulation in 
vivo, thus providing major clinical benefit in a number of malignancies. 
Simultaneously, considerable technical refinements have opened new prospects for 
the development of immune cell-based medicinal products and unprecedented 
success with chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells targeting B-cell 
hematologic malignancies has been obtained. However, T cell therapies introduced 
and performed in the field of solid tumors have produced so far only limited 
responses in selected patient populations. This standstill is attributable to 
the difficulty in identifying target antigens which are homogeneously expressed 
by all tumor cells while absent from normal tissues, and the limited T cell 
persistence and proliferation in a hostile tumor microenvironment that favors 
immune escape. Replicating the results observed in hematology is a major 
scientific challenge in solid tumors, and ongoing translational and clinical 
research is focused on obtaining insight into the mechanisms of tumor 
recognition and evasion, and how to improve the efficacy of cellular therapies, 
also combining them with immune checkpoint inhibitors or other agents targeting 
either the cancer cell or the tumor environment. This paper provides an overview 
of current adaptive T cell therapy approaches in solid tumors, the research 
performed to increase their efficacy and safety, and results from ongoing 
clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15143667
PMCID: PMC10377409
PMID: 37509328

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.