1. J Fungi (Basel). 2023 Jun 21;9(7):693. doi: 10.3390/jof9070693.

Integration of Physiological, Transcriptomic and Metabolomic Reveals Molecular 
Mechanism of Paraisaria dubia Response to Zn(2+) Stress.

Wang Y(1), Tong LL(1), Yuan L(1), Liu MZ(1), Du YH(1), Yang LH(1), Ren B(1), Guo 
DS(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Food Science and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Normal 
University, Nanjing 210023, China.

Utilizing mycoremediation is an important direction for managing heavy metal 
pollution. Zn2+ pollution has gradually become apparent, but there are few 
reports about its pollution remediation. Here, the Zn2+ remediation potential of 
Paraisaria dubia, an anamorph of the entomopathogenic fungus Ophiocordyceps 
gracilis, was explored. There was 60% Zn2+ removed by Paraisaria dubia mycelia 
from a Zn2+-contaminated medium. To reveal the Zn2+ tolerance mechanism of 
Paraisaria dubia, transcriptomic and metabolomic were executed. Results showed 
that Zn2+ caused a series of stress responses, such as energy metabolism 
inhibition, oxidative stress, antioxidant defense system disruption, autophagy 
obstruction, and DNA damage. Moreover, metabolomic analyses showed that the 
biosynthesis of some metabolites was affected against Zn2+ stress. In order to 
improve the tolerance to Zn2+ stress, the metabolic mechanism of metal ion 
transport, extracellular polysaccharides (EPS) synthesis, and microcycle 
conidiation were activated in P. dubia. Remarkably, the formation of microcycle 
conidiation may be triggered by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways. This study 
supplemented the gap of the Zn2+ resistance mechanism of Paraisaria dubia and 
provided a reference for the application of Paraisaria dubia in the 
bioremediation of heavy metals pollution.

DOI: 10.3390/jof9070693
PMCID: PMC10381912
PMID: 37504682

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.