1. Chem Sci. 2023 Jun 20;14(29):7913-7921. doi: 10.1039/d3sc01921g. eCollection 
2023 Jul 26.

The proximity-enabled sulfur fluoride exchange reaction in the protein context.

Yu B(1), Cao L(1), Li S(1), Klauser PC(1), Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, The Cardiovascular Research 
Institute, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
California San Francisco 555 Mission Bay Blvd. South San Francisco California 
94158 USA Lei.wang2@ucsf.edu.

The proximity-enabled sulfur(vi) fluoride exchange (SuFEx) reaction generates 
specific covalent linkages between proteins in cells and in vivo, which opens 
innovative avenues for studying elusive protein-protein interactions and 
developing potent covalent protein drugs. To exploit the power and expand the 
applications of covalent proteins, covalent linkage formation between proteins 
is the critical step, for which fundamental kinetic and essential properties 
remain unexplored. Herein, we systematically studied SuFEx kinetics in different 
proteins and conditions. In contrast to in small molecules, SuFEx in interacting 
proteins conformed with a two-step mechanism involving noncovalent binding, 
followed by covalent bond formation, exhibiting nonlinear rate dependence on 
protein concentration. The protein SuFEx rate consistently changed with protein 
binding affinity as well as chemical reactivity of the functional group and was 
impacted by target residue identity and solution pH. In addition, kinetic 
analyses of nanobody SR4 binding with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein revealed that 
viral target mutations did not abolish covalent binding but decreased the SuFEx 
rate with affinity decrease. Moreover, off-target cross-linking of a 
SuFEx-capable nanobody in human serum was not detected, and the SuFEx-generated 
protein linkage was stable at cellular acidic pHs, suggesting SuFEx suitability 
for in vivo usage. These results advanced our understanding of SuFEx reactivity 
and kinetics in proteins, which is invaluable for ongoing exploration of 
SuFEx-enabled covalent proteins for basic biological research and creative 
biotherapeutics.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d3sc01921g
PMCID: PMC10370592
PMID: 37502323

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.