1. Vet Sci. 2023 Jul 23;10(7):481. doi: 10.3390/vetsci10070481.

Isolation, Identification, and Whole Genome Analysis of Chicken Infectious 
Anemia Virus in an Outbreak of Disease in Adult Layer Hens.

Zeng Y(1), Zhang H(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Southwest Minzu University, 
Chengdu 610041, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Veterinary Medicine, Universities in Sichuan, Chengdu 
610093, China.

Chicken infectious anemia (CIA) poses a significant threat to the chicken 
industry in China. Due to its non-specific symptoms, the disease is often 
overlooked. This study aimed to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the etiology 
and pathology of CIA in Guangxi Province, China. Three strains of the chicken 
infectious anemia virus (CIAV) were isolated from liver samples of diseased 
20-week-old chickens. The complete genomes of these strains were sequenced, and 
experiments on specific pathogen-free (SPF) chicks revealed that the GX21121 
strain exhibited high virulence. Histopathological examination of the deceased 
chickens showed liver cell necrosis, fibrous serous exudation, inflammatory cell 
infiltration, hemorrhage in liver tissues, and congestion in lung and renal 
tissues. Phylogenetic analysis of the genome revealed that the three strains had 
a close genetic relationship to the Heilongjiang wild-type strain (GenBank 
KY486144). The genetic evolution of their VP1 genes indicated that all three 
CIAV isolates belonged to genotype IIIc. In summary, this study demonstrated the 
genomic diversity of three CIAV strains in adult layer hens. The isolation and 
characterization of the GX21121 strain as a highly virulent isolate provide 
valuable information for further investigations into the etiology, molecular 
epidemiology, and viral evolution of CIAV.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci10070481
PMCID: PMC10386238
PMID: 37505885

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.