1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Jul 12;10:1215167. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1215167. 
eCollection 2023.

Lowering maintenance immune suppression in elderly kidney transplant recipients; 
connecting the immunological and clinical dots.

Betjes MGH(1), De Weerd A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC Transplant Institute, University 
Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

The management of long-term immune suppressive medication in kidney transplant 
recipients is a poorly explored field in the area of transplant medicine. In 
particular, older recipients are at an increased risk for side effects and have 
an exponentially increased risk of infection-related death. In contrast, an aged 
immune system decreases the risk of acute T-cell-mediated rejection in older 
recipients. Recent advances in alloimmunity research have shown a rapid and 
substantial decline in polyfunctional, high-risk CD4+ T cells 
post-transplantation. This lowers the direct alloreactivity responsible for 
T-cell-mediated rejection, also known as donor-specific hyporesponsiveness. 
Chronic antibody-mediated rejection (c-aABMR) is the most frequent cause of 
kidney graft loss in the long term. However, in older adults, c-aABMR as a cause 
of graft loss is outnumbered by death with a functioning graft. In addition, DSA 
development and a diagnosis of c-aABMR plateau ~10 years after transplantation, 
resulting in a very low risk for rejection thereafter. The intensity of immune 
suppression regimes could likely be reduced accordingly, but trials in this area 
are scarce. Tacrolimus monotherapy for 1 year after transplantation seems 
feasible in older kidney transplant recipients with standard immunological risk, 
showing the expected benefits of fewer infections and better vaccination 
responses.

Copyright Â© 2023 Betjes and De Weerd.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1215167
PMCID: PMC10368955
PMID: 37502354

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.