1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Jul 14;13(14):2368. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics13142368.

A Cross-Sectional Study of the Dermatological Manifestations of Patients with 
Fabry Disease and the Assessment of Angiokeratomas with Multimodal Imaging.

Anker P(1), Fésűs L(1)(2), Kiss N(1), Lengyel A(3), Pinti É(3), Lihacova I(4), 
Lihachev A(4), Plorina EV(4), Fekete G(3), Medvecz M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Dermatooncology, Semmelweis 
University, 1085 Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Institute for Solid State Physics and Optics, Wigner RCP, 1525 Budapest, 
Hungary.
(3)Pediatric Center, Semmelweis University, 1085 Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Institute of Atomic Physics and Spectroscopy, University of Latvia, 1586 
Riga, Latvia.

Fabry disease (FD) is a multisystemic X-linked lysosomal storage disease that 
presents with angiokeratomas (AKs). Our objective was to investigate the 
clinical and morphologic features of AKs and to present two experimental 
techniques, multispectral imaging (MSI) and non-linear microscopy (NLM). A 
thorough dermatological examination was carried out in our 26 FD patients and 
dermoscopic images (n = 136) were evaluated for specific structures. MSI was 
used for the evaluation of AKs in seven patients. NLM was carried out to obtain 
histology samples of two AKs and two hemangiomas. Although AKs were the most 
common manifestation, the majority of patients presented an atypical 
distribution and appearance, which could cause a diagnostic challenge. 
Dermoscopy revealed lacunae (65%) and dotted vessels (56%) as the most common 
structures, with a whitish veil present in only 25%. Autofluorescence (405 nm) 
and diffuse reflectance (526 nm) images showed the underlying vasculature more 
prominently compared to dermoscopy. Using NLM, AKs and hemangiomas could be 
distinguished based on morphologic features. The clinical heterogeneity of FD 
can result in a diagnostic delay. Although AKs are often the first sign of FD, 
their presentation is diverse. A thorough dermatological examination and the 
evaluation of other cutaneous signs are essential for the early diagnosis of FD.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13142368
PMCID: PMC10378346
PMID: 37510112

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.