1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jul 7;14(7):1407. doi: 10.3390/genes14071407.

L138ins Variant of the CFTR Gene in Russian Infertile Men.

Chernykh V(1)(2), Sorokina T(1), Sedova A(1), Shtaut M(1), Solovova O(1), Marnat 
E(2), Adyan T(1), Beskorovaynaya T(1), Stepanova A(1), Shchagina O(1), Polyakov 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Medical Genetics, 115522 Moscow, Russia.
(2)Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University of the Ministry of 
Healthcare of the Russian Federation, 117997 Moscow, Russia.

(1) Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the CFTR (Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane 
conductance Regulator, OMIM: 602421) gene cause Cystic Fibrosis (CF, OMIM: 
219700) and CF-related disorders (CF-RD), often accompanied by obstructive 
azoospermia due to congenital bilateral aplasia of vas deferens (CBAVD, OMIM: 
277180) in male patients. The L138ins (c.413_415dup; p. (Leu138dup)) is a mild 
variant in the CFTR gene that is relatively common among CF-patients in Slavic 
populations. The frequency of this variant in Russian infertile men has not been 
sufficiently studied; (2) Materials and Methods: The sample consisted of 6033 
Russian infertile men. The patients were tested for 22 common in Russian 
populations pathogenic variants of the CFTR gene and the IVS9Tn-polymorphic 
locus of the intron 9. Molecular-genetic studies were performed using amplified 
fragment length polymorphism (AFLP-PCR), multiplex ligation-dependent probe 
amplification (MLPA), and nested PCR (for analysis of the IVS9Tn-polymorphic 
locus); (3) Results: Pathogenic variants in the CFTR were detected in 3.9% of 
patients. The most frequent variants were F508del and CFTRdele2.3(21kb), 
accounted for 61.0% and 7.1% of detected variants, respectively. The L138ins 
variant was detected in 17 (0.28%) individuals: one of them was homozygous, 10 
patients were heterozygous, and 6 patients were compound-heterozygous 
(F508del/L138ins, n = 4; L138ins/N1303K, n = 1; L138ins/5T, n = 1). Two 
pathogenic CF-causing variants in the CFTR gene were detected in 8 patients, 
including 7 compound heterozygous (F508del/L138ins, n = 4; F508del/N1303K, n = 
1; 2184insA/E92K, n = 1; 3849+10kbC>T/E92K, n = 1) and one homozygous 
(L138ins/L138ins). The L138ins variant was found in 7 out of 16 (43.75%) 
chromosomes in six of these patients. The most common pathogenic variant, 
F508del, was identified in five out of them, in 5 of 16 (31.25%) chromosomes. 
The allele frequency (AF) of the L138ins variant in the sample has been found to 
be 0.0014.; (4) Conclusions: The L138ins variant of the CFTR gene is the third 
most common variant after F508del and CFTRdele2.3(kb) among Russian infertile 
men.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14071407
PMCID: PMC10379041
PMID: 37510311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.