1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jul 13;24(14):11397. doi: 10.3390/ijms241411397.

Protein-Mediated Electroporation in a Cardiac Voltage-Sensing Domain Due to an 
nsPEF Stimulus.

Ruiz-Fernández AR(1), Campos L(1)(2), Villanelo F(1)(2), Garate JA(1)(2)(3), 
Perez-Acle T(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Computational Biology Lab, Fundación Ciencia & Vida, Santiago 7780272, Chile.
(2)Facultad de Ingeniería y Tecnología, Universidad San Sebastián, Santiago 
8420524, Chile.
(3)Millennium Nucleus im NanoBioPhysics, Universidad de Valparaiso, Valparaiso 
2351319, Chile.
(4)Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaíso, Universidad de 
Valparaíso, Valparaiso 2360102, Chile.

This study takes a step in understanding the physiological implications of the 
nanosecond pulsed electric field (nsPEF) by integrating molecular dynamics 
simulations and machine learning techniques. nsPEF, a state-of-the-art 
technology, uses high-voltage electric field pulses with a nanosecond duration 
to modulate cellular activity. This investigation reveals a relatively new and 
underexplored phenomenon: protein-mediated electroporation. Our research focused 
on the voltage-sensing domain (VSD) of the NaV1.5 sodium cardiac channel in 
response to nsPEF stimulation. We scrutinized the VSD structures that form pores 
and thereby contribute to the physical chemistry that governs the defibrillation 
effect of nsPEF. To do so, we conducted a comprehensive analysis involving the 
clustering of 142 replicas simulated for 50 ns under nsPEF stimuli. We 
subsequently pinpointed the representative structures of each cluster and 
computed the free energy between them. We find that the selected VSD of NaV1.5 
forms pores under nsPEF stimulation, but in a way that significant differs from 
the traditional VSD opening. This study not only extends our understanding of 
nsPEF and its interaction with protein channels but also adds a new effect to 
further study.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241411397
PMCID: PMC10379607
PMID: 37511161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.