1. Sci Rep. 2023 Jul 29;13(1):12299. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-39562-z.

Optical and pharmacological manipulation of hypoglossal motor nucleus identifies 
differential effects of taltirelin on sleeping tonic motor activity and 
responsiveness.

Aggarwal J(1), Ladha R(1), Liu WY(1), Liu H(1), Horner RL(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, 3206 Medical Sciences 
Building, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, 3206 Medical Sciences 
Building, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada. 
richard.horner@utoronto.ca.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, 3206 Medical Sciences 
Building, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada. 
richard.horner@utoronto.ca.

Pharyngeal muscle activity and responsiveness are key pathophysiological traits 
in human obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and strong contributors to improvements 
with pharmacotherapy. The thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) analog taltirelin 
is of high pre-clinical interest given its neuronal-stimulant properties, 
minimal endocrine activity, tongue muscle activation following microperfusion 
into the hypoglossal motor nucleus (HMN) or systemic delivery, and high TRH 
receptor expression at the HMN compared to rest of the brain. Here we test the 
hypothesis that taltirelin increases HMN activity and/or responsivity to 
excitatory stimuli applied across sleep-wake states in-vivo. To target 
hypoglossal motoneurons with simultaneous pharmacological and optical stimuli we 
used customized "opto-dialysis" probes and chronically implanted them in mice 
expressing a light sensitive cation channel exclusively on cholinergic neurons 
(ChAT-ChR2, n = 12) and wild-type mice lacking the opsin (n = 10). Both optical 
stimuli applied across a range of powers (P < 0.001) and microperfusion of 
taltirelin into the HMN (P < 0.020) increased tongue motor activity in sleeping 
ChAT-ChR2 mice. Notably, taltirelin increased tonic background tongue motor 
activity (P < 0.001) but not responsivity to excitatory optical stimuli across 
sleep-wake states (P > 0.098). This differential effect on tonic motor activity 
versus responsivity informs human studies of the potential beneficial effects of 
taltirelin on pharyngeal motor control and OSA pharmacotherapy.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-39562-z
PMCID: PMC10387086
PMID: 37516800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.