1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jul 20;24(14):11689. doi: 10.3390/ijms241411689.

Delineating Zinc Influx Mechanisms during Platelet Activation.

Kuravi SJ(1), Ahmed NS(1), Taylor KA(2), Capes EM(1), Bye A(2), Unsworth AJ(3), 
Gibbins JM(2), Pugh N(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge CB1 1PT, UK.
(2)Institute for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, School of Biological 
Sciences, University of Reading, Reading RG6 6EX, UK.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Manchester 
Metropolitan University, Manchester M1 5GD, UK.

Zinc (Zn2+) is released by platelets during a hemostatic response to injury. 
Extracellular zinc ([Zn2+]o) initiates platelet activation following influx into 
the platelet cytosol. However, the mechanisms that permit Zn2+ influx are 
unknown. Fluctuations in intracellular zinc ([Zn2+]i) were measured in 
fluozin-3-loaded platelets using fluorometry and flow cytometry. Platelet 
activation was assessed using light transmission aggregometry. The detection of 
phosphoproteins was performed by Western blotting. [Zn2+]o influx and subsequent 
platelet activation were abrogated by blocking the sodium/calcium exchanged, TRP 
channels, and ZIP7. Cation store depletion regulated Zn2+ influx. [Zn2+]o 
stimulation resulted in the phosphorylation of PKC substates, MLC, and Î²3 
integrin. Platelet activation via GPVI or Zn2+ resulted in ZIP7 phosphorylation 
in a casein kinase 2-dependent manner and initiated elevations of [Zn2+]i that 
were sensitive to the inhibition of Orai1, ZIP7, or IP3R-mediated pathways. 
These data indicate that platelets detect and respond to changes in [Zn2+]o via 
influx into the cytosol through TRP channels and the NCX exchanger. Platelet 
activation results in the externalization of ZIP7, which further regulates Zn2+ 
influx. Increases in [Zn2+]i contribute to the activation of cation-dependent 
enzymes. Sensitivity of Zn2+ influx to thapsigargin indicates a store-operated 
pathway that we term store-operated Zn2+ entry (SOZE). These mechanisms may 
affect platelet behavior during thrombosis and hemostasis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241411689
PMCID: PMC10380784
PMID: 37511448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.