1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jul 17;24(14):11564. doi: 10.3390/ijms241411564.

Impact of E484Q and L452R Mutations on Structure and Binding Behavior of 
SARS-CoV-2 B.1.617.1 Using Deep Learning AlphaFold2, Molecular Docking and 
Dynamics Simulation.

Jiao Y(1), Xing Y(1), Sun Y(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Science, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen 
518055, China.

During the outbreak of COVID-19, many SARS-CoV-2 variants presented key amino 
acid mutations that influenced their binding abilities with 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2) and neutralizing antibodies. For the 
B.1.617 lineage, there had been fears that two key mutations, i.e., L452R and 
E484Q, would have additive effects on the evasion of neutralizing antibodies. In 
this paper, we systematically investigated the impact of the L452R and E484Q 
mutations on the structure and binding behavior of B.1.617.1 using deep learning 
AlphaFold2, molecular docking and dynamics simulation. We firstly predicted and 
verified the structure of the S protein containing L452R and E484Q mutations via 
the AlphaFold2-calculated pLDDT value and compared it with the experimental 
structure. Next, a molecular simulation was performed to reveal the structural 
and interaction stabilities of the S protein of the double mutant variant with 
hACE2. We found that the double mutations, L452R and E484Q, could lead to a 
decrease in hydrogen bonds and higher interaction energy between the S protein 
and hACE2, demonstrating the lower structural stability and the worse binding 
affinity in the long dynamic evolutional process, even though the molecular 
docking showed the lower binding energy score of the S1 RBD of the double mutant 
variant with hACE2 than that of the wild type (WT) with hACE2. In addition, 
docking to three approved neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) showed a 
reduced binding affinity of the double mutant variant, suggesting a lower 
neutralization ability of the mAbs against the double mutant variant. Our study 
helps lay the foundation for further SARS-CoV-2 studies and provides 
bioinformatics and computational insights into how the double mutations lead to 
immune evasion, which could offer guidance for subsequent biomedical studies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241411564
PMCID: PMC10380202
PMID: 37511322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.