1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2023 Nov;21(11):2358-2373. doi: 10.1111/pbi.14137. Epub
2023  Jul 31.

Rice DSP controls stigma, panicle and tiller primordium initiation.

Yu L(#)(1), Yao M(#)(1), Mao L(#)(1), Ma T(1), Nie Y(1), Ma H(1), Shao K(1), An 
H(1), Zhao J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Hybrid Rice, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Tiller and seed number are key determinants of rice (Oryza sativa) yield. These 
traits are mainly affected by tiller, panicle, spikelet and stigma formation, 
but to date, no single gene involved in the development of all these organs has 
been identified. Here, we found a rice mutant defective stigma and panicle (dsp) 
with greatly reduced numbers of tillers and panicle branches, and ovaries 
lacking stigmas, due to defects in primordium initiation. We cloned DSP using 
sequencing-based mapping and verified its function with the CRISPR/Cas9 system. 
DSP encodes a transcription factor containing an APETALA2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE 
FACTOR (AP2/ERF) domain that recognizes the GCC motif and a 
transcription-activating domain at the site of 244-314 that contains an 
angiosperm-related (AR) motif. Mutating the AR motif resulted in the dsp mutant 
phenotypes, whereas mutating the AP2/ERF domain led to seedling death. DSP 
directly regulated PINOID (PID) expression to determine the emergence of rice 
stigmas, and PID overexpression partially rescued the stigma defect in the dsp 
cr2-8 and dsp mutants. Moreover, DSP indirectly affected LAX PANICLE1 (LAX1) 
expression to determine tiller primordium formation and synergistically 
regulated panicle primordium development. Our results indicated that DSP was a 
key regulator that modulated different genetic pathways to control the 
initiation of stigma primordia, the axillary meristem formation of tillers and 
panicle branches, which revealed their molecular mechanisms and cross-networks, 
laying the vital foundation for rice yield and trait improvement.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for 
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.14137
PMCID: PMC10579714
PMID: 37523341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.