1. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2023 Jul 28;17:11779322231189371. doi: 
10.1177/11779322231189371. eCollection 2023.

Insights into Omicron's Low Fusogenicity through In Silico Molecular Studies on 
Spike-Furin Interactions.

Mondol SM(1), Hasib M(2), Limon MBH(1), Alam ASMRU(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Barishal, 
Barishal, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Jashore University of Science and Technology, 
Jashore, Bangladesh.

The Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) Omicron variant 
and its subvariants have a unique set of mutations. Two of those mutations 
(N679 K and P681 H) reside close to the S1 /S2 furin cleavage site (FCS; 
685-686). When these mutations reside together, they exert less-efficient 
membrane fusion than wild type and most other variants of concern such as the 
Delta variant. Here, we in silico targeted these mutations to find out which of 
the amino acids and interactions change plays the key role in fusion. To 
comprehend the epistatic effect of N679 K and P681 H mutations on the spike 
protein, we in silico constructed three types of spike protein sequences by 
changing the respective amino acids on 679 and 681 positions (P681 H, N679 K, 
K679 N-H681 P variants). We then analyzed the binding affinity of furin and 
spike (Furin-Wild, Furin-Omicron, Furin-P681 H, Furin-N679 K, and 
Furin-K679 N/H681 P) complexes. Omicron and P681 H variants showed a similar 
higher binding energy trend compared to the wild type and N679 K. The variation 
in hydrogen, hydrophobic, and salt bridge bonds between spike protein and furin 
provided an explanation for the observed low fusogenicity of Omicron. The fate 
of the epistasis in furin binding and possible cleavage depends on the efficient 
interaction between FCS in spike and furin catalytic triad, and in addition, the 
loss of the hydrogen bond between Arg 681 (spike) and Asn 295 (furin) along with 
inhibitor-like ineffective higher affinity plays an important role in the 
enzymatic activity.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/11779322231189371
PMCID: PMC10387760
PMID: 37529484

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.