1. FEBS Open Bio. 2023 Oct;13(10):1874-1886. doi: 10.1002/2211-5463.13685. Epub 
2023 Sep 7.

Functional characterization of all-trans retinoic acid-induced differentiation 
factor (ATRAID).

Mehrasa R(1)(2), Cristea I(1)(3), Bredrup C(1)(3), Rødahl E(1)(3), Bruland O(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

All-trans retinoic acid-induced differentiation (ATRAID) factor was first 
identified in HL60 cells. Several mRNA isoforms exist, but the respective 
proteins have not been fully characterized. In transfected cells expressing 
Myc-Flag-tagged ATRAID Isoform (Iso) A, B, and C, Iso C was found to be 
expressed at high levels, Iso A was found to be expressed at low levels due to 
rapid degradation, and the predicted protein expressed from Iso B was not 
detected. Iso C was present mainly in an N-glycosylated form. In subcellular 
fractionation experiments, Iso C localized to the membranous and nuclear 
fractions, while immunofluorescence analysis revealed that Iso C is located 
close to the plasma membrane, mainly in cytoplasmic vesicles and in the Golgi 
area. We confirm that Iso C colocalizes to some extent with endosomal/lysosomal 
markers LAMP1 and LAMP2. Furthermore, we show that ATRAID co-localizes with 
RAB11, a GTPase associated with recycling endosomes and implicated in regulating 
vesicular trafficking.

© 2023 The Authors. FEBS Open Bio published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/2211-5463.13685
PMCID: PMC10549228
PMID: 37530719

Conflict of interest statement: We confirm that the work herein has been carried 
out in accordance with Uniform Requirements for manuscripts submitted to 
Biomedical journals (http://www.icmje.org). None of the authors have any 
disclosure of conflicts of interest.