1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2023 Oct 1;325(4):H601-H616. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.00104.2023. Epub 2023 Aug 4.

Best practices in assessing cardiac protein O-GlcNAcylation by immunoblot.

Zou L(1), Zhang D(1), Ha CM(1), Wende AR(1), Chatham JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, Department of Pathology, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States.

The modification of serine and threonine amino acids of proteins by O-linked 
N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) regulates the activity, stability, function, and 
subcellular localization of proteins. Dysregulation of O-GlcNAc homeostasis is 
well established as a hallmark of various cardiac diseases, including cardiac 
hypertrophy, heart failure, complications associated with diabetes, and 
responses to acute injuries such as oxidative stress and ischemia-reperfusion. 
Given the limited availability of site-specific O-GlcNAc antibodies, studies of 
changes in O-GlcNAcylation in the heart frequently use pan-O-GlcNAc antibodies 
for semiquantitative evaluation of overall O-GlcNAc levels. However, there is a 
high degree of variability in many published cardiac O-GlcNAc blots. For 
example, many blots often have regions that lack O-GlcNAc positive staining of 
proteins either below 50 or above 100 kDa. In some O-GlcNAc blots, only a few 
protein bands are detected, while in others, intense bands around 75 kDa 
dominate the gel due to nonspecific IgM band staining, making it difficult to 
visualize less intense bands. Therefore, the goal of this study was to develop a 
modifiable protocol that optimizes O-GlcNAc positive banding of proteins in 
cardiac tissue extracts. We showed that O-GlcNAc blots using CTD110.6 antibody 
of proteins ranging from <30 to ∼450 kDa could be obtained while also limiting 
nonspecific staining. We also show that some myofilament proteins are recognized 
by the CTD110.6 antibody. Therefore, by protocol optimization using the widely 
available CTD110.6 antibody, we found that it is possible to obtain pan-O-GlcNAc 
blots of cardiac tissue, which minimizes common limitations associated with this 
technique.NEW & NOTEWORTHY The post-translational modification of proteins by 
O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is recognized as mediating cardiac 
pathophysiology. However, there is considerable variability in the quality of 
O-GlcNAc immunoblots used to evaluate changes in cardiac O-GlcNAc levels. Here 
we show that with relatively minor changes to a commonly used protocol it is 
possible to minimize the intensity of nonspecific bands while also reproducibly 
generating O-GlcNAc immunoblots covering a range of molecular weights from <30 
to ∼450 kDa.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00104.2023
PMCID: PMC10642998
PMID: 37539459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.