1. PLoS Pathog. 2023 Aug 4;19(8):e1011552. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011552. 
eCollection 2023 Aug.

Hepatitis C virus non-structural proteins modulate cellular kinases for 
increased cytoplasmic abundance of host factor HuR and facilitate viral 
replication.

Raheja H(1), George B(1), Tripathi SK(1), Saha S(2), Maiti TK(2), Das S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore, India.
(2)Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Faridabad, India.

Host protein HuR translocation from nucleus to cytoplasm following infection is 
crucial for the life cycle of several RNA viruses including hepatitis C virus 
(HCV), a major causative agent of hepatocellular carcinoma. HuR assists the 
assembly of replication-complex on the viral-3'UTR, and its depletion hampers 
viral replication. Although cytoplasmic HuR is crucial for HCV replication, 
little is known about how the virus orchestrates the mobilization of HuR into 
the cytoplasm from the nucleus. We show that two viral proteins, NS3 and NS5A, 
act co-ordinately to alter the equilibrium of the nucleo-cytoplasmic movement of 
HuR. NS3 activates protein kinase C (PKC)-δ, which in-turn phosphorylates HuR on 
S318 residue, triggering its export to the cytoplasm. NS5A inactivates 
AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) resulting in diminished nuclear import of HuR 
through blockade of AMPK-mediated phosphorylation and acetylation of 
importin-α1. Cytoplasmic retention or entry of HuR can be reversed by an AMPK 
activator or a PKC-δ inhibitor. Our findings suggest that efforts should be made 
to develop inhibitors of PKC-δ and activators of AMPK, either separately or in 
combination, to inhibit HCV infection.

Copyright: © 2023 Raheja et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011552
PMCID: PMC10431626
PMID: 37540723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.