1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Sep;299(9):105132. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105132. Epub 2023
 Aug 6.

Beta-subunit-eliminated eHAP expression (BeHAPe) cells reveal subunit regulation 
of the cardiac voltage-gated sodium channel.

Minard AY(1), Clark CJ(1), Ahern CA(2), Piper RC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa College 
of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa College 
of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, United States. Electronic address: 
christopher-ahern@uiowa.edu.
(3)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa College 
of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, United States. Electronic address: 
robert-piper@uiowa.edu.

Voltage-gated sodium (NaV) channels drive the upstroke of the action potential 
and are comprised of a pore-forming α-subunit and regulatory β-subunits. The 
β-subunits modulate the gating, trafficking, and pharmacology of the α-subunit. 
These functions are routinely assessed by ectopic expression in heterologous 
cells. However, currently available expression systems may not capture the full 
range of these effects since they contain endogenous β-subunits. To better 
reveal β-subunit functions, we engineered a human cell line devoid of endogenous 
NaV β-subunits and their immediate phylogenetic relatives. This new cell line, 
β-subunit-eliminated eHAP expression (BeHAPe) cells, were derived from haploid 
eHAP cells by engineering inactivating mutations in the β-subunits SCN1B, SCN2B, 
SCN3B, and SCN4B, and other subfamily members MPZ (myelin protein zero(P0)), 
MPZL1, MPZL2, MPZL3, and JAML. In diploid BeHAPe cells, the cardiac NaV 
α-subunit, NaV1.5, was highly sensitive to β-subunit modulation and revealed 
that each β-subunit and even MPZ imparted unique gating properties. Furthermore, 
combining β1 and β2 with NaV1.5 generated a sodium channel with hybrid 
properties, distinct from the effects of the individual subunits. Thus, this 
approach revealed an expanded ability of β-subunits to regulate NaV1.5 activity 
and can be used to improve the characterization of other α/β NaV complexes.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105132
PMCID: PMC10506104
PMID: 37544648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.