1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Aug 5;24(15):12455. doi: 10.3390/ijms241512455.

TET Family Members Are Integral to Porcine Oocyte Maturation and Parthenogenetic 
Pre-Implantation Embryogenesis.

Chen F(1), Li MG(1), Hua ZD(1), Ren HY(1), Gu H(1), Luo AF(1), Zhou CF(1), Zhu 
Z(1), Huang T(2), Bi YZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Animal Embryo Engineering and Molecular Breeding, 
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary, Hubei Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Wuhan 430070, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shihezi University, Shihezi 832061, 
China.

The ten-eleven translocation (TET) enzyme family, which includes TET1/2/3, 
participates in active DNA demethylation in the eukaryotic genome; moreover, 
TET1/2/3 are functionally redundant in mice embryos. However, the combined 
effect of TET1/2/3 triple-gene knockdown or knockout on the porcine oocytes or 
embryos is still unclear. In this study, using Bobcat339, a specific 
small-molecule inhibitor of the TET family, we explored the effects of TET 
enzymes on oocyte maturation and early embryogenesis in pigs. Our results 
revealed that Bobcat339 treatment blocked porcine oocyte maturation and 
triggered early apoptosis. Furthermore, in the Bobcat339-treated oocytes, 
spindle architecture and chromosome alignment were disrupted, probably due to 
the huge loss of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC)and concurrent increase in 
5-methylcytosine (5mC). After Bobcat339 treatment, early parthenogenetic embryos 
exhibited abnormal 5mC and 5hmC levels, which resulted in compromised cleavage 
and blastocyst rate. The mRNA levels of EIF1A and DPPA2 (ZGA marker genes) were 
significantly decreased, which may explain why the embryos were arrested at the 
4-cell stage after Bobcat339 treatment. In addition, the mRNA levels of 
pluripotency-related genes OCT4 and NANOG were declined after Bobcat339 
treatment. RNA sequencing analysis revealed differentially expressed genes in 
Bobcat339-treated embryos at the 4-cell stage, which were significantly enriched 
in cell proliferation, cell component related to mitochondrion, and cell 
adhesion molecule binding. Our results indicated that TET proteins are essential 
for porcine oocyte maturation and early embryogenesis, and they act by mediating 
5mC/5hmC levels and gene transcription.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241512455
PMCID: PMC10419807
PMID: 37569830

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.