1. J Clin Med. 2023 Jul 29;12(15):5002. doi: 10.3390/jcm12155002.

Computational and Experimental Analyses for Pathogenicity Prediction of ACVRL1 
Missense Variants in Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.

Iwasa T(1)(2), Urasaki A(1), Kakihana Y(1), Nagata-Akaho N(1), Harada Y(1)(3), 
Takeda S(4), Kawamura T(3), Shiraishi I(2), Kurosaki K(2), Morisaki H(5), Yamada 
O(2), Nakagawa O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular 
Center Research Institute, 6-1 Kishibe-Shimmachi, Suita, Osaka 564-8565, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular 
Center, 6-1 Kishibe-Shimmachi, Suita, Osaka 564-8565, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, College of Life Sciences, Ritsumeikan University, 1-1-1 Noji-Higashi, 
Kusatsu, Shiga 525-8577, Japan.
(4)Department of Advanced Medical Technologies, National Cerebral and 
Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, 6-1 Kishibe-Shimmachi, Suita, Osaka 
564-8565, Japan.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Sakakibara Heart Institute, 3-16-1 Asahi-cho, 
Fuchu, Tokyo 183-0003, Japan.

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is a vascular disease caused by the 
defects of ALK1/ACVRL1 receptor signaling. In this study, we evaluated 25 
recently identified ACVRL1 missense variants using multiple computational 
pathogenicity classifiers and experimentally characterized their signal 
transduction capacity. Three extracellular residue variants showed no detectable 
cell surface expression and impairment of bone morphogenetic protein 9 (BMP9) 
responsiveness of SMAD-dependent transcription in luciferase assays. Four 
variants with amino acid replacement in the motifs essential for the 
intracellular kinase function lost SMAD-dependent signaling. Most of other 
variations in the kinase domain also caused marked downregulation of signaling; 
however, two variants behaved as the wild-type ACVRL1 did, while computational 
classifiers predicted their functional abnormalities. Three-dimensional 
structure prediction using the ColabFold program supported the significance of 
the L45 loop and NANDOR domain of ACVRL1 for its association with SMAD1 and 
BMPR2, respectively, and the variations in these motifs resulted in the 
reduction of SMAD signaling. On the other hand, two of the GS domain variants 
maintained high signal transduction capacity, which did not accord with their 
computational pathogenicity prediction. These results affirm the requirement of 
a combinatory approach using computational and experimental analyses to 
accurately predict the pathogenicity of ACVRL1 missense variants in the HHT 
patients.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12155002
PMCID: PMC10419700
PMID: 37568404

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.