1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Aug 1;15(15):3919. doi: 10.3390/cancers15153919.

Transforming Growth Factor Beta and Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition Alter 
Homologous Recombination Repair Gene Expression and Sensitize BRCA Wild-Type 
Ovarian Cancer Cells to Olaparib.

Roberts CM(1), Rojas-Alexandre M(2), Hanna RE(2), Lin ZP(2), Ratner ES(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Midwestern University, 555 31st St., Downers 
Grove, IL 60515, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale 
University School of Medicine, 15 York St., New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) remains the most lethal gynecologic malignancy, 
largely due to metastasis and drug resistant recurrences. Fifteen percent of 
ovarian tumors carry mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2, rendering them vulnerable to 
treatment with PARP inhibitors such as olaparib. Recent studies have shown that 
TGFβ can induce "BRCAness" in BRCA wild-type cancer cells. Given that TGFβ is a 
known driver of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), and the connection 
between EMT and metastatic spread in EOC and other cancers, we asked if TGFβ and 
EMT alter the susceptibility of EOC to PARP inhibition. Epithelial EOC cells 
were transiently treated with soluble TGFβ, and their clonogenic potential, 
expression, and function of EMT and DNA repair genes, and response to PARP 
inhibitors compared with untreated controls. A second epithelial cell line was 
compared to its mesenchymal derivative for EMT and DNA repair gene expression 
and drug responses. We found that TGFβ and EMT resulted in the downregulation of 
genes responsible for homologous recombination (HR) and sensitized cells to 
olaparib. HR efficiency was reduced in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, 
mesenchymal cells displayed sensitivity to olaparib, cisplatin, and the DNA-PK 
inhibitor Nu-7441. Therefore, the treatment of disseminated, mesenchymal tumors 
may represent an opportunity to expand the clinical utility of PARP inhibitors 
and similar agents.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15153919
PMCID: PMC10417836
PMID: 37568736

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.