1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jul 27;14:1207514. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1207514. 
eCollection 2023.

COVID-19 and the risk of neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder: a Mendelian 
randomization study.

Sun D(1), Du Q(1), Wang R(1), Shi Z(1), Chen H(1), Zhou H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Guo 
Xuexiang, Chengdu, China.

BACKGROUND: An increasing number of studies have elucidated a close nexus 
between COVID-19 phenotypes and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD), 
yet the causality between them remains enigmatic.
METHODS: In this study, we conducted a Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis 
employing summary data sourced from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) 
pertaining to COVID-19 susceptibility, hospitalization, severity, and NMOSD. The 
primary MR analysis employed the Inverse variance weighted (IVW) approach, which 
was supplemented by MR-Egger, weighted median, simple mode, and weighted mode 
methods. We implemented various sensitivity analyses including Cochran's Q test, 
MR-PRESSO method, MR-Egger intercept, leave-one-out analysis, and funnel plot.
RESULTS: The MR results demonstrated a nominal association between COVID-19 
susceptibility and the risk of AQP4+ NMOSD, as evidenced by the IVW method (OR = 
4.958; 95% CI: 1.322-18.585; P = 0.018). Conversely, no causal association was 
observed between COVID-19 susceptibility, hospitalization, or severity and the 
increased risk of NMOSD, AQP4-NMOSD, or AQP4+ NMOSD. The comprehensive 
sensitivity analyses further bolstered the robustness and consistency of the MR 
estimates.
CONCLUSION: Our findings provide compelling evidence for a causal effect of 
COVID-19 phenotype on AQP4+ NMOSD, shedding new light on the understanding of 
the comorbidity between COVID-19 and NMOSD.

Copyright Â© 2023 Sun, Du, Wang, Shi, Chen and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1207514
PMCID: PMC10414539
PMID: 37575255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.