1. Front Psychiatry. 2023 Jul 28;14:1215110. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1215110. 
eCollection 2023.

Current trends of high-risk gene Cul3 in neurodevelopmental disorders.

Lin P(1), Yang J(1), Wu S(1), Ye T(1), Zhuang W(1), Wang W(1)(2), Tan T(1).

Author information:
(1)Oujiang Laboratory (Zhejiang Lab for Regenerative Medicine, Vision and Brain 
Health), Key Laboratory of Alzheimer's Disease of Zhejiang Province, Institute 
of Aging, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United 
States.

Cul3 encodes Cullin-3, a core component of the ubiquitin E3 ligase that is 
involved in protein ubiquitination. Recent studies have identified Cul3 as a 
high-confidence risk gene in neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), especially 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Different strategies have been used to generate 
animal models with Cul3 deficiency in the central nervous system, including 
whole-brain knockout (KO), cell-type specific conditional KO (cKO), and brain 
region-specific knockdown. In this review, we revisited the basic properties of 
CUL3 and its function under physiological and pathological conditions. Recent 
clinical studies including case reports and large cohort sequencing studies 
related to CUl3 in NDDs have been summarized. Moreover, we characterized the 
behavioral, electrophysiological, and molecular changes in newly developed Cul3 
deficiency models. This would guide further studies related to Cul3 in CNS and 
provide potential therapeutic targets for Cul3-deficiency-induced NDDs, 
including ASD.

Copyright Â© 2023 Lin, Yang, Wu, Ye, Zhuang, Wang and Tan.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1215110
PMCID: PMC10416632
PMID: 37575562

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.