1. J Gen Physiol. 2023 Oct 2;155(10):e202313375. doi: 10.1085/jgp.202313375. Epub
 2023 Aug 14.

Epilepsy-associated SCN2A (NaV1.2) variants exhibit diverse and complex 
functional properties.

Thompson CH(#)(1), Potet F(#)(1), Abramova TV(1), DeKeyser JM(1), Ghabra NF(1), 
Vanoye CG(1), Millichap JJ(2), George AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Epilepsy Curr. 2024 Jan 17;24(2):126-128. doi: 10.1177/15357597231225565.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Feb 23:2023.02.23.529757. doi: 10.1101/2023.02.23.529757.

Pathogenic variants in voltage-gated sodium (NaV) channel genes including SCN2A, 
encoding NaV1.2, are discovered frequently in neurodevelopmental disorders with 
or without epilepsy. SCN2A is also a high-confidence risk gene for autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD) and nonsyndromic intellectual disability (ID). Previous 
work to determine the functional consequences of SCN2A variants yielded a 
paradigm in which predominantly gain-of-function variants cause neonatal-onset 
epilepsy, whereas loss-of-function variants are associated with ASD and ID. 
However, this framework was derived from a limited number of studies conducted 
under heterogeneous experimental conditions, whereas most disease-associated 
SCN2A variants have not been functionally annotated. We determined the 
functional properties of SCN2A variants using automated patch-clamp recording to 
demonstrate the validity of this method and to examine whether a binary 
classification of variant dysfunction is evident in a larger cohort studied 
under uniform conditions. We studied 28 disease-associated variants and 4 common 
variants using two alternatively spliced isoforms of NaV1.2 expressed in HEK293T 
cells. Automated patch-clamp recording provided a valid high throughput method 
to ascertain detailed functional properties of NaV1.2 variants with concordant 
findings for variants that were previously studied using manual patch clamp. 
Many epilepsy-associated variants in our study exhibited complex patterns of 
gain- and loss-of-functions that are difficult to classify by a simple binary 
scheme. The higher throughput achievable with automated patch clamp enables 
study of variants with greater standardization of recording conditions, freedom 
from operator bias, and enhanced experimental rigor. This approach offers an 
enhanced ability to discern relationships between channel dysfunction and 
neurodevelopmental disorders.

Â© 2023 Thompson et al.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.202313375
PMCID: PMC10424433
PMID: 37578743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: J.J. Millichap reported personal 
fees from Xenon, Praxis, and Biohaven outside the submitted work. A.L. George, 
Jr. reported grants from Praxis Precision Medicines and Neurocrine Biosciences 
during the conduct of the study. No other disclosures were reported.