1. Molecules. 2023 Aug 6;28(15):5914. doi: 10.3390/molecules28155914.

Computer-Aided Drug Design of Novel Derivatives of 
2-Amino-7,9-dihydro-8H-purin-8-one as Potent Pan-Janus JAK3 Inhibitors.

Faris A(1), Ibrahim IM(2), Al Kamaly O(3), Saleh A(3), Elhallaoui M(1).

Author information:
(1)LIMAS, Department of Chemical Sciences, Faculty of Sciences Dhar El Mahraz, 
Sidi Mohamed Ben Abdellah University, Fez 30000, Morocco.
(2)Biophysics Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Cairo 12613, 
Egypt.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Princess Nourah 
Bint Abdulrahman University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) remains one of the most prevalent autoimmune diseases 
worldwide. Janus kinase 3 (JAK3) is an essential enzyme for treating autoimmune 
diseases, including RA. Molecular modeling techniques play a crucial role in the 
search for new drugs by reducing time delays. In this study, the 3D-QSAR 
approach is employed to predict new JAK3 inhibitors. Two robust models, both 
field-based with R2 = 0.93, R = 0.96, and Q2 = 87, and atom-based with R2 = 
0.94, R = 0.97, and Q2 = 86, yielded good results by identifying groups that may 
readily direct their interaction. A reliable pharmacophore model, DHRRR1, was 
provided in this work to enable the clear characterization of chemical features, 
leading to the design of 13 inhibitors with their pIC50 values. The DHRRR1 model 
yielded a validation result with a ROC value of 0.87. Five promising inhibitors 
were selected for further study based on an ADMET analysis of their 
pharmacokinetic properties and covalent docking (CovDock). Compared to the 
FDA-approved drug tofacitinib, the pharmaceutical features, binding affinity and 
stability of the inhibitors were analyzed through CovDock, 300 ns molecular 
dynamics simulations, free energy binding calculations and ADMET predictions. 
The results show that the inhibitors have strong binding affinity, stability and 
favorable pharmaceutical properties. The newly predicted molecules, as JAK3 
inhibitors for the treatment of RA, are promising candidates for use as drugs.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28155914
PMCID: PMC10473238
PMID: 37570884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.