1. EMBO J. 2023 Oct 4;42(19):e113481. doi: 10.15252/embj.2023113481. Epub 2023
Aug  14.

MARCH5-dependent NLRP3 ubiquitination is required for mitochondrial NLRP3-NEK7 
complex formation and NLRP3 inflammasome activation.

Park YJ(#)(1)(2), Dodantenna N(#)(3), Kim Y(#)(1)(2), Kim TH(3), Lee HS(1), Yoo 
YS(1), Heo J(1)(2), Lee JH(1), Kwon MH(4), Kang HC(5), Lee JS(3), Cho H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Ajou University, Suwon, 
Korea.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(5)Department of Physiology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

The NLRP3 inflammasome plays a key role in responding to pathogens, and 
endogenous damage and mitochondria are intensively involved in inflammasome 
activation. The NLRP3 inflammasome forms multiprotein complexes and its 
sequential assembly is important for its activation. Here, we show that NLRP3 is 
ubiquitinated by the mitochondria-associated E3 ligase, MARCH5. Myeloid 
cell-specific March5 conditional knockout (March5 cKO) mice failed to secrete 
IL-1β and IL-18 and exhibited an attenuated mortality rate upon LPS or 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa challenge. Macrophages derived from March5 cKO mice also 
did not produce IL-1β and IL-18 after microbial infection. Mechanistically, 
MARCH5 interacts with the NACHT domain of NLRP3 and promotes K27-linked 
polyubiquitination on K324 and K430 residues of NLRP3. Ubiquitination-defective 
NLRP3 mutants on K324 and K430 residues are not able to bind to NEK7, nor form 
NLRP3 oligomers leading to abortive ASC speck formation and diminished IL-1β 
production. Thus, MARCH5-dependent NLRP3 ubiquitination on the mitochondria is 
required for NLRP3-NEK7 complex formation and NLRP3 oligomerization. We propose 
that the E3 ligase MARCH5 is a regulator of NLRP3 inflammasome activation on the 
mitochondria.

© 2023 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.2023113481
PMCID: PMC10548170
PMID: 37575012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.