1. BMC Genomics. 2023 Aug 16;24(1):460. doi: 10.1186/s12864-023-09561-5.

Rare disease variant curation from literature: assessing gaps with creatine 
transport deficiency in focus.

Lyons EL(1), Watson D(1), Alodadi MS(1), Haugabook SJ(2), Tawa GJ(2), 
Hannah-Shmouni F(3), Porter FD(3), Collins JR(1), Ottinger EA(4), Mudunuri 
US(5).

Author information:
(1)Advanced Biomedical Computational Science, Frederick National Laboratory for 
Cancer Research, Frederick, MD, 21702, USA.
(2)Division of Preclinical Innovation, Therapeutic Development Branch, 
Therapeutics for Rare and Neglected Diseases (TRND) Program, National Center for 
Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
20892, USA.
(3)Division of Translational Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, 20892, USA.
(4)Division of Preclinical Innovation, Therapeutic Development Branch, 
Therapeutics for Rare and Neglected Diseases (TRND) Program, National Center for 
Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
20892, USA. elizabeth.ottinger@nih.gov.
(5)Advanced Biomedical Computational Science, Frederick National Laboratory for 
Cancer Research, Frederick, MD, 21702, USA. uma.mudunuri@nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Approximately 4-8% of the world suffers from a rare disease. Rare 
diseases are often difficult to diagnose, and many do not have approved 
therapies. Genetic sequencing has the potential to shorten the current 
diagnostic process, increase mechanistic understanding, and facilitate research 
on therapeutic approaches but is limited by the difficulty of novel variant 
pathogenicity interpretation and the communication of known causative variants. 
It is unknown how many published rare disease variants are currently accessible 
in the public domain.
RESULTS: This study investigated the translation of knowledge of variants 
reported in published manuscripts to publicly accessible variant databases. 
Variants, symptoms, biochemical assay results, and protein function from 
literature on the SLC6A8 gene associated with X-linked Creatine Transporter 
Deficiency (CTD) were curated and reported as a highly annotated dataset of 
variants with clinical context and functional details. Variants were harmonized, 
their availability in existing variant databases was analyzed and pathogenicity 
assignments were compared with impact algorithm predictions. 24% of the 
pathogenic variants found in PubMed articles were not captured in any database 
used in this analysis while only 65% of the published variants received an 
accurate pathogenicity prediction from at least one impact prediction algorithm.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite being published in the literature, pathogenicity data on 
patient variants may remain inaccessible for genetic diagnosis, therapeutic 
target identification, mechanistic understanding, or hypothesis generation. 
Clinical and functional details presented in the literature are important to 
make pathogenicity assessments. Impact predictions remain imperfect but are 
improving, especially for single nucleotide exonic variants, however such 
predictions are less accurate or unavailable for intronic and multi-nucleotide 
variants. Developing text mining workflows that use natural language processing 
for identifying diseases, genes and variants, along with impact prediction 
algorithms and integrating with details on clinical phenotypes and functional 
assessments might be a promising approach to scale literature mining of variants 
and assigning correct pathogenicity. The curated variants list created by this 
effort includes context details to improve any such efforts on variant curation 
for rare diseases.

Â© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-023-09561-5
PMCID: PMC10433598
PMID: 37587458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.