1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Aug 22;120(34):e2305142120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2305142120. Epub 2023 Aug 16.

Organelle-dependent polyprotein designs enable stoichiometric expression of 
nitrogen fixation components targeted to mitochondria.

Yang J(#)(1), Xiang N(#)(1), Liu Y(1), Guo C(1), Li C(1), Li H(1), Cai S(1), 
Dixon R(2), Wang YP(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Advanced 
Agricultural Sciences and School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 
100871, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, John Innes Centre, NR4 7UH Norwich, 
United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

Introducing nitrogen fixation (nif   ) genes into eukaryotic genomes and 
targeting Nif components to mitochondria or chloroplasts is a promising strategy 
for engineering nitrogen-fixing plants. A prerequisite for achieving nitrogen 
fixation in crops is stable and stoichiometric expression of each component in 
organelles. Previously, we designed a polyprotein-based nitrogenase system 
depending on Tobacco Etch Virus protease (TEVp) to release functional Nif 
components from five polyproteins. Although this system satisfies the demand for 
specific expression ratios of Nif components in Escherichia coli, we encountered 
issues with TEVp cleavage of polyproteins targeted to yeast mitochondria. To 
overcome this obstacle, a version of the Nif polyprotein system was constructed 
by replacing TEVp cleavage sites with minimal peptide sequences, identified by 
knowledge-based engineering, that are susceptible to cleavage by the endogenous 
mitochondrial-processing peptidase. This replacement not only further reduces 
the number of genes required, but also prevents potential precleavage of 
polyproteins outside the target organelle. This version of the polyprotein-based 
nitrogenase system achieved levels of nitrogenase activity in E. coli, 
comparable to those observed with the TEVp-based polyprotein nitrogenase system. 
When applied to yeast mitochondria, stable and balanced expression of Nif 
components was realized. This strategy has potential advantages, not only for 
transferring nitrogen fixation to eukaryotic cells, but also for the engineering 
of other metabolic pathways that require mitochondrial compartmentalization.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2305142120
PMCID: PMC10450427
PMID: 37585462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.