1. Elife. 2023 Aug 17;12:e83975. doi: 10.7554/eLife.83975.

Optogenetic manipulation of neuronal and cardiomyocyte functions in zebrafish 
using microbial rhodopsins and adenylyl cyclases.

Hagio H(#)(1)(2)(3), Koyama W(#)(1), Hosaka S(1), Song AD(1), Narantsatsral 
J(1), Matsuda K(1), Shimizu T(1), Hososhima S(4), Tsunoda SP(4), Kandori H(4), 
Hibi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University, Japan, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya, 
Japan.
(3)Institute for Advanced Research, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.
(4)Department of Life Science and Applied Chemistry, Nagoya Institute of 
Technology, Nagoya, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    doi: 10.1101/2022.10.25.513731.

Even though microbial photosensitive proteins have been used for optogenetics, 
their use should be optimized to precisely control cell and tissue functions in 
vivo. We exploited GtCCR4 and KnChR, cation channelrhodopsins from algae, BeGC1, 
a guanylyl cyclase rhodopsin from a fungus, and photoactivated adenylyl cyclases 
(PACs) from cyanobacteria (OaPAC) or bacteria (bPAC), to control cell functions 
in zebrafish. Optical activation of GtCCR4 and KnChR in the hindbrain 
reticulospinal V2a neurons, which are involved in locomotion, induced swimming 
behavior at relatively short latencies, whereas activation of BeGC1 or PACs 
achieved it at long latencies. Activation of GtCCR4 and KnChR in cardiomyocytes 
induced cardiac arrest, whereas activation of bPAC gradually induced 
bradycardia. KnChR activation led to an increase in intracellular Ca2+ in the 
heart, suggesting that depolarization caused cardiac arrest. These data suggest 
that these optogenetic tools can be used to reveal the function and regulation 
of zebrafish neurons and cardiomyocytes.

Â© 2023, Hagio, Koyama et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.83975
PMCID: PMC10435232
PMID: 37589546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HH, WK, SH, AS, JN, KM, TS, SH, ST, HK, MH No 
competing interests declared