1. Pharmacogenomics J. 2023 Nov;23(6):161-168. doi: 10.1038/s41397-023-00314-x. 
Epub 2023 Aug 16.

Genome-wide association study on pharmacological outcomes of musculoskeletal 
pain in UK Biobank.

Li S(1), Poelmans G(2), van Boekel RLM(3), Coenen MJH(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud 
university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Pain and Palliative Medicine, Radboud Institute 
for Health Sciences, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud 
university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. M.Coenen@erasmusmc.nl.
(5)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands. M.Coenen@erasmusmc.nl.

The pharmacological management of musculoskeletal pain starts with NSAIDs, 
followed by weak or strong opioids until the pain is under control. However, the 
treatment outcome is usually unsatisfying due to inter-individual differences. 
To investigate the genetic component of treatment outcome differences, we 
performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in ~23,000 participants with 
musculoskeletal pain from the UK Biobank. NSAID vs. opioid users were compared 
as a reflection of the treatment outcome of NSAIDs. We identified one 
genome-wide significant hit in chromosome 4 (rs549224715, P = 3.88 × 10-8). 
Suggestive significant (P < 1 × 10-6) loci were functionally annotated to 18 
target genes, including four genes linked to neuropathic pain processes or 
musculoskeletal development. Pathway and network analyses identified 
immunity-related processes and a (putative) central role of EGFR. However, this 
study should be viewed as a first step to elucidate the genetic background of 
musculoskeletal pain treatment.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41397-023-00314-x
PMID: 37587271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]