1. Microb Genom. 2023 Aug;9(8):mgen001083. doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.001083.

Feasibility and clinical utility of local rapid Nanopore influenza A virus whole 
genome sequencing for integrated outbreak management, genotypic resistance 
detection and timely surveillance.

Williams TGS(1)(2), Snell LB(2)(3), Alder C(2), Charalampous T(2), 
Alcolea-Medina A(2)(4), Sehmi JK(4), Al-Yaakoubi N(2), Humayun G(2), Miah S(5), 
Lackenby A(5), Zambon M(5), Batra R(2), Douthwaite S(1), Edgeworth JD(2), Nebbia 
G(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infection, Guy's & St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
UK.
(2)Centre for Clinical Diagnostics & Infectious Disease Research, Guy's & St. 
Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Infection Sciences, Synnovis, London, UK.
(5)United Kingdom Health Security Agency (UKHSA), London, UK.

Rapid respiratory viral whole genome sequencing (WGS) in a clinical setting can 
inform real-time outbreak and patient treatment decisions, but the feasibility 
and clinical utility of influenza A virus (IAV) WGS using Nanopore technology 
has not been demonstrated. A 24 h turnaround Nanopore IAV WGS protocol was 
performed on 128 reverse transcriptase PCR IAV-positive nasopharyngeal samples 
taken over seven weeks of the 2022-2023 winter influenza season, including 25 
from patients with nosocomial IAV infections and 102 from patients attending the 
Emergency Department. WGS results were reviewed collectively alongside clinical 
details for interpretation and reported to clinical teams. All eight segments of 
the IAV genome were recovered for 97/128 samples (75.8 %) and the haemagglutinin 
gene for 117/128 samples (91.4 %). Infection prevention and control identified 
nosocomial IAV infections in 19 patients across five wards. IAV WGS revealed two 
separate clusters on one ward and excluded transmission across different wards 
with contemporaneous outbreaks. IAV WGS also identified neuraminidase inhibitor 
resistance in a persistently infected patient and excluded avian influenza in a 
sample taken from an immunosuppressed patient with a history of travel to 
Singapore which had failed PCR subtyping. Accurate IAV genomes can be generated 
in 24 h using a Nanopore protocol accessible to any laboratory with SARS-CoV-2 
Nanopore sequencing capacity. In addition to replicating reference laboratory 
surveillance results, IAV WGS can identify antiviral resistance and exclude 
avian influenza. IAV WGS also informs management of nosocomial outbreaks, though 
molecular and clinical epidemiology were concordant in this study, limiting the 
impact on decision-making.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.001083
PMCID: PMC10483427
PMID: 37590039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AA-M and JKS are full-time employees of 
Synnovis. JDE holds part-time employment contract with Oxford Nanopore 
Technologies as VP Medical Affairs. Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust 
signed a commercial collaboration agreement with Oxford Nanopore Technology in 
September 2022. TGSW, LBS, CA, TC, NA-Y, GH, SM, AL, MZ, SD and GN have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.