1. Plant Physiol. 2023 Dec 30;194(1):33-50. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiad415.

Enzymes in 3D: Synthesis, remodelling, and hydrolysis of cell wall 
(1,3;1,4)-β-glucans.

Hrmova M(1), Zimmer J(2), Bulone V(3)(4), Fincher GB(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Agriculture, Food and Wine, and the Waite Research Institute, 
University of Adelaide, Glen Osmond, South Australia 5064, Australia.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Physiology and 
Biological Physics, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, 
VA 22908, USA.
(3)College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, Bedford Park, 
South Australia 5042, Australia.
(4)Division of Glycoscience, Department of Chemistry, KTH Royal Institute of 
Technology, Alba Nova University Centre, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

Recent breakthroughs in structural biology have provided valuable new insights 
into enzymes involved in plant cell wall metabolism. More specifically, the 
molecular mechanism of synthesis of (1,3;1,4)-β-glucans, which are widespread in 
cell walls of commercially important cereals and grasses, has been the topic of 
debate and intense research activity for decades. However, an inability to 
purify these integral membrane enzymes or apply transgenic approaches without 
interpretative problems associated with pleiotropic effects has presented 
barriers to attempts to define their synthetic mechanisms. Following the 
demonstration that some members of the CslF sub-family of GT2 family enzymes 
mediate (1,3;1,4)-β-glucan synthesis, the expression of the corresponding genes 
in a heterologous system that is free of background complications has now been 
achieved. Biochemical analyses of the (1,3;1,4)-β-glucan synthesized in vitro, 
combined with 3-dimensional (3D) cryogenic-electron microscopy and AlphaFold 
protein structure predictions, have demonstrated how a single CslF6 enzyme, 
without exogenous primers, can incorporate both (1,3)- and (1,4)-β-linkages into 
the nascent polysaccharide chain. Similarly, 3D structures of xyloglucan 
endo-transglycosylases and (1,3;1,4)-β-glucan endo- and exohydrolases have 
allowed the mechanisms of (1,3;1,4)-β-glucan modification and degradation to be 
defined. X-ray crystallography and multi-scale modeling of a broad specificity 
GH3 β-glucan exohydrolase recently revealed a previously unknown and remarkable 
molecular mechanism with reactant trajectories through which a polysaccharide 
exohydrolase can act with a processive action pattern. The availability of 
high-quality protein 3D structural predictions should prove invaluable for 
defining structures, dynamics, and functions of other enzymes involved in plant 
cell wall metabolism in the immediate future.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Society of Plant Biologists.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiad415
PMCID: PMC10762513
PMID: 37594400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
could identify no conflicts of interest.