1. China CDC Wkly. 2023 Jul 28;5(30):664-671. doi: 10.46234/ccdcw2023.129.

Changes in HIV-1 Subtypes/Sub-Subtypes, and Transmitted Drug Resistance Among 
ART-Na誰ve HIV-Infected Individuals - China, 2004-2022.

Liu X(1), Wang D(1), Hu J(1), Song C(1), Liao L(1), Feng Y(1), Li D(1), Xing 
H(1), Ruan Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease Prevention and Control (SKLID), 
National Center for AIDS/STD Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention (China CDC), Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Beijing, China.

INTRODUCTION: The efficacy of treatment and clinical outcomes may be jeopardized 
by factors such as transmitted drug resistance (TDR) and the genetic diversity 
of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). This comprehensive study 
aims to examine the alterations in HIV-1 subtypes or sub-subtypes and TDR among 
Chinese individuals, who have been diagnosed with HIV infection and are 
previously untreated with antiretroviral therapy (ART), across the span of 2004 
to 2022.
METHODS: Sequences of the HIV-1 pol gene region were obtained from ART-na誰ve 
HIV-positive individuals across 31 provincial-level administrative divisions 
between 2004 and 2022. To predict susceptibility to 12 antiretroviral drugs, the 
research utilized the Stanford HIV Drug Resistance Database. The 
Cochran-Armitage trend test facilitated the analysis of changes in HIV-1 
subtype/sub-subtype prevalence and TDR. This analysis was conducted in alignment 
with the progression of the National Free Antiretroviral Treatment Program's 
stages between 2004 and 2022.
RESULTS: Among the 57,902 ART-na誰ve individuals infected with HIV, there was a 
notable decline in the prevalence of CRF01_AE, B, and C from 37.3%, 24.1%, and 
1.3% respectively in 2004-2007 to 29.4%, 7.3%, and 0.2% respectively in 
2020-2022. Simultaneously, a significant increase was observed in the 
proportions of CRF07_BC, CRF08_BC, CRF55_01B, other CRFs, and URFs, from 24.1%, 
11.5%, 0.1%, 0.4%, and 0.9% respectively in 2004-2007 to 40.8%, 11.5%, 3.8%, 
3.7%, and 2.8% respectively in 2020-2022 (all P<0.001 for trend). The prevalence 
of TDR to overall, non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI), 
efavirenz, and nevirapine also significantly increased from 2.6%, 1.8%, 1.6%, 
and 1.8% respectively in 2004-2007 to 7.8%, 6.7%, 6.3%, and 6.7% respectively in 
2020-2022 (all P<0.001 for trend). However, there were no meaningful changes in 
the TDR prevalence of nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor and protease 
inhibitor. Notably, in 2020-2022, the overall TDR prevalence exceeded 15% in 
Xinjiang.
CONCLUSIONS: The total prevalence of TDR in China has achieved a moderate level 
(7.8%) from 2020 to 2022, with NNRTI resistance standing prominently at 6.7%. 
Consequently, measures to curb TDR are urgently required, particularly among 
ART-na誰ve HIV-infected individuals in China.

Copyright and License information: Editorial Office of CCDCW, Chinese Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention 2023.

DOI: 10.46234/ccdcw2023.129
PMCID: PMC10427497
PMID: 37593123

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest.