1. Development. 2023 Sep 15;150(18):dev201868. doi: 10.1242/dev.201868. Epub 2023
 Sep 28.

Frizzled2 receives WntA signaling during butterfly wing pattern formation.

Hanly JJ(1)(2), Loh LS(1), Mazo-Vargas A(1), Rivera-Miranda TS(3), Livraghi 
L(1)(2)(4), Tendolkar A(1), Day CR(1)(5), Liutikaite N(1), Earls EA(1), Corning 
OBWH(1), D'Souza N(1), Hermina-Perez JJ(1), Mehta C(1), Ainsworth JA(6), Rossi 
M(7), Papa R(3)(8)(9), McMillan WO(2), Perry MW(6), Martin A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The George Washington University, 
Washington, DC 20052, USA.
(2)Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Gamboa 0843-03092, Panama.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico at Río Piedras, San Juan 
00931, Puerto Rico.
(4)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK.
(5)Epigenetics and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Durham, NC 27708, USA.
(6)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(7)Division of Evolutionary Biology, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich 80539, 
Germany.
(8)Molecular Sciences and Research Center, University of Puerto Rico, San Juan 
00931, Puerto Rico.
(9)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche della Vita e della Sostenibilità Ambientale, 
Università di Parma, Parma 43121, Italy.

Butterfly color patterns provide visible and biodiverse phenotypic readouts of 
the patterning processes. Although the secreted ligand WntA has been shown to 
instruct the color pattern formation in butterflies, its mode of reception 
remains elusive. Butterfly genomes encode four homologs of the Frizzled-family 
of Wnt receptors. Here, we show that CRISPR mosaic knockouts of frizzled2 (fz2) 
phenocopy the color pattern effects of WntA loss of function in multiple 
nymphalids. Whereas WntA mosaic clones result in intermediate patterns of 
reduced size, fz2 clones are cell-autonomous, consistent with a morphogen 
function. Shifts in expression of WntA and fz2 in WntA crispant pupae show that 
they are under positive and negative feedback, respectively. Fz1 is required for 
Wnt-independent planar cell polarity in the wing epithelium. Fz3 and Fz4 show 
phenotypes consistent with Wnt competitive-antagonist functions in vein 
formation (Fz3 and Fz4), wing margin specification (Fz3), and color patterning 
in the Discalis and Marginal Band Systems (Fz4). Overall, these data show that 
the WntA/Frizzled2 morphogen-receptor pair forms a signaling axis that instructs 
butterfly color patterning and shed light on the functional diversity of insect 
Frizzled receptors.

© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.201868
PMCID: PMC10560568
PMID: 37602496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.