1. Zookeys. 2023 Aug 11;1174:219-272. doi: 10.3897/zookeys.1174.101251.
eCollection  2023.

﻿Integrative taxonomic revision of the genera Nesticella and Howaia in Japan 
with the description of five new species (Araneae, Nesticidae, Nesticellini).

Ballarin F(1)(2), Eguchi K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Systematic Zoology Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo 
Metropolitan University, 1-1 Minami-Osawa, Hachioji-shi, 192-0397, Tokyo, Japan 
Tokyo Metropolitan University Tokyo Japan.
(2)Department of Zoology, Museo di Storia Naturale of Verona, Lungadige Porta 
Vittoria, 9, I-37129 Verona, Italy Museo di Storia Naturale of Verona Verona 
Italy.
(3)Department of International Health and Medical Anthropology, Institute of 
Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki-shi, 852-8523, 
Nagasaki, Japan Nagasaki University Nagasaki City Japan.

The Japanese species of the genera Nesticella Lehtinen & Saaristo, 1980 and 
Howaia Lehtinen & Saaristo, 1980 (Araneae, Nesticidae, Nesticellini) are revised 
using an integrative taxonomic approach. Their morphology, phylogenetic position 
within the genera, assignment to species groups, and distribution in mainland 
Japan and the Ryukyu islands are discussed herein. A phylogenetic and species 
delimitation analysis was conducted to confirm the boundaries between the 
putative species that were initially discriminated based on external and genital 
morphology. As a result of the present study, six species of Nesticella and 
three species of Howaia are proposed for the fauna of Japan based on the 
combined results of morphology and molecular analyses. Male and female of the 
previously known species H.mogera (Yaginuma, 1972), N.brevipes (Yaginuma, 1970), 
and N.okinawaensis (Yaginuma, 1979) are redescribed and illustrated using type 
specimens or specimens collected at the type locality. Nesticellaterrestris 
(Yaginuma, 1970) is resurrected as a valid species and distinguished from the 
closely related N.brevipes based on morphological and molecular evidence. The 
male of N.terrestris is described for the first time. We herein describe three 
new species of Nesticella and two new species of Howaia from different islands 
in the Ryukyu Archipelago, southwest Japan: N.insulanasp. nov. (♂, ♀) from 
Yonaguni-jima Island, N.occultasp. nov. (♀) from Ishigaki-jima Island, 
N.silvicolasp. nov. (♂, ♀) from Yakushima Island, H.albasp. nov. (♂, ♀) from 
Miyako-jima Island and H.subterraneasp. nov. (♀) from Okinoerabu-jima Island. 
Nesticellaoccultasp. nov., H.albasp. nov. and H.subterraneasp. nov. dwell 
exclusively in caves and show extensive morphological adaptation to subterranean 
life.

Francesco Ballarin, Katsuyuki Eguchi.

DOI: 10.3897/zookeys.1174.101251
PMCID: PMC10439460
PMID: 37602201

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.