1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Aug 2;14:1187819. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1187819. 
eCollection 2023.

Alleviation of hippocampal necroptosis and neuroinflammation by NecroX-7 
treatment after acute seizures.

Roh Y(1), Lee SB(2), Kim M(1), Kim MH(2), Kim HJ(3), Cho KO(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Medical Laser, Graduate School, Dankook University, Cheonan, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Center for Human Risk 
Assessment, Dankook University, Cheonan, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Catholic Neuroscience Institute, Institute for 
Aging and Metabolic Diseases, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Biomedicine and Health Sciences, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is one of the most common neurological disorders, 
but still one-third of patients cannot be properly treated by current 
medication. Thus, we investigated the therapeutic effects of a novel small 
molecule, NecroX-7, in TLE using both a low [Mg2+]o-induced epileptiform 
activity model and a mouse model of pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus (SE). 
NecroX-7 post-treatment enhanced the viability of primary hippocampal neurons 
exposed to low [Mg2+]o compared to controls in an MTT assay. Application of 
NecroX-7 after pilocarpine-induced SE also reduced the number of degenerating 
neurons labelled with Fluoro-Jade B. Immunocytochemistry and 
immunohistochemistry showed that NecroX-7 post-treatment significantly 
alleviated ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba1) intensity and 
immunoreactive area, while the attenuation of reactive astrocytosis by glial 
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) staining was observed in cultured hippocampal 
neurons. However, NecroX-7-mediated morphologic changes of astrocytes were seen 
in both in vitro and in vivo models of TLE. Finally, western blot analysis 
demonstrated that NecroX-7 post-treatment after acute seizures could decrease 
the expression of mixed lineage kinase domain-like pseudokinase (MLKL) and 
phosphorylated MLKL (p-MLKL), markers for necroptosis. Taken all together, 
NecroX-7 has potential as a novel medication for TLE with its neuroprotective, 
anti-inflammatory, and anti-necroptotic effects.

Copyright Â© 2023 Roh, Lee, Kim, Kim, Kim and Cho.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1187819
PMCID: PMC10433749
PMID: 37601059

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.