1. PLoS Genet. 2023 Aug 21;19(8):e1010733. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010733. 
eCollection 2023 Aug.

Beyond a PPR-RNA recognition code: Many aspects matter for the multi-targeting 
properties of RNA editing factor PPR56.

Yang Y(1), Ritzenhofen K(1), Otrzonsek J(1), Xie J(1), Schallenberg-Rüdinger 
M(1), Knoop V(1).

Author information:
(1)IZMB-Institut für Zelluläre und Molekulare Botanik, Abteilung Molekulare 
Evolution, Universität Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The mitochondrial C-to-U RNA editing factor PPR56 of the moss Physcomitrium 
patens is an RNA-binding pentatricopeptide repeat protein equipped with a 
terminal DYW-type cytidine deaminase domain. Transferred into Escherichia coli, 
PPR56 works faithfully on its two native RNA editing targets, nad3eU230SL and 
nad4eU272SL, and also converts cytidines into uridines at over 100 off-targets 
in the bacterial transcriptome. Accordingly, PPR56 is attractive for detailed 
mechanistic studies in the heterologous bacterial setup, allowing for scoring 
differential RNA editing activities of many target and protein variants in 
reasonable time. Here, we report (i) on the effects of numerous individual and 
combined PPR56 protein and target modifications, (ii) on the spectrum of 
off-target C-to-U editing in the bacterial background transcriptome for PPR56 
and two variants engineered for target re-direction and (iii) on combinations of 
targets in tandem or separately at the 5'- and 3'-ends of large mRNAs. The 
latter experimentation finds enhancement of RNA editing at weak targets in many 
cases, including cox3eU290SF as a new candidate mitogenome target. We conclude 
that C-to-U RNA editing can be much enhanced by transcript features also outside 
the region ultimately targeted by PPRs of a plant editing factor, possibly 
facilitated by its enrichment or scanning along transcripts.

Copyright: © 2023 Yang et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010733
PMCID: PMC10482289
PMID: 37603555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.