1. DNA (Basel). 2022 Dec;2(4):264-278. doi: 10.3390/dna2040019. Epub 2022 Nov 11.

An Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay for the Detection of Mitochondrial 
DNA-Protein Cross-Links from Mammalian Cells.

Xu W(1), Zhao L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, 
California, 92521, United States.
(2)Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program, University of California, 
Riverside, Riverside, California, 92521, United States.

DNA-Protein cross-links (DPCs) are cytotoxic DNA lesions with a protein 
covalently bound to the DNA. Although much has been learned about the formation, 
repair, and biological consequences of DPCs in the nucleus, little is known 
regarding mitochondrial DPCs. This is due in part to the lack of robust and 
specific methods to measure mitochondrial DPCs. Herein, we reported an 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based method for detecting 
mitochondrial DPCs formed between DNA and mitochondrial transcription factor A 
(TFAM) in cultured human cells. To optimize the purification and detection 
workflow, we prepared model TFAM-DPCs via Schiff base chemistry using 
recombinant human TFAM and a DNA substrate containing an abasic (AP) lesion. We 
optimized the isolation of TFAM-DPCs using commercial silica gel-based columns 
to achieve a high recovery yield for DPCs. We evaluated the microplate, 
DNA-coating solution, and HRP substrate for specific and sensitive detection of 
TFAM-DPCs. Additionally, we optimized the mtDNA isolation procedure to eliminate 
almost all nuclear DNA contaminants. For proof of concept, we detected the 
different levels of TFAM-DPCs in mtDNA from HEK293 cells under different 
biological conditions. The method is based on commercially available materials 
and can be amended to detect other types of DPCs in mitochondria.

DOI: 10.3390/dna2040019
PMCID: PMC10438828
PMID: 37601565

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.