1. Life (Basel). 2023 Jul 29;13(8):1655. doi: 10.3390/life13081655.

Voltage-Gated Na(+) Channels in Alzheimer's Disease: Physiological Roles and 
Therapeutic Potential.

Baumgartner TJ(1), Haghighijoo Z(1), Goode NA(1), Dvorak NM(1), Arman P(1), 
Laezza F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, The University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia and is classically 
characterized by two major histopathological abnormalities: extracellular 
plaques composed of amyloid beta (AÎ²) and intracellular hyperphosphorylated tau. 
Due to the progressive nature of the disease, it is of the utmost importance to 
develop disease-modifying therapeutics that tackle AD pathology in its early 
stages. Attenuation of hippocampal hyperactivity, one of the earliest neuronal 
abnormalities observed in AD brains, has emerged as a promising strategy to 
ameliorate cognitive deficits and abate the spread of neurotoxic species. This 
aberrant hyperactivity has been attributed in part to the dysfunction of 
voltage-gated Na+ (Nav) channels, which are central mediators of neuronal 
excitability. Therefore, targeting Nav channels is a promising strategy for 
developing disease-modifying therapeutics that can correct aberrant neuronal 
phenotypes in early-stage AD. This review will explore the role of Nav channels 
in neuronal function, their connections to AD pathology, and their potential as 
therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.3390/life13081655
PMCID: PMC10455313
PMID: 37629512

Conflict of interest statement: F.L. is the founder and president of IonTx Inc., 
a start-up company focusing on developing regulators of voltage-gated Na+ 
channels.