1. Toxins (Basel). 2023 Aug 14;15(8):504. doi: 10.3390/toxins15080504.

A Novel Therapeutic Formulation for the Improved Treatment of Indian Red 
Scorpion (Mesobuthus tamulus) Venom-Induced Toxicity-Tested in Caenorhabditis 
elegans and Rodent Models.

Das B(1), Madhubala D(1)(2), Mahanta S(3), Patra A(2), Puzari U(1), Khan MR(2), 
Mukherjee AK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Microbial Biotechnology and Protein Research Laboratory, Department of 
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Tezpur 784028, Assam, 
India.
(2)Division of Life Sciences, Institute of Advanced Study in Science and 
Technology, Vigyan Path, Garchuk, Paschim Boragaon, Guwahati 781035, Assam, 
India.
(3)National Institute of Electronics and Information Technology (NIELIT), 
Guwahati 781008, Assam, India.

Indian Red Scorpion (Mesobuthus tamulus) stings are a neglected public health 
problem in tropical and sub-tropical countries, including India. The drawbacks 
of conventional therapies using commercial anti-scorpion antivenom (ASA) and 
Î±1-adrenoreceptor antagonists (AAA) have prompted us to search for an adequate 
formulation to improve treatment against M. tamulus stings. Novel therapeutic 
drug formulations (TDF) of low doses of commercial ASA, AAA, and ascorbic acid 
have remarkably improved in neutralising the in vivo toxic effects of M. tamulus 
venom (MTV) tested in Caenorhabditis elegans and Wistar strain albino rats in 
vivo models. The neutralisation of MTV-induced production of free radicals, 
alteration of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential, and upregulated 
expression of genes involved in apoptosis, detoxification, and stress response 
in C. elegans by TDF surpassed the same effect shown by individual components of 
the TDF. Further, TDF efficiently neutralized the MTV-induced increase in blood 
glucose level within 30 to 60 min post-treatment, organ tissue damage, necrosis, 
and pulmonary oedema in Wistar rats, indicating its clinical application for 
effecting treating M. tamulus envenomation. This study demonstrates for the 
first time that C. elegans can be a model organism for screening the 
neutralization potency of the drug molecules against a neurotoxic scorpion 
venom.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins15080504
PMCID: PMC10467153
PMID: 37624261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.