1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2023 Aug 3;12(8):1283. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics12081283.

Site Mutation Improves the Expression and Antimicrobial Properties of Fungal 
Defense.

Hao Y(1)(2)(3), Teng D(1)(2)(3), Mao R(1)(2)(3), Yang N(1)(2)(3), Wang 
J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Gene Engineering Laboratory, Feed Research Institute, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, 12 Zhongguancun Nandajie St., Haidian District, Beijing 
100081, China.
(2)Innovative Team of Antimicrobial Peptides and Alternatives to Antibiotics, 
Feed Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 12 
Zhongguancun Nandajie St., Haidian District, Beijing 100081, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Feed Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, Beijing 100081, China.

Although antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have highly desirable intrinsic 
characteristics in their commercial product development as new antimicrobials, 
the limitations of AMPs from experimental to scale development include the low 
oral bioavailability, and high production costs due to inadequate in vitro/in 
vivo gene expression- and low scale. Plectasin has good bactericidal activity 
against Staphylococcus and Streptococcus, and the selective bactericidal 
activity greatly reduces the damage to the micro-ecosystem when applied in vivo. 
However, its expression level was relatively low (748.63 mg/L). In view of these 
situations, this study will optimize and modify the structure of Plectasin, 
hoping to obtain candidates with high expression, no/low toxicity, and maintain 
desirable antibacterial activity. Through sequence alignment, Plectasin was used 
as a template to introduce the degenerate bases, and the screening library was 
constructed. After three different levels of screening, the candidate sequence 
PN7 was obtained, and its total protein yield in the supernatant was 5.53 g/L, 
with the highest value so far for the variants or constructs from the same 
ancestor source. PN7 had strong activity against several species of 
Gram-positive bacteria (MIC value range 1~16 μg/mL). It was relatively stable in 
various conditions in vitro; in addition, the peptide showed no toxicity to mice 
for 1 week after intraperitoneal injection. Meanwhile, PN7 kills Staphylococcus 
aureus ATCC 43300 with a mode of a quicker (>99% S. aureus was killed within 2 
h, whereas vancomycin at 2× MIC was 8 h.) and longer PAE period. The findings 
indicate that PN7 may be a novel promising antimicrobial agent, and this study 
also provides a model or an example for the design, modification, or 
reconstruction of novel AMPs and their derivatives.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics12081283
PMCID: PMC10451632
PMID: 37627703

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.