1. Biology (Basel). 2023 Jul 26;12(8):1047. doi: 10.3390/biology12081047.

Protein Kinase C at the Crossroad of Mutations, Cancer, Targeted Therapy and 
Immune Response.

Aquino A(1), Bianchi N(2), Terrazzan A(2)(3), Franzese O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, 00133 Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, 
Italy.
(3)Laboratory for Advanced Therapy Technologies (LTTA), University of Ferrara, 
44121 Ferrara, Italy.

The frequent PKC dysregulations observed in many tumors have made these enzymes 
natural targets for anticancer applications. Nevertheless, this considerable 
interest in the development of PKC modulators has not led to the expected 
therapeutic benefits, likely due to the complex biological activities regulated 
by PKC isoenzymes, often playing ambiguous and protective functions, further 
driven by the occurrence of mutations. The structure, regulation and functions 
of PKCs have been extensively covered in other publications. Herein, we focused 
on PKC alterations mostly associated with complete functional loss. We also 
addressed the modest yet encouraging results obtained targeting PKC in selected 
malignancies and the more frequent negative clinical outcomes. The reported 
observations advocate the need for more selective molecules and a better 
understanding of the involved pathways. Furthermore, we underlined the most 
relevant immune mechanisms controlled by PKC isoforms potentially impacting the 
immune checkpoint inhibitor blockade-mediated immune recovery. We believe that a 
comprehensive examination of the molecular features of the tumor 
microenvironment might improve clinical outcomes by tailoring PKC modulation. 
This approach can be further supported by the identification of potential 
response biomarkers, which may indicate patients who may benefit from the 
manipulation of distinctive PKC isoforms.

DOI: 10.3390/biology12081047
PMCID: PMC10451643
PMID: 37626933

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.