1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Aug 11;14(8):1608. doi: 10.3390/genes14081608.

Next-Generation Sequencing for Screening Analysis of Cystic Fibrosis: Spectrum 
and Novel Variants in a South-Central Italian Cohort.

De Paolis E(1)(2), Tilocca B(3), Lombardi C(2), De Bonis M(1), Concolino P(1), 
Onori ME(1), Ricciardi Tenore C(1), Perrucci A(1), Roncada P(3), Capoluongo 
E(4)(5), Urbani A(1)(2), Minucci A(1), Santonocito C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departmental Unit of Molecular and Genomic Diagnostics, Fondazione 
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Basic Biotechnological Sciences, Intensivological and 
Perioperative Clinics, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Health Science, University "Magna Graecia" of Catanzaro, 88100 
Catanzaro, Italy.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University 
Federico II, 80138 Naples, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical Pathology and Genomics, Ospedale Cannizzaro, 95021 
Catania, Italy.

The incidence of cystic fibrosis (CF) and the spectrum of cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene variants differ among geographic 
regions. Differences in CF carrier distribution are also reported among Italian 
regions. We described the spectrum of the CFTR variants observed in a large 
group of subjects belonging from central-southern Italy. We also provide a 
predictive evaluation of the novel variants identified. CFTR screening was 
performed in a south-central Italian cohort of 770 subjects. We adopted a 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) approach using the Devyser CFTR NGS kit on the 
Illumina MiSeq System coupled with Amplicon Suite data analysis. Bioinformatics 
evaluation of the impact of novel variants was described. Overall, the presence 
of at least one alternative allele in the CFTR gene was recorded for 23% of the 
subjects, with a carrier frequency of CF pathogenic variants of 1:12. The 
largest sub-group corresponded to the heterozygous carriers of a variant with a 
conflicting interpretation of pathogenicity. The common CFTR p.(Phe508del) 
pathogenic variants were identified in 37% of mutated subjects. Bioinformatics 
prediction supported a potential damaging effect for the three novel CFTR 
variants identified: p.(Leu1187Phe), p.(Pro22Thr), and c.744-3C > G. NGS applied 
to CF screening had the benefit of: effectively identifying asymptomatic 
carriers. It lies in a wide overview of CFTR variants and gives a comprehensive 
picture of the carrier prevalence. The identification of a high number of 
unclassified variants may represent a challenge whilst at the same time being of 
interest and relevance for clinicians.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14081608
PMCID: PMC10454170
PMID: 37628659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.