1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Aug 18;15(16):4173. doi: 10.3390/cancers15164173.

Small Molecules against Metastatic Tumors: Concrete Perspectives and Shattered 
Dreams.

Serra M(1), Rubes D(1), Schinelli S(1), Paolillo M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Sciences, University of Pavia, Viale Taramelli 12, 27100 
Pavia, Italy.

Metastasis is the main cause of anti-cancer therapy failure, leading to 
unfavorable prognosis for patients. The true challenge to increase cancer 
patient life expectancy by making cancer a chronic disease with periodic but 
manageable relapses relies on the development of efficient therapeutic 
strategies specifically directed against key targets in the metastatic process. 
Traditional chemotherapy with classical alkylating agents, microtubule 
inhibitors, and antimetabolites has demonstrated its limited efficacy against 
metastatic cells due to their capacity to select chemo-resistant cell 
populations that undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), thus 
promoting the colonization of distant sites that, in turn, sustain the initial 
metastatic process. This scenario has prompted efforts aimed at discovering a 
wide variety of small molecules and biologics as potential anti-metastatic drugs 
directed against more specific targets known to be involved in the various 
stages of metastasis. In this short review, we give an overview of the most 
recent advances related to important families of antimetastatic small molecules: 
intracellular tyrosine kinase inhibitors, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, 
KRAS inhibitors, and integrin antagonists. Although the majority of these small 
molecules are not yet approved and not available in the drug market, any 
information related to their stage of development could represent a precious and 
valuable tool to identify new targets in the endless fight against metastasis.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15164173
PMCID: PMC10453213
PMID: 37627201

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.