1. Toxins (Basel). 2023 Aug 2;15(8):486. doi: 10.3390/toxins15080486.

Mycolactone A vs. B: Multiscale Simulations Reveal the Roles of Localization and 
Association in Isomer-Specific Toxicity.

Nguyen JDM(1), da Hora GCA(1), Swanson JMJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 May 22:2023.05.19.541532. doi: 10.1101/2023.05.19.541532.

Mycolactone is an exotoxin produced by Mycobacterium ulcerans that causes the 
neglected tropical skin disease Buruli ulcer. This toxin inhibits the Sec61 
translocon in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), preventing the host cell from 
producing several secretory and transmembrane proteins, resulting in cytotoxic 
and immunomodulatory effects. Interestingly, only one of the two dominant 
isoforms of mycolactone is cytotoxic. Here, we investigate the origin of this 
specificity by performing extensive molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with 
enhanced free energy sampling to query the association trends of the two 
isoforms with both the Sec61 translocon, using two distinct cryo-electron 
microscopy (cryo-EM) models as references, and the ER membrane, which serves as 
a toxin reservoir prior to association. Our results suggest that mycolactone B 
(the cytotoxic isoform) has a stronger association with the ER membrane than 
mycolactone A due to more favorable interactions with membrane lipids and water 
molecules. This could increase the reservoir of toxin proximal to the Sec61 
translocon. In one model of Sec61 inhibited by mycolactone, we find that isomer 
B interacts more closely with residues thought to play a key role in signal 
peptide recognition and, thus, are essential for subsequent protein 
translocation. In the other model, we find that isomer B interacts more closely 
with the lumenal and lateral gates of the translocon, the dynamics of which are 
essential for protein translocation. These interactions induce a more closed 
conformation, which has been suggested to block signal peptide insertion and 
subsequent protein translocation. Collectively, these findings suggest that 
isomer B's unique cytotoxicity is a consequence of both increased localization 
to the ER membrane and channel-locking association with the Sec61 translocon, 
facets that could be targeted in the development of Buruli Ulcer diagnostics and 
Sec61-targeted therapeutics.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins15080486
PMCID: PMC10467071
PMID: 37624243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.