1. Cells. 2023 Aug 10;12(16):2041. doi: 10.3390/cells12162041.

The Role of c-Abl Tyrosine Kinase in Brain and Its Pathologies.

Motaln H(1), Rogelj B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Jozef Stefan Institute, 1000 Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, University of Ljubljana, 1000 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Differentiated status, low regenerative capacity and complex signaling make 
neuronal tissues highly susceptible to translating an imbalance in cell 
homeostasis into cell death. The high rate of neurodegenerative diseases in the 
elderly population confirms this. The multiple and divergent signaling cascades 
downstream of the various stress triggers challenge researchers to identify the 
central components of the stress-induced signaling pathways that cause 
neurodegeneration. Because of their critical role in cell homeostasis, kinases 
have emerged as one of the key regulators. Among kinases, non-receptor tyrosine 
kinase (Abelson kinase) c-Abl appears to be involved in both the normal 
development of neural tissue and the development of neurodegenerative 
pathologies when abnormally expressed or activated. However, exactly how c-Abl 
mediates the progression of neurodegeneration remains largely unexplored. Here, 
we summarize recent findings on the involvement of c-Abl in normal and abnormal 
processes in nervous tissue, focusing on neurons, astrocytes and microglial 
cells, with particular reference to molecular events at the interface between 
stress signaling, DNA damage, and metabolic regulation. Because inhibition of 
c-Abl has neuroprotective effects and can prevent neuronal death, we believe 
that an integrated view of c-Abl signaling in neurodegeneration could lead to 
significantly improved treatment of the disease.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12162041
PMCID: PMC10453230
PMID: 37626851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.