1. Viruses. 2023 Aug 4;15(8):1694. doi: 10.3390/v15081694.

Multiple Vaccines and Strategies for Pandemic Preparedness of Avian Influenza 
Virus.

Xu H(1)(2), Zhu S(1), Govinden R(2), Chenia HY(2).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for High-Tech Research and Development of Veterinary 
Biopharmaceuticals, Jiangsu Agri-Animal Husbandry Vocational College, Taizhou 
225300, China.
(2)Discipline of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture, 
Engineering and Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban 4001, South Africa.

Avian influenza viruses (AIV) are a continuous cause of concern due to their 
pandemic potential and devasting effects on poultry, birds, and human health. 
The low pathogenic avian influenza virus has the potential to evolve into a 
highly pathogenic avian influenza virus, resulting in its rapid spread and 
significant outbreaks in poultry. Over the years, a wide array of traditional 
and novel strategies has been implemented to prevent the transmission of AIV in 
poultry. Mass vaccination is still an economical and effective approach to 
establish immune protection against clinical virus infection. At present, some 
AIV vaccines have been licensed for large-scale production and use in the 
poultry industry; however, other new types of AIV vaccines are currently under 
research and development. In this review, we assess the recent progress 
surrounding the various types of AIV vaccines, which are based on the classical 
and next-generation platforms. Additionally, the delivery systems for nucleic 
acid vaccines are discussed, since these vaccines have attracted significant 
attention following their significant role in the fight against COVID-19. We 
also provide a general introduction to the dendritic targeting strategy, which 
can be used to enhance the immune efficiency of AIV vaccines. This review may be 
beneficial for the avian influenza research community, providing ideas for the 
design and development of new AIV vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/v15081694
PMCID: PMC10459121
PMID: 37632036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.