1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2023 Aug 10;11:1251595. doi: 
10.3389/fbioe.2023.1251595. eCollection 2023.

Highly sensitive detection of CYFRA21-1 with a SERS sensing platform based on 
the MBs enrichment strategy and antibody-DNA-mediated CHA amplification.

Bao X(1), Wang S(1), Liu X(2), Li G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Affiliated 
Hospital of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Xishan People's 
Hospital of Wuxi City, Wuxi, China.

Laryngeal carcinoma (LC) is the second most common malignant tumor of the head 
and neck. Due to its insidious nature, most patients have developed to the 
middle and late stages by the time they are diagnosed, missing the best 
treatment period. Thus, early detection, diagnosis and treatment are crucial to 
improve the prognosis of LC and enhance the quality of life of patients. In this 
study, a surface-enhanced Raman (SERS) sensing platform was developed by 
combining the magnetic beads (MBs) enrichment strategy and the 
antibody-DNA-mediated catalytic hairpin self-assembly (CHA) signal amplification 
technology. 4-Mercaptobenzoic acid (4-MBA) and hairpin DNA 1 (hpDNA1) were 
modified onto the surface of gold nanobipyramids (GNBPs) as SERS nanotags. 
Hairpin DNA 2 (hpDNA2) modified MBs were used as capture nanoprobes. Under the 
action of CHA and magnet-induced MBs enrichment, GNBPs can be assembled on the 
surface of MBs, forming high-density "hot spots" for the SERS signal 
enhancement. The results showed that the SERS sensing platform has the 
advantages of high sensitivity, high specificity and high reproducibility, with 
the limit of detection (LOD) low to pg/mL level. The expression level of 
CYFRA21-1 in serum of LC patients and healthy controls was successfully detected 
by the SERS sensing platform. The accuracy of the SERS results was verified by 
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Therefore, this SERS sensor can be 
used for the detection of CYFRA21-1 in serum, providing a simple and reliable 
new method for the early diagnosis of LC.

Copyright Â© 2023 Bao, Wang, Liu and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2023.1251595
PMCID: PMC10449459
PMID: 37635996

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.