1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Aug 15:2023.08.12.553096. doi: 
10.1101/2023.08.12.553096.

Near-Infrared Photothermal Ablation of Biofilms using ProteinFunctionalized Gold 
Nanospheres with a Tunable Temperature Response.

Amarasekara DL(1), Kariyawasam CS(1), Hejny MA(1), Torgall VB(2), Werfel 
TA(2)(3)(4)(5), Fitzkee NC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Mississippi, University, 
MS.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Mississippi, University, 
MS.
(4)Department of BioMolecular Sciences, University of Mississippi, University, 
MS.
(5)Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson, MS.

Update in
    ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2024 Jan 31;16(4):4321-4332. doi: 
10.1021/acsami.3c13288.

Temperature-responsive nanostructures with high antimicrobial efficacy are 
attractive for therapeutic applications against multi-drug-resistant bacteria. 
Here, we report temperature-responsive nanospheres (TRNs) that are engineered to 
undergo self-association and agglomeration above a tunable transition 
temperature (Tt). Temperature-responsive behavior of the nanoparticles is 
obtained by functionalizing citrate-capped, spherical gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) 
with elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs). Using protein design principles, we 
achieve a broad range of attainable Tt values and photothermal conversion 
efficiencies (η). Two approaches were used to adjust this range: First, by 
altering the position of the cysteine residue used to attach ELP to the AuNP, we 
attained a Tt range from 34-42 °C. Then, functionalizing the AuNP with an 
additional small globular protein, we were able to extend this range to 34-50 
°C. Under near-infrared (NIR) light exposure, all TRNs exhibited reversible 
agglomeration. Moreover, they showed enhanced photothermal conversion efficiency 
in their agglomerated state relative to the dispersed state. Despite their 
spherical shape, TRNs have a photothermal conversion efficiency approaching that 
of gold nanorods (η = 68±6%), yet unlike nanorods, the synthesis of TRNs 
requires no cytotoxic compounds. Finally, we tested TRNs for photothermal 
ablation of biofilms. Above Tt, NIR irradiation of TRNs resulted in a 
10,000-fold improvement in killing efficiency compared to untreated controls (p 
< 0.0001). Below Tt, no enhanced anti-biofilm effect was observed. In 
conclusion, engineering the interactions between proteins and nanoparticles 
enables the tunable control of TRNs, resulting in a novel, anti-biofilm 
nanomaterial with low cytotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.08.12.553096
PMCID: PMC10462018
PMID: 37645901

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.