1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2024 Nov;42(18):9753-9766. doi: 
10.1080/07391102.2023.2252908. Epub 2023 Aug 30.

Unraveling the impact of ORF3a Q57H mutation on SARS-CoV-2: insights from 
molecular dynamics.

Islam MJ(1), Alom MS(2)(3), Hossain MS(1), Ali MA(4), Akter S(1), Islam S(1), 
Ullah MO(1), Halim MA(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Division of Computer Aided Drug Design, 
The Red-Green Research Centre, BICCB, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, 
USA.
(3)Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Kennesaw State University, 
Kennesaw, Georgia, USA.

ORF3a is a conserved accessory protein of SARS-CoV-2, linked to viral infection 
and pathogenesis, with acquired mutations at various locations. Previous studies 
have shown that the occurrence of the Q57H mutation is higher in comparison to 
other positions in ORF3a. This mutation is known to induce conformational 
changes, yet the extent of structural alteration and its role in the viral 
adaptation process remain unknown. Here we performed molecular dynamics (MD) 
simulations of wt-ORF3a, Q57H, and Q57A mutants to analyze structural changes 
caused by mutations compared to the native protein. The MD analysis revealed 
that Q57H and Q57A mutants show significant structural changes in the dimer 
conformation than the wt-ORF3a. This dimer conformer narrows down the ion 
channel cavity, which reduces Na + or K + permeability leading to decrease the 
antigenic response that can help the virus to escape the host immune system. 
Non-bonding interaction analysis shows the Q57H mutant has more interacting 
residues, resulting in more stability within dimer conformation than the 
wt-ORF3a and Q57A. Moreover, both mutant dimers (Q57H and Q57A) form a novel 
salt-bridge interaction at the same position between A:Asp142 and B:Lys61, 
whereas such an interaction is absent in the wt-ORF3a dimer. We have also 
noticed that the TM3 domain's flexibility in Q57H is increased because of strong 
inter-domain interactions of TM1 and TM2 within the dimer conformation. These 
unusual interactions and flexibility of Q57H mutant can have significant impacts 
on the SARS-CoV-2 adaptations, virulence, transmission, and immune system 
evasion. Our findings are consistent with the previous experimental data and 
provided details information on the structural perturbation in ORF3a caused by 
mutations, which can help better understand the structural change at the 
molecular level as well as the reason for the high virulence properties of this 
variant.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2023.2252908
PMID: 37649361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]