1. Mamm Genome. 2023 Dec;34(4):559-571. doi: 10.1007/s00335-023-10016-1. Epub
2023  Sep 1.

A nonsense mutation in mouse Adamtsl2 causes uterine hypoplasia and an irregular 
estrous cycle.

Iwanaga Y(1), Tsuji K(1), Nishimura A(1), Tateishi K(1), Kakiuchi M(1), Tsuji 
T(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Environmental, Life, Natural Science and Technology, 
Okayama University, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Environmental, Life, Natural Science and Technology, 
Okayama University, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan. takehito@okayama-u.ac.jp.

The spontaneous mutation stubby (stb) in mice causes chondrodysplasia and male 
infertility due to impotence through autosomal recessive inheritance. In this 
study, we conducted linkage analysis to localize the stb locus within a 1.6 Mb 
region on mouse chromosome 2 and identified a nonsense mutation in Adamtsl2 of 
stb/stb mice. Histological analysis revealed disturbed endochondral ossification 
with a reduced hypertrophic chondrocyte layer and stiff skin with a thickened 
dermal layer. These phenotypes are similar to those observed in humans and mice 
with ADAMTSL2/Adamtsl2 mutations. Moreover, stb/stb female mice exhibited severe 
uterine hypoplasia at 5 weeks of age and irregular estrous cycles at 10 weeks of 
age. In normal mice, Adamtsl2 was more highly expressed in the ovary and 
pituitary gland than in the uterus, and this expression was decreased in stb/stb 
mice. These findings suggest that Adamtsl2 may function in these organs rather 
than in the uterus. Thus, we analyzed Gh expression in the pituitary gland and 
plasma estradiol and IGF1 levels, which are required for the development of the 
female reproductive tract. There was no significant difference in Gh expression 
and estradiol levels, whereas IGF1 levels in stb/stb mice were significantly 
reduced to 54-59% of those in +/+ mice. We conclude that Adamtsl2 is required 
for the development of the uterus and regulation of the estrous cycle in female 
mice, and decreased IGF1 may be related to these abnormalities.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-023-10016-1
PMCID: PMC10627917
PMID: 37656189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding 
author declare no conflict of interests.