1. Biofactors. 2024 Jan-Feb;50(1):181-200. doi: 10.1002/biof.2002. Epub 2023 Aug 
31.

Biochemical and cellular studies of three human 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase 
variants responsible for pathological reduced L-serine levels.

Murtas G(1), Zerbini E(1), Rabattoni V(1), Motta Z(1), Caldinelli L(1), Orlando 
M(2), Marchesani F(3), Campanini B(4), Sacchi S(1), Pollegioni L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Life Sciences, University of Insubria, 
Varese, Italy.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(4)Department of Food and Drug, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

In the brain, the non-essential amino acid L-serine is produced through the 
phosphorylated pathway (PP) starting from the glycolytic intermediate 
3-phosphoglycerate: among the different roles played by this amino acid, it can 
be converted into D-serine and glycine, the two main co-agonists of NMDA 
receptors. In humans, the enzymes of the PP, namely phosphoglycerate 
dehydrogenase (hPHGDH, which catalyzes the first and rate-limiting step of this 
pathway), 3-phosphoserine aminotransferase, and 3-phosphoserine phosphatase are 
likely organized in the cytosol as a metabolic assembly (a "serinosome"). The 
hPHGDH deficiency is a pathological condition biochemically characterized by 
reduced levels of L-serine in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid and clinically 
identified by severe neurological impairment. Here, three single-point variants 
responsible for hPHGDH deficiency and Neu-Laxova syndrome have been studied. 
Their biochemical characterization shows that V261M, V425M, and V490M 
substitutions alter either the kinetic (both maximal activity and Km for 
3-phosphoglycerate in the physiological direction) and the structural properties 
(secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structure, favoring aggregation) of hPHGDH. 
All the three variants have been successfully ectopically expressed in U251 
cells, thus the pathological effect is not due to hindered expression level. At 
the cellular level, mistargeting and aggregation phenomena have been observed in 
cells transiently expressing the pathological protein variants, as well as a 
reduced L-serine cellular level. Previous studies demonstrated that the 
pharmacological supplementation of L-serine in hPHGDH deficiencies could 
ameliorate some of the related symptoms: our results now suggest the use of 
additional and alternative therapeutic approaches.

Â© 2023 The Authors. BioFactors published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/biof.2002
PMID: 37650587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]