1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gene Regul Mech. 2023 Dec;1866(4):194980. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2023.194980. Epub 2023 Aug 29.

Role of clusterin gene 3'-UTR polymorphisms and promoter hypomethylation in the 
pathogenesis of pseudoexfoliation syndrome and pseudoexfoliation glaucoma.

Kapuganti RS(1), Sahoo L(1), Mohanty PP(2), Hayat B(1), Parija S(3), Alone 
DP(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and 
Research (NISER) Bhubaneswar, P.O. Bhimpur-Padanpur, Jatni, Khurda, Odisha, 
752050, India; Homi Bhabha National Institute (HBNI), Training School Complex, 
Anushaktinagar, Mumbai, 400094, India.
(2)Sri Sri Borda Hospital, Dhauli, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, 751002, India.
(3)All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhubaneswar, Sijua, Patrapada, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, 751019, India.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and 
Research (NISER) Bhubaneswar, P.O. Bhimpur-Padanpur, Jatni, Khurda, Odisha, 
752050, India; Homi Bhabha National Institute (HBNI), Training School Complex, 
Anushaktinagar, Mumbai, 400094, India. Electronic address: 
debasmita@niser.ac.in.

Pseudoexfoliation (PEX) is a multifactorial age-related disease characterized by 
the deposition of extracellular fibrillar aggregates in the anterior ocular 
tissues. This study aims to identify the genetic and epigenetic contribution of 
clusterin (CLU) in PEX pathology. CLU is a molecular chaperone upregulated in 
PEX and genetically associated with the disease. Sequencing of a 2.9 kb region 
encompassing the previously associated rs2279590 in 250 control and 313 PEX 
[(207 pseudoexfoliation syndrome (PEXS) and 106 pseudoexfoliation glaucoma 
(PEXG)] individuals identified three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 
rs9331942, rs9331949 and rs9331950, in the 3'-UTR of CLU of which rs9331942 and 
rs9331949 were found to be significantly associated with PEXS and PEXG as risk 
factors. Following in silico analysis, in vitro luciferase reporter assays in 
human embryonic kidney cells revealed that risk alleles at rs9331942 and 
rs9331949 bind to miR-223 and miR-1283, respectively, suggesting differential 
regulation of clusterin in the presence of risk alleles at the SNPs. Further, 
through bisulfite sequencing, we also identified that CLU promoter is 
hypomethylated in DNA from blood and lens capsules of PEX patients compared to 
controls that correlated with decreased expression of DNA methyltransferase 1 
(DNMT1). Promoter demethylation of CLU using DNMT inhibitor, 5'-aza-dC, in human 
lens epithelial cells increased CLU expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays showed that the demethylated CLU promoter provides increased access to 
the transcription factor, Sp1, which might lead to enhanced expression of CLU. 
In conclusion, this study highlights the different molecular mechanisms of 
clusterin regulation in pseudoexfoliation pathology.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2023.194980
PMID: 37652361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.