1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Sep 1;11(5):e0196323. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01963-23. 
Online ahead of print.

Associating bovine herpesvirus 1 envelope glycoprotein gD with activated 
phospho-PLC-γ1(S1248).

Liu C(1), Yuan W(2), Yang H(1), Ni J(3), Tang L(1), Zhao H(1), Neumann D(4), 
Ding X(1), Zhu L(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Hebei University , Baoding, China.
(2)Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences , 
Beijing, China.
(3)Animal Husbandry and Improved Breeds Work Station of Hebei Province , 
Shijiazhuang, China.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison , Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(5)Key Laboratory of Microbial Diversity Research and Application of Hebei 
Province, College of Life Science, Hebei University , Baoding, China.

Phospholipase C gamma 1 (PLC-γ1) may locate at distinct subcellular locations, 
such as cytosol, plasma membrane, and nucleus for varied biological functions. 
Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) productive infection activates PLC-γ1 signaling, 
as demonstrated by increased protein levels of phosphorylated-PLC-γ1 at Ser1248 
[p-PLC-γ1(S1248)], which benefits virus productive infection. Here, for the 
first time, we reported that Golgi apparatus also contains activated 
p-PLC-γ1(S1248). And BoHV-1 productive infection at later stages (24 hpi) 
increased the accumulation of p-PLC-γ1(S1248) in the Golgi apparatus, where 
p-PLC-γ1(S1248) forms highlighted puncta observed via a confocal microscope. 
Coimmunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that the Golgi p-PLC-γ1(S1248) is 
specifically associated with the viral protein gD but not gC. In addition, we 
found that p-PLC-γ1(S1248) is consistently associated with both the plasma 
membrane-associated virions and the released virions. When the virus-infected 
cells were treated with PLC-γ1-specific inhibitor, U73122, for a short duration 
of 4 hours prior to the endpoint of virus infection, we found that the viral 
protein gD was trapped in the Golgi apparatus, suggesting that the PLC-γ1 
signaling may facilitate trafficking of progeny virions out of this organelle. 
These findings provide a novel insight into the interplay between PLC-γ1 
signaling and BoHV-1 replication. IMPORTANCE Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) 
productive infection increases protein levels of phosphorylated-phospholipase C 
gamma 1 at Ser1248 [p-PLC-γ1(S1248)]. However, whether it causes any variations 
to p-PLC-γ1(S1248) localization is not well understood. Here, for the first 
time, we found that partial p-PLC-γ1(S1248) is residing in the Golgi apparatus, 
where the accumulation is enhanced by virus infection. p-PLC-γ1(S1248) is 
consistently associated with virions, partially via binding to gD, in both the 
Golgi apparatus and cytoplasm membranes. Surprisingly, it also associates with 
the released virions. Of note, this is the first evidenced BoHV-1 virion-bound 
host protein. It seems that p-PLC-γ1(S1248) works as an escort during 
trafficking of progeny virions out of Golgi apparatus to the plasma membranes as 
well as releasing outside of the cell membranes. Furthermore, we showed that the 
activated p-PLC-γ1(S1248) is potentially implicated in the transport of virions 
out of Golgi apparatus, which may represent a novel mechanism to regulate virus 
productive infection.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01963-23
PMCID: PMC10580943
PMID: 37655900

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.