1. Development. 2023 Sep 15;150(18):dev202079. doi: 10.1242/dev.202079. Epub 2023
 Sep 25.

An inducible germ cell ablation chicken model for high-grade germline chimeras.

Chen YC(1)(2), Saito D(3), Suzuki T(4), Takemoto T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Research and Development, Setsuro Tech Inc., Tokushima 770-8503, 
Japan.
(2)Laboratory for Embryology, Institute for Advanced Medical Sciences, Tokushima 
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 
819-0395, Japan.
(4)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka Metropolitan 
University, Osaka 558-8585, Japan.

Chicken embryos are a powerful and widely used animal model in developmental 
biology studies. Since the development of CRISPR technology, gene-edited 
chickens have been generated by transferring primordial germ cells (PGCs) into 
recipients after genetic modifications. However, low inheritance caused by 
competition between host germ cells and the transferred cells is a common 
complication and greatly reduces production efficiency. Here, we generated a 
gene-edited chicken, in which germ cells can be ablated in a drug-dependent 
manner, as recipients for gene-edited PGC transfer. We used the 
nitroreductase/metronidazole (NTR/Mtz) system for cell ablation, in which 
nitroreductase produces cytotoxic alkylating agents from administered 
metronidazole, causing cell apoptosis. The chicken Vasa homolog (CVH) gene locus 
was used to drive the expression of the nitroreductase gene in a germ 
cell-specific manner. In addition, a fluorescent protein gene, mCherry, was also 
placed in the CVH locus to visualize the PGCs. We named this system 'germ 
cell-specific autonomous removal induction' (gSAMURAI). gSAMURAI chickens will 
be an ideal recipient to produce offspring derived from transplanted exogenous 
germ cells.

Â© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.202079
PMCID: PMC10560566
PMID: 37665168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests Y.-C.C. is an employee of 
Setsuro Tech Inc. The other authors declare no competing interests.