1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2023 Aug 9;21:4056-4069. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2023.07.034. eCollection 2023.

GAPDH: A common housekeeping gene with an oncogenic role in pan-cancer.

Wang J(1), Yu X(1), Cao X(1), Tan L(1), Jia B(1), Chen R(2), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Suzhou Medical College of 
Soochow University, Soochow University, 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, 215123, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, 1055 Sanxiang Road, Suzhou, 215004, China.

Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) is one of the most prominent 
housekeeping proteins and is widely used as an internal control in some 
semi-quantitative assays. In addition to glycolysis, GAPDH is involved in 
several cancer-related biological processes and has been reported to be commonly 
dysregulated in multiple cancer types. Therefore, its role in the physiological 
process of cancer needs to be urgently elucidated. Pan-cancer analysis indicated 
that GAPDH is ubiquitously highly expressed in most cancer types, and that 
patients with a high GAPDH expression of in tumor tissues have a poor prognosis. 
The concordance of GAPDH expression in tumors with the infiltration of immune 
cells and immune checkpoints implies a certain association between GAPDH and the 
tumor microenvironment as well as tumor development. Gene Set Enrichment 
Analysis revealed that GAPDH may contribute to multiple important cancer-related 
pathways and biological processes. Multi-omics analysis and in vitro cell 
experiments revealed that GAPDH overexpression is regulated by DNA copy number 
amplification and promoter methylation modification. Importantly, a 
transcription factor, forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), which is capable of regulating 
GAPDH expression, was also identified and was confirmed to be an oncogene and 
ubiquitously highly expressed in multiple cancer types. Semi-quantitative 
chromatin immunoprecipitation, quantitative PCR, and dual-luciferase assays 
showed that FOXM1 mainly binds to the promoter region of GAPDH in two cancer 
cell lines. The present findings revealed the implication of GAPDH in tumor 
development, thus bringing attention to this important molecule and casting 
doubts on its role as an internal reference gene in cancer studies.

Â© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2023.07.034
PMCID: PMC10470192
PMID: 37664172

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. All authors have seen and 
approved the final version of the manuscript being submitted. They warrant that 
the article is the authors' original work, hasn't received prior publication and 
isn't under consideration for publication elsewhere.