1. Front Immunol. 2023 Aug 16;14:1213180. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1213180. 
eCollection 2023.

Two-photon fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy of NADH metabolism in HIV-1 
infected cells and tissues.

Snyder GA(1)(2), Kumar S(1), Lewis GK(1)(2), Ray K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vaccine Research, Institute of Human Virology, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.

Rapid detection of microbial-induced cellular changes during the course of an 
infection is critical to understanding pathogenesis and immunological 
homeostasis. In the last two decades, fluorescence imaging has received 
significant attention for its ability to help characterize microbial induced 
cellular and tissue changes in in vitro and in vivo settings. However, most of 
these methods rely on the covalent conjugation of large exogenous probes and 
detection methods based on intensity-based imaging. Here, we report a 
quantitative, intrinsic, label-free, and minimally invasive method based on 
two-photon fluorescence lifetime (FLT) imaging microscopy (2p-FLIM) for imaging 
1,4-dihydro-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) metabolism of virally 
infected cells and tissue sections. To better understand virally induced 
cellular and tissue changes in metabolism we have used 2p-FLIM to study 
differences in NADH intensity and fluorescence lifetimes in HIV-1 infected cells 
and tissues. Differences in NADH fluorescence lifetimes are associated with 
cellular changes in metabolism and changes in cellular metabolism are associated 
with HIV-1 infection. NADH is a critical co-enzyme and redox regulator and an 
essential biomarker in the metabolic processes. Label-free 2p-FLIM application 
and detection of NADH fluorescence using viral infection systems are in their 
infancy. In this study, the application of the 2p-FLIM assay and quantitative 
analyses of HIV-1 infected cells and tissue sections reveal increased 
fluorescence lifetime and higher enzyme-bound NADH fraction suggesting oxidative 
phosphorylation (OxPhos) compared to uninfected cells and tissues. 2p-FLIM 
measurements improve signal to background, fluorescence specificity, provide 
spatial and temporal resolution of intracellular structures, and thus, are 
suitable for quantitative studies of cellular functions and tissue morphology. 
Furthermore, 2p-FLIM allows distinguishing free and bound populations of NADH by 
their different fluorescence lifetimes within single infected cells. 
Accordingly, NADH fluorescence measurements of individual single cells should 
provide necessary insight into the heterogeneity of metabolic activity of 
infected cells. Implementing 2p-FLIM to viral infection systems measuring NADH 
fluorescence at the single or subcellular level within a tissue can provide 
visual evidence, localization, and information in a real-time diagnostic or 
therapeutic metabolic workflow.

Copyright Â© 2023 Snyder, Kumar, Lewis and Ray.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1213180
PMCID: PMC10468605
PMID: 37662898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.