1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Jul 29:2023.08.18.553899. doi: 
10.1101/2023.08.18.553899.

A suite of selective pressures supports the maintenance of alleles of a 
Drosophila immune peptide.

Mullinax SR, Darby AM, Gupta A, Chan P, Smith BR, Unckless RL.

The innate immune system provides hosts with a crucial first line of defense 
against pathogens. While immune genes are often among the fastest evolving genes 
in the genome, in Drosophila , antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are notable 
exceptions. Instead, AMPs may be under balancing selection, such that over 
evolutionary timescales multiple alleles are maintained in populations. In this 
study, we focus on the Drosophila antimicrobial peptide Diptericin A, which has 
a segregating amino acid polymorphism associated with differential survival 
after infection with the Gram-negative bacteria Providencia rettgeri . 
Diptericin A also helps control opportunistic gut infections by common 
Drosophila gut microbes, especially those of Lactobacillus plantarum . In 
addition to genotypic effects on gut immunity, we also see strong sex-specific 
effects that are most prominent in flies without functional diptericin A . To 
further characterize differences in microbiomes between different diptericin 
genotypes, we used 16S metagenomics to look at the microbiome composition. We 
used both lab reared and wild caught flies for our sequencing and looked at 
overall composition as well as the differential abundance of individual 
bacterial families. Overall, we find flies that are homozygous for one allele of 
diptericin A are better equipped to survive a systemic infection from P. 
rettgeri , but in general have a shorter lifespans after being fed common gut 
commensals. Our results suggest a possible mechanism for the maintenance of 
genetic variation of diptericin A through the complex interactions of sex, 
systemic immunity, and the maintenance of the gut microbiome.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.08.18.553899
PMCID: PMC10473621
PMID: 37662279