1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2024 Feb;45(2):268-281. doi: 10.1038/s41401-023-01153-z. 
Epub 2023 Sep 6.

Cell senescence induced by toxic interaction between α-synuclein and iron 
precedes nigral dopaminergic neuron loss in a mouse model of Parkinson's 
disease.

Shen QQ(#)(1), Jv XH(#)(1), Ma XZ(1), Li C(1), Liu L(1), Jia WT(1), Qu L(1), 
Chen LL(2), Xie JX(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Brain Science and Disease, Shandong Provincial Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Neurodegenerative Disorders, Shandong Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Pathogenesis and Prevention of Neurological Disorders, Qingdao 
University, Qingdao, 266021, China.
(2)Institute of Brain Science and Disease, Shandong Provincial Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Neurodegenerative Disorders, Shandong Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Pathogenesis and Prevention of Neurological Disorders, Qingdao 
University, Qingdao, 266021, China. leileichen2019@qdu.edu.cn.
(3)Institute of Brain Science and Disease, Shandong Provincial Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Neurodegenerative Disorders, Shandong Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Pathogenesis and Prevention of Neurological Disorders, Qingdao 
University, Qingdao, 266021, China. jxiaxie@public.qd.sd.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Cell senescence has been implicated in the pathology of Parkinson's disease 
(PD). Both abnormal α-synuclein aggregation and iron deposition are suggested to 
be the triggers, facilitators, and aggravators during the development of PD. In 
this study, we investigated the involvement of α-synuclein and iron in the 
process of cell senescence in a mouse model of PD. In order to overexpress 
α-syn-A53T in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc), human α-syn-A53T was 
microinjected into both sides of the SNpc in mice. We found that overexpression 
of α-syn-A53T for one week induced significant pro-inflammatory 
senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), increased cell 
senescence-related proteins (β-gal, p16, p21, H2A.X and γ-H2A.X), mitochondrial 
dysfunction accompanied by dysregulation of iron-related proteins (L-ferritin, 
H-ferritin, DMT1, IRP1 and IRP2) in the SNpc. In contrast, significant loss of 
nigral dopaminergic neurons and motor dysfunction were only observed after 
overexpression of α-syn-A53T for 4 weeks. In PC12 cells stably overexpressing 
α-syn-A53T, iron overload (ferric ammonium citrate, FAC, 100 μM) not only 
increased the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS), p16 and p21, but also 
exacerbated the processes of oxidative stress and cell senescence signalling 
induced by α-syn-A53T overexpression. Interestingly, reducing the iron level 
with deferoxamine (DFO) or knockdown of transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) 
significantly improved both the phenotypes and dysregulated proteins of cell 
senescence induced by α-syn-A53T overexpression. All these evidence highlights 
the toxic interaction between iron and α-synuclein inducing cell senescence, 
which precedes nigral dopaminergic neuronal loss in PD. Further investigation on 
cell senescence may yield new therapeutic agents for the prevention or treatment 
of PD.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Shanghai Institute of Materia 
Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Chinese Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1038/s41401-023-01153-z
PMCID: PMC10789811
PMID: 37674042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.