1. Bioengineered. 2023 Dec;14(1):2253414. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2023.2253414.

Exosomes derived from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells regulate pyroptosis via 
the miR-143-3p/myeloid differentiation factor 88 axis to ameliorate intestinal 
ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Wan Z(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Lv J(1)(2), Yuan Y(1)(2), Guo W(1)(2), Leng Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The First School of Clinical Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.

Intestinal ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury is a condition in which tissue 
injury is aggravated after ischemia due to recovery of blood supply. Bone marrow 
mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosome (BMSC-exo) showed a protective effect on 
I/R injury. This study aimed to investigate the possible mechanisms by which 
BMSC-exos ameliorate intestinal I/R injury. We isolated mouse BMSC-exos by 
super-centrifugation and found that they effectively increased cell viability in 
a cell model, alleviated intestinal barrier injury in a mouse model, and 
downregulated the expression of inflammatory cytokines and pyroptosis-related 
proteins, suggesting that BMSC-exos may alleviate intestinal I/R injury in vitro 
and in vivo by regulating pyroptosis. We identified miR-143-3p as a 
differentially expressed miRNA by microarray sequencing. Bioinformatic analysis 
predicted a binding site between miR-143-3p and myeloid differentiation factor 
88 (MyD88); a dual-luciferase reporter assay confirmed that miR-143-3p could 
directly regulate the expression of MyD88. Our findings suggest that miR-143-3p 
regulates pyroptosis by regulating NOD-like receptor thermal protein domain 
associated protein 3 (NLRP3) through the toll-like receptor 
(TLR)-4/MyD88/nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-кB) pathway. This study describes a 
potential strategy for the treatment of intestinal I/R injury using BMSC-exos 
that act by regulating pyroptosis through the miR-143-3p mediated 
TLR4/MyD88/NF-кB pathway.

Plain Language Summary: BMSC-exos ameliorate intestinal ischemia/reperfusion 
(I/R) injurymiR-143-3p levels were reduced in I/R injury and increased with 
BMSC-exo treatmentmiR-143-3p directly targeted and downregulated the expression 
of MyD88BMSC-exos regulate pyroptosis in intestinal I/R injury via the 
miR-143-3p-MyD88 axis.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2023.2253414
PMCID: PMC10486297
PMID: 37674357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).