1. Protein Expr Purif. 2024 Jan;213:106362. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2023.106362. Epub 
2023 Sep 7.

Optimized expression and purification of a human adenosine deaminase in E. coli 
and characterization of its Asp8Asn variant.

Jennings MR(1), Min S(1), Xu GS(1), Homayuni K(1), Suresh B(1), Haikal YA(1), 
Blazeck J(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA.
(2)School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA. Electronic address: 
john.blazeck@chbe.gatech.edu.

Homo sapiens adenosine deaminase isoform 1 (HsADA1) hydrolyzes adenosine and 
2-deoxyadenosine as a key step in the purine nucleoside salvage pathway. Some 
HsADA1 mutations have severe deleterious effects, as is the case in a severe 
combined immunodeficiency resulting from loss of enzyme activity (ADA-SCID). 
Other mutations that reduce enzyme activity, for instance the Asp8Asn (D8N) 
variant, do not cause ADA-SCID but are correlated with other consequences to 
health. To ease further study of HsADA1 and its variants, we optimized an 
inexpensive, recombinant expression process in an Escherichia coli host through 
multiplexed parameter testing enabled by a lysate-based microtiter plate assay. 
We demonstrate the importance of gene codon usage, induction time and 
temperature, and alcohol supplementation towards improving enzyme yield to a 
final titer of 5 mg per liter of culture. We further show that use of a 
double-histidine-tag (his-tag) system greatly improves purity. We then utilize 
our expression and purification framework to produce the HsADA1 D8N variant, 
which had previously not been purified to homogeneity. We confirm that the D8N 
variant is ∼30% less active than the wildtype HsADA1 and show that it better 
retains its activity in human serum. Additionally, we show that both HsADA1 and 
the D8N variant have heightened activity in serum, driven in part by a 
previously undescribed phenomenon involving albumin. Therefore, this work 
presents a valuable process to produce HsADA1 that allows for insights into it 
and its variants' behavior. We also confirm the utility of lysate-based activity 
assays towards finding optimal E. coli expression conditions for enzymes and 
show how fusing his-tags in tandem can enhance product purity.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2023.106362
PMCID: PMC10664833
PMID: 37683902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest JB and MRJ 
have filed a patent application in relation to this work.