1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Oct;299(10):105235. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105235. Epub
2023  Sep 9.

O-GlcNAc transferase promotes glioblastoma by modulating genes responsible for 
cell survival, invasion, and inflammation.

Sheikh MA(1), Alawathugoda TT(1), Vyas G(1), Emerald BS(2), Ansari SA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates.
(2)Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab 
Emirates University, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates; Zayed Center for 
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates; Precision Medicine Research Institute Abu Dhabi (PMRIAD), United Arab 
Emirates University, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates; Zayed Center for Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al 
Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates; Precision Medicine Research Institute Abu 
Dhabi (PMRIAD), United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates. Electronic address: sansari@uaeu.ac.ae.

Metabolic reprogramming has emerged as one of the key hallmarks of cancer cells. 
Various metabolic pathways are dysregulated in cancers, including the hexosamine 
biosynthesis pathway. Protein O-GlcNAcylation is catalyzed by the enzyme 
O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT), an effector of hexosamine biosynthesis pathway that 
is found to be upregulated in most cancers. Posttranslational O-GlcNAcylation of 
various signaling and transcriptional regulators could promote cancer cell 
maintenance and progression by regulating gene expression, as gene-specific 
transcription factors and chromatin regulators are among the most highly 
O-GlcNAcylated proteins. Here, we investigated the role of OGT in glioblastoma. 
We demonstrate that OGT knockdown and chemical inhibition led to reduced 
glioblastoma cell proliferation and downregulation of many genes known to play 
key roles in glioblastoma cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. We show 
that genes downregulated due to OGT reduction are also known to be 
transcriptionally regulated by transcriptional initiation/elongation cofactor 
BRD4. We found BRD4 to be O-GlcNAcylated in glioblastoma cells; however, OGT 
knockdown/inhibition neither changed its expression nor its chromatin 
association on promoters. Intriguingly, we observed OGT knockdown led to reduced 
Pol II-Ser2P chromatin association on target genes without affecting other 
transcription initiation/elongation factors. Finally, we found that chemical 
inhibition of BRD4 potentiated the effects of OGT inhibition in reducing 
glioblastoma cell proliferation, invasion, and migration. We propose BRD4 and 
OGT act independently in the transcriptional regulation of a common set of genes 
and that combined inhibition of OGT and BRD4 could be utilized therapeutically 
for more efficient glioblastoma cell targeting than targeting of either protein 
alone.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105235
PMCID: PMC10570119
PMID: 37689115

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.