1. PLoS Genet. 2023 Sep 8;19(9):e1010924. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010924. 
eCollection 2023 Sep.

Steroid receptor coactivator TAIMAN is a new modulator of insect circadian 
clock.

Smykal V(1), Chodakova L(1)(2), Hejnikova M(1), Briedikova K(3), Wu BC(1)(2), 
Vaneckova H(1), Chen P(1)(2), Janovska A(4), Kyjakova P(4), Vacha M(3), Dolezel 
D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biology Centre of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Institute of 
Entomology, Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, Ceske Budejovice, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(4)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the Czech Academy of 
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.

TAIMAN (TAI), the only insect ortholog of mammalian Steroid Receptor 
Coactivators (SRCs), is a critical modulator of ecdysone and juvenile hormone 
(JH) signaling pathways, which govern insect development and reproduction. The 
modulatory effect is mediated by JH-dependent TAI's heterodimerization with JH 
receptor Methoprene-tolerant and association with the Ecdysone Receptor complex. 
Insect hormones regulate insect physiology and development in concert with 
abiotic cues, such as photo- and thermoperiod. Here we tested the effects of JH 
and ecdysone signaling on the circadian clock by a combination of microsurgical 
operations, application of hormones and hormone mimics, and gene knockdowns in 
the linden bug Pyrrhocoris apterus males. Silencing taiman by each of three 
non-overlapping double-strand RNA fragments dramatically slowed the free-running 
period (FRP) to 27-29 hours, contrasting to 24 hours in controls. To further 
corroborate TAIMAN's clock modulatory function in the insect circadian clock, we 
performed taiman knockdown in the cockroach Blattella germanica. Although 
Blattella and Pyrrhocoris lineages separated ~380 mya, B. germanica taiman 
silencing slowed the FRP by more than 2 hours, suggesting a conserved TAI clock 
function in (at least) some insect groups. Interestingly, the pace of the linden 
bug circadian clock was neither changed by blocking JH and ecdysone synthesis, 
by application of the hormones or their mimics nor by the knockdown of 
corresponding hormone receptors. Our results promote TAI as a new circadian 
clock modulator, a role described for the first time in insects. We speculate 
that TAI participation in the clock is congruent with the mammalian SRC-2 role 
in orchestrating metabolism and circadian rhythms, and that TAI/SRCs might be 
conserved components of the circadian clock in animals.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Smykal et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010924
PMCID: PMC10511111
PMID: 37683015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.