1. BMC Cancer. 2023 Sep 8;23(1):842. doi: 10.1186/s12885-023-11323-1.

Association between IL-10 gene polymorphisms (- 1082 A/G, -819 T/C, -592 A/C) 
and hepatocellular carcinoma: a meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis.

Mei TTY(1)(2), Aung HH(#)(3), Tung WS(1), Naing C(#)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, International Medical University, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(3)School of Medicine, International Medical University, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
htarswe65@gmail.com.
(4)Faculty of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook University, Queensland, 
Australia.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The carcinogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma is complicated, and 
genetic factor may have the role in the malignant transformation of liver cells. 
IL-10 gene polymorphisms have been investigated for their potential roles in 
hepatocellular carcinoma This study aimed to investigate the relationship 
between polymorphisms of IL-10 (-1082 A/G, -819 T/C, -592 A/C), and 
hepatocellular carcinoma by performing a meta-analysis with eligible individual 
studies.
METHODS: This study followed the PRISMA 2020 Checklist. Relevant studies were 
searched in health-related databases. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale criteria were 
used to evaluate the studies quality. Pooled odds ratio (OR) and its 95% 
confidence interval (CI) were used to determine the strength of association 
between each polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma using five genetic 
models. Stratification was done by ethnic groups. Trial sequential analysis 
(TSA) was performed to determine the required information size.
RESULTS: Fifteen case-control studies (n = 8182) were identified. Overall, the 
heterozygous model showed a marginal significant association only between IL-10 
(-1082 A/G) and hepatocellular carcinoma risk (OR: 0.82, 95% CI: 0.67-1.00, 9 
studies). On stratification, IL-10 (-1082 A/G) was significantly associated with 
hepatocellular carcinoma risk in the non-Asian population under dominant (OR: 
0.62, 95% CI: 0.45-0.86, 4 studies), heterozygous (OR: 0.60, 95% CI: 0.43-0.85) 
and allelic models (OR: 0.79, 95% CI: 0.64-0.99). IL-10 (-819 T/C) was 
significantly associated with hepatocellular carcinoma risk only among 
non-Asians under the dominant (OR: 1.47, 95% CI: 1.02-2.13, 8 studies), 
recessive (OR: 1.99, 95% CI: 1.03-3.86, and homozygous models (OR: 2.18, 95% CI: 
1.13-4.23). For IL-10 (-592 A/C) with 11 studies, there was no significant 
association with hepatocellular carcinoma in all five genetic models (P 
values > 0.5). TSA plots indicated that the information size for firm evidence 
of effect was sufficient only for the analysis of IL-10 (-592 A/C), but not for 
the - 1082 A/G or -819 T/C.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest that IL-10 (-1082 A/G and - 819 T/C) polymorphisms 
are associated with hepatocellular carcinoma in ethnic-specific manner. However, 
this evidence is not conclusive because the sample size was insufficient. IL-10 
(-592 A/C) polymorphism was not associated with hepatocellular carcinoma albeit 
with sufficient information size. Future well-designed large case-control 
studies on IL-10 (-1082 A/G and - 819 T/C) with different ethnicities are 
recommended.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-023-11323-1
PMCID: PMC10492326
PMID: 37684564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.