1. Adv Nutr. 2023 Nov;14(6):1523-1537. doi: 10.1016/j.advnut.2023.09.001. Epub
2023  Sep 7.

Whole-Milk Dairy Foods: Biological Mechanisms Underlying Beneficial Effects on 
Risk Markers for Cardiometabolic Health.

Torres-Gonzalez M(1), Rice Bradley BH(2).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Research, National Dairy Council, Rosemont, IL, United States.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Food Sciences, University of Vermont, Burlington, 
VT, United States. Electronic address: Beth.Bradley@uvm.edu.

Lifestyle modifications that include adherence to healthy dietary patterns that 
are low in saturated fat have been associated with reduced risk for 
cardiovascular disease, the leading cause of death globally. Whole-milk dairy 
foods, including milk, cheese, and yogurt, are leading sources of saturated fat 
in the diet. Dietary guidelines around the world recommend the consumption of 
low-fat and fat-free dairy foods to obtain overall healthy dietary patterns that 
help meet nutrient recommendations while keeping within recommended calorie and 
saturated fat limitations. A body of observational and clinical evidence 
indicates, however, that whole-milk dairy food consumption, despite saturated 
fat content, does not increase the risk for cardiovascular disease. This review 
describes the proposed biological mechanisms underlying inverse associations 
between whole-milk dairy food consumption and risk markers for cardiometabolic 
health, such as altered lipid digestion, absorption, and metabolism; influence 
on the gut microflora; and regulation of oxidative stress and inflammatory 
responses. The dairy food matrix, a term used to describe how the macronutrients 
and micronutrients and other bioactive components of dairy foods are 
differentially packaged and compartmentalized among fluid milk, cheese, and 
yogurt, may dictate how each affects cardiovascular risk. Current evidence 
indicates consideration of dairy foods as complex food matrices, rather than 
delivery systems for isolated nutrients, such as saturated fatty acids, is 
warranted.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.advnut.2023.09.001
PMCID: PMC10721525
PMID: 37684008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]