1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Aug 31;24(17):13519. doi: 10.3390/ijms241713519.

The Effect of Skeletal Muscle-Specific Creatine Treatment on ALS NMJ Integrity 
and Function.

Badu-Mensah A(1)(2), Guo X(1), Mendez R(1), Parsaud H(1), Hickman JJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)NanoScience Technology Center, University of Central Florida, 12424 Research 
Parkway, Suite 400, Orlando, FL 32826, USA.
(2)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of 
Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA.

Although skeletal muscle (hSKM) has been proven to be actively involved in 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) neuromuscular junction (NMJ) dysfunction, it 
is rarely considered as a pharmacological target in preclinical drug discovery. 
This project investigated how improving ALS hSKM viability and function effects 
NMJ integrity. Phenotypic ALS NMJ human-on-a-chip models developed from 
patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) were used to study the 
effect of hSKM-specific creatine treatment on clinically relevant functional ALS 
NMJ parameters, such as NMJ numbers, fidelity, stability, and fatigue index. 
Results indicated comparatively enhanced NMJ numbers, fidelity, and stability, 
as well as reduced fatigue index, across all hSKM-specific creatine-treated 
systems. Immunocytochemical analysis of the NMJs also revealed improved 
post-synaptic nicotinic Acetylcholine receptor (AChR) clustering and cluster 
size in systems supplemented with creatine relative to the un-dosed control. 
This work strongly suggests hSKM as a therapeutic target in ALS drug discovery. 
It also demonstrates the need to consider all tissues involved in multi-systemic 
diseases, such as ALS, in drug discovery efforts. Finally, this work further 
establishes the BioMEMs NMJ platform as an effective means of performing 
mutation-specific drug screening, which is a step towards personalized medicine 
for rare diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241713519
PMCID: PMC10487911
PMID: 37686322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors but J.J.H. confirm no existing 
potential conflict of interest. J.J.H. has ownership interest and is Chief 
Scientist and member of the Board of Directors in a company that may benefit 
financially from the outcomes of the research work reported in this publication. 
“The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the 
decision to publish the results”.