1. Foods. 2023 Aug 24;12(17):3195. doi: 10.3390/foods12173195.

Chemical Profile of Turnip According to the Plant Part and the Cultivar: A 
Multivariate Approach.

Yang J(1), Lou J(1), Zhong W(1), Li Y(1), He Y(1), Su S(2), Chen X(2), Zhu B(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Quality and Safety Control for Subtropical Fruit and 
Vegetable, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Efficient and Green Production of Agriculture in Mountainous Areas of 
Zhejiang Province, College of Horticulture Science, Zhejiang A&F University, 
Hangzhou 311300, China.
(2)Wenzhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Wenzhou 325006, China.

Turnip (Brassica rapa subsp. rapa) is a cruciferous plant cultivated worldwide 
that serves as a source of nutrients and bioactive compounds. Most turnip 
studies have focused on a few compounds or on part of the plant. The 
establishment of a complete chemical profile of different plant parts would 
facilitate its use for nutritional and medicinal purposes. In the current study, 
mineral elements, soluble sugars, free amino acids (FAA), total phenols (TP), 
total flavonoids (TF), and glucosinolates (GS) were quantified in the leaves, 
stems, and roots. Results were compared for 20 strains of turnip. The outcomes 
showed significant differences between parts of the plant and strains. The 
leaves exhibited the highest TF, TP, indispensable FAA, and microelement levels, 
and they showed a higher GS. Moreover, the stems had a high content of GS and 
macroelements. Furthermore, the roots showed high levels of free sugars and 
total FAA. The findings of this work provide the basis for utilizing each part 
of the turnip plant based on its chemical composition.

DOI: 10.3390/foods12173195
PMCID: PMC10486609
PMID: 37685128

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.