1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Aug 23;24(17):13079. doi: 10.3390/ijms241713079.

Revisiting Retinal Degeneration Hallmarks: Insights from Molecular Markers and 
Therapy Perspectives.

Rosa JGS(1), Disner GR(1), Pinto FJ(1), Lima C(1), Lopes-Ferreira M(1).

Author information:
(1)Immunoregulation Unit, Laboratory of Applied Toxinology (CeTICs/FAPESP), 
Butantan Institute, SÃ£o Paulo 05503900, Brazil.

Visual impairment and blindness are a growing public health problem as they 
reduce the life quality of millions of people. The management and treatment of 
these diseases represent scientific and therapeutic challenges because different 
cellular and molecular actors involved in the pathophysiology are still being 
identified. Visual system components, particularly retinal cells, are extremely 
sensitive to genetic or metabolic alterations, and immune responses activated by 
local insults contribute to biological events, culminating in vision loss and 
irreversible blindness. Several ocular diseases are linked to retinal cell loss, 
and some of them, such as retinitis pigmentosa, age-related macular 
degeneration, glaucoma, and diabetic retinopathy, are characterized by 
pathophysiological hallmarks that represent possibilities to study and develop 
novel treatments for retinal cell degeneration. Here, we present a compilation 
of revisited information on retinal degeneration, including pathophysiological 
and molecular features and biochemical hallmarks, and possible research 
directions for novel treatments to assist as a guide for innovative research. 
The knowledge expansion upon the mechanistic bases of the pathobiology of eye 
diseases, including information on complex interactions of genetic 
predisposition, chronic inflammation, and environmental and aging-related 
factors, will prompt the identification of new therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241713079
PMCID: PMC10488251
PMID: 37685886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.