1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Aug 26;24(17):13275. doi: 10.3390/ijms241713275.

Brain-Derived 11S Regulator (PA28αβ) Promotes Proteasomal Hydrolysis of 
Elongated Oligoglutamine-Containing Peptides.

Kriachkov VA(1), Gotmanova NN(2), Tashlitsky VN(2), Bacheva AV(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory 1, 
119991 Moscow, Russia.

Proteins with extended polyglutamine regions are associated with several 
neurodegenerative disorders, including Huntington's disease. Intracellular 
proteolytic processing of these proteins is not well understood. In particular, 
it is unclear whether long polyglutamine fragments resulting from the 
proteolysis of these proteins can be potentially cleaved by the proteasome. 
Here, we studied the susceptibility of the glutamine-glutamine bond to 
proteolysis by the proteasome using oligoglutamine-containing peptides with a 
fluorophore/quencher pair. We found that the addition of the 11S proteasomal 
regulator (also known as PA28) significantly accelerated the hydrolysis of 
oligoglutamine-containing peptides by the 20S proteasome. Unexpectedly, a 
similar effect was observed for the 26S proteasome in the presence of the 11S 
regulator. LC/MS data revealed that the hydrolysis of our peptides with both 20S 
and 26S proteasomes leads to N-terminal fragments containing two or three 
glutamine residues and that the hydrolysis site does not change after the 
addition of the 11S regulator. This was confirmed by the docking experiment, 
which shows that the preferred hydrolysis site is located after the second/third 
glutamine residue. Inhibitory analysis revealed that trypsin-like specificity is 
mainly responsible for the proteasomal hydrolysis of the glutamine-glutamine 
bond. Together, our results indicate that both 20S and 26S proteasomes are 
capable of degrading the N-terminal part of oligoglutamine fragments, while the 
11S regulator significantly accelerates the hydrolysis without changing its 
specificity. This data suggests that proteasome activity may be enhanced in 
relation to polyglutamine substrates present in neurons in the early stages of 
polyglutamine disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241713275
PMCID: PMC10487437
PMID: 37686081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.