1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Oct 13;51(18):9594-9609. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad756.

CRISPR screens in sister chromatid cohesion defective cells reveal PAXIP1-PAGR1 
as regulator of chromatin association of cohesin.

van Schie JJM(1)(2), de Lint K(1)(2), Molenaar TM(1)(2), Moronta Gines M(3), 
Balk JA(1)(2), Rooimans MA(1)(2), Roohollahi K(1)(2), Pai GM(1)(2), Borghuis 
L(1)(2), Ramadhin AR(1)(2), Corazza F(3), Dorsman JC(1)(2), Wendt KS(3), 
Wolthuis RMF(1)(2), de Lange J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Amsterdam UMC location Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Human 
Genetics, Section Oncogenetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Cancer Center Amsterdam, Cancer Biology and Immunology, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Erasmus Medical Centre, Department of Cell Biology, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    10.1093/nar/gkad267.

The cohesin complex regulates higher order chromosome architecture through 
maintaining sister chromatid cohesion and folding chromatin by DNA loop 
extrusion. Impaired cohesin function underlies a heterogeneous group of genetic 
syndromes and is associated with cancer. Here, we mapped the genetic 
dependencies of human cell lines defective of cohesion regulators DDX11 and 
ESCO2. The obtained synthetic lethality networks are strongly enriched for genes 
involved in DNA replication and mitosis and support the existence of parallel 
sister chromatid cohesion establishment pathways. Among the hits, we identify 
the chromatin binding, BRCT-domain containing protein PAXIP1 as a novel cohesin 
regulator. Depletion of PAXIP1 severely aggravates cohesion defects in ESCO2 
mutant cells, leading to mitotic cell death. PAXIP1 promotes global chromatin 
association of cohesin, independent of DNA replication, a function that cannot 
be explained by indirect effects of PAXIP1 on transcription or DNA repair. 
Cohesin regulation by PAXIP1 requires its binding partner PAGR1 and a conserved 
FDF motif in PAGR1. PAXIP1 co-localizes with cohesin on multiple genomic loci, 
including active gene promoters and enhancers. Possibly, this newly identified 
role of PAXIP1-PAGR1 in regulating cohesin occupancy on chromatin is also 
relevant for previously described functions of PAXIP1 in transcription, immune 
cell maturation and DNA repair.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad756
PMCID: PMC10570055
PMID: 37702151