1. Dev Cell. 2023 Dec 4;58(23):2802-2818.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2023.08.021. 
Epub 2023 Sep 14.

An improved Erk biosensor detects oscillatory Erk dynamics driven by mitotic 
erasure during early development.

Wilcockson SG(1), Guglielmi L(1), Araguas Rodriguez P(2), Amoyel M(2), Hill 
CS(3).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Signalling Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 
1AT, UK.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, 
London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(3)Developmental Signalling Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 
1AT, UK. Electronic address: caroline.hill@crick.ac.uk.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) signaling dynamics elicit distinct 
cellular responses in a variety of contexts. The early zebrafish embryo is an 
ideal model to explore the role of Erk signaling dynamics in vivo, as a gradient 
of activated diphosphorylated Erk (P-Erk) is induced by fibroblast growth factor 
(Fgf) signaling at the blastula margin. Here, we describe an improved 
Erk-specific biosensor, which we term modified Erk kinase translocation reporter 
(modErk-KTR). We demonstrate the utility of this biosensor in vitro and in 
developing zebrafish and Drosophila embryos. Moreover, we show that Fgf/Erk 
signaling is dynamic and coupled to tissue growth during both early zebrafish 
and Drosophila development. Erk activity is rapidly extinguished just prior to 
mitosis, which we refer to as mitotic erasure, inducing periods of inactivity, 
thus providing a source of heterogeneity in an asynchronously dividing tissue. 
Our modified reporter and transgenic lines represent an important resource for 
interrogating the role of Erk signaling dynamics in vivo.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2023.08.021
PMCID: PMC7615346
PMID: 37714159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.