1. Vet Med Sci. 2023 Nov;9(6):2648-2659. doi: 10.1002/vms3.1273. Epub 2023 Sep
19.

4G mobile phone radiation alters some immunogenic and vascular gene expressions, 
and gross and microscopic and biochemical parameters in the chick embryo model.

Islam MS(1), Islam MM(2), Rahman MM(3), Islam K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Histology, Faculty of Veterinary and Animal 
Science, Hajee Mohammad Danesh Science and Technology University, Dinajpur, 
Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Pathology and Parasitology, Faculty of Veterinary and Animal 
Science, Hajee Mohammad Danesh Science and Technology University, Dinajpur, 
Bangladesh.
(3)Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima, Japan.
(4)Institute of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.

BACKGROUND: The risks to human health have grown over the past 10 years due to 
the excessive use of mobile phones.
OBJECTIVES: The study was designed to determine the harmful effects of 4G mobile 
phone radiation on the expression of immunogenic and vascular genes and gross, 
microscopic and biochemical alterations in the development of chicken embryos.
METHODS: Sixty individuals in the exposure group were subjected to mobile phones 
with a specific absorption rate of 1.4 W/kg and a frequency of 2100 MHz 
positioned at a distance of 12 cm in the incubator for 60 min/night for 14 days. 
The histopathological examination involved hematoxylin and eosin staining, 
whereas cresyl violet staining was used to evaluate the condition and number of 
neurons in the brain. The biochemical parameters of amniotic fluid were analysed 
using the photometry method, and the expression of VEGF-A and immunity genes 
(AvBD9, IL6) was measured using the real-time PCR (qPCR) technique.
RESULTS: Compared to the control, the exposure group's body weight and length 
significantly decreased (p < 0.05). Subcutaneous bleeding was seen in the 
exposure group. Urea, creatinine, alkaline phosphatase, aspartate 
aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels were all significantly 
higher than in the control group (p < 0.05). The exposed group showed 
pathological lesions in the liver and degenerated neurons with lightly stained 
nuclei in the cerebral cortex. Hyperchromatic neurons were significantly higher 
in the exposure group (58.8 ± 2.28) compared to the control (6.6 ± 0.44) 
(p < 0.05). 4G exposure reduced lymphocyte count in the caecal tonsil 
(86.8 ± 5.38) compared to the control (147.2 ± 9.06) (p < 0.05). Vascular gene 
mRNA expression was higher, but immune gene expression was lower in the exposed 
group.
CONCLUSION: Exposure to mobile phone radiation may result in gross, microscopic 
and biochemical changes, as well as alterations in gene expression that could 
hinder embryonic development.

© 2023 The Authors. Veterinary Medicine and Science published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/vms3.1273
PMCID: PMC10650348
PMID: 37725264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors affirm that there are no conflicts 
of interest related to this work.