1. Sci Rep. 2023 Sep 18;13(1):15421. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-42083-4.

Real world evidence reveals improved survival outcomes in biliary tract cancer 
through molecular matched targeted treatment.

Doleschal B(1), Taghizadeh H(2), Webersinke G(3), Piringer G(4)(5), Schreil 
G(6), Decker J(7), Aichberger KJ(7), Kirchweger P(5)(8)(9), Thaler J(10), Petzer 
A(11), Schmitt CA(4)(5), Prager GW(12), Rumpold H(5)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I for Hematology with Stem Cell 
Transplantation, Hemostaseology, and Medical Oncology, Ordensklinikum Linz, 
Seilerstaette 4, 4010, Linz, Austria. bernhard.doleschal@ordensklinikum.at.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital St. Pölten, St. Pölten, 
Austria.
(3)Laboratory for Molecular Genetic Diagnostics, Ordensklinikum Linz, Linz, 
Austria.
(4)Department of Oncology and Hematology, Kepler University Clinic Linz, Linz, 
Austria.
(5)Medical Faculty, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, Austria.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, State Hospital Pyhrn Eisenwurzen, Steyr, 
Austria.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, State Hospital Rohrbach, Rohrbach, Austria.
(8)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, Ordensklinikum Linz, Linz, 
Austria.
(9)Gastrointestinal Cancer Center, Ordensklinikum Linz, Linz, Austria.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine IV, Hospital Wels-Grieskirchen, Wels, 
Austria.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine I for Hematology with Stem Cell 
Transplantation, Hemostaseology, and Medical Oncology, Ordensklinikum Linz, 
Seilerstaette 4, 4010, Linz, Austria.
(12)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine I, Medical University Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.

Biliary tract cancers are rare cancers with poor prognosis due to a lack of 
therapeutic options, especially after the failure of first-line systemic 
treatment. Targeted treatments for this clinical situation are promising and 
have entered clinical practice. We aimed to describe the overall survival of 
matched targeted treatment after first-line treatment in patients with biliary 
tract cancers in an Austrian real-world multicenter cohort. We performed a 
multicenter retrospective chart review of patients with biliary tract cancer 
between September 2015 and January 2022. Data, including comprehensive molecular 
characteristics-next generation sequencing (NGS) and immunohistochemistry (IHC), 
clinical history, surgical procedures, ablative treatments, patient history, and 
systemic chemotherapy, were extracted from the records of the participating 
institutions. Targeted treatment was matched according to the ESMO scale for the 
clinical actionability of molecular targets (ESCAT). We identified 159 patients 
with the available molecular characteristics. A total of 79 patients underwent 
second-line treatment. Of these, 36 patients received matched targeted treatment 
beyond the first-line and were compared with 43 patients treated with cytotoxic 
chemotherapy in terms of efficacy outcomes. For Tier I/II alterations, we 
observed a progression free survival ratio (PFStargeted/PFSpre-chemotherapy) of 
1.86, p = 0.059. The overall survival for patients receiving at least two lines 
of systemic treatment significantly favored the targeted approach, with an 
overall survival of 22.3 months (95% CI 14.7-29.3) vs. 17.5 months (95% CI 
1.7-19.8; p = 0.048). Our results underscore the value of targeted treatment 
approaches based on extended molecular characterization of biliary tract cancer 
to improve clinical outcomes.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-42083-4
PMCID: PMC10507096
PMID: 37723192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.