1. Noncoding RNA. 2023 Aug 24;9(5):49. doi: 10.3390/ncrna9050049.

Advances and Obstacles in Using CRISPR/Cas9 Technology for Non-Coding RNA Gene 
Knockout in Human Mesenchymal Stromal Cells.

Basalova N(1)(2), Illarionova M(2), Skryabina M(2), Vigovskiy M(1)(2), 
Tolstoluzhinskaya A(1)(2), Primak A(2), Chechekhina E(2), Chechekhin V(2), 
Karagyaur M(1)(2), Efimenko A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Medical Research and Education Center, 
Lomonosov Moscow State University, 27/10, Lomonosovsky Ave., 119192 Moscow, 
Russia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Lomonosov Moscow State University, 27/1, Lomonosovsky 
Ave., 119192 Moscow, Russia.

Non-coding RNA (ncRNAs) genes have attracted increasing attention in recent 
years due to their widespread involvement in physiological and pathological 
processes and regulatory networks. The study of the function and molecular 
partners of ncRNAs opens up opportunities for the early diagnosis and treatment 
of previously incurable diseases. However, the classical "loss-of-function" 
approach in ncRNA function analysis is challenged due to some specific issues. 
Here, we have studied the potency of two CRISPR/Cas9 variants, wild-type 
(SpCas9wt) and nickase (SpCas9D10A) programmable nucleases, for the editing of 
extended DNA sequences in human mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs). Editing the 
genes of fibrosis-related hsa-miR-21-5p and hsa-miR-29c-3p, we have shown that a 
pair of SpCas9D10A molecules can effectively disrupt miRNA genes within the 
genomes of MSCs. This leads not only to a decrease in the level of knockout 
miRNA in MSCs and MSC-produced extracellular vesicles, but also to a change in 
cell physiology and the antifibrotic properties of the cell secretome. These 
changes correlate well with previously published data for the knockdown of 
certain miRNAs. The proposed approach can be used to knock out ncRNA genes 
within the genomes of MSCs or similar cell types in order to study their 
function in biological processes.

DOI: 10.3390/ncrna9050049
PMCID: PMC10514828
PMID: 37736895

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.