1. Zookeys. 2023 Sep 11;1179:169-196. doi: 10.3897/zookeys.1179.106718.
eCollection  2023.

ï»¿Molecular evidence and differences in gonopod morphology lead to the 
recognition of a new species of the freshwater crab genus Candidiopotamon Bott, 
1967 (Crustacea, Brachyura, Potamidae) from eastern Taiwan.

Shih HT(1), Naruse T(2), Schubart CD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and Global Change Biology Research Center, 
National Chung Hsing University, 250, Kuo Kuang Road, Taichung 402, Taiwan 
National Chung Hsing University Taichung Taiwan.
(2)Tropical Biosphere Research Center, Iriomote Station, University of the 
Ryukyus, 870 Uehara, Taketomi, Okinawa 907-1541, Japan University of the Ryukyus 
Okinawa Japan.
(3)Zoology & Evolution, University of Regensburg, 93040 Regensburg, Germany 
University of Regensburg Regensburg Germany.

A new freshwater crab of the potamid genus Candidiopotamon Bott, 1967, is 
described from eastern Taiwan. Candidiopotamonpenglai sp. nov. is 
morphologically similar to C.rathbuni (De Man, 1914) from western Taiwan, but 
can be distinguished by the morphology of the male first gonopod (G1), as well 
as by their mitochondrial DNA (16S rRNA and COI genes). In the G1 of C.rathbuni, 
the subterminal segment shows a cline from robust in northern populations to 
slender in southern populations. In the G1 of C.penglaisp. nov., a distinctly 
larger and more distally directed keel-like projection is found on the distal 
inner edge of the terminal segment, with northern populations having an 
inward-curving subterminal segment and southern populations a straight 
subterminal segment. The genetic differentiation of the two species of 
Candidiopotamon within Taiwan is discussed, and morphological differences are 
compared. A key to the species of Candidiopotamon is also provided.

Hsi-Te Shih, Tohru Naruse, Christoph D. Schubart.

DOI: 10.3897/zookeys.1179.106718
PMCID: PMC10507446
PMID: 37731535

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.