1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Sep 21;11(5):e0132423. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01324-23. 
Online ahead of print.

Insight into the drug-resistant characteristics and genetic diversity of 
multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis in China.

Song Z(#)(1)(2), Liu C(#)(2), He W(#)(1)(2), Pei S(#)(3), Liu D(1), Cao X(1)(2), 
Wang Y(1)(2), He P(1)(2), Zhao B(2), Ou X(2), Xia H(2), Wang S(2), Zhao Y(2).

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention , Beijing, China.
(2)National Tuberculosis Reference Laboratory, Chinese Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention , Beijing, China.
(3)School of Public Health, Peking University , Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) has a severe impact on public health. 
To investigate the drug-resistant profile, compensatory mutations and genetic 
variations among MDR-TB isolates, a total of 546 MDR-TB isolates from China 
underwent drug-susceptibility testing and whole genome sequencing for further 
analysis. The results showed that our isolates have a high rate of 
fluoroquinolone resistance (45.60%, 249/546) and a low proportion of conferring 
resistance to bedaquiline, clofazimine, linezolid, and delamanid. The majority 
of MDR-TB isolates (77.66%, 424/546) belong to Lineage 2.2.1, followed by 
Lineage 4.5 (6.41%, 35/546), and the Lineage 2 isolates have a strong 
association with pre-XDR/XDR-TB (P < 0.05) in our study. Epidemic success 
analysis using time-scaled haplotypic density (THD) showed that clustered 
isolates outperformed non-clustered isolates. Compensatory mutations happened in 
rpoA, rpoC, and non-RRDR of rpoB genes, which were found more frequently in 
clusters and were associated with the increase of THD index, suggesting that 
increased bacterial fitness was associated with MDR-TB transmission. In 
addition, the variants in resistance associated genes in MDR isolates are mainly 
focused on single nucleotide polymorphism mutations, and only a few genes have 
indel variants, such as katG, ethA. We also found some genes underwent indel 
variation correlated with the lineage and sub-lineage of isolates, suggesting 
the selective evolution of different lineage isolates. Thus, this analysis of 
the characterization and genetic diversity of MDR isolates would be helpful in 
developing effective strategies for treatment regimens and tailoring public 
interventions. IMPORTANCE Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) is a serious 
obstacle to tuberculosis prevention and control in China. This study provides 
insight into the drug-resistant characteristics of MDR combined with phenotypic 
drug-susceptibility testing and whole genome sequencing. The compensatory 
mutations and epidemic success analysis were analyzed by time-scaled haplotypic 
density (THD) method, suggesting clustered isolates and compensatory mutations 
are associated with MDR-TB transmission. In addition, the insertion and deletion 
variants happened in some genes, which are associated with the lineage and 
sub-lineage of isolates, such as the mpt64 gene. This study offered a valuable 
reference and increased understanding of MDR-TB in China, which could be crucial 
for achieving the objective of precision medicine in the prevention and 
treatment of MDR-TB.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01324-23
PMCID: PMC10581218
PMID: 37732780

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.