1. Front Fungal Biol. 2021 Dec 16;2:778882. doi: 10.3389/ffunb.2021.778882. 
eCollection 2021.

Increased Pathogenicity of the Nematophagous Fungus Drechmeria coniospora 
Following Long-Term Laboratory Culture.

Courtine D(1), Zhang X(1), Ewbank JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INSERM, CIML, Turing Centre for Living Systems, 
Marseille, France.

Domestication provides a window into adaptive change. Over the course of 2 
decades of laboratory culture, a strain of the nematode-specific fungus 
Drechmeria coniospora became more virulent during its infection of 
Caenorhabditis elegans. Through a close comparative examination of the genome 
sequences of the original strain and its more pathogenic derivative, we 
identified a small number of non-synonymous mutations in protein-coding genes. 
In one case, the mutation was predicted to affect a gene involved in hypoxia 
resistance and we provide direct corroborative evidence for such an effect. The 
mutated genes with functional annotation were all predicted to impact the 
general physiology of the fungus and this was reflected in an increased in vitro 
growth, even in the absence of C. elegans. While most cases involved single 
nucleotide substitutions predicted to lead to a loss of function, we also 
observed a predicted restoration of gene function through deletion of an 
extraneous tandem repeat. This latter change affected the regulatory subunit of 
a cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Remarkably, we also found a mutation in a gene 
for a second protein of the same, protein kinase A, pathway. Together, we 
predict that they result in a stronger repression of the pathway for given 
levels of ATP and adenylate cyclase activity. Finally, we also identified 
mutations in a few lineage-specific genes of unknown function that are 
candidates for factors that influence virulence in a more direct manner.

Copyright Â© 2021 Courtine, Zhang and Ewbank.

DOI: 10.3389/ffunb.2021.778882
PMCID: PMC10512298
PMID: 37744153

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.