1. ACS Omega. 2023 Sep 1;8(37):33723-33736. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.3c04061. 
eCollection 2023 Sep 19.

Anticancer Effects of Plasma-Treated Water Solutions from Clinically Approved 
Infusion Liquids Supplemented with Organic Molecules.

Veronico V(1), Morelli S(2), Piscioneri A(2), Gristina R(3), Casiello M(1), 
Favia P(1)(3), Armenise V(1), Fracassi F(1)(3), De Bartolo L(2), Sardella E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Bari Aldo Moro, via Orabona, 4, 70126 
Bari, Italy.
(2)CNR-Institute on Membrane Technology (CNR-ITM), Via Pietro Bucci Cubo, 17/C, 
87036 Rende, CS, Italy.
(3)CNR-Institute of Nanotechnology (CNR-NANOTEC), Via Amendola, 122/D, 70124 
Bari, Italy.

Water solutions treated by cold atmospheric plasmas (CAPs) currently stand out 
in the field of cancer treatment as sources of exogenous blends of reactive 
oxygen and nitrogen species (RONS). It is well known that the balance of RONS 
inside both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells is directly involved in 
physiological as well as pathological pathways. Also, organic molecules 
including phenols could exert promising anticancer effects, mostly attributed to 
their pro-oxidant ability in vitro and in vivo to generate RONS like O2-, H2O2, 
and a mixture of potentially cytotoxic compounds. By our vision of combining the 
efficacy of plasma-produced RONS and the use of organic molecules, we could 
synergistically attack cancer cells; yet, so far, this combination, to the best 
of our knowledge, has been completely unexplored. In this study, l-tyrosine, an 
amino acid with a phenolic side chain, is added to a physiological solution, 
often used in clinical practice (SIII) to be exposed to plasma. The efficacy of 
the gas plasma-oxidized SIII solution, containing tyrosine, was evaluated on 
four cancer cell lines selected from among tumors with poor prognosis (SHSY-5Y, 
MCF-7, HT-29, and SW-480). The aim was to induce tumor toxicity and trigger 
apoptosis pathways. The results clearly indicate that the plasma-treated water 
solution (PTWS) reduced cell viability and oxygen uptake due to an increase in 
intracellular ROS levels and activation of apoptosis pathways in all 
investigated cancer cells, which may be related to the activation of the 
mitochondrial-mediated and p-JNK/caspase-3 signaling pathways. This research 
offers improved knowledge about the physiological mechanisms underlying cancer 
treatment and a valid method to set up a prompt, adequate, and effective cancer 
treatment in the clinic.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.3c04061
PMCID: PMC10515361
PMID: 37744835

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.