1. J Cardiovasc Dev Dis. 2023 Sep 20;10(9):406. doi: 10.3390/jcdd10090406.

The Role of Advanced Glycation End-Product Levels Measured by Skin 
Autofluorescence in the Development of Mitral Annular Calcification.

Boyraz B(1), Peker T(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology Department, Medicalpark Hospital, Health Science Faculty, Mudanya 
University, Bursa 16950, Turkey.

As a person ages, mitral annular calcification develops in the mitral annulus 
with increasing frequency. Lipid deposition, inflammation, and aging-related 
degeneration have been cited as potential causes of this pathophysiology, though 
there is currently no conclusive evidence to support this. AGEs accumulate in 
tissues due to the glycation of proteins and lipids, increasing the release of 
proinflammatory cytokines secondary to oxidative stress through the AGE 
receptor. The AGE levels increase in diabetic microvascular complications and 
degenerative aortic valve disease. Our study was planned prospectively as a 
case-control study involving 94 MAC-positive patients and 94 MAC-negative 
patients. The demographics, echocardiographic data and AGE levels of the 
patients were measured and recorded using the skin autofluorescence method. AGE 
levels were significantly higher in the MAC-positive patient group (3.2 vs. 2.7; 
p < 0.001). The AGE levels were observed as an independent predictor of MAC 
development in a regression analysis (OR: 8.05, 95% CI: 3.74-17.33, p < 0.001). 
In a ROC-curve analysis, the AUC was 0.79 (95% CI: 0.72-0.85). At a cut-off 
value of 2.7, 79.7% sensitivity and 69.1% specificity were observed. AGE levels 
can be used to cheaply, easily and non-invasively identify patients at risk of 
developing MAC.

DOI: 10.3390/jcdd10090406
PMCID: PMC10531500
PMID: 37754835

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.