1. Cells. 2023 Sep 8;12(18):2240. doi: 10.3390/cells12182240.

Myoglobin in Brown Adipose Tissue: A Multifaceted Player in Thermogenesis.

Aboouf MA(1)(2)(3), Gorr TA(1), Hamdy NM(3), Gassmann M(1)(2), Thiersch M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Veterinary Physiology, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), University of Zurich, 
8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams University, Cairo 
11566, Egypt.

Brown adipose tissue (BAT) plays an important role in energy homeostasis by 
generating heat from chemical energy via uncoupled oxidative phosphorylation. 
Besides its high mitochondrial content and its exclusive expression of the 
uncoupling protein 1, another key feature of BAT is the high expression of 
myoglobin (MB), a heme-containing protein that typically binds oxygen, thereby 
facilitating the diffusion of the gas from cell membranes to mitochondria of 
muscle cells. In addition, MB also modulates nitric oxide (NO•) pools and can 
bind C16 and C18 fatty acids, which indicates a role in lipid metabolism. Recent 
studies in humans and mice implicated MB present in BAT in the regulation of 
lipid droplet morphology and fatty acid shuttling and composition, as well as 
mitochondrial oxidative metabolism. These functions suggest that MB plays an 
essential role in BAT energy metabolism and thermogenesis. In this review, we 
will discuss in detail the possible physiological roles played by MB in BAT 
thermogenesis along with the potential underlying molecular mechanisms and focus 
on the question of how BAT-MB expression is regulated and, in turn, how this 
globin regulates mitochondrial, lipid, and NO• metabolism. Finally, we present 
potential MB-mediated approaches to augment energy metabolism, which ultimately 
could help tackle different metabolic disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12182240
PMCID: PMC10526770
PMID: 37759463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.