1. PLoS Genet. 2023 Sep 27;19(9):e1010937. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010937. 
eCollection 2023 Sep.

RBMX involves in telomere stability maintenance by regulating TERRA expression.

Liu J(1), Zheng T(1)(2), Chen D(1), Huang J(1), Zhao Y(1), Ma W(1), Liu H(1).

Author information:
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation, School of Life Sciences, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen 
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Telomeric repeat-containing RNA (TERRA) is a class of long noncoding RNAs 
(lncRNAs) that are transcribed from subtelomeric to telomeric region of 
chromosome ends. TERRA is prone to form R-loop structures at telomeres by 
invading into telomeric DNA. Excessive telomere R-loops result in telomere 
instability, so the TERRA level needs to be delicately modulated. However, the 
molecular mechanisms and factors controlling TERRA level are still largely 
unknown. In this study, we report that the RNA binding protein RBMX is a novel 
regulator of TERRA level and telomere integrity. The expression level of TERRA 
is significantly elevated in RBMX depleted cells, leading to enhanced telomere 
R-loop formation, replication stress, and telomere instability. We also found 
that RBMX binds to TERRA and the nuclear exosome targeting protein ZCCHC8 
simultaneously, and that TERRA degradation slows down upon RBMX depletion, 
implying that RBMX promotes TERRA degradation by regulating its transportation 
to the nuclear exosome, which decays nuclear RNAs. Altogether, these findings 
uncover a new role of RBMX in TERRA expression regulation and telomere integrity 
maintenance, and raising RBMX as a potential target of cancer therapy.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Liu et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010937
PMCID: PMC10529574
PMID: 37756323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.