1. J Cardiovasc Dev Dis. 2023 Sep 12;10(9):393. doi: 10.3390/jcdd10090393.

Identification of Rare Genetic Variants in Familial Spontaneous Coronary Artery 
Dissection and Evidence for Shared Biological Pathways.

Turley TN(1)(2), Theis JL(2), Evans JM(3), Fogarty ZC(3), Gulati R(4), Hayes 
SN(4), Tweet MS(4), Olson TM(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics Track, Mayo Clinic 
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(2)Cardiovascular Genetics Research Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.
(3)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Division of Computational 
Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Division of Pediatric 
Cardiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Rare familial spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) kindreds implicate 
genetic disease predisposition and provide a unique opportunity for candidate 
gene discovery. Whole-genome sequencing was performed in fifteen probands with 
non-syndromic SCAD who had a relative with SCAD, eight of whom had a second 
relative with extra-coronary arteriopathy. Co-segregating variants and 
associated genes were prioritized by quantitative variant, gene, and 
disease-level metrics. Curated public databases were queried for functional 
relationships among encoded proteins. Fifty-four heterozygous coding variants in 
thirteen families co-segregated with disease and fulfilled primary filters of 
rarity, gene variation constraint, and predicted-deleterious protein effect. 
Secondary filters yielded 11 prioritized candidate genes in 12 families, with 
high arterial tissue expression (n = 7), high-confidence protein-level 
interactions with genes associated with SCAD previously (n = 10), and/or 
previous associations with connective tissue disorders and aortopathies (n = 3) 
or other vascular phenotypes in mice or humans (n = 11). High-confidence 
associations were identified among 10 familial SCAD candidate-gene-encoded 
proteins. A collagen-encoding gene was identified in five families, two with 
distinct variants in COL4A2. Familial SCAD is genetically heterogeneous, yet 
perturbations of extracellular matrix, cytoskeletal, and cell-cell adhesion 
proteins implicate common disease-susceptibility pathways. Incomplete penetrance 
and variable expression suggest genetic or environmental modifiers.

DOI: 10.3390/jcdd10090393
PMCID: PMC10532385
PMID: 37754822

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.