1. Sci Rep. 2023 Sep 26;13(1):16084. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-43378-2.

Deterministic field-free voltage-induced magnetization switching with 
self-regulated precession for low-power memory.

Sin S(1), Oh S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Hanyang University, 
Ansan, 15588, Korea.
(2)Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Hanyang University, 
Ansan, 15588, Korea. sroonter@hanyang.ac.kr.

Spintronic devices are regarded as a promising solution for future computing and 
memory technologies. They are non-volatile, resilient to radiation, and 
compatible with the CMOS back-end process. However, the major drawbacks of 
modern current-driven spintronic devices are the long switching delay and 
relatively high power consumption. Recent progress in magnetoelectronics, 
particularly in voltage-controlled magnetism reveals a possible solution. 
Voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy (VCMA) allows the manipulation of 
interface-mediated perpendicular anisotropy energy. However, most VCMA-based 
switching methods require pre-read operation, precise pulse-width control and 
have high write error rate. This study proposes a novel deterministic 
self-regulated precessional ferromagnet switching method, which overcomes these 
issues. In the discussed method, energy symmetry is broken by a dependence of 
MTJ resistance on the angle between magnetization vectors of free and pinned 
layers. Hence, the method does not require an external magnetic field and large 
electric current. The proposed method is verified through micromagnetic 
simulations and benchmarked with other methods typically reported in the 
literature. We report the write error rate is significantly improved compared to 
other VCMA switching methods. Moreover, the mean energy consumption is as low as 
38.22 fJ and the mean switching delay is 3.77 ns.

Â© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-43378-2
PMCID: PMC10522764
PMID: 37752252

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.