1. Foods. 2023 Sep 13;12(18):3415. doi: 10.3390/foods12183415.

Inhibitory Mechanism of Quercimeritrin as a Novel α-Glucosidase Selective 
Inhibitor.

Guo F(1), An J(2), Wang M(2), Zhang W(2), Chen C(2), Mao X(1), Liu S(2)(3), Wang 
P(2)(3), Ren F(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing 100083, China.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Health, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100083, China.
(3)Food Laboratory of Zhongyuan, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100083, 
China.

In this study, 12 flavonoid glycosides were selected based on virtual screening 
and the literature, and Quercimeritrin was selected as the best selective 
inhibitor of α-glucosidase through in vitro enzyme activity inhibition 
experiments. Its IC50 value for α-glucosidase was 79.88 µM, and its IC50 value 
for α-amylase >250 µM. As such, it could be used as a new selective inhibitor of 
α-glucosidase. The selective inhibition mechanism of Quercimeritrin on the two 
starch-digesting enzymes was further explored, and it was confirmed that 
Quercimeritrin had a strong binding affinity for α-glucosidase and occupied the 
binding pocket of α-glucosidase through non-covalent binding. Subsequently, 
animal experiments demonstrated that Quercimeritrin can effectively control 
postprandial blood glucose in vivo, with the same inhibitory effect as acarbose 
but without side effects. Our results, therefore, provide insights into how 
flavone aglycones can be used to effectively control the rate of digestion to 
improve postprandial blood glucose levels.

DOI: 10.3390/foods12183415
PMCID: PMC10528180
PMID: 37761124

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.