1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 11;24(18):13939. doi: 10.3390/ijms241813939.

Novel Toxicodynamic Model of Subcutaneous Envenomation to Characterize Snake 
Venom Coagulopathies and Assess the Efficacy of Site-Directed Inorganic 
Antivenoms.

Nielsen VG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The University of Arizona College of Medicine, 
Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Venomous snake bite adversely affects millions of people yearly, but few animal 
models allow for the determination of toxicodynamic timelines with hemotoxic 
venoms to characterize the onset and severity of coagulopathy or assess novel, 
site-directed antivenom strategies. Thus, the goals of this investigation were 
to create a rabbit model of subcutaneous envenomation to assess venom 
toxicodynamics and efficacy of ruthenium-based antivenom administration. New 
Zealand White rabbits were sedated with midazolam via the ear vein and had 
viscoelastic measurements of whole blood and/or plasmatic coagulation kinetics 
obtained from ear artery samples. Venoms derived from Crotalus scutulatus 
scutulatus, Bothrops moojeni, or Calloselasma rhodostoma were injected 
subcutaneously, and changes in coagulation were determined over three hours and 
compared to samples obtained prior to envenomation. Other rabbits had 
ruthenium-based antivenoms injected five minutes after venom injection. 
Viscoelastic analyses demonstrated diverse toxicodynamic patterns of 
coagulopathy consistent with the molecular composition of the proteomes of the 
venoms tested. The antivenoms tested attenuated venom-mediated coagulopathy. A 
novel rabbit model can be used to characterize the onset and severity of 
envenomation by diverse proteomes and to assess site-directed antivenoms. Future 
investigation is planned involving other medically important venoms and 
antivenom development.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241813939
PMCID: PMC10530349
PMID: 37762243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author is the inventor of the use of CORM-2 
as a remedy for venom-induced coagulopathy, with USPTO patents (#10,314,860 and 
#10,828,326) owned by the University of Arizona Board of Regents. Another patent 
involving the combination of RuCl3 with CORM-2 as a treatment for hemotoxic 
envenomation has been filed with the USPTO, also owned by the University of 
Arizona Board of Regents, with the author as inventor. The author is also the 
owner of a company, Trinity Antivenoms, LLC, that is inactive and possesses no 
assets. These conflicts of interest are overseen by the University of Arizonaâ€™s 
Office of Conflict of Interest, which has in place a plan for the mitigation of 
conflict that includes periodic reporting by the author and oversight by a 
colleague who is not involved with this project or any relevant patents to 
provide assurance of scientific integrity. Lastly, the funders had no role in 
the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; 
in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results.