1. Biomedicines. 2023 Aug 29;11(9):2413. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11092413.

A Review of the Relationship between the Immune Response, Inflammation, 
Oxidative Stress, and the Pathogenesis of Sickle Cell Anaemia.

Aboderin FI(1), Oduola T(2), Davison GM(3), Oguntibeju OO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health and Wellness Sciences, 
Cape Peninsula University of Technology, Bellville 7535, South Africa.
(2)Department of Chemical Pathology, Usmanu Danfodiyo University, Sokoto 840004, 
Nigeria.
(3)SAMRC/CPUT Cardiometabolic Health Research Unit, Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, Faculty of Health and Wellness Sciences, Cape Peninsula University of 
Technology, Bellville 7535, South Africa.

Sickle cell anaemia (SCD) is a life-threatening haematological disorder which is 
predominant in sub-Saharan Africa and is triggered by a genetic mutation of the 
Î²-chain haemoglobin gene resulting in the substitution of glutamic acid with 
valine. This mutation leads to the production of an abnormal haemoglobin 
molecule called haemoglobin S (HbS). When deoxygenated, haemoglobin S (HbS) 
polymerises and results in a sickle-shaped red blood cell which is rigid and has 
a significantly shortened life span. Various reports have shown a strong link 
between oxidative stress, inflammation, the immune response, and the 
pathogenesis of sickle cell disease. The consequence of these processes leads to 
the development of vasculopathy (disease of the blood vessels) and several other 
complications. The role of the immune system, particularly the innate immune 
system, in the pathogenesis of SCD has become increasingly clear in recent years 
of research; however, little is known about the roles of the adaptive immune 
system in this disease. This review examines the interaction between the immune 
system, inflammation, oxidative stress, blood transfusion, and their effects on 
the pathogenesis of sickle cell anaemia.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11092413
PMCID: PMC10525295
PMID: 37760854

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.