1. Ultrason Sonochem. 2023 Nov;100:106618. doi: 10.1016/j.ultsonch.2023.106618. 
Epub 2023 Sep 23.

Enhanced on-Chip modification and intracellular hydrogen peroxide detection via 
gigahertz acoustic streaming microfluidic platform.

Zhu F(1), Liu Z(1), Wu X(1), Xu D(1), Li Q(1), Chen X(1), Pang W(1), Duan X(1), 
Wang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Precision Measuring Technology and Instruments, 
College of Precision Instruments and Opto-electronics Engineering, Tianjin 
University, Tianjin 300072, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Precision Measuring Technology and Instruments, 
College of Precision Instruments and Opto-electronics Engineering, Tianjin 
University, Tianjin 300072, China. Electronic address: yanyanwang@tju.edu.cn.

Developing effective strategies for the flexible control of fluid is vital for 
microfluidic electrochemical biosensing. In this study, a gigahertz (GHz) 
acoustic streaming (AS) based sonoelectrochemical system was developed to 
realize an on-chip surface modification and sensitive hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) 
detection from living cells. The flexible and controlled fluid surrounding the 
electrochemical chip was optimized theoretically and applied in the 
sonoelectrochemical deposition of Au nanoparticles (AuNPs) first. Under the 
steady and fast flow stimulus of AS, AuNPs could be synthesized with a smaller 
and evener size distribution than the normal condition, allowing AuNPs to show 
an excellent peroxidase-like activity. Moreover, the AS also accelerated the 
mass transport of target molecules and improved the catalytic rate, leading to 
the enhancement of H2O2 detection, with an extremely low detection limit of 
32 nM and a high sensitivity of 4.34 μA/ (mM·mm2). Finally, this system was 
successfully applied in tracking H2O2 release from different cell lines to 
distinguish the cancer cells from normal cells. This study innovatively 
integrated the surface modification and molecules detection process on a chip, 
and also proposed a simple but sensitive platform for microfluidic biosensing 
application.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ultsonch.2023.106618
PMCID: PMC10543187
PMID: 37769590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.