1. Pharmaceutics. 2023 Sep 13;15(9):2316. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics15092316.

A Promising Approach: Magnetic Nanosystems for Alzheimer's Disease Theranostics.

Chaparro CIP(1)(2), Sim√µes BT(1), Borges JP(2), Castanho MARB(1), Soares PIP(2), 
Neves V(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de 
Lisboa, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)i3N/CENIMAT, Department of Materials Science, NOVA School of Science and 
Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon, Campus de Caparica, 2829-516 Caparica, 
Portugal.

Among central nervous system (CNS) disorders, Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the 
most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder and a major cause of dementia 
worldwide. The yet unclear etiology of AD and the high impenetrability of the 
blood-brain barrier (BBB) limit most therapeutic compounds from reaching the 
brain. Although many efforts have been made to effectively deliver drugs to the 
CNS, both invasive and noninvasive strategies employed often come with 
associated side effects. Nanotechnology-based approaches such as nanoparticles 
(NPs), which can act as multifunctional platforms in a single system, emerged as 
a potential solution for current AD theranostics. Among these, magnetic 
nanoparticles (MNPs) are an appealing strategy since they can act as contrast 
agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and as drug delivery systems. The 
nanocarrier functionalization with specific moieties, such as peptides, 
proteins, and antibodies, influences the particles' interaction with brain 
endothelial cell constituents, facilitating transport across the BBB and 
possibly increasing brain penetration. In this review, we introduce MNP-based 
systems, combining surface modifications with the particles' physical properties 
for molecular imaging, as a novel neuro-targeted strategy for AD theranostics. 
The main goal is to highlight the potential of multifunctional MNPs and their 
advances as a dual nanotechnological diagnosis and treatment platform for 
neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics15092316
PMCID: PMC10536416
PMID: 37765284

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.