1. Microorganisms. 2023 Sep 20;11(9):2354. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11092354.

A Whole-Genome Sequencing-Based Approach for the Characterization of Klebsiella 
pneumoniae Co-Producing KPC and OXA-48-like Carbapenemases Circulating in 
Sardinia, Italy.

Del Rio A(1), Fox V(2), Muresu N(3), Sechi I(4), Cossu A(4), Palmieri A(4), 
Scutari R(2), Alteri C(2), Sotgiu G(5), Castiglia P(4), Piana A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sassari, 07100 Sassari, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, 20122 Milan, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Sassari, 07100 
Sassari, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine, Surgery, and Pharmacy, University of Sassari, 07100 
Sassari, Italy.
(5)Clinical Epidemiology and Medical Statistics Unit, Department of Medical, 
Surgical and Experimental Medicine, University of Sassari, 07100 Sassari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) provides important information for the 
characterization, surveillance, and monitoring of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) 
determinants, particularly in cases of multi- and extensively drug-resistant 
microorganisms. We reported the results of a WGS analysis carried out on 
carbapenemases-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae, which causes hospital-acquired 
infections (HAIs) and is characterized by a marked resistance profile.
METHODS: Clinical, phenotypic, and genotypic data were collected for the AMR 
surveillance screening program of the University Hospital of Sassari (Italy) 
during 2020-2021. Genomic DNA was sequenced using the Illumina Nova Seq 6000 
platform. Final assemblies were manually curated and carefully verified for the 
detection of antimicrobial resistance genes, porin mutations, and virulence 
factors. A phylogenetic analysis was performed using the maximum likelihood 
method.
RESULTS: All 17 strains analyzed belonged to ST512, and most of them carried the 
blaKPC-31 variant blaOXA-48-like, an OmpK35 truncation, and an OmpK36 mutation. 
Phenotypic analysis showed a marked resistance profile to all antibiotic 
classes, including β-lactams, carbapenems, aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolone, 
sulphonamides, and novel β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitors (BL/BLI).
CONCLUSION: WGS characterization revealed the presence of several antibiotic 
resistance determinants and porin mutations in highly resistant K. pneumoniae 
strains responsible for HAIs. The detection of blaKPC-31 in our hospital wards 
highlights the importance of genomic surveillance in hospital settings to 
monitor the emergence of new clones and the need to improve control and 
preventive strategies to efficiently contrast AMR.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms11092354
PMCID: PMC10535212
PMID: 37764198

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.