1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 9;24(18):13882. doi: 10.3390/ijms241813882.

Characterization and Functional Analysis of Chalcone Synthase Genes in Highbush 
Blueberry (Vaccinium corymbosum).

Zhang Z(1), Qu P(1), Hao S(1), Li R(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhao Q(1), Wen P(1), Cheng 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Horticulture, Shanxi Agricultural University, Jinzhong 030801, 
China.

Chalcone synthase (CHS) is the first key enzyme-catalyzing plant flavonoid 
biosynthesis. Until now, however, the blueberry CHS gene family has not been 
systematically characterized and studied. In this study, we identified 22 CHS 
genes that could be further classified into four subfamilies from the highbush 
blueberry (Vaccinium corymbosum) genome. This classification was well supported 
by the high nucleotide and protein sequence similarities and similar gene 
structure and conserved motifs among VcCHS members from the same subfamily. Gene 
duplication analysis revealed that the expansion of the blueberry CHS gene 
family was mainly caused by segmental duplications. Promoter analysis revealed 
that the promoter regions of VcCHSs contained numerous cis-acting elements 
responsive to light, phytohormone and stress, along with binding sites for 36 
different types of transcription factors. Gene expression analysis revealed that 
Subfamily I VcCHSs highly expressed in fruits at late ripening stages. Through 
transient overexpression, we found that three VcCHSs (VcCHS13 from subfamily II; 
VcCHS8 and VcCHS21 from subfamily I) could significantly enhance the anthocyanin 
accumulation and up-regulate the expression of flavonoid biosynthetic structural 
genes in blueberry leaves and apple fruits. Notably, the promoting effect of the 
Subfamily I member VcCHS21 was the best. The promoter of VcCHS21 contains a 
G-box (CACGTG) and an E-box sequence, as well as a bHLH binding site. A yeast 
one hybridization (Y1H) assay revealed that three anthocyanin biosynthesis 
regulatory bHLHs (VcAN1, VcbHLH1-1 and VcbHLH1-2) could specifically bind to the 
G-box sequence (CACGTG) in the VcCHS21 promoter, indicating that the expression 
of VcCHS21 was regulated by bHLHs. Our study will be helpful for understanding 
the characteristics and functions of blueberry CHSs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241813882
PMCID: PMC10530253
PMID: 37762185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.