1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 18;24(18):14240. doi: 10.3390/ijms241814240.

Functional Insight into and Refinement of the Genomic Boundaries of the 
JARID2-Neurodevelopmental Disorder Episignature.

van der Laan L(1), Rooney K(2)(3), Haghshenas S(2), Silva A(3), McConkey 
H(2)(3), Relator R(2), Levy MA(2), Valenzuela I(4)(5), Trujillano L(4)(5), 
Lasa-Aranzasti A(4)(5), Campos B(4)(5), Castells N(4)(5), Verberne EA(1), Maas 
S(1), Alders M(1), Mannens MMAM(1), van Haelst MM(1), Sadikovic B(1)(2)(3), 
Henneman P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam Reproduction and Development Research 
Institute, Amsterdam University Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre, London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON 
N6A 5W9, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London, 
ON N6A 3K7, Canada.
(4)Medicine Genetics Group, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Vall 
d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Universitari, 129, 
08035 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona 
Hospital Campus, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Universitari, 129, 08035 Barcelona, 
Spain.

JARID2 (Jumonji, AT-rich interactive domain 2) haploinsufficiency is associated 
with a clinically distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome. It is characterized by 
intellectual disability, developmental delay, autistic features, behavior 
abnormalities, cognitive impairment, hypotonia, and dysmorphic features. JARID2 
acts as a transcriptional repressor protein that is involved in the regulation 
of histone methyltransferase complexes. JARID2 plays a role in the epigenetic 
machinery, and the associated syndrome has an identified DNA methylation 
episignature derived from sequence variants and intragenic deletions involving 
JARID2. For this study, our aim was to determine whether patients with larger 
deletions spanning beyond JARID2 present a similar DNA methylation episignature 
and to define the critical region involved in aberrant DNA methylation in 
6p22-p24 microdeletions. We examined the DNA methylation profiles of peripheral 
blood from 56 control subjects, 13 patients with (likely) pathogenic JARID2 
variants or patients carrying copy number variants, and three patients with 
JARID2 VUS variants. The analysis showed a distinct and strong differentiation 
between patients with (likely) pathogenic variants, both sequence and copy 
number, and controls. Using the identified episignature, we developed a binary 
model to classify patients with the JARID2-neurodevelopmental syndrome. DNA 
methylation analysis indicated that JARID2 is the driver gene for aberrant DNA 
methylation observed in 6p22-p24 microdeletions. In addition, we performed 
analysis of functional correlation of the JARID2 genome-wide methylation profile 
with the DNA methylation profiles of 56 additional neurodevelopmental disorders. 
To conclude, we refined the critical region for the presence of the JARID2 
episignature in 6p22-p24 microdeletions and provide insight into the functional 
changes in the epigenome observed when regulation by JARID2 is lost.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241814240
PMCID: PMC10531903
PMID: 37762546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.