1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2023 Aug 28;16(9):1212. doi: 10.3390/ph16091212.

Hyperhomocysteinaemia Promotes Doxorubicin-Induced Cardiotoxicity in Mice.

Fan R(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang J(1), An X(2), Liu S(3), Bai J(4), Li J(1), Lin Q(1), 
Xie Y(1), Liao J(1), Xia Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian 
Medical University, Dalian 116011, China.
(2)Department of Interventional Therapy, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian 
Medical University, Dalian 116011, China.
(3)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116004, 
China.
(4)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Dalian 
Medical University, Dalian 116004, China.

Doxorubicin, a widely used chemotherapeutic drug in clinical oncology, causes a 
series of cardiac side effects referred to as doxorubicin-induced 
cardiotoxicity. Hyperhomocysteinaemia is an independent risk factor for multiple 
cardiovascular diseases. However, whether hyperhomocysteinaemia contributes to 
doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity is currently unknown. In this study, we 
explored the pathogenic effects of hyperhomocysteinaemia induced by dietary 
methionine supplementation (2% wt/wt in rodent chow) in a mouse model of 
doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Our data showed that methionine 
supplementation doubled serum homocysteine levels, inducing mild 
hyperhomocysteinaemia. Doxorubicin at a cumulative dosage of 25 mg/kg body 
weight led to significant weight loss and severe cardiac dysfunction, which were 
further exacerbated by methionine-induced mild hyperhomocysteinaemia. 
Doxorubicin-induced cardiac atrophy, cytoplasmic vacuolisation, myofibrillar 
disarray and loss, as well as cardiac fibrosis, were also exacerbated by 
methionine-induced mild hyperhomocysteinaemia. Additional folic acid 
supplementation (0.006% wt/wt) prevented methionine-induced 
hyperhomocysteinaemia and inhibited hyperhomocysteinaemia-aggravated cardiac 
dysfunction and cardiomyopathy. In particular, hyperhomocysteinaemia increased 
both serum and cardiac oxidative stress, which could all be inhibited by folic 
acid supplementation. Therefore, we demonstrated for the first time that 
hyperhomocysteinaemia could exacerbate doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity in 
mice, and the pathogenic effects of hyperhomocysteinaemia might at least 
partially correlate with increased oxidative stress and could be prevented by 
folic acid supplementation. Our study provides preliminary experimental evidence 
for the assessment of hyperhomocysteinaemia as a potential risk factor for 
chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity in cancer patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ph16091212
PMCID: PMC10534320
PMID: 37765020

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflict of interest.