1. Biomedicines. 2023 Sep 19;11(9):2573. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11092573.

A Truncated Receptor TrkB Isoform (TrkB.T1) in Mechanisms of Genetically 
Determined Depressive-like Behavior of Mice.

Alsalloum M(1), Ilchibaeva T(1), Tsybko A(1)(2), Eremin D(1), Naumenko V(1).

Author information:
(1)Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch 
of Russian Academy of Sciences, Prospekt Akad. Lavrentyeva 10, Novosibirsk 
630090, Russia.
(2)Department of Natural Sciences, Novosibirsk State University, Pirogova Street 
2, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.

Depression is a mental disorder that significantly reduces quality of life, and 
the discovery of new drug targets is an urgent problem for modern neuroscience. 
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its receptors have been found to 
participate in mechanisms of depression and antidepressant drugs' action. In 
this study, we focused on a less-studied truncated isoform of receptor TrkB: 
TrkB.T1. Initially, we noticed that the level of TrkB.T1 is low in the 
hippocampus of Antidepressant-Sensitive Cataleptics (ASC) mice, which are 
characterized by genetically determined depressive-like behavior in contrast to 
"normal" C57BL/6J mice. Next, overexpression of TrkB.T1 receptor in hippocampal 
neurons of ACS mice was induced to clarify the role of this receptor in 
mechanisms of depressive-like behavior. TrkB.T1 overexpression lowered BDNF 
protein concentration in the hippocampus. On the behavioral level, TrkB.T1 
overexpression severely decreased aggression and enhanced social behavior. 
Additionally, this excess of receptor TrkB.T1 slightly promoted anxiety and 
depressive-like behavioral traits without affecting learning and memory. Our 
results show that this TrkB isoform participates in the control of aggression, 
anxiety, and depressive-like behavior and in the regulation of BDNF system 
functioning in ASC mice (genetically predisposed to depressive-like behavior). 
Considering our findings, we believe that hippocampal receptor TrkB.T1 can be a 
drug target for the correction of behavioral pathologies.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11092573
PMCID: PMC10526453
PMID: 37761014

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.