1. Microorganisms. 2023 Sep 20;11(9):2351. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11092351.

Alpha-Naphthoflavone as a Novel Scaffold for the Design of Potential Inhibitors 
of the APH(3')-IIIa Nucleotide-Binding Site of Enterococcus faecalis.

Amorim JC(1), Carpio JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidad Académica de Salud y Bienestar, Universidad Católica de Cuenca, Av. 
Las Américas, Cuenca 010105, Ecuador.

The spread of nosocomial infections caused by antibiotic-resistant Enterococcus 
faecalis is one of the major threats to global health at present. While 
aminoglycosides are often used to combat these infections, their effectiveness 
is reduced by various resistance mechanisms, including aminoglycoside modifying 
enzymes, and there are currently no drugs to inhibit these enzymes. To address 
this issue, this study was conducted to identify potential aminoglycoside 
adjuvants from a database of 462 flavones. The affinity of these molecules with 
the nucleotide-binding site (NBS) of aminoglycoside phosphotransferase type IIIa 
of E. faecalis (EfAPH(3')-IIIa) was evaluated, and the five molecules with the 
highest binding energies were identified. Of these, four were naphthoflavones, 
suggesting that their backbone could be useful in designing potential 
inhibitors. The highest-ranked naphthoflavone, 
2-phenyl-4H-benzo[h]chromen-4-one, was modified to generate two new derivatives 
(ANF2OHC and ANF2OHCC) to interact with the NBS similarly to adenine in ATP. 
These derivatives showed higher binding free energies, better stability in 
molecular dynamics analysis and superior pharmacokinetic and toxicological 
profiles compared to the parent molecule. These findings suggest that these 
alpha-naphthoflavone derivatives are potential inhibitors of EfAPH(3')-IIIa and 
that this core may be a promising scaffold for developing adjuvants that restore 
the sensitivity of aminoglycosides.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms11092351
PMCID: PMC10535617
PMID: 37764195

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.