1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Aug 30;14(9):1737. doi: 10.3390/genes14091737.

Characterization of Plant Homeodomain Transcription Factor Genes Involved in 
Flower Development and Multiple Abiotic Stress Response in Pepper.

Wen J(1), Deng M(2), Zhao K(2), Zhou H(2), Wu R(2), Li M(2), Cheng H(2), Li 
P(2), Zhang R(2), Lv J(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Architecture and City Planning, Kunming University of Science and 
Technology, Kunming 650500, China.
(2)College of Landscape and Horticulture, Yunnan Agricultural University, 
Kunming 650201, China.

Plant homeodomain (PHD) transcription factor genes are involved in plant 
development and in a plant's response to stress. However, there are few reports 
about this gene family in peppers (Capsicum annuum L.). In this study, the 
pepper inbred line "Zunla-1" was used as the reference genome, and a total of 43 
PHD genes were identified, and systematic analysis was performed to study the 
chromosomal location, evolutionary relationship, gene structure, domains, and 
upstream cis-regulatory elements of the CaPHD genes. The fewest CaPHD genes were 
located on chromosome 4, while the most were on chromosome 3. Genes with similar 
gene structures and domains were clustered together. Expression analysis showed 
that the expression of CaPHD genes was quite different in different tissues and 
in response to various stress treatments. The expression of CaPHD17 was 
different in the early stage of flower bud development in the near-isogenic 
cytoplasmic male-sterile inbred and the maintainer inbred lines. It is 
speculated that this gene is involved in the development of male sterility in 
pepper. CaPHD37 was significantly upregulated in leaves and roots after heat 
stress, and it is speculated that CaPHD37 plays an important role in tolerating 
heat stress in pepper; in addition, CaPHD9, CaPHD10, CaPHD11, CaPHD17, CaPHD19, 
CaPHD20, and CaPHD43 were not sensitive to abiotic stress or hormonal factors. 
This study will provide the basis for further research into the function of 
CaPHD genes in plant development and responses to abiotic stresses and hormones.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14091737
PMCID: PMC10531376
PMID: 37761877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.