1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Sep 9;14(9):1781. doi: 10.3390/genes14091781.

Quantitative Evaluation of CFTR Gene Expression: A Comparison between Relative 
Quantification by Real-Time PCR and Absolute Quantification by Droplet Digital 
PCR.

Bruno SM(1), Blaconà G(1), Lo Cicero S(2), Castelli G(2), Virgulti M(1), Testino 
G(1), Pierandrei S(1), Fuso A(1), Cimino G(3), Ferraguti G(1), Eramo A(2), 
Lucarelli M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 00161 Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, National Institute of Health, 
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, ISS, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(3)Cystic Fibrosis Reference Center of Lazio Region, Policlinico Umberto I 
University Hospital, 00161 Rome, Italy.

In the precision medicine era of cystic fibrosis (CF), therapeutic 
interventions, by the so-called modulators, target the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein. The levels of targetable 
CFTR proteins are a main variable in the success of patient-specific therapy. In 
turn, the CFTR protein level depends, at least in part, on the level of CFTR 
mRNA. Many mechanisms can modulate the CFTR mRNA level, for example, 
transcriptional rate, stability of the mRNA, epigenetics, and pathogenic 
variants that can affect mRNA production and degradation. Independently from the 
causes of variable CFTR mRNA levels, their exact quantitative assessment is of 
great importance in CF. Methods with high analytical sensitivity, precision, and 
accuracy are mandatory for the quantitative evaluation aimed at the amelioration 
of the diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic aspects. This paper compares, for 
the first time, two CFTR gene expression quantification methods: a 
well-established method for the relative quantification of CFTR mRNA using a 
real-time PCR and an innovative method for its absolute quantification using a 
droplet digital PCR. No comprehensive methods for absolute CFTR quantification 
via droplet digital PCR have been published so far. The accurate quantification 
of CFTR expression at the mRNA level is a critical step for the personalized 
therapeutic approaches of CF.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14091781
PMCID: PMC10531455
PMID: 37761921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.