1. World J Diabetes. 2023 Sep 15;14(9):1334-1340. doi: 10.4239/wjd.v14.i9.1334.

MicroRNA-155 mediates endogenous angiotensin II type 1 receptor regulation: 
implications for innovative type 2 diabetes mellitus management.

Papadopoulos KI(1), Papadopoulou A(2), Aw TC(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of R&D, THAI StemLife, Bangkok 10310, Thailand. 
kostas@thaistemlife.co.th.
(2)Occupational and Environmental Health Services, Feelgood Lund, Lund 223-63, 
Skåne, Sweden.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Changi General Hospital, Singapore 529889, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119228, 
Singapore, Singapore.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a lifelong condition and a threat to human 
health. Thorough understanding of its pathogenesis is acutely needed in order to 
devise innovative, preventative, and potentially curative pharmacological 
interventions. MicroRNAs (miRNA), are small, non-coding, one-stranded RNA 
molecules, that can target and silence around 60% of all human genes through 
translational repression. MiR-155 is an ancient, evolutionarily well-conserved 
miRNA, with distinct expression profiles and multifunctionality, and a target 
repertoire of over 241 genes involved in numerous physiological and pathological 
processes including hematopoietic lineage differentiation, immunity, 
inflammation, viral infections, cancer, cardiovascular conditions, and 
particularly diabetes mellitus. MiR-155 Levels are progressively reduced in 
aging, obesity, sarcopenia, and T2DM. Thus, the loss of coordinated repression 
of multiple miR-155 targets acting as negative regulators, such as C/EBPβ, 
HDAC4, and SOCS1 impacts insulin signaling, deteriorating glucose homeostasis, 
and causing insulin resistance (IR). Moreover, deranged regulation of the renin 
angiotensin aldo-sterone system (RAAS) through loss of Angiotensin II Type 1 
receptor downregulation, and negated repression of ETS-1, results in unopposed 
detrimental Angiotensin II effects, further promoting IR. Finally, loss of BACH1 
and SOCS1 repression abolishes cytoprotective, anti-oxidant, anti-apoptotic, and 
anti-inflammatory cellular pathways, and promotes β-cell loss. In contrast to 
RAAS inhibitor treatments that further decrease already reduced miR-155 Levels, 
strategies to increase an ailing miR-155 production in T2DM, e.g., the use of 
metformin, mineralocorticoid receptor blockers (spironolactone, eplerenone, 
finerenone), and verapamil, alone or in various combinations, represent current 
treatment options. In the future, direct tissue delivery of miRNA analogs is 
likely.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.4239/wjd.v14.i9.1334
PMCID: PMC10523232
PMID: 37771329

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.