1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Nov;299(11):105306. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105306. Epub
2023  Sep 29.

The mitochondrial amidoxime reducing component-from prodrug-activation mechanism 
to drug-metabolizing enzyme and onward to drug target.

Struwe MA(1), Scheidig AJ(2), Clement B(3).

Author information:
(1)Zoologisches Institut - Strukturbiologie, Christian-Albrechts-Universität 
Kiel, Kiel, Germany; Pharmazeutisches Institut, Christian-Albrechts-Universität 
Kiel, Kiel, Germany. Electronic address: mstruwe@strubio.uni-kiel.de.
(2)Zoologisches Institut - Strukturbiologie, Christian-Albrechts-Universität 
Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Pharmazeutisches Institut, Christian-Albrechts-Universität Kiel, Kiel, 
Germany.

The mitochondrial amidoxime-reducing component (mARC) is one of five known 
molybdenum enzymes in eukaryotes. mARC belongs to the MOSC domain superfamily, a 
large group of so far poorly studied molybdoenzymes. mARC was initially 
discovered as the enzyme activating N-hydroxylated prodrugs of basic amidines 
but has since been shown to also reduce a variety of other N-oxygenated 
compounds, for example, toxic nucleobase analogs. Under certain circumstances, 
mARC might also be involved in reductive nitric oxide synthesis through 
reduction of nitrite. Recently, mARC enzymes have received a lot of attention 
due to their apparent involvement in lipid metabolism and, in particular, 
because many genome-wide association studies have shown a common variant of 
human mARC1 to have a protective effect against liver disease. The mechanism 
linking mARC enzymes with lipid metabolism remains unknown. Here, we give a 
comprehensive overview of what is currently known about mARC enzymes, their 
substrates, structure, and apparent involvement in human disease.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105306
PMCID: PMC10637980
PMID: 37778733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.