1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2023 Sep 1;24(9):3139-3153. doi: 
10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.9.3139.

The Tumor Suppressor BRCA1/2, Cancer Susceptibility and Genome Instability in 
Gynecological and Mammary Cancers.

Oubaddou Y(1), Ben Ali F(1), Oubaqui FE(1)(2), Qmichou Z(2), Bakri Y(1), 
Ameziane El Hassani R(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biology of Human Pathologies (BioPatH), Faculty of Sciences, 
Mohammed V University in Rabat, Rabat, Morocco.
(2)Medical Biotechnology Center, Moroccan Foundation for Advanced Science, 
Innovation and Research (MAScIR), Rabat, Morocco.

BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline alterations highly predispose women to breast and 
ovarian cancers. They are mostly found within the TNBC (Triple-Negative Breast 
Cancer) and the HGSOC (High-Grade Serous Ovarian Carcinoma) subsets, known by an 
aggressive phenotype, the lack of therapeutic targets and poor prognosis. 
Importantly, there is an increased risk for cervical cancer in BRCA1 and BRCA2 
mutation carriers that raises questions about the link between the HPV-driven 
genome instability and BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutations. Clinical, 
preclinical, and in vitro studies explained the increased risk for breast and 
ovarian cancers by genome instability resulting from the lack or loss of many 
functions related to BRCA1 or BRCA2 proteins such as DNA damage repair, stalled 
forks and R-loops resolution, transcription regulation, cell cycle control, and 
oxidative stress. In this review, we decipher the relationship between BRCA1/2 
alterations and genomic instability leading to gynecomammary cancers through 
results from patients, mice, and cell lines. Understanding the early events of 
BRCA1/2-driven genomic instability in gynecomammary cancers would help to find 
new biomarkers for early diagnosis, improve the sensitivity of emerging 
therapies such as PARP inhibitors, and reveal new potential therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.9.3139
PMCID: PMC10762740
PMID: 37774066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest