1. BJA Open. 2023 Sep 26;8:100224. doi: 10.1016/j.bjao.2023.100224. eCollection 
2023 Dec.

The nature of consciousness in anaesthesia.

Montupil J(1)(2)(3), Cardone P(4)(5), Staquet C(1)(2), Bonhomme A(4), Defresne 
A(1)(2)(3), Martial C(4)(5), Alnagger NLN(4)(5), Gosseries O(4)(5), Bonhomme 
V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Anesthesia and Perioperative Neuroscience Laboratory, Liege, Belgium.
(2)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Liege, Belgium.
(3)University Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Citadelle 
Regional Hospital, Liege, Belgium.
(4)Coma Science Group, GIGA-Consciousness Thematic Unit, GIGA-Research, Liege 
University, Liege, Belgium.
(5)Centre du Cerveau, Liege University Hospital, Liege, Belgium.

Neuroscientists agree on the value of locating the source of consciousness 
within the brain. Anaesthesiologists are no exception, and have their own 
operational definition of consciousness based on phenomenological observations 
during anaesthesia. The full functional correlates of consciousness are yet to 
be precisely identified, however rapidly evolving progress in this scientific 
domain has yielded several theories that attempt to model the generation of 
consciousness. They have received variable support from experimental 
observations, including those involving anaesthesia and its ability to 
reversibly modulate different aspects of consciousness. Aside from the interest 
in a better understanding of the mechanisms of consciousness, exploring the 
functional tenets of the phenomenological consciousness states of general 
anaesthesia has the potential to ultimately improve patient management. It could 
facilitate the design of specific monitoring devices and approaches, aiming at 
reliably detecting each of the possible states of consciousness during an 
anaesthetic procedure, including total absence of mental content 
(unconsciousness), and internal awareness (sensation of self and internal 
thoughts) with or without conscious perception of the environment (connected or 
disconnected consciousness, respectively). Indeed, it must be noted that 
unresponsiveness is not sufficient to infer absence of connectedness or even 
absence of consciousness. This narrative review presents the current knowledge 
in this field from a system-level, underlining the contribution of anaesthesia 
studies in supporting theories of consciousness, and proposing directions for 
future research.

Â© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.bjao.2023.100224
PMCID: PMC10539891
PMID: 37780201

Conflict of interest statement: VB has had financial relationships with the 
following companies: Orion Pharma, Medtronic, Edwards, and Elsevier. PC and NA 
are research fellows and OG is research associate at F.R.S-FNRS. The other 
authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.