1. BMC Neurol. 2023 Oct 4;23(1):350. doi: 10.1186/s12883-023-03398-x.

Novel heterozygous VPS13A pathogenic variants in chorea-neuroacanthocytosis: a 
case report.

Chen X(1)(2)(3), Zhang P(1)(3), Wang L(1)(3), Zhang Y(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Guangdong Neuroscience Institute, Guangdong 
Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, No. 106 Zhongshan Er Road, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(2)Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, China.
(3)Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment for Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital (Guangdong Academy of Medical 
Sciences), Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Guangdong Neuroscience Institute, Guangdong 
Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, No. 106 Zhongshan Er Road, Guangzhou, 510080, China. 
zhangyuhu@gdph.org.cn.
(5)Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment for Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital (Guangdong Academy of Medical 
Sciences), Guangzhou, 510080, China. zhangyuhu@gdph.org.cn.

BACKGROUND: Chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc) is a rare hereditary autosomal 
recessive neurodegenerative disorder caused by pathogenic variants of the 
Vacuolar Protein Sorting 13 homolog A (VPS13A) gene. The variant spectrum of 
VPS13A has not been completely elucidated. This study reports two novel 
heterozygous VPS13A pathogenic variants in ChAc that expand the variant spectrum 
of VPS13A.
CASE PRESENTATION: We described a case of a 29-year-old man with typical 
clinical manifestations of ChAc, including chorea, orofacial lingual dyskinesia, 
vocal tics, elevated serum biochemical indicators, increased acanthocytes in 
peripheral blood, and caudate nucleus atrophy. Next-generation sequencing 
revealed two heterozygous variants of VPS13A: a nonsense variant (NM_033305.2: 
c.8215G > T, p. Glu2739Ter) and a deletion variant in the exons 25-31.
CONCLUSION: The identified nonsense variant gives rise to premature translation 
termination, while the deletion variant is expected to cause a significant 
in-frame deletion of amino acid residues in the encoded protein. Both variants 
are considered to be pathogenic and result in loss-of-function proteins. These 
findings have implications for the genetic counseling of patients with VPS13A 
variants.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-023-03398-x
PMCID: PMC10548615
PMID: 37794323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.