1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Sep 19;14:1268366. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1268366. 
eCollection 2023.

Ghrelin receptor antagonist JMV2959 blunts cocaine and oxycodone drug-seeking, 
but not self-administration, in male rats.

Merritt CR(#)(1), Garcia EJ(#)(1), Brehm VD(1), Fox RG(1), Moeller FG(2), 
Anastasio NC(1), Cunningham KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Addiction Sciences and Therapeutics and Department of Pharmacology 
and Toxicology, John Sealy School of Medicine, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX, United States.
(2)C. Kenneth and Dianne Wright Center for Clinical and Translational Research, 
Departments of Psychiatry and Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth 
University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

The drug overdose crisis has spawned serious health consequences, including the 
increased incidence of substance use disorders (SUDs), conditions manifested by 
escalating medical and psychological impairments. While medication management is 
a key adjunct in SUD treatment, this crisis has crystallized the need to develop 
additional therapeutics to facilitate extended recovery from SUDs. The "hunger 
hormone" ghrelin acts by binding to the growth hormone secretagogue receptor 1α 
(GHS1αR) to control homeostatic and hedonic aspects of food intake and has been 
implicated in the mechanisms underlying SUDs. Preclinical studies indicate that 
GHS1αR antagonists and inverse agonists suppress reward-related signaling 
associated with cocaine and opioids. In the present study, we found that the 
GHS1αR antagonist JMV2959 was efficacious to suppress both cue-reinforced 
cocaine and oxycodone drug-seeking, but not cocaine or oxycodone 
self-administration in male Sprague-Dawley rats. These data suggest a role of 
the ghrelin-GHS1αR axis in mediating overlapping reward-related aspects of 
cocaine and oxycodone and premises the possibility that a GHS1αR antagonist may 
be a valuable therapeutic strategy for relapse vulnerability in SUDs.

Copyright © 2023 Merritt, Garcia, Brehm, Fox, Moeller, Anastasio and Cunningham.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1268366
PMCID: PMC10545966
PMID: 37795028

Conflict of interest statement: FM has past research funding from Indivior 
Pharmaceuticals and Nektar Therapeutics. He also recently served as a consultant 
for Astellas Pharmaceuticals and Boehringer Ingelheim. KC is a consultant for 
Delix Therapeutics for research unrelated to the current topic. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.