1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Oct 6;102(40):e35401. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000035401.

Value of Hcy combined with Framingham score for predicting macrovascular disease 
in elderly patients with type 2 diabetes.

Wang L(1), Wang ZH, Liu LP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hanyang Hospital Affiliated to Wuhan University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China.

To analyze the predictive value of homocysteine (Hcy) combined with the 
Framingham risk score for cardio- and cerebrovascular disease in elderly 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) to provide a reference for 
clinical treatment. We retrospectively reviewed the clinical data of 1036 
elderly patients with T2DM admitted to our hospital between July 2017 and July 
2022. The patients were divided into occurrence (n = 438) and control (n = 598) 
groups based on the incidence of cardio- or cerebrovascular disease. Univariate 
and multivariate logistic analyses were used to analyze the factors associated 
with cardio-cerebral small-vessel disease in the elderly patients with T2DM. The 
predictive value of Hcy combined with the Framingham score for cardio- and 
cerebrovascular diseases in elderly patients with T2DM was determined using 
receiver operating characteristic curves. Univariate analysis showed that the 
occurrence group had significantly higher Framingham score, systolic blood 
pressure (SBP), total cholesterol (TC), fasting blood glucose (FBG), 2-hour 
postprandial plasma glucose, Hcy, glycated hemoglobin, smoking history, and 
disease duration than the control group (all P < .05). Food preferences, sleep 
duration, physical exercise, high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels were significantly lower in the 
occurrence group than in the control group (all P < .05). Multivariate logistic 
analysis showed that smoking history, duration of diabetes, Framingham score, 
SBP, TC, FBG, HDL-C, 2h postprandial plasma glucose, and Hcy levels were risk 
factors for cardio- and cerebrovascular disease in elderly patients with T2DM. 
The area under the curve for Hcy and Framingham scores was 0.741 (95% confidence 
interval [CI]: 0.635-1.871) and 0.717 (95% CI: 0.601-0.856), respectively. Hcy 
combined with the Framingham score demonstrated a significantly higher 
predictive value (0.852, 95% CI: 0.741-0.979). Long smoking history, long 
diabetes duration, high Framingham score, high SBP, high TC, high FBG, low 
HDL-C, and high Hcy levels are risk factors for cardio-cerebrovascular disease 
in elderly patients with T2DM. In addition, Hcy level combined with the 
Framingham score demonstrated superior predictive power for cardio- and 
cerebrovascular disease in elderly patients with T2DM.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000035401
PMCID: PMC10553110
PMID: 37800767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]