1. Open Med (Wars). 2023 Oct 5;18(1):20230806. doi: 10.1515/med-2023-0806. 
eCollection 2023.

Analysis of two-gene signatures and related drugs in small-cell lung cancer by 
bioinformatics.

Li Y(1), Zhou X(2), Lyu Z(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)The School of Clinical Medicine, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Medical College, Shantou University, Shantou, China.
(3)Department of Senior Cadres Ward, Zhongshan Hospital of Xiamen University, 
School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.

Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) has a poor prognosis and can be diagnosed with 
systemic metastases. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
development of SCLC are unclear, requiring further investigation. The current 
research aims to identify relevant biomarkers and available drugs to treat SCLC. 
The bioinformatics analysis comprised three Gene Expression Omnibus datasets 
(including GSE2149507, GSE6044, and GSE30219). Using the limma R package, we 
discovered differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the current work. Gene 
Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses were made by 
adopting the DAVID website. The DEG protein-protein interaction network was 
built based on the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins 
website and visualized using the CytoHubba plugin in Cytoscape, aiming to screen 
the top ten hub genes. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was 
adopted for verifying the level of the top ten hub genes. Finally, the potential 
drugs were screened and identified using the QuartataWeb database. Totally 195 
upregulated and 167 downregulated DEGs were determined. The ten hub genes were 
NCAPG, BUB1B, TOP2A, CCNA2, NUSAP1, UBE2C, AURKB, RRM2, CDK1, and KIF11. Ten 
FDA-approved drugs were screened. Finally, two genes and related drugs screened 
could be the prospective drug targets for SCLC treatment.

Â© 2023 the author(s), published by De Gruyter.

DOI: 10.1515/med-2023-0806
PMCID: PMC10560035
PMID: 37808164

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
there are no conflicts of interest in this work.