1. PLoS One. 2023 Oct 10;18(10):e0292589. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0292589. 
eCollection 2023.

Designing peptides predicted to bind to the omicron variant better than ACE2 via 
computational protein design and molecular dynamics.

Sitthiyotha T(1), Treewattanawong W(1), Chunsrivirot S(1).

Author information:
(1)Structural and Computational Biology Research Unit, Department of 
Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok, 
Thailand.

Brought about by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), 
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has resulted in large numbers of 
worldwide deaths and cases. Several SARS-CoV-2 variants have evolved, and 
Omicron (B.1.1.529) was one of the important variants of concern. It gets inside 
human cells by using its S1 subunit's receptor-binding domain (SARS-CoV-2-RBD) 
to bind to Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor's peptidase domain 
(ACE2-PD). Using peptides to inhibit binding interactions (BIs) between ACE2-PD 
and SARS-CoV-2-RBD is one of promising COVID-19 therapies. Employing 
computational protein design (CPD) as well as molecular dynamics (MD), this 
study used ACE2-PD's α1 helix to generate novel 25-mer peptide binders (SPB25) 
of Omicron RBD that have predicted binding affinities (ΔGbind (MM‑GBSA)) better 
than ACE2 by increasing favorable BIs between SPB25 and the conserved residues 
of RBD. Results from MD and the MM-GBSA method identified two best designed 
peptides (SPB25T7L/K11A and SPB25T7L/K11L with ΔGbind (MM‑GBSA) of -92.4 ± 0.4 
and -95.7 ± 0.5 kcal/mol, respectively) that have better ΔGbind (MM‑GBSA) to 
Omicron RBD than ACE2 (-87.9 ± 0.5 kcal/mol) and SPB25 (-71.6 ± 0.5 kcal/mol). 
Additionally, they were predicted to have slightly higher stabilities, based on 
their percent helicities in water, than SBP1 (the experimentally proven 
inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2-RBD). Our two best designed SPB25s are promising 
candidates as omicron variant inhibitors.

Copyright: © 2023 Sitthiyotha et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0292589
PMCID: PMC10564162
PMID: 37816037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.