1. Clin Proteomics. 2023 Oct 12;20(1):42. doi: 10.1186/s12014-023-09431-y.

Redefining serological diagnostics with immunoaffinity proteomics.

Walter J(1), Eludin Z(1), Drabovich AP(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Analytical and Environmental Toxicology, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Alberta, 10-102 Clinical Sciences Building, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2G3, Canada.
(2)Division of Analytical and Environmental Toxicology, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Alberta, 10-102 Clinical Sciences Building, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2G3, Canada. 
andrei.drabovich@ualberta.ca.

Serological diagnostics is generally defined as the detection of specific human 
immunoglobulins developed against viral, bacterial, or parasitic diseases. 
Serological tests facilitate the detection of past infections, evaluate immune 
status, and provide prognostic information. Serological assays were 
traditionally implemented as indirect immunoassays, and their design has not 
changed for decades. The advantages of straightforward setup and manufacturing, 
analytical sensitivity and specificity, affordability, and high-throughput 
measurements were accompanied by limitations such as semi-quantitative 
measurements, lack of universal reference standards, potential cross-reactivity, 
and challenges with multiplexing the complete panel of human immunoglobulin 
isotypes and subclasses. Redesign of conventional serological tests to include 
multiplex quantification of immunoglobulin isotypes and subclasses, utilize 
universal reference standards, and minimize cross-reactivity and non-specific 
binding will facilitate the development of assays with higher diagnostic 
specificity. Improved serological assays with higher diagnostic specificity will 
enable screenings of asymptomatic populations and may provide earlier detection 
of infectious diseases, autoimmune disorders, and cancer. In this review, we 
present the major clinical needs for serological diagnostics, overview 
conventional immunoassay detection techniques, present the emerging immunoassay 
detection technologies, and discuss in detail the advantages and limitations of 
mass spectrometry and immunoaffinity proteomics for serological diagnostics. 
Finally, we explore the design of novel immunoaffinity-proteomic assays to 
evaluate cell-mediated immunity and advance the sequencing of clinically 
relevant immunoglobulins.

Â© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12014-023-09431-y
PMCID: PMC10568870
PMID: 37821808

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.