1. ACS Catal. 2023 Sep 15;13(19):12774-12802. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.3c03047. 
eCollection 2023 Oct 6.

Decoding Catalysis by Terpene Synthases.

Whitehead JN(1), Leferink NGH(2), Johannissen LO(1), Hay S(1), Scrutton 
NS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, Department of Chemistry, The 
University of Manchester, Manchester, M1 7DN, United Kingdom.
(2)Future Biomanufacturing Research Hub (FBRH), Manchester Institute of 
Biotechnology, Department of Chemistry, The University of Manchester, 
Manchester, M1 7DN, United Kingdom.

The review by Christianson, published in 2017 on the twentieth anniversary of 
the emergence of the field, summarizes the foundational discoveries and key 
advances in terpene synthase/cyclase (TS) biocatalysis (Christianson, D. W. Chem 
Rev2017, 117 (17), 11570-11648. DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00287). Here, we 
review the TS literature published since then, bringing the field up to date and 
looking forward to what could be the near future of TS rational design. Many 
revealing discoveries have been made in recent years, building on the knowledge 
and fundamental principles uncovered during those initial two decades of study. 
We use these to explore TS reaction chemistry and see how a combined 
experimental and computational approach helps to decipher the complexities of TS 
catalysis. Revealed are a suite of catalytic motifs which control product 
outcome in TSs, some obvious, some more subtle. We examine each in detail, using 
the most recent papers and insights to illustrate how exactly this fascinating 
class of enzymes takes a single acyclic substrate and turns it into the many 
thousands of complex terpenoids found in Nature. We then explore some of the 
recent strategies for TS engineering, including machine learning and other 
data-driven approaches. From this, rational and predictive engineering of TSs, 
"designer terpene synthases", will begin to emerge as a realistic goal.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.3c03047
PMCID: PMC10563020
PMID: 37822860

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
financial interest(s): NSS is founder and shareholder of C3 Biotechnologies Ltd.