1. Front Immunol. 2023 Sep 26;14:1271508. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1271508. 
eCollection 2023.

A novel bispecific antibody dual-targeting approach for enhanced neutralization 
against fast-evolving SARS-CoV-2 variants.

Kim JW(1), Kim HJ(2), Heo K(1)(2)(3), Lee Y(4), Jang HJ(4), Lee HY(4), Park 
JW(5), Cho YB(1), Lee JH(2), Shin HG(2), Yang HR(2), Choi HL(2), Shim HB(6), Lee 
S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Kookmin University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biopharmaceutical Chemistry, Kookmin University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Antibody Research Institute, Kookmin University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Division of Biomedical Convergence, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, 
Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Life Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.

INTRODUCTION: The emergence of new severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants has caused unprecedented health and socioeconomic 
crises, necessitating the immediate development of highly effective neutralizing 
antibodies. Despite recent advancements in anti-SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding 
domain (RBD)-specific monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) derived from convalescent 
patient samples, their efficacy against emerging variants has been limited. In 
this study, we present a novel dual-targeting strategy using bispecific 
antibodies (bsAbs) that specifically recognize both the SARS-CoV-2 RBD and 
fusion peptide (FP), crucial domains for viral attachment to the host cell 
membrane and fusion in SARS-CoV-2 infection.
METHODS: Using phage display technology, we rapidly isolated FP-specific mAbs 
from an established human recombinant antibody library, identifying K107.1 with 
a nanomolar affinity for SARS-CoV-2 FP. Furthermore, we generated K203.A, a new 
bsAb built in immunoglobulin G4-(single-chain variable fragment)2 forms and 
demonstrating a high manufacturing yield and nanomolar affinity to both the RBD 
and FP, by fusing K102.1, our previously reported RBD-specific mAb, with K107.1.
RESULTS: Our comprehensive in vitro functional analyses revealed that the K203.A 
bsAb significantly outperformed the parental RBD-specific mAb in terms of 
neutralization efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 variants. Furthermore, intravenous 
monotherapy with K203.A demonstrated potent in vivo neutralizing activity 
without significant in vivo toxicity in a mouse model infected with a SARS-CoV-2 
variant.
CONCLUSION: These findings present a novel bsAb dual-targeting strategy, 
directed at SARS-CoV-2 RBD and FP, as an effective approach for rapid 
development and management against continuously evolving SARS-CoV-2 variants.

Copyright Â© 2023 Kim, Kim, Heo, Lee, Jang, Lee, Park, Cho, Lee, Shin, Yang, 
Choi, Shim and Lee.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1271508
PMCID: PMC10562541
PMID: 37822941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.