1. Plant Physiol. 2024 Jan 31;194(2):1204-1217. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiad543.

Phosphate starvation regulates cellulose synthesis to modify root growth.

Khan GA(1), Dutta A(1), van de Meene A(2), Frandsen KEH(3), Ogden M(3), Whelan 
J(1)(4), Persson S(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal, Plant and Soil Sciences, School of Agriculture, 
Biomedicine and Environment, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC 3086, Australia.
(2)School of Biosciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, 
Australia.
(3)Copenhagen Plant Science Center, Department of Plant & Environmental 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C 1871, Denmark.
(4)College of Life Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.
(5)Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic and Developmental 
Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Hybrid Rice, School of Life Sciences and 
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 20040, China.

In the model plant Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), the absence of the 
essential macro-nutrient phosphate reduces primary root growth through decreased 
cell division and elongation, requiring alterations to the polysaccharide-rich 
cell wall surrounding the cells. Despite its importance, the regulation of cell 
wall synthesis in response to low phosphate levels is not well understood. In 
this study, we show that plants increase cellulose synthesis in roots under 
limiting phosphate conditions, which leads to changes in the thickness and 
structure of the cell wall. These changes contribute to the reduced growth of 
primary roots in low-phosphate conditions. Furthermore, we found that the 
cellulose synthase complex (CSC) activity at the plasma membrane increases 
during phosphate deficiency. Moreover, we show that this increase in the 
activity of the CSC is likely due to alterations in the phosphorylation status 
of cellulose synthases in low-phosphate conditions. Specifically, 
phosphorylation of CELLULOSE SYNTHASE 1 (CESA1) at the S688 site decreases in 
low-phosphate conditions. Phosphomimic versions of CESA1 with an S688E mutation 
showed significantly reduced cellulose induction and primary root length changes 
in low-phosphate conditions. Protein structure modeling suggests that the 
phosphorylation status of S688 in CESA1 could play a role in stabilizing and 
activating the CSC. This mechanistic understanding of root growth regulation 
under limiting phosphate conditions provides potential strategies for changing 
root responses to soil phosphate content.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Society of Plant Biologists.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiad543
PMCID: PMC10828208
PMID: 37823515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.