1. Exp Oncol. 2023 Oct 11;45(2):170-179. doi: 10.15407/exp-oncology.2023.02.170.

PATHOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF CDH1/E-CADHERIN GERMLINE SEQUENCE VARIANTS IN 
BREAST CANCER PATIENTS.

Tabassum S(1), Munir F(1), Al Awadh AA(2), Anwar Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, International Islamic Univeristy, 
Islamabad 1243, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Najran University, Najran 61441, 
Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw 02-097, 
Poland.

BACKGROUND: Germline alterations of the CDH1 (E-cadherin) tumor suppressor gene 
have been reported in several epithelial malignancies like hereditary diffuse 
gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. E-cadherin plays a central role in 
proliferation, maintenance of cell-to-cell adhesion, polarity, and 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of tissue cells. It is necessary to analyze 
the impact of the CDH1 germline sequence variants on protein and predict its 
clinical significance in breast cancer (BC) progression. The aim of the current 
study was to evaluate the impact and association of CDH1 gene potentially 
pathogenic variants/likely pathogenic variants (PVs/LPVs) with the initiation 
and progression of BC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, the clinical data of 200 BC patients have 
been analyzed based on the type of BC, age, grade, stage, hormonal status, and 
risk factors. Blood samples from 50 healthy donors were used as a control. 
Furthermore, CDH1 gene molecular analysis, along with in silico analysis, was 
provided to assess the invasiveness and progression of BC caused by the 
E-cadherin protein.
RESULTS: Four variants were identified by genetic screening within the CDH1 gene 
that included variations in exons 7, 8, 10, 11, and 13. Exon 10 had splice site 
mutation at position c.1337C>A, affecting the protein structure. In exon 11, 
there was an insertion of T base at position 1669, resulting in truncated 
protein compared to a normal one that can lead to the disease-causing non- 
sense-mediated decay and exon 13 variant c.2076T>C has already known 
polymorphism. In silico analysis of CDH1 showed the presence of the different 
variants that indicated the overall disruption of protein structure and 
function.
CONCLUSIONS: The further functional analysis of these variants and their 
association with BC can be ensured by increasing the sample size and in vivo 
studies using mouse models.

DOI: 10.15407/exp-oncology.2023.02.170
PMID: 37824775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.