1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 22;24(19):14448. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914448.

Combined Transcriptomic and Metabolomic Approach Revealed a Relationship between 
Light Control, Photoprotective Pigments, and Lipid Biosynthesis in Olives.

Sirangelo TM(1), Forgione I(1), Zelasco S(1), Benincasa C(1), Perri E(1), 
Vendramin E(2), Angilè F(1)(3), Fanizzi FP(3), Sunseri F(4), Salimonti A(1), 
Carbone F(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Olive, Fruit and Citrus Crops, Council for Agricultural 
Research and Economics (CREA), Via Settimio Severo, 83, 87036 Rende, Italy.
(2)Research Centre for Olive, Fruit and Citrus Crops, Council for Agricultural 
Research and Economics (CREA), Via di Fioranello, 52, 00134 Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Technologies, 
University of Salento, Via Lecce-Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy.
(4)Department Agraria, University Mediterranea of Reggio Calabria, Località Feo 
di Vito, 89124 Reggio Calabria, Italy.

Olive possesses excellent nutritional and economic values for its main healthy 
products. Among them, a high content of antioxidant compounds, balanced during 
the ripening process, are produced under genetic and environmental control, 
resulting in high variability among cultivars. The genes involved in these 
complex pathways are mainly known, but despite many studies which indicated the 
key role of light quality and quantity for the synthesis of many metabolites in 
plants, limited information on these topics is available in olive. We carried 
out a targeted gene expression profiling in three olive cultivars, Cellina di 
Nardò, Ruveia, and Salella, which were selected for their contrasting oleic acid 
and phenolic content. The -omics combined approach revealed a direct correlation 
between a higher expression of the main flavonoid genes and the high content of 
these metabolites in 'Cellina di Nardò'. Furthermore, it confirmed the key role 
of FAD2-2 in the linoleic acid biosynthesis. More interestingly, in all the 
comparisons, a co-regulation of genes involved in photoperception and circadian 
clock machinery suggests a key role of light in orchestrating the regulation of 
these pathways in olive. Therefore, the identified genes in our analyses might 
represent a useful tool to support olive breeding, although further 
investigations are needed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914448
PMCID: PMC10572622
PMID: 37833896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.