1. Cells. 2023 Sep 28;12(19):2378. doi: 10.3390/cells12192378.

Regulation of Microglial Signaling by Lyn and SHIP-1 in the Steady-State Adult 
Mouse Brain.

Chu E(1)(2), Mychasiuk R(1)(3), Tsantikos E(2), Raftery AL(2), 
L'Estrange-Stranieri E(2), Dill LK(1), Semple BD(1)(3)(4), Hibbs ML(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Central Clinical School, Monash University, 
Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia.
(2)Department of Immunology, Central Clinical School, Monash University, 
Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia.
(3)Department of Neurology, Alfred Health, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia.
(4)Department of Medicine, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, The University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia.

Chronic neuroinflammation and glial activation are associated with the 
development of many neurodegenerative diseases and neuropsychological disorders. 
Recent evidence suggests that the protein tyrosine kinase Lyn and the lipid 
phosphatase SH2 domain-containing inositol 5' phosphatase-1 (SHIP-1) regulate 
neuroimmunological responses, but their homeostatic roles remain unclear. The 
current study investigated the roles of Lyn and SHIP-1 in microglial responses 
in the steady-state adult mouse brain. Young adult Lyn-/- and SHIP-1-/- mice 
underwent a series of neurobehavior tests and postmortem brain analyses. The 
microglial phenotype and activation state were examined by immunofluorescence 
and flow cytometry, and neuroimmune responses were assessed using gene 
expression analysis. Lyn-/- mice had an unaltered behavioral phenotype, 
neuroimmune response, and microglial phenotype, while SHIP-1-/- mice 
demonstrated reduced explorative activity and exhibited microglia with elevated 
activation markers but reduced granularity. In addition, expression of several 
neuroinflammatory genes was increased in SHIP-1-/- mice. In response to LPS 
stimulation ex vivo, the microglia from both Lyn-/- and SHIP-1-/- showed 
evidence of hyper-activity with augmented TNF-Î± production. Together, these 
findings demonstrate that both Lyn and SHIP-1 have the propensity to control 
microglial responses, but only SHIP-1 regulates neuroinflammation and microglial 
activation in the steady-state adult brain, while Lyn activity appears 
dispensable for maintaining brain homeostasis.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12192378
PMCID: PMC10571795
PMID: 37830592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.