1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Nov;299(11):105350. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105350. Epub
2023  Oct 12.

ROR2 homodimerization is sufficient to activate a neuronal Wnt/calcium signaling 
pathway.

Riquelme R(1), Li L(2), Gambrill A(1), Barria A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Undergraduate Program, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. Electronic address: barria@uw.edu.

Wnt signaling plays a key role in the mature CNS by regulating trafficking of 
NMDA-type glutamate receptors and intrinsic properties of neurons. The Wnt 
receptor ROR2 has been identified as a necessary component of the neuronal 
Wnt5a/Ca2+ signaling pathway that regulates synaptic and neuronal function. 
Since ROR2 is considered a pseudokinase, its mechanism for downstream signaling 
upon ligand binding has been controversial. It has been suggested that its role 
is to function as a coreceptor of a G-protein-coupled Wnt receptor of the 
Frizzled family. We show that chemically induced homodimerization of ROR2 is 
sufficient to recapitulate key signaling events downstream of receptor 
activation in neurons, including PKC and JNK kinases activation, elevation of 
somatic and dendritic Ca2+ levels, and increased trafficking of NMDARs to 
synapses. In addition, we show that homodimerization of ROR2 induces 
phosphorylation of the receptor on Tyr residues. Point mutations in the 
conserved but presumed nonfunctional ATP-binding site of the receptor prevent 
its phosphorylation, as well as downstream signaling. This suggests an active 
kinase domain. Our results indicate that ROR2 can signal independently of 
Frizzled receptors to regulate the trafficking of a key synaptic component. 
Additionally, they suggest that homodimerization can overcome structural 
conformations that render the tyrosine kinase inactive. A better understanding 
of ROR2 signaling is crucial for comprehending the regulation of synaptic and 
neuronal function in normal brain processes in mature animals.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105350
PMCID: PMC10654037
PMID: 37832874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.