1. Cells. 2023 Sep 22;12(19):2332. doi: 10.3390/cells12192332.

Antiangiogenic Action of JZL184 on Endothelial Cells via Inhibition of VEGF 
Expression in Hypoxic Lung Cancer Cells.

Wittig F(1), Pannenberg L(1), Schwarz R(1), Bekeschus S(2), Ramer R(1), Hinz 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Rostock University Medical Center, 
Schillingallee 70, 18057 Rostock, Germany.
(2)ZIK plasmatis, Leibniz Institute for Plasma Science and Technology (INP), 
Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 2, 17489 Greifswald, Germany.

JZL184, an inhibitor of monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) and thus of the 
degradation of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), mediates 
various anticancer effects in preclinical studies. However, studies on the 
effect of this or other MAGL inhibitors under hypoxia, an important factor in 
tumor biology and response to cancer therapy, have not yet been performed in 
cancer cells. In the present study, the impact of the conditioned media (CM) of 
A549 and H358 lung cancer cells incubated with JZL184 under hypoxic conditions 
on the angiogenic properties of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) 
was investigated. Treatment of HUVECs with CM derived from cancer cells cultured 
for 48 h under hypoxic conditions was associated with a substantial increase in 
migration and tube formation compared with unconditioned medium, which was 
inhibited when cancer cells were incubated with JZL184. In this process, JZL184 
led to a significant increase in 2-AG levels in both cell lines. Analysis of a 
panel of proangiogenic factors revealed inhibition of hypoxia-induced vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression by JZL184. Antiangiogenic and 
VEGF-lowering effects were also demonstrated for the MAGL inhibitor MJN110. 
Receptor antagonist experiments suggest partial involvement of the cannabinoid 
receptors CB1 and CB2 in the antiangiogenic and VEGF-lowering effects induced by 
JZL184. The functional importance of VEGF for angiogenesis in the selected 
system is supported by observations showing inhibition of VEGF receptor 2 
(VEGFR2) phosphorylation in HUVECs by CM from hypoxic cancer cells treated with 
JZL184 or when hypoxic cancer cell-derived CM was spiked with a neutralizing 
VEGF antibody. On the other hand, JZL184 did not exert a direct effect on VEGFR2 
activation induced by recombinant VEGF, so there seems to be no downstream 
effect on already released VEGF. In conclusion, these results reveal a novel 
mechanism of antiangiogenic action of JZL184 under conditions of hypoxic 
tumor-endothelial communication.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12192332
PMCID: PMC10572003
PMID: 37830546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.