1. Foods. 2023 Sep 26;12(19):3574. doi: 10.3390/foods12193574.

Directed Modification of a GHF11 Thermostable Xylanase AusM for Enhancing 
Inhibitory Resistance towards SyXIP-I and Application of AusM(PKK) in Bread 
Making.

Zhang D(1)(2), Huang J(3), Liu Y(1), Chen X(1), Gao T(4), Li N(4), Huang W(3), 
Wu M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Wuxi School of Medicine, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biotechnology, Ministry of 
Education, School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, and the Laboratory of 
Baking and Fermentation Science, Cereals/Sourdough and Nutritional Functionality 
Research, School of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 
214122, China.
(4)Guangzhou Puratos Food Co., Ltd., Guangzhou 511400, China.

To reduce the inhibition sensitivity of a thermoresistant xylanase AusM to 
xylanase inhibitor protein (XIP)-type in wheat flour, the site-directed 
mutagenesis was conducted based on the computer-aided redesign. First, fourteen 
single-site variants and one three-amino acid replacement variant in the thumb 
region of an AusM-encoding gene (AusM) were constructed and expressed in E. coli 
BL21(DE3), respectively, as predicted theoretically. At a molar ratio of 100:1 
between SyXIP-I/xylanase, the majority of mutants were nearly completely 
inactivated by the inhibitor SyXIP-I, whereas AusMN127A retained 62.7% of its 
initial activity and AusMPKK retained 100% of its initial activity. The optimal 
temperature of the best mutant AusMPKK was 60 °C, as opposed to 60-65 °C for 
AusM, while it exhibited improved thermostability, retaining approximately 60% 
of its residual activity after heating at 80 °C for 60 min. Furthermore, AusMPKK 
at a dosage of 1000 U/kg was more effective than AusM at 4000 U/kg in increasing 
specific bread loaf volume and reducing hardness during bread production and 
storage. Directed evolution of AusM significantly reduces inhibition 
sensitivity, and the mutant enzyme AusMPKK is conducive to improving bread 
quality and extending its shelf life.

DOI: 10.3390/foods12193574
PMCID: PMC10572589
PMID: 37835228

Conflict of interest statement: Ning Li and Tiecheng Gao are the employees of 
Guangzhou Puratos Food Co., Ltd. Puratos Food Co., Ltd. provided us with actual 
samples and some experimental conditions in this work. We clarify that our work 
does not create any conflict of interest for publishing.