1. Nutrients. 2023 Sep 27;15(19):4162. doi: 10.3390/nu15194162.

Teaching Kitchens and Culinary Gardens as Integral Components of Healthcare 
Facilities Providing Whole Person Care: A Commentary.

Fals AM(1), Brennan AM(2).

Author information:
(1)AdventHealth for Children, 601 E. Rollins St., Orlando, FL 32803, USA.
(2)AdventHealth Research Institute, 800 N. Magnolia Ave., Orlando, FL 32803, 
USA.

Child and adult obesity continue to be major health concerns in the United 
States and can contribute to the development of chronic diseases. Culinary 
medicine, which incorporates teaching kitchens and gardens, may be a useful 
strategy for preventing and/or treating obesity-related disease by providing the 
knowledge and skills that encourage consumption of whole plant-based foods 
prepared at home. Though emerging research describes the benefits of culinary 
medicine-based programming, examples of teaching kitchens and culinary gardens 
being integrated into current clinical practice is minimal. Here, we describe 
the development of innovative, community-centered culinary medicine programming 
borne from interdisciplinary collaboration at a leading healthcare system. 
Preliminary outcomes suggest improvements in anthropometrics, cardiometabolic 
risk factors, and participation in healthy lifestyle behaviors in pediatric 
weight management patients, as well as improved confidence, knowledge, and 
likelihood to prepare whole food, plant-based meals in healthcare employees 
following participation in culinary medicine workshops. Hospitals and culinary 
medicine partners can support each other through shared knowledge, vision, and 
resources to provide value-based care to patients in the community. 
Collaboration among gardeners, chefs, architects, educators, and healthcare 
professionals can transfer traditional physician-driven care to patients, 
empowering them with the tools, resources, and confidence to improve health and 
wellbeing.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15194162
PMCID: PMC10574558
PMID: 37836446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.