1. J Inorg Biochem. 2023 Dec;249:112391. doi: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2023.112391.
Epub  2023 Oct 4.

Characterisation of the heme aqua-ligand coordination environment in an 
engineered peroxygenase cytochrome P450 variant.

Podgorski MN(1), Lee JHZ(1), Harbort JS(2), Nguyen GTH(3), Doherty DZ(1), Donald 
WA(3), Harmer JR(2), Bruning JB(4), Bell SG(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, 
Australia.
(2)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, University of 
Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia.
(3)School of Chemistry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 
2052, Australia.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, 
Australia. Electronic address: stephen.bell@adelaide.edu.au.

The cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs) are heme-thiolate monooxygenases that 
catalyse the insertion of an oxygen atom into the C-H bonds of organic 
molecules. In most CYPs, the activation of dioxygen by the heme is aided by an 
acid-alcohol pair of residues located in the I-helix of the enzyme. Mutation of 
the threonine residue of this acid-alcohol pair of CYP199A4, from the bacterium 
Rhodospeudomonas palustris HaA2, to a glutamate residue induces peroxygenase 
activity. In the X-ray crystal structures of this variant an interaction of the 
glutamate side chain and the distal aqua ligand of the heme was observed and 
this results in this ligand not being readily displaced in the peroxygenase 
mutant on the addition of substrate. Here we use a range of bulky hydrophobic 
and nitrogen donor containing ligands in an attempt to displace the distal aqua 
ligand of the T252E mutant of CYP199A4. Ligand binding was assessed by 
UV-visible absorbance spectroscopy, native mass spectrometry, electron 
paramagnetic resonance and X-ray crystallography. None of the ligands tested, 
even the nitrogen donor ligands which bind directly to the iron in the wild-type 
enzyme, resulted in displacement of the aqua ligand. Therefore, modification of 
the I-helix threonine residue to a glutamate residue results in a significant 
strengthening of the ferric distal aqua ligand. This ligand was not displaced 
using any of the ligands during this study and this provides a rationale as to 
why this mutant can shutdown the monooxygenase pathway of this enzyme and switch 
to peroxygenase activity.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2023.112391
PMID: 37837941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.