1. Cells. 2023 Sep 27;12(19):2369. doi: 10.3390/cells12192369.

MicroRNA-30d-5p-A Potential New Therapeutic Target for Prevention of Ischemic 
Cardiomyopathy after Myocardial Infarction.

Boxhammer E(1), Paar V(1), Wernly B(2), Kiss A(3), Mirna M(1), Aigner A(4), Acar 
E(3), Watzinger S(3), Podesser BK(3), Zauner R(5), Wally V(5), Ablinger M(5), 
Hackl M(6), Hoppe UC(1), Lichtenauer M(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine II, Department of Cardiology, Paracelsus Medical University 
Salzburg, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, General Hospital Oberndorf, Teaching 
Hospital of the Paracelsus Medical University, 5110 Oberndorf, Austria.
(3)Ludwig Boltzmann Cluster for Cardiovascular Research, Center for Biomedical 
Research and Translational Surgery, Medical University Vienna, 1090 Vienna, 
Austria.
(4)Rudolf Boehm-Institute for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Clinical 
Pharmacology, Leipzig University, 04107 Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Dermatology, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.
(6)TAmiRNA GmbH, Muthgasse 18, 1110 Vienna, Austria.

(1) Background and Objective: MicroRNAs (miRs) are biomarkers for assessing the 
extent of cardiac remodeling after myocardial infarction (MI) and important 
predictors of clinical outcome in heart failure. Overexpression of miR-30d-5p 
appears to have a cardioprotective effect. The aim of the present study was to 
demonstrate whether miR-30d-5p could be used as a potential therapeutic target 
to improve post-MI adverse remodeling. (2) Methods and Results: MiR profiling 
was performed by next-generation sequencing to assess different expression 
patterns in ischemic vs. healthy myocardium in a rat model of MI. MiR-30d-5p was 
significantly downregulated (p < 0.001) in ischemic myocardium and was selected 
as a promising target. A mimic of miR-30d-5p was administered in the treatment 
group, whereas the control group received non-functional, scrambled siRNA. To 
measure the effect of miR-30d-5p on infarct area size of the left ventricle, the 
rats were randomized and treated with miR-30d-5p or scrambled siRNA. 
Histological planimetry was performed 72 h and 6 weeks after induction of MI. 
Infarct area was significantly reduced at 72 h and at 6 weeks by using 
miR-30d-5p (72 h: 22.89 ± 7.66% vs. 35.96 ± 9.27%, p = 0.0136; 6 weeks: 6.93 ± 
4.58% vs. 12.48 ± 7.09%, p = 0.0172). To gain insight into infarct healing, 
scratch assays were used to obtain information on cell migration in human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Gap closure was significantly faster 
in the mimic-treated cells 20 h post-scratching (12.4% more than the scrambled 
control after 20 h; p = 0.013). To analyze the anti-apoptotic quality of 
miR-30d-5p, the ratio between phosphorylated p53 and total p53 was evaluated in 
human cardiomyocytes using ELISA. Under the influence of the miR-30d-5p mimic, 
cardiomyocytes demonstrated a decreased pp53/total p53 ratio (0.66 ± 0.08 vs. 
0.81 ± 0.17), showing a distinct tendency (p = 0.055) to decrease the apoptosis 
rate compared to the control group. (3) Conclusion: Using a mimic of miR-30d-5p 
underlines the cardioprotective effect of miR-30d-5p in MI and could reduce the 
risk for development of ischemic cardiomyopathy.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12192369
PMCID: PMC10571870
PMID: 37830583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.