1. Schizophrenia (Heidelb). 2023 Oct 18;9(1):74. doi: 10.1038/s41537-023-00404-6.

Mediation and longitudinal analysis to interpret the association between 
clozapine pharmacokinetics, pharmacogenomics, and absolute neutrophil count.

Lock SK(1), Legge SE(1), Kappel DB(1), Willcocks IR(1), Helthuis M(2), Jansen 
J(2), Walters JTR(1), Owen MJ(1), O'Donovan MC(1), Pardiñas AF(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Division of Psychological 
Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, UK.
(2)Leyden Delta B.V., Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Division of Psychological 
Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, UK. PardinasA@cardiff.ac.uk.

Clozapine is effective at reducing symptoms of treatment-resistant 
schizophrenia, but it can also induce several adverse outcomes including 
neutropenia and agranulocytosis. We used linear mixed-effect models and 
structural equation modelling to determine whether pharmacokinetic and genetic 
variables influence absolute neutrophil count in a longitudinal UK-based sample 
of clozapine users not currently experiencing neutropenia (N = 811). Increased 
daily clozapine dose was associated with elevated neutrophil count, amounting to 
a 133 cells/mm3 rise per standard deviation increase in clozapine dose. 
One-third of the total effect of clozapine dose was mediated by plasma clozapine 
and norclozapine levels, which themselves demonstrated opposing, independent 
associations with absolute neutrophil count. Finally, CYP1A2 pharmacogenomic 
activity score was associated with absolute neutrophil count, supporting lower 
neutrophil levels in CYP1A2 poor metabolisers during clozapine use. This 
information may facilitate identifying at-risk patients and then introducing 
preventative interventions or individualised pharmacovigilance procedures to 
help mitigate these adverse haematological reactions.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41537-023-00404-6
PMCID: PMC10585000
PMID: 37853043

Conflict of interest statement: M.H. and J.J. are full-time employees of Leyden 
Delta B.V.; M.J.O., M.C.O.D. and J.T.R.W. are supported by a collaborative 
research grant from Takeda Pharmaceuticals Ltd. for a project unrelated to work 
presented here. A.F.P., M.J.O., M.C.O.D. and J.T.R.W. also reported receiving 
grants from Akrivia Health for a project unrelated to this submission. Takeda 
and Akrivia played no part in the conception, design, implementation, or 
interpretation of this study.