1. BMC Cancer. 2023 Oct 18;23(1):997. doi: 10.1186/s12885-023-11490-1.

S100P as a potential biomarker for immunosuppressive microenvironment in 
pancreatic cancer: a bioinformatics analysis and in vitro study.

Hao W(1), Zhang Y(1), Dou J(1), Cui P(1), Zhu J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of gastroenterology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, 450052, Henan, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, 450052, Henan, China. jicunzhu1101@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Immunosuppression is a significant factor contributing to the poor 
prognosis of cancer. S100P, a member of the S100 protein family, has been 
implicated in various cancers. However, its role in the tumor microenvironment 
(TME) of pancreatic cancer remains unclear. This study aimed to investigate the 
potential impact of S100P on TME characteristics in patients with pancreatic 
cancer.
METHODS: Multiple data (including microarray, RNA-Seq, and scRNA-Seq) were 
obtained from public databases. The expression pattern of S100P was 
comprehensively evaluated in RNA-Seq data and validated in four different 
microarray datasets. Prognostic value was assessed through Kaplan-Meier plotter 
and Cox regression analyses. Immune infiltration levels were determined using 
the ESTIMATE and ssGSEA algorithms and validated at the single-cell level. 
Spearman correlation test was used to examine the correlation between S100P 
expression and immune checkpoint genes, and tumor mutation burden (TMB). DNA 
methylation analysis was performed to investigate the change in mRNA expression. 
Reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemical (IHC) were utilized 
to validate the expression using five cell lines and 60 pancreatic cancer 
tissues.
RESULTS: This study found that S100P was differentially expressed in pancreatic 
cancer and was associated with poor prognosis (P < 0.05). Notably, S100P 
exhibited a significant negative-correlation with immune cell infiltration, 
particularly CD8 + T cells. Furthermore, a close association between S100P and 
immunotherapy was observed, as it strongly correlated with TMB and the 
expression levels of TIGIT, HAVCR2, CTLA4, and BTLA (P < 0.05). Intriguingly, 
higher S100P expression demonstrated a negative correlation with methylation 
levels (cg14323984, cg27027375, cg14900031, cg14140379, cg25083732, cg07210669, 
cg26233331, and cg22266967), which were associated with CD8 + T cells. In vitro 
RT-PCR validated upregulated S100P expression across all five pancreatic cancer 
cell lines, and IHC confirmed high S100P levels in pancreatic cancer tissues 
(P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that S100P could serve as a promising 
biomarker for immunosuppressive microenvironment, which may provide a novel 
therapeutic way for pancreatic cancer.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-023-11490-1
PMCID: PMC10585823
PMID: 37853345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.