1. Front Neurosci. 2023 Oct 6;17:1241919. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1241919. 
eCollection 2023.

An experimental platform for stochastic analyses of single serotonergic fibers 
in the mouse brain.

Mays KC(1), Haiman JH(1), Janušonis S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of California, 
Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, United States.

The self-organization of the serotonergic matrix, a massive axon meshwork in all 
vertebrate brains, is driven by the structural and dynamical properties of its 
constitutive elements. Each of these elements, a single serotonergic axon 
(fiber), has a unique trajectory and can be supported by a soma that executes 
one of the many available transcriptional programs. This "individuality" of 
serotonergic neurons necessitates the development of specialized methods for 
single-fiber analyses, both at the experimental and theoretical levels. We 
developed an integrated platform that facilitates experimental isolation of 
single serotonergic fibers in brain tissue, including regions with high fiber 
densities, and demonstrated the potential of their quantitative analyses based 
on stochastic modeling. Single fibers were visualized using two transgenic mouse 
models, one of which is the first implementation of the Brainbow toolbox in this 
system. The trajectories of serotonergic fibers were automatically traced in the 
three spatial dimensions with a novel algorithm, and their properties were 
captured with a single parameter associated with the directional von 
Mises-Fisher probability distribution. The system represents an end-to-end 
workflow that can be imported into various studies, including those 
investigating serotonergic dysfunction in brain disorders. It also supports new 
research directions inspired by single-fiber analyses in the serotonergic 
matrix, including supercomputing simulations and modeling in physics.

Copyright © 2023 Mays, Haiman and Janušonis.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1241919
PMCID: PMC10587471
PMID: 37869509

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.