1. Epigenetics. 2023 Dec;18(1):2265625. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2023.2265625. Epub 
2023 Oct 23.

IL-18 serves as a main effector of CAF-derived METTL3 against immunosuppression 
of NSCLC via driving NF-κB pathway.

Xu L(1), Li K(1), Li J(1), Xu F(1), Liang S(1), Kong Y(1), Chen B(1).

Author information:
(1)The Second Department of Thoracic Oncology, Hunan Cancer Hospital/The 
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan Province, P.R. China.

Background: N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is the most abundant modification in 
eukaryotic mRNA. However, its role in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not 
been completely elucidated.Objective: To explore whether methyltransferase like 
3 (METTL3) in cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) affects the secretion of 
IL-18, which drives NSCLC cells to regulate PD-L1-mediated immunosuppression via 
the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) pathway.Methods: Histopathological features 
of NSCLC tissues were identified by H&E and IHC staining. The levels of m6A 
writers (METTL3), IL-18 and NF-κB pathway related genes were assessed. The 
quantity of CD8+ T cells was evaluated by flow cytometry (FCM). The direct 
binding relationship between METTL3 and IL-18 mRNA was detected by RIP assay and 
RNA pulldown and confirmed by dual - luciferase reporter assay. The level of RNA 
m6A was detected by RNA m6A dot blot and meRIP assays. A heterotopic 
implantation model of NSCLC was established in NOD-SCID mice for further explore 
the effect of CAF derived METTL3 on immunosuppression of NSCLC in vivo.Results: 
Our results illustrated that METTL3 was down-regulated in CAFs, and CAF derived 
METTL3 alleviated PD-L1-mediated immunosuppression of NSCLC through IL-18. 
Subsequently, we found that IL-18 was main effector of CAF-derived METTL3 
against immunosuppression of NSCLC, and IL-18 accelerated immunosuppression of 
NSCLC by driving NF-κB pathway. In vivo, METTL3 knockdown-derived CAFs 
accelerated immunosuppression of NSCLC.Conclusion: IL-18 served as a main 
effector of CAF-derived METTL3 against immunosuppression of NSCLC via driving 
NF-κB pathway.

DOI: 10.1080/15592294.2023.2265625
PMCID: PMC10595399
PMID: 37871286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.