1. Cells. 2023 Oct 17;12(20):2469. doi: 10.3390/cells12202469.

Clinical Cases and the Molecular Profiling of a Novel Childhood 
Encephalopathy-Causing GNAO1 Mutation P170R.

Larasati YA(1), Solis GP(1), Koval A(1), Griffiths ST(2), Berentsen R(3), 
Aukrust I(3)(4), Lesca G(5), Chatron N(5), Ville D(6), Korff CM(7), Katanaev 
VL(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Translational Research Center in Oncohaematology, Department of Cell 
Physiology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, CH-1211 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5009 Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5009 Bergen, 
Norway.
(4)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 5008 Bergen, Norway.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Lyon, 69002 Lyon, 
France.
(6)Pediatric Neurology Department, University Hospital of Lyon, 69002 Lyon, 
France.
(7)Pediatric Neurology Unit, University Hospitals of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(8)Institute of Life Sciences and Biomedicine, Far Eastern Federal University, 
Vladivostok 690090, Russia.

De novo mutations in GNAO1, the gene encoding the major neuronal G protein Gαo, 
cause a spectrum of pediatric encephalopathies with seizures, motor dysfunction, 
and developmental delay. Of the >80 distinct missense pathogenic variants, many 
appear to uniformly destabilize the guanine nucleotide handling of the mutant 
protein, speeding up GTP uptake and deactivating GTP hydrolysis. Zinc 
supplementation emerges as a promising treatment option for this disease, as 
Zn2+ ions reactivate the GTP hydrolysis on the mutant Gαo and restore cellular 
interactions for some of the mutants studied earlier. The molecular etiology of 
GNAO1 encephalopathies needs further elucidation as a prerequisite for the 
development of efficient therapeutic approaches. In this work, we combine 
clinical and medical genetics analysis of a novel GNAO1 mutation with an 
in-depth molecular dissection of the resultant protein variant. We identify two 
unrelated patients from Norway and France with a previously unknown mutation in 
GNAO1, c.509C>G that results in the production of the Pro170Arg mutant Gαo, 
leading to severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathy. Molecular 
investigations of Pro170Arg identify this mutant as a unique representative of 
the pathogenic variants. Its 100-fold-accelerated GTP uptake is not accompanied 
by a loss in GTP hydrolysis; Zn2+ ions induce a previously unseen effect on the 
mutant, forcing it to lose the bound GTP. Our work combining clinical and 
molecular analyses discovers a novel, biochemically distinct pathogenic missense 
variant of GNAO1 laying the ground for personalized treatment development.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12202469
PMCID: PMC10605901
PMID: 37887313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.