1. Curr Oncol. 2023 Sep 27;30(10):8805-8814. doi: 10.3390/curroncol30100635.

The Combined Therapy of Cabozantinib, Crizotinib, and Osimertinib in a Lung 
Cancer Patient with Acquired MET Amplification and Resistance Mutations.

Jóri B(1)(2), Vössing C(1)(2), Pirngruber J(1)(2), Willing EM(1)(2), Arndt 
K(1)(2), Falk M(1)(2), Tiemann M(2), Heukamp LC(1)(2), Hoffknecht P(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Lungenkrebsmedizin Oldenburg, Georgstraße 12, 26121 Oldenburg, Germany.
(2)Institut für Hämatopathologie Hamburg, Fangdieckstraße 75A, 22547 Hamburg, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Thorax Oncology, Niels-Stensen-Kliniken, Franziskus-Hospital 
Harderberg Alte, Rothen-Felder Straße 23, 49124 Georgsmarienhütte, Germany.

EGFR-mutant lung cancers develop a wide range of potential resistance 
alterations under therapy with the third-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor osimertinib. MET amplification ranks among the most common acquired 
resistance alterations and is currently being investigated as a therapeutic 
target in several studies. Nevertheless, targeted therapy of MET might similarly 
result in acquired resistance by point mutations in MET, which further expands 
therapeutic and diagnostic challenges. Here, we report a 50-year-old male 
patient with EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma and stepwise acquired resistance by 
a focal amplification of MET followed by D1246N (D1228N), D1246H (D1228H), and 
L1213V (L1195V) point mutations in MET, all detected by NGS. The patient 
successfully responded to the combined and sequential treatment of osimertinib, 
osimertinib/crizotinib, and third-line osimertinib/cabozantinib. This case 
highlights the importance of well-designed, sequential molecular diagnostic 
analyses and the personalized treatment of patients with acquired resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/curroncol30100635
PMCID: PMC10605877
PMID: 37887535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.T. has received honoraria for consulting 
and/or lectures from Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, MSD, Novartis, 
Lilly Oncology, Roche, and Takeda. M.F. has received honoraria for consulting 
and/or lectures from Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Roche, and Novartis. 
L.C.H. has an advisory role at Agilent, Roche, Astra Zeneca, Lilly, Bayer, and 
Smart in Media. All other authors declare no conflict of interest.