1. Sci Rep. 2023 Oct 26;13(1):18399. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-45272-3.

Computational completion of the Aurora interaction region of N-Myc in the Aurora 
a kinase complex.

Altiner P(1), Çınaroğlu SS(2), Timucin AC(3), Timucin E(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IPBS), CNRS, Université 
Toulouse III - Paul Sabatier (UT3), 31077, Toulouse, France.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, 
OX1 3QU, UK.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Engineering and 
Natural Sciences, Acibadem University, 34752, Istanbul, Turkey. 
ahmet.timucin@acibadem.edu.tr.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, School of Medicine, 
Acibadem University, 34752, Istanbul, Turkey. emel.timucin@acibadem.edu.tr.

Inhibiting protein-protein interactions of the Myc family is a viable 
pharmacological strategy for modulation of the levels of Myc oncoproteins in 
cancer. Aurora A kinase (AurA) and N-Myc interaction is one of the most 
attractive targets of this strategy because formation of this complex blocks 
proteasomal degradation of N-Myc in neuroblastoma. Two crystallization studies 
have captured this complex (PDB IDs: 5g1x, 7ztl), partially resolving the AurA 
interaction region (AIR) of N-Myc. Prompted by the missing N-Myc fragment in 
these crystal structures, we modeled the complete structure between AurA and 
N-Myc, and comprehensively analyzed how the incomplete and complete N-Myc behave 
in complex by molecular dynamics simulations. Molecular dynamics simulations of 
the incomplete PDB complex (5g1x) repeatedly showed partial dissociation of the 
short N-Myc fragment (61-89) from the kinase. The missing N-Myc (19-60) fragment 
was modeled utilizing the N-terminal lobe of AurA as the protein-protein 
interaction surface, wherein TPX2, a well-known partner of AurA, also binds. 
Binding free energy calculations along with flexibility analysis confirmed that 
the complete AIR of N-Myc stabilizes the complex, accentuating the N-terminal 
lobe of AurA as a binding site for the missing N-Myc fragment (19-60). We 
further generated additional models consisting of only the missing N-Myc 
(19-60), and the fused form of TPX2 (7-43) and N-Myc (61-89). These partners 
also formed more stable interactions with the N-terminal lobe of AurA than did 
the incomplete N-Myc fragment (61-89) in the 5g1x complex. Altogether, this 
study provides structural insights into the involvement of the N-terminus of the 
AIR of N-Myc and the N-terminal lobe of AurA in formation of a stable complex, 
reflecting its potential for effective targeting of N-Myc.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-45272-3
PMCID: PMC10603048
PMID: 37884585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.