1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2023 Oct 10;17:1253424. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2023.1253424. 
eCollection 2023.

K(+)/Cl(-) cotransporter 2 (KCC2) and Na(+)/HCO3- cotransporter 1 (NBCe1) 
interaction modulates profile of KCC2 phosphorylation.

Pethe A(1), Hamze M(2), Giannaki M(1), Heimrich B(3), Medina I(2), Hartmann 
AM(4)(5), Roussa E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Institute for 
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(2)INMED, INSERM, Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France.
(3)Department of Neuroanatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Anatomy and 
Cell Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Division of Neurogenetics, Faculty VI, School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(5)Research Center for Neurosensory Science, Carl von Ossietzky University 
Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.

K+/Cl- cotransporter 2 (KCC2) is a major Cl- extruder in mature neurons and is 
responsible for the establishment of low intracellular [Cl-], necessary for fast 
hyperpolarizing GABAA-receptor mediated synaptic inhibition. Electrogenic sodium 
bicarbonate cotransporter 1 (NBCe1) is a pH regulatory protein expressed in 
neurons and glial cells. An interactome study identified NBCe1 as a possible 
interaction partner of KCC2. In this study, we investigated the putative effect 
of KCC2/NBCe1 interaction in baseline and the stimulus-induced phosphorylation 
pattern and function of KCC2. Primary mouse hippocampal neuronal cultures from 
wildtype (WT) and Nbce1-deficient mice, as well as HEK-293 cells stably 
transfected with KCC2WT, were used. The results show that KCC2 and NBCe1 are 
interaction partners in the mouse brain. In HEKKCC2 cells, pharmacological 
inhibition of NBCs with S0859 prevented staurosporine- and 4-aminopyridine 
(4AP)-induced KCC2 activation. In mature cultures of hippocampal neurons, 
however, S0859 completely inhibited postsynaptic GABAAR and, thus, could not be 
used as a tool to investigate the role of NBCs in GABA-dependent neuronal 
networks. In Nbce1-deficient immature hippocampal neurons, baseline 
phosphorylation of KCC2 at S940 was downregulated, compared to WT, and exposure 
to staurosporine failed to reduce pKCC2 S940 and T1007. In Nbce1-deficient 
mature neurons, baseline levels of pKCC2 S940 and T1007 were upregulated 
compared to WT, whereas after 4AP treatment, pKCC2 S940 was downregulated, and 
pKCC2 T1007 was further upregulated. Functional experiments showed that the 
levels of GABAAR reversal potential, baseline intracellular [Cl-], Cl- 
extrusion, and baseline intracellular pH were similar between WT and 
Nbce1-deficient neurons. Altogether, our data provide a primary description of 
the properties of KCC2/NBCe1 protein-protein interaction and implicate 
modulation of stimulus-mediated phosphorylation of KCC2 by NBCe1/KCC2 
interaction-a mechanism with putative pathophysiological relevance.

Copyright © 2023 Pethe, Hamze, Giannaki, Heimrich, Medina, Hartmann and Roussa.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2023.1253424
PMCID: PMC10595033
PMID: 37881493

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.