1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Dec;299(12):105386. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105386. Epub
2023  Oct 26.

Proteases influence colony aggregation behavior in Vibrio cholerae.

Detomasi TC(1), Batka AE(2), Valastyan JS(3), Hydorn MA(4), Craik CS(5), Bassler 
BL(3), Marletta MA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California, USA; Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
USA; The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California, USA; California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University 
of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA; Department of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA. 
Electronic address: marletta@berkeley.edu.

Aggregation behavior provides bacteria protection from harsh environments and 
threats to survival. Two uncharacterized proteases, LapX and Lap, are important 
for Vibrio cholerae liquid-based aggregation. Here, we determined that LapX is a 
serine protease with a preference for cleavage after glutamate and glutamine 
residues in the P1 position, which processes a physiologically based peptide 
substrate with a catalytic efficiency of 180 ± 80 M-1s-1. The activity with a 
LapX substrate identified by a multiplex substrate profiling by mass 
spectrometry screen was 590 ± 20 M-1s-1. Lap shares high sequence identity with 
an aminopeptidase (termed VpAP) from Vibrio proteolyticus and contains an 
inhibitory bacterial prepeptidase C-terminal domain that, when eliminated, 
increases catalytic efficiency on leucine p-nitroanilide nearly four-fold from 
5.4 ± 4.1 × 104 M-1s-1 to 20.3 ± 4.3 × 104 M-1s-1. We demonstrate that LapX 
processes Lap to its mature form and thus amplifies Lap activity. The increase 
is approximately eighteen-fold for full-length Lap (95.7 ± 5.6 × 104 M-1s-1) and 
six-fold for Lap lacking the prepeptidase C-terminal domain (11.3 ± 
1.9 × 105 M-1s-1). In addition, substrate profiling reveals preferences for 
these two proteases that could inform in vivo function. Furthermore, purified 
LapX and Lap restore the timing of the V. cholerae aggregation program to a 
mutant lacking the lapX and lap genes. Both proteases must be present to restore 
WT timing, and thus they appear to act sequentially: LapX acts on Lap, and Lap 
acts on the substrate involved in aggregation.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105386
PMCID: PMC10709122
PMID: 37898401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.