1. Micromachines (Basel). 2023 Oct 18;14(10):1938. doi: 10.3390/mi14101938.

Model-Based Feedback Control for an Automated Micro Liquid Dispensing System 
Based on Contacting Droplet Generation through Image Sensing.

Qian Q(1)(2), Xu W(1)(2), Tian H(2), Cheng W(2)(3), Zhou L(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering (Suzhou), Division of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Biomedical Diagnostics, Suzhou Institute of Biomedical 
Engineering and Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Suzhou 215163, 
China.
(3)Tianjin Guoke Medical Engineering and Technology Development Co., Ltd., 
Tianjin 300399, China.

Over the past few decades, micro liquid dispensing technology has been widely 
used in biology, chemistry, material and environmental sciences due to its 
efficacy in processing multiple samples. For practical applications, precise and 
effective droplet generation is very important. Despite numerous droplet 
generation methods, the implementation of droplet-on-demand still faces 
challenges concerning system complexity, precision, cost, and robustness. In 
this work, a novel on-demand contacting droplet generation method incorporated 
with model-based feedback control with an image processing unit as a sensor was 
proposed. By studying droplet identification using image processing techniques, 
the model of droplet formation was simplified. Then model-based feedback control 
was implemented using volumes of dispensed samples as sensing signals by tuning 
related parameters adaptively to resist disturbances. The proposed method was 
integrated and applied to a homebuilt automated micro liquid dispensing system 
with droplets ranging from 20 nanoliter to 200 nanoliter. The experimental 
results demonstrated a high degree of accuracy and precision. Additionally, the 
proposed system's practical utility was evaluated by analyzing mutations in 
genes associated with sensorineural hearing loss, verifying its effectiveness.

DOI: 10.3390/mi14101938
PMCID: PMC10609237
PMID: 37893375

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.