1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Dec;299(12):105385. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105385. Epub
2023  Oct 25.

Atypical genotoxicity of carcinogenic nickel(II): Linkage to dNTP biosynthesis, 
DNA-incorporated rNMPs, and impaired repair of TOP1-DNA crosslinks.

Krawic C(1), Luczak MW(1), Valiente S(1), Zhitkovich A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, 
Providence, Rhode Island, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, 
Providence, Rhode Island, USA. Electronic address: anatoly_zhitkovich@brown.edu.

Cancer is a genetic disease requiring multiple mutations for its development. 
However, many carcinogens are DNA-unreactive and nonmutagenic and consequently 
described as nongenotoxic. One of such carcinogens is nickel, a global 
environmental pollutant abundantly emitted by burning of coal. We investigated 
activation of DNA damage responses by Ni and identified this metal as a 
replication stressor. Genotoxic stress markers indicated the accumulation of 
ssDNA and stalled replication forks, and Ni-treated cells were dependent on ATR 
for suppression of DNA damage and long-term survival. Replication stress by Ni 
resulted from destabilization of RRM1 and RRM2 subunits of ribonucleotide 
reductase and the resulting deficiency in dNTPs. Ni also increased DNA 
incorporation of rNMPs (detected by a specific fluorescent assay) and strongly 
enhanced their genotoxicity as a result of repressed repair of TOP1-DNA protein 
crosslinks (TOP1-DPC). The DPC-trap assay found severely impaired SUMOylation 
and K48-polyubiquitination of DNA-crosslinked TOP1 due to downregulation of 
specific enzymes. Our findings identified Ni as the human carcinogen inducing 
genome instability via DNA-embedded ribonucleotides and accumulation of TOP1-DPC 
which are carcinogenic abnormalities with poor detectability by the standard 
mutagenicity tests. The discovered mechanisms for Ni could also play a role in 
genotoxicity of other protein-reactive carcinogens.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105385
PMCID: PMC10692736
PMID: 37890780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.