1. JCEM Case Rep. 2023 Aug 14;1(4):luad089. doi: 10.1210/jcemcr/luad089. 
eCollection 2023 Jul.

Siblings With HNF4A Congenital Hyperinsulinism From Possible Parental Gonadal 
Mosaicism.

Wolschendorf R(1)(2), Eimicke T(1)(3), Swartz J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Barbara Bush Children's Hospital at Maine Medical Center, Portland, ME 04102, 
USA.
(2)C.S. Mott Children's Hospital, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
USA.
(3)Maine Medical Partners Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Portland, ME 
04102, USA.

Congenital hyperinsulinism is the most common cause of persistent hypoglycemia 
in early infancy. Mutations in the gene for heterozygous hepatocyte nuclear 
transcription factor 4-alpha (HNF4A) account for approximately 5% of cases and 
are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion or arise as de novo mutations. 
This case describes a unique presentation of parental gonadal, or germline, 
mosaicism as the suspected inheritance pattern for siblings with congenital 
hyperinsulinism caused by HNF4A mutations. Two siblings presented with 
hypoglycemia in the first hours of life and were subsequently confirmed to have 
hyperinsulinism. In each patient, glycemic control was achieved at relatively 
low doses of diazoxide. Both siblings tested positive for the same HNF4A 
mutation, whereas the parents tested negative for HNF4A mutations. Gonadal, or 
germline, mosaicism became the presumed leading diagnosis, given 2 unaffected 
parents with 2 children with congenital hyperinsulinism. The older sibling 
demonstrated additional clinical features of liver disease and renal Fanconi 
syndrome, both of which are associated with HNF4A mutations. Genetic testing 
plays an important role in the diagnosis and management of congenital 
hyperinsulinism. HNF4A mutations may arise by a range of mechanisms, including 
gonadal, or germline, mosaicism. HNF4A mutations have phenotypic variance that 
may affect multiple organ systems at any age.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jcemcr/luad089
PMCID: PMC10580462
PMID: 37908999