1. Front Plant Sci. 2023 Oct 16;14:1269521. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1269521. 
eCollection 2023.

Expression of sucrose metabolizing enzymes in different sugarcane varieties 
under progressive heat stress.

Mehdi F(1)(2)(3), Liu X(1)(4), Riaz Z(2), Javed U(5), Aman A(3), Galani S(3).

Author information:
(1)Sugarcane Research Institute, Yunnan Key Laboratory of Sugarcane Genetic 
Improvement, Yunnan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Kaiyuan, China.
(2)Agriculture and Agribusiness Management, University of Karachi, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(3)Dr. A. Q. Khan Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (KIBGE), 
University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)National Key Laboratory for Biological Breeding of Tropical Crops, Yunnan 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Kunming, China.
(5)Dow College of Biotechnology, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, 
Pakistan.

Studying the thermal stress effect on sucrose-metabolizing enzymes in sugarcane 
is of great importance for understanding acclimation to thermal stress. In this 
study, two varieties, S2003-US-633 and SPF-238, were grown at three different 
temperatures ( ± 2°C): 30°C as a control, 45°C for various episodes of high 
temperature treatments and recovery conditions at 24, 48 and 72 hours. Data 
showed that reducing sugar content increased until the grand growth stage but 
sharply declined at the maturity stage in both cultivars. On the other hand, 
sucrose is enhanced only at the maturity stage. The expression of all invertase 
isozymes declined prominently; however, the expression of SPS was high at the 
maturity stage. Hence, the sucrose accumulation in mature cane was due to 
increased SPS activity while decreased invertase isozymes (vacuolar, cytoplasmic 
and cell wall) activities at maturity stage in both cultivars. Heat shock 
decreased the sucrose metabolizing enzymes, sucrose content and sugar recovery 
rate in both cultivars. In contrast, heat-shock treatments induced maximum 
proline, MDA, H2O2 and EC in both cultivars. Notably, this is the first report 
of diverse invertase isozyme molecular weight proteins, such as those with 67, 
134 and 160 kDa, produced under heat stress, suggesting that these enzymes have 
varied activities at different developmental stages. Overall, S2003-US-633 
performs better than the cultivar SPF-238 under heat stress conditions at all 
development stages, with increased sucrose content, enzyme expression, proline 
and sugar recovery rate. This work will provide a new avenue regarding sugarcane 
molecular breeding programs with respect to thermal stress.

Copyright © 2023 Mehdi, Liu, Riaz, Javed, Aman and Galani.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1269521
PMCID: PMC10614296
PMID: 37908828

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.