1. Life Sci Alliance. 2023 Nov 2;7(1):e202302232. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202302232. 
Print 2024 Jan.

Characterization of Na(+) currents regulating intrinsic excitability of optic 
tectal neurons.

Thompson AC(1), Aizenman CD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA 
Carlos_Aizenman@Brown.edu.

Developing neurons adapt their intrinsic excitability to maintain stable output 
despite changing synaptic input. The mechanisms behind this process remain 
unclear. In this study, we examined Xenopus optic tectal neurons and found that 
the expressions of Nav1.1 and Nav1.6 voltage-gated Na+ channels are regulated 
during changes in intrinsic excitability, both during development and becsuse of 
changes in visual experience. Using whole-cell electrophysiology, we demonstrate 
the existence of distinct, fast, persistent, and resurgent Na+ currents in the 
tectum, and show that these Na+ currents are co-regulated with changes in Nav 
channel expression. Using antisense RNA to suppress the expression of specific 
Nav subunits, we found that up-regulation of Nav1.6 expression, but not Nav1.1, 
was necessary for experience-dependent increases in Na+ currents and intrinsic 
excitability. Furthermore, this regulation was also necessary for normal 
development of sensory guided behaviors. These data suggest that the regulation 
of Na+ currents through the modulation of Nav1.6 expression, and to a lesser 
extent Nav1.1, plays a crucial role in controlling the intrinsic excitability of 
tectal neurons and guiding normal development of the tectal circuitry.

Â© 2023 Thompson and Aizenman.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202302232
PMCID: PMC10622587
PMID: 37918964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.