1. J Int Med Res. 2023 Nov;51(11):3000605231204502. doi:
10.1177/03000605231204502.

Advanced renal pelvis carcinoma patient with an ERBB2 insertion mutation: a case 
report.

Shang P(1), Lou C(1), Yin L(1), Tao C(1), Dong Y(1), Yang G(1), Yuan Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, 
Anting Town, Jiading District, Shanghai, China.

The prognosis of renal pelvis cancer is poor and therapeutic options are 
limited, especially for patients with advanced disease. In this report, we 
present a case of advanced renal pelvis carcinoma in a male patient in his 60s, 
characterized by an activating mutation in ERBB2. Clinical evaluation resulted 
in a pathological diagnosis of renal pelvis carcinoma with liver metastasis. 
Immunohistochemistry staining results suggested that CK, P63, and PAX8 were 
positively expressed, while Sy, CK7, CK20, S100, PAX8, and HEP1 were negatively 
expressed. Furthermore, next-generation sequencing results showed an activating 
mutation in the ERBB2 gene. The patient initially received a trastuzumab-based 
combination therapy, which led to a significant reduction in ERBB2 mutation 
frequency and a stable condition after three treatment cycles. However, 
following continuous treatment for 4 months, the patient developed drug 
resistance that resulted in disease relapse. Subsequently, the patient received 
apatinib treatment, but the therapeutic response was not satisfactory. The 
patient's condition underwent rapid deterioration and he ultimately succumbed to 
the disease. This case underscores the potential benefit of trastuzumab for 
treating ERBB2-mutated advanced renal pelvis cancer, but further highlights that 
overcoming drug resistance remains a crucial challenge for long-term efficacy.

DOI: 10.1177/03000605231204502
PMCID: PMC10623987
PMID: 37917812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.