1. Aging (Albany NY). 2023 Nov 2;15(21):12155-12170. doi: 10.18632/aging.205170. 
Epub 2023 Nov 2.

Identification of circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network as biomarkers for interstitial 
cystitis/bladder pain syndrome.

Yang SQ(1), Peng L(1), Lin LD(1), Chen YZ(1), Liu MZ(1), Zhang C(1), Chen JW(1), 
Luo DY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Institute of Urology, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.

Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS) is a long-lasting and 
incapacitating disease, and the exact factors that affect its onset and 
advancement are still uncertain. Thus, the main aim was to explore new 
biomarkers and possible therapeutic targets for IC/BPS. Next-generation 
high-throughput sequencing experiments were performed on bladder tissues. Based 
on the interactions between circRNA and miRNA, as well as miRNA and mRNA, 
candidates were selected to build a network of circRNA-miRNA-mRNA. The STRING 
database and Cytoscape software were utilized to build a protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) network to pinpoint the hub genes associated with IC/BPS. The 
expression levels of circRNA and miRNA in the network were confirmed through 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Western blot was applied to confirm the 
stability of the lipopolysaccharide-induced IC/BPS model, and the effect of 
overexpression of circ.5863 by lentivirus on inflammation. Ten circRNA-miRNA 
interactions involving three circRNAs and six miRNAs were identified, and IFIT3 
and RSAD2 were identified as hub genes in the resulting PPI network with 19 
nodes. Circ.5863 showed a statistically significant decrease in the constructed 
model, which is consistent with the sequencing results, and overexpression via 
lentiviral transfection of circ.5863 was found to alleviate inflammation damage. 
In this study, a circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network was successfully constructed, and 
IFIT3 and RSAD2 were identified as hub genes. Our findings suggest that 
circ.5863 can mitigate inflammation damage in IC/BPS. The identified marker 
genes may serve as valuable targets for future research aimed at developing 
diagnostic tools and more effective therapies for IC/BPS.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.205170
PMCID: PMC10683623
PMID: 37925174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest related to this study.