1. ACS Omega. 2023 Oct 19;8(43):40729-40740. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.3c05802. 
eCollection 2023 Oct 31.

Block Copolymer Encapsulation of Disarib, an Inhibitor of BCL2 for Improved 
Chemotherapeutic Potential.

Joy R(1), Siddiqua H(2), Sharma S(2), Raveendran M(2), John F(1), Hassan PA(3), 
Gawali SL(3), Raghavan SC(2), George J(1).

Author information:
(1)Bio-organic Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Sacred Heart College, Kochi 
682013, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, 
India.
(3)Chemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400085, India.

A chemical inhibitor of antiapoptotic protein, BCL2, known as Disarib, suffers 
poor solubility in aqueous environments; thereby limiting its potential as a 
chemotherapeutic agent. To overcome this limitation and enhance the therapeutic 
efficacy of Disarib, we have employed the encapsulation of this small molecule 
inhibitor within P123 copolymer matrix. Micelles were synthesized using a 
thin-film hydration technique, and a comprehensive analysis was undertaken to 
evaluate the resulting micelle properties, including morphology, particle size, 
intermolecular interactions, encapsulation efficiency, and in vitro release 
characteristics. This assessment utilized various physicochemical techniques 
including UV spectroscopy, FTIR spectroscopy, dynamic light scattering (DLS), 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). 
Disarib-loaded P123 micelle formulation denoted as P123D exhibited a 
well-defined particle size of approximately 29.2 nm spherical core-shell 
morphology. Our investigations revealed a notable encapsulation efficiency of 
75%, and we observed a biphasic release pattern for the encapsulated Disarib. 
Furthermore, our cytotoxicity assessment of P123D micelles against mouse breast 
adenocarcinoma, mouse lymphoma, and human leukemic cell lines showed 40-45% 
increase in cytotoxicity compared with the administration of Disarib alone in 
the breast adenocarcinoma cell line. Enhancement in the cytotoxicity of P123D 
was found to be higher or limited; however, it is important to observe that the 
encapsulation method significantly enhanced the aqueous solubility of Disarib as 
it has the best solubility in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in the unencapsulated 
state.

Â© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.3c05802
PMCID: PMC10621013
PMID: 37929147

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.