1. Stem Cell Reports. 2023 Nov 14;18(11):2240-2253. doi: 
10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.10.007. Epub 2023 Nov 2.

Enrichment of FGF8-expressing cells from neurally induced human pluripotent stem 
cell cultures.

Offen N(1), Filatova A(1), Nuber UA(2).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Technical University of Darmstadt, 64287 
Darmstadt, Germany.
(2)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Technical University of Darmstadt, 64287 
Darmstadt, Germany. Electronic address: nuber@bio.tu-darmstadt.de.

In early vertebrate development, organizer regions-groups of cells that signal 
to and thereby influence neighboring cells by secreted morphogens-play pivotal 
roles in the establishment and maintenance of cell identities within defined 
tissue territories. The midbrain-hindbrain organizer drives regionalization of 
neural tissue into midbrain and hindbrain territories with fibroblast growth 
factor 8 (FGF8) acting as a key morphogen. This organizer has been extensively 
studied in chicken, mouse, and zebrafish. Here, we demonstrate the enrichment of 
FGF8-expressing cells from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), cultured as 
attached embryoid bodies using antibodies that recognize "Similar Expression to 
Fgf" (SEF) and Frizzled proteins. The arrangement of cells in embryoid body 
subsets of these cultures and the gene expression profile of the FGF8-expressing 
population show certain similarities to the midbrain-hindbrain organizer in 
animal models. In the embryonic chick brain, the enriched cell population 
induces formation of midbrain structures, consistent with FGF8-organizing 
capability.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.10.007
PMCID: PMC10679777
PMID: 37922914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.