1. Virus Res. 2024 Jan 2;339:199261. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2023.199261. Epub
2023  Nov 14.

Rotavirus-induced lncRNA SLC7A11-AS1 promotes ferroptosis by targeting 
cystine/glutamate antiporter xCT (SLC7A11) to facilitate virus infection.

Banerjee S(1), Sarkar R(1), Mukherjee A(1), Mitra S(1), Gope A(1), Chawla-Sarkar 
M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Virology, ICMR-National Institute of Cholera and Enteric 
Diseases, P-33, C.I.T. Road, Scheme-XM, Beliaghata, Kolkata, West Bengal 700010, 
India.
(2)Division of Virology, ICMR-National Institute of Cholera and Enteric 
Diseases, P-33, C.I.T. Road, Scheme-XM, Beliaghata, Kolkata, West Bengal 700010, 
India. Electronic address: chawlasarkar.m@icmr.gov.in.

Rotavirus (RV) is the primary etiological agent of virus-associated 
gastroenteritis in infants, causing 200,000 childhood death annually. Despite 
the availability of vaccines, rotaviral diarrhea continues to be a severe issue 
in underdeveloped nations in Asia and Africa. The situation demands continual 
studies on host-rotavirus interactions to understand disease pathogenesis and 
develop effective antiviral therapeutics. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), which 
are a subset of non-coding RNAs of more than 200 nucleotides in length, are 
reported to play a regulatory function in numerous viral infections. Virus 
infection often alters the host transcriptome including lncRNA that are 
differentially expressed either to play an antiviral role or to be advantageous 
towards virus propagation. In the current study, qPCR array-based expression 
profiling of host lncRNAs was performed in rotavirus-infected HT-29 cells that 
identified the lncRNA SLC7A11-AS1 to be upregulated during RV infection. 
Knockdown of SLC7A11-AS1 conspicuously reduced RV titers implying its pro-viral 
significance. RV-induced SLC7A11-AS1 downregulates the gene SLC7A11/xCT that 
encodes the light chain subunit of the system XC- cystine-glutamate exchange 
transporter, leading to decrease in intracellular glutathione level and increase 
in lipid peroxidation, which are signature features of ferroptotic pathway. 
Ectopic expression of xCT also abrogated RV infection by reversing the virus 
optimized levels of intracellular GSH and lipid ROS levels. Cumulatively, the 
study reveals that RV infection triggers ferroptotic cell death via 
SLC7A11-AS1/xCT axis to facilitate its own propagation.

Copyright Â© 2023. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2023.199261
PMCID: PMC10684390
PMID: 37923170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.