1. Front Immunol. 2023 Oct 23;14:1258573. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1258573. 
eCollection 2023.

A first-in-human, open-label, dose-escalation and dose-expansion phase I study 
to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics, and 
antitumor activity of QL1604, a humanized anti-PD-1 mAb, in patients with 
advanced or metastatic solid tumors.

Huang Z(1), Xu Y(1), Hong W(1), Gong L(2), Chen K(1), Qin J(1), Xie F(1), Wang 
F(2), Tian X(2), Meng X(2), Feng W(3), Li L(3), Zhang B(3), Kang X(3), Fan Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital; Institute of Basic 
Medicine and Cancer (IBMC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.
(2)Oncology Department, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(3)Medcine Department, Qilu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Jinan, China.

BACKGROUND: QL1604 is a humanized immunoglobulin G4 monoclonal antibody against 
programmed cell death protein 1. This first-in-human, open-label phase I study 
aimed to investigate the safety and tolerability and to identify the recommended 
doses of QL1604 for future studies. Pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics (PK/PD) 
and preliminary antitumor activity were also assessed.
METHODS: Patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumors who failed or had no 
standard therapies available were recruited. In the dose-escalation phase, 
patients were treated with QL1604 at 0.3 mg/kg, 1 mg/kg, 3 mg/kg, and 10 mg/kg 
intravenously once every 2 weeks (Q2W) in an accelerated titration with a 
traditional 3 + 3 design, followed by a dose-expansion phase at 3 mg/kg Q2W, 3 
mg/kg once every 3 weeks (Q3W), 10 mg/kg Q2W and a fixed dose of 200 mg Q3W. 
Dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) were assessed during the first 28 days after the 
first dose of study drug. Adverse events (AEs) were graded per National Cancer 
Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0, and 
antitumor activity of QL1604 was evaluated by investigators on the basis of 
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1.
RESULTS: A total of 35 patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumors were 
enrolled. DLTs were reported in one patient at the dose level of 3 mg/kg Q2W 
(grade 3 immune-mediated myositis and myasthenia gravis), and maximum tolerated 
dose was not reached. The most frequent treatment-related AEs (≥10%) were 
fatigue (37.1%), anemia (22.9%), increased blood thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(17.1%), increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (17.1%), increased alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT) (14.3%), decreased white blood cell (WBC) count (11.4%), 
rash (14.3%), and pruritus (14.3%). AEs leading to discontinuation of QL1604 
occurred in three of the 35 patients (8.6%). Partial responses (PRs) occurred in 
seven patients, resulting in an objective response rate of 20.0% (7/35). Single 
dose of QL1604 exhibited a dose-dependent increase in the exposure ranging from 
0.3 mg/kg to 10 mg/kg. Mean receptor occupancy (RO) for QL1604 at the dose of 3 
mg/kg (Q2W and Q3W) and 200 mg (Q3W) was greater than 80% during cycle 1 after 
one infusion.
CONCLUSION: QL1604 monotherapy exhibited favorable safety, PK, and signal of 
antitumor activity in patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumors, and the 
results supported further clinical studies of QL1604. On the basis of the 
safety, PK, and RO data, the recommended dosage for further clinical trials is 3 
mg/kg or a fixed dose of 200 mg given every 3 weeks.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: 
https://classic.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT05649761?term=QL1604&draw=2&rank=1, 
identifier NCT05649761.

Copyright © 2023 Huang, Xu, Hong, Gong, Chen, Qin, Xie, Wang, Tian, Meng, Feng, 
Li, Zhang, Kang and Fan.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1258573
PMCID: PMC10627225
PMID: 37936687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors WF, LL, BZ, and XK are full time 
employees of the company Qilu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest. The authors declare that this study received funding from Qilu 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. The funder(s) had the following involvement in the 
study project management, data analyses, review, and editing of this manuscript. 
Medical writing assistance was provided by Qilu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. and 
Happy Life Tech. Co., Ltd.