1. J Extracell Vesicles. 2023 Nov;12(11):e12378. doi: 10.1002/jev2.12378.

RTP801 mediates transneuronal toxicity in culture via extracellular vesicles.

Solana-Balaguer J(1)(2)(3), Martín-Flores N(1)(2), Garcia-Segura P(1)(2)(3), 
Campoy-Campos G(1)(2)(3), Pérez-Sisqués L(1)(2), Chicote-González A(1)(2)(3), 
Fernández-Irigoyen J(4), Santamaría E(4), Pérez-Navarro E(1)(2)(3)(5), Alberch 
J(1)(2)(3)(5), Malagelada C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(2)Institut de Neurociències (UBneuro), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades 
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Proteored-ISCIII, Proteomics Unit, Navarrabiomed, Departamento de Salud, 
UPNA, IdiSNA, Pamplona, Spain.
(5)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) play a crucial role in intercellular communication, 
participating in the paracrine trophic support or in the propagation of toxic 
molecules, including proteins. RTP801 is a stress-regulated protein, whose 
levels are elevated during neurodegeneration and induce neuron death. However, 
whether RTP801 toxicity is transferred trans-neuronally via EVs remains unknown. 
Hence, we overexpressed or silenced RTP801 protein in cultured cortical neurons, 
isolated their derived EVs (RTP801-EVs or shRTP801-EVs, respectively), and 
characterized EVs protein content by mass spectrometry (MS). RTP801-EVs toxicity 
was assessed by treating cultured neurons with these EVs and quantifying 
apoptotic neuron death and branching. We also tested shRTP801-EVs functionality 
in the pathologic in vitro model of 6-Hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA). Expression of 
RTP801 increased the number of EVs released by neurons. Moreover, RTP801 led to 
a distinct proteomic signature of neuron-derived EVs, containing more 
pro-apoptotic markers. Hence, we observed that RTP801-induced toxicity was 
transferred to neurons via EVs, activating apoptosis and impairing neuron 
morphology complexity. In contrast, shRTP801-EVs were able to increase the 
arborization in recipient neurons. The 6-OHDA neurotoxin elevated levels of 
RTP801 in EVs, and 6-OHDA-derived EVs lost the mTOR/Akt signalling activation 
via Akt and RPS6 downstream effectors. Interestingly, EVs derived from neurons 
where RTP801 was silenced prior to exposing them to 6-OHDA maintained Akt and 
RPS6 transactivation in recipient neurons. Taken together, these results suggest 
that RTP801-induced toxicity is transferred via EVs, and therefore, it could 
contribute to the progression of neurodegenerative diseases, in which RTP801 is 
involved.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Extracellular Vesicles published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Society for Extracellular Vesicles.

DOI: 10.1002/jev2.12378
PMCID: PMC10627824
PMID: 37932242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare to have no competing 
interests.