1. ISME Commun. 2023 Nov 7;3(1):115. doi: 10.1038/s43705-023-00321-w.

Prevalence and transmission risk of colistin and multidrug resistance in 
long-distance coastal aquaculture.

An T(1)(2), Cai Y(3)(4), Li G(3)(4), Li S(5), Wong PK(3)(4), Guo J(6), Zhao 
H(7).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory for Contaminants Exposure and 
Health, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Environmental Catalysis and Health Risk 
Control, Institute of Environmental Health and Pollution Control, Guangdong 
University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China. antc99@gdut.edu.cn.
(2)Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Environmental Catalysis and Pollution Control, 
Key Laboratory of City Cluster Environmental Safety and Green Development of the 
Ministry of Education, School of Environmental Science and Engineering, 
Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China. 
antc99@gdut.edu.cn.
(3)Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory for Contaminants Exposure and 
Health, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Environmental Catalysis and Health Risk 
Control, Institute of Environmental Health and Pollution Control, Guangdong 
University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China.
(4)Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Environmental Catalysis and Pollution Control, 
Key Laboratory of City Cluster Environmental Safety and Green Development of the 
Ministry of Education, School of Environmental Science and Engineering, 
Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China.
(5)College of Biological and Pharmaceutical Science, Guangdong University of 
Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China.
(6)Australian Centre for Water and Environmental Biotechnology, The University 
of Queensland, St. Lucia, Brisbane, QLD, 4072, Australia. jianhua.guo@uq.edu.au.
(7)Centre for Clean Environment and Energy, and Griffith School of Environment, 
Gold Coast Campus, Griffith University, Gold Coast, QLD, 4222, Australia.

Due to the wide use of antibiotics, intensive aquaculture farms have been 
recognized as a significant reservoir of antibiotic resistomes. Although the 
prevalence of colistin resistance genes and multidrug-resistant bacteria (MDRB) 
has been documented, empirical evidence for the transmission of colistin and 
multidrug resistance between bacterial communities in aquaculture farms through 
horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is lacking. Here, we report the prevalence and 
transmission risk of colistin and multidrug resistance in 27 aquaculture water 
samples from 9 aquaculture zones from over 5000 km of subtropical coastlines in 
southern China. The colistin resistance gene mcr-1, mobile genetic element (MGE) 
intl1 and 13 typical antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) were prevalent in all 
the aquaculture water samples. Most types of antibiotic (especially colistin) 
resistance are transmissible in bacterial communities based on evidence from 
laboratory conjugation and transformation experiments. Diverse MDRB were 
detected in most of the aquaculture water samples, and a strain with high-level 
colistin resistance, named Ralstonia pickettii MCR, was isolated. The risk of 
horizontal transfer of the colistin resistance of R. pickettii MCR through 
conjugation and transformation was low, but the colistin resistance could be 
steadily transmitted to offspring through vertical transfer. The findings have 
important implications for the future regulation of antibiotic use in 
aquaculture farms globally to address the growing threat posed by antibiotic 
resistance to human health.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s43705-023-00321-w
PMCID: PMC10630474
PMID: 37935916

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.