1. Sci Rep. 2023 Nov 9;13(1):19544. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-47012-z.

Establishment and validation of a nomogram model for riskprediction of hepatic 
encephalopathy: a retrospective analysis.

Yao C(1), Huang L(1), Wang M(2), Mao D(2), Wang M(2), Zheng J(1), Long F(2), 
Huang J(2), Liu X(2), Zhang R(2), Xie J(1), Cheng C(2), Yao F(2), Huang G(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine, Nanning, 530001, Guangxi, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine, 89-9 
Dongge Road, Nanning, 530001, Guangxi, People's Republic of China.
(3)First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine, 89-9 
Dongge Road, Nanning, 530001, Guangxi, People's Republic of China. 
349661907@qq.com.

To establish a high-quality, easy-to-use, and effective risk prediction model 
for hepatic encephalopathy, to help healthcare professionals with identifying 
people who are at high risk of getting hepatic encephalopathy, and to guide them 
to take early interventions to reduce the occurrence of hepatic encephalopathy. 
Patients (n = 1178) with decompensated cirrhosis who attended the First 
Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine between January 
2016 and June 2022 were selected for the establishment and validation of a 
nomogram model for risk prediction of hepatic encephalopathy. In this study, we 
screened the risk factors for the development of hepatic encephalopathy in 
patients with decompensated cirrhosis by univariate analysis, LASSO regression 
and multifactor analysis, then established a nomogram model for predicting the 
risk of getting hepatic encephalopathy for patients with decompensated 
cirrhosis, and finally performed differentiation analysis, calibration analysis, 
clinical decision curve analysis and validation of the established model. A 
total of 1178 patients with decompensated cirrhosis who were hospitalized and 
treated at the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi University of Chinese 
Medicine between January 2016 and June 2022 were included for modeling and 
validation. Based on the results of univariate analysis, LASSO regression 
analysis and multifactor analysis, a final nomogram model with age, diabetes, 
ascites, spontaneous peritonitis, alanine transaminase, and blood potassium as 
predictors of hepatic encephalopathy risk prediction was created. The results of 
model differentiation analysis showed that the AUC of the model of the training 
set was 0.738 (95% CI 0.63-0.746), while the AUC of the model of the validation 
set was 0.667 (95% CI 0.541-0.706), and the two AUCs indicated a good 
discrimination of this nomogram model. According to the Cut-Off value determined 
by the Jorden index, when the Cut-Off value of the training set was set at 
0.150, the sensitivity of the model was 72.8%, the specificity was 64.8%, the 
positive predictive value was 30.4%, and the negative predictive value was 
91.9%; when the Cut-Off value of the validation set was set at 0.141, the 
sensitivity of the model was 69.7%, the specificity was 57.3%, the positive 
predictive value was 34.5%, and the negative predictive value was 84.7%. The 
calibration curve and the actual events curve largely overlap at the diagonal, 
indicating that the prediction with this model has less error. The 
Hosmer-Lemeshow test for goodness of fit was also applied, and the results 
showed that for the training set, χ2 = 1.237587, P = 0.998, and for the 
validation set, χ2 = 31.90904, P = 0.0202, indicating that there was no 
significant difference between the predicted and actual observed values. The 
results of the clinical decision curve analysis showed that the model had a good 
clinical benefit, compared with the two extreme clinical scenarios (all patients 
treated or none treated), and the model also had a good clinical benefit in the 
validation set. This study showed that aged over 55 years, complications of 
diabetes, ascites, and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, abnormal glutamate 
aminotransferase and abnormal blood potassium are independent risks indicators 
for the development of hepatic encephalopathy in patients with decompensated 
cirrhosis. The nomogram model based on the indicators mentioned above can 
effectively and conveniently predict the risk of developing hepatic 
encephalopathy in patients with decompensated cirrhosis. The nomogram model 
established on this study can help clinical healthcare professionals to timely 
and early identify patients with high risk of developing hepatic encephalopathy.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-47012-z
PMCID: PMC10636098
PMID: 37945916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.