1. Cells. 2023 Oct 31;12(21):2554. doi: 10.3390/cells12212554.

CREB1 Is Involved in miR-134-5p-Mediated Endometrial Stromal Cell Proliferation, 
Apoptosis, and Autophagy.

Li X(1)(2), Yao X(1)(2), Li K(1)(2), Guo J(1)(2), Deng K(2), Liu Z(2), Yang 
F(1)(2), Fan Y(2), Yang Y(2), Zhu H(3), Wang F(2).

Author information:
(1)Hu Sheep Academy, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.
(2)Jiangsu Livestock Embryo Engineering Laboratory, Nanjing Agricultural 
University, Nanjing 210095, China.
(3)Embryo Biotechnology and Reproduction Laboratory, Institute of Animal 
Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193, China.

The successful establishment of endometrial receptivity is a key factor in 
ensuring the fertility of ewes and their economic benefits. Hu sheep have 
attracted attention due to their high fecundity and year-round estrus. In this 
study, we found that in the luteal phase, the uterine gland density, uterine 
coefficient, and number of uterine caruncles of high-fertility Hu sheep were 
higher than those of low-fertility Hu sheep. Thousands of differentially 
expressed genes were identified in the endometrium of Hu sheep with different 
fertility potential using RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq). Several genes involved in 
endometrial receptivity were screened using bioinformatics analysis. The qRT-PCR 
analysis further revealed the differential expression of cAMP reactive element 
binding protein-1 (CREB1) in the Hu sheep endometrium during the estrous cycle. 
Functionally, our results suggested that CREB1 significantly affected the 
expression level of endometrial receptivity marker genes, promoted cell 
proliferation by facilitating the transition from the G1 phase to the S phase, 
and inhibited cell apoptosis and autophagy. Moreover, we observed a negative 
linear correlation between miR-134-5p and CREB1 in the endometrium. In addition, 
CREB1 overexpression prevented the negative effect of miR-134-5p on endometrial 
stromal cell (ESC) growth. Taken together, these data indicated that CREB1 was 
regulated by miR-134-5p and may promote the establishment of uterine receptivity 
by regulating the function of ESCs. Moreover, this study provides new 
theoretical references for identifying candidate genes associated with 
fertility.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12212554
PMCID: PMC10649013
PMID: 37947633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.