1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 30;24(21):15746. doi: 10.3390/ijms242115746.

ASCL1 Is Involved in the Pathogenesis of Schizophrenia by Regulation of Genes 
Related to Cell Proliferation, Neuronal Signature Formation, and 
Neuroplasticity.

Abashkin DA(1), Karpov DS(1)(2), Kurishev AO(1), Marilovtseva EV(1), Golimbet 
VE(1).

Author information:
(1)Mental Health Research Center, Kashirskoe Sh., 34, Moscow 115522, Russia.
(2)Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic Technologies for Biomedicine, 
Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Vavilov 
Str. 32, Moscow 119991, Russia.

Schizophrenia (SZ) is a common psychiatric neurodevelopmental disorder with a 
complex genetic architecture. Genome-wide association studies indicate the 
involvement of several transcription factors, including ASCL1, in the 
pathogenesis of SZ. We aimed to identify ASCL1-dependent cellular and molecular 
mechanisms associated with SZ. We used Capture-C, CRISPR/Cas9 systems and 
RNA-seq analysis to confirm the involvement of ASCL1 in SZ-associated 
pathogenesis, establish a mutant SH-SY5Y line with a functional ASCL1 knockout 
(ASCL1-del) and elucidate differentially expressed genes that may underlie 
ASCL1-dependent pathogenic mechanisms. Capture-C confirmed the spatial 
interaction of the ASCL1 promoter with SZ-associated loci. Transcriptome 
analysis showed that ASCL1 regulation may be through a negative feedback 
mechanism. ASCL1 dysfunction affects the expression of genes associated with the 
pathogenesis of SZ, as well as bipolar and depressive disorders. Genes 
differentially expressed in ASCL1-del are involved in cell mitosis, neuronal 
projection, neuropeptide signaling, and the formation of intercellular contacts, 
including the synapse. After retinoic acid (RA)-induced differentiation, ASCL1 
activity is restricted to a small subset of genes involved in neuroplasticity. 
These data suggest that ASCL1 dysfunction promotes SZ development predominantly 
before the onset of neuronal differentiation by slowing cell proliferation and 
impeding the formation of neuronal signatures.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms242115746
PMCID: PMC10648210
PMID: 37958729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.