1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2024 Jan 5;52(D1):D980-D989. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad1080.

PigBiobank: a valuable resource for understanding genetic and biological 
mechanisms of diverse complex traits in pigs.

Zeng H(1), Zhang W(1), Lin Q(1), Gao Y(1), Teng J(1), Xu Z(1), Cai X(1), Zhong 
Z(1), Wu J(1), Liu Y(1), Diao S(1), Wei C(1), Gong W(1), Pan X(1), Li Z(1), 
Huang X(1), Chen X(1), Du J(1); PigGTEx Consortium.

Collaborators: Zhao F, Zhao Y, Ballester M, Crespo-Piazuelo D, Amills M, Clop A, 
Karlskov-Mortensen P, Fredholm M, Li P, Huang R, Tang G, Li M, Liu X, Chen Y, 
Zhang Q, Li J, Yuan X, Ding X, Fang L, Zhang Z.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Swine and Poultry Breeding Industry, National 
Engineering Research Center for Breeding Swine Industry, Guangdong Provincial 
Key Lab of Agro-Animal Genomics and Molecular Breeding, College of Animal 
Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2024 Mar 21;52(5):2758. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae074.

To fully unlock the potential of pigs as both agricultural species for 
animal-based protein food and biomedical models for human biology and disease, a 
comprehensive understanding of molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying 
various complex phenotypes in pigs and how the findings can be translated to 
other species, especially humans, are urgently needed. Here, within the Farm 
animal Genotype-Tissue Expression (FarmGTEx) project, we build the PigBiobank 
(http://pigbiobank.farmgtex.org) to systematically investigate the relationships 
among genomic variants, regulatory elements, genes, molecular networks, tissues 
and complex traits in pigs. This first version of the PigBiobank curates 71 885 
pigs with both genotypes and phenotypes from over 100 pig breeds worldwide, 
covering 264 distinct complex traits. The PigBiobank has the following 
functions: (i) imputed sequence-based genotype-phenotype associations via a 
standardized and uniform pipeline, (ii) molecular and cellular mechanisms 
underlying trait-associations via integrating multi-omics data, (iii) 
cross-species gene mapping of complex traits via transcriptome-wide association 
studies, and (iv) high-quality results display and visualization. The PigBiobank 
will be updated timely with the development of the FarmGTEx-PigGTEx project, 
serving as an open-access and easy-to-use resource for genetically and 
biologically dissecting complex traits in pigs and translating the findings to 
other species.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad1080
PMCID: PMC10767803
PMID: 37956339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]