1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Nov 1;24(21):15865. doi: 10.3390/ijms242115865.

The Role of Genetic Polymorphisms in Diabetic Retinopathy: Narrative Review.

Sienkiewicz-Szłapka E(1), Fiedorowicz E(1), Król-Grzymała A(1), Kordulewska 
N(1), Rozmus D(1), Cieślińska A(1), Grzybowski A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, University 
of Warmia and Mazury, 10-719 Olsztyn, Poland.
(2)Institute for Research in Ophthalmology, Foundation for Ophthalmology 
Development, Gorczyczewskiego 2/3, 61-553 Poznań, Poland.

Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is renowned as a leading cause of visual loss in 
working-age populations with its etiopathology influenced by the disturbance of 
biochemical metabolic pathways and genetic factors, including gene polymorphism. 
Metabolic pathways considered to have an impact on the development of the 
disease, as well as genes and polymorphisms that can affect the gene expression, 
modify the quantity and quality of the encoded product (protein), and 
significantly alter the metabolic pathway and its control, and thus cause 
changes in the functioning of metabolic pathways. In this article, the screening 
of chromosomes and the most important genes involved in the etiology of diabetic 
retinopathy is presented. The common databases with manuscripts published from 
January 2000 to June 2023 have been taken into consideration and chosen. This 
article indicates the role of specific genes in the development of diabetic 
retinopathy, as well as polymorphic changes within the indicated genes that may 
have an impact on exacerbating the symptoms of the disease. The collected data 
will allow for a broader look at the disease and help to select candidate genes 
that can become markers of the disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms242115865
PMCID: PMC10650381
PMID: 37958858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.