1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 24;24(21):15518. doi: 10.3390/ijms242115518.

Assessing the Potential Contribution of In Silico Studies in Discovering Drug 
Candidates That Interact with Various SARS-CoV-2 Receptors.

Mushebenge AG(1)(2)(3), Ugbaja SC(2)(4), Mbatha NA(5), B Khan R(2), Kumalo 
HM(2).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 
Westville, Durban 4000, South Africa.
(2)Drug Research and Innovation Unit, Discipline of Medical Biochemistry, School 
of Laboratory Medicine and Medical Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban 
4000, South Africa.
(3)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Lubumbashi, Lubumbashi 
1825, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(4)Africa Health Research Institute, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban 4000, 
South Africa.
(5)KwaZulu-Natal Research Innovation and Sequencing Platform, School of 
Laboratory Medicine and Medical Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban 
4000, South Africa.

The COVID-19 pandemic has spurred intense research efforts to identify effective 
treatments for SARS-CoV-2. In silico studies have emerged as a powerful tool in 
the drug discovery process, particularly in the search for drug candidates that 
interact with various SARS-CoV-2 receptors. These studies involve the use of 
computer simulations and computational algorithms to predict the potential 
interaction of drug candidates with target receptors. The primary receptors 
targeted by drug candidates include the RNA polymerase, main protease, spike 
protein, ACE2 receptor, and transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2). In silico 
studies have identified several promising drug candidates, including Remdesivir, 
Favipiravir, Ribavirin, Ivermectin, Lopinavir/Ritonavir, and Camostat Mesylate, 
among others. The use of in silico studies offers several advantages, including 
the ability to screen a large number of drug candidates in a relatively short 
amount of time, thereby reducing the time and cost involved in traditional drug 
discovery methods. Additionally, in silico studies allow for the prediction of 
the binding affinity of the drug candidates to target receptors, providing 
insight into their potential efficacy. This study is aimed at assessing the 
useful contributions of the application of computational instruments in the 
discovery of receptors targeted in SARS-CoV-2. It further highlights some 
identified advantages and limitations of these studies, thereby revealing some 
complementary experimental validation to ensure the efficacy and safety of 
identified drug candidates.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms242115518
PMCID: PMC10647470
PMID: 37958503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.