1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Oct 27:2023.10.25.564061. doi: 
10.1101/2023.10.25.564061.

Modular vector assembly enables rapid assessment of emerging CRISPR 
technologies.

McGee AV(1), Liu YV(1), Griffith AL(1), Szegletes ZM(1), Wen B(1), Kraus C(2), 
Miller NW(1), Steger RJ(1), Velasco BE(1), Bosch JA(3), Zirin JD(3), Viswanatha 
R(3), Sontheimer EJ(2)(4)(5), Goodale A(1), Greene MA(1), Green TM(1), Doench 
JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Genetic Perturbation Platform, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, 
MA 02142, USA.
(2)RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.
(4)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical 
School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(5)Li Weibo Institute for Rare Diseases Research, University of Massachusetts 
Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Update in
    Cell Genom. 2024 Mar 13;4(3):100519. doi: 10.1016/j.xgen.2024.100519.

The diversity of CRISPR systems, coupled with scientific ingenuity, has led to 
an explosion of applications; however, to test newly-described innovations in 
their model systems, researchers typically embark on cumbersome, one-off cloning 
projects to generate custom reagents that are optimized for their biological 
questions. Here, we leverage Golden Gate cloning to create the Fragmid toolkit, 
a modular set of CRISPR cassettes and delivery technologies, along with a web 
portal, resulting in a combinatorial platform that enables scalable vector 
assembly within days. We further demonstrate that multiple CRISPR technologies 
can be assessed in parallel in a pooled screening format using this resource, 
enabling the rapid optimization of both novel technologies and cellular models. 
These results establish Fragmid as a robust system for the rapid design of 
CRISPR vectors, and we anticipate that this assembly approach will be broadly 
useful for systematic development, comparison, and dissemination of CRISPR 
technologies.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.10.25.564061
PMCID: PMC10634825
PMID: 37961518

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS EJS is a cofounder, 
scientific advisor, and equity holder of Intellia Therapeutics, and a member of 
the scientific advisory board of Tessera Therapeutics. JGD consults for 
Microsoft Research, BioNTech, and Pfizer. JGD consults for and has equity in 
Tango Therapeutics. JGD serves as a paid scientific advisor to the Laboratory 
for Genomics Research, funded in part by GSK, and the Innovative Genomics 
Institute, funded in part by Apple Tree Partners. JGD receives funding support 
from the Functional Genomics Consortium: Abbvie, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen, 
Merck, and Vir Biotechnology. JGDâ€™s interests are reviewed and managed by the 
Broad Institute in accordance with its conflict of interest policies.