1. Transl Neurodegener. 2023 Nov 14;12(1):52. doi: 10.1186/s40035-023-00385-7.

Oligodendrocyte progenitor cells in Alzheimer's disease: from physiology to 
pathology.

Zou P(1)(2), Wu C(1), Liu TC(1), Duan R(1), Yang L(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Exercise and Neurobiology, School of Physical Education and 
Sports Science, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, 510006, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 
1501 Kings Highway, Shreveport, LA, 71103, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Exercise and Neurobiology, School of Physical Education and 
Sports Science, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, 510006, China. 
luodanyang@m.scnu.edu.cn.

Oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) play pivotal roles in myelin formation 
and phagocytosis, communicating with neighboring cells and contributing to the 
integrity of the blood-brain barrier (BBB). However, under the pathological 
circumstances of Alzheimer's disease (AD), the brain's microenvironment 
undergoes detrimental changes that significantly impact OPCs and their 
functions. Starting with OPC functions, we delve into the transformation of OPCs 
to myelin-producing oligodendrocytes, the intricate signaling interactions with 
other cells in the central nervous system (CNS), and the fascinating process of 
phagocytosis, which influences the function of OPCs and affects CNS homeostasis. 
Moreover, we discuss the essential role of OPCs in BBB formation and highlight 
the critical contribution of OPCs in forming CNS-protective barriers. In the 
context of AD, the deterioration of the local microenvironment in the brain is 
discussed, mainly focusing on neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, and the 
accumulation of toxic proteins. The detrimental changes disturb the delicate 
balance in the brain, impacting the regenerative capacity of OPCs and 
compromising myelin integrity. Under pathological conditions, OPCs experience 
significant alterations in migration and proliferation, leading to impaired 
differentiation and a reduced ability to produce mature oligodendrocytes. 
Moreover, myelin degeneration and formation become increasingly active in AD, 
contributing to progressive neurodegeneration. Finally, we summarize the current 
therapeutic approaches targeting OPCs in AD. Strategies to revitalize OPC 
senescence, modulate signaling pathways to enhance OPC differentiation, and 
explore other potential therapeutic avenues are promising in alleviating the 
impact of AD on OPCs and CNS function. In conclusion, this review highlights the 
indispensable role of OPCs in CNS function and their involvement in the 
pathogenesis of AD. The intricate interplay between OPCs and the AD brain 
microenvironment underscores the complexity of neurodegenerative diseases. 
Insights from studying OPCs under pathological conditions provide a foundation 
for innovative therapeutic strategies targeting OPCs and fostering 
neurodegeneration. Future research will advance our understanding and management 
of neurodegenerative diseases, ultimately offering hope for effective treatments 
and improved quality of life for those affected by AD and related disorders.

Â© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40035-023-00385-7
PMCID: PMC10644503
PMID: 37964328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.