1. PLoS One. 2023 Nov 15;18(11):e0292275. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0292275. 
eCollection 2023.

DNA barcoding as new diagnostic tool to lethal plant poisoning in herbivorous 
mammals.

Schweikle S(1)(2), Häser A(1), Wetters S(1), Raisin M(1), Greiner M(3), Rigbers 
K(2), Fischer U(3), Pietsch K(3), Suntz M(3), Nick P(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cell Biology, Botanical Institute, Karlsruhe Institute of 
Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.
(2)State Institute for Chemical and Veterinary Analysis Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, 
Germany.
(3)State Institute for Chemical and Veterinary Analysis Freiburg, Freiburg im 
Breisgau, Germany.

Reliable identification of plant species in the digestive tract of a deceased 
animal often represents the major key to diagnose a lethal intoxication with 
poisonous plants in veterinary pathology. In many cases, identification of the 
species is challenging or even impossible because the diagnostic morphological 
features have been degraded, and because the interpretation of such features 
requires a considerable expertise in plant anatomy and biodiversity. The use of 
DNA barcoding markers can support or even replace classical morphological 
assessment. While these markers have been widely used for plant taxonomy, their 
forensic application to clarify causes of animal poisoning is novel. In 
addition, we use specific single-nucleotide polymorphisms as fingerprints. This 
allows for a clear decision even in cases, where the conventionally used 
statistical e-values remain ambiguous. In the current work, we explore the 
feasibility of this strategy in a couple of exemplary cases, either in concert 
with anatomical diagnostics, or in cases where visual species identification is 
not possible, or where chemical toxin detection methods are not well 
established, complex, time consuming and expensive.

Copyright: © 2023 Schweikle et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0292275
PMCID: PMC10650979
PMID: 37967132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.