1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2023 Oct 27;21:5358-5371. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2023.10.046. eCollection 2023.

Structure-function and engineering of plant UDP-glycosyltransferase.

Wang M(1)(2), Ji Q(1)(2), Lai B(3), Liu Y(1)(2), Mei K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory for Modern Drug Delivery and High Efficiency, School 
of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Tianjin 
University, Tianjin 300072, China.
(3)BMBF junior research group Biophotovoltaics, Department of Environmental 
Microbiology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig 04318, 
Germany.

Natural products synthesized by plants have substantial industrial and medicinal 
values and are therefore attracting increasing interest in various related 
industries. Among the key enzyme families involved in the biosynthesis of 
natural products, uridine diphosphate-dependent glycosyltransferases (UGTs) play 
a crucial role in plants. In recent years, significant efforts have been made to 
elucidate the catalytic mechanisms and substrate recognition of plant UGTs and 
to improve them for desired functions. In this review, we presented a 
comprehensive overview of all currently published structures of plant UGTs, 
along with in-depth analyses of the corresponding catalytic and substrate 
recognition mechanisms. In addition, we summarized and evaluated the protein 
engineering strategies applied to improve the catalytic activities of plant 
UGTs, with a particular focus on high-throughput screening methods. The primary 
objective of this review is to provide readers with a comprehensive 
understanding of plant UGTs and to serve as a valuable reference for the latest 
techniques used to improve their activities.

Â© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2023.10.046
PMCID: PMC10641439
PMID: 37965058

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests to 
the contents of this paper.