1. iScience. 2023 Oct 16;26(11):108220. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.108220. 
eCollection 2023 Nov 17.

Pcdh19 mediates olfactory sensory neuron coalescence during postnatal stages and 
regeneration.

Martinez AP(1), Chung AC(1), Huang S(2), Bisogni AJ(1), Lin Y(3), Cao Y(3), 
Williams EO(1), Kim JY(4), Yang JYH(3), Lin DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA.
(2)Jockey Club College of Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, City University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(3)School of Mathematics and Statistics, F07 University of Sydney, NSW 2006, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
SAR, China.

The mouse olfactory system regenerates constantly throughout life. While genes 
critical for the initial projection of olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) to the 
olfactory bulb have been identified, what genes are important for maintaining 
the olfactory map during regeneration are still unknown. Here we show a mutation 
in Protocadherin 19 (Pcdh19), a cell adhesion molecule and member of the 
cadherin superfamily, leads to defects in OSN coalescence during regeneration. 
Surprisingly, lateral glomeruli were more affected and males in particular 
showed a more severe phenotype. Single cell analysis unexpectedly showed OSNs 
expressing the MOR28 odorant receptor could be subdivided into two major 
clusters. We showed that at least one protocadherin is differentially expressed 
between OSNs coalescing on the medial and lateral glomeruli. Moreover, females 
expressed a slightly different complement of genes from males. These features 
may explain the differential effects of mutating Pcdh19 on medial and lateral 
glomeruli in males and females.

Â© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.108220
PMCID: PMC10641745
PMID: 37965156

Conflict of interest statement: We, the authors, have a patent related to this 
work.