1. Mol Cell. 2023 Nov 16;83(22):4032-4046.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2023.10.018. 
Epub 2023 Nov 16.

Genome homeostasis defects drive enlarged cells into senescence.

Manohar S(1), Estrada ME(1), Uliana F(1), Vuina K(2), Alvarez PM(1), de Bruin 
RAM(3), Neurohr GE(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich 8093, Zürich, 
Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London WC1E 
6BT, UK.
(3)Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London WC1E 
6BT, UK; UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(4)Institute for Biochemistry, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich 8093, Zürich, 
Zürich, Switzerland. Electronic address: gabriel.neurohr@bc.biol.ethz.ch.

Cellular senescence refers to an irreversible state of cell-cycle arrest and 
plays important roles in aging and cancer biology. Because senescence is 
associated with increased cell size, we used reversible cell-cycle arrests 
combined with growth rate modulation to study how excessive growth affects 
proliferation. We find that enlarged cells upregulate p21, which limits 
cell-cycle progression. Cells that re-enter the cell cycle encounter replication 
stress that is well tolerated in physiologically sized cells but causes severe 
DNA damage in enlarged cells, ultimately resulting in mitotic failure and 
permanent cell-cycle withdrawal. We demonstrate that enlarged cells fail to 
recruit 53BP1 and other non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) machinery to DNA 
damage sites and fail to robustly initiate DNA damage-dependent p53 signaling, 
rendering them highly sensitive to genotoxic stress. We propose that an impaired 
DNA damage response primes enlarged cells for persistent replication-acquired 
damage, ultimately leading to cell division failure and permanent cell-cycle 
exit.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2023.10.018
PMCID: PMC10659931
PMID: 37977116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.