1. Clin Respir J. 2023 Dec;17(12):1301-1315. doi: 10.1111/crj.13717. Epub 2023
Nov  20.

Association of TOP2A and ADH1B with lipid levels and prognosis in patients with 
lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.

Yin D(1), Zhang Y(1), Li H(1), Cheng L(1).

Author information:
(1)First Affiliated Hospital (Huainan First People's Hospital), Anhui University 
of Science and Technology, Huainan, China.

BACKGROUND: Although lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and lung squamous cell carcinoma 
(LUSC) have different pathological and clinical features, they may share common 
driver genes. It was found that lipid levels can be used for early diagnosis of 
NSCLC; however, the relationship between driver genes and genes regulating lipid 
metabolism and their relationship with patient prognosis needs further 
investigation.
METHODS: Genes whose expression was up- or down-regulated in both LUAD and LUSC 
were identified using the GEO database. Online tools like GEPIA 2, PrognoScan, 
UALCAN, and TIMER2.0 were used to investigate the association of these gene 
expressions with the patient's prognosis and lipid regulatory genes. The 
association between clinical lipid levels and the risk of LUAD and LUSC was 
analyzed by using a multiple logistic regression model.
RESULTS: Topoisomerase II alpha (TOP2A) and alcohol dehydrogenase 1B (ADH1B) 
were identified as the only genes up- and down-regulated in both LUAD and LUSC. 
TOP2A and ADH1B expression levels significantly correlated with the patient's 
gender, age, individual cancer stage, histological subtype, nodal metastasis 
status, and TP53 mutation status. Additionally, only LUAD patients with higher 
TOP2A or lower ADH1B expressions displayed poor overall and relapse-free 
survival rates. Moreover, TOP2A levels exhibited a negative correlation with 
adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) and ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 
(ABCA1) in both LUAD and LUSC. However, ADH1B showed inverse associations with 
the above-mentioned genes when compared to TOP2A expressions in both LUAD and 
LUSC. Furthermore, elevated triglyceride (OR = 1.59; 95% CI = 1.01 to 2.49; 
P < 0.05) and total cholesterol (OR = 2.45; 95% CI = 1.08 to 5.57; P < 0.05) 
levels might increase the risk of LUAD.
CONCLUSIONS: TOP2A and ADH1B can be used as diagnostic markers for LUAD and 
LUSC, but only as independent prognostic factors for LUAD, and may be involved 
in lipid metabolism in LUAD patients but not in LUSC. Thus, combining genetic 
diagnostics with lipid panel tests might be an effective method for an early 
diagnosis and improved prognosis of LUAD.

© 2023 The Authors. The Clinical Respiratory Journal published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13717
PMCID: PMC10730466
PMID: 37985446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interest exists.