1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2023 Nov 20;11(11):CD010966. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD010966.pub4.

Corrector therapies (with or without potentiators) for people with cystic 
fibrosis with class II CFTR gene variants (most commonly F508del).

Heneghan M(1), Southern KW(1), Murphy J(2), Sinha IP(1), Nevitt SJ(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool, UK.
(2)Leighton Hospital, Crewe, UK.
(3)Department of Health Data Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(4)Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York, York, UK.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Dec 17;12:CD010966. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD010966.pub3.

BACKGROUND: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common life-shortening genetic condition 
caused by a variant in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
(CFTR) protein. A class II CFTR variant F508del is the commonest CF-causing 
variant (found in up to 90% of people with CF (pwCF)). The F508del variant lacks 
meaningful CFTR function - faulty protein is degraded before reaching the cell 
membrane, where it needs to be to effect transepithelial salt transport. 
Corrective therapy could benefit many pwCF. This review evaluates single 
correctors (monotherapy) and any combination of correctors (most commonly 
lumacaftor, tezacaftor, elexacaftor, VX-659, VX-440 or VX-152) and a potentiator 
(e.g. ivacaftor) (dual and triple therapies).
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effects of CFTR correctors (with or without 
potentiators) on clinically important benefits and harms in pwCF of any age with 
class II CFTR mutations (most commonly F508del).
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane CF Trials Register (28 November 2022), 
reference lists of relevant articles and online trials registries (3 December 
2022).
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) (parallel design) 
comparing CFTR correctors to control in pwCF with class II mutations.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently extracted data, assessed 
risk of bias and judged evidence certainty (GRADE); we contacted investigators 
for additional data.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 34 RCTs (4781 participants), lasting between 1 day and 
48 weeks; an extension of two lumacaftor-ivacaftor studies provided additional 
96-week safety data (1029 participants). We assessed eight monotherapy RCTs (344 
participants) (4PBA, CPX, lumacaftor, cavosonstat and FDL169), 16 dual-therapy 
RCTs (2627 participants) (lumacaftor-ivacaftor or tezacaftor-ivacaftor) and 11 
triple-therapy RCTs (1804 participants) 
(elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor/deutivacaftor; 
VX-659-tezacaftor-ivacaftor/deutivacaftor; VX-440-tezacaftor-ivacaftor; 
VX-152-tezacaftor-ivacaftor). Participants in 21 RCTs had the genotype 
F508del/F508del, in seven RCTs they had F508del/minimal function (MF), in one 
RCT F508del/gating genotypes, in one RCT either F508del/F508del genotypes or 
F508del/residual function genotypes, in one RCT either F508del/gating or 
F508del/residual function genotypes, and in three RCTs either F508del/F508del 
genotypes or F508del/MF genotypes. Risk of bias judgements varied across 
different comparisons. Results from 16 RCTs may not be applicable to all pwCF 
due to age limits (e.g. adults only) or non-standard designs (converting from 
monotherapy to combination therapy). Monotherapy Investigators reported no 
deaths or clinically relevant improvements in quality of life (QoL). There was 
insufficient evidence to determine effects on lung function. No 
placebo-controlled monotherapy RCT demonstrated differences in mild, moderate or 
severe adverse effects (AEs); the clinical relevance of these events is 
difficult to assess due to their variety and few participants (all 
F508del/F508del). Dual therapy In a tezacaftor-ivacaftor group there was one 
death (deemed unrelated to the study drug). QoL scores (respiratory domain) 
favoured both lumacaftor-ivacaftor and tezacaftor-ivacaftor therapy compared to 
placebo at all time points (moderate-certainty evidence). At six months, 
relative change in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) % predicted 
improved with all dual combination therapies compared to placebo (high- to 
moderate-certainty evidence). More pwCF reported early transient breathlessness 
with lumacaftor-ivacaftor (odds ratio (OR) 2.05, 99% confidence interval (CI) 
1.10 to 3.83; I2 = 0%; 2 studies, 739 participants; high-certainty evidence). 
Over 120 weeks (initial study period and follow-up), systolic blood pressure 
rose by 5.1 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by 4.1 mmHg with twice-daily 400 
mg lumacaftor-ivacaftor (80 participants). The tezacaftor-ivacaftor RCTs did not 
report these adverse effects. Pulmonary exacerbation rates decreased in pwCF 
receiving additional therapies to ivacaftor compared to placebo (all 
moderate-certainty evidence): lumacaftor 600 mg (hazard ratio (HR) 0.70, 95% CI 
0.57 to 0.87; I2 = 0%; 2 studies, 739 participants); lumacaftor 400 mg (HR 0.61, 
95% CI 0.49 to 0.76; I2 = 0%; 2 studies, 740 participants); and tezacaftor (HR 
0.64, 95% CI 0.46 to 0.89; 1 study, 506 participants). Triple therapy No study 
reported any deaths (high-certainty evidence). All other evidence was low- to 
moderate-certainty. QoL respiratory domain scores probably improved with triple 
therapy compared to control at six months (six studies). There was probably a 
greater relative and absolute change in FEV1 % predicted with triple therapy 
(four studies each across all combinations). The absolute change in FEV1 % 
predicted was probably greater for F508del/MF participants taking 
elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor compared to placebo (mean difference 14.30, 95% 
CI 12.76 to 15.84; 1 study, 403 participants; moderate-certainty evidence), with 
similar results for other drug combinations and genotypes. There was little or 
no difference in adverse events between triple therapy and control (10 studies). 
No study reported time to next pulmonary exacerbation, but fewer F508del/F508del 
participants experienced a pulmonary exacerbation with 
elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor at four weeks (OR 0.17, 99% CI 0.06 to 0.45; 1 
study, 175 participants) and 24 weeks (OR 0.29, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.60; 1 study, 
405 participants); similar results were seen across other triple therapy and 
genotype combinations.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There is insufficient evidence of clinically important 
effects from corrector monotherapy in pwCF with F508del/F508del. Additional data 
in this review reduced the evidence for efficacy of dual therapy; these agents 
can no longer be considered as standard therapy. Their use may be appropriate in 
exceptional circumstances (e.g. if triple therapy is not tolerated or due to 
age). Both dual therapies (lumacaftor-ivacaftor, tezacaftor-ivacaftor) result in 
similar small improvements in QoL and respiratory function with lower pulmonary 
exacerbation rates. While the effect sizes for QoL and FEV1 still favour 
treatment, they have reduced compared to our previous findings. 
Lumacaftor-ivacaftor was associated with an increase in early transient 
shortness of breath and longer-term increases in blood pressure (not observed 
for tezacaftor-ivacaftor). Tezacaftor-ivacaftor has a better safety profile, 
although data are lacking in children under 12 years. In this population, 
lumacaftor-ivacaftor had an important impact on respiratory function with no 
apparent immediate safety concerns, but this should be balanced against the 
blood pressure increase and shortness of breath seen in longer-term adult data 
when considering lumacaftor-ivacaftor. Data from triple therapy trials 
demonstrate improvements in several key outcomes, including FEV1 and QoL. There 
is probably little or no difference in adverse events for triple therapy 
(elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor/deutivacaftor; 
VX-659-tezacaftor-ivacaftor/deutivacaftor; VX-440-tezacaftor-ivacaftor; 
VX-152-tezacaftor-ivacaftor) in pwCF with one or two F508del variants aged 12 
years or older (moderate-certainty evidence). Further RCTs are required in 
children under 12 years and those with more severe lung disease.

Copyright Â© 2023 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010966.pub4
PMCID: PMC10659105
PMID: 37983082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Matthew Heneghan declares no potential conflict 
of interest. Professor Kevin Southern declares no potential conflict of 
interest. Dr Jared Murphy declares no potential conflict of interest. Dr Ian 
Sinha is in receipt of a NIHR HTA grant for paediatric asthma and is a member of 
the NICE asthma committee; however, neither of these are related to cystic 
fibrosis or this review and thus do not constitute a potential conflict of 
interest. Dr Sarah J Nevitt declares no potential conflict of interest.