1. Gels. 2023 Nov 13;9(11):896. doi: 10.3390/gels9110896.

Preparation and Optimization of Bovine Serum Albumin Nanoparticles as a 
Promising Gelling System for Enhanced Nasal Drug Administration.

Mardikasari SA(1)(2), Katona G(1), Sipos B(1), Ambrus R(1), Cs√≥ka I(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology and Regulatory Affairs, Faculty of 
Pharmacy, University of Szeged, H-6720 Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Hasanuddin University, Makassar 90245, Indonesia.

Bovine serum albumin (BSA) has been used extensively as a suitable carrier 
system for alternative drug delivery routes, such as nasal administration. 
However, the optimization of BSA nanoparticles with respect to their nasal 
applicability has not been widely studied. The present study focuses on the 
characterization of BSA nanoparticles prepared using the desolvation method, 
followed by a gelation process to facilitate intranasal drug delivery. The 
results demonstrated that the ratio of BSA and the desolvating agent, ethanol, 
played a critical role in the nanoparticle characteristics of the BSA nanogel 
matrices (BSA-NGs). Based on the gelling properties, the formulations of BSA-NG 
2, BSA-NG 4, and BSA-NG 6 were selected for further investigation. The Raman 
spectra confirmed that there were no specific changes to the secondary 
structures of the BSA. The mucoadhesion studies revealed moderately high 
mucoadhesive properties, with a mucin binding efficiency (MBE) value of around 
67%, allowing the dose to avoid elimination due to rapid mucociliary clearance 
of the nasal passage. Via studying the nexus of the carrier system, BSA-NGs 
loaded with dexamethasone as a model drug were prepared and evaluated by 
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermal gravimetry (TG), 
ascertaining that no ethanol remained in the samples after the freeze-drying 
process. Furthermore, the viscosity measurements exhibited moderate viscosity, 
which is suitable for nasal liquid preparations. The in vitro release studies 
performed with a simulated nasal electrolyte solution (SNES) medium showed 
88.15-95.47% drug release within 4 h. In conclusion, BSA nanoparticle gelling 
matrices can offer potential, value-added drug delivery carriers for improved 
nasal drug administration.

DOI: 10.3390/gels9110896
PMCID: PMC10670644
PMID: 37998986

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.