1. Int J Mol Med. 2024 Jan;53(1):5. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2023.5329. Epub 2023 Nov
24.

mROS‑calcium feedback loop promotes lethal ventricular arrhythmias and sudden 
cardiac death in early myocardial ischemia.

Zhou D(#)(1), Zhang Y(#)(1), Zhu M(#)(1), Zhang X(2), Zhang X(1), Lv J(1), Tang 
W(1), Weng Q(1), Lin Y(1), Tong L(1), Zhong Z(1), Zhang Y(3), Zhang M(1), Lai 
M(4), Wang D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 
Guangdong 515041, P.R. China.
(2)Institute of Marine Sciences and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Marine Biotechnology, Shantou University, Shantou, Guangdong 515041, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 
Guangdong 515041, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Neurology, First Affiliated Hospital of Shantou University 
Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong 515041, P.R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

Lethal ventricular arrhythmia‑sudden cardiac death (LVA‑SCD) occurs frequently 
during the early stage of myocardial ischemia (MI). However, the mechanism 
underlying higher LVA‑SCD incidence is still poorly understood. The present 
study aimed to explore the role of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mROS) 
and Ca2+ crosstalk in promoting LVA‑SCD in early MI. RyR2 S2814A mice and their 
wild‑type littermates were used. MitoTEMPO was applied to scavenge mitochondrial 
ROS (mROS). Mice were subjected to severe MI and the occurrence of LVA‑SCD was 
evaluated. Levels of mitochondrial ROS and calcium (mitoCa2+), cytosolic ROS 
(cytoROS), and calcium (cytoCa2+), RyR2 Ser‑2814 phosphorylation, CaMKII Met‑282 
oxidation, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), and glutathione/oxidized 
glutathione (GSH/GSSG) ratio in the myocardia were detected. Dynamic changes in 
mROS after hypoxia were investigated using H9c2 cells. Moreover, the myocardial 
phosphoproteome was analyzed to explore the related mechanisms facilitating 
mROS‑Ca2+ crosstalk and LVA‑SCD. There was a high incidence (~33.9%) of LVA‑SCD 
in early MI. Mice who underwent SCD displayed notably elevated levels of 
myocardial ROS and mROS, and the latter was validated in H9c2 cells. These mice 
also demonstrated overloads of cytoplasmic and mitochondrial Ca2+, decreased MMP 
and reduced GSH/GSSG ratio, upregulated RyR2‑S2814 phosphorylation and 
CaMKII‑M282 oxidation and transient hyperphosphorylation of mitochondrial 
proteomes in the myocardium. mROS‑specific scavenging by a mitochondria‑targeted 
antioxidant agent (MitoTEMPO) corrected these SCD‑induced alterations. S2814A 
mice with a genetically inactivated CaMKII phosphorylation site in RyR2 
exhibited decreased overloads in cytoplasmic and mitochondrial Ca2+ and 
demonstrated similar effects as MitoTEMPO to correct SCD‑induced changes and 
prevent SCD post‑MI. The data confirmed crosstalk between mROS and Ca2+ in 
promoting LVA‑SCD. Therefore, we provided evidence that there is a higher 
incidence of LVA‑SCD in early MI, which may be attributed to a positive feedback 
loop between mROS and Ca2+ imbalance.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2023.5329
PMCID: PMC10712693
PMID: 37997788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.