1. Pathogens. 2023 Nov 8;12(11):1328. doi: 10.3390/pathogens12111328.

Genomic Mutations in SARS-CoV-2 Genome following Infection in Syrian Golden 
Hamster and Associated Lung Pathologies.

Rudramurthy GR(1), Naveenkumar CN(1), Bharathkumar K(1), Shandil RK(1), 
Narayanan S(1).

Author information:
(1)Foundation for Neglected Disease Research (FNDR), Plot No. 20A, KIADB 
Industrial Area, Bengaluru 561203, Karnataka, India.

The continuous evolution of the SARS-CoV-2 virus led to constant developments 
and efforts in understanding the significance and impacts of SARS-CoV-2 variants 
on human health. Our study aimed to determine the accumulation of genetic 
mutations and associated lung pathologies in male and female hamsters infected 
with the ancestral Wuhan strain of SARS-CoV-2. The present study showed no 
significant difference in the viral load between male and female hamsters and 
peak infection was found to be on day four post infection in both sexes of the 
animals. Live virus particles were detected up to 5 days post infection (dpi) 
through the TCID-50 assay, while qRT-PCR could detect viral RNA up to 14 dpi 
from all the infected animals. Further, the determination of the neutralizing 
antibody titer showed the onset of the humoral immune response as early as 4 dpi 
in both sexes against SARS-CoV-2, and a significant cross-protection against the 
delta variant of SARS-CoV-2 was observed. Histopathology showed edema, 
inflammation, inflammatory cell infiltration, necrosis, and degeneration of 
alveolar and bronchial epithelium cells from 3 dpi to 14 dpi in both sexes. 
Furthermore, next-generation sequencing (NGS) showed up to 10 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the SARS-CoV-2 (ancestral Wuhan strain) genome isolated 
from both male and female hamsters. The mutation observed at the 23014 position 
(Glu484Asp) in the SARS-CoV-2 genome isolated from both sexes of the hamsters 
plays a significant role in the antiviral efficacy of small molecules, vaccines, 
and the Mabs-targeting S protein. The present study shows that either of the 
genders can be used in the pre-clinical efficacy of antiviral agents against 
SARS-CoV-2 in hamsters. However, considering the major mutation in the S 
protein, the understanding of the genetic mutation in SARS-CoV-2 after passing 
through hamsters is crucial in deciding the efficacy of the antiviral agents 
targeting the S protein. Importance: Our study findings indicate the 
accumulation of genomic mutations in SARS-CoV-2 after passing through the Syrian 
golden hamsters. Understanding the genomic mutations showed that either of the 
hamster genders can be used in the pre-clinical efficacy of antiviral agents and 
vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens12111328
PMCID: PMC10674674
PMID: 38003792

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.