1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Nov 17;24(22):16433. doi: 10.3390/ijms242216433.

Evaluation of Local Retinal Function in Light-Damaged Rats Using Multifocal 
Electroretinograms and Multifocal Visual Evoked Potentials.

Takita Y(1), Sugano E(1), Kitabayashi K(1), Tabata K(1), Saito A(1), Yokoyama 
T(1), Onoguchi R(1), Fukuda T(1), Ozaki T(1), Bai L(1), Tomita H(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Visual Neuroscience, Graduate Course in Biological Sciences, 
Iwate University Division of Science and Engineering, 4-3-5 Ueda, Morioka 
020-8551, Iwate, Japan.

Electroretinograms (ERGs) are often used to evaluate retinal function. However, 
assessing local retinal function can be challenging; therefore, photopic and 
scotopic ERGs are used to record whole-retinal function. This study evaluated 
focal retinal function in rats exposed to continuous light using a multifocal 
ERG (mfERG) system. The rats were exposed to 1000 lux of fluorescent light for 
24 h to induce photoreceptor degeneration. After light exposure, the rats were 
reared under cyclic light conditions (12 h: 5 lux, 12 h: dark). Photopic and 
multifocal ERGs and single-flash and multifocal visual evoked potentials 
(mfVEPs) were recorded 7 days after light exposure. Fourteen days following 
light exposure, paraffin-embedded sections were prepared from the eyes for 
histological evaluation. The ERG and VEP responses dramatically decreased after 
24 h of light exposure, and retinal area-dependent decreases were observed in 
mfERGs and mfVEPs. Histological assessment revealed severe damage to the 
superior retina and less damage to the inferior retina. Considering the recorded 
visual angles of mfERGs and mfVEPs, the degenerated area shown on the 
histological examinations correlates well with the responses from multifocal 
recordings.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms242216433
PMCID: PMC10670973
PMID: 38003623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.