1. Biomedicines. 2023 Oct 24;11(11):2872. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11112872.

IZUMO1 Receptor Localization during Hyaluronic Acid Selection in Human 
Spermatozoa.

Gómez-Torres MJ(1)(2), Hernández-Falcó M(1), López-Botella A(1), Huerta-Retamal 
N(1), Sáez-Espinosa P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Alicante, 03690 Alicante, Spain.
(2)Human Fertility Cathedra, University of Alicante, 03690 Alicante, Spain.

IZUMO1 is an acrosome transmembrane protein implicated in the adhesion and 
fusion of gametes. This study aims to describe the distribution of IZUMO1 in 
human sperm under different physiological conditions: before capacitation (NCS), 
at one-hour capacitation (CS1), after a hyaluronic acid (HA) selection test 
(mature, MS1 and immature, IS1), and induced acrosome reaction from 
one-hour-capacitated sperm (ARS1). The data obtained in NCS, CS1, and MS1 
significantly highlight dotted fluorescence in the acrosomal region (P1) as the 
major staining pattern (~70%). Moreover, we describe a new distribution pattern 
(P2) with a dotted acrosomal region and a labelled equatorial region that 
significantly increases in HA-bound spermatozoa, suggesting the onset of the 
migration of IZUMO1. In contrast, unbound spermatozoa presented an increase in 
P3 (equatorial region labelled) and P4 (not labelled). Finally, costaining to 
observe IZUMO1 distribution and acrosome status was performed in ARS1. 
Interestingly, we reported a variety of combinations between the IZUMO1 staining 
patterns and the acrosomal stages. In conclusion, these data show as a novelty 
the diffusion of the IZUMO1 protein during different physiological conditions 
that could contribute to the improvement in sperm selection techniques.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11112872
PMCID: PMC10669769
PMID: 38001873

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.