1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2024 Jan 25;52(2):625-642. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad1126.

Chromatin accessibility and pioneer factor FOXA1 restrict glucocorticoid 
receptor action in prostate cancer.

Helminen L(1), Huttunen J(1), Tulonen M(1), Aaltonen N(1), Niskanen EA(1), 
Palvimo JJ(1), Paakinaho V(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.

Treatment of prostate cancer relies predominantly on the inhibition of androgen 
receptor (AR) signaling. Despite the initial effectiveness of the antiandrogen 
therapies, the cancer often develops resistance to the AR blockade. One 
mechanism of the resistance is glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-mediated replacement 
of AR function. Nevertheless, the mechanistic ways and means how the GR-mediated 
antiandrogen resistance occurs have remained elusive. Here, we have discovered 
several crucial features of GR action in prostate cancer cells through 
genome-wide techniques. We detected that the replacement of AR by GR in 
enzalutamide-exposed prostate cancer cells occurs almost exclusively at 
pre-accessible chromatin sites displaying FOXA1 occupancy. Counterintuitively to 
the classical pioneer factor model, silencing of FOXA1 potentiated the chromatin 
binding and transcriptional activity of GR. This was attributed to 
FOXA1-mediated repression of the NR3C1 (gene encoding GR) expression via the 
corepressor TLE3. Moreover, the small-molecule inhibition of coactivator p300's 
enzymatic activity efficiently restricted GR-mediated gene regulation and cell 
proliferation. Overall, we identified chromatin pre-accessibility and 
FOXA1-mediated repression as important regulators of GR action in prostate 
cancer, pointing out new avenues to oppose steroid receptor-mediated 
antiandrogen resistance.

Â© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad1126
PMCID: PMC10810216
PMID: 38015476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]