1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Nov 16:2023.06.30.547256. doi: 
10.1101/2023.06.30.547256.

Water content, transition temperature and fragility influence protection and 
anhydrobiotic capacity.

Ramirez JF(1), Kumara UGVSS(1), Arulsamy N(2), Boothby TC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Wyoming. Laramie, WY 82071.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Wyoming. Laramie, WY 82071.

Update in
    BBA Adv. 2024 Jan 24;5:100115. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadva.2024.100115.

Water is essential for metabolism and all life processes. Despite this, many 
organisms distributed across the kingdoms of life survive near-complete 
desiccation or anhydrobiosis (Greek for "life without water"). Increased 
intracellular viscosity, leading to the formation of a vitrified state is 
necessary, but not sufficient, for survival while dry. What properties of a 
vitrified system make it desiccation-tolerant or -sensitive are unknown. We have 
analyzed 18 different in vitro vitrified systems, composed of one of three 
protective disaccharides (trehalose, sucrose, or maltose) and varying amounts of 
glycerol, quantifying their enzyme-protective capacity and their material 
properties in a dry state. We find that protection conferred by mixtures 
containing maltose correlates strongly with increased water content, increased 
glass-transition temperature, and reduced glass former fragility, while the 
protection of glasses formed with sucrose correlates with increased glass 
transition temperature and the protection conferred by trehalose glasses 
correlates with reduced glass former fragility. Thus, in vitro different 
vitrified sugars confer protection through distinct material properties. 
Extending on this, we have examined the material properties of a dry desiccation 
tolerant and intolerant life stage from three different organisms. In all cases, 
the dried desiccation tolerant life stage of an organism had an increased glass 
transition temperature relative to its dried desiccation intolerant life stage, 
and this trend is also seen in all three organisms when considering reduced 
glass former fragility. These results suggest that while drying of different 
protective sugars in vitro results in vitrified systems with distinct material 
properties that correlate with their enzyme-protective capacity, in nature 
organismal desiccation tolerance relies on a combination of these properties. 
This study advances our understanding of how protective and non-protective 
glasses differ in terms of material properties that promote anhydrobiosis. This 
knowledge presents avenues to develop novel stabilization technologies for 
pharmaceuticals that currently rely on the cold-chain.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.06.30.547256
PMCID: PMC10680572
PMID: 38014150

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.