1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2023 Dec 5;12(23):e031217. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.123.031217.
Epub  2023 Nov 28.

Varying Definitions of Carotid Intima-Media Thickness and Future Cardiovascular 
Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Ling Y(1), Wan Y(1), Barinas-Mitchell E(2), Fujiyoshi A(3), Cui H(1), Maimaiti 
A(1), Xu R(1), Li J(4), Suo C(1), Zaid M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology Fudan University Shanghai China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh PA USA.
(3)Department of Hygiene Wakayama Medical University Wakayama Japan.
(4)Songjiang District Zhongshan Street Community Healthcare Center Shanghai 
China.

BACKGROUND: Carotid intima-media thickness (cIMT) has been widely used as a 
predictor of future cardiovascular disease (CVD); however, various definitions 
of cIMT exist. This study provides a systematic review and meta-analysis of the 
associations between different cIMT definitions and CVD.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A systematic review of the different cIMT definitions used 
in prospective cohort studies was performed. The relationships between cIMT of 
different definitions (common carotid artery IMT [CCA-IMT], internal carotid 
artery IMT [ICA-IMT], combined segments [combined-IMT], mean CCA-IMT, and 
maximum CCA-IMT) with future stroke, myocardial infarction (MI), and CVD events 
were analyzed using random effects models. Among 2287 articles, 18 articles (14 
studies) with >10 different cIMT definitions were identified and included in our 
meta-analysis. After adjusting for age and sex, a 1-SD increase in CCA-IMT was 
associated with future stroke (hazard ratio [HR], 1.32 [95% CI, 1.27-1.38]), MI 
(HR, 1.27 [95% CI, 1.22-1.33]), and CVD events (HR, 1.28 [95% CI, 1.19-1.37]). A 
1-SD increase in ICA-IMT was related to future stroke (HR, 1.25 [95% CI, 
1.11-1.42]) and CVD events (HR, 1.25 [95% CI, 1.04-1.50]) but not MI (HR, 1.26 
[95% CI, 0.98-1.61]). A 1-SD increase in combined-IMT was associated with future 
stroke (HR, 1.30 [95% CI, 1.08-1.57]) and CVD events (HR, 1.36 [95% CI, 
1.23-1.49]). Maximum CCA-IMT was more strongly related than mean CCA-IMT with 
risk of MI, and both measures were similarly associated with stroke and CVD 
events.
CONCLUSIONS: Combined-IMT is more strongly associated with CVD events compared 
with single-segment cIMT definitions. Maximum CCA-IMT shows a stronger 
association with MI than mean CCA-IMT. Further research is warranted to validate 
our findings and to standardize the cIMT measurement protocol, as well as to 
explore underlying mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.123.031217
PMCID: PMC10727343
PMID: 38014663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]