1. Function (Oxf). 2023 Oct 19;5(1):zqad060. doi: 10.1093/function/zqad060. 
eCollection 2024.

The Interplay Between Splicing of Two Exon Combinations Differentially Affects 
Membrane Targeting and Function of Human Ca(V)2.2.

Dahimene S(1), Page KM(1), Nieto-Rostro M(1), Pratt WS(1), Dolphin AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and Pharmacology, University College 
London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

N-type calcium channels (CaV2.2) are predominantly localized in presynaptic 
terminals, and are particularly important for pain transmission in the spinal 
cord. Furthermore, they have multiple isoforms, conferred by alternatively 
spliced or cassette exons, which are differentially expressed. Here, we have 
examined alternatively spliced exon47 variants that encode a long or short 
C-terminus in human CaV2.2. In the Ensembl database, all short exon47-containing 
transcripts were associated with the absence of exon18a, therefore, we also 
examined the effect of inclusion or absence of exon18a, combinatorially with the 
exon47 splice variants. We found that long exon47, only in the additional 
presence of exon18a, results in CaV2.2 currents that have a 3.6-fold greater 
maximum conductance than the other three combinations. In contrast, cell-surface 
expression of CaV2.2 in both tsA-201 cells and hippocampal neurons is increased 
∼4-fold by long exon47, relative to short exon47, in either the presence or the 
absence of exon18a. This surprising discrepancy between trafficking and function 
indicates that cell-surface expression is enhanced by long exon47, independently 
of exon18a. However, in the presence of long exon47, exon18a mediates an 
additional permissive effect on CaV2.2 gating. We also investigated the 
single-nucleotide polymorphism in exon47 that has been linked to schizophrenia 
and Parkinson's disease, which we found is only non-synonymous in the short 
exon47 C-terminal isoform, resulting in two minor alleles. This study highlights 
the importance of investigating the combinatorial effects of exon inclusion, 
rather than each in isolation, in order to increase our understanding of calcium 
channel function.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1093/function/zqad060
PMCID: PMC10666670
PMID: 38020068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.C.D. holds the position of Executive Editor 
for Function and is blinded from reviewing or making decisions for the 
manuscript.