1. Front Neurol. 2023 Nov 2;14:1274709. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1274709. 
eCollection 2023.

Mechanisms associated with post-stroke depression and pharmacologic therapy.

Zhan Q(1), Kong F(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chinese Medicine, Heilongjiang University of Chinese Medicine, 
Harbin, China.
(2)Neurosurgery, Affiliated First Hospital, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 
China.

Stroke is one of the most common cerebrovascular diseases, which is the cause of 
long-term mental illness and physical disability, Post-stroke depression (PSD) 
is the most common neuropsychiatric complication after stroke, and its 
mechanisms are characterized by complexity, plurality, and diversity, which 
seriously affects the quality of survival and prognosis of patients. Studies 
have focused on and recognized neurotransmitter-based mechanisms and selective 
serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) can be used to treat PSD. 
Neuroinflammation, neuroendocrinology, neurotrophic factors, and the site of the 
stroke lesion may affect neurotransmitters. Thus the mechanisms of PSD have been 
increasingly studied. Pharmacological treatment mainly includes SSRIs, 
noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressant (NaSSA), 
anti-inflammatory drugs, vitamin D, ect, which have been confirmed to have 
better efficacy by clinical studies. Currently, there is an increasing number of 
studies related to the mechanisms of PSD. However, the mechanisms and 
pharmacologic treatment of PSD is still unclear. In the future, in-depth 
research on the mechanisms and treatment of PSD is needed to provide a reference 
for the prevention and treatment of clinical PSD.

Copyright Â© 2023 Zhan and Kong.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1274709
PMCID: PMC10651767
PMID: 38020612

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.