1. Vet World. 2023 Oct;16(10):2055-2062. doi: 10.14202/vetworld.2023.2055-2062. 
Epub 2023 Oct 7.

The effects of using multi-species probiotics in late-pregnant and lactating 
sows on milk quality and quantity, fecal microflora, and performance of their 
offspring.

Innamma N(1), Ngamwongsatit N(1)(2), Kaeoket K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences and Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary 
Science, Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom, 73170, Thailand.
(2)Laboratory of Bacteria, Veterinary Diagnostic Center, Faculty of Veterinary 
Science, Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom, 73170, Thailand.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The dietary probiotics in sows during gestation to lactation 
period have gained considerable attention with respect to their beneficial 
effects on sows and their piglets' performance and health. This study aimed to 
evaluate the effects of using probiotics in late-pregnant and lactating sows on 
milk quality, quantity, fecal microflora of sows, and growth performance of 
their offspring until weaning.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-four sows were equally divided into two groups 
(control and treatment). Only those in the treatment group were fed 5 g of 
probiotics at 12 weeks of pregnancy, once daily for 7 weeks, until their piglets 
were weaned. Colostrum samples were collected at 3, 6, 12, and 24 h after 
farrowing and measured for immunoglobulin concentration. Percentages of fat, 
protein, and lactose in colostrum, colostrum production, total intake of 
immunoglobulin A (IgA), immunoglobulin G (IgG), fat, protein, and lactose, the 
change of fecal microflora of sows, and average daily gain of piglets were 
measured.
RESULTS: The results showed that there were no significant differences in the 
concentrations of IgA, IgG, and IgM in colostrum and the percentages of fat, 
protein, lactose, solid-not-fat, and total solid in colostrum between the 
groups; however, the colostrum production at 24 h in the treatment group 
(6,075.29 mL) was higher than in the control group (4,809.54 mL). Higher total 
intakes of IgA and IgG as well as total intake of fat, protein, and lactose, 
particularly at 3 h after farrowing, were found in the treatment group. 
Probiotic supplementation remarkably altered the microbiota community at the 
phylum level. We found that Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes are the dominant phyla, 
present in the gut of more than 90% of pregnant and lactating sows. Changes in 
microbial proportions were observed due to the changes of pig production stage. 
The weaning weight of the treatment group was higher than in the control group 
(6.34 ± 1.71 vs. 4.84 ± 1.29 kg, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Feeding of multi-species probiotic BACTOSAC-P™ during late pregnancy 
and lactation in sows positively influenced colostrum production. In this 
experiment, the use of BACTOSAC-P™ improved the yield of colostrum production. 
The high immunoglobulin concentration and high yield of the colostrum of sows 
with a diet supplemented with BACTOSAC-P™ significantly reduced piglet mortality 
during the suckling period. Furthermore, the probiotic diet induced changes in 
the fecal microbial population in sows by increasing the number of 
microorganisms from the Firmicutes phylum, which had positive effects on sow 
health and their piglets, leading to better piglet growth performance.

Copyright: © Innamma, et al.

DOI: 10.14202/vetworld.2023.2055-2062
PMCID: PMC10668563
PMID: 38023266

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.