1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Nov 9;14:1253197. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1253197. 
eCollection 2023.

Comparative analysis of the biological characteristics and mechanisms of azole 
resistance of clinical Aspergillus fumigatus strains.

Zeng M(1)(2), Zhou X(1), Yang C(1), Liu Y(3), Zhang J(1), Xin C(1), Qin G(4), 
Liu F(1), Song Z(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, 
China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Yongchuan Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao 
University, Qingdao, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital 
of Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, China.

Aspergillus fumigatus is a common causative pathogen of aspergillosis. At 
present, triazole resistance of A. fumigatus poses an important challenge to 
human health globally. In this study, the biological characteristics and 
mechanisms of azole resistance of five A. fumigatus strains (AF1, AF2, AF4, AF5, 
and AF8) were explored. There were notable differences in the sporulation and 
biofilm formation abilities of the five test strains as compared to the standard 
strain AF293. The ability of strain AF1 to avoid phagocytosis by MH-S cells was 
significantly decreased as compared to strain AF293, while that of strains AF2, 
AF4, and AF5 were significantly increased. Fungal burden analysis with Galleria 
mellonella larvae revealed differences in pathogenicity among the five strains. 
Moreover, the broth microdilution and E-test assays confirmed that strains AF1 
and AF2 were resistant to itraconazole and isaconazole, while strains AF4, AF5, 
and AF8 were resistant to voriconazole and isaconazole. Strains AF1 and AF2 
carried the cyp51A mutations TR34/L98H/V242I/S297T/F495I combined with the hmg1 
mutation S541G, whereas strains AF4 and AF8 carried the cyp51A mutation 
TR46/Y121F/V242I/T289A, while strain AF5 had no cyp51A mutation. Real-time 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) analysis revealed differences 
in the expression levels of genes associated with ergosterol synthesis and 
efflux pumps among the five strains. In addition, transcriptomics, RT-qPCR, and 
the NAD+/NADH ratio demonstrated that the mechanism of voriconazole resistance 
of strain AF5 was related to overexpression of genes associated with energy 
production and efflux pumps. These findings will help to further elucidate the 
triazole resistance mechanism in A. fumigatus.

Copyright Â© 2023 Zeng, Zhou, Yang, Liu, Zhang, Xin, Qin, Liu and Song.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1253197
PMCID: PMC10665732
PMID: 38029222

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.