1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Nov 23:2023.11.22.568343. doi: 
10.1101/2023.11.22.568343.

Epigenetic and transcriptional regulation of the human angiotensinogen gene by 
high salt.

Perla S(1)(2)(3), Kumar A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Toledo College of 
Medicine and Life Sciences, Toledo, OH, USA.

Hypertension is caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors. 
Angiotensinogen (AGT) is a component of RAAS, that regulates blood pressure. The 
human angiotensinogen (hAGT) gene has -6A/-6G polymorphism and -6A variant is 
associated with human hypertension. In this study, we have investigated the 
epigenetic regulation of the hAGT. To understand transcriptional regulation of 
the hAGT, we have made transgenic animals containing -6A. We show that HS 
affects DNA methylation and modulates transcriptional regulation of this gene in 
liver and kidney. High salt (HS) increases hAGT gene expression in -6A TG mice. 
We have observed that the number of CpG sites in the hAGT promoter is decreased 
after HS treatment. In the liver, seven CpG sites are methylated whereas after 
HS treatment, only three CpG sites remain methylated. In the kidney, five CpG 
sites are methylated, whereas after HS treatment, only three CpG sites remain 
methylated. These results suggest that HS promotes DNA demethylation and 
increasing AGT gene expression. RT-PCR and immunoblot analysis show that hAGT 
gene expression is increased by HS. Chip assay has shown that transcription 
factors bind strongly after HS treatment. RNA-Seq identified differentially 
expressed genes, novel target genes associated with hypertension, top canonical 
pathways, upstream regulators. One of the plausible mechanisms for HS induced 
up-regulation of the hAGT gene is through IL-6/JAK/STAT3/AGT axis.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.11.22.568343
PMCID: PMC10690268
PMID: 38045346

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
competing interests.