1. Curr Res Food Sci. 2023 Nov 13;7:100638. doi: 10.1016/j.crfs.2023.100638. 
eCollection 2023.

Therapeutic impact of stachyose on hyperlipidaemia caused by a high-fat diet in 
mice as revealed by gut microbiota and metabolomics.

Zhang W(1), Cui N(1), Su F(1), Sun Y(1), Li B(1), Zhang Z(1), Zeng Y(2), Guan 
W(1), Yang B(1), Wang Q(2), Kuang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Basic and Application Research of Beiyao (Heilongjiang 
University of Chinese Medicine), Ministry of Education, 24 Heping Road, 
Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150040, China.
(2)Guangdong Engineering Technology Research Center for Standardized Processing 
of Chinese Materia Medica (Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, School of 
Chinese Materia Medica), Guangdong, 510006, China.

Hyperlipidaemia, which is characterized by an excess of lipids or fats in the 
bloodstream, is a high-risk factor and critical indicator of many metabolic 
diseases. This study used 16 S rRNA gene sequencing and metabolomics to 
determine that stachyose (ST) has a therapeutic effect and is a mechanism of 
hyperlipidaemia. These results show that ST significantly attenuated high-fat 
diet-induced weight gain and fat deposition while also adjusting the gut 
microbial composition. Untargeted serum metabolomics identified 12 biomarkers, 
which suggests that ST may function by regulating metabolic pathways. These 
results highlight the potential of ST in treating hyperlipidaemia and provides 
directions for future research including an in-depth investigation of the 
bioactive components, dosage, and treatment strategies of ST.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crfs.2023.100638
PMCID: PMC10692757
PMID: 38045511

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.