1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Nov 16;14:1281150. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1281150. 
eCollection 2023.

Pharmacology activity, toxicity, and clinical trials of Erythrina genus plants 
(Fabaceae): an evidence-based review.

Susilawati E(1)(2), Levita J(3), Susilawati Y(4), Sumiwi SA(3).

Author information:
(1)Doctoral Program in Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universitas Padjadjaran, 
Sumedang, Indonesia.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Bhakti Kencana University, Bandung, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Universitas Padjadjaran, Sumedang, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Biology Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universitas Padjadjaran, 
Sumedang, Indonesia.

The concept of using plants to alleviate diseases is always challenging. In West 
Java, Indonesia, a local plant, named dadap serep has been traditionally used to 
reduce blood glucose, fever, and edema, by pounding the leaves and applying them 
on the inflamed skin, or boiled and consumed as herbal tea. This plant belongs 
to the Erythrina genus, which covers approximately 120 species. The scope of 
this review (1943-2023) is related to the Global Development Goals, in 
particular Goal 3: Good Health and Wellbeing, by focusing on the pharmacology 
activity, toxicity, and clinical trials of Erythrina genus plants and their 
metabolites, e.g., pterocarpans, alkaloids, and flavonoids. Articles were 
searched on PubMed and ScienceDirect databases, using "Erythrina" AND 
"pharmacology activity" keywords, and only original articles written in English 
and open access were included. In vitro and in vivo studies reveal promising 
results, particularly for antibacterial and anticancer activities. The toxicity 
and clinical studies of Erythrina genus plants are limitedly reported. 
Considering that extensive caution should be taken when prescribing botanical 
drugs for patients parallelly taking a narrow therapeutic window drug, it is 
confirmed that no interactions of the Erythrina genus were recorded, indicating 
the safety of the studied plants. We, therefore, concluded that Erythrina genus 
plants are promising to be further explored for their effects in various 
signaling pathways as future plant-based drug candidates.

Copyright Â© 2023 Susilawati, Levita, Susilawati and Sumiwi.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1281150
PMCID: PMC10690608
PMID: 38044940

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.