1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Dec 1;102(48):e36238. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000036238.

Active ingredient and mechanistic analysis of traditional Chinese medicine 
formulas for the prevention and treatment of COVID-19: Insights from 
bioinformatics and in vitro experiments.

Yang J(1), Zhuang Q, Zhang C, Liu X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Qilu University of Technology, Jinan, 
China.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an acute infectious disease caused by a 
novel coronavirus. Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) has been proven to have a 
potential curative effect on COVID-19. This study preliminarily analyzed the 
existing TCM prescription's key components and action mechanisms for preventing 
and treating COVID-19 using bioinformatic and experimental methods. Association 
and clustering analysis reveals that the "HQ + FF + BZ" drug combination had a 
strong correlation and confidence in 93 TCM prescriptions and may affect the 
progression of COVID-19 through inflammatory pathways such as the TNF signaling 
pathway. Further molecular docking revealed that quercetin has a higher affinity 
for IL6 and IL10 in the TNF signaling pathway associated with COVID-19. In vitro 
experiments demonstrated that quercetin could effectively reduce the levels of 
the inflammatory factor IL-6 and increase the anti-inflammatory factor IL-10, 
alleviating inflammation impact on cells. Our results provide a new 
understanding of the molecular mechanism of TCM prevention and treatment of 
COVID-19, which is helpful to the development of new diagnosis and treatment 
schemes for COVID-19.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000036238
PMCID: PMC10695544
PMID: 38050310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.