1. J Immunol. 1985 Jun;134(6):3969-77.

Identification of a human granulocyte functional antigen (GFA-2) involved in 
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and phagocytosis.

LÃ³pez AF, Begley G, Andrews P, Butterworth AE, Vadas MA.

A human neutrophil- and eosinophil-specific surface antigen, GFA-2, has been 
found to be involved in the antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) 
to extracellular targets, and in phagocytosis. The monoclonal antibody (MAb) 
WEM-G11 was produced which recognizes the GFA-2 structure. This MAb, when used 
as F(ab')2, stimulated human neutrophils to kill antibody-coated P815 cells and, 
in the case of human eosinophils, increased their cytotoxic effect on 
schistosomula of Schistosoma mansoni in a dose-dependent manner. MAb WEM-G11 
F(ab')2 also stimulated the phagocytosis of antibody-coated sheep erythrocytes 
by neutrophils. The effect of WEM-G11 F(ab')2 was specific, because other MAb, 
whether tested in the form of F(ab')2 fragments or as whole IgG, failed to 
stimulate neutrophils despite binding to these cells. In contrast to the F(ab')2 
fragments of these cells. In contrast to the F(ab')2 fragments of WEM-G11, the 
whole IgG of this MAb inhibited ADCC and phagocytosis, presumably through 
interaction with granulocyte Fc receptors. WEM-G11 F(ab')2, and to a greater 
extent WEM-G11 IgG, induced degranulation, but only from cytochalasin B-treated 
neutrophils. GFA-2 was absent from lymphocytes, monocytes, erythrocytes, and 
myeloid and erythroid colony-forming cells, as shown by flow cytometry and 
colony-forming experiments. GFA-2 appeared at the promyelocytic stage and 
increased in density as neutrophils became more mature. In the mature 
neutrophil, the number of binding sites for WEM-G11 were found to be about 
20,000 per cell. By immunoprecipitation, it appeared that GFA-2 consisted of a 
polypeptide chain of about 95,000 m.w. and a low m.w. peptide of about 43,000. 
By immunoblotting, it was demonstrated that the epitope recognized by WEM-G11 is 
in the chain of m.w. 95,000. GFA-2 thus constitutes a novel human 
granulocyte-specific antigen that is central to the functional activity and 
differentiation of these cells.

PMID: 3989303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]