1. EMBO J. 1984 Sep;3(9):2009-14. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1984.tb02083.x.

Differentiation-dependent expression of the chicken delta-crystallin gene 
introduced into mouse teratocarcinoma stem cells.

Kondoh H, Takahashi Y, Okada TS.

PCC3 mouse teratocarcinoma (TCC) stem cells were cotransfected with either the 
plasmid p delta C-1A or p delta C-1B carrying the chicken delta-crystallin gene, 
and with the plasmid pSV2gpt containing the selectable bacterial 
xanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (XGPRT) gene, using the calcium 
phosphate technique. Nine transformed PCC3 stem cell lines, each of which was 
clonally derived from respective colonies surviving after the selection process, 
were isolated. Southern blot analysis revealed that all of them stably 
maintained delta-crystallin sequences associated with high mol. wt. cellular DNA 
after propagation in non-selective medium in vitro, and after the production of 
solid tumors in the syngenic host mice. Six cell lines contain the intact 
delta-crystallin gene sequence and eight contain the gpt sequence. The number of 
delta-crystallin DNA copies was highly variable among transformed lines, 1-500 
delta-crystallin genes per diploid mouse genome. No expression of the exogenous 
genes was detected in the transformed cells as long as they were in the 
undifferentiated state. However, the synthesis of delta-crystallin in certain 
types of cells was detected immunohistologically in three lines after the 
differentiation. The positive cell types were unique to each line, skeletal 
muscle in Y delta-9, certain columnar epithelia in Y delta-2, and unidentified 
spindle-shaped cells in Y delta-3. Authentic delta-crystallin polypeptides with 
a mol. wt. of 48 000 are synthesized upon differentiation of line Y delta-3 in 
solid tumors in syngenic mice.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1984.tb02083.x
PMCID: PMC557635
PMID: 6092052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]