1. J Mol Biol. 1983 Jun 25;167(2):245-57. doi: 10.1016/s0022-2836(83)80334-9.

Loci for human U1 RNA: structural and evolutionary implications.

Monstein HJ, Hammarstr√∂m K, Westin G, Zabielski J, Philipson L, Pettersson U.

Three clones U1-1, U1-6, and U1-8 containing sequences related to human U1 RNA 
have been studied by sequence analysis. The results show that each of the three 
clones represents a distinct locus. The U1-6 locus is closely related to the 
HU1-1 locus, which is believed to represent a functional U1 gene. The U1-1 and 
U1-8 loci are pseudogenes by definition, since they contain sequences that are 
closely related to but not identical with the human U1 RNA sequence. The U1-6 
locus contains the sequence T-A-T-A-T close to the 5'-end of the U1 sequence but 
it is unclear if this represents the promoter. When the U1-8 locus was compared 
to the U1-6 locus, it was observed that the 5'-flanking sequences, except in the 
immediate vicinity of the pseudogene, are as well-conserved as the U1-related 
sequence itself, at least up to position -220. The high degree of homology in 
the 5'-flanking region suggests that U1 genes have a much more strict sequence 
requirement with regard to 5'-flanking sequences than most other eukaryotic 
genes. The U1-6 and U1-8 loci contain the sequence T-A-T-G-T-A-G-A-T-G-A between 
positions -211 and -221. An identical sequence is present in the equivalent 
position in the HU1-1 locus, and may represent the promoter. The high degree of 
conservation in the postulated promoter region indicates that pseudogenes like 
U1-8 possibly could be expressed. A truncated U1-related sequence is present 
between 106 to 150 nucleotides upstream from the U1 gene/pseudogene in the U1-6, 
the U1-8 and the HU1-1 loci, suggesting that the U1 genes may have been 
clustered early in evolution. The U1-1 locus has a strikingly different 
structure from the U1-8 locus; the pseudogene itself is as closely related to 
the U1 RNA sequence as is the U1-8 pseudogene but the flanking sequences, both 
on the 5' and the 3' side, share no detectable homology with the corresponding 
regions in the U1-6 or U1-8 loci. It may therefore be postulated that small 
nuclear RNA pseudogenes are created by several different mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-2836(83)80334-9
PMID: 6191037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]