1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981 Jul;78(7):4218-21. doi: 10.1073/pnas.78.7.4218.

A nucleotide change at a splice junction in the human beta-globin gene is 
associated with beta 0-thalassemia.

Baird M, Driscoll C, Schreiner H, Sciarratta GV, Sansone G, Niazi G, Ramirez F, 
Bank A.

beta 0-Thalassemia is a heterogeneous group of disorders associated with absence 
of beta-globin. In a survey of DNAs from patients with beta 0-thalassemia of 
diverse ethnic origins, a change at the splice junction at the 5' end of the 
large intervening sequence (IVS 2) of the human beta-globin gene has been found 
in one patient of Italian and another two of Iranian ethnic origins. The enzyme 
Hph I recognizes a change at this site and generates a large-than-normal 
fragment of DNA, which hybridizes specifically to a beta-globin IVS 2 probe. No 
other changes in beta-globin gene DNA structure or organization are detectable 
by extensive restriction endonuclease analysis. The enzyme HinfI which 
recognizes a sequence beginning three nucleotides from the 5' end of the IVS 2 
splice junction, produces normal fragments and localizes the defect to a G-G-T 
sequence at the 5'-end IVS 2 splice junction. This sequence is known to be 
remarkably conserved in all globin genes from many species and in most other 
genes examined to date. Thus, in at least some beta 0-thalassemia patients, the 
beta 0-thalassemia defect is associated with a nucleotide change at a splice 
junction. These patients provide unique examples of naturally occurring defects 
in splice junctions of eukaryotic genes associated with absence of specific gene 
function.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.78.7.4218
PMCID: PMC319760
PMID: 6270663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]