1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1984 May;81(9):2674-8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.81.9.2674.

Autophosphorylation of v-Ha-ras p21 is modulated by amino acid residue 12.

Gibbs JB, Ellis RW, Scolnick EM.

The 21,000-dalton protein (p21) encoded by the ras oncogene of Harvey murine 
sarcoma virus (v-Ha-ras) becomes phosphorylated (pp21) in vivo and in vitro on 
threonine residue 59. p21 molecules encoded by cellular ras genes (c-Ha-ras-1) 
contain an alanine at position 59, and thus these p21 molecules are not 
phosphorylated. In this investigation, recombinant ras genes have been 
constructed between the 5' p21 coding region of normal (EC) or oncogenically 
activated (EJ) human c-Ha-ras-1 and the 3' p21 coding region of v-Ha-ras to 
generate p21 molecules containing a threonine phosphoacceptor site at position 
59 and a glycine (EC/v-Ha) or valine (EJ/v-Ha) at residue 12. In transformed NIH 
3T3 mouse fibroblast cells labeled with [35S]methionine, the ratio of pp21 to 
p21 was strikingly modulated by the amino acid at residue 12. v-Ha-ras p21 has 
an arginine at position 12, and 24% of total p21 was in the phosphorylated form. 
A glycine at residue 12 decreased the amount of pp21 to 14% of total p21, and a 
valine at residue 12 dramatically increased this value to 50%. In vitro, the 
valine form of p21 had 2.4- and 2.7-fold greater autophosphorylating activity 
than the glycine and arginine forms of p21, respectively, using [gamma-32P]GTP 
as phosphate donor, but the three p21 species had similar Km values for GTP 
(0.20-0.27 microM). These results indicate that a biochemical activity of p21 
distinguishes between previously observed biological differences of normal and 
activated human ras genes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.81.9.2674
PMCID: PMC345132
PMID: 6609366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]