1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1981 Mar 27;668(1):1-15. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2795(81)90143-4.

Functional abnormalities of hemoglobin Toyoake (142 (H20)beta, Ala leads to 
Pro).

Imai K, Yoshioka Y, Tyuma I, Hirano M.

Oxygen equilibrium of Hb Toyoake (142 (H20)beta, Ala leads to Pro) is 
characterized by an oxygen affinity 6-times higher than that of Hb A, a slightly 
decreased alkaline Bohr effect, diminished cooperativity, with Hill's 
coefficient decreased by 1.2, and reduced response to 2,3-diphosphoglycerate and 
inositol hexaphosphate. These properties are in qualitative agreement with those 
shown previously from oxygen equilibrium data for hemolysate containing Hb 
Toyoake. The heat of oxygenation was -13.5 kcal/mol for Hb Toyoake and -12.9 
kcal/mol for Hb A at pH 7.4 in 0.1 M Cl- and they became equal when corrected 
for the heat of oxygen-linked proton and Cl- release. OxyHb Toyoake autooxidized 
faster than oxyHb A. The visible absorption spectrum and electron paramagnetic 
resonance spectrum of oxidized Hb Toyake indicated that oxidation of this 
hemoglobin, either by autooxidation or by K3Fe(CN)6, is followed by gradual 
conversion into hemichrome derivatives. The soret peak of deoxyHb Toyoake was 
lowered compared to that of deoxyHb A and the magnitude of narrow-banded 
oxy-minus-deoxy difference spectrum around 290 nm was smaller for Hb Toyoake 
than for Hb A, indicating that the former remains predominantly in the R state 
upon deoxygenation. The functional abnormalities, including tendency to lose 
heme groups previously reported, were interpreted in terms of structural 
disturbance by proline at 142beta of 141 leucine, 143 histidine, 145 tyrosine, 
and 146 histidine residues of the same beta chain.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2795(81)90143-4
PMID: 7236701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]