1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 8;270(49):29194-200. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.49.29194.

Interaction between cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator and 
outwardly rectified chloride channels.

Jovov B(1), Ismailov II, Berdiev BK, Fuller CM, Sorscher EJ, Dedman JR, Kaetzel 
MA, Benos DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics University of Alabama at Birmingham 
35294, USA.

We have previously described a protocol for the simultaneous isolation and 
reconstitution of a protein kinase A (PKA)-sensitive outwardly rectified 
chloride channel (ORCC) and the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator (CFTR) from bovine tracheal epithelium. Immunoprecipitation of CFTR 
from this preparation prevented PKA activation of the ORCC, suggesting that CFTR 
regulated the ORCC and that this regulatory relationship was preserved 
throughout the purification procedure. We now report the purification of CFTR 
from bovine tracheal epithelia and the purification of a CFTR conduction mutant 
(G551D CFTR) from retrovirally transduced mouse L cells using a combination of 
alkali stripping, Triton-X extraction, and immunoaffinity chromatography. 
Immunopurified CFTR proteins were reconstituted in the absence and presence of 
ORCC. To test the hypothesis that only functional CFTR can support activation of 
ORCC by PKA and ATP, we used an inhibitory anti-CFTR505-511 peptide antibody or 
G551D CFTR. When anti-CFTR505-511 peptide antibodies were present prior to the 
addition of PKA and ATP, activation of both the ORCC and CFTR was prevented. If 
the antibody was added after activation of the ORCC and CFTR Cl- channels by PKA 
and ATP, only the CFTR Cl- channel was inhibited. When ORCC and G551D CFTR were 
co-incorporated into planar bilayers, only the ORCC was recorded and this 
channel could not be further activated by the addition of PKA and ATP. Thus, 
functional CFTR is required for activation of the ORCC by PKA and ATP. We also 
tested the hypothesis that PKA activation of ORCC was dependent on the 
extracellular presence of ATP. We added ATP on the presumed extracellular side 
of the lipid bilayer under conditions where it was not possible to activate the 
ORCC, i.e. in the presence of inhibitory anti-CFTR505-511 antibody or G551D 
CFTR. In both cases the ORCC regained PKA sensitivity. Moreover, the addition of 
hexokinase + glucose to the extracellular side prevented activation of the ORCCs 
by PKA and ATP in the presence of CFTR. These experiments confirm that both the 
presence of CFTR as well as the presence of ATP on the extracellular side is 
required for activation of the ORCC by PKA and ATP.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.49.29194
PMID: 7493947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]