1. Br J Urol. 1995 Jan;75(1):14-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410x.1995.tb07225.x.

Post-operative serial prostate-specific antigen and transrectal ultrasound for 
staging incidental carcinoma of the prostate.

Feneley MR(1), Webb JA, McLean A, Kirby RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, UK.

Comment in
    Br J Urol. 1995 Oct;76(4):526-7.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the value of post-operative serum prostate-specific 
antigen (PSA), PSA density, incremental change in serial serum PSA (PSA slope) 
and transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) in the assessment of residual malignancy after 
the diagnosis of clinically unsuspected prostatic adenocarcinoma at 
transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Forty-eight untreated patients with incidental carcinoma 
of the prostate, demonstrated at TURP for a clinically benign gland, were 
evaluated post-operatively with serum PSA and TRUS with multiple systematic 
prostatic biopsies. Prostatic volume was determined from TRUS measurements and 
PSA density was defined as serum PSA divided by gland volume. Those patients who 
did not undergo further treatment were monitored with serial PSA levels, and PSA 
slope was calculated as the overall annual percentage increase in serum PSA.
RESULTS: Among 36 patients staged T1A (A1), 11 (31%) had histologically proven 
residual carcinoma, and five of the 12 patients (42%) with T1B (A2) disease had 
no residual disease on biopsy. Serum PSA levels following TURP were greater in 
those patients with residual disease than those without (P = 0.001), but at a 
cut-off of 4.0 ng/mL--providing a sensitivity of 89%--the specificity of PSA 
alone was 57%. PSA density had an 83% sensitivity and a 67% specificity with a 
cut-off of 0.15 ng/mL/cm3. TRUS had a sensitivity of 63% and a specificity of 
52%. An incremental rise in PSA exceeding 20% per year in untreated patients 
gave a sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 79% for biopsy proven residual 
malignancy.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates the inaccuracy of staging incidental 
prostatic malignancy by TURP. Although the performance of PSA density is better 
than that of PSA alone, the reliability of both are limited by the lack of 
specificity, and TRUS imaging lacks both sensitivity and specificity. The PSA 
slope has sufficient sensitivity and specificity to distinguish reliably most 
patients with biopsy proven residual malignancy. Although ultrasound-guided 
systematic biopsies provide a means for confirming residual malignancy, they may 
not be indicated in all patients with incidental carcinoma: for such patients, 
PSA progression may provide a rational basis for subsequent treatment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1464-410x.1995.tb07225.x
PMID: 7531587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]