1. Eur J Cell Biol. 1994 Oct;65(1):214-9.

Abnormal subcellular localization of mutated CFTR protein in a cystic fibrosis 
epithelial cell line.

Demolombe S(1), Baró I, Laurent M, Hongre AS, Pavirani A, Escande D.

Author information:
(1)Unité CNRS URA 1121, Université Paris XI, Orsay/France.

The cystic fibrosis gene product, CFTR, is a Cl- channel that possesses specific 
binding sites for cytosolic ATP and is activated by cAMP-dependent protein 
kinase. Most recently, it was reported that CFTR localizes at the surface apical 
compartment of normal airway epithelial cells, but accumulates in the cytosol of 
airway cells from CF patients with the delta F508 mutation. In order to explore 
whether the same difference exists in normal and CF established cell lines that 
are commonly used in physiological and pharmacological investigations of the CF 
defect, we employed monoclonal antibodies raised against synthetic peptides 
corresponding to two different regions of the CFTR protein. One antibody (MATG 
1061) was generated against amino acids 503-515 delta 508 in the nucleotide 
binding domain 1, whereas the other (MATG 1031) was generated against amino 
acids 107-117 situated in a putative external loop. We used confocal laser 
scanning microscopy to localize the CFTR protein in T84 (a colonic derived 
carcinoma), CAPAN-1 (a pancreatic carcinoma), and in CFPAC-1 (a pancreatic 
carcinoma homozygous for the delta F508 deletion) cell lines. In permeabilized 
T84 and CAPAN-1 cells, immunolabeling with MATG 1061 predominated at the apical 
domain. By contrast, CFTR staining with MATG 1061 was homogeneously distributed 
in the cytoplasm of CFPAC-1 cells. In non-permeabilized non-CF cell lines, MATG 
1031 specifically labeled an apical membrane surface epitope. No such labeling 
was present in CFPAC-1 cells.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7534234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]