1. J Mol Biol. 1995 Mar 17;247(1):49-59. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1994.0121.

Characterization of a non-long terminal repeat retrotransposon cDNA (L1Tc) from 
Trypanosoma cruzi: homology of the first ORF with the ape family of DNA repair 
enzymes.

Martín F(1), Marañón C, Olivares M, Alonso C, López MC.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina 
López Neyra, Granada, Spain.

In the present paper we describe the characterization of a Trypanosoma cruzi 
cDNA (L1Tc) corresponding to a transcript from a new long terminal repeat (LTR) 
retrotransposon. This element is present in a high-copy number, and is found 
dispersed throughout the T. cruzi genome. Northern analysis shows an abundant 
expression of L1Tc-related sequences with a major band of about 5 kb. The 
transcript has at its 3' end a fragment of a highly repetitive DNA sequence 
(E12A), at its 5' end a ribosomal mobile element-like sequence and three 
putative open reading frames (ORF) in different frames. The ORF2 codes for a 
protein which has significant homology with the retrotranscriptase-related 
sequences from non-LTR retrotransposons containing the seven domains present in 
all the retrotranscriptase and retrotranscriptase-related proteins. The ORF3 
codes for a gag-like protein showing unusual cysteine motifs present in all 
non-LTR trypanosomatid elements, similar to the C2H2 zinc finger family of 
transcription factors. Interestingly, ORF1 codes for a protein with significant 
homology to the major human AP endonuclease protein, and maintains in similar 
positions most of the amino acid domains described for all the Ape family of 
proteins. The presence of Ape-related sequences, described for the first time in 
a non-LTR retrotransposon (L1Tc), may have functional relevance for these types 
of elements.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1994.0121
PMID: 7534829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]