1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 1;270(35):20466-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.35.20466.

Pyrophosphate stimulates wild-type and mutant cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator Cl- channels.

Carson MR(1), Winter MC, Travis SM, Welsh MJ.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City 52242, USA.

A unique feature of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
(CFTR) Cl- channel is regulation by ATP through the two cytoplasmic 
nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs). To better understand this process, we asked 
how channel activity is affected by inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), a compound 
that binds to NBDs in other proteins. PPi and three nonhydrolyzable PPi analogs 
reversibly stimulated the activity of phosphorylated channels. Kinetic modeling 
of single channel data demonstrated that PPi affected two distinct steps in 
channel regulation. First, PPi increased the rate at which channels opened. 
Second, once channels were open, PPi delayed their closure. PPi could only 
stimulate channels when it was applied in the presence of ATP. PPi also 
increased the photolabeling of CFTR by an ATP analog. These two findings suggest 
that PPi modifies the activity of ATP-dependent CFTR channel gating. Based on 
these and previous data, we speculate that the effects of PPi are mediated by 
binding of PPi to NBD2 where it regulates channel opening by NBD1, and then, 
because it is not hydrolyzed, it slows the rate of NBD2-mediated channel 
closing. Because PPi stimulated wild-type channels, we tested its effect on CFTR 
containing the cystic fibrosis mutations: delta F508, R117H, and G551S. PPi 
stimulated all three. PPi also stimulated endogenous CFTR in the apical membrane 
of permeabilized T-84 epithelia. These results suggest that PPi or an analog 
might be of value in the development of new approaches to the treatment of 
cystic fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.35.20466
PMID: 7544788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]