1. Biochemistry. 1995 Sep 26;34(38):12221-6. doi: 10.1021/bi00038a016.

Tryptophans 231 and 234 in protein C report the Ca(2+)-dependent conformational 
change required for activation by the thrombin-thrombomodulin complex.

Rezaie AR(1), Esmon CT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, USA.

Human protein C circulates as both single- and two-chain zymogens. Activation by 
the physiological activation complex, thrombin-thrombomodulin, generates the 
anticoagulant enzyme, activated protein C. Ca2+ binding to the protease domain 
of protein C is accompanied by 5.5 +/- 0.2% quenching of intrinsic fluorescence 
that correlates with the conformational change required for the rapid activation 
by the thrombin-thrombomodulin complex. To map which Trp residues report this 
Ca2+ binding, candidate Trp residues at positions 84, 115, 145, 205, 231, and 
234 were changed individually to Phe within a protein C deletion mutant lacking 
the Gla domain (GDPC). Of these, the Trp to Phe mutation at position 231 (W231F) 
eliminated the Ca(2+)-induced fluorescence quenching, and the Trp 234 to Phe 
mutation (W234F) increased the maximum quenching in protein C to 9.4 +/- 0.4%. 
Upon Ca2+ binding, the fluorescence emission intensity of the W231F mutant was 
increased 3.4% +/- 0.6%. The Kd for this site (84 +/- 20 microM) was similar to 
that of GDPC (Kd = 39 +/- 4 microM). To compare the properties of single- and 
two-chain protein C, we replaced the Lys156-Arg157 dipeptide cleavage site in 
protein C with Thr and Gln to form GDPCKR/TQ. GDPCKR/TQ and the two-chain form 
of protein C were activated at the same rate with the thrombin-thrombomodulin 
complex, they exhibited similar Ca2+ dependence for both activation and 
fluorescence quenching, and these enzymes had the same chromogenic activity. In 
contrast to the zymogen form, activated human Gla-domainless protein C did not 
undergo a Ca(2+)-induced fluorescence change. These results indicate that the 
environment of Trp 231 and 234 within the Ca2+ binding loop of the protein C 
zymogen are perturbed by Ca2+ binding to the zymogen.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00038a016
PMID: 7547963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]