1. Med Pediatr Oncol. 1995 Dec;25(6):431-6. doi: 10.1002/mpo.2950250603.

p53 gene mutations in pediatric brain tumors.

Felix CA(1), Slavc I, Dunn M, Strauss EA, Phillips PC, Rorke LB, Sutton L, Bunin 
GR, Biegel JA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

We investigated the frequency of p53 mutations in 47 pediatric brain tumors of 
various histologic subtypes that were collected over a period of 5 years. The 
specimens included 15 primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs), 17 low grade 
astrocytomas, one anaplastic astrocytoma, three glioblastomas (GBMs), one mixed 
glial tumor, eight ependymomas, one choroid plexus carcinoma, and one 
gangliocytoma/ganglioneuroma. Mutations were identified by single strand 
conformation polymorphism analysis of exons 4-8 and verified by sequencing. 
Mutations were present in 2 of 3 cases of GBM, but not in 17 low grade 
astrocytomas (P = 0.02, Fisher's exact test). One GBM demonstrated a germline 
GGC to AGC transition (gly to ser) at codon 245 with loss of the wild-type 
allele. A second GBM contained a CGG to TGG transition (arg to trp) at codon 
248, also with loss of the wild-type allele, but normal tissue was not available 
for comparison. In addition, one of 15 PNETs retained heterozygosity but 
demonstrated a somatic CGT to TGT transition (arg to cys) at codon 273. p53 
mutations were absent in other histologic subtypes and in two cases with 
multiple primary cancers. These data are consistent with earlier findings that 
p53 mutations are rare in PNETs, which are primarily pediatric tumors. In 
contrast to adult gliomas, p53 mutations in pediatric gliomas appear restricted 
to the GBMs. The lack of p53 mutations in pediatric low grade astrocytomas 
suggests not only histological differences, but also a different molecular 
pathogenesis in adult and pediatric patients.

DOI: 10.1002/mpo.2950250603
PMID: 7565304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]