1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 13;270(41):24222-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.41.24222.

Characterization of two activated mutants of human pp60c-src that escape c-Src 
kinase regulation by distinct mechanisms.

Bjorge JD(1), Bellagamba C, Cheng HC, Tanaka A, Wang JH, Fujita DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Canada.

Two activated transforming mutants of human pp60c-src were found to possess 
single point mutations within the regulatory carboxyl terminus (E527K in CY 
CST201) and the kinase domain (E381G in WO CST1), respectively, that do not 
directly interfere with either the regulatory c-Src kinase (CSK) phosphorylation 
site (Tyr530) or the SH2/3 domains. In vivo, both mutant proteins are 
hypophosphorylated on their carboxyl-terminal regulatory tyrosines and are 
hyperactive. In an in vitro Src kinase inactivation assay, both mutant Src 
proteins exhibited resistance to inactivation by CSK relative to wild-type Src. 
Under these in vitro conditions, E381G c-Src was found to be phosphorylated by 
CSK to wild-type levels, while E527K c-Src was not detectably phosphorylated. 
The ability of CSK to phosphorylate a carboxyl-terminal peptide modelled against 
E527K c-Src was also impaired, suggesting that CSK is unable to recognize E527K 
c-Src as an efficient substrate. In the case of E381G c-Src, examination of 
whether its SH2/3 domains were accessible to the carboxyl-terminal regulatory 
phosphotyrosine revealed a highly reduced ability of autophosphorylated E381G 
c-Src to bind to a synthetic phosphopeptide modelled from the SH2-binding region 
of polyoma middle-T antigen which binds to Src SH2 with high affinity. This 
suggests that the E381G c-Src mutation results in an altered or reduced 
accessibility of the SH2 domain of the autophosphorylated form of E381G c-Src 
and may represent a previously undescribed mode of Src activation. Further study 
of these and other Src mutants may offer additional new insights into the 
regulation of "Src family" kinases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.41.24222
PMID: 7592628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]