1. Biochemistry. 1995 Aug 22;34(33):10334-9. doi: 10.1021/bi00033a003.

Monomer-heptamer equilibrium of the Escherichia coli chaperonin GroES.

Zondlo J(1), Fisher KE, Lin Z, Ducote KR, Eisenstein E.

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Biotechnology, University of Maryland 
Biotechnology Institute, Rockville 20850, USA.

In an effort to clarify the role of GroES in chaperonin-facilitated protein 
folding, a plasmid-encoding expression system for GroES incorporating a 
histidine-tagged, thrombin-cleavable, N-terminal sequence was constructed. This 
approach facilitated the rapid purification of native-like, histidine-cleaved 
GroES (HC-GroES). The addition of NaSCN to purification buffers to mildly 
promote subunit dissociation enabled the complete separation of chromosomally 
encoded, wild-type GroES chains from recombinant chains, allowing the production 
of homogeneous mutant variants of GroES. A substitution of histidine-7 to 
tryptophan in GroES was used to demonstrate the concentration-dependent 
modulation of the heptameric quaternary structure of the chaperonin. 
Fluorescence and light scattering studies of this mutant suggest that GroES 
heptamers dissociate to monomers upon dilution with half-times of 2-4 min. 
Sedimentation equilibrium experiments using either wild-type or HC-GroES can 
best be described by a monomer--heptamer equilibrium, yielding dissociation 
constants of 1 x 10(-38) M6 for native GroES and 2 x 10(-32) M6 for HC-GroES. 
These results are supported by subunit exchange experiments using mixtures of 
native or HC-GroES and GroES containing the complete N-terminal histidine tail. 
Native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis demonstrates that these mixtures form 
an eight-membered hybrid set within minutes. The studies described here suggest 
a dynamic equilibrium for the quaternary structure of GroES, which may be an 
important feature for its role in GroEL-mediated protein folding reactions.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00033a003
PMID: 7654686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]