1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 22;270(38):22337-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.38.22337.

A single amino acid exchange, Arg-45 to Ala, generates an epidermal growth 
factor (EGF) mutant with high affinity for the chicken EGF receptor.

van de Poll ML(1), Lenferink AE, van Vugt MJ, Jacobs JJ, Janssen JW, Joldersma 
M, van Zoelen EJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The finding that human epidermal growth factor (hEGF) and human transforming 
growth factor (hTGF) alpha bind with similar affinity to the human EGF receptor 
but differ in their affinity for the chicken EGF receptor was used as a model 
system to study ligand-receptor interaction of EGF receptor agonists. We 
previously constructed domain-exchange mutants of hEGF and hTGF alpha and found 
that the region COOH-terminal of the sixth cysteine residue in hTGF alpha is 
important for high affinity binding to the chicken EGF receptor (Kramer, R. H., 
Lenferink, A. E. G., Lammerts van Bueren-Koornneef, I., van der Meer, A., van de 
Poll, M. L. M., and van Zoelen, E. J. J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 8708-8711). 
To analyze this domain in more detail, we now constructed four additional 
chimeras in which either the region between the sixth cysteine residue and the 
highly conserved Leu-47 was exchanged or the region COOH-terminal of Leu-47. A 
mutant in which the latter region in hEGF was replaced by hTGF alpha (designated 
E6ET) showed intermediate binding affinity, whereas replacement of the former 
region in hEGF by hTGF alpha was sufficient to generate a mutant (designated 
E6TE) with a similar high affinity for the chicken EGF receptor as wild type 
hTGF alpha. Furthermore, a deletion mutant of hEGF lacking three COOH-terminal 
amino acids, EGF50, showed intermediate binding affinity for the chicken EGF 
receptor similar to E6ET, but upon additional deletions (EGF49 and EGF48), this 
initial gain in affinity was lost. A systematic analysis of the region between 
the sixth cysteine residue and Leu-47 showed that the low affinity of hEGF for 
the chicken EGF receptor is mainly due to the presence of Arg-45. Replacement of 
the positively charged Arg-45 by Ala, the corresponding amino acid in hTGF 
alpha, was sufficient to generate a mutant growth factor with high affinity for 
the chicken EGF receptor. This indicates that in hEGF Arg-45 may play an 
important role in receptor binding. A model is proposed in which positively 
charged amino acids close to or within the receptor recognition site of hEGF 
prohibit high affinity binding to the chicken EGF receptor due to electrostatic 
repulsion of positively charged amino acids in the putative ligand binding 
domain of the chicken EGF receptor.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.38.22337
PMID: 7673217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]