1. EMBO J. 1995 May 1;14(9):1845-53. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07176.x.

Molecular identification of an ABC transporter complex for manganese: analysis 
of a cyanobacterial mutant strain impaired in the photosynthetic oxygen 
evolution process.

Bartsevich VV(1), Pakrasi HB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University, St Louis, MO 63130, USA.

During photosynthesis, the photosystem II (PSII) pigment-protein complex 
catalyzes oxygen evolution, a reaction in which a four-manganese ensemble plays 
a crucial role. Using a newly developed selection scheme, we have isolated BP13, 
a random photosynthesis-deficient mutant strain of the cyanobacterium, 
Synechocystis 6803. This mutant grew slowly under photoautotrophic conditions, 
and had a low oxygen evolution activity. Biochemical analysis revealed that the 
lesion in this mutant strain had specifically affected the Mn ensemble in PSII. 
Interestingly, incubation of BP13 cells with micromolar levels of added Mn 
induced rapid recovery of oxygen evolution activity. The mutant could be 
complemented with a fragment of wild-type chromosomal DNA containing three 
closely linked genes, mntA, mntB and mntC. These gene products showed 
significant sequence similarities with polypeptide components of bacterial 
permeases that are members of the 'ABC (ATP binding cassette) superfamily' of 
transporter proteins. We determined that in the BP13 strain, a single nucleotide 
change had resulted in the replacement of an alanine by an aspartic acid residue 
in MntA, a soluble protein containing ATP binding motifs. These results suggest 
that the mntCAB gene cluster encodes polypeptide components of a Mn transporter, 
the first such protein complex identified in any organism.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07176.x
PMCID: PMC398283
PMID: 7743991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]