1. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 12;270(19):11168-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.19.11168.

Proteolysis of the human platelet and endothelial cell thrombin receptor by 
neutrophil-derived cathepsin G.

Molino M(1), Blanchard N, Belmonte E, Tarver AP, Abrams C, Hoxie JA, Cerletti C, 
Brass LF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Cathepsin G is a neutrophil-derived protease that has been shown to inhibit the 
effects of thrombin on some cells expressing thrombin receptors while acting as 
an agonist on others. The present studies examine whether cleavage of the 
thrombin receptor by cathepsin G can account for these diverse effects. When 
added to cells that normally respond to thrombin, cathepsin G prevented a 
subsequent cytosolic Ca2+ increase caused by thrombin, but had no effect on 
responses to the thrombin receptor agonist peptide, SFLLRN. These effects were 
observed in cells in which cathepsin G had little or no agonist effect (human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells and HEL cells), as well as in cells in which 
cathepsin G acted as an agonist (platelets and CHRF-288 cells). Binding studies 
using monoclonal antibodies with defined epitopes within the first 60 residues 
of the thrombin receptor N-terminus showed that incubation of platelets and 
endothelial cells with cathepsin G abolished the binding of all of the 
antibodies, while thrombin abolished only the binding of antibodies whose 
epitopes were N-terminal to the known thrombin cleavage site between Arg41 and 
Ser42. Analysis of peptide proteolytic fragments identified three potential 
cleavage sites for cathepsin G: Arg41-Ser42, Phe43-Leu44, and Phe55-Trp56. 
Cleavage at Phe55-Trp56 would account for both the observed loss of all of the 
antibody binding sites and the inhibition of receptor activation by thrombin. 
Two approaches were used to determine whether a solitary cleavage at Arg41-Ser42 
could result in receptor activation. In the first, HEL cells were exposed to 
cathepsin G or thrombin in the presence of an antibody whose epitope includes 
Phe55. The antibody inhibited responses to thrombin, but augmented the response 
to cathepsin G. In the second, COS-1 cells were transfected with variant 
thrombin receptors in which Phe55 and Trp56 were mutated to alanine. Transfected 
wild-type receptors responded to thrombin, but not cathepsin G, while the 
variant receptors responded to both proteases. These results 1) suggest that the 
ability of cathepsin G to inhibit responses to thrombin, but not SFLLRN, is due 
to cleavage of the receptor at Phe55-Trp56, deleting the tethered ligand domain, 
and 2) show that cathepsin G can activate thrombin receptors, but only if the 
cleavage site at Phe55-Trp56 is mutated or otherwise protected.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.19.11168
PMID: 7744748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]