1. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Apr 1;229(1):113-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1995.tb20445.x.

Substrate specificity differences between two catechol 2,3-dioxygenases encoded 
by the TOL and NAH plasmids from Pseudomonas putida.

Cerdan P(1), Rekik M, Harayama S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University Medical Center, Geneva, 
Switzerland.

The substrate specificities of two catechol 2,3-dioxygenases, one encoded by 
xylE on the TOL plasmid pWW0 and the other encoded by nahH on the NAH7 plasmid, 
were investigated. The XylE catechol 2,3-dioxygenase catalyzes the ring-cleavage 
of catechol, 3-methylcatechol and 4-methylcatechol. The NahH catechol 
2,3-dioxygenase was partially deficient in oxidizing 3-methylcatechol due to 
defects in two catalytic properties. First, NahH has a lower kcat value for 
3-methylcatechol compared to XylE, and secondly, NahH is more susceptible than 
XylE to suicide inhibition by 3-methylcatechol. To identify the amino acid 
residues of XylE and NahH responsible for the differences in the efficacy of the 
3-methylcatechol oxidation, kcat and kinact (the rate constant for suicide 
inhibition) for 3-methylcatechol were determined for several NahH-XylE hybrid 
proteins, each of which consisted of the NahH sequence in the N-terminal region 
and the XylE sequence in the C-terminal region. It is shown that a single amino 
acid substitution present in the NahH sequence, His250-->Gln, was responsible 
for the reduced kcat and increased kinact values for 3-methylcatechol. In 
addition to the substitution at residue 250, some substitution(s) at residues 
77-102 were responsible for the twofold difference in the kinact values for NahH 
and XylE with 3-methylcatechol. We also show that the binding site of 
3-methylcatechol for suicide inhibition is different from the catalytic site.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1995.tb20445.x
PMID: 7744021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]