1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 9;92(10):4547-51. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.92.10.4547.

Metaxin, a gene contiguous to both thrombospondin 3 and glucocerebrosidase, is 
required for embryonic development in the mouse: implications for Gaucher 
disease.

Bornstein P(1), McKinney CE, LaMarca ME, Winfield S, Shingu T, Devarayalu S, Vos 
HL, Ginns EI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

We have identified a murine gene, metaxin, that spans the 6-kb interval 
separating the glucocerebrosidase gene (GC) from the thrombospondin 3 gene on 
chromosome 3E3-F1. Metaxin and GC are transcribed convergently; their major 
polyadenylylation sites are only 431 bp apart. On the other hand, metaxin and 
the thrombospondin 3 gene are transcribed divergently and share a common 
promoter sequence. The cDNA for metaxin encodes a 317-aa protein, without either 
a signal sequence or consensus for N-linked glycosylation. Metaxin protein is 
expressed ubiquitously in tissues of the young adult mouse, but no close 
homologues have been found in the DNA or protein data bases. A targeted mutation 
(A-->G in exon 9) was introduced into GC by homologous recombination in 
embryonic stem cells to establish a mouse model for a mild form of Gaucher 
disease. A phosphoglycerate kinase-neomycin gene cassette was also inserted into 
the 3'-flanking region of GC as a selectable marker, at a site later identified 
as the terminal exon of metaxin. Mice homozygous for the combined mutations die 
early in gestation. Since the same amino acid mutation in humans is associated 
with mild type 1 Gaucher disease, we suggest that metaxin protein is likely to 
be essential for embryonic development in mice. Clearly, the contiguous gene 
organization at this locus limits targeting strategies for the production of 
murine models of Gaucher disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.10.4547
PMCID: PMC41981
PMID: 7753840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]