1. Res Virol. 1995 Jan-Feb;146(1):5-17. doi: 10.1016/0923-2516(96)80585-1.

Membrane-expressed HIV envelope glycoprotein heterodimer is a powerful inducer 
of cell death in uninfected CD4+ target cells.

Laurent-Crawford AG(1), Coccia E, Krust B, Hovanessian AG.

Author information:
(1)Unit√© de Virologie et Immunologie cellulaire, UA 1157 CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris.

HIV infection of CD4+ T cells in culture results in the production of virus and 
induction of cell killing by apoptosis. Such a cytopathic effect is observed 
during infection with syncytium-inducing or non-syncytium-inducing HIV isolates. 
Apoptosis is triggered by the interaction of the cell membrane-expressed HIV 
envelope glycoprotein heterodimer gp120-gp41 complex (external and transmembrane 
glycoprotein complex) with the CD4 receptor. Here we demonstrate an experimental 
model for the induction of apoptosis independent of HIV infection, using 
transiently transfected HeLa cells with the HIV1 env gene as effector cells and 
the CD4+ MOLT4-T4 T cells as target cells. Results obtained confirm that the 
induction of apoptosis requires the membrane expression of the two HIV env gene 
products, gp120 and gp41. Single amino acid point mutations of the envelope 
products that affect binding to the CD4 receptor or the fusion process abrogate 
the capacity of the gp120-gp41 complex to induce apoptosis. Interestingly, a 
point mutation in the V3 loop which inhibits fusion without affecting CD4 
binding also results in the abrogation of apoptosis. These observations indicate 
that the induction of apoptosis is an intrinsic property of the cell 
membrane-expressed gp120-gp41 complex, and thus should be considered as one of 
the functions of HIV env gene products.

DOI: 10.1016/0923-2516(96)80585-1
PMID: 7754236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]