1. Protein Sci. 1994 Dec;3(12):2254-71. doi: 10.1002/pro.5560031211.

The isomorphous structures of prethrombin2, hirugen-, and PPACK-thrombin: 
changes accompanying activation and exosite binding to thrombin.

Vijayalakshmi J(1), Padmanabhan KP, Mann KG, Tulinsky A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824-1322, 
USA.

The X-ray crystal structure of prethrombin2 (pre2), the immediate inactive 
precursor of alpha-thrombin, has been determined at 2.0 A resolution complexed 
with hirugen. The structure has been refined to a final R-value of 0.169 using 
14,211 observed reflections in the resolution range 8.0-2.0 A. A total of 202 
water molecules have also been located in the structure. Comparison with the 
hirugen-thrombin complex showed that, apart from the flexible beginning and 
terminal regions of the molecule, there are 4 polypeptide segments in pre2 
differing in conformation from the active enzyme (Pro 186-Asp 194, Gly 216-Gly 
223, Gly 142-Pro 152, and the Arg 15-Ile 16 cleavage region). The formation of 
the Ile 16-Asp 194 ion pair and the specificity pocket are characteristic of 
serine protease activation with the conformation of the catalytic triad being 
conserved. With the determination of isomorphous structures of hirugen-thrombin 
and D-Phe-Pro-Arg chloromethyl ketone (PPACK)-thrombin, the changes that occur 
in the active site that affect the kinetics of chromogenic substrate hydrolysis 
on binding to the fibrinogen recognition exosite have been determined. The 
backbone of the Ala 190-Gly 197 segment in the active site has an average RMS 
difference of 0.55 A between the 2 structures (about 3.7 sigma compared to the 
bulk structure). This segment has 2 type II beta-bends, the first bend showing 
the largest shift due to hirugen binding. Another important feature was the 2 
different conformations of the side chain of Glu 192. The side chain extends to 
solvent in hirugen-thrombin, which is compatible with the binding of substrates 
having an acidic residue in the P3 position (protein-C, thrombin platelet 
receptor). In PPACK-thrombin, the side chain of Asp 189 and the segment Arg 
221A-Gly 223 move to provide space for the inhibitor, whereas in 
hirugen-thrombin, the Ala 190-Gly 197 movement expands the active site region. 
Although 8 water molecules are expelled from the active site with PPACK binding, 
the inhibitor complex is resolvated with 5 other water molecules.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560031211
PMCID: PMC2142772
PMID: 7756983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]