1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 30;270(26):15838-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.26.15838.

Two distinct cell attachment sites in entactin are revealed by amino acid 
substitutions and deletion of the RGD sequence in the cysteine-rich epidermal 
growth factor repeat 2.

Dong LJ(1), Hsieh JC, Chung AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 
15260, USA.

The basement membrane glycoprotein, entactin, has previously been shown to 
promote cell attachment and chemotaxis. We have constructed a panel of 
glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins that encompasses the four major 
structural domains of entactin, G1, G2, E, and G3. These proteins have been 
synthesized in bacteria and purified by affinity chromatography. The connecting 
stalk of entactin, E, which contains four cysteine-rich EGF homology repeats and 
the integrin receptor RGD recognition sequence, has been modified by deletion of 
the RGD sequence and substituting glutamic acid for aspartic acid. Attachment 
assays reveal that the RGD sequence is one of the major cell attachment sites in 
entactin and that this sequence is recognized by the alpha v beta 3 integrin 
receptor. Analysis of cell attachment on mutant forms of full-length entactin 
expressed in the baculovirus expression system revealed a second attachment site 
that was independent of the RGD sequence. This second site was localized to a 
peptide of 39 amino acid residues in the second globular G2 domain of entactin. 
This peptide represents a cysteine-rich EGF repeat. Inhibition of cell 
attachment by anti-integrin receptor antibodies indicates that the second 
attachment site is recognized by a member of the beta 1 family of integrin 
receptors, possibly alpha 3 beta 1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.26.15838
PMID: 7797588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]