1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Dec 11;22(24):5347-53. doi: 10.1093/nar/22.24.5347.

Regulation of EcoRII methyltransferase: effect of mutations on gene expression 
and in vitro binding to the promoter region.

Som S(1), Friedman S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, State University of New York Health Science 
Center at Brooklyn 11203.

EcoRII Methyltransferase (M.EcoRII) which methylates the second C in the 
sequence CCWGG (W = A/T) is autogenously regulated by binding to the 5' 
regulatory region of its gene. DNase I footprinting experiments demonstrated 
that purified M.EcoRII protected a 47-49 bp region of DNA immediately upstream 
of the ecoRIIM coding region. We have studied this interaction with mutants of 
the enzyme, in vitro by DNA binding and in vivo by investigating the repression 
in trans of expression of beta-galactosidase from an ecoRIIM-lacZ operon fusion. 
Two catalytically active mutants failed to repress expression of the fusion 
whereas catalytically inactive mutants had repressor activity. However, with one 
of the catalytically inactive mutants, C186S, in which the catalytic Cys was 
replaced with Ser, and which bound unmethylated CCWGG sequences, repression 
could only be demonstrated when those sequences in cellular DNA were methylated 
by supplying a cloned dcm gene in trans. In vitro binding of the DNA fragment 
containing the ecoRIIM regulatory region was detected only with the mutants that 
showed repressor activity, including C186S. Results indicate that 
down-regulation of the gene in vivo and binding to the promoter in vitro are not 
dependent on the catalytic properties of M.EcoRII. Mobility shift experiments 
with C186S also revealed that it could bind either the promoter or unmethylated 
CCWGG sites, but not both. We conclude that the concentration of unmethylated 
CCWGG sites controls expression from the ecoRIIM promoter.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/22.24.5347
PMCID: PMC332081
PMID: 7816624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]