1. Anticancer Res. 1994 Sep-Oct;14(5B):2259-66.

Overexpression of p53 protein is common in premalignant head and neck lesions.

Pavelic ZP(1), Li YQ, Stambrook PJ, McDonald JS, Munck-Wikland E, Pavelic K, 
Dacic S, Danilovic Z, Pavelic L, Mugge RE, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine, 
University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45267.

In order to determine whether or not the p53 gene is involved in the malignant 
transformation of the head and neck carcinoma HNSCC, we have analyzed archival 
specimens from 527 primary head and neck lesions and 27 corresponding lymph node 
metastases. Nuclear p53 protein was present in 107 of 190 (56%) dysplasias, 61 
of 102 (60%) carcinoma in situ (CIS), and 262 of 493 (53%) carcinomas. The p53 
score did not increase significantly with progression of these lesions from 
dysplasia to CIS and to carcinoma. All 357 normal samples of head and neck 
tissues were negative. The majority of the 172 sets of premalignant and 
malignant lesions displayed concordant p53 staining patterns. The staining was 
incongruous in only six cases. The p53 staining results were congruent in all 27 
pairs of primary and metastatic (lymph nodes) tumors. These data strongly 
suggest that p53 protein could be altered in a very early phase of the head and 
neck tumorigenesis and is maintained during tumor progression and metastatic 
spread. Mutations in p53 were examined in 11 cases that exhibited high levels of 
p53 protein as detected by immunohistochemistry using PAb 1801 MAb. Mutation 
analysis was performed by direct sequencing of the PCR amplification products of 
exons 5 through 8, which contain greater than 90% of p53 mutations found in 
tumors. Three of 11 HNSCC had mutations at codon 130 (C to A), 193 (A to T), 283 
(G to C), respectively. No mutations were found in the other 8 samples within 
the regions examined. However, they may have mutations in unsequenced regions of 
p53 or may have wild type protein that accumulates for other reasons.

PMID: 7840533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]