1. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Feb 1;227(3):787-91. doi: 
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1995.tb20202.x.

C-terminus or juxtamembrane deletions in the insulin receptor do not affect the 
glucose-dependent inhibition of the tyrosine kinase activity.

Mosthaf L(1), Berti L, Kellerer M, Mushack J, Seffer E, Bossenmaier B, Coghlan 
M, Siddle K, Ullrich A, H채ring HU.

Author information:
(1)Institut f체r Diabetesforschung, M체nchen, Germany.

We have previously shown, in rat-1 fibroblasts which stably overexpress high 
levels of human insulin receptor (HIR), that high glucose levels induce an 
inhibition of insulin receptor tyrosine kinase (IRK) activity [Berti, L., 
Mosthaf, L., Kellerer, M., Tippmer, S., Mushack, J., Seffer, E., Seedorf, K., 
H채ring, H. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 3381-3386]. This effect appears to be 
mediated through activation of protein kinase C and phosphorylation of the 
receptor beta-subunit on threonine or serine residues. The aim of the present 
study was to determine whether the juxtamembrane region or the C-terminus tail 
of the receptor are involved in the IRK modulation by glucose. In these domains 
increased serine and threonine phosphorylation was observed after phorbol ester 
or insulin stimulation of cells, and a regulatory function for IRK activity 
seems conceivable. We used an antibody directed against one potential regulatory 
site in the C-terminus tail, i.e. PSer1315, to study the effect of glucose. An 
increased signal was detected in HIR from rat-1 fibroblasts treated with phorbol 
12-myristate 13-acetate or glucose (25 mM). To investigate whether this site in 
the C-terminus is essential for glucose-dependent IRK inhibition, rat-1 
fibroblasts stably overexpressing a C-terminus-truncated human insulin receptor 
lacking 43 amino acids (HIR delta CT) were studied in parallel with cells 
expressing the wild-type receptor. As described earlier, HIR delta CT has lost 
the ability to stimulate glucose uptake. Glucose (25 mM) inhibited the insulin 
effect on the autophosphorylation of both receptors to a similar extent. Thus, 
glucose (25 mM) stimulates phosphorylation of Ser1315, however, this appears not 
to mediate the inhibitory effect on IRK. To test whether serine residues 955/956 
and 962/964 in the juxtamembrane region of the insulin receptor are involved in 
the inhibitory effect of glucose, 293 cells transiently transfected either with 
wild-type HIR or HIR with a juxtamembrane deletion spanning amino acids 954-965 
[des-(954-965)-HIR] were studied in parallel. As described earlier, the 
des-(954-965)-HIR has lost the ability to stimulate PI-3 kinase. However, 25 mM 
glucose equally inhibited the insulin effect on tyrosine phosphorylation of the 
receptor. Together, the data suggest that the regulatory serine or threonine 
phosphorylation site(s) involved in the inhibitory effect of hyperglycemia are 
neither located in the C-terminus nor in the juxtamembrane region of the insulin 
receptor beta subunit.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1995.tb20202.x
PMID: 7867639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]