1. J Gen Virol. 1995 Mar;76 ( Pt 3):509-17. doi: 10.1099/0022-1317-76-3-509.

Identification of five allelic variants of the sheep PrP gene and their 
association with natural scrapie.

Belt PB(1), Muileman IH, Schreuder BE, Bos-de Ruijter J, Gielkens AL, Smits MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, DLO-Institute for Animal Science and Health 
(ID-DLO), Lelystad, The Netherlands.

Scrapie is a fatal neurodegenerative disease of sheep that belongs to the group 
of prion diseases found in humans and animals. The host encoded prion protein 
(PrP) plays a central role in the disease process. In the PrP genes of man, mice 
and sheep, polymorphisms have been found that are associated with disease 
susceptibility and pathogenesis. We have used denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis (DGGE) to detect polymorphisms in the sheep PrP gene. In 
addition to the already described polymorphisms at codons 136, 154 and 171, we 
identified a hitherto unknown G --> T transition at codon 171. This transition 
is responsible for a glutamine to histidine substitution. An arginine to 
glutamine substitution at this position has been described previously. DGGE 
allowed us to identify five different combinations of these polymorphisms within 
the PrP gene representing five allelic variants, which were cloned and 
sequenced. Based on the triplet sequences present at codons 136, 154 and 171 
these allelic variants were designated PrPVRQ, PrPARR, PrPARQ, PrPARH and 
PrPAHQ. To determine the association of these allelic variants with natural 
scrapie, we screened 34 scrapie affected and 91 healthy control sheep of the 
Texel breed for the presence of these allelic variants. In these two groups, the 
five variants gave rise to 13 different genotypes. The distribution of the 
allelic variants among both groups showed marked differences. The PrPVRQ variant 
was present with high frequency in scrapie affected sheep, whereas the PrPARR 
variant was almost exclusively present in the healthy group. Two other variants, 
PrPARQ and PrPARH, were found in both groups with equal frequencies. The data 
obtained suggest modulation of disease susceptibility in these Texel sheep by at 
least five different PrP allelic variants, with the PrPVRQ and PrPARR alleles 
acting in a dominant, but opposite fashion over the PrPARQ and PrPARH alleles. 
The frequency of the PrPAHQ variant was too low to draw any conclusions.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-76-3-509
PMID: 7897344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]