1. Int J Cancer. 1994 Jan 2;56(1):40-5. doi: 10.1002/ijc.2910560108.

p21-ras-peptide-specific T-cell responses in a patient with colorectal cancer. 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells recognize a peptide corresponding to a common mutation 
(13Gly-->Asp).

Fossum B(1), Gedde-Dahl T 3rd, Breivik J, Eriksen JA, Spurkland A, Thorsby E, 
Gaudernack G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Transplantation Immunology, National Hospital, University of 
Oslo, Norway.

Peptides derived from mutated ras are immunogenic in mice and humans, and 
represent a group of specific tumor antigens that are potential targets for 
immunotherapy. T-cell responses against mutant p21 ras can be initiated in vitro 
by repeated stimulation of peripheral-blood mononuclear cells with mutant 
ras-derived peptides. Patients with tumors commonly harbouring ras mutations may 
therefore show evidence of in vivo reactivity against such mutations. 
Peripheral-blood mononuclear cells from 10 patients with colorectal 
adenocarcinoma were screened for reactivity against synthetic ras-derived 
peptides corresponding to the most commonly found mutations in this type of 
cancer. In one patient, T-cell reactivity against the 1-25,13Gly-->Asp peptide 
was detected. From this patient, both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell clones specific for 
the 1-25,13Gly-->Asp mutation could be raised. We were not, however, able to 
detect the corresponding mutation in the cancer. The 13Gly-->Asp mutation in the 
ras oncogene is frequent and constitutes 9 to 27% of all K ras mutations found 
in biopsies from patients with colorectal carcinomas. Our study demonstrates a 
mutant ras-specific T-cell response of both the CD4+ and the CD8+ phenotype in a 
cancer patient. We speculate that in this patient a specific T-cell response 
resulted in eradication of tumor cells harboring the 13Gly-->Asp mutation.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.2910560108
PMID: 7903287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]