1. Biochemistry. 1994 Aug 16;33(32):9414-9. doi: 10.1021/bi00198a006.

Amino-terminal polymorphisms of the human beta 2-adrenergic receptor impart 
distinct agonist-promoted regulatory properties.

Green SA(1), Turki J, Innis M, Liggett SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Pulmonary), University of Cincinnati Medical Center, 
Ohio 45267-0564.

Erratum in
    Biochemistry 1994 Nov 29;33(47):14368.

We have recently delineated three naturally occurring polymorphisms of the human 
beta 2-adrenergic receptor caused by missense mutations encoding for amino acids 
16 and 27 of the extracellular N-terminus of the receptor. We have studied the 
functional consequences of these polymorphisms by site-directed mutagenesis and 
the recombinant expression of these receptors in Chinese hamster fibroblasts. 
The polymorphisms consist of substitutions of Gly for Arg at amino acid 16 
(Arg16-->Gly), Glu for Gln at amino acid 27 (Gln27-->Glu), and a combination of 
both substitutions. All three mutated receptors displayed normal agonist binding 
and functional coupling to Gs, resulting in the stimulation of adenylyl cyclase 
activity. However, these mutations markedly altered the degree of 
agonist-promoted downregulation of receptor expression. After 24-h exposure to 
10 microM isoproterenol, wild-type beta 2AR underwent a 26 +/- 3% reduction in 
receptor density. In contrast, Arg16-->Gly underwent a 41 +/- 3% reduction. 
Gln27-->Glu, on the other hand, was found to be completely resistant to 
downregulation. Arg16-->Gly+Gln27-->Glu also underwent an increased 
downregulation compared to wild-type beta 2AR (39 +/- 4%). The rates of new 
receptor synthesis after irreversible alkylation were not different between 
these receptors, nor were the rates of agonist-promoted receptor internalization 
to the intracellular pool. Gln27-->Glu cellular mRNA minimally increased during 
agonist exposure, and wild-type beta 2AR and the other mutated receptor mRNAs 
did not change, which infer that the aberrant downregulation patterns of these 
polymorphisms may be due to the altered degradation of receptor 
protein.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00198a006
PMID: 7915137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]