1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 30;269(39):24046-9.

Replacement of Asp333 with Asn by site-directed mutagenesis changes the 
substrate specificity of Escherichia coli adenylosuccinate synthetase from 
guanosine 5'-triphosphate to xanthosine 5'-triphosphate.

Kang C(1), Sun N, Honzatko RB, Fromm HJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Iowa State University, Ames 50010.

The aspartate residue of the (N/T)KXD concensus sequence for GTP-binding 
proteins is present in the eight available sequences of adenylosuccinate 
synthetase. Reported here is a comprehensive analysis of the substrate 
specificity of mutant enzymes, where the conserved Asp333 of the synthetase from 
Escherichia coli is changed to asparagine, glutamate, and glutamine by 
site-directed mutagenesis. The mutants D333N, D333E, and D333Q generally show 
decreased kcat values and increased Km values for GTP. The decreased values of 
kcat exhibited by the mutants indicate that the interactions between Asp333 and 
the guanine are relayed by some mechanism to the catalytic residues around the 
gamma-phosphate of GTP, and that the energy provided by the interaction between 
Asp333 and the guanine moiety of GTP is utilized for rearrangement of the 
catalytic residues. The three mutants each have higher affinity for xanthosine 
5'-triphosphate (XTP) and ITP than does the wild-type enzyme. In fact, the D333N 
mutant uses XTP more effectively than the wild-type enzyme employs GTP as a 
substrate. The side-chain of Asp333 forms hydrogen bonds with the N-1 and the 
exocyclic amino group of the guanine base of GTP. In the D333N mutant, this 
interaction is probably replaced by hydrogen bonds between the amide side chain 
of Asn333 and N-1 and the 2-oxo group of XTP. The D333Q mutant can use UTP as a 
substrate more effectively than the wild-type enzyme. The longer side chain of 
glutamine at residue 333 favors pyrimidine nucleotides over the purine 
nucleotides, GTP, XTP, and ITP. These results demonstrate that Asp333 in the 
(N/T)KXD consensus sequence of adenylosuccinate synthetase from E. coli is a 
determinant for GTP-specificity.

PMID: 7929056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]