1. Plant Mol Biol. 1994 Oct;26(2):679-90. doi: 10.1007/BF00013753.

Identification of a maize root transcript expressed in the primary response to 
nitrate: characterization of a cDNA with homology to ferredoxin-NADP+ 
oxidoreductase.

Ritchie SW(1), Redinbaugh MG, Shiraishi N, Vrba JM, Campbell WH.

Author information:
(1)USDA-ARS Crops Research Laboratory, Oxford, NC.

To more fully understand the biochemical and molecular events which occur in 
plants exposed to nitrate, cDNAs whose accumulation was enhanced in nitrate- and 
cycloheximide-treated maize (Zea mays L. W64A x W182E) roots were isolated. The 
340 bp Zmrprn1 (for Zea mays root primary response to nitrate) cDNA also 
hybridized with a probe enriched for nitrate-induced sequences, and was 
characterized further. Sequence analysis of a near full-length cDNA (Zmrprn1A) 
showed strong homology (> 90% amino acid identity) with a root ferredoxin-NADP+ 
oxidoreductase (FNR) of rice, and 45-50% amino acid identify with leaf FNR 
genes. When expressed in Escherichia coli, the Zmrprn1A cDNA produced a protein 
with NADPH: ferricyanide reductase activity, consistent with the enzymatic 
properties of an FNR. The Zmrprn1 cDNA hybridized with a 1.4 kb transcript which 
was expressed in the maize root primary response to nitrate. That is, mRNA 
levels in roots increased rapidly and transiently in response to external 
nitrate, and low levels of nitrate (10 microM) induced transcript accumulation. 
The accumulation of the Zmrprn1 transcript was not prevented by cycloheximide, 
indicating that the cellular factor(s) required for expression were 
constitutively present in maize roots. The Zmrprn1 mRNA accumulated specifically 
in response to nitrate, since neither K+ nor NH4+ treatment of roots caused 
transcript accumulation. Maize leaves had about 5% of the transcript level found 
in roots, indicating a strong preference for expression of Zmrprn1 in roots. 
Analysis of maize genomic DNA indicated the presence of only a single gene or 
very small gene family for the Zmrprn1. Together, the data indicate that 
Zmrprn1A encodes a nitrate regulated maize root FNR.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00013753
PMID: 7948922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]