1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 9;269(49):30898-903.

Palmitoylation of a G protein alpha i subunit requires membrane localization not 
myristoylation.

Degtyarev MY(1), Spiegel AM, Jones TL.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Branch, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892.

Palmitoylation is a dynamic, post-translational modification of the amino 
terminus of heterotrimeric G protein alpha subunits. Since myristoylation, beta 
gamma interactions, and membrane attachment also involve the amino terminus of 
the G protein alpha i1 subunit, we studied the relationships between 
palmitoylation and these events. Using COS cell transfection, the turnover of 
palmitate was slower on alpha i1 subunits co-expressed with beta and gamma 
subunits than on the alpha i1 subunit expressed alone. Mutation of cysteine 3 of 
alpha i1 prevented [2H]palmitate but not [3H]myristate incorporation and 
decreased the membrane localization of this protein. This nonpalmitoylated 
mutant could form a heterotrimer with co-expressed beta gamma subunits which 
restored its membrane localization. A nonmyristoylated alpha i1 mutant (glycine 
2 to alanine) could incorporate [3H]palmitate when co-expressed with beta gamma 
subunits and localized to the membrane. The [3H]palmitate turnover of this 
nonmyristoylated mutant was more rapid than seen with the wild-type alpha i1 
subunit. While myristoylation is not required for palmitoylation, both 
myristoylation and beta gamma association can slow the turnover of palmitate on 
alpha i1. These results suggest that palmitoylation maintains the membrane 
attachment of the free alpha subunit and changes in beta gamma association could 
modulate palmitoylation during signaling.

PMID: 7983022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]