1. C R Acad Sci III. 1994 May;317(5):437-44.

Hb Taybe (alpha 38 or 39 THR deleted): an alpha-globin defect, silent in the 
heterozygous state and producing severe hemolytic anemia in the homozygous.

Galacteros F(1), Girodon E, M'Rad A, Martin J, Goossens M, Jaber L, Cohen IJ, 
Tamary H, Goshen Y, Zaizov R, et al.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U. 91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

Several alpha-chain hemoglobin variants have been described as responsible, in 
homozygous or compound heterozygous patients, for a chronic hemolytic disease 
that overlaps thalassemia and Heinz bodies hemolytic anemia phenotypes. These 
variants are present in trace amounts together with some Hb H in the lysate of 
the patients. In the asymptomatic heterozygous carriers, they are usually not 
detected by electrophoretic methods. Hb Taybe is an example of such an unstable 
and thalassemic alpha-hemoglobin variant. This hemoglobin was observed in a 
young Israeli Arab woman having suffered since birth from a severe and highly 
regenerative hemolytic anemia for which she was splenectomized at age sixteen. 
The structural abnormality was characterized by protein chemistry as the 
deletion of a threonine residue at position alpha 38 or 39 and assigned to the 
alpha 1 gene by selective DNA sequencing. This structural modification is 
localized in helix C, which is a highly conserved 3(10) helix participating in 
the alpha 1 beta 2 contact and close to the alpha 1 beta 1 interface. The 
propositus and two siblings, who were also anemic, were found to be homozygous 
for the molecular defect, although the abnormal Hb was not detected in the 
latters. Consanguinity in this family demonstrated the threshold effect in the 
clinical manifestations of such alpha-gene disorders since heterozygotes were 
clinically and biologically normal.

PMID: 7994622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]