1. Biochemistry. 1994 Jun 14;33(23):7041-6. doi: 10.1021/bi00189a004.

Serine 90 is required for enzymic activity by tRNA-guanine transglycosylase from 
Escherichia coli.

Reuter K(1), Chong S, Ullrich F, Kersten H, Garcia GA.

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-1065.

An Escherichia coli mutant described by Noguchi et al. [Noguchi, S., et al. 
(1982) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 6544-6550] contains tRNA lacking the hypermodified 
wobble nucleoside queuosine (Q) due to an inactive tRNA-guanine transglycosylase 
(TGT). TGT catalyzes the posttranscriptional base exchange of the Q precursor 
preQ1 with the genetically encoded guanine in tRNA(Asp,Asn,His,Tyr). The mutant 
tgt gene was cloned and sequenced; it contained a single point mutation 
resulting in the change of serine 90 to phenylalanine. Overexpression of the 
mutant gene yielded TGT(S90F) that showed a reduced solubility and did not 
purify in the same fashion as the wild-type enzyme. TGT(S90F) has no detectable 
enzymic activity. To determine whether serine 90 performs a catalytic role in 
the TGT reaction or whether the loss of activity was caused solely by a 
conformational change of the enzyme, we used site-specific mutagenesis to 
construct serine-to-alanine (S90A) and serine-to-cysteine (S90C) mutants. Both 
S90A and S90C mutants were purified in a manner identical to that used for the 
wild-type enzyme. SDS-PAGE of dimethyl suberimidate-cross-linked mutants showed 
a pattern identical to that of the wild-type TGT, indicative of a trimeric 
quaternary structure. Native PAGE of wild-type and mutant TGTs in the absence 
and presence of substrate tRNA exhibited band shifts indicating that both 
mutants retain the ability to bind tRNA.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00189a004
PMID: 8003468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]