1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1994 Aug;79(2):372-6. doi: 10.1210/jcem.79.2.8045950.

Naturally occurring mutations in human steroid 21-hydroxylase influence adrenal 
autoantibody binding.

Asawa T(1), Wedlock N, Baumann-Antczak A, Smith BR, Furmaniak J.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Immunology Unit, University of Wales College of Medicine, Heath 
Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

Human 21-hydroxylase (21-OH) genes containing various mutations, truncations, 
and deletions were expressed in yeast, and autoantibody binding was studied by 
Western blotting using patient sera and rabbit antibodies to 21-OH. 21-OH 
autoantibodies in 13 Addisonian sera showed a marked reduction in their ability 
to recognize 21-OH mutated at Pro453-->Ser (mean +/- SD, 31 +/- 9% of binding to 
wild type), whereas the effect on rabbit antibody binding was small (88 +/- 11% 
of binding to wild type; n = 7). Mutation at Arg339-->His had a less pronounced 
effect on autoantibody binding (85 +/- 11% of binding to wild type; n = 13) and 
caused a small enhancement of rabbit antibody binding (124 +/- 16% of binding to 
wild type; n = 7). These studies indicate that Pro453 has a key role in forming 
an autoantigenic epitope on 21-OH. It is important to note, however, that the 
Pro453 mutation caused only partial loss of autoantibody binding, i.e. all 
Addisonian sera studied still reacted with the mutated protein. This may 
indicate that each serum sample contains at least two different populations of 
21-OH autoantibodies, only one of which recognizes a site dependent on Pro453. A 
series of more extensive modifications of the 21-OH sequence, including 
truncations (amino acids 460-494, 448-494, and 418-494) and deletions (amino 
acids 165-379, 142-240, and 142-280) indicated that most of the sequence of 
amino acids from 241-494 is important for autoantibody binding. The involvement 
of such an extensive region of the molecule suggests that the binding sites are 
generated by three-dimensional folding, with Pro453 having a critical role in 
forming at least one major autoantigenic epitope.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.79.2.8045950
PMID: 8045950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]