1. Biochemistry. 1994 Aug 30;33(34):10463-9. doi: 10.1021/bi00200a030.

The Na+/H+ exchanger NHE-1 possesses N- and O-linked glycosylation restricted to 
the first N-terminal extracellular domain.

Counillon L(1), Pouysségur J, Reithmeier RA.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Biochimie-CNRS, Université de Nice, France.

The ubiquitously-expressed human Na+H+ exchanger (NHE-1) contains three 
consensus sites (Asn-X-Ser/Thr) for N-linked glycosylation at asparagines 75, 
370, and 410. The first extracellular loop is rich in serine and threonine 
residues which may contain O-linked carbohydrate. In order to determine 
unambiguously the sites of glycosylation and their role in biosynthesis and 
cation transport, site-directed mutagenesis at the individual potential 
N-glycosylation sites (Asn to Asp) was performed and all possible double and 
triple mutants were constructed. The mutated DNAs were expressed in PS120 
hamster fibroblasts lacking endogenous exchanger, and the transfected cells were 
selected by their ability to survive acute intracellular acidification. All 
constructs produced functional exchangers that had transport rates and 
pharmacological profiles that were similar to that of wild-type. Immunoblot 
analysis of the expressed proteins with and without N-glycosidase F treatment 
showed that only the first N-glycosylation site (Asn 75) is utilized. In 
addition, treatment of NHE-1 with neuraminidase and O-glycosidase demonstrated 
that NHE-1 also contains O-linked oligosaccharide. Two forms of NHE-1 was 
consistently observed, a mature form with a molecular mass of 110,000 Da which 
contains N-linked and O-linked oligosaccharide and is expressed at the cell 
surface, and a lower molecular mass form (85,000 Da) present in the endoplasmic 
reticulum which only contains N-linked high-mannose oligosaccharide. NHE-3, an 
apically-expressed epithelial isoform which does not possess the N75 N-linked 
putative glycosylation site and any extracellular loops enriched in serine and 
threonine residues, does not exhibit any detectable glycosylation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00200a030
PMID: 8068684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]