1. Am J Hum Genet. 1994 Sep;55(3):437-46.

Maternally inherited hypertrophic cardiomyopathy due to a novel T-to-C 
transition at nucleotide 9997 in the mitochondrial tRNA(glycine) gene.

Merante F(1), Tein I, Benson L, Robinson BH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We report a unique heteroplasmic T-to-C transition at nucleotide 9997 in the 
mitochondrial tRNA(glycine) gene in a multiplex family who manifested 
nonobstructive cardiomyopathy. The degree of mtDNA heteroplasmy generally 
correlated with the severity of the symptoms. This T-to-C transition disrupts 
hydrogen bonding in the region adjacent to the acceptor stem of the tRNA 
molecule. The thymine residue at position 9997 is highly conserved in mammals, 
as well as in various vertebrates and invertebrates. A PCR diagnostic test for 
the presence of the 9997 T-to-C transition revealed that the base change was 
always present in high proportion in affected family members, not present in 
unaffected family members, and never present in control subjects from various 
ethnic groups (25 groups sampled, 42 individuals), thus ruling out the 
possibility that this change represents a polymorphic variant in the general 
population. The degree of heteroplasmy in lymphoblast cultures also correlated 
with the level of enzyme activity present for cytochrome c oxidase (complex IV) 
and succinate cytochrome c oxidoreductase (complexes II and III). The absence of 
previously reported mtDNA mutations associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
was verified by both PCR diagnostic procedures and sequence analysis. All 
mitochondrial tRNA genes, as well as genes encoding ATPase subunits 6 and 8, 
were sequenced and found not to possess base changes consistent with the 
clinical profile. More detailed biochemical and molecular biological 
investigations are discussed.

PMCID: PMC1918404
PMID: 8079988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]