1. J Virol. 1993 Jul;67(7):3969-77. doi: 10.1128/JVI.67.7.3969-3977.1993.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 DNA synthesis, integration, and efficient 
viral replication in growth-arrested T cells.

Li G(1), Simm M, Potash MJ, Volsky DJ.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Virology Laboratory, St. Luke's/Roosevelt Hospital Center, New 
York, New York.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) replicates efficiently in 
nonproliferating monocytes and macrophages but not in resting primary T 
lymphocytes. To determine the contribution of cell division to the HIV-1 
replicative cycle in T cells, we evaluated HIV-1 expression, integration of 
proviral DNA, and production of infectious progeny virus in C8166 T-lymphoid 
cells blocked in cell division by treatment with either mitomycin, a DNA 
cross-linker, or aphidicolin, a DNA polymerase alpha inhibitor. The arrest of 
cell division was confirmed by assay of [3H]thymidine uptake; the nondividing 
cells remained viable for at least 3 days after treatment. HIV-1 was expressed 
and replicated equally well in nondividing and dividing C8166 cells, as judged 
by the comparison of the levels of p24 core antigens in culture supernatants, 
the proportion of cells expressing HIV-1 specific antigens, the pattern and 
quantity of HIV-1 DNA present in the extrachromosomal and total cellular DNA 
fractions, and the biological activity of progeny viruses. A polymerase chain 
reaction-based viral DNA integration assay indicated that HIV-1 provirus was 
integrated in C8166 cells treated with either of the two inhibitors of cell 
division. Similar results were obtained by using growth-arrested Jurkat 
T-lymphoid cells. We conclude that cell division and cellular DNA synthesis are 
not required for efficient HIV-1 expression in T cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.67.7.3969-3977.1993
PMCID: PMC237764
PMID: 8099628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]