1. Biochemistry. 1993 Aug 10;32(31):7999-8003. doi: 10.1021/bi00082a022.

A model for oxidative modification of glutamine synthetase, based on crystal 
structures of mutant H269N and the oxidized enzyme.

Liaw SH(1), Villafranca JJ, Eisenberg D.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

Proteolytic degradation of glutamine synthetase (GS) in Escherichia coli is 
known to follow "marking" by oxidative modification. At an early stage of the 
degradative pathway, oxidation of His 269 and Arg 344 abolishes GS enzymatic 
activity. We propose a mechanism for the early stage of oxidative inactivation 
of GS on the basis of the crystal structure of H269N and tryptophan fluorescence 
spectra of H269N and H269NR344Q: (1) Oxidation of Arg 344, adjacent to the n2 
metal ion site, decreases ATP binding. (2) Oxidation of His 269 to Asn destroys 
the n2 site, consistent with the function of His 269 as a ligand for the n2 
metal. (3) Loss of Mn2+ at the n2 site destroys the integrity of the ATP binding 
site. (4) Destruction of the ATP site results in the observed low enzymatic 
activity of H269N and H269NR344Q. During later stages of oxidative modification, 
the n1 metal ion site is destroyed and the active site of the enzyme becomes 
flexible as suggested by X-ray data collected from an oxidized crystal of GS. 
Thus, studies of mutant and oxidized enzymes confirm that there are at least two 
stages of oxidative modification of GS. These studies suggest that the early 
modification occurs at the n2 metal ion site, eliminating enzyme activity, and 
the later modification occurs at the n1 metal ion site, relaxing the GS 
structure, perhaps enabling proteolytic degradation. These studies also 
illuminate the differing roles of the two bound metal ions: the tightly bound n1 
ion enhances the stability of the catalytically active conformation, and the 
less tightly bound n2 ion participates in ATP binding.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00082a022
PMID: 8102250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]