1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Feb 15;91(4):1594-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.91.4.1594.

Formation of two hydrogen bonds from the globin to the heme-linked oxygen 
molecule in Ascaris hemoglobin.

De Baere I(1), Perutz MF, Kiger L, Marden MC, Poyart C.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, England.

We have tried to find out why Ascaris hemoglobin has such an exceptionally high 
oxygen affinity (P50 approximately 0.004 mmHg; 1 mmHg = 133 Pa). Following Kloek 
et al., we have synthesized the N-terminal globin domain of Ascaris hemoglobin 
in Escherichia coli [Kloek, A. P., Yang, J., Mathews, F. S. & Goldberg, D. 
(1993) J. Biol. Chem. 268, 17669-17671]. Like Kloek et al., we found its oxygen 
affinity to be as high as that of native Ascaris hemoglobin. We thought that 
this high affinity might be due to the heme-bound oxygen molecule being 
stabilized by two hydrogen bonds from the globin instead of the usual one. 
Ascaris hemoglobin has a distal glutamine instead of the more usual histidine as 
one of the potential hydrogen bond donors. In addition, it contains a tyrosine 
at position 10 of B helix (B10) in place of the leucine generally found there in 
vertebrate myoglobins and hemoglobins. Following the discovery of Carver et al. 
that sperm whale myoglobin with the replacement of leucine B10 by phenylalanine 
has a raised oxygen affinity, we have replaced tyrosine B10 in the N-terminal 
domain of Ascaris hemoglobin by either leucine or phenylalanine [Carver, T. E., 
Brantley, R. E., Jr., Singleton, E. W., Arduini, R. M., Quillin, H. L., 
Phillips, G. N., Jr., & Olson, J. S. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267, 14443-14450]. 
Either of these replacements lowered the oxygen affinity about 100-fold, to the 
same level of that of human alpha-globin chains. These results are consistent 
with a hydrogen bond linking the tyrosine hydroxyl to the heme-linked oxygen, 
with a bond energy of 2.7 kcal/mol.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.4.1594
PMCID: PMC43206
PMID: 8108450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]