1. Clin Chim Acta. 1993 Nov 15;220(2):165-74. doi: 10.1016/0009-8981(93)90045-6.

Improved PCR/NcoI method for the molecular diagnosis of medium chain acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency using dried blood samples: two-stage amplification 
using two different sets of primers improves accuracy and sensitivity.

Nagao M(1), Raymond D, Kim J, Tanaka K.

Author information:
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Genetics, New Haven, CT 
06510.

A 985A-->G transition is the single prevalent mutation representing 89% of all 
variant medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) alleles that causes MCAD 
deficiency. We and others previously devised a molecular method for the 
detection of the 985G allele that involves PCR coupled with NcoI digestion. The 
method has been widely used. However, when used for the analysis of dried blood 
samples, it sometimes produced ambiguous results with weak target bands in the 
presence of numerous artifact bands. An improved version of the method has been 
developed here, involving two stages of amplification using two different sets 
of primers. In the first stage, the entire exon-11 was amplified. A small 
aliquot (5 microliters) of the first PCR products were directly used as a 
template for the second PCR amplification. The second PCR is similar to the 
original method, but utilizes a pair of primers encompassing a smaller section 
within exon-11. The upstream primer incorporates a substitution at 981, so that 
a NcoI site involving 985G is introduced in the copies of the variant allele, as 
in the original PCR/NcoI method. The improved 2-stage method produces an intense 
target band with a very high sensitivity, yet devoid of artifacts, providing 
clean, unequivocal results.

DOI: 10.1016/0009-8981(93)90045-6
PMID: 8111961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]