1. Nature. 1994 May 5;369(6475):64-7. doi: 10.1038/369064a0.

Mutation in blood coagulation factor V associated with resistance to activated 
protein C.

Bertina RM(1), Koeleman BP, Koster T, Rosendaal FR, Dirven RJ, de Ronde H, van 
der Velden PA, Reitsma PH.

Author information:
(1)Hemostasis and Thrombosis Research Center, University Hospital, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nature. 1994 May 5;369(6475):14-5. doi: 10.1038/369014a0.

Activated protein C (APC) is a serine protease with potent anticoagulant 
properties, which is formed in blood on the endothelium from an inactive 
precursor. During normal haemostasis, APC limits clot formation by proteolytic 
inactivation of factors Va and VIIIa (ref. 2). To do this efficiently the enzyme 
needs a nonenzymatic cofactor, protein S (ref. 3). Recently it was found that 
the anticoagulant response to APC (APC resistance) was very weak in the plasma 
of 21% of unselected consecutive patients with thrombosis and about 50% of 
selected patients with a personal or family history of thrombosis; moreover, 5% 
of healthy individuals show APC resistance, which is associated with a sevenfold 
increase in the risk for deep vein thrombosis. Here we demonstrate that the 
phenotype of APC resistance is associated with heterozygosity or homozygosity 
for a single point mutation in the factor V gene (at nucleotide position 1,691, 
G-->A substitution) which predicts the synthesis of a factor V molecule (FV 
Q506, or FV Leiden) that is not properly inactivated by APC. The allelic 
frequency of the mutation in the Dutch population is approximately 2% and is at 
least tenfold higher than that of all other known genetic risk factors for 
thrombosis (protein C (ref. 8), protein S (ref. 9), antithrombin10 deficiency) 
together.

DOI: 10.1038/369064a0
PMID: 8164741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]