1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Apr 26;91(9):3593-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.91.9.3593.

A recombinant bisphosphoglycerate mutase variant with acid phosphatase homology 
degrades 2,3-diphosphoglycerate.

Garel MC(1), Arous N, Calvin MC, Craescu CT, Rosa J, Rosa R.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U.91, Hôpital 
Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

To date no definite and undisputed treatment has been found for sickle cell 
anemia, which is characterized by polymerization of a deoxygenated hemoglobin 
mutant (HbS) giving rise to deformed erythrocytes and vasoocclusive 
complications. Since the erythrocyte glycerate 2,3-bisphosphate (2,3-DPG) has 
been shown to facilitate this polymerization, one therapeutic approach would be 
to decrease the intraerythrocytic level of 2,3-DPG by increasing the phosphatase 
activity of the bisphosphoglycerate mutase (BPGM; 3-phospho-D-glycerate 
1,2-phosphomutase, EC 5.4.2.4). For this purpose, we have investigated the role 
of Gly-13, which is located in the active site sequence 
Arg9-His10-Gly11-Glu12-Gly13 in human BPGM. This sequence is similar to the 
Arg-His-Gly-Xaa-Arg* sequence of the distantly related acid phosphatases, which 
catalyze as BPGM similar phosphoryl transfers but to a greater extent. We 
hypothesized that the conserved Arg* residue in acid phosphatase sequences 
facilitates the phosphoryl transfer. Consequently, in human BPGM, we replaced by 
site-directed mutagenesis the corresponding amino acid residue Gly13 with an Arg 
or a Lys. In another experiment, we replaced Gly13 with Ser, the amino acid 
present at the corresponding position of the homologous yeast phosphoglycerate 
mutase (D-phosphoglycerate 2,3-phosphomutase, EC 5.4.2.1). Mutation of Gly13 to 
Ser did not modify the synthase activity, whereas the mutase and the phosphatase 
were 2-fold increased or decreased, respectively. However, replacing Gly13 with 
Arg enhanced phosphatase activity 28.6-fold, whereas synthase and mutase 
activities were 10-fold decreased. The presence of a Lys in position 13 gave 
rise to a smaller increase in phosphatase activity (6.5-fold) but an identical 
decrease in synthase and mutase activities. Taken together these results support 
the hypothesis that a positively charged amino acid residue in position 13, 
especially Arg, greatly activates the phosphoryl transfer to water. These 
results also provide elements for locating the conserved Arg* residue in the 
active site of acid phosphatases and facilitating the phosphoryl transfer. The 
implications for genetic therapy of sickle cell disease are discussed.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.9.3593
PMCID: PMC43626
PMID: 8170953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]