1. J Mol Biol. 1994 May 13;238(4):496-500. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1994.1309.

Solvent rearrangement in an antigen-antibody interface introduced by 
site-directed mutagenesis of the antibody combining site.

Ysern X(1), Fields BA, Bhat TN, Goldbaum FA, Dall'Acqua W, Schwarz FP, Poljak 
RJ, Mariuzza RA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, F.D.A., Rockville, MD 20857.

The three-dimensional structure of a site-directed mutant of the bacterially 
expressed Fv fragment from monoclonal antibody D1.3, complexed to the specific 
antigen lysozyme has been determined to a nominal resolution of 1.8 A using 
X-ray diffraction data. The replacement of VL Trp92 by Asp allows two water 
molecules to occupy space taken by Trp92 in the wild-type complex, in agreement 
with a previous observation that water molecules play an important role in 
stabilizing this antigen-antibody complex. The equilibrium constant for the 
binding of the mutant Fv to the antigen decreases by three orders of magnitude 
(from 2.3 x 10(8) M-1 to 2.6 x 10(5) M-1). Titration calorimetry shows that this 
results from a smaller negative binding enthalpy (delta delta H = -16 kJ mol-1 
at 24 degrees C), whereas the value of the binding entropy is not affected. 
Since in the complex between the mutated Fv and antigen the buried area has 
decreased relative to that of the wild-type Fv by about 150 A2, the contribution 
of the buried unit area to the decrease in free energy (delta Gzero) is 
approximately 117 J mol-1 (28 cal mol-1) per A2. The loss of interatomic 
contacts in replacing Trp by Asp permits an approximate calculation for the 
contribution of van der Waals interactions made by Trp92 in this complex, which 
gives an average of 2.1 kJ mol-1 (0.5 kcal mol-1) for contacts between carbon 
atoms.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1994.1309
PMID: 8176740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]