1. J Biol Chem. 1994 May 13;269(19):13843-53.

Structural factors governing azide and cyanide binding to mammalian 
metmyoglobins.

Brancaccio A(1), Cutruzzol√° F, Allocatelli CT, Brunori M, Smerdon SJ, Wilkinson 
AJ, Dou Y, Keenan D, Ikeda-Saito M, Brantley RE Jr, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Sciences A. Rossi Fanelli, University of Rome, La 
Sapienza, Italy.

The structural factors governing azide and cyanide binding have been examined by 
measuring the effects of 46 mutations at key topological positions in the distal 
pocket in sperm whale, pig, and human myoglobin. Replacement of His64 (E7) with 
smaller amino acids results in dramatic increases in the association rate 
constant for azide binding primarily due to relief of steric hindrance imposed 
by the imidazole side chain. Gln64 and His64 (native) metmyoglobins have 
abnormally low rate constants for azide dissociation (0.1-0.3 s-1) due to direct 
hydrogen bonding between the N epsilon atoms of these residues and the bound 
ligand. Mutations at positions 67(E10) and 68(E11) produce large but complex 
changes in the azide binding parameters as a result of both steric and 
electrostatic effects, which alter water coordination, influence the rate of 
anion movement into the distal pocket, and affect the stability of the Fe-N3 
bond. Replacement of Phe46 with Leu or Val and substitution of Arg(Lys)45 with 
Glu and Ser cause disorder in the position of the distal histidine side chain 
and result in 4-700-fold increases in both k'N3 and kN3 but produce little 
change in overall azide affinity. All of these results suggest strongly that 
azide enters the distal pocket of native myoglobin through a polar channel that 
is regulated by a His64 "gate." In contrast to azide binding, the rate constant 
for cyanide association decreases 4-300-fold when the distal histidine is 
replaced with apolar residues. His64, Gln64, and distal pocket water molecules 
appear to facilitate deprotonation of HCN, which is the major kinetic barrier to 
cyanide binding at neutral pH.

PMID: 8188662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]