1. Glycoconj J. 1994 Feb;11(1):43-50. doi: 10.1007/BF00732431.

Biochemical characterization of the O-glycans on recombinant glycophorin A 
expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells.

PÃ¥hlsson P(1), Blackall DP, Ugorski M, Czerwinski M, Spitalnik SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia 19104.

Alterations in N- and O-linked glycosylation affect cell surface expression and 
antigenicity of recombinant glycophorin A expressed in transfected Chinese 
hamster ovary (CHO) cells. To understand these effects further, glycophorin A 
was purified by immunoaffinity chromatography from transfected wild type and 
glycosylation deficient CHO cells. The O-glycans were characterized both 
biochemically, using gel filtration and high performance anion exchange 
chromatography, and immunologically, using carbohydrate specific monoclonal 
antibodies to probe Western blots. The O-glycans of human erythrocyte 
glycophorin A consist mainly of short oligosaccharides with one, two, or three 
sialic acid residues linked to a common disaccharide core, Gal beta 1-3GalNAc 
alpha 1-Ser/Thr, with the disialylated structure being the most abundant. With 
the exception of the trisialylated derivative, the same structures were found on 
recombinant glycophorin A expressed by wild type CHO cells. However, in contrast 
to human erythrocyte glycophorin A, the monosialylated oligosaccharide was the 
most abundant structure on the recombinant protein. Furthermore, recombinant 
glycophorin A was shown to express a small amount of the Tn antigen (GalNAc 
alpha 1-Ser/Thr). Recombinant glycophorin A had the same O-glycan composition, 
whether purified from clones expressing high or moderate levels of the 
recombinant glycoprotein. This indicates that the level of expression of the 
transfected glycoprotein did not affect its O-glycan composition. Deletion of 
the N-linked glycosylation site at Asn26, by introducing the Mi.I mutation 
(Thr28-->Met) by site-directed mutagenesis, did not markedly affect the O-glycan 
composition of the resulting recombinant glycoprotein expressed in wild type CHO 
cells.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1007/BF00732431
PMID: 8193553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]