1. Am J Hum Genet. 1993 Nov;53(5):987-1000.

Genetic heterogeneity among blue-cone monochromats.

Nathans J(1), Maumenee IH, Zrenner E, Sadowski B, Sharpe LT, Lewis RA, Hansen E, 
Rosenberg T, Schwartz M, Heckenlively JR, et al.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, Baltimore, 
MD.

Thirty-three unrelated subjects with blue-cone monochromacy or closely related 
variants of blue-cone monochromacy were examined for rearrangements in the 
tandem array of genes encoding the red- and green-cone pigments. In 24 subjects, 
eight genotypes were found that would be predicted to eliminate the function of 
all of the genes within the array. As observed in an earlier study, the 
rearrangements involve either deletion of a locus control region adjacent to the 
gene array or loss of function via homologous recombination and point mutation. 
One inactivating mutation, Cys203-to-Arg, was found in 15 probands who carry 
single genes and in both visual pigment genes in one subject whose array has two 
genes. This mutation was also found in at least one of the visual pigment genes 
in 1 subject whose array has multiple genes and in 2 of 321 control subjects, 
suggesting that preexisting Cys203-to-Arg mutations constitute a reservoir of 
chromosomes that are predisposed to generate blue-cone-monochromat genotypes by 
unequal homologous recombination and/or gene conversion. Two other point 
mutations were identified: (a) Arg247-to-Ter in one subject with a single 
red-pigment gene and (b) Pro307-to-Leu in one subject with a single 5' red-3' 
green hybrid gene. The observed heterogeneity of genotypes points to the 
existence of multiple one- and two-step mutational pathways to blue-cone 
monochromacy.

PMCID: PMC1682301
PMID: 8213841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]