1. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1993 Sep;42(3):240-8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399-3011.1993.tb00138.x.

Inhibition of binding of phospholipase C gamma 1 SH2 domains to phosphorylated 
epidermal growth factor receptor by phosphorylated peptides.

McNamara DJ(1), Dobrusin EM, Zhu G, Decker SJ, Saltiel AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Warner-Lambert Company, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan.

Erratum in
    Int J Pept Protein Res 1994 May;43(5):512.

A series of tyrosine-containing peptides 1-12: [formula: see text] (six pairs 
with and without the tyrosine phosphorylated) has been synthesized. The peptides 
were derived from tyrosine autophosphorylation sites in the epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR): Tyr 992, 1068, 1148 and 1173. Peptide 1, derived from 
the Tyr 992 site, inhibited binding of a 35S-labelled fusion protein containing 
both of the SH2 domains from PLC gamma 1 to the phosphorylated EGFR with an IC50 
of 8 microM. All of the phosphorylated peptides except 11 (1, 3, 5, 7 and 9) 
inhibited this binding to some degree (20-55%) at 10 microM. The 
nonphosphorylated peptides were inactive in this assay. The nonphosphorylated 
peptides 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 were obtained by standard solid-phase synthetic 
methodologies using both Boc/benzyl and Fmoc/tert-butyl strategies. The 
phosphorylated peptides 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 were similarly obtained using a 
Fmoc/tert-butyl strategy incorporating unprotected N alpha-Fmoc-Tyr, followed by 
phosphitylation and oxidation of the tyrosine in the resin-bound peptide. In 
addition, Asp-Ala-Asp-Glu-Phe992(4-CH2PO3H2)-Leu-Ile-Pro-Gln-Gln-Gly-O H (15), 
an analog of 1 incorporating an enzymatically stable phosphotyrosine mimic, 
4-phosphonomethyl-L-phenylalanine, was synthesized and found to be inactive.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3011.1993.tb00138.x
PMID: 8225779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]