1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Nov 15;268(32):23837-42.

Role of the conserved Lys-X-Gly-Gly sequence at the ADP-glucose-binding site in 
Escherichia coli glycogen synthase.

Furukawa K(1), Tagaya M, Tanizawa K, Fukui T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University, Japan.

Although bacterial and mammalian glycogen synthases differ in the primary 
structure and specificity for glucosyl donor, lysyl residues identified at their 
substrate-binding sites by affinity labeling are present in a conserved 
tetrapeptide sequence, Lys-X-Gly-Gly, where X is a residue not conserved 
(Tagaya, M., Nakano, K., and Fukui, T. (1985) J. Biol. Chem. 260, 6670-6676; 
Furukawa, K., Tagaya, M., Inouye, M., Preiss, J., and Fukui, T. (1990) J. Biol. 
Chem. 265, 2086-2090). To elucidate the functional role of this conserved 
sequence, Lys-15, Gly-17, and Gly-18 in Escherichia coli glycogen synthase have 
been replaced by other amino acid residues via site-directed mutagenesis. 
Kinetic analyses of the Lys-15 mutant enzymes showed that the epsilon-amino 
group of Lys-15 is mainly involved in binding of the phosphate moiety adjacent 
to the glycosidic linkage in the substrate ADP-glucose, presumably through an 
ionic interaction. The mutant enzyme in which Ala was substituted for Gly-17 had 
a catalytic rate constant 3 orders of magnitude smaller than that of the 
wild-type enzyme with a slightly increased Michaelis constant for ADP-glucose, 
whereas the Gly-18-->Ala mutant showed a rate constant only 3.2-fold smaller. In 
addition, mutations of Gly-17 and Gly-18 resulted in marked changes in the 
reactivity of Lys-15 with affinity labeling reagents. These results suggest that 
the 2 glycyl residues in the conserved Lys-X-Gly-Gly sequence, in particular the 
one closer to the ADP-glucose-binding lysyl residue, participate in catalysis by 
assisting conformational change(s) of the active site or stabilizing the 
transition state.

PMID: 8226921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]