1. Hum Mol Genet. 1993 Sep;2(9):1437-41. doi: 10.1093/hmg/2.9.1437.

Substitution of Leu for Pro-193 in the insulin receptor in a patient with a 
genetic form of severe insulin resistance.

Carrera P(1), Cordera R, Ferrari M, Cremonesi L, Taramelli R, Andraghetti G, 
Carducci C, Dozio N, Pozza G, Taylor SI, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, I.R.C.C.S. H.S. Raffaele, Milan, Italy.

Mutations have been identified in the insulin receptor (IR) gene in patients who 
are insensitive to insulin action. We studied an extremely insulin resistant 
patient whose insulin binding to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transformed 
lymphocytes was severely reduced. Transmembrane signalling, evaluated as insulin 
receptor autophosphorylation, was normal. The patient's IR was 
immunoprecipitated normally by AbP6, a polyclonal antibody directed to the beta 
subunit. However, there was an approximately 50% decrease in the affinity of IR 
immunoprecipitation by a monoclonal antibody (MA-10) directed against the alpha 
subunit. These observations suggested that there were likely to be a mutation in 
the patient's insulin receptor that caused misfolding of the IR alpha subunit. 
Analysis of gene structure by Southern blotting experiments did not reveal any 
major deletion in the IR gene of the proband. Northern blot analysis showed a 
normal level of expression of IR gene. We applied denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis (DGGE) as well as direct sequence analysis to study the 22 exons 
of IR gene amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the proband's 
genomic DNA as a template. We identified a new missense mutation substituting 
leucine (CTG) for proline (CCG) in homozygous state at codon 193 in exon 3. Both 
parents are heterozygous for the Leu193 mutation. The Leu193 mutation was not 
detected in any of 75 normal subjects (150 chromosomes), indicating that it is 
not a common sequence variant of the insulin receptor. In addition, during the 
course of screening the patient's DNA with perpendicular DGGE, we identified two 
previously unreported silent substitutions in exon 9.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/2.9.1437
PMID: 8242067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]