1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jan 7;269(1):33-6.

Expression of constitutively active Gs alpha-subunits in GH3 pituitary cells 
stimulates prolactin promoter activity.

Tian J(1), Chen J, Bancroft C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, City 
University of New York, New York 10029.

Although G protein alpha subunits are known to regulate such cellular functions 
as growth and enzymatic activity, the ability of these proteins to regulate 
target gene expression has not yet been directly investigated. Transient 
expression in GH3 pituitary cells of a target rat prolactin 
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase construct, (-1957)PRL-CAT, was 
increased by coexpressed constitutively active alpha s mutant Q227L-alpha s but 
not by wild-type alpha s. Thus activated alpha s but not basal state alpha s can 
stimulate prolactin promoter activity. Q227L-alpha s also stimulated expression 
of construct (-187)PRL-CAT, showing that only the proximal prolactin promoter 
region is required for a response to activated alpha s. The promoter specificity 
of the transcriptional influence of activated alpha s was demonstrated by the 
inability of either Q227L-alpha s or wild-type alpha s to stimulate expression 
of control target constructs containing either the rat growth hormone promoter 
or the thymidine kinase promoter. Previous studies have shown that the most 
proximal prolactin promoter binding site for the pituitary-specific 
transcription factor pit-1, site 1P, can act as an independent response element 
for either thyrotropin-releasing hormone or Ca2+. Two copies of site 1P 
conferred upon a heterologous metallothionein promoter a response to Q227L-alpha 
s. This implies that site 1P can also serve as an independent response element 
for alpha s and suggests that pit-1 may be a mediator of the cellular regulation 
by alpha s of the prolactin promoter.

PMID: 8276815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]