1. Biochemistry. 1994 Jan 11;33(1):65-73. doi: 10.1021/bi00167a009.

Site-directed mutagenesis, fluorescence, and two-dimensional NMR studies on 
microenvironments of effector region aromatic residues of human c-Ha-Ras 
protein.

Yamasaki K(1), Shirouzu M, Muto Y, Fujita-Yoshigaki J, Koide H, Ito Y, Kawai G, 
Hattori S, Yokoyama S, Nishimura S, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, 
University of Tokyo, Japan.

The Tyr residues in positions 32 and 40 of human c-Ha-Ras protein were replaced 
by site-directed mutagenesis (Y32F, Y32W, Y40K, and Y40W) to examine their roles 
in the signal-transducing activity and the sensitivity to the GTPase activating 
protein (GAP). The signal-transducing activity of the oncogenic Ras protein in 
PC12 cells was lost upon mutations Y32F and Y40K, but retained upon mutations 
Y32W and Y40W. These results suggest that residues 32 and 40 are both required 
to have aromatic groups and residue 32 is further required to have a hydrogen 
donor. On the other hand, three mutations (Y32F, Y32W, and Y40W) caused no 
appreciable reduction in either GAP-binding affinity or GAP sensitivity. By the 
Y40K mutation, GAP-binding affinity was slightly lowered, while GAP sensitivity 
was drastically impaired. Therefore, for residues 32 and 40 of Ras, interactions 
with GAP appear to be different from those with the target of signal 
transduction in the PC12 cell. As for the Y32W-Ras protein bound with an 
unhydrolyzable GTP analogue (GMPPNP), the Trp32 fluorescence is appreciably 
red-shifted, weaker, and more susceptible to KI quenching as compared to that of 
the GDP-bound form. Two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy with selectively deuterated 
Ras proteins revealed fewer and weaker nuclear Overhauser effects on the 
aromatic protons of Trp32 in the GMPPNP-bound form than in the GDP-bound form. 
This indicates that the side chain of Trp32 is more exposed to the solvent in 
the GMPPNP-bound form than in the GDP-bound form.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00167a009
PMID: 8286364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]