1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1994 Jan;308(1):311-7. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1994.1044.

The highly efficient production of full-length and mutant rat brain 
calcium-binding proteins (calbindins-D28K) in a bacterial expression system.

Kumar R(1), Hunziker W, Gross M, Naylor S, Londowski JM, Schaefer J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic/Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota 55905.

We expressed gram amounts of full-length and mutant rat brain calcium-binding 
proteins (calbindins-D28K) lacking one or two "EF-hand" motifs in a bacterial 
expression system. The cDNA for the full-length rat calcium-binding protein was 
cloned into the NdeI and BamHI sites of the pET3a vector. Additionally, 
constructs of the rat brain calcium-binding protein lacking EF-hand 2 (delta 2 
mutant), EF-hand 6 (delta 6 mutant), and EF-hands 2 and 6 (delta 2, 6 mutant) 
were constructed using the same vector. These chimeric plasmids were used to 
transfect BL21 (DE3) pLysS Escherichia coli cells. Following transformation, the 
cells were grown in the presence of isopropylthiogalactoside in order to induce 
bacterial T7 polymerase, which resulted in the production of large amounts of 
the proteins of interest in the bacterial cytosol. Expressed full-length and 
delta 2 and delta 2,6 mutant proteins represented 50% or more of total bacterial 
protein. The delta 6 protein was not expressed. Cell lysis followed by 
purification of the proteins on DEAE-cellulose routinely resulted in gram yields 
of the proteins. The purified proteins displayed the appropriate amino acid 
composition and amino-terminal amino acid sequence. When analyzed by 
matrix-assisted laser desorption mass spectrometry the proteins were found to 
have the appropriate molecular weights (within the accuracy limits of the 
instrument). The expressed proteins bound to a polyclonal antiserum raised 
against chick intestinal calcium-binding protein. In addition, the full-length, 
delta 2, and delta 2,6 mutants bound calcium as assessed by a 45Ca blotting 
procedure. The production of large amounts of readily purified vitamin 
D-dependent calcium-binding proteins should be useful in biophysical studies of 
the proteins.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1994.1044
PMID: 8311469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]