1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Jul 5;268(19):14329-41.

Recombinant human butyrylcholinesterase G390V, the fluoride-2 variant, expressed 
in Chinese hamster ovary cells, is a low affinity variant.

Masson P(1), Adkins S, Gouet P, Lockridge O.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherches du Service de Santé des Armées, Unité de Biochimie, La 
Tronche, France.

Kinetics of recombinant fluoride-2 variant of human butyrylcholinesterase 
(Gly390 Val) secreted by Chinese hamster ovary cells were compared to 
recombinant usual and to usual butyrylcholinesterase purified from human plasma. 
The usual and fluoride-2 variant were indistinguishable with regard to 
hydrolysis of benzoylcholine (Km = 5 microM), neutral esters, and at high 
concentrations of acetylthiocholine, propionylthiocholine, and 
butyrylthiocholine. However, at low substrate concentrations Km values for 
acetylthiocholine and succinyldithiocholine were 2-6-fold higher for the 
fluoride-2 variant. pH rate profiles revealed small differences in pKa that 
could be attributed to changes in the active site histidine environment. On the 
other hand, Arrhenius plot analysis of o-nitrophenylbutyrate hydrolysis at pH 
7.5 showed no difference in activation energy between fluoride-2 and usual 
butyrylcholinesterases. Both exhibited an anomalous temperature dependence with 
a wavelike change in activation energy around 18 degrees C. Affinity of the 
fluoride-2 variant for sodium fluoride, tacrine, dibucaine, amodiaquin, and 
succinyldicholine was lower than for usual enzyme. Apparent Ki for 
succinyldicholine was 125 microM for the fluoride-2 variant and 20 microM for 
the usual enzyme. Organophosphate inhibition showed equivalent reactivity, 
indicating that the point mutation altered only the binding properties of the 
variant. Thus, Km and Ki changes explain the succinyldicholine sensitivity of 
people carrying the fluoride-2 variant.

PMID: 8314794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]