1. Mol Pharmacol. 1993 Jul;44(1):180-90.

Barium blockade of a clonal potassium channel and its regulation by a critical 
pore residue.

Taglialatela M(1), Drewe JA, Brown AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

Barium ion (Ba2+) has the same crystal radius as potassium ion but blocks rather 
than permeates the ion-conducting pore of K+ channels. Ba2+ ion may therefore be 
used as a probe of residues lining the pore of K+ channels, and we applied it to 
test the position and function of a residue crucial for K+/Rb+ selectivity and 
blockade by internal tetraethylammonium. We examined blockade by internal and 
external Ba2+ of the delayed rectifier K+ channel DRK1 (Kv2.1) and tested the 
effects of point mutations at pore residue 374. Internal Ba2+ blocked the 
wild-type open channel with high affinity (Kd = 13 microM). Blockade involved 
more than one site, was voltage dependent, and increased at more positive 
potentials. Mutation of V374 to threonine or serine produced a significant 
decrease in the rate of dissociation of internal Ba2+ from the pore, whereas 
mutation of V374 to isoleucine produced no change. For wild-type channels, 
external Ba2+ decreased the rate of activation of the K+ current, suggesting 
that Ba2+ can interact with closed DRK1 channels. This result was unaffected by 
the V374T substitution. Furthermore, external Ba2+ also caused a very low 
affinity (Kd approximately 30 mM) and voltage-independent block of the open DRK1 
channel. Thus, Ba2+ blocked the pore at internal and external sites, which were 
clearly distinguishable. The effects of substitution at position 374 with 
residues having polar hydroxyls are consistent with position 374 being at a 
surface position critical for ion permeation, near the inner mouth of the pore.

PMID: 8341271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]