1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1993 Sep 8;1182(2):142-6. doi: 
10.1016/0925-4439(93)90134-m.

Molecular basis of an adult form of Sandhoff disease: substitution of glutamine 
for arginine at position 505 of the beta-chain of beta-hexosaminidase results in 
a labile enzyme.

Bolhuis PA(1), Ponne NJ, Bikker H, Baas F, Vianney de Jong JM.

Author information:
(1)Academic Medical Center, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Sandhoff disease is a lysosomal storage disorder characterized by accumulation 
of GM2 ganglioside due to mutations in the beta-chain of beta-hexosaminidase. 
Hexosaminidase activity is negligible in infantile Sandhoff disease whereas 
residual activity is present in juvenile and adult forms. Here we report the 
molecular basis of the first described adult form of Sandhoff disease. Southern 
analysis of chromosomal DNA indicated the absence of chromosomal deletions in 
the gene encoding the beta-chain. Northern analysis of RNA from cultured 
fibroblasts demonstrated that at least one of the beta-chain alleles was 
transcribed into normal-length mRNA. Sequence analysis of the entire cDNA 
prepared from poly-adenylated RNA showed that only one point mutation was 
present, consisting of a G-->A transition at nucleotide position 1514. This 
mutation changes the electric charge at amino acid position 505 by substitution 
of glutamine for arginine in a highly conserved part of the beta-chain, present 
even in the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. The nucleotide transition 
generated a new restriction site for DdeI, which was present in only one of the 
alleles of the patient. Reverse transcription of mRNA followed by restriction 
with DdeI resulted in complete digestion at the mutation site, demonstrating 
that the second allele was of an mRNA-negative type. Transfection of COS cells 
with a cDNA construct containing the mutation but otherwise the normal sequence 
resulted in the expression of a labile form of beta-hexosaminidase. These 
results show that the patient's is a genetic compound, and that the lability of 
beta-hexosaminidase found in this form of Sandhoff disease is based on a single 
nucleotide transition.

DOI: 10.1016/0925-4439(93)90134-m
PMID: 8357844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]