1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Sep 15;268(26):19267-73.

Probing the role of the carboxyl-terminal region of ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase 
by site-directed mutagenesis and deletion analysis.

Orellano EG(1), Calcaterra NB, Carrillo N, Ceccarelli EA.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y 
Farmacéuticas, Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Argentina.

The carboxyl-terminal region of plant ferredoxin-NADP+ reductases is formed by 
an invariant alpha-helix/loop/beta-strand, culminating in a conserved tyrosine 
that displays extensive interaction with the prosthetic group FAD. We have 
investigated the potential role of the terminal region in reductase function, by 
introducing mutations and deletions on pea ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase 
overexpressed in Escherichia coli. Replacement of the terminal tyrosine by 
tryptophan, phenylalanine, serine, and glycine resulted in a 2.2-, 2.0-, 22-, 
and 302-fold reduction, respectively, in kcat for the diaphorase reaction, 
whereas elimination of the tyrosine caused a 846-fold decrease in kcat. Km 
values were largely unaffected by the substitutions. Similar results were 
obtained when the mutants were assayed for cytochrome c reduction, indicating 
that aromaticity is the most important factor to the function of the tyrosine in 
catalysis. The presence of the phenol ring at the carboxyl-terminal position of 
wild-type reductase is important, but not an absolute requirement for enzyme 
function or FAD assembly. Deletion of the alpha-helix/beta-strand region 
prevented reductase proper folding in the bacterial host, while shortening of 
the terminal region by splicing 3 amino acids at the beginning of the 
alpha-helix produced a moderately soluble reductase, devoid of FAD and enzymatic 
activity.

PMID: 8366077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]