1. EMBO J. 1993 Jan;12(1):349-56. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb05663.x.

Altered phosphorylation and desensitization patterns of a human beta 
2-adrenergic receptor lacking the palmitoylated Cys341.

Moffett S(1), Mouillac B, Bonin H, Bouvier M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Exposure of beta 2-adrenergic receptors to agonists causes a rapid 
desensitization of the receptor-stimulated adenylyl cyclase, associated with an 
increased phosphorylation of the receptor. Agonist-promoted phosphorylation of 
the beta 2-adrenergic receptor (beta 2AR) by protein kinase A and the 
beta-adrenergic receptor kinase (beta ARK) is believed to promote a functional 
uncoupling of the receptor from the guanyl nucleotide regulatory protein Gs. 
More recently, palmitoylation of Cys341 of the receptor has also been proposed 
to play an important role in the coupling of the beta 2-adrenergic receptor to 
Gs. Here we report that substitution of the palmitoylated cysteine by a glycine 
(Gly341 beta 2 AR) using site directed mutagenesis leads to a receptor being 
highly phosphorylated and largely uncoupled from Gs. In Chinese hamster 
fibroblasts (CHW), stably transfected with the human receptor cDNAs, the basal 
phosphorylation level of Gly341 beta 2AR was found to be approximately 4 times 
that of the wild type receptor. This elevated phosphorylation level was 
accompanied by a depressed ability of the receptor to stimulate the adenylyl 
cyclase and to form a guanyl nucleotide-sensitive high affinity state for 
agonists. Moreover, exposure of this unpalmitoylated receptor to an agonist did 
not promote any further phosphorylation or uncoupling. A modest desensitization 
of the receptor-stimulated adenylyl cyclase response was observed but resulted 
from the agonist-induced sequestration of the unpalmitoylated receptor and could 
be blocked by concanavalin A. This contrasts with the agonist-promoted 
phosphorylation and uncoupling of the wild type receptor.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb05663.x
PMCID: PMC413212
PMID: 8381352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]