1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1993 Mar;8(3):334-9. doi: 10.1165/ajrcmb/8.3.334.

Mutations in the gene encoding for the beta 2-adrenergic receptor in normal and 
asthmatic subjects.

Reihsaus E(1), Innis M, MacIntyre N, Liggett SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Pulmonary), University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Ohio.

It has long been hypothesized that a defective beta 2-adrenergic receptor (beta 
2AR) may be a pathogenic factor in bronchial asthma. We examined the gene 
encoding the beta 2AR to assess the frequency of polymorphisms in 51 patients 
with moderate to severe asthma and 56 normal subjects. Nine different point 
mutations were found in both heterozygous and homozygous forms at nucleic acid 
residues 46, 79, 100, 252, 491, 523, 1053, 1098, and 1239. No mutations 
resulting in large deletions or frame shifts were detected. Of these nine 
polymorphisms, four were found to cause changes in the encoded amino acids at 
residues 16, 27, 34, and 164. The most frequent polymorphisms were arginine 16 
to glycine (Arg16-->Gly) and glutamine 27 to glutamic acid (Gln27-->Glu). The 
other two polymorphisms, valine 34 to methionine, and threonine 164 to 
isoleucine, occurred in only four subjects. The incidence of beta 2AR homozygous 
polymorphisms was no greater in asthmatic patients as compared with controls 
(Arg16-->Gly: 53% versus 59%, Gln27-->Glu: 24% versus 29%, respectively; P = 
NS). Some subjects were found to have both of these polymorphisms 
simultaneously, but there was no difference in incidence between the two groups, 
with 23% of asthmatics and 28% of normal subjects being homozygous for both 
polymorphisms. The apparently normal subjects with both polymorphisms did not 
have subclinical hyperreactive airways disease as determined by methacholine 
challenge testing. In the asthma group, one mutation (Arg16-->Gly) identified a 
subset of patients with a distinct clinical profile.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1165/ajrcmb/8.3.334
PMID: 8383511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]