1. J Virol. 1993 Aug;67(8):4588-97. doi: 10.1128/JVI.67.8.4588-4597.1993.

Mutational analysis of the cysteine residues in the hepatitis B virus small 
envelope protein.

Mangold CM(1), Streeck RE.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität 
Mainz, Germany.

The small envelope protein of hepatitis B virus is the major component of the 
viral coat and is also secreted from cells as a 20-nm subviral particle, even in 
the absence of other viral proteins. Such empty envelope particles are composed 
of approximately 100 copies of this polypeptide and host-derived lipids and are 
stabilized by extensive intermolecular disulfide cross-linking. To study the 
contribution of disulfide bonds to assembly and secretion of the viral envelope, 
single and multiple mutants involving all 14 cysteines in HepG2 and COS-7 cells 
were analyzed. Of the six cysteines located outside the region carrying the 
surface antigen, Cys-48, Cys-65, and Cys-69 were each found to be essential for 
secretion of 20-nm particles, whereas Cys-76, Cys-90, and Cys-221 were 
dispensable. By introduction of an additional cysteine substituting serine 58, 
the yield of secreted particles was increased. Of four mutants involving the 
eight cysteines located in the antigenic region, only the double mutant lacking 
Cys-121 and Cys-124 was secreted with wild-type efficiency. Secretion-competent 
envelope proteins were intracellularly retained by secretion-deficient cysteine 
mutants. According to alkylation studies, both intracellular and secreted 
envelope proteins contained free sulfhydryl groups. Disulfide-linked oligomers 
were studied by gel electrophoresis under nonreducing conditions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.67.8.4588-4597.1993
PMCID: PMC237843
PMID: 8392600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]