1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Aug 25;268(24):18053-61.

Inclusion body formation and protein stability in sequence variants of 
interleukin-1 beta.

Chrunyk BA(1), Evans J, Lillquist J, Young P, Wetzel R.

Author information:
(1)Macromolecular Sciences Department, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, King 
of Prussia, Pennsylvania 19406.

Inclusion body formation during recombinant protein expression in bacteria is of 
both fundamental interest and practical importance. To elucidate molecular 
mechanisms of this process, we are examining the in vitro folding and stability 
properties of a series of human interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) sequence variants 
which exhibit widely differing tendencies to form inclusion bodies. Of 67 
variants surveyed, nine, including wild type, were purified and their in vitro 
stability properties determined. One of these, a high inclusion body mutant, 
exhibited very low solubility in native buffer after purification and was not 
pursued further. For the other eight sequence variants, no strong correlations 
were observed between extent of inclusion body formation and either 
thermodynamic or thermal stability. In particular, a Lys97-->Val mutation 
produces substantially more IL-1 beta in inclusion bodies than the wild type (61 
versus 8%) despite generating a protein more thermodynamically stable than wild 
type. Furthermore, the Lys97-->Val mutant forms substantial levels of inclusion 
bodies at 32 degrees C but requires incubation at temperatures greater than 48 
degrees C for thermally induced aggregation in vitro. This and other data 
suggest that the tendency of at least some IL-1 beta variants to form inclusion 
bodies is most likely related to the stability or solubility of folding 
intermediates rather than native states. Implications of the structural 
locations of these mutations are also discussed.

PMID: 8394358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]