1. J Virol. 1993 Sep;67(9):5206-15. doi: 10.1128/JVI.67.9.5206-5215.1993.

cdc2 phosphorylation of threonine 124 activates the origin-unwinding functions 
of simian virus 40 T antigen.

McVey D(1), Ray S, Gluzman Y, Berger L, Wildeman AG, Marshak DR, Tegtmeyer P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, State University of New York, Stony Brook 11794.

Phosphorylation of simian virus 40 (SV40) T antigen on threonine 124 activates 
viral DNA replication in vivo and in vitro. We have manipulated the modification 
of T-antigen residue 124 both genetically and biochemically and have 
investigated individual replication functions of T antigen under conditions 
suitable for in vitro DNA replication. We find that the hexamer assembly, 
helicase, DNA polymerase alpha-binding, and transcriptional-autoregulation 
functions are independent of phosphorylation of threonine 124. In contrast, 
neither T antigen with an alanine mutation of threonine 124 made in human cells 
nor unphosphorylated T antigen made in Escherichia coli binds the SV40 
replication origin as stably as phosphorylated wild-type T antigen does. 
Furthermore, modification of threonine 124 is essential for complete unwinding 
of the SV40 replication origin. We conclude that phosphorylation of threonine 
124 enhances specific interactions of T antigen with SV40 origin DNA. Our 
findings do not exclude the possibility that phosphorylation of threonine 124 
may affect additional undefined steps in DNA replication. We also show that 
DNase footprinting and KMnO4 modification assays are not as stringent as 
immunoprecipitation and origin-dependent strand displacement assays for 
detecting defects in the origin-binding and -unwinding functions of T antigen. 
Differences in the assays may explain discrepancies in previous reports on the 
role of T-antigen phosphorylation in DNA binding.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.67.9.5206-5215.1993
PMCID: PMC237918
PMID: 8394445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]