1. Biochem J. 1993 Jan 1;289 ( Pt 1)(Pt 1):25-31. doi: 10.1042/bj2890025.

Purified yeast protein farnesyltransferase is structurally and functionally 
similar to its mammalian counterpart.

Gomez R(1), Goodman LE, Tripathy SK, O'Rourke E, Manne V, Tamanoi F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago, IL 
60637.

Protein farnesyltransferase (FTase) catalyses the addition of a farnesyl group 
to a cysteine within the so-called 'CAAX box' at the C-terminus of various 
proteins. In the present paper we report purification of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae FTase to near-homogeneity. This was accomplished by constructing a 
yeast strain overproducing FTase approx. 100-fold. The purified enzyme was a 
heterodimer of approx. 90 kDa and consisted of 43 kDa and 34 kDa subunits. The 
43 kDa subunit was shown to be the product of the DPR1 gene by using antibody 
raised against baculovirus-produced DPR1 polypeptide. The purified enzyme 
required Mg2+, showed a pH optimum of 7.8 and was most active at 50 degrees C. 
The Km values for farnesyl pyrophosphate and GST-CIIS (glutathione S-transferase 
fused to the C-terminal 12 amino acids of yeast RAS2 protein), KmFpp and KmGST 
CIIS, were 8.1 and 5.1 microM respectively. The enzyme was capable of 
farnesylating GST-CIIL (the same as GST-CIIS, except that the C-terminal serine 
is changed to leucine), a substrate protein for the enzyme 
geranylgeranyltransferase, although with a higher apparent Km than for GST-CIIS. 
Like its mammalian counterpart, yeast FTase activity was inhibited by peptides 
containing the C-terminal CAAX sequence (that is, one where C = cysteine, A = 
aliphatic amino acid and X = any amino acid). These results provide direct 
evidence for the idea that the yeast and mammalian FTases are structurally and 
functionally very similar.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2890025
PMCID: PMC1132125
PMID: 8424764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]