1. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Jan 15;211(1-2):347-55. doi: 
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1993.tb19904.x.

Structural characterization of a biologically active human lipocortin 1 
expressed in Escherichia coli.

Arcone R(1), Arpaia G, Ruoppolo M, Malorni A, Pucci P, Marino G, Ialenti A, Di 
Rosa M, Ciliberto G.

Author information:
(1)CEINGE, Biotecnologie Avanzate, Napoli, Italy.

Lipocortin or annexin 1 is a calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding protein 
which probably acts as a glucocorticoid- regulated anti-inflammatory factor. 
cDNA for human lipocortin 1 was cloned in the pT7.7 expression plasmid under the 
control of the inducible bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoter. Upon 
induction with isopropyl thio-beta-D-galactoside, large amounts of the protein 
were produced and accumulated in Escherichia coli in a soluble form. The 
recombinant protein was purified to homogeneity by means of two subsequent 
ion-exchange chromatographic steps. The final yield was about 30 mg/l bacterial 
culture. Electrospray mass spectrometric analysis of the purified protein 
demonstrated that the recombinant product corresponds to the native human 
lipocortin 1, without the initial methionine and with a free N-terminal alanine; 
tryptic peptide mapping by fast-atom-bombardment mass spectrometry showed that 
the recombinant protein contains cysteine residues at positions 263 and 324 with 
free thiol groups, whereas Cys270 and Cys343 are probably involved in an 
intrachain disulfide bridge. Recombinant human lipocortin 1 reduces the 
carrageenin-induced paw oedema in rat in vivo and inhibits porcine pancreatic 
phospholipase A2 activity in vitro; in both cases, a dose-related response is 
observed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1993.tb19904.x
PMID: 8425544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]