1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Feb 15;268(5):3662-9.

DNA sequence requirements for interaction of the RK2 replication initiation 
protein with plasmid origin repeats.

Perri S(1), Helinski DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 
92093-0634.

Replication of plasmid RK2 in a variety of Gram-negative bacteria requires its 
origin of replication and the plasmid-encoded TrfA proteins (TrfA-33 and 
TrfA-44). The initiation of replication requires that the TrfA proteins bind to 
a series of 17-base pair (bp) direct repeats located within the RK2 origin. The 
conserved 17-bp repeats are arranged in tandem and are separated by less 
conserved spacer sequences of 4-6 bp in length. A series of plasmids containing 
one or two iterons, with or without the less conserved spacer sequences, were 
constructed to analyze the DNA sequence requirements for binding of TrfA-33 to 
the iterons. In addition to the analysis of TrfA binding in vitro, the plasmid 
constructs were examined for their ability to exert incompatibility toward an 
RK2 replicon in Escherichia coli. These analyses revealed that the conserved 
17-bp iteron sequence itself is not sufficient for TrfA binding; the adjacent 
less conserved spacer sequences are also required. Site-specific mutagenesis was 
carried out to determine the importance of specific bases within the spacer 
sequence for binding activity and a consensus sequence for a TrfA-specific 
binding unit was determined. DNase I and methylation interference footprinting 
procedures were also carried out to characterize the TrfA-binding unit complex. 
Finally, it was shown that the binding of the TrfA-33 protein to two adjacent 
TrfA binding units on a DNA fragment is not substantially affected by the 
relative orientation or spacing between the two units.

PMID: 8429042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]