1. J Virol. 1996 Feb;70(2):721-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.70.2.721-728.1996.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 integrase mutants retain in vitro integrase 
activity yet fail to integrate viral DNA efficiently during infection.

Leavitt AD(1), Robles G, Alesandro N, Varmus HE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 
94143-0100, USA.

The viral integrase (IN) protein is the only viral protein known to be required 
for integration of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) genome into 
the host cell DNA, a step in the viral life cycle that is essential for viral 
replication. To better understand the relationship between in vitro IN activity 
and IN-mediated integration of viral DNA in an infected cell, we characterized 
the effects of 13 IN mutations on viral replication in cultured cells. Using 
HIV-1 genomes that express the hygromycin resistance gene and do not express the 
HIV-1 env gene, we generated stocks of pseudotype virus coated with the murine 
leukemia virus amphotropic envelope glycoprotein, containing either wild-type or 
mutant HIV-1 IN. All mutants produced normal amounts of physical particles, as 
measured by reverse transcriptase activity and capsid protein (p24) 
concentration, but they formed three groups based on infectious titer and 
synthesis of viral DNA. Changes at the three highly conserved acidic residues in 
the IN core domain (D-64, D-116, and E-152) impair provirus formation without 
affecting viral DNA synthesis or the accumulation of viral DNA in the nucleus of 
the infected cell, a phenotype predicted by each mutant's lack of in vitro 
integrase activity. Mutations at positions N-120, R-199, and W-235 minimally 
affect in vitro integrase activity, but infectious titers are severely reduced, 
despite normal synthesis of viral DNA, implying a defect during integration in 
vivo. Mutations in the zinc binding region (H12C, H16V, and H16C), S81R, and a 
deletion of residues 32 through 275 yield noninfectious particles that 
synthesize little or no viral DNA following infection, despite wild-type levels 
of reverse transcriptase activity and viral RNA in the particles. The two latter 
classes of mutants suggest that IN can affect DNA synthesis or integration 
during infection in ways that are not appreciated from currently used assays in 
vitro.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.70.2.721-728.1996
PMCID: PMC189872
PMID: 8551608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]