1. J Mol Med (Berl). 1995 Oct;73(10):515-20. doi: 10.1007/BF00198903.

Germ line mutations of hMSH2 and hMLH1 genes in Japanese families with 
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC): usefulness of DNA analysis 
for screening and diagnosis of HNPCC patients.

Miyaki M(1), Konishi M, Muraoka M, Kikuchi-Yanoshita R, Tanaka K, Iwama T, Mori 
T, Koike M, Ushio K, Chiba M, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, 
Japan.

Mutations in hMSH2 and hMLH1 genes were analyzed in patients from 11 Japanese 
families that had been diagnosed as carrying hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal 
cancer (HNPCC) by clinical examination. Germ line mutations of hMSH2 gene were 
identified in 5 independent families in which colorectal (87% of patients), 
endometrial (30%), ovarian (17%), gastric (14%), and other cancers existed. Five 
mutations detected between codons 136 and 811 included single-base substitutions 
(C-->T and T-->G), a T deletion, and an A insertion, all of which produced stop 
codons resulting in truncated proteins, and an A-->T substitution at splice 
donor site of exon 5 which resulted in deletion of this exon. Moreover, one 
HNPCC family was presumed to have germ line mutation of hMSH2 gene because a 
somatic mutation of hMSH2 gene was detected in a cancer from a patient in this 
family. In addition to these 11 families already diagnosed with HNPCC, 3 new 
families with germ line mutations of hMSH2 gene and hMLH1 gene were found 
through analysis of DNA from patients who had multiple cancers with alteration 
in microsatellite DNA. These mutations included an AG deletion at codons 877-878 
of hMSH2 gene, an AAG deletion at codons 616-618 of hMLH1 gene, and a C-->T 
single-base substitution at codon 217 of hMLH1 gene. Seven of eight germ line 
mutations found in this study are new mutations that have not been reported 
previously. In families in which germ line mutations were identified 
presymptomatic examination was then carried out using polymerase chain reaction 
single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis of DNA from peripheral blood, 
and the result was the detection of family members predisposed to HNPCC who did 
not yet show signs of cancer. These results indicate the value of DNA analysis 
in the screening and diagnosis of HNPCC patients and families.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00198903
PMID: 8581513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]