1. Exp Eye Res. 1993 Jun;56(6):701-8. doi: 10.1006/exer.1993.1087.

Effect of inhibitors of arachidonic acid metabolism on corneal 
reepithelialization in the rat.

Gupta AG(1), Hirakata A, Proia AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

We examined the ability of inhibitors of arachidonic acid metabolism to 
influence the rate of healing of organ-cultured rat corneas with 3-mm diameter 
central epithelial abrasions. In control corneas, and in the presence of the 
cyclooxygenase inhibitors indomethacin (1 microM), or flurbiprofen (1 microM), 
the defect was completely reepithelialized by 25 hr. In contrast, corneas 
cultured with the lipoxygenase inhibitors quercetin (100 microM), esculetin (100 
microM), or baicalein (10 microM) or the dual cyclooxygenase/lipoxygenase 
inhibitors BW 775C (100 microM) or BW A540C (100 microM) had significantly 
delayed epithelial healing rates when compared with the controls; complete 
healing of the epithelial defects required 32.5-40 hr. Dose-response studies 
with esculetin and BW 755C demonstrated that the concentrations for 50% 
inhibition of reepithelialization (65.3 microM for esculetin, 39.6 microM for BW 
755 C) were significantly greater than those for inhibition of 12-lipoxygenase 
activity (16.6 microM for esculetin, 21.1 microM for BW 755C), the major 
lipoxygenase activity in normal rat cornea. Addition of 12(S)-5,8,10,14- 
hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid [12(S)-HETE, 0.01-10 microM], the main 
12-lipoxygenase metabolite of arachidonic acid in normal rat cornea, to the 
organ cultures did not influence the rate of epithelial wound healing in the 
absence of presence of 100 microM esculetin. Our results suggest that 
lipoxygenase activity is an important factor in regulating corneal epithelial 
wound healing in the rat, presumably by influencing epithelial cell migration. 
The lipoxygenase enzyme and metabolite(s) responsible for regulating 
reepithelialization, and the mechanism of action, remain to be determined.

DOI: 10.1006/exer.1993.1087
PMID: 8595812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]