1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Apr 2;93(7):2856-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.93.7.2856.

Mutants in the Exo I motif of Escherichia coli dnaQ: defective proofreading and 
inviability due to error catastrophe.

Fijalkowska IJ(1), Schaaper RM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecualr Genetics, NationalInstitute of Enviromental Health 
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

The Escherichia coli dnaQ gene encodes the proofreading 3' exonuclease (epsilon 
subunit) of DNA polymerase III holoenzyme and is a critical determinant of 
chromosomal replication fidelity. We constructed by site-specific mutagenesis a 
mutant, dnaQ926, by changing two conserved amino acid residues (Asp-12-->Ala and 
Glu-14-->Ala) in the Exo I motif, which, by analogy to other proofreading 
exonucleases, is essential for the catalytic activity. When residing on a 
plasmid, dnaQ926 confers a strong, dominant mutator phenotype, suggesting that 
the protein, although deficient in exonuclease activity, still binds to the 
polymerase subunit (alpha subunit or dnaE gene product). When dnaQ926 was 
transferred to the chromosome, replacing the wild-type gene, the cells became 
inviable. However, viable dnaQ926 strains could be obtained if they contained 
one of the dnaE alleles previously characterized in our laboratory as 
antimutator alleles or if it carried a multicopy plasmid containing the E. coli 
mutL+ gene. These results suggest that loss of proofreading exonuclease activity 
in dnaQ926 is lethal due to excessive error rates (error catastrophe). Error 
catastrophe results from both the loss of proofreading and the subsequent 
saturation of DNA mismatch repair. The probability of lethality by excessive 
mutation is supported by calculations estimating the number of inactivating 
mutations in essential genes per chromosome replication.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.7.2856
PMCID: PMC39723
PMID: 8610131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]