1. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):2183-94. doi: 10.1128/MCB.16.5.2183.

A novel STAT-like factor mediates lipopolysaccharide, interleukin 1 (IL-1), and 
IL-6 signaling and recognizes a gamma interferon activation site-like element in 
the IL1B gene.

Tsukada J(1), Waterman WR, Koyama Y, Webb AC, Auron PE.

Author information:
(1)Center for Blood Research, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 1996 Jun;16(6):3233.

Binding of many cytokines to their cognate receptors immediately activates Jak 
tyrosine kinases and their substrates, STAT (signal transducers and activators 
of transcription) DNA-binding proteins. The DNA binding targets of STATs are 
sequence elements related to the archetypal gamma interferon activation site, 
GAS. However, association of interleukin 1 (IL-1) with Jak-STAT signaling has 
remained unresolved. We now report an element termed LILRE (lipopolysaccharide 
[LPS] and IL-1-responsive element) in the human prointerleukin 1beta gene (IL1B) 
which can be immediately induced by either lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or IL-1 
protein to bind a tyrosine-phosphorylated protein. This LPS- and IL-1-induced 
factor (LIL factor) is recognized by an antibody raised against the N terminus 
of Stat1, but not by those specific for either the C terminus of Stat1 or any 
other GAS-binding STAT. Phosphotyrosine (P-Tyr) specifically inhibits formation 
of the LIL factor-DNA complex, suggesting the importance of P-Tyr for the 
DNA-binding activity, as has been found for all STAT dimers. Analysis of 
DNA-binding specificity demonstrates that the LIL factor possesses a novel 
GAS-like binding activity that contrasts with those of other STATs in a 
requirement for a G residue at position 8 (TTCCTGAGA). Further investigation has 
revealed that IL-6, but neither IL-4 nor gamma interferon, activates the LIL 
factor. Thus, the existence of such a STAT-like factor (LIL-Stat) relates the 
LPS and IL-1 signaling pathway to other cytokine receptor signaling pathways via 
the activation of STATs. Moreover, the unique DNA-binding specificity and 
antigenicity of this factor suggest that LPS, IL-1, and IL-6 may use a common 
signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.16.5.2183
PMCID: PMC231206
PMID: 8628285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]