1. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Mar 15;236(3):996-1002. doi: 
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.00996.x.

Investigation on the structure of the active site of monoamine oxidase-B by 
affinity labeling with the selective inhibitor lazabemide and by site-directed 
mutagenesis.

Cesura AM(1), Gottowik J, Lahm HW, Lang G, Imhof R, Malherbe P, RÃ¶thlisberger U, 
Da Prada M.

Author information:
(1)Pharma Division, Preclinical Research, Nervous System Diseases, F. 
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland.

The structural features of the active site of human monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) 
were investigated by affinity labeling and site-directed mutagenesis. The 
pseudosubstrate inhibitor N-[2-aminoethyl]-5-chloro-2-pyridine carboxamide HCl 
(lazabemide) can be irreversibly linked to MAO-B by reduction of the 
enzyme-inhibitor complex with NaBH(3)CN. Analysis of the flavin spectrum of 
[(3)H]lazabemide-labeled human MAO-B indicated that insertion of the inhibitor 
did not occur into the isoalloxazine ring of FAD. After trypsin digestion and 
HPLC peptide mapping of the radiolabeled enzyme, two labeled peptides were 
observed. Sequence analysis showed that both peptides started at Val371 of human 
MAO-B. These results indicate that [(3)H]lazabemide is incorporated into the 
MAO-B peptide stretch containing the FAD-modified Cys397. The function of 
putative active-site residues contained in this region was investigated by 
site-directed mutagenesis and expression of the mutant proteins in HEK-293 
cells. Substitution of His382 of MAO-B with an Arg greatly reduced the enzymic 
activity, suggesting that this residue may represent a nucleophile relevant for 
the MAO-B catalytic mechanism. Whereas it has been shown that mutation of Cys389 
with a Ser residue does not markedly affect the activity of the enzyme [Wu, 
H.-F., Chen, K. and Shih, J.C. (1993) Mol. Pharmacol. 43, 888-893] the mutant 
carrying an Ala at this position was virtually inactive. Conversely, 
substitution of Lys386 (to Met) and Ser394 (to Ala) did not markedly modify the 
kinetic properties of the enzyme. We also report that mutation of MAO-B Thr158 
(to Ala) resulted in a dramatic loss of enzymic activity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.00996.x
PMID: 8665924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]