1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 30;271(35):21193-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.35.21193.

Identification of residues in the translocation pathway of EmrE, a multidrug 
antiporter from Escherichia coli.

Lebendiker M(1), Schuldiner S.

Author information:
(1)Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, 91904 Jerusalem, Israel.

EmrE is a small, 12-kDa, highly polyspecific antiporter, which exchanges 
hydrogen ions with aromatic cations such as methyl viologen. EmrE-mediated 
transport is inhibited by the sulfhydryl-reactive reagent 
4-(chloromercuri)benzoic acid (PCMB) but not by a variety of other sulfhydryl 
reagents. This differential effect is due to the fact that the organic mercurial 
is a substrate of the transporter and can reach domains otherwise inaccessible 
to the different reagents. To find out which of the three cysteine residues in 
EmrE is reacting with PCMB, each was replaced with serine and it was shown that 
none of them is essential for transport activity. A protein completely devoid of 
Cys residues (CL) is also capable of substrate accumulation albeit at a slower 
rate. Mutated proteins in which only one of the native cysteines was left 
whereas the other changed to serine were also constructed. The use of these 
proteins demonstrated that two of the three Cys in EmrE, Cys-41 and Cys-95, but 
not Cys-39, react with PCMB. A related mercurial, 
4-(chloromercuri)benzenesulfonic acid (PCMBS), is only a very poor inhibitor, 
probably because of the negative charge it bears. PCMBS reacts with EmrE in an 
asymmetric and unique way. It reacts with the mutant bearing a single Cys 
residue in position 95 (CL-C95) only when the reagent is present in the outside 
face of the membrane and with the mutant CL-C41 only when allowed to permeate to 
the cell interior; as expected, it does not react with the mutant protein 
bearing a single Cys at position 39 (CL-C39). It is concluded that PCMB 
permeates through the substrate pathway of EmrE and covalently reacts with the 
two exposed residues, Cys-95 and Cys-41, but not with Cys-39, located on the 
opposite face of the helix relative to residue 41. In addition, because of the 
asymmetric reactivity to PCMBS, an inhibitor that does not permeate through the 
protein, it is concluded that Cys-41 is closer to the cytoplasmic face than 
Cys-95. The results demonstrate the existence of a domain accessible only to 
substrates and provide a unique tool for studying the substrate permeation 
pathway of an ion-coupled transporter.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.35.21193
PMID: 8702890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]