1. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Jul 1;239(1):42-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0042u.x.

Cloning, sequencing and functional overexpression of the Streptococcus 
equisimilis H46A gapC gene encoding a glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 
that also functions as a plasmin(ogen)-binding protein. Purification and 
biochemical characterization of the protein.

Gase K(1), Gase A, Schirmer H, Malke H.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Jena University, Germany.

We previously identified DNA sequences involved in the function of the complex 
promoter of the streptokinase gene from Streptococcus equisimilis H46A, a human 
serogroup C strain known to express this gene at a high level. As a prerequisite 
to understanding possible mechanisms that control the balance between the 
plasminogen activating and plasmin(ogen) binding capacities of H46A, we describe 
here its gapC gene encoding glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GraP-DH, 
EC 1.2.1.12), a glycolytic enzyme apparently transported to the cell surface 
where it functions as a plasmin(ogen).binding protein. The gapC gene was cloned 
and sequenced and found to code for a 336-amino-acid polypeptide (approximately 
35.9 kDa) exhibiting 94.9% sequence identity to the Plr protein from 
Streptococcus pyogenes shown by others to be capable of plasmin binding 
[Lottenberg, R., Broder, C. C., Boyle, M. D., Kain, S. J., Schroeder, B. L. & 
Curtiss, R. III (1992) J. Bacteriol. 174, 5204-5210]. To study the properties of 
the GapC protein, its gene was inducibly overexpressed in Escherichia coli from 
QIAexpress expression plasmids to yield the authentic GapC or (His)6GapC 
carrying a hexahistidyl N-terminus to permit affinity purification. Both 
proteins were functionally active, exhibiting specific GraP-DH activities of 
about 80 kat/mol (approximately 130 U/mg) after purification. Their binding 
parameters [association (ka) and dissociation (kd) rate constants, and 
equlibrium dissociation constants (Kd = kd/ka)] for the interaction with human 
Gluplasminogen and plasmin were determined by real-time biospecific interaction 
analysis using the Pharmacia BIAcore instrument. For comparative purposes, the 
commercial GraP-DH from Bacillus stearothermophilus (BstGraP-DH), a 
nonpathogenic organism, was included in these experiments. The Kd values for 
binding of plasminogen to GapC, (His)6GapC and BstGraP-DH were 220 nM, 260 nM 
and 520 nM, respectively, as compared to 25 nM, 17 nM and 98 nM, respectively, 
for the binding to plasmin. These data show that both the zymogen and active 
enzyme possess low-affinity binding sites for the gapC gene product and that the 
hexahistidyl terminus does not affect its function. Prior limited treatment with 
plasmin enhanced the subsequent plasminogen binding capacity of all three 
GraP-DHs, presumably by the exposure of new C-terminal lysine residues for 
binding to the zymogen.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0042u.x
PMID: 8706717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]