1. Biol Chem Hoppe Seyler. 1996 Mar;377(3):175-86. doi: 
10.1515/bchm3.1996.377.3.175.

Structure of recombinant human parathyroid hormone in solution using 
multidimensional NMR spectroscopy.

Gronwald W(1), Schomburg D, Harder MP, Mayer H, Paulsen J, Wingender E, Wray V.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Molekulare Strukturforschung, Gesellschaft für 
Biotechnologische Forschung, Braunschweig, Germany.

The solution structure of human parathyroid hormone, in the form of recombinant 
prolyl-hPTH(1-84), has been investigated by multidimensional NMR spectroscopy 
under conditions (aqueous trifluoroethanol) which favour the structured-state of 
the protein. Spin systems were identified from 3D 1H DQF (double-quantum 
filtered)-COSY and TOCSY spectra and sequence-specific assignments were from 2D 
1H phase-sensitive NOESY spectra. Signal overlap was resolved in a 
3D-NOESY-TOCSY spectrum and assignments were confirmed with 2D NOESY-15N-HMQC 
(heteronuclear multiple-quantum coherence) spectra taken of a sample universally 
labeled with 15N. A satisfactory set of final structures was calculated from the 
quantitative NOE data using restrained molecular dynamics and energy 
minimization calculations. The N-terminus is dominated by three, well defined 
helices between Ser-3 to Asn-10, Ser-17 to Lys-27 and Asp-30 to Leu-37, while 
the most significant structural features in the C-terminus are a short, 
less-well defined helix between Asn-57 to Ser-62 and a series of loose turns. 
These two terminal units are joined by an unstructured mid-region. The molecule 
shows a tendency towards tertiary structure, defined by a number of long-range 
NOEs. A detailed RMS deviation analysis allowed the final refined structures to 
be classified into a limited ensemble of stable conformations that reflect the 
inherent flexibility of the hormone in solution.

DOI: 10.1515/bchm3.1996.377.3.175
PMID: 8722319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]