1. Eur J Hum Genet. 1996;4(2):65-73. doi: 10.1159/000472174.

The molecular basis for disease variability in cystic fibrosis.

Kerem B(1), Kerem E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in 
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. The disease 
is characterized by a wide variability of clinical expression. The cloning of 
the CFTR gene and the identification of its mutations has promoted extensive 
research into the association between genotype and phenotype. Several studies 
showed that there are mutations, like the delta F508 (the most common mutation 
worldwide), which are associated with a severe phenotype and there are mutations 
associated with a milder phenotype. However, there is a substantial variability 
in disease expression among patients carrying the same mutation. This 
variability involves also the severity of lung disease. Furthermore, increased 
frequencies of mutations are found among patients with incomplete CF expression 
which includes male infertility due to congenital bilateral absence of the vas 
deferens. In vitro studies of the CFTR function suggested that different 
mutations cause different defects in protein production and function. The 
mechanisms by which mutations disrupt CFTR function are defective protein 
production, processing, channel regulation, and conductance. In addition, 
reduced levels of the normal CFTR mRNA are associated with the CF disease. These 
mutations are associated with a highly variable phenotype from healthy 
individuals or infertile males to a typical CF disease. This variability in 
disease expression is associated with different levels of normally spliced 
transcripts. Further understanding the mechanisms of CFTR dysfunction may 
suggest different therapeutic strategies for each class of mutations.

DOI: 10.1159/000472174
PMID: 8744024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]