1. J Neurochem. 1996 Mar;66(3):908-14. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1996.66030908.x.

Identification of Gln313 and Pro327 as residues critical for substrate 
inhibition in tyrosine hydroxylase.

Quinsey NS(1), Lenaghan CM, Dickson PW.

Author information:
(1)Russell Grimwade Laboratory of Protein Engineering, Russell Grimwade School 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.

Rat tyrosine hydroxylase was expressed in Escherichia coli. High-level 
expression was obtained after incubation at 27 degrees C for 18 h. The smallest 
fragment of tyrosine hydroxylase that gave a soluble active molecule was from 
Leu188 to Phe456. This fragment corresponds directly to the section of 
phenylalanine hydroxylase that had previously been shown to be this enzyme's 
catalytic core region. It has been shown that Glu288 plays a critical role in 
pterin function in phenylalanine hydroxylase. The corresponding residue in 
tyrosine hydroxylase (Glu332) has no significant role in pterin function. 
Substitution of a leucine for a proline at position 327 in tyrosine hydroxylase 
produces a molecule with a K(m) for tetrahydrobiopterin 20-fold higher than that 
of the wild-type molecule, whereas the same substitution at the corresponding 
residue in phenylalanine hydroxylase (pro281) has no effect on the kinetic 
constant for the cofactor. This suggests that corresponding residues in 
phenylalanine hydroxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase can have different roles in 
pterin function. Substitution of a leucine for a proline at position 281 in 
phenylalanine hydroxylase increases the K(m) for phenylalanine > 20-fold over 
that of the wild-type. Substitution of leucine or alanine for Pro327 or a 
glutamic acid for Gln313 in tyrosine hydroxylase eliminates the substrate 
inhibition shown by wild-type tyrosine hydroxylase.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1996.66030908.x
PMID: 8769848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]