1. Biochemistry. 1996 Aug 27;35(34):11221-7. doi: 10.1021/bi960618e.

APMA (4-aminophenylmercuric acetate) activation of stromelysin-1 involves 
protein interactions in addition to those with cysteine-75 in the propeptide.

Galazka G(1), Windsor LJ, Birkedal-Hansen H, Engler JA.

Author information:
(1)Research Center in Oral Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham 35294, 
USA.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) can be activated in vitro by multiple 
mechanisms such as treatment with proteases, organomercurials, oxidants, and 
detergents. The proposed cysteine switch model for activation suggests that 
these multiple methods for activation cause the dissociation of the single 
cysteine residue in the propeptide from the active site zinc. In particular, it 
has been suggested that organomercurials such as 4-aminophenylmercuric acetate 
(APMA) work by directly reacting with the sulfhydryl group of this cysteine 
residue, resulting in its displacement from the active site. However, recent 
data by Chen et al. [(1993) Biochemistry 32, 10289-10295] demonstrated that 
modification of this cysteine residue in the propeptide of stromelysin-1 by 
sulfhydryl reagents did not result in an active enzyme as predicted. To 
investigate the roles that this cysteine residue and the propeptide salt bridge 
(R74 to D79) might play in the APMA-induced activation of stromelysin-1, we have 
changed these residues by site-directed mutagenesis. Wild-type stromelysin-1 and 
the mutants were all expressed at detectable levels using a recombinant vaccinia 
virus system and determined to be catalytically competent by zymography. The 
wild-type stromelysin-1 and the cysteine mutants (C75S and C75H) underwent 
APMA-induced activation as determined by the characteristic reduction in 
molecular weight associated with activation and by their ability to cleave 
casein only when activated. On the other hand, mutants R74K, D79A, and C75H/D79A 
did not undergo APMA-induced activation. These results demonstrate that 
APMA-induced activation of stromelysin-1 involves protein interactions in 
addition to those with cysteine-75 in the propeptide and also suggest that the 
R74 to D79 salt bridge may play a role.

DOI: 10.1021/bi960618e
PMID: 8780527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]