1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 13;271(37):22598-603. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.37.22598.

Role of conserved Asn-Tyr-Asp-Tyr sequence in bacterial copper/2,4, 
5-trihydroxyphenylalanyl quinone-containing histamine oxidase.

Choi YH(1), Matsuzaki R, Suzuki S, Tanizawa K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Science, Institute of Scientific and Industrial 
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567, Japan.

Copper amine oxidase contains a covalently bound quinonoid cofactor, 
2,4,5-trihydroxyphenylalanyl quinone (TPQ), which is synthesized by 
post-translational modification of a specific tyrosyl residue occurring in the 
highly conserved sequence, Asn-Tyr-(Asp/Glu)-Tyr. To elucidate the role(s) of 
the conserved sequence in the biogenesis of TPQ, each of the corresponding 
residues at positions 401-404 in the recombinant histamine oxidase from 
Arthrobacter globiformis has been replaced with other amino acids by 
site-directed mutagenesis. When Asn-401 was changed to Asp or Gln, the rate of 
TPQ formation by copper-dependent self-processing was 10(3)- to 10(4)-fold 
slower than in the wild-type enzyme. When Tyr-402 was replaced by Phe, TPQ was 
not formed at all, showing that Tyr-402 is essential as the precursor to TPQ. In 
contrast, Asp-403 could be replaced by Glu without changes in the rate of TPQ 
formation, whereas its replacement by Asn led to a marked decrease. Furthermore, 
when Tyr-404 was changed to Phe, TPQ was formed swiftly on incubation with 
copper ions, but the TPQ enzyme exhibited very low activity with altered 
substrate specificity. These results collectively indicate that a very rigorous 
structural motif is required for efficient formation of TPQ and for the 
catalytic activity in the active site of copper amine oxidases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.37.22598
PMID: 8798429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]