1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1996 Sep 1;333(1):243-50. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1996.0387.

Charge reversal mutations in a conserved acidic patch in Anabaena ferredoxin can 
attenuate or enhance electron transfer to ferredoxin:NADP+ reductase by altering 
protein/protein orientation within the intermediate complex.

Hurley JK(1), Schmeits JL, Genzor C, GÃ³mez-Moreno C, Tollin G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson 85721, USA.

A series of charge reversal mutations in a highly conserved acidic patch on the 
surface of Anabaena ferredoxin (Fd), comprising residues D67, D68, and D69, have 
been constructed by site-directed mutagenesis. One such mutant, D68K, has a rate 
constant for electron transfer (et) to Anabaena ferredoxin:NADP+ reductase (FNR) 
at low ionic strength (I = 12 mM) which is 2.5 times larger than wild type (9000 
vs 3600 s-1). This mutant Fd became indistinguishable from the wild-type protein 
in its reactivity at I > or = 100 mM. The other mutants showed various degrees 
of impairment in their et reactions with FNR over the entire range of ionic 
strengths. The degrees of such impairment for the D67K and D69K mutants were 
similar to that of the double mutant D67K/D69K. The double mutant D68K/ D69K had 
et activity intermediate between these mutants and wild type, whereas 
incorporation of the "super" mutation, D68K, into the double mutant, resulting 
in the D67K/D68K/D69K triple mutant, did not significantly alter the impairment 
caused by the D67K/D69K double mutation. Binding constants for complex formation 
(Kd) between the oxidized mutant proteins and oxidized FNR (except for that of 
the triple mutant which was not measurable), and the kinetically determined Kd 
values for the intermediate Fdred:FNRox complex, showed no correlation with et 
rate constants or with the extent of charge reversal. These results indicate 
that hydrophobic interactions play a key role in determining complex stability. 
They also provide strong support for the contention that the specific 
protein/protein geometry within the Fdred:FNRox intermediate complex is the 
major determinant of the et rate constants in this series of mutants, and that 
this is optimized largely by hydrophobic rather than electrostatic interactions. 
When electrostatic forces are dominant, as they are at low ionic strength, this 
can lead to nonoptimal et orientations.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1996.0387
PMID: 8806777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]