1. J Med Chem. 1996 Oct 11;39(21):4211-7. doi: 10.1021/jm960376g.

2-alkenyl and 2-alkyl derivatives of adenosine and 
adenosine-5'-N-ethyluronamide: different affinity and selectivity of E- and 
Z-diastereomers at A2A adenosine receptors.

Vittori S(1), Camaioni E, Di Francesco E, Volpini R, Monopoli A, Dionisotti S, 
Ongini E, Cristalli G.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Universit√† di Camerino, (MC), Italy.

A series of new 2-(ar)alkenyl, both Z- and E-diastereomers, and 2-alkyl 
derivatives of adenosine-5'-N-ethyluronamide (NECA) and adenosine were 
synthesized and evaluated for their interaction with the A1 and A2A adeosine 
receptors, to better understand the conformational requirements of the receptor 
area interacting with the substituents in the 2- and 5'-positions. Partial 
reduction of the triple bond in 2-alkynyl derivatives of NECA led to compounds 
whose activity at the A2A receptor subtype was related to Z-E-isomerism, the 
E-diastereomers being more potent and selective than the Z-ones. Saturation of 
the side chain markedly reduced compound affinity at adenosine receptors. 
Specifically, compounds bearing an (E)-alkenyl chain, while maintaining the same 
affinity at A2A receptors as the corresponding alknyl derivatives, showed an 
increase in A2A vs A1 selectivity. Hence, the new nucleosides (E)-2-hexenylNECA 
(12a) and (E)-2-(phenylpentenyl)NECA (12b) exhibited both high A2A receptor 
affinity (Ki = 1.6 and 3.5 nM, respectively) and A2A vs A1 selectivity (157- and 
290-fold, respectively). Moreover, 12a displayed potent antiaggregatory 
activity, similar to that of the reference compound NECA. Comparison between 
NECA and adenosine derivatives further demonstrated that the 5'-ethylcarboxamido 
group is critical for the A2A affinity. These studies indicated that the 
orientation of the substituent in the 2-position and the nature of the 5'-group 
in adenosine derivatives are critical to achieve high affinity and selectivity 
at the A2A adenosine receptor subtype.

DOI: 10.1021/jm960376g
PMID: 8863798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]