1. Eur J Cancer. 1996 Jul;32A(8):1359-65. doi: 10.1016/0959-8049(96)00104-9.

A new germline TP53 gene mutation in a family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

Dockhorn-Dworniczak B(1), Wolff J, Poremba C, Schäfer KL, Ritter J, Gullotta F, 
Jürgens H, Böcker W.

Author information:
(1)Gerhard-Domagk-Institute of Pathology, Westfälische-Wilhelms-University, 
Münster, Germany.

This report describes an unusual clinical presentation of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. 
Family history revealed a mild aggregation of adult cancers in one generation, 
and an unusual clustering of brain tumours of early childhood in the following 
generation. In order to evaluate the genetic basis for cancer predisposition in 
this family, molecular genetic analysis for the occurrence of germline TP53 
tumour suppressor gene mutations was performed on 12 siblings of two 
generations. Indirect mutation analysis was performed by the single-strand 
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique. Alterations were characterised by 
automated direct fluorescence sequencing analysis. Tumour material was also 
examined for p53 protein accumulation by immunohistochemistry. Initially, a TP53 
gene germline missense mutation was detected in an 11-year-old kindred with 
acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) following intensive treatment of a brain tumour. 
In peripheral blood and bone marrow samples of this proband, a reduction to 
hemizygosity occurred. During AML treatment, detection of LOH of 17p was used as 
a marker for clonality and treatment control. The mutation was found to be 
inherited from the proband's mother, who was diagnosed with breast cancer at the 
age of 48 years. Further, three siblings were carriers, and two are apparently 
healthy at the age of 21 and 23 years. Knowledge of germline mutations may allow 
accurate DNA-based carrier diagnosis which is of important clinical significance 
for treatment strategy and control. Furthermore, the occurrence of unaffected 
carriers in this family raises questions about appropriate methods of cancer 
surveillance and counselling for these people.

DOI: 10.1016/0959-8049(96)00104-9
PMID: 8869100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]