1. Biochem J. 1996 Oct 1;319 ( Pt 1)(Pt 1):117-22. doi: 10.1042/bj3190117.

Heterogeneity in utilization of N-glycosylation sites Asn624 and Asn138 in human 
lactoferrin: a study with glycosylation-site mutants.

van Berkel PH(1), van Veen HA, Geerts ME, de Boer HA, Nuijens JH.

Author information:
(1)Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Medical Biotechnology Department, Gorlaeus 
Laboratories, Leiden University, The Netherlands.

Human lactoferrin (hLF) is a glycoprotein involved in the host defence against 
infection and excessive inflammation. Our objective was to determine to what 
extent each of the three sequons for N-linked glycosylation in hLF is actually 
used. Human kidney-derived 293(S) cell lines expressing recombinant hLF (rhLF) 
or glycosylation-site mutants were produced. The mutations involved replacement 
of asparagine residues with glutamine at one or more sequons for N-glycosylation 
(Asn138, Asn479 and Asn624). Comparative SDS/PAGE analyses of rhLF, mutated rhLF 
and human-milk-derived (natural) hLF led us to propose that glycosylation of hLF 
occurs at two sites (at Asn138 and Asn479) in approx. 85% of all hLF molecules. 
Glycosylation at a single site (Asn479) or at all three sites occurs in approx, 
5% and 9% of hLF respectively. The extent of glycosylation at Asn624 was 
increased to approx. 29% and 40% of Asn479 and Asn138/479 mutant molecules 
respectively, which indicates that glycosylation at Asn624 in natural hLF might 
be limited by glycosylation at Asn479. The presence in supernatant of 
unglycosylated hLF (approx. 60% of the total) after mutations of Asn138 and 
Asn479 suggests that glycosylation of hLF is not an absolute requirement for its 
secretion. The pronounced degradation of unglycosylated hLF in supernatant after 
mutation at all three glycosylation sites (Asn138/479/624 mutant) but not after 
mutation at both Asn138 and Asn479 suggests that an altered conformation rather 
than the lack of glycosylation has rendered the Asn138/479/624 mutant 
susceptible to intra- and/or extra-cellular degradation.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3190117
PMCID: PMC1217743
PMID: 8870657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]