1. J Clin Invest. 1996 Nov 1;98(9):2086-93. doi: 10.1172/JCI119014.

The Trp64Arg mutation of the beta3 adrenergic receptor gene has no effect on 
obesity phenotypes in the Québec Family Study and Swedish Obese Subjects 
cohorts.

Gagnon J(1), Mauriège P, Roy S, Sjöström D, Chagnon YC, Dionne FT, Oppert JM, 
Pérusse L, Sjöström L, Bouchard C.

Author information:
(1)Physical Activity Sciences Laboratory, Laval University, Québec, Canada.

The beta adrenergic system plays a key role in regulating energy balance through 
the stimulation of both thermogenesis and lipid mobilization in brown and white 
adipose tissues in human and various animal models. Recent studies have 
suggested that a missense Trp64Arg mutation in the beta3 adrenergic receptor 
(ADRB3) gene was involved in obesity and insulin resistance. We have 
investigated the effect of this mutation on obesity-related phenotypes in two 
cohorts: the Québec Family Study (QFS) and the Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS). In 
QFS, no association was found between this mutation and body mass index (BMI), 
body fat including abdominal visceral fat, resting metabolic rate, various 
diabetes and cardiovascular risk factors, and changes in body weight and body 
fat over a 12-yr period. With the exception of RMR (P = 0.04), no evidence of 
linkage was detected between the mutation and phenotypes of QFS based on 
sib-pair data. In SOS, the frequency of the Trp64Arg allele was not 
significantly different between nonobese and obese female subjects and no 
association was found between the mutation and body weight gain over time. These 
findings do not support the view that there is an association between the 
Trp64Arg mutation in the ADRB3 gene and obesity.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI119014
PMCID: PMC507653
PMID: 8903328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]