1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 8;271(45):28414-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.45.28414.

Use of normal and transgenic mice to examine the relationship between terminal 
differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells and accumulation of their cell 
cycle regulators.

Chandrasekaran C(1), Coopersmith CM, Gordon JI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. jgordon@pharmdec.wustl.edu

A spatially well organized continuum of proliferation, differentiation, and 
death is displayed along crypt-villus units in the adult mouse small intestine. 
This continuum provides an opportunity to examine in vivo the mechanisms by 
which proliferative status changes as a function of cellular differentiation. 
Immunohistochemical studies of normal FVB/N mice revealed that as epithelial 
cells complete their terminal differentiation during a 48-72-h migration up 
villi, there is a marked and rapid fall in the levels of two important 
regulators of the G1/S transition, cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) 
2. However, cellular levels of their partners, cdk4 and cyclin E, remain 
unchanged as does the level of pRB. Adult FVB/N transgenic mice were studied 
that contained an intestinal fatty acid binding protein gene promoter (Fabpi) 
linked to wild type Simian virus 40 large T antigen (SV40 TAgWt) or a mutant TAg 
with Lys for Glu substitutions at residues 107 and 108 (SV40 TAgK107/8) that 
fails to bind pRB and related pocket proteins. Both transgenes are expressed 
only in villus enterocytes. SV40 TAgWt causes these terminally differentiated 
cells to re-enter the cycle. Re-entry is accompanied by a reduction in 
un/hypophosphorylated pRB, an induction of cyclin D1 and cdk2, but no change in 
cdk4, cyclin E, or E2F-1. In contrast, SV40 TAgK107/8 fails to induce re-entry 
and does not produce changes in un/hypophosphorylated pRB, cyclin D1, or cdk2 
accumulation. These results suggest that un/hypophosphorylated pRB is an 
important mediator of the cell cycle arrest that normally occurs as enterocytes 
exit the crypt and complete their differentiation. Fabpi-directed expression of 
E2F-1 does not cause villus enterocytes to return to the cell cycle, alter their 
suppression of cyclin D1 or cdk2, or affect their state of differentiation, 
emphasizing the insensitivity of these cells to the effects of E2F-1. Analyses 
of p53(-/-) and p53(+/+) mice containing Fabpi-SV40 TAgWt and Fabpi-SV40 
TAgK107/8 established that the proliferation induced by SV40 TAgWt does not 
require p53 and is associated with increased (p53-independent) apoptosis. The 
presence of cyclin E and cdk4 in differentiating villus enterocytes emphasizes 
that these cells retain part of their proliferative heritage expressed 24-72 h 
earlier in the crypt. The data suggest that down-regulation of cdk2 and/or 
cyclin D1 expression may be important for control of proliferative status and/or 
execution of terminal differentiation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.45.28414
PMID: 8910466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]