1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 15;271(46):29146-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.46.29146.

Hypolipidemic and hyperlipidemic phenotypes in transgenic mice expressing human 
apolipoprotein E2.

Huang Y(1), Schwendner SW, Rall SC Jr, Mahley RW.

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, University of California, San 
Francisco, California 94141-9100, USA.

Transgenic mice were produced that expressed different plasma levels (3-60 
mg/dl) of human apolipoprotein (apo) E2(Arg158 --> Cys), which is associated 
with the recessive form of human type III hyperlipoproteinemia (HLP). In 
transgenic mice fed a normal chow diet, low levels of apoE2 (<10 mg/dl) did not 
significantly alter the lipid phenotype. Mice expressing intermediate levels of 
apoE2 (10-30 mg/dl) had a 50-60% decrease in total cholesterol compared with 
nontransgenic mice. The decrease was almost entirely due to a reduction in high 
density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. These hypolipidemic apoE2 transgenic mice 
were cross-bred with human apoB transgenic mice, which have increased total 
cholesterol and low density lipoprotein (LDL) levels. The apoE2/apoB double 
transgenics revealed that expression of apoE2 on the background of human apoB 
overexpression resulted in a substantial decrease in LDL and HDL cholesterol and 
a corresponding accumulation of very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) and 
intermediate density lipoproteins (IDL). Thus, the double transgenics had a 
lipid phenotype resembling human type III HLP. In contrast to the hypolipidemic 
mice, mice expressing high levels of apoE2 (>50 mg/dl) were hyperlipidemic. The 
VLDL and IDL in these mice were significantly increased and cholesterol-enriched 
and had other characteristics of remnant lipoproteins. Upon agarose gel 
electrophoresis, the VLDL and IDL from both intermediate and high expressers 
migrated more slowly toward the beta position compared with the 
pre-beta-mobility of nontransgenic mouse VLDL and IDL. Thus, depending on plasma 
apoE2 levels, the expression of human apoE2 in the transgenic mice leads to 
either a hypolipidemic or hyperlipidemic phenotype. This animal model provides 
the opportunity to study the factors that cause hypolipidemia and those that 
precipitate the hyperlipidemia of type III HLP.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.46.29146
PMID: 8910571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]