1. Mutat Res. 1996 Oct;366(1):23-44. doi: 10.1016/s0165-1110(96)90005-6.

Mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene and ras oncogenes in aflatoxin 
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Shen HM(1), Ong CN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community, Occupational and Family Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) is classified as a group I carcinogen in humans by IARC. 
However, the exact mechanisms of AFB1 hepatocarcinogenesis have not been fully 
elucidated. Recent studies have suggested that oncogenes are critical molecular 
targets for AFB1, and AFB1 causes characteristic genetic changes in the p53 
tumor suppressor gene and ras protooncogenes. Up to date, more than 1500 human 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) samples have been examined for p53 mutations with 
respect to different AFB1 exposure levels. The most significant finding is that 
more than 50% of HCC patients from high aflatoxin exposure areas such as 
southern Africa and Qidong, China harboured a codon 249 G to T transversion in 
the p53 tumor suppressor gene, which is found to be consistent with the 
mutagenic specificity of AFB1 observed in vitro. In contrast, this mutational 
pattern is not found in HCC samples from moderate or low aflatoxin exposure 
countries or regions. Therefore, this hot-spot mutation is believed to be a 
molecular fingerprint linking the initial event of AFB1-DNA adduct formation 
with the ultimate development and progress of human HCC. However, some important 
points still remain to be explicated. First, in many of these studies, the 
systematic evaluation of AFB1 exposure is rather limited and the classification 
of AFB1 exposure level is speculative and confusing, without the definite 
evidence for the actual aflatoxin exposure level. Second, the role of 
hepadnaviral infection has to be considered in the induction of this unique 
mutational spectrum. On the other hand, ras oncogene mutations are frequently 
found in AFB1-induced HCC samples in experimental animals, while the frequency 
of ras mutation in human HCC in contrast is much lower than that of p53. Recent 
studies have provided additional evidence that reactive oxygen species (ROS) and 
oxidative DNA damage may be involved in AFB1-induced p53 and ras mutations. In 
future, follow-up cohorts exposed to different levels of AFB1 combined with the 
determination of putative gene markers are much needed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-1110(96)90005-6
PMID: 8921985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]