1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 26;93(24):13726-30. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.24.13726.

Defective subunit assembly underlies a digenic form of retinitis pigmentosa 
linked to mutations in peripherin/rds and rom-1.

Goldberg AF(1), Molday RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular-Biology, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a group of progressive retinal dystrophies that 
include the most common hereditary degenerative disease affecting the retina. 
Although most disease phenotypes appear to result from defects at single genetic 
loci (monogenic), at least one instance of RP appears to require a coinheritance 
of defects in the unlinked peripherin/rds and rom-1 alleles (digenic), which 
encode the polypeptide subunits of an oligomeric transmembrane protein complex 
present at photoreceptor outer segment disc rims. Sedimentation velocity 
analysis was performed upon the affected gene products expressed heterologously 
in COS-1 cells to examine the assembly of the subunit polypeptides. The results 
indicate that the missense peripherin/rds mutant, L185P, which segregates with 
instance of digenically inherited RP, is conditionally defective with respect to 
its subunit assembly. Unlike wild-type peripherin/rds, the L185P mutant does not 
form native-like homotetramers on its own; however, the L185P mutant can 
assemble with wild-type rom-1 to form a structurally normal heterotetrameric 
complex. These findings provide a novel molecular-based rationale for the 
unusual digenic disease inheritance pattern and offer insight into regions of 
peripherin/rds and rom-1, which contribute to subunit-subunit interactions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.24.13726
PMCID: PMC19405
PMID: 8943002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]