1. Biochem J. 1996 Nov 15;320 ( Pt 1)(Pt 1):69-77. doi: 10.1042/bj3200069.

Association between phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase, Cbl and other tyrosine 
phosphorylated proteins in colony-stimulating factor-1-stimulated macrophages.

Kanagasundaram V(1), Jaworowski A, Hamilton JA.

Author information:
(1)University of Melbourne, Department of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) stimulation of the macrophage cell line 
BAC1.2F5 and murine bone marrow-derived macrophages resulted in tyrosine 
phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3 kinase) p85 alpha and its 
stable association with several tyrosine phosphorylated proteins, including 
CSF-1 receptor (p165), p120, p95 and p55-p60. p120 co-migrated with the product 
of the protooncogene c-cb1 in anti-p85 alpha immunoprecipitates, and associated 
with p85 alpha in a rapid and transient manner. Reciprocal experiments confirmed 
the presence of p85 alpha in anti-Cb1 immunoprecipitates on CSF-1 stimulation of 
macrophages. PI-3 kinase immunoprecipitates from the myeloid FDC-P1 cell line 
expressing mutant CSF-1 receptor (Y721F), which does not associate with PI-3 
kinase, still contained Cbl. The identity of the tyrosine phosphorylated protein 
p95 remains unknown. The interaction between p85 alpha and the tyrosine 
phosphorylated proteins survived anion-exchange chromatography, suggesting 
perhaps the presence of a stable complex; furthermore, in CSF-1-treated BAC1.2F5 
cell extracts, only one of the two pools of PI-3 kinase separated by 
chromatography was present in this putative complex. The association did not 
appear to correlate with proliferation, since a similar interaction between p85 
alpha and tyrosine phosphorylated proteins was also observed in poorly 
proliferating resident peritoneal macrophages stimulated with CSF-1. The 
possible significance of these findings for CSF-1-regulated macrophage functions 
is discussed.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3200069
PMCID: PMC1217899
PMID: 8947469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]