1. Proteins. 1996 Nov;26(3):288-303. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1097-0134(199611)26:3<288::AID-PROT5>3.0.CO;2-A.

Modeling of serpin-protease complexes: antithrombin-thrombin, alpha 
1-antitrypsin (358Met-->Arg)-thrombin, alpha 1-antitrypsin 
(358Met-->Arg)-trypsin, and antitrypsin-elastase.

Whisstock J(1), Lesk AM, Carrell R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, Medical Research Council Centre, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

Based on the most recent available crystal structures and biochemical studies of 
protease complexes of normal and mutant serine protease inhibitors (serpins), we 
have built models of the complexes: alpha 1-antitrypsin + human neutrophil 
elastase; alpha 1-antitrypsin Pittsburgh (358Met-->Arg) (Scott et al., J. Clin. 
Invest. 77:631-634, 1986) + tyrpsin; alpha 1-antitrypsin Pittsburgh 
(358Met-->Arg) + thrombin; and antithrombin + thrombin. All serpin sequences 
correspond to human molecules. The models show correct stereochemistry and no 
steric clashes between protease and inhibitor. The main structural differences 
in the serpins from the parent structures are: (1) the reactive center loop is 
inserted into the A-sheet as far as P12; (2) strand s1C is removed from the 
C-sheet; and (3) the C-terminus has changed conformation and interacts with the 
protease. In the absence of an X-ray structure determination of a 
serpin-protease complex, the demonstration that insertion of the reactive center 
loop into the A-sheet as far as P12 is stereochemically feasible provides 
structures of a protease-bound conformation of intact serpins with which to 
rationalize the properties of mutants, guide the design of experiments, and form 
a basis for further modeling studies, such as the investigation of the 
interaction of heparin with serpin-protease complexes.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0134(199611)26:3<288::AID-PROT5>3.0.CO;2-A
PMID: 8953650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]