1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Dec 24;93(26):15018-23. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.26.15018.

Regulation of product chain length by isoprenyl diphosphate synthases.

Tarshis LC(1), Proteau PJ, Kellogg BA, Sacchettini JC, Poulter CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461, USA.

An analysis of the x-ray structure of homodimeric avian farnesyl diphosphate 
synthase (geranyltransferase, EC 2.5.1.10) coupled with information about 
conserved amino acids obtained from a sequence alignment of 35 isoprenyl 
diphosphate synthases that synthesize farnesyl (C15), geranylgeranyl (C20), and 
higher chain length isoprenoid diphosphates suggested that the side chains of 
residues corresponding to F112 and F113 in the avian enzyme were important for 
determining the ultimate length of the hydrocarbon chains. This hypothesis was 
supported by site-directed mutagenesis to transform wild-type avian farnesyl 
diphosphate synthase (FPS) into synthases capable of producing geranylgeranyl 
diphosphate (F112A), geranylfarnesyl (C25) diphosphate (F113S), and longer chain 
prenyl diphosphates (F112A/F113S). An x-ray analysis of the structure of the 
F112A/F113S mutant in the apo state and with allylic substrates bound produced 
the strongest evidence that these mutations caused the observed change in 
product specificity by directly altering the size of the binding pocket for the 
growing isoprenoid chain in the active site of the enzyme. The proposed binding 
pocket in the apo mutant structure was increased in depth by 5.8 A as compared 
with that for the wild-type enzyme. Allylic diphosphates were observed in the 
holo structures, bound through magnesium ions to the aspartates of the first of 
two conserved aspartate-rich sequences (D117-D121), with the hydrocarbon tails 
of all the ligands growing down the hydrophobic pocket toward the mutation site. 
A model was constructed to show how the growth of a long chain prenyl product 
may proceed by creation of a hydrophobic passageway from the FPS active site to 
the outside surface of the enzyme.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.26.15018
PMCID: PMC26348
PMID: 8986756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]