1. Br J Cancer. 1997;75(1):2-8. doi: 10.1038/bjc.1997.2.

Infrequent methylation of CDKN2A(MTS1/p16) and rare mutation of both CDKN2A and 
CDKN2B(MTS2/p15) in primary astrocytic tumours.

Schmidt EE(1), Ichimura K, Messerle KR, Goike HM, Collins VP.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Oncology and Pathology, Division of Tumour Pathology, 
Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

In a series of 46 glioblastomas, 16 anaplastic astrocytomas and eight 
astrocytomas, all tumours retaining one or both alleles of CDKN2A (48 tumours) 
and CDKN2B (49 tumours) were subjected to sequence analysis (entire coding 
region and splice acceptor and donor sites). One glioblastoma with hemizygous 
deletion of CDKN2A showed a missense mutation in exon 2 (codon 83) that would 
result in the substitution of tyrosine for histidine in the protein. None of the 
tumours retaining alleles of CDKN2B showed mutations of this gene. Glioblastomas 
with retention of both alleles of CDKN2A (14 tumours) and CDKN2B (16 tumours) 
expressed transcripts for these genes. In contrast, 7/13 glioblastomas with 
hemizygous deletions of CDKN2A and 8/11 glioblastomas with hemizygous deletions 
of CDKN2B showed no or weak expression. Anaplastic astrocytomas and astrocytomas 
showed a considerable variation in the expression of both genes, regardless of 
whether they retained one or two copies of the genes. The methylation status of 
the 5' CpG island of the CDKN2A gene was studied in all 15 tumours retaining 
only one allele of CDKN2A as well as in the six tumours showing no significant 
expression of transcript despite their retaining both CDKN2A alleles. Three 
tumours (one of each malignancy grade studied) were found to have partially 
methylated the 5' CpG island of CDKN2A. It appears that in human astrocytic 
gliomas point mutations of the CDKN2A and CDKN2B genes are uncommon and 
hypermethylation of the 5' CpG region of CDKN2A does not appear to be a major 
mechanism for inhibiting transcription of this gene.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.1997.2
PMCID: PMC2222701
PMID: 9000591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]