1. J Mol Biol. 1996 Dec 20;264(5):1072-84. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1996.0697.

The crystal structure of a hyperthermophilic archaeal TATA-box binding protein.

DeDecker BS(1), O'Brien R, Fleming PJ, Geiger JH, Jackson SP, Sigler PB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry and the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511-8114, USA.

This study analyzes the three-dimensional structure of the TATA-box binding 
protein (TBP) from the hyperthermophilic archaea Pyrococcus woesei. The crystal 
structure of P. woesei TBP (PwTBP) was solved at 2.2 A by X-ray diffraction and 
as expected from sequence homology (36% to 41% identical to eukaryotic TBPs) its 
overall structure is very similar to eukaryotic TBPs. The thermal unfolding 
transition temperature of this protein was measured by differential scanning 
calorimetry to be 101 degrees C, which is more than 40 degrees C higher than 
that of yeast TBP. Preliminary titration calorimetry data show that the affinity 
of PwTBP for its DNA target, unlike its eukaryotic counterparts, is enhanced by 
increasing the temperature and salt concentration. The structure reveals 
possible explanations for this thermostability and these unusual DNA binding 
properties. The crystal structure of this hyperthermostable protein was compared 
to its mesophilic homologs and analyzed for differences in the native structure 
that may contribute to thermostability. Differences found were: (1) a disulfide 
bond not found in mesophilic counterparts; (2) an increased number of surface 
electrostatic interactions; (3) more compact protein packing. The presumed DNA 
binding surface of PwTBP, like its eukaryotic counterparts, is hydrophobic but 
the electrostatic profile surrounding the protein is relatively neutral compared 
to the asymmetric positive potential that surrounds eukaryotic TBPs. The total 
reliance on a hydrophobic interface with DNA may explain the enhanced affinity 
of PwTBP for its DNA promoter at higher temperatures and increased salt 
concentration.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1996.0697
PMID: 9000631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]