1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1996 Dec;59(5-6):467-78. doi: 
10.1016/s0960-0760(96)00142-2.

Human dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase pharmacogenetics: quantitative 
Western analysis and gene sequence polymorphisms.

Wood TC(1), Her C, Aksoy I, Otterness DM, Weinshilboum RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Mayo Medical School/Mayo Clinic/Mayo Foundation, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase (DHEA ST) catalyzes the sulfation of 
DHEA and other hydroxysteroids. DHEA ST enzymatic activity in individual human 
liver biopsy samples has been shown to vary over a five-fold range, and 
frequency distribution histograms are bimodal, with approximately 25% of 
subjects included in a high activity subgroup. We set out to characterize the 
molecular basis for variation in human liver DHEA ST activity. The first step 
involved performing quantitative Western analysis of cytosol preparations from 
92 human liver samples that had been phenotyped with regard to level of DHEA ST 
enzymatic activity. There was a highly significant correlation (r(s) = 0.635, P 
< 0.0001) between levels of DHEA ST activity and immunoreactive protein. We next 
attempted to determine whether the expression of DHEA ST might be controlled, in 
part, by a genetic polymorphism. DNA was isolated from three "low" and three 
"high" DHEA ST activity liver samples. Exons and the 5'-flanking region of the 
DHEA ST gene (STD) were amplified for each of these samples with the polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR). When compared with "wild type" STD sequence, some of the 
samples contained a T --> C transition at DHEA ST cDNA nucleotide 170, located 
within exon 2, resulting in a Met 57 --> Thr change in amino acid. Other samples 
contained an A --> T transversion at nucleotide 557 within STD exon 4 that 
resulted in a Glu 186 --> Val change. STD exons 2 and 4 were then sequenced for 
DNA isolated from an additional 87 liver samples that had been phenotyped with 
regard to level of DHEA ST enzymatic activity. The allele frequency for the exon 
2 polymorphism in these samples was 0.027, whereas that for the exon 4 
polymorphism was 0.038, but neither polymorphism was systematically related to 
the level of enzyme activity in these samples. Transient expression in COS-1 
cells of cDNA that contained the nucleotide 170 and 557 polymorphisms, either 
separately or together, resulted in decreased expression of both DHEA ST 
enzymatic activity and level of immunoreactive protein, but only when the 
nucleotide 557 variant was present. Identification of common genetic 
polymorphisms within STD will now make it possible to test the hypothesis that 
those polymorphisms might alter in vivo expression and/or function of this 
important human steroid-metabolizing enzyme.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-0760(96)00142-2
PMID: 9010352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]