1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 28;272(9):6067-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.9.6067.

Staphylokinase requires NH2-terminal proteolysis for plasminogen activation.

Schlott B(1), Gührs KH, Hartmann M, Röcker A, Collen D.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, 07745 Jena, Germany.

Staphylokinase (Sak), a single-chain protein comprising 136 amino acids with 
NH2-terminal sequence,SSSFDKGKYKKGDDA forms a complex with plasmin, that is 
endowed with plasminogen activating properties. Plasmin is presumed to process 
mature (high molecular weight, HMW) Sak to low molecular weight derivatives 
(LMW-Sak), primarily by hydrolyzing the Lys10-Lys11 peptide bond, but the 
kinetics of plasminogen activation by HMW-Sak and LMW-Sak are very similar. 
Here, the requirement of NH2-terminal proteolysis of Sak for the induction of 
plasminogen activating potential was studied by mutagenesis of Lys10 and Lys11 
in combination with NH2-terminal microsequence analysis of equimolar mixtures of 
Sak and plasminogen and determination of kinetic parameters of plasminogen 
activation by catalytic amounts of Sak. Substitution of Lys10 with Arg did not 
affect processing of the Arg10-Lys11 site nor plasminogen activation, whereas 
substitution with His resulted in cleavage of the Lys11-Gly12 peptide bond and 
abolished plasminogen activation. Substitution of Lys11 with Arg did not affect 
Lys10-Arg11 processing or plasminogen activation, whereas replacement with His 
did not prevent Lys10-His11 hydrolysis but abolished plasminogen activation. 
Substitution of Lys11 with Cys yielded an inactive processed derivative which 
was fully activated by aminoethylation. Deletion of the 10 NH2-terminal amino 
acids did not affect plasminogen activation, but additional deletion of Lys11 
eliminated plasminogen activation. Thus generation of plasminogen activator 
potential in Sak proceeds via plasmin-mediated removal of the 10 NH2-terminal 
amino acids with exposure of Lys11 as the new NH2 terminus. This provides a 
structural basis for the hypothesis, derived from kinetic measurements, that 
plasminogen activation by Sak needs to be primed by plasmin and a mechanism for 
the high fibrin selectivity of Sak in a plasma milieu.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.9.6067
PMID: 9038231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]