1. Ophthalmology. 1997 Feb;104(2):299-306. doi: 10.1016/s0161-6420(97)30320-0.

Serine-27-phenylalanine mutation within the peripherin/RDS gene in a family with 
cone dystrophy.

Fishman GA(1), Stone EM, Alexander KR, Gilbert LD, Derlacki DJ, Butler NS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Illinois, 
Chicago College of Medicine 60612, USA.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the clinical and electrophysiologic findings in a family 
with two heterozygous sequence changes in the peripherin-retinal degeneration 
slow (RDS) gene.
METHODS: A family study was done of a pedigree obtained by screening for 
rhodopsin, peripherin/RDS, or rom-1 gene mutations in probands from families 
with hereditary retinal diseases. The patients consisted of three affected and 
four unaffected members from a family with cone dystrophy. Ophthalmoscopy, 
visual field testing, electroretinography, and DNA analysis were performed.
RESULTS: Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis showed the presence of two 
different sequence changes in the RDS genes of this family. In three members 
with a retinal disease, the authors observed the substitution of phenylalanine 
for serine in codon 27 (serine-27-phenylalanine). The clinical and functional 
findings in these three patients were most consistent with autosomal-dominant 
cone dystrophy. Three other family members, unaffected with retinal disease, 
were found to show a substitution of serine for cysteine in codon 72 of the 
peripherin protein.
CONCLUSION: A peripherin/RDS sequence change may produce a cone dystrophy with 
minimal ophthalmoscopic changes in the macula and limited peripheral 
degenerative changes. Caution is warranted to avoid ascribing nondisease-causing 
sequence polymorphisms in candidate genes as responsible for determining the 
development of a retinal disease phenotype.

DOI: 10.1016/s0161-6420(97)30320-0
PMID: 9052636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]