1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Mar 15;339(2):344-52. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1997.9887.

Critical roles for arginine 1061/1060 and tyrosine 1057 in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae arginine-specific carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase.

Lim AL(1), Powers-Lee SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, 02115, 
USA.

Carbamoyl-phosphate synthetases (CPSases) bind two molecules of ATP at two 
internally duplicated domains. Previous affinity labeling studies with the ATP 
analog 5'-p-fluorosulfonylbenzoyladenosine (FSBA; Kim, H., Kelly, R. E., and 
Evans, D. R. (1991) Biochemistry 30, 10322-10329; Potter, M. D., and Powers-Lee, 
S. G. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267, 2023-2031) have identified several peptides as 
being near the ATP sites, with most of the FSBA-labeled peptides localized to 
the internally duplicated domains. However, two of the FSBA-labeled peptides 
were localized to the third domain of CPSase, an autonomously folded but 
flexible domain at the extreme C-terminus of the protein. These findings 
suggested that the C-terminal domain is also involved in interaction with both 
molecules of ATP and that it might serve to complement the ATP binding sites on 
the duplicated domains by participating in catalytic processing of the ATP 
molecules. To further define the role of the C-terminal domain in ATP 
utilization, we have now carried out site-directed mutagenic analysis of peptide 
1052-1061 of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae arginine-specific CPSase. Aspartate 
residues at positions 1053, 1054, and 1056 did not appear to play a significant 
role in CPSase structure or function. However, tyrosine 1057 was critical for 
CPSase structure and the presence of one of the tandem arginyl residues at 
positions 1061 and 1060 was critical for CPSase catalytic function.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1997.9887
PMID: 9056267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]