1. Nat Genet. 1997 Apr;15(4):393-6. doi: 10.1038/ng0497-393.

Unstable minisatellite expansion causing recessively inherited myoclonus 
epilepsy, EPM1.

Virtaneva K(1), D'Amato E, Miao J, Koskiniemi M, Norio R, Avanzini G, 
Franceschetti S, Michelucci R, Tassinari CA, Omer S, Pennacchio LA, Myers RM, 
Dieguez-Lucena JL, Krahe R, de la Chapelle A, Lehesjoki AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, 
Finland.

Progressive myoclonus epilepsy of Unverricht-Lundborg type (EPM1; MIM 254800) is 
an autosomal recessive disorder that occurs with a low frequency in many 
populations but is more common in Finland and the Mediterranean region. It is 
characterized by stimulus-sensitive myoclonus and tonic-clonic seizures with 
onset at age 6-15 years, typical electroencephalographic abnormalities and a 
variable rate of progression between and within families. Following the initial 
mapping of the EPM1 gene to chromosome 21 (ref. 6) and the refinement of the 
critical region to a small interval, positional cloning identified the gene 
encoding cystatin B (CST6), a cysteine protease inhibitor, as the gene 
underlying EPM1 (ref. 10). Levels of messenger RNA encoded by CST6 were 
dramatically decreased in patients. A 3' splice site and a stop codon mutation 
were identified in three families, leaving most mutations uncharacterized. In 
this study, we report a novel type of disease-causing mutation, an unstable 15- 
to 18-mer minisatellite repeat expansion in the putative promoter region of the 
CST6 gene. The mutation accounts for the majority of EPM1 patients worldwide. 
Haplotype data are compatible with a single ancestral founder mutation. The 
length of the repeat array differs between chromosomes and families, but changes 
in repeat number seem to be comparatively rare events.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0497-393
PMID: 9090386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]