1. J Exp Med. 1997 Mar 17;185(6):1023-33. doi: 10.1084/jem.185.6.1023.

Peptide-independent recognition by alloreactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL).

Smith PA(1), Brunmark A, Jackson MR, Potter TA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory 
Medicine, Denver, Colorado 80206-2761, USA.

We have isolated several H-2K(b)-alloreactive cytotoxic T cell clones and 
analyzed their reactivity for several forms of H-2K(b). These cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes (CTL) were elicited by priming with a skin graft followed by in 
vitro stimulation using stimulator cells that express an H-2K(b) molecule unable 
to bind CD8. In contrast to most alloreactive T cells, these CTL were able to 
recognize H-2K(b) on the surface of the antigen processing defective cell lines 
RMA-S and T2. Furthermore, this reactivity was not increased by the addition of 
an extract containing peptides from C57BL/6 (H-2(b)) spleen cells, nor was the 
reactivity decreased by treating the target cells with acid to remove peptides 
bound to MHC molecules. The CTL were also capable of recognizing targets 
expressing the mutant H-2K(bm8) molecule. These findings suggested that the 
clones recognized determinants on H-2K(b) that were independent of peptide. 
Further evidence for this hypothesis was provided by experiments in which 
H-2K(b) produced in Drosophila melanogaster cells and immobilized on the surface 
of a tissue culture plate was able to stimulate hybridomas derived from these 
alloreactive T cells. Precursor frequency analysis demonstrated that skin graft 
priming, whether with skin expressing the wild-type or the mutant H-2K(b) 
molecule, is a strong stimulus to elicit peptide-independent CTL. Moreover, 
reconstitution experiments demonstrated that the peptide-independent CTL clones 
were capable of mediating rapid and complete rejection of H-2-incompatible skin 
grafts. These findings provide evidence that not all allorecognition is peptide 
dependent.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.185.6.1023
PMCID: PMC2196245
PMID: 9091576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]