1. J Virol. 1997 May;71(5):3904-15. doi: 10.1128/JVI.71.5.3904-3915.1997.

The A34R glycoprotein gene is required for induction of specialized 
actin-containing microvilli and efficient cell-to-cell transmission of vaccinia 
virus.

Wolffe EJ(1), Katz E, Weisberg A, Moss B.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0445, USA.

The mechanisms allowing vaccinia virus to spread from cell to cell are 
incompletely understood. The A34R gene of vaccinia virus encodes a glycoprotein 
that is localized in the outer membranes of extracellular virions. The 
small-plaque phenotype of an A34R deletion mutant was similar to that of mutants 
with deletions in other envelope genes that fail to produce extracellular 
vaccinia virions. Transmission electron microscopy, however, revealed that the 
A34R mutant produced numerous extracellular particles that were labeled with 
antibodies to other outer-envelope proteins and with protein A-colloidal gold. 
Fluorescence and scanning electron microscopy indicated that expression of the 
A34R protein was necessary for detection of vaccinia virus-induced actin tails, 
which provide motility to the intracellular enveloped form of vaccinia virus, 
and of virus-tipped specialized microvilli that project from the cell. The 
ability of vaccinia virus-infected cells to form syncytia after a brief exposure 
to a pH below 6, known as fusion from within, failed to occur in the absence of 
expression of the A34R protein; nevertheless, purified A34R- virions were 
capable of mediating low-pH-induced fusion from without. The present study 
provides genetic and microscopic evidence for the involvement of a specific 
viral protein in the formation or stability of actin-containing microvilli and 
for a role of these structures in cell-to-cell spread rather than in formation 
of extracellular virions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.5.3904-3915.1997
PMCID: PMC191542
PMID: 9094667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]