1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1997 Mar;155(3):1004-10. doi: 
10.1164/ajrccm.155.3.9116979.

Pulmonary involvement in Fabry disease.

Brown LK(1), Miller A, Bhuptani A, Sloane MF, Zimmerman MI, Schilero G, Eng CM, 
Desnick RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.

Fabry disease is an X-linked inborn error of metabolism resulting from deficient 
activity of alpha-galactosidase A. Although several case reports have suggested 
an association between Fabry disease and airway obstruction, this has not been 
investigated in a large series of patients. We studied 25 unselected, 
consecutive, enzymatically diagnosed men referred to a General Clinical Research 
Center for evaluation. Thirty-six percent complained of dyspnea, and 24% had 
cough and/or wheezing. Symptoms were similar in smokers and nonsmokers. Nine 
(36%) had airway obstruction on spirometry; this finding was associated with age 
> or = 26 yr (p < 0.05) and dyspnea or wheezing (p < 0.005), but only weakly 
with smoking (p = 0.062). Five of eight patients responded to bronchodilators, 
but all 10 methacholine challenges were negative. Chest radiographs revealed 
normal lung fields in 24 patients and streaky bibasilar densities in one. No 
pulmonary uptake occurred on 67Ga citrate scans (18 patients) and 111In-tagged 
leukocyte scans (16 patients). Specific alpha-galactosidase A mutations were 
identified in 17 patients; all three patients with frameshift mutations and both 
subjects with the D264V missense mutation had obstructive impairment. We 
conclude that airway obstruction commonly occurs in patients with Fabry disease 
regardless of smoking history, and it increases with age. The presence of 
obstruction may be associated with certain mutations and most likely results 
from fixed narrowing of the airways by accumulated glycosphingolipid.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.155.3.9116979
PMID: 9116979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]