1. Arch Toxicol. 1997;71(5):332-5. doi: 10.1007/s002040050394.

Renal cell carcinomas in trichloroethene (TRI) exposed persons are associated 
with somatic mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumour suppressor gene.

Brüning T(1), Weirich G, Hornauer MA, Höfler H, Brauch H.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Arbeitsphysiologie, Universität Dortmund, Germany.

Renal cell carcinomas (RCC) develop as a consequence of somatic mutations of the 
von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumour suppressor gene. Recent epidemiological studies 
show that high and prolonged occupational exposures to trichloroethene (TRI) are 
associated with an increased incidence of RCC. Tumour tissues from 23 RCC 
patients with occupational histories of very high TRI exposure were analysed for 
somatic mutations within the VHL gene. DNA was isolated from microdissected 
tumour cells, amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and analysed in 
single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and sequencing. RCC tissues of 
all 23 TRI exposed persons analysed thus far showed aberrations of the VHL gene, 
with 30% having aberrations in exon 1, 44% in exon 2, and 26% in exon 3. By 
comparison to much lower reported VHL mutation frequencies of 33-55% in 
TRI-unexposed RCC patients, these results indicate a specifically high mutation 
frequency at the VHL gene in TRI-exposed RCC patients; four of these aberrations 
have thus far been confirmed as VHL mutations by sequence analysis. This finding 
indicates the VHL gene being a susceptible and specific target in TRI induced 
renal carcinogenesis. Furthermore, the frequent involvement of exon 2 identifies 
potential 'hot spots' for this carcinogen. In addition to the available 
epidemiological studies the results are now further proof for human renal 
carcinogenicity induced by high occupational exposures to TRI.

DOI: 10.1007/s002040050394
PMID: 9137812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]