1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 May 27;94(11):5656-61. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.11.5656.

Conditional activation defect of a human Gsalpha mutant.

Iiri T(1), Farfel Z, Bourne HR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, S-1212, Box 0450, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Hormonal signals activate trimeric G proteins by promoting exchange of GTP for 
GDP bound to the G protein's alpha subunit (Galpha). Here we describe a point 
mutation that impairs this activation mechanism in the alpha subunit of Gs, 
producing an inherited disorder of hormone responsiveness. Biochemical analysis 
reveals an activation defect that is paradoxically intensified by hormonal and 
other stimuli. By substituting histidine for a conserved arginine residue, the 
mutation removes an internal salt bridge (to a conserved glutamate) that 
normally acts as an intramolecular hasp to maintain tight binding of the 
gamma-phosphate of GTP. In its basal, unperturbed state, the mutant alphas binds 
guanosine 5'-[gamma-thio]triphosphate (GTP[gammaS]), a GTP analog, slightly less 
tightly than does normal alphas, but (in the GTP[gammaS]-bound form) can 
stimulate adenylyl cyclase. The activation defect becomes prominent only under 
conditions that destabilize binding of guanine nucleotide (receptor stimulation) 
or impair the ability of alphas to bind the gamma-phosphate of GTP (cholera 
toxin, AlF4- ion). Although GDP release is usually the rate-limiting step in 
nucleotide exchange, the biochemical phenotype of this mutant alphas indicates 
that efficient G protein activation by receptors and other stimuli depends on 
the ability of Galpha to clasp tightly the GTP molecule that enters the binding 
site.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.11.5656
PMCID: PMC20834
PMID: 9159128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]