1. Biol Chem. 1997 Mar-Apr;378(3-4):273-81. doi: 10.1515/bchm.1997.378.3-4.273.

Purification and primary structure determination of a Bowman-Birk trypsin 
inhibitor from Torresea cearensis seeds.

Tanaka AS(1), Sampaio MU, Marangoni S, de Oliveira B, Novello JC, Oliva ML, Fink 
E, Sampaio CA.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquimica, Universidade Federal de SÃ£o Paulo, Escola 
Paulista de Medicina, UNIFESP, Brazil.

A Bowman-Birk-type trypsin inhibitor (TcTI) was purified from seeds of Torresea 
cearensis, a Brazilian native tree of the Papilionoideae sub-family of 
Leguminosae. Three forms of the inhibitor were separated by anion exchange 
chromatography. The major form with 63 amino acids was entirely sequenced; it 
shows a high structural similarity to the Bowman-Birk inhibitors from other 
Leguminosae. The putative reactive sites of the inhibitor are a lysine residue 
at position 15 and a histidine at position 42 as identified by alignment to 
related inhibitors, direct chemical modification and specific enzymatic 
degradation. Immunoprecipitation with antibodies raised in rats is reduced 
significantly if TcTI is complexed with chymotrypsin and, to a lesser degree, if 
complexed with trypsin. TcTI forms a ternary complex with trypsin and 
chymotrypsin. The binary complexes with trypsin or chymotrypsin were isolated by 
gel filtration. Dissociation constants of the complexes with trypsin, plasmin, 
chymotrypsin, and factor XIIa are 1, 36, 50, 1450 nM, respectively; human plasma 
kallikrein, human factor Xa, porcine pancreatic kallikrein and bovine thrombin 
are not inhibited. TcTI prolongs blood clotting time of the contact phase 
activation pathway by inhibition of FXIIa.

DOI: 10.1515/bchm.1997.378.3-4.273
PMID: 9165081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]