1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 6;272(23):14497-500. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.23.14497.

Redox regulation of the DNA binding activity in transcription factor PEBP2. The 
roles of two conserved cysteine residues.

Akamatsu Y(1), Ohno T, Hirota K, Kagoshima H, Yodoi J, Shigesada K.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, 
Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-01,-Japan.

Transcription factor PEBP2/CBF consists of a DNA binding subunit, alpha, and a 
regulatory subunit, beta. The alpha subunit has an evolutionarily conserved 
128-amino acid region termed "Runt domain" that is responsible for both DNA 
binding and heterodimerization with the beta subunit. The Runt domain in all 
mammalian submembers of the alpha subunit contains two conserved cysteine 
residues, and its DNA binding activity undergoes redox regulation. To 
investigate the mechanism of this redox regulation, we performed site-directed 
mutagenesis of the two conserved cysteines in the Runt domain of the mouse 
PEBP2alphaA homolog. Substitution of Cys-115 to serine resulted in a partially 
impaired DNA binding, which remained highly sensitive to a thiol-oxidizing 
reagent, diamide. Conversely, the corresponding substitution of Cys-124 caused 
an increased DNA binding concomitant with an increased resistance to diamide. In 
contrast, substitution of either cysteine to aspartate was destructive to DNA 
binding to marked extents. These results have revealed that both Cys-115 and 
Cys-124 are responsible for the redox regulation in their own ways with low and 
high oxidizabilities, respectively. We have also found that two cellular 
thiol-reactive proteins, thioredoxin and Ref-1, work effectively and 
synergistically for activation of the Runt domain. Interestingly, the beta 
subunit further enhanced the activation by these proteins and reciprocally 
prevented the oxidative inactivation by diamide. These findings collectively 
suggest the possibility that the Runt domain's function in vivo could be 
dynamically regulated by the redox mechanism with Trx, Ref-1, and the beta 
subunit as key modulators.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.23.14497
PMID: 9169404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]