1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 20;272(25):15739-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.25.15739.

Localization and suppression of a kinetic defect in cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator folding.

Qu BH(1), Strickland EH, Thomas PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas 75235-9040, USA.

A growing body of evidence indicates that the most common cystic 
fibrosis-causing mutation, DeltaF508, alters the ability of the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein to fold and transit to the 
plasma membrane. Here we present evidence that the DeltaF508 mutation affects a 
step on the folding pathway prior to formation of the ATP binding site in the 
nucleotide binding domain (NBD). Notably, stabilization of the native state with 
4 mM ATP does not alter the temperature-dependent folding yield of the mutant 
DeltaF508 NBD1 in vitro. In contrast, glycerol, which promotes DeltaF508-CFTR 
maturation in vivo, increases the folding yield of NBD1DeltaF and reduces the 
off pathway rate in vitro, although it does not significantly alter the free 
energy of stability. Likewise a second site mutation, R553M, which corrects the 
maturation defect in vivo, is a superfolder which counters the effects of 
DeltaF508 on the temperature-dependent folding yield in vitro, but does not 
significantly alter the free energy of stability. A disease-causing mutation, 
G551D, which does not alter the maturation of CFTR in vivo but rather its 
function as a chloride channel, and the S549R maturation mutation have no 
discernible effect on the folding of the domain. These results demonstrate that 
DeltaF508 is a kinetic folding mutation that affects a step early in the 
process, and that there is a significant energy barrier between the native state 
and the step affected by the mutation precluding the use of native state ligands 
to promote folding. The implications for protein folding in general are that the 
primary sequence may not necessarily simply define the most stable native 
structure, but rather a stable structure that is kinetically accessible.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.25.15739
PMID: 9188468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]