1. Blood. 1997 Jun 15;89(12):4348-54.

The carbohydrate moiety of factor V modulates inactivation by activated protein 
C.

Fern√°ndez JA(1), Hackeng TM, Kojima K, Griffin JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

An important risk factor for thrombosis is the polymorphism R506Q in factor V 
that causes resistance of factor Va to proteolytic inactivation by activated 
protein C (APC). To study the potential influence of the carbohydrate moieties 
of factor Va on its inactivation by APC, factor V was subjected to mild 
deglycosylation (neuraminidase plus N-glycanase) under nondenaturing conditions. 
The APC resistance ratio values (ratio of activated partial thromboplastin time 
[APTT] clotting times with and without APC) of the treated factor V were 
increased (2.4 to 3.4) as measured in APTT assays. O-glycanase treatment of 
factor V did not change the APC resistance ratio. The procoagulant activity of 
factor V as well as its activation by thrombin was not affected by mild 
deglycosylation. Treatment of factor V with neuraminidase and N-glycanase mainly 
altered the electrophoretic mobility of the factor Va heavy chain, whereas 
treatment with O-glycanase changed the mobility of the connecting region. This 
suggests that the removal of the N-linked carbohydrates from the heavy chain of 
factor Va, which is the substrate for APC, is responsible for the increase in 
susceptibility to inactivation by APC. Thus, variability in carbohydrate could 
account for some of the known variability in APC resistance ratios, including 
the presence of borderline or low APC resistance ratios among patients who lack 
the R506Q mutation.

PMID: 9192757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]