1. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1997 Apr;88(4):407-13. doi: 
10.1111/j.1349-7006.1997.tb00397.x.

Mutational analysis of BRCA1 gene in ovarian and breast-ovarian cancer families 
in Japan.

Takano M(1), Aida H, Tsuneki I, Takakuwa K, Hasegawa I, Tanaka H, Saito M, Tsuji 
S, Sonoda T, Hatae M, Chen JT, Takahashi K, Hasegawa K, Toyoda N, Saito N, 
Yakushiji M, Araki T, Tanaka K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Niigata University School of 
Medicine, Asahimachi-Dori.

We analyzed the alteration of BRCA1 in DNA obtained from 83 individuals of 13 
Japanese site-specific ovarian cancer families and 6 breast-ovarian cancer 
families. Six germline mutations were detected in 7 families, which consisted of 
4 breast-ovarian cancer and 3 site-specific ovarian cancer families, by 
single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis, followed by direct sequence 
determination. The mutations included three frameshifts, two nonsense mutations, 
and one missense mutation causing loss of a zinc-binding motif. The frequency of 
loss of heterozygosity at the microsatellite markers on the BRCA1 gene was 57% 
(8 of 14 cases) in site-specific ovarian cancer families, and 100% (6 of 6 
cases) in breast-ovarian cancer families. All tumors of the patients carrying a 
mutation of BRCA1 showed deletion of wild-type alleles, implicating BRCA1 as a 
tumor suppressor gene. These results suggest that germline mutations of the 
BRCA1 gene play an important role in the carcinogenesis of breast and/or ovarian 
cancer in a majority of breast-ovarian cancer families and in some site-specific 
ovarian cancer families.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.1997.tb00397.x
PMCID: PMC5921420
PMID: 9197534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]