1. J Gen Physiol. 1997 Jun;109(6):767-78. doi: 10.1085/jgp.109.6.767.

Role of transmembrane segment S5 on gating of voltage-dependent K+ channels.

Shieh CC(1), Klemic KG, Kirsch GE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44109, USA.

The cytoplasmic half of S5 (5'S5) has been identified as part of the inner mouth 
of the pore based on evidence that mutations in this region greatly alter single 
channel conductance, 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) block and the rate of channel 
closing upon repolarization (deactivation). The latter effect, suggestive of a 
role for 5'S5 in channel gating was investigated in the present study. The 
biophysical properties of chimeric channels, in which the 5'S5 regions were 
exchanged between two host channels (Kv2.1 and Kv3.1) that differ in 4-AP 
sensitivity and deactivation rate, were examined in a Xenopus oocyte expression 
system. Exchange of 5'S5 between Kv2.1 and Kv3.1 confers steady-state voltage 
dependence of activation and rates of channel deactivation similar to those of 
the donor channel. The involvement of voltage-dependent gating was confirmed by 
the observation that exchanging the 5'S5 segment of Kv2.1 with that of Kv3.1 
confers a change from slow to fast deactivation kinetics by accelerating the 
decay of off-gating charge movement. We suggest that a conformational change 
that extends from the voltage-sensor in S4 to the region of the pore lined by S5 
regulates the stability of the open state. Therefore, the cytoplasmic end of S5, 
in addition to forming part of the conduction pathway near the inner mouth of 
the pore, also participates in the conformational rearrangements associated with 
late steps in channel activation and early steps in deactivation.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.109.6.767
PMCID: PMC2217039
PMID: 9222902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]