1. Pharmacogenetics. 1997 Jun;7(3):211-21. doi: 10.1097/00008571-199706000-00006.

Identification of the polymorphically expressed CYP2C19 and the wild-type 
CYP2C9-ILE359 allele as low-Km catalysts of cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide 
activation.

Chang TK(1), Yu L, Goldstein JA, Waxman DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, MA 02215, USA.

Cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide are alkylating agent prodrugs that require 
activation by cytochrome P450 (CYP) to manifest their cancer chemotherapeutic 
activity. The present study investigates the activity of four individual human 
CYP2C enzymes and their allelic variants in cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide 
activation as an initial attempt to gain insight into the underlying basis for 
the large interpatient differences in the clinical pharmacokinetics and 
metabolism of these anticancer drugs. Recombinant CYP2C8, CYP2C19, two allelic 
variants of CYP2C18, and six variants of CYP2C9 expressed in a yeast cDNA 
expression system were each enzymatically active, as judged by the ability of 
the isolated microsomes to catalyse 7-ethoxycoumarin O-deethylation after 
reconstitution with purified NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase and cytochrome b5. 
With cyclophosphamide as substrate, CYP2C19 had the lowest apparent Km, followed 
by CYP2C9, CYP2C18 and CYP2C8, whereas in the case of ifosfamide, the rank order 
was: Km CYP2C19 < CYP2C18 < CYP2C9 < CYP2C8. CYP2C18 had the highest in vitro 
intrinsic clearance/catalytic efficiency (apparent Vmax/Km) in cyclophosphamide 
and ifosfamide activation, followed by 2C19 > 2C9 approximately 2C8. Examination 
of a panel of CYP2C allelic variants revealed that CYP2C18-Thr385 had both a 
higher Vmax and a higher apparent Km toward cyclophosphamide than CYP2C18-Met385 
with no difference in catalytic efficiency, whereas with ifosfamide the Thr385 
allele exhibited a strikingly lower apparent Km resulting in a six-fold higher 
catalytic efficiency. In the case of CYP2C9, a Ile359 to Leu mutation associated 
with poor metabolism of the hypoglycemic drug tolbutamide decreased catalytic 
efficiency toward cyclophosphamide by increasing the apparent Km, whereas the 
same mutation reduced the efficiency of this P450 toward ifosfamide by 
decreasing the Vmax. Substitution of CYP2C9-Gly417 by Asp resulted in a two-fold 
lower catalytic efficiency for cyclophosphamide metabolism but a three-fold 
higher efficiency for ifosfamide metabolism. A His276 to Gly substitution 
resulted in an increase in both Vmax and apparent Km with no net change in 
catalytic efficiency for either oxazaphosphorine. Mutations at CYP2C9 residues 
144 and 358 had little or no effect. Thus (a) wild type CYP2C19 and CYP2C9 are 
relatively low Km catalysts of cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide activation, and 
(b) all four human CYP2C enzymes activate these two anticancer prodrugs with 
varying efficiencies and with striking differences among naturally occurring 
allelic variants in the case of CYP2C9 and CYP2C18.

DOI: 10.1097/00008571-199706000-00006
PMID: 9241661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]