1. J Hepatol. 1997 Jul;27(1):42-8. doi: 10.1016/s0168-8278(97)80278-4.

Serine protease inhibitors in patients with chronic viral hepatitis.

Elzouki AN(1), Verbaan H, Lindgren S, Widell A, Carlson J, Eriksson S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Lund, University Hospital, Malmo, 
Sweden.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: This study aimed to determine whether deficiency of the major 
serine protease inhibitors (alpha1-antitrypsin (AAT) or alpha1-antichymotrypsin 
(ACT)) is associated with increased risk for chronic hepatitis B or C virus (HBV 
or HCV) infection.
METHODS: We studied 709 adults with chronic liver disease who had undergone 
liver biopsy during the 14-year period 1978-92. Anti-HCV testing was carried out 
with second-generation ELISA and immunoblot assays (RIBA 2). HBV markers were 
tested with commercially available radioimmunoassays. ACT and AAT concentrations 
in plasma were measured with electroimmunoassay and immune nephelometry. Plasma 
samples were screened for the AAT PiZ deficiency with ELISA technique and 
phenotyped by isoelectric focusing. The 229Pro-->Ala mutation for ACT deficiency 
was identified by PCR techniques.
RESULTS: Of the 709 patients, 132 (18.6%) were positive for anti-HCV according 
to RIBA 2. PiZ AAT deficiency was found in 44 (6.2%) of patients (one PiZZ, 38 
PiMZ, and PiSZ), while subnormal ACT levels were found in 33 (4.6%) patients, 
frequencies that were higher than expected in the general population (p=0.0375 
and p<0.0001, respectively). Of the PiZ-carriers, 8/44 (18%) were found to be 
anti-HCV positive according to RIBA 2, as compared to 123/662 (19%) 
non-PiZ-carriers (p>0.05). One of these patients had cirrhosis, four chronic 
active hepatitis, and three chronic persistent hepatitis. In contrast, 17/33 
(51.5%) of the patients with subnormal ACT were anti-HCV positive (OR=5.2, 
CI=2.6-10.6; p<0.0001). No relationship was found between HBV infection and AAT 
deficiency or subnormal ACT levels. Only one patient with subnormal ACT levels 
was heterozygous for the 229Pro-->Ala mutation of ACT deficiency. There was no 
significant difference in the histological findings when the patients with 
subnormal ACT levels or PiZ allele were subgrouped according to HCV status.
CONCLUSIONS: There is no overrepresentation of chronic HBV or HCV in 
heterozygous AAT deficiency, although an association with more severe liver 
disease in such patients cannot be excluded. In contrast, low plasma levels of 
ACT that may be acquired or hereditary, due to mutations other than 
229Pro-->Ala, are frequent in HCV infection.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-8278(97)80278-4
PMID: 9252072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]