1. J Lipid Res. 1997 Jul;38(7):1361-73.

Association of genetic variations in apolipoprotein B with hypercholesterolemia, 
coronary artery disease, and receptor binding of low density lipoproteins.

Ludwig EH(1), Hopkins PN, Allen A, Wu LL, Williams RR, Anderson JL, Ward RH, 
Lalouel JM, Innerarity TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

To search for unique mutations in the apolipoprotein B (apoB) gene that disrupt 
the binding of LDL to its receptor and cause hypercholesterolemia, we examined 
more than 800 patients with high LDL cholesterol levels and/or coronary artery 
disease (CAD). Analysis of patient DNA by single-strand conformation 
polymorphism and allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization of the sequence 
surrounding the putative receptor- binding domain of apoB (amino acid positions 
2965 to 3534) revealed seven variations. LDL from heterozygotes with either Arg 
3500 Gln or Arg 3531 Cys bound defectively with the LDL receptor in competitive 
binding assays. The Arg 3500 Gln substitution was statistically more prevalent 
in patients with hypercholesterolemia (P = 0.0003). Total cholesterol and 
LDL-cholesterol were significantly higher (P< 0.0004) in 34 apoB 3500 Gln 
carriers than in the controls. The allele encoding the Arg 3531 Cys substitution 
was more prevalent (0.8%) in the CAD group (P = 0.05) than in the controls. A 
Ser 3252 Gly variant was statistically more prevalent in the 
hypercholesterolemic group (P = 0.03), but LDL with this mutation had normal LDL 
receptor-binding activity. The other four variants identified (Leu 3350 Leu, Gln 
3405 Glu, Val 3396 Met, and Ser 3455 Arg) were not associated with defective 
LDL-receptor binding, hypercholesterolemia, or CAD, nor were the apoB mutations 
associated with elevated lipid levels in family members. The surprising result 
that only two mutations of apoB in the receptor-binding domain (Arg 3500 Gln and 
Arg 3531 Cys) were associated with defective LDL binding, hypercholesterolemia, 
or CAD is in stark contrast with familial hypercholesterolemia, where nearly 150 
mutations of the LDL receptor have been described that disrupt its function. 
This study strongly suggests that a limited number of mutations of apoB markedly 
influence LDL binding to its receptor.

PMID: 9254062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]