1. Gene. 1997 Jul 9;193(2):141-50. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00079-6.

Molecular cloning of a rod opsin cDNA from the skate retina.

O'Brien J(1), Ripps H, Al-Ubaidi MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Univeristy of Illinois 
College of Medicine, Chicago 60612, USA.

Skates (Raja erinacea and R. ocellata) are among the few animals that have an 
exclusively rod retina. However, skate rods are unusual in that they are capable 
of adapting to extremely high levels of illumination that initially saturate the 
rod photocurrent. This adaptive process restores the ability of the visual cells 
to respond to incremental photic stimuli and enables them to function under 
ambient conditions that are subserved by the cone mechanism in mixed (rod/cone) 
retinae. As a first step towards exploring the molecular basis of visual 
adaptation in the skate retina, we have cloned and analyzed the opsin cDNA from 
a skate retina library. The cDNA codes for a protein 354 amino acids (aa) long 
and 39.7 kDa predicted molecular mass, and labels a single abundant transcript 
of 1.7 kb in retinal RNA. Amino acid alignments and a parsimony analysis of 
nucleotide alignments show the skate opsin to be homologous to other rod opsins. 
An analysis of the aa sequence reveals a high degree of conservation of those 
residues thought to be important for most aspects of rhodopsin function. 
However, a few critical aa replacements may indicate alterations in the 
interactions of skate rhodopsin with other proteins in the phototransduction 
cascade. In particular, replacements of Glu150 with serine and Cys323 with 
leucine are in cytoplasmic domains thought to interact with transducin and 
rhodopsin kinase. The latter change eliminates one of the conserved acylation 
sites in the carboxyl terminal tail. These substitutions increase the similarity 
of the cytoplasmic domains of skate opsin to those of blue-sensitive visual 
pigments.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00079-6
PMID: 9256070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]