1. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Aug;6(8):1275-82. doi: 10.1093/hmg/6.8.1275.

Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) is associated with CTLA4 
polymorphisms in multiple ethnic groups.

Marron MP(1), Raffel LJ, Garchon HJ, Jacob CO, Serrano-Rios M, Martinez Larrad 
MT, Teng WP, Park Y, Zhang ZX, Goldstein DR, Tao YW, Beaurain G, Bach JF, Huang 
HS, Luo DF, Zeidler A, Rotter JI, Yang MC, Modilevsky T, Maclaren NK, She JX.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, College of 
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, USA.

Linkage disequilibrium (association) analysis was used to evaluate a candidate 
region near the CTLA4/CD28 genes using a multi-ethnic collection of families 
with one or more children affected by IDDM. In the data set unique to this study 
(Spanish, French, Mexican-American, Chinese and Korean), the 
transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT) revealed a highly significant deviation 
for transmission of alleles at the (AT)n microsatellite marker in the 3' 
untranslated region (P = 0.002) and the A/G polymorphism in the first exon (P = 
0.00002) of the CTLA4 gene. The overall evidence for transmission deviation of 
the CTLA4 A/G alleles is also highly significant (P = 0.00005) in the combined 
data set (669 multiplex and 357 simplex families) from this study and a previous 
report on families from USA, Italy, UK, Spain and Sardinia. Significant 
heterogeneity was observed in these data sets. The British, Sardinian and 
Chinese data sets did not show any deviation for the A/G polymorphism, while the 
Caucasian-American data set showed a weak transmission deviation. Strong 
deviation for transmission was seen in the three Mediterranean-European 
populations (Italian, Spanish and French) (P = 10(-5)), the Mexican-American 
population (P = 0.002) and the Korean population (P = 0.03). These results 
suggest that a true IDDM susceptibility locus (designated IDDM12) is located 
near CTLA4.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/6.8.1275
PMID: 9259273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]