1. J Mol Biol. 1997 Aug 15;271(2):235-43. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1163.

Modulation of yeast F-actin structure by a mutation in the nucleotide-binding 
cleft.

Orlova A(1), Chen X, Rubenstein PA, Egelman EH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroanatomy, University of Minnesota Medical 
School, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA.

Although the actin sequence is very highly conserved across evolution, 
tissue-specific expression of different isoforms in high eukaryotes suggests 
that different isoforms carry out different functions. However, little 
information exists about either the differences in filaments made from different 
actins or the effects on filament structure caused by the various mutations in 
actin that have been introduced to gain insight into actin function. Using 
electron microscopy and three-dimensional reconstruction, we have studied the 
differences in the filaments made by yeast and rabbit skeletal muscle actin, two 
proteins with 88% homologous sequences, and we have assessed the changes in 
filament structure caused by the introduction of the S14A mutation into yeast 
actin. Elimination of the S14 hydroxyl group, assumed to bind to the 
gamma-phosphate of actin-bound ATP, results in a 40 to 60-fold decrease in 
actin's affinity for ATP. We show that yeast actin displays less extensive 
contacts between the two long-pitch helical strands than does muscle actin, and 
displays the large cooperativity within filaments previously observed for muscle 
actin. Finally, we demonstrate that the S14A mutation narrows the cleft between 
the two lobes of the actin subunit and strengthens the inter-strand connections 
in F-actin.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1163
PMID: 9268655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]