1. Biochemistry. 1997 Sep 16;36(37):11252-60. doi: 10.1021/bi9702952.

Mechanism-based phage display selection of active-site mutants of human 
glutathione transferase A1-1 catalyzing SNAr reactions.

Hansson LO(1), Widersten M, Mannervik B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Uppsala University, Biomedical Center, Box 576, 
S-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.

A library of active-site mutants has been constructed by targeting selected 
amino acid residues in human glutathione transferase (GST) A1-1 for random 
mutagenesis. The mutated residues are suitably positioned for interaction with 
the second, electrophilic substrate, in particular chloronitrobenzene 
derivatives undergoing SNAr reactions. DNA representing the GST A1-1 mutant 
library was fused with DNA encoding gene III protein, a component of the coat of 
filamentous phage. Phage display was used for affinity selection of GST A1-1 
mutants with altered catalytic properties. The affinity ligand used was the 
sigma-complex of 1,3,5-trinitrobenzene and glutathione immobilized to Sepharose. 
The complex was designed to mimic the transition state of SNAr reactions 
catalyzed by GSTs. The selection system is based on the combination of affinity 
for the sigma-complex as well as the ability to promote its formation, thus 
mimicking two salient features of the assumed catalytic mechanism for the SNAr 
reactions. Many of the GST A1-1 mutants selected and analyzed contained an 
aromatic amino acid residue in one of the mutated positions, suggesting 
favorable interactions with the trinitrocyclohexadienate moiety of the affinity 
ligand. A mutant C36 was selected for more detailed studies. Its catalytic 
efficiency with several chloronitrobenzene substrates was 20-90-fold lower than 
that of wild-type GST A1-1, but fully comparable to naturally evolved GSTs of 
different classes, providing a 10(5)-fold rate enhancement over the uncatalyzed 
reaction. In the conjugation of ethacrynic acid, a Michael addition reaction, 
mutant C36 was 13-fold more efficient than the wild-type enzyme. Within 
experimental error, the quotient between the KF values for wild-type GST A1-1 
and mutant C36 is the same as that between the kcat/KM values determined with 
1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene for the two enzyme forms. This result indicates that 
sigma-complex formation is rate-limiting for the catalyzed reaction. Thus, the 
principle of transition-state stabilization as a component of catalysis has been 
successfully exploited in affinity selection of catalytically competent GST A1-1 
mutants. This mechanism-based procedure also selects for the ability to promote 
sigma-complex formation, and serves as a probe of the catalytic mechanism.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9702952
PMID: 9287168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]