1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 19;272(38):23682-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.38.23682.

Internalization of the m2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. 
Arrestin-independent and -dependent pathways.

Pals-Rylaarsdam R(1), Gurevich VV, Lee KB, Ptasienski JA, Benovic JL, Hosey MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern 
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Recent studies have identified agonist-dependent phosphorylation as a critical 
event in the rapid uncoupling of the m2 muscarinic cholinergic receptors (mAChR) 
from G-proteins and sequestration of the receptors away from the cell surface. 
However, mutant m2 mAChRs were identified that were phosphorylated but unable to 
desensitize in adenylyl cyclase assays, while they internalized like wild type 
(WT) mAChRs. We have tested whether these properties might stem from differences 
in the abilities of the WT and mutant mAChR to bind arrestins, proteins 
implicated in both receptor/G-protein uncoupling and internalization. We have 
determined that arrestin binding requires phosphorylation at a cluster of 
Ser/Thr residues in amino acids 307-311 in the m2 mAChR. A strong correlation 
was found between the ability of WT and mutant receptors to bind arrestins in 
vitro or in vivo and to desensitize in adenylyl cyclase assays. However, the 
phosphorylation-dependent internalization of the m2 mAChR in HEK-tsA201 cells 
did not require arrestins and did not proceed via clathrin-mediated endocytosis. 
While the m2 mAChR was able to enter a clathrin- and arrestin-dependent pathway 
when arrestin 2 or arrestin 3 was significantly overexpressed, the preferred 
pathway of internalization of WT and certain mutant m2 mAChR in HEK-tsA201 cells 
did not involve participation of arrestins. The results suggest that the 
phosphorylation-mediated regulation of the m2 mAChR may involve 
arrestin-dependent and -independent events.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.38.23682
PMID: 9295310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]