1. J Gen Physiol. 1997 Nov;110(5):485-502. doi: 10.1085/jgp.110.5.485.

Stoichiometry of recombinant N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor channels inferred 
from single-channel current patterns.

Premkumar LS(1), Auerbach A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysical Sciences, State University of New York, Buffalo, 
New York 14214, USA.

Single-channel currents were recorded from mouse NR1-NR2B (zeta-epsilon2) 
receptors containing mixtures of wild-type and mutant subunits expressed in 
Xenopus oocytes. Mutant subunits had an asparagine-to-glutamine (N-to-Q) 
mutation at the N0 site of the M2 segment (NR1:598, NR2B:589). Receptors with 
pure N or Q NR1 and NR2 subunits generated single-channel currents with 
distinctive current patterns. Based on main and sublevel amplitudes, occupancy 
probabilities, and lifetimes, four patterns of current were identified, 
corresponding to receptors with the following subunit compositions (NR1/NR2): 
N/N, N/Q, Q/N, and Q/Q. Only one current pattern was apparent for each 
composition. When a mixture of N and Q NR2 subunits was coexpressed with pure 
mutant NR1 subunits, three single-channel current patterns were apparent. One 
pattern was the same as Q/Q receptors and another was the same as Q/N receptors. 
The third, novel pattern presumably arose from hybrid receptors having both N 
and Q NR2 subunits. When a mixture of N and Q NR1 subunits was coexpressed with 
pure mutant NR2 subunits, six single-channel current patterns were apparent. One 
pattern was the same as Q/Q receptors and another was the same as N/Q receptors. 
The four novel patterns presumably arose from hybrid receptors having both N and 
Q NR1 subunits. The relative frequency of NR1 hybrid receptor current patterns 
depended on the relative amounts of Q and N subunits that were injected into the 
oocytes. The number of hybrid receptor patterns suggests that there are two NR2 
subunits per receptor and is consistent with either three or five NR1 subunits 
per receptor, depending on whether or not the order of mutant and wild-type 
subunits influences the current pattern. When considered in relation to other 
studies, the most straightforward interpretation of the results is that 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors are pentamers composed of three NR1 and two NR2 
subunits.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.110.5.485
PMCID: PMC2229386
PMID: 9348322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]