1. Pharmacogenetics. 1997 Oct;7(5):361-7. doi: 10.1097/00008571-199710000-00004.

Genetic association between sensitivity to warfarin and expression of CYP2C9*3.

Steward DJ(1), Haining RL, Henne KR, Davis G, Rushmore TH, Trager WF, Rettie AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, 
USA.

Cytochrome P4502C9 (CYP2C9) is largely responsible for terminating the 
anticoagulant effect of racemic warfarin via hydroxylation of the 
pharmacologically more potent S-enantiomer to inactive metabolites. Mutations in 
the CYP2C9 gene result in the expression of three allelic variants, CYP2C9*1, 
CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3. Both CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 exhibit altered catalytic 
properties in vitro relative to the wild-type enzyme. In the present study, a 
patient was genotyped who had proven unusually sensitive to warfarin therapy and 
could tolerate no more than 0.5 mg of the racemic drug/day. PCR-amplification of 
exons 3 and 7 of the CYP2C9 gene, followed by restriction digest or sequence 
analysis, showed that this individual was homozygous for CYP2C9*3. In addition, 
patient plasma warfarin enantiomer ratios and urinary 7-hydroxywarfarin 
enantiomer ratios were determined by chiral-phase high performance liquid 
chromotography in order to investigate whether either parameter might be of 
diagnostic value in place of a genotypic test. Control patients receiving 4-8 mg 
warfarin/day exhibited plasma S:R ratios of 0.50 +/- 0.25:1, whereas the patient 
on very low-dose warfarin exhibited an S:R ratio of 3.9:1. In contrast, the 
urinary 7-hydroxywarfarin S:R ratio of 4:1 showed the same stereoselectivity as 
that reported for control patients. Therefore, expression of CYP2C9*3 is 
associated with diminished clearance of S-warfarin and a dangerously exacerbated 
therapeutic response to normal doses of the racemic drug. Analysis of the plasma 
S:R warfarin ratio may serve as a useful alternative test to genotyping for this 
genetic defect.

DOI: 10.1097/00008571-199710000-00004
PMID: 9352571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]