1. J Cell Biol. 1997 Nov 17;139(4):875-83. doi: 10.1083/jcb.139.4.875.

Stimulation of NSF ATPase activity by alpha-SNAP is required for SNARE complex 
disassembly and exocytosis.

Barnard RJ(1), Morgan A, Burgoyne RD.

Author information:
(1)The Physiological Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, UK.

N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein (NSF) and alpha-SNAP play key roles in 
vesicular traffic through the secretory pathway. In this study, NH2- and 
COOH-terminal truncation mutants of alpha-SNAP were assayed for ability to bind 
NSF and stimulate its ATPase activity. Deletion of up to 160 NH2-terminal amino 
acids had little effect on the ability of alpha-SNAP to stimulate the ATPase 
activity of NSF. However, deletion of as few as 10 COOH-terminal amino acids 
resulted in a marked decrease. Both NH2-terminal (1-160) and COOH-terminal 
(160-295) fragments of alpha-SNAP were able to bind to NSF, suggesting that 
alpha-SNAP contains distinct NH2- and COOH-terminal binding sites for NSF. 
Sequence alignment of known SNAPs revealed only leucine 294 to be conserved in 
the final 10 amino acids of alpha-SNAP. Mutation of leucine 294 to alanine 
(alpha-SNAP(L294A)) resulted in a decrease in the ability to stimulate NSF 
ATPase activity but had no effect on the ability of this mutant to bind NSF. 
alpha-SNAP (1-285) and alpha-SNAP (L294A) were unable to stimulate 
Ca2+-dependent exocytosis in permeabilized chromaffin cells. In addition, 
alpha-SNAP (1-285), and alpha-SNAP (L294A) were able to inhibit the stimulation 
of exocytosis by exogenous alpha-SNAP. alpha-SNAP, alpha-SNAP (1-285), and 
alpha-SNAP (L294A) were all able to become incorporated into a 20S complex and 
recruit NSF. In the presence of MgATP, alpha-SNAP (1-285) and alpha-SNAP (L294A) 
were unable to fully disassemble the 20S complex and did not allow 
vesicle-associated membrane protein dissociation to any greater level than seen 
in control incubations. These findings imply that alpha-SNAP stimulation of NSF 
ATPase activity may be required for 20S complex disassembly and for the 
alpha-SNAP stimulation of exocytosis.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.139.4.875
PMCID: PMC2139964
PMID: 9362506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]