1. J Clin Invest. 1997 Nov 15;100(10):2457-65. doi: 10.1172/JCI119788.

In vitro pharmacologic restoration of CFTR-mediated chloride transport with 
sodium 4-phenylbutyrate in cystic fibrosis epithelial cells containing delta 
F508-CFTR.

Rubenstein RC(1), Egan ME, Zeitlin PL.

Author information:
(1)Eudowood Division of Pediatric Respiratory Sciences, Johns Hopkins Hospital, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA. rrubenst@welchlink.welch.jhu.edu

The most common cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator mutation, 
delta F508-CFTR, is a partially functional chloride channel that is retained in 
the endoplasmic reticulum and degraded. We hypothesize that a known 
transcriptional regulator, sodium 4-phenylbutyrate (4PBA), will enable a greater 
fraction of delta F508-CFTR to escape degradation and appear at the cell 
surface. Primary cultures of nasal polyp epithelia from CF patients (delta F508 
homozygous or heterozygous), or the CF bronchial epithelial cell line IB3-1 
(delta F508/W1282X) were exposed to 4PBA for up to 7 d in culture. 4PBA 
treatment at concentrations of 0.1 and 2 mM resulted in the restoration of 
forskolin-activated chloride secretion. Protein kinase A-activated, linear, 10 
pS chloride channels appeared at the plasma membrane of IB3-1 cells at the 
tested concentration of 2.5 mM. Treatment of IB3-1 cells with 0.1-1 mM 4PBA and 
primary nasal epithelia with 5 mM 4PBA also resulted in the appearance of higher 
molecular mass forms of CFTR consistent with addition and modification of 
oligosaccharides in the Golgi apparatus, as detected by immunoblotting of whole 
cell lysates with anti-CFTR antisera. Immunocytochemistry in CF epithelial cells 
treated with 4PBA was consistent with increasing amounts of delta F508-CFTR. 
These data indicate that 4PBA is a promising pharmacologic agent for inducing 
correction of the CF phenotype in CF patients carrying the delta F508 mutation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI119788
PMCID: PMC508446
PMID: 9366560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]