1. Biochemistry. 1997 Oct 14;36(41):12535-41. doi: 10.1021/bi971697c.

Identification of the predominant non-native histidine ligand in unfolded 
cytochrome c.

Col√≥n W(1), Wakem LP, Sherman F, Roder H.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cancer Research, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

The heme and its two axial ligands, His18 and Met80, play a central role in the 
folding/unfolding mechanism of cytochrome c. Because of the covalent heme 
attachment, His18 remains bound under typical denaturing conditions, while the 
more labile Met80 ligand is replaced by an alternate histidine ligand. To 
distinguish between the two possible non-native histidine ligands in horse 
cytochrome c, variants with a His26 to Gln or His33 to Asn substitution were 
prepared using a yeast expression system. Protonation of the non-native 
histidine ligand in the GuHCl-denatured state results in a pronounced blue shift 
of the Soret heme absorbance band (low-spin to high-spin transition). While 
substitution of His26 has no effect on the apparent pKa of this transition (5.7 
+/- 0.05), the H33N variant exhibits a substantially higher pKa (6.1 +/- 0.05), 
indicating that His33 is the dominant sixth heme ligand in denatured cytochrome 
c and that His26 (or another nitrogenous group) acts as a ligand in the absence 
of a histidine at position 33. The kinetics of the pH-induced ligand 
dissociation shows two phases which were assigned to each of the two histidine 
ligands on the basis of their distinct temperature dependence. Despite their 
nearly identical equilibrium unfolding transitions, the two histidine mutants 
show differences in their folding kinetics. While the kinetic behavior of H26Q 
cyt c is very similar to that of the wild-type, the H33N mutation leads to loss 
of a kinetic phase with a rate in the 2-10 s-1 range that has previously been 
attributed to the rate-limiting dissociation of a trapped non-native histidine, 
which is thus identified as His33.

DOI: 10.1021/bi971697c
PMID: 9376358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]