1. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1996 Dec;18(6):429-34.

[Increased promoter activity of human delta-globin gene with point mutation of 
C-T at site-64].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang J(1), Kou H, Di X, Chen S, Liang Z.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, CAMS, Beijing.

With PCR point mutation technique, the CCAAC box in the promoter region of 
delta-globin gene was changed into CCAAT which is required in the normal 
transcription of beta-globin gene at the corresponding site. The normal and 
mutant segments of the delta-globin promoter region obtained with each segment 
of about 300 bp (-280/+54 bp), a fragment sufficient for the requirement of its 
normal promoter function, were separately cloned into pUC19/Hinc II. After 
sequencing, it showed that the CCAAC box had been successfully changed into 
CCAAT without other mutations. The two segments were released by Nco I and BamH 
I, and were cloned into the corresponding site of plasmid pMG3 which has the 
firefly luciferase as its reporter gene. The positive clones were selected by 
Dot Blot and were comfirmed with restriction mapping. Then the two recombinant 
plasmids were transfected into HeLa cell line respectively and the promoter 
activities of the two fragments were identified by comparing the light intensity 
generated by the cell extracts when added with luciferase assay substrate. The 
results demonstrated that the luminescence of the mutant group is on average 
five times higher than that of the normal group, which indicate that the C-T 
mutation of the CCAAC box of delta-globin promoter region could increase its 
promoter activity. Our results have confirmed the hypothesis that the sequence 
of CCAAC box of human delta-globin gene is one of the main reasons which 
accounts for its low expression level. The author is now studying the specific 
DNA binding protein of the upstream promoter region of human delta-globin gene.

PMID: 9388948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]