1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 2;273(1):33-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.1.33.

kappa-Conotoxin PVIIA is a peptide inhibiting the shaker K+ channel.

Shon KJ(1), Stocker M, Terlau H, St√ºhmer W, Jacobsen R, Walker C, Grilley M, 
Watkins M, Hillyard DR, Gray WR, Olivera BM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

kappa-Conotoxin PVIIA (kappa-PVIIA), a 27-amino acid toxin from Conus 
purpurascens venom that inhibits the Shaker potassium channel, was chemically 
synthesized in a biologically active form. The disulfide connectivity of the 
peptide was determined. kappa-Conotoxin PVIIA has the following structure. This 
is the first Conus peptide known to target K+ channels. [structure: see text] 
Although the Shaker K+ channel is sensitive to kappa-PVIIA, the rat brain Kv1.1 
subtype is resistant. Chimeras between Shaker and the Kv1.1 K+ channels were 
constructed and expressed in Xenopus oocytes. Only channels containing the 
putative pore-forming region between the fifth and sixth transmembrane domains 
of Shaker retained toxin sensitivity, indicating that the toxin target site is 
in this region of the channel. Evidence is presented that kappa-PVIIA interacts 
with the external tetraethyl-ammonium binding site on the Shaker channel. 
Although both kappa-PVIIA and charybdotoxin inhibit the Shaker channel, they 
must interact differently. The F425G Shaker mutation increases charybdotoxin 
affinity by 3 orders of magnitude but abolishes kappa-PVIIA sensitivity. The 
precursor sequence of kappa-PVIIA was deduced from a cDNA clone, revealing a 
prepropeptide comprising 72 amino acids. The N-terminal region of the 
kappa-PVIIA prepropeptide exhibits striking homology to the omega-, muO-, and 
delta-conotoxins. Thus, at least four pharmacologically distinct superfamilies 
of Conus peptides belong to the same "O" superfamily, with the omega- and 
kappa-conotoxins forming one branch, and the delta- and muO-conotoxins forming a 
second major branch.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.1.33
PMID: 9417043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]