1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 2;273(1):256-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.1.256.

Identification of functionally important residues of human thrombopoietin.

Park H(1), Park SS, Jin EH, Song JS, Ryu SE, Yu MH, Hong HJ.

Author information:
(1)Protein Engineering Research Group, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience 
and Biotechnology, KIST, P. O. Box 115, Yusong, Taejon 305-600, Korea.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is a megakaryocyte growth and differentiation factor. It 
consists of a characteristic two domain structure. The amino-terminal domain of 
TPO has a sequence homology with erythropoietin and is required for the binding 
and activation of its receptor c-Mpl. To determine the functionally important 
regions interacting with its receptor, a series of site-directed mutants of TPO 
were constructed based on a three-dimensional model of the amino-terminal 
domain. Two strategies of mutagenesis were employed: 1) nonnative N-linked 
glycosylation scan of 12 residues predicted to be on the surface, and 2) alanine 
replacement scan of mostly charged 44 amino acid residues. Each TPO mutein was 
transiently expressed in COS7 cells, and the specific bioactivity of the TPO 
protein secreted into the culture medium was measured using a recombinant BaF3 
cell line expressing human c-Mpl. Four alanine substitutions at Arg10, Pro42, 
Glu50, and Lys138 nearly or completely abolished the activity, whereas the 
mutation at Arg14 slightly decreased the activity, suggesting that these 
residues are functionally important in interacting with its receptor. These 
residues mapped to helix A, loop AB, and helix D. Sequence comparison between 
human TPO and other mammalian TPO showed that the identified residues are 
completely conserved among the species. However, unlike the recent report on the 
mutational analysis of TPO, alanine substitutions at Lys52, Lys59, Arg136, and 
Arg140 did not affect the TPO activity significantly in our system. The 
identified receptor binding regions of TPO are analogous to those of human 
growth hormone and erythropoietin. Based on the similarity of these three 
cytokines, we propose that Lys138 of helix D and Pro42 and Glu50 of loop AB may 
constitute one binding region, whereas Arg10 and Lys14 of helix A may constitute 
the other binding region to dimerize the receptors.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.1.256
PMID: 9417073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]