1. J Virol. 1998 Feb;72(2):1647-51. doi: 10.1128/JVI.72.2.1647-1651.1998.

Genetic determinants responsible for acquisition of dengue type 2 virus mouse 
neurovirulence.

Bray M(1), Men R, Tokimatsu I, Lai CJ.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Viral Biology Section, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Studies conducted some 50 years ago showed that serial intracerebral passage of 
dengue viruses in mice selected for neurovirulent mutants that also exhibited 
significant attenuation for humans. We investigated the genetic basis of mouse 
neurovirulence of dengue virus because it might be directly or indirectly 
associated with attenuation for humans. Analysis of the sequence in the 
C-PreM-E-NS1 region of the parental dengue type 2 virus (DEN2) New Guinea C 
(NGC) strain and its mouse-adapted, neurovirulent mutant revealed that 10 
nucleotide changes occurred during serial passage in mice. Seven of these 
changes resulted in amino acid substitutions, i.e., Leu55-Phe and Arg57-Lys in 
PreM, Glu71-Asp, Glu126-Lys, Phe402-Ile, and Thr454-Ile in E, and Arg105-Gln in 
NS1. The sequence of C was fully conserved between the parental and mutant DEN2. 
We constructed intertypic chimeric dengue viruses that contained the PreM-E 
genes or only the NS1 gene of neurovirulent DEN2 NGC substituting for the 
corresponding genes of DEN4. The DEN2 (PreM-E)/DEN4 chimera was neurovirulent 
for mice, whereas DEN2 (NS1)/DEN4 was not. The mutations present in the 
neurovirulent DEN2 PreM-E genes were then substituted singly or in combination 
into the sequence of the nonneurovirulent, parental DEN2. Intracerebral 
titration of the various mutant chimeras so produced identified two amino acid 
changes, namely, Glu71-Asp and Glu126-Lys, in DEN2 E as being responsible for 
mouse neurovirulence. The conservative amino acid change of Gu71-Asp probably 
had a minor effect, if any. The Glu126-Lys substitution in DEN2 E, representing 
a change from a negatively charged amino acid to a positively charged amino 
acid, most likely plays an important role in conferring mouse neurovirulence.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.2.1647-1651.1998
PMCID: PMC124649
PMID: 9445071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]