1. Circulation. 1998 Jan 20;97(2):142-6. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.97.2.142.

Mutation of the gene for IsK associated with both Jervell and Lange-Nielsen and 
Romano-Ward forms of Long-QT syndrome.

Duggal P(1), Vesely MR, Wattanasirichaigoon D, Villafane J, Kaushik V, Beggs AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Mass 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Long-QT syndrome (LQTS) is a disorder of ventricular repolarization 
characterized by a prolonged QT interval, syncope, seizures, and sudden death. 
Recently, three forms of LQTS have been shown to result from mutations in 
potassium or sodium ion channel genes: KVLQT1 for LQT1, HERG for LQT2, and SCN5A 
for LQT3. IsK, an apparent potassium channel subunit encoded by KCNE1 on 
chromosome 21, regulates both KVLQT1 and HERG. This relationship makes KCNE1 a 
likely candidate gene, because mutations of these genes are known to cause both 
the autosomal dominant Romano-Ward and recessive Jervell and Lange-Nielsen (JLN) 
forms of LQTS.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We screened 84 unrelated patients with Romano-Ward and 4 
with JLN for possible mutations in KCNE1. We identified one homozygous mutation 
in a JLN patient that results in the nonconservative substitution of Asn for Asp 
at amino acid 76. The patient is congenitally deaf-mute, with recurrent syncopal 
events and a greatly prolonged QTc interval. The proband's mother and 
half-sister are both heterozygous for this mutation. Remarkably, both these 
family members have prolonged QTc intervals and would have been classified as 
Romano-Ward patients if not for the proband's diagnosis of JLN. This mutation 
was not identified in more than 100 control individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide strong evidence that KCNE1 mutations represent a 
fifth LQTS locus (LQT5). Further functional analysis, as well as the 
identification of more LQTS patients with KCNE1 mutations, will be important to 
confirm the role of IsK in LQTS.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.97.2.142
PMID: 9445165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]