1. Neuromuscul Disord. 1997 Dec;7(8):499-504. doi: 10.1016/s0960-8966(97)00114-4.

A point mutation in the glycerol kinase gene associated with a deletion in the 
dystrophin gene in a familial X-linked muscular dystrophy: non-contiguous gene 
syndrome involving Becker muscular dystrophy and glycerol kinase loci.

Romero NB(1), Récan D, Rigal O, Leturcq F, Llense S, Barbot JC, Deburgrave N, 
Cheval MA, Deniau F, Kaplan JC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Pathologie Musculaire, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.

We report a family with an X-linked recessive muscular dystrophy characterised 
by exercise-induced myalgia, recurrent pigmenturia and mild proximal muscle 
involvement. Immunocytochemical and immunoblotting analysis in muscle, using the 
antibody directed against the rod domain of dystrophin, revealed a loss of 
immunoreactivity, but the immunolabelling using the antibodies directed against 
the COOH and NH2 domains of dystrophin were almost normal. The immunoreactions 
for alpha-sarcoglycan, gamma-sarcoglycan and beta-dystroglycan were normal. In 
the five male patients of this family with increased serum creatine kinase 
levels (from x8 to x50), mass spectrometry screening of the urine revealed a 
large increase in glycerol elimination which was quantified by enzymatic assay 
(from x14 to x39). An in-frame deletion of the dystrophin gene (exons 13-29) was 
found in the same five males and in three carrier females. All the deleted 
chromosomes also carried a missense mutation at nucleotide 947 of the Xp 
glycerol kinase (GK) gene resulting in a Thr to Met substitution at codon 278. 
These findings indicate that the two mutations cosegregate on the same 
chromosome in this family. This is the first reported case of two physically 
independent mutations, within the DMD and GK genes, which are contiguous but 
several hundred kilobases apart.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-8966(97)00114-4
PMID: 9447607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]