1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Feb 13;273(7):4149-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.7.4149.

A novel soluble tissue factor variant with an altered factor VIIa binding 
interface.

Lee GF(1), Kelley RF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Protein Engineering, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, 
California 94080, USA.

Tissue factor (TF) residues Lys20 and Asp58 form part of a binding epitope 
previously shown by alanine scanning to be critical for high affinity 
interactions with factor VIIa (FVIIa). To explore the possibility of enhancing 
the affinity of a TF-based antagonist for FVIIa, we created libraries in which 
residues at 20, 58, and adjacent positions were varied in constructs containing 
the soluble extracellular domain of TF (sTF) fused to the bacteriophage M13 tail 
coat protein. TF variants monovalently displayed on phage were then sorted on 
the basis of binding to FVIIa. Sorting of preliminary libraries, in which 
position 58 and/or 20 and surrounding residues were randomized, led to the 
selection of TF proteins of essentially wild-type sequence. Therefore, we 
devised a strategy wherein TF position 20 was held fixed as alanine and 5 
specific residues near to, and including, position 58 were randomized to 
effectively obtain alternative sequences at this interface. The consensus 
sequence reached with this library included wild-type residues at positions 61, 
62, 65, and 66 but exclusively tryptophan at position 58. Analyses of the 
soluble K20A,D58W (A20W58) TF protein indicated that it binds FVIIa with an 
affinity comparable with wild-type sTF but is defective as a cofactor for 
FVIIa-dependent factor X activation. Further experiments designed to elucidate 
the mechanism of binding suggest that the new binding interactions involve more 
than the simple addition of hydrophobic surface area.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.7.4149
PMID: 9461610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]