1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Feb;62(2):346-54. doi: 10.1086/301726.

Mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in hereditary multiple exostoses.

Wuyts W(1), Van Hul W, De Boulle K, Hendrickx J, Bakker E, Vanhoenacker F, 
Mollica F, LÃ¼decke HJ, Sayli BS, Pazzaglia UE, Mortier G, Hamel B, Conrad EU, 
Matsushita M, Raskind WH, Willems PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Belgium.

Hereditary multiple exostoses (EXT; MIM 133700) is an autosomal dominant bone 
disorder characterized by the presence of multiple benign cartilage-capped 
tumors (exostoses). Besides suffering complications caused by the pressure of 
these exostoses on the surrounding tissues, EXT patients are at an increased 
risk for malignant chondrosarcoma, which may develop from an exostosis. EXT is 
genetically heterogeneous, and three loci have been identified so far: EXT1, on 
chromosome 8q23-q24; EXT2, on 11p11-p12; and EXT3, on the short arm of 
chromosome 19. The EXT1 and EXT2 genes were cloned recently, and they were shown 
to be homologous. We have now analyzed the EXT1 and EXT2 genes, in 26 EXT 
families originating from nine countries, to identify the underlying 
disease-causing mutation. Of the 26 families, 10 families had an EXT1 mutation, 
and 10 had an EXT2 mutation. Twelve of these mutations have never been described 
before. In addition, we have reviewed all EXT1 and EXT2 mutations reported so 
far, to determine the nature, frequency, and distribution of mutations that 
cause EXT. From this analysis, we conclude that mutations in either the EXT1 or 
the EXT2 gene are responsible for the majority of EXT cases. Most of the 
mutations in EXT1 and EXT2 cause premature termination of the EXT proteins, 
whereas missense mutations are rare. The development is thus mainly due to loss 
of function of the EXT genes, consistent with the hypothesis that the EXT genes 
have a tumor- suppressor function.

DOI: 10.1086/301726
PMCID: PMC1376901
PMID: 9463333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]