1. J Lipid Res. 1998 Feb;39(2):442-56.

Human plasma CETP deficiency: identification of a novel mutation in exon 9 of 
the CETP gene in a Caucasian subject from North America.

Teh EM(1), Dolphin PJ, Breckenridge WC, Tan MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.

Human plasma cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) is a 476-residue 
hydrophobic glycoprotein that catalyzes the heterotransfer of cholesteryl esters 
and triacylglycerols among lipoproteins: Mutations in the CETP gene have been 
identified, mostly in the Japanese population. These mutations result in 
hypercholesterolemia due to the presence of large cholesteryl ester-rich HDL 
particles, elevated plasma apoA-I and apoE, and reduced apoB levels. Here we 
report the plasma lipoprotein phenotype and molecular defect in a 57-year-old 
female Nova Scotian subject lacking Japanese ancestry who is homozygous for a 
novel mutation in the CETP gene. Her total plasma cholesterol was 7.3 mmol/l 
with an LDL cholesterol of 2.9 mmol/l and HDL cholesterol of 4.4 mmol/l. She was 
mildly hypertriglyceridemic (1.6 mmol/l) and had markedly elevated apoA-I (256 
mg/dl) and apoE (14.4 mg/dl) with only slightly reduced apo/B levels (94 mg/dl). 
Her VLDL and LDL were cholesteryl ester-poor (1.8 and 37.2% of lipids, 
respectively) and triacylglycerol-rich (67.3 and 18.9% of lipids, respectively) 
while her HDL was cholesteryl ester-rich (40.2-45.7% of lipids) and 
triacylglycerol-poor (3.3-2.5% of lipids). No plasma CETP activity or mass was 
detected. Bi-directional DNA sequence analysis of PCR products from all 16 exons 
showed a single base substitution (C-->T at nucleotide 836 in exon 9 resulting 
in 268 Arg-->STOP) in both alleles. No other mutation was detected. A single 
base mismatched, 26 bp reverse PCR primer that produced a single Mae III RFLP 
site upon amplification of the mutated DNA sequence was designed for rapid 
population screening. This subject is, we believe, the first Caucasian North 
American patient reported to have CETP deficiency.

PMID: 9508004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]