1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 10;273(15):8932-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.15.8932.

Localization of the thrombin-binding domain on prothrombin fragment 2.

Liaw PC(1), Fredenburgh JC, Stafford AR, Tulinsky A, Austin RC, Weitz JI.

Author information:
(1)McMaster University and the Hamilton Civic Hospitals Research Centre, 
Hamilton, Ontario L8V 1C3, Canada.

Co-crystallographic studies have shown that the interaction of human prothrombin 
fragment 2 (F2) with thrombin involves the formation of salt bridges between the 
kringle inner loop of F2 and anion-binding exosite II of thrombin. When F2 binds 
to thrombin, it has been shown to evoke conformational changes at the active 
site and at exosite I of the enzyme. Using plasma, recombinant, and synthetic F2 
peptides (F2, rF2, and sF2, respectively) we have further localized the 
thrombin-binding domain on F2. F2, rF2-(1-116), rF2-(55-116), and sF2-(63-116), 
all of which contain the kringle inner loop (residues 64-93) and the acidic 
COOH-terminal connecting peptide (residues 94-116), bind to thrombin-agarose. In 
contrast, analogues of the kringle inner loop, sF2-(63-90), or the COOH-terminal 
connecting peptide, sF2-(92-116), do not bind. Thus, contrary to predictions 
from the crystal structure, the COOH-terminal connecting peptide as well as the 
kringle inner loop are involved in the interaction of F2 with thrombin. F2 and 
sF2-(63-116) bind saturably to fluorescently labeled active site-blocked 
thrombin with Kd values of 4.1 and 51.3 microM, respectively. The affinity of 
sF2-(63-116) for thrombin increases about 5-fold (Kd = 10 microM) when Val at 
position 78 is substituted with Glu. F2 and sF2-(63-116) bind to exosite II on 
thrombin because both reduce the heparin-catalyzed rate of thrombin inhibition 
by antithrombin approximately 4-fold. In contrast, only F2 slows the uncatalyzed 
rate of thrombin inactivation by antithrombin. Like F2, sF2-(63-116) induces 
allosteric changes in the active site and exosite I of thrombin because it 
alters the rates of thrombin-mediated hydrolysis of chromogenic substrates and 
displaces fluorescently labeled hirudin54-65 from active site-blocked thrombin, 
respectively. Both peptides also prolong the thrombin clotting time of 
fibrinogen in a concentration-dependent fashion, reflecting their effects on the 
active site and/or exosite I. These studies provide further insight into the 
regions of F2 that evoke functional changes in thrombin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.15.8932
PMID: 9535876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]