1. Biochemistry. 1998 Apr 7;37(14):4875-83. doi: 10.1021/bi971634u.

Cation-promoted association of Escherichia coli phosphocarrier protein IIAGlc 
with regulatory target protein glycerol kinase: substitutions of a Zinc(II) 
ligand and implications for inducer exclusion.

Pettigrew DW(1), Meadow ND, Roseman S, Remington SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, Texas 77843-2128, USA.

In Escherichia coli, inducer exclusion is one mechanism by which glucose 
prevents unnecessary expression of genes needed for metabolism of other sugars. 
The basis for this mechanism is binding of the unphosphorylated form of the 
glucose-specific phosphocarrier protein of the phosphoenolpyruvate:glycose 
phosphotransferase system, IIAGlc (also known as IIIGlc), to a variety of target 
proteins to prevent uptake or synthesis of the inducer. One of these target 
proteins is glycerol kinase (EC 2.1.7.30, ATP:glycerol 3-phosphotransferase), 
which is inhibited by IIAGlc. Glycerol kinase is the only IIAGlc target protein 
for which the structure of the complex is known. Association of these two 
proteins forms an intermolecular binding site for Zn(II) with metal ligands 
contributed by each protein, and Zn(II) enhances IIAGlc inhibition [Feese, M., 
Pettigrew, D. W., Meadow, N. D., Roseman, S., and Remington, S. J. (1994) Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 3544-3548]. Here, we show that the Zn(II) 
enhancement can be described quantitatively by a model with binding of Zn(II) to 
the complex with an apparent dissociation constant of less than 1 microM at pH 
7.0 and 25 degreesC. Initial velocity studies show that IIAGlc is an 
uncompetitive inhibitor with respect to both substrates, and the mechanism of 
inhibition is not altered by Zn(II). The Zn(II)-liganding residue contributed by 
glycerol kinase (Glu478) is substituted by using site-directed mutagenesis to 
construct the enzymes E478C, E478D, E478H, and E478Q. The substitutions have 
only small effects on the inhibition by IIAGlc in the absence of Zn(II), the 
catalytic properties, or other allosteric regulation. However, all of the 
substitutions abolish the Zn(II) enhancement of IIAGlc inhibition, and the X-ray 
crystallographic structures of the complexes of IIAGlc with the E478C and E478H 
mutants show these substitutions abolish binding of Zn(II) to the intermolecular 
site. These results support the hypothesis that Zn(II) enhances the affinity for 
complex formation by binding at the intermolecular site, i.e., cation promoted 
association. The high affinity for Zn(II) binding to the complex and the ability 
of the other four amino acid residues to efficiently substitute for Glu478 in 
all functions except binding of Zn(II) suggest that cation promoted association 
of these two proteins may have a role in inducer exclusion in vivo.

DOI: 10.1021/bi971634u
PMID: 9538005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]