1. Biochemistry. 1998 May 19;37(20):7083-8. doi: 10.1021/bi980370o.

Transient kinetic analysis of adenosine 5'-triphosphate binding-induced 
conformational changes in the allosteric chaperonin GroEL.

Yifrach O(1), Horovitz A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

GroEL with an intrinsic fluorescent probe was generated by introducing the 
mutation Phe44 --> Trp. Different concentrations of ATP were rapidly mixed with 
GroEL containing this mutation, and the time-resolved change in fluorescence 
emission, upon excitation at 280 nm, was followed. Three kinetic phases were 
observed: a fast phase with a large amplitude and two slower phases with small 
amplitudes. The phases were assigned by (i) determining their dependence on ATP 
concentration; (ii) measuring their sensitivity to the mutation Arg197 --> Ala, 
which decreases cooperativity in ATP binding; and (iii) by carrying out mixing 
experiments of GroEL also with ADP, ATPgammaS, and ATP without K+. The apparent 
rate constant corresponding to the fast phase displays a bi-sigmoidal dependence 
on ATP concentration with Hill coefficients that are strikingly similar to those 
determined in steady-state experiments. This phase, which reflects ATP-induced 
conformational changes, is sensitive to the mutation Arg197 --> Ala in a manner 
that parallels steady-state experiments. The rate of conformational change in 
the presence of ATP is >100 sec-1, which is fast relative to most protein 
folding rates, whereas in the absence of ATP it is approximately 0.7 s-1. The 
second phase reflects the transition from an ATP-bound state of GroEL to an 
ADP-bound state. The third phase, with the smallest amplitude, reflects release 
of residual contaminants. The results in this study are found to be consistent 
with the nested model for cooperativity in ATP binding by GroEL [Yifrach, O., 
and Horovitz, A. (1995) Biochemistry 34, 5303-5308].

DOI: 10.1021/bi980370o
PMID: 9585518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]