1. J Neurosci. 1998 Jun 1;18(11):4063-75. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-11-04063.1998.

Connexin32 mutations associated with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease show 
two distinct behaviors: loss of function and altered gating properties.

Ressot C(1), Gomès D, Dautigny A, Pham-Dinh D, Bruzzone R.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Neurovirologie et Régénération du Système Nerveux, Institut Pasteur, 
F-75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

The X-linked form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX) is associated with 
mutations in the gene encoding connexin32 (Cx32), which is expressed in Schwann 
cells. We have compared the functional properties of 11 Cx32 mutations with 
those of the wild-type protein by testing their ability to form intercellular 
channels in the paired oocyte expression system. Although seven mutations were 
functionally incompetent, four others were able to generate intercellular 
currents of the same order of magnitude as those induced by wild-type Cx32 
(Cx32wt). In homotypic oocyte pairs, CMTX mutations retaining functional 
activity induced the development of junctional currents that exhibited changes 
in the sensitivity and kinetics of voltage dependence with respect to that of 
Cx32wt. The four mutations were also capable of interacting in heterotypic 
configuration with the wild-type protein, and in one case the result was a 
marked rectification of junctional currents in response to voltage steps of 
opposite polarity. In addition, the functional CMTX mutations displayed the same 
selective pattern of compatibility as Cx32wt, interacting with Cx26, Cx46, and 
Cx50 but failing to do so with Cx40. Although the functional mutations exhibited 
sensitivity to cytoplasmic acidification, which induced a >/=80% decrease in 
junctional currents, both the rate and extent of channel closure were enhanced 
markedly for two of them. Together, these results indicate that the functional 
consequences of CMTX mutations of Cx32 are of two drastically distinct kinds. 
The presence of a functional group of mutations suggests that a selective 
deficit of Cx32 channels may be sufficient to impair the homeostasis of Schwann 
cells and lead to the development of CMTX.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-11-04063.1998
PMCID: PMC6792797
PMID: 9592087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]