1. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 1998 May;19(5):184-91. doi:
10.1016/s0165-6147(98)01203-6.

Adenosine A3 receptors: novel ligands and paradoxical effects.

Jacobson KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0810, USA.

The physiological role of the adenosine A3 receptor is being investigated using 
newly synthesized, selective ligands. Recently, in addition to agonists, 
selective antagonists have been developed that belong to three distinct, 
non-purine chemical classes: flavonoids, 1,4-dihydropyridine derivatives (e.g. 
MRS1191, which is 1300-fold selective for human adenosine A3 vs A1/A2A 
receptors, with a Ki value of 31 nM) and the triazoloquinazolines (e.g. MRS1220, 
which has a Ki value of 0.65 nM). The A3 receptor has proven enigmatic in terms 
of antagonist ligand specificity, coupling to second messengers, and biological 
effects in the CNS, inflammatory system and cardiovascular system. A3 receptors 
are also potentially involved in apoptosis. It appears that intense, acute 
activation of A3 receptors acts as a lethal input to cells, while low 
concentrations of A3 receptor agonists protect against apoptosis. Here, Kenneth 
Jacobson describes how A3 receptor agonists might be useful in treating 
inflammatory conditions, possibly through their inhibition of tumour necrosis 
factor alpha (TNF-alpha) release, which has been shown in macrophages. A3 
receptor antagonists might be useful in treating asthma or acute brain 
ischaemia. Recently, the versatility of A3 receptor agonists, administered 
either before or during ischaemia, in eliciting potent cardioprotection has been 
shown.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-6147(98)01203-6
PMCID: PMC3158240
PMID: 9652191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]