1. Biochem J. 1998 Jul 15;333 ( Pt 2)(Pt 2):367-72. doi: 10.1042/bj3330367.

Critical role of arg433 in rat transketolase activity as probed by site-directed 
mutagenesis.

Soh Y(1), Song BJ, Jeng J, Kallarakal AT.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Membrane Biochemistry and Biophysics, National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 12501 Washington Avenue, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

It has been shown that one arginine per monomer at an unknown position is 
essential for enzyme activity of the homodimeric transketolase (TK) [Kremer, 
Egan and Sable (1980) J. Biol. Chem. 255, 2405-2410]. To identify the critical 
arginine, four highly conserved arginine residues of rat TK (Arg102, Arg350, 
Arg433 and Arg506) were replaced with alanine by site-directed mutagenesis. 
Wild-type and mutant TK proteins were produced in Escherichia coli and 
characterized. The Arg102-->Ala mutant exhibited similar catalytic activity to 
the wild-type enzyme, whereas Arg350-->Ala, Arg506-->Ala and Arg433-->Ala 
mutants exhibited 36.7, 37.0 and 6.1% of the wild-type activity respectively. 
Three recombinant proteins (wild-type, Arg350-->Ala and Arg433-->Ala) were 
purified to apparent homogeneity using Ni2+-affinity chromatography and further 
characterized. All these proteins were able to form homodimers (148 kDa), as 
shown by immunoblot analysis subsequent to non-denaturing gel electrophoresis. 
The Arg433-->Ala mutant protein was less stable than the wild-type and 
Arg350-->Ala proteins at 55 degrees C. Kinetic analyses revealed that both Vmax 
and Km values were markedly affected in the Arg433-->Ala mutant. The Km values 
for two substrates xylulose 5-phosphate and ribose 5-phosphate were 11.5- and 
24.3-fold higher respectively. The kcat/Km values of the Arg433-->Ala mutant for 
the two substrates were less than 1% of those of the wild-type protein. 
Molecular modelling of the rat TK revealed that Arg433 of one monomer has three 
potential hydrogen-bond interactions with the catalytically important highly 
conserved loop of the other monomer. Thus, our biochemical analyses and 
modelling data suggest the critical role of the previously uncharacterized 
Arg433 in TK activity.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3330367
PMCID: PMC1219594
PMID: 9657977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]