1. J Clin Invest. 1998 Jul 15;102(2):361-70. doi: 10.1172/JCI3112.

Molecular genetics of palmitoyl-protein thioesterase deficiency in the U.S.

Das AK(1), Becerra CH, Yi W, Lu JY, Siakotos AN, Wisniewski KE, Hofmann SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and the Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology 
Research, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75235, 
USA.

Mutations in a newly described lysosomal enzyme, palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 
(PPT), were recently shown to be responsible for an autosomal recessive 
neurological disorder prevalent in Finland, infantile neuronal ceroid 
lipofuscinosis. The disease results in blindness, motor and cognitive 
deterioration, and seizures. Characteristic inclusion bodies (granular 
osmiophilic deposits [GROD]) are found in the brain and other tissues. The vast 
majority of Finnish cases are homozygous for a missense mutation (R122W) that 
severely affects PPT enzyme activity, and the clinical course in Finnish 
children is uniformly rapidly progressive and fatal. To define the clinical, 
biochemical, and molecular genetic characteristics of subjects with PPT 
deficiency in a broader population, we collected blood samples from U.S. and 
Canadian subjects representing 32 unrelated families with neuronal ceroid 
lipofuscinosis who had GROD documented morphologically. We measured PPT activity 
and screened the coding region of the PPT gene for mutations. In 29 of the 
families, PPT deficiency was found to be responsible for the neurodegenerative 
disorder, and mutations were identified in 57 out of 58 PPT alleles. One 
nonsense mutation (R151X) accounted for 40% of the alleles and was associated 
with severe disease in the homozygous state. A second mutation (T75P) accounted 
for 13% of the alleles and was associated with a late onset and protracted 
clinical course. A total of 19 different mutations were found, resulting in a 
broader spectrum of clinical presentations than previously seen in the Finnish 
population. Symptoms first appeared at ages ranging from 3 mo to 9 yr, and about 
half of the subjects have survived into the second or even third decades of 
life.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI3112
PMCID: PMC508894
PMID: 9664077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]