1. Biochemistry. 1998 Jul 21;37(29):10522-8. doi: 10.1021/bi9800395.

Neutralization of conservative charged transmembrane residues in the Na+/glucose 
cotransporter SGLT1.

Panayotova-Heiermann M(1), Loo DD, Lam JT, Wright EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of California at Los Angeles Medical 
Center 90095-1751, USA. mariana@physiology.medsch.ucla.edu

Our goal was to identify pairs of charged residues in the membrane domains of 
the Na+/glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) that form salt bridges, to obtain 
information about packing of the transmembrane helices. The strategy was to 
neutralize Glu225, Asp273, Asp294, and Lys321 in helices 6-8, express the 
mutants in oocytes, measure [14C]-alphaMDG uptake, and then attempt to find 
second-site mutations of opposite charge that restored function. alphaMDG uptake 
by E225A was identical to that by SGLT1, whereas transport was reduced by over 
90% for D273A, D294A, and K321A and was not restored in the double mutants 
D273A/K321A or D294A/K321A. This suggested that K321 did not form salt bridges 
with D273 or D294 and that E225 was not involved in salt-bridging. 
Neutralization of K321 dramatically changed the Na+ uniport and Na+/glucose 
cotransport kinetics. The maximum rate of uniport in K321A increased 3-5-fold 
with a decrease in the apparent affinity for Na+ (70 vs 3 mM) and no change in 
apparent H+ affinity (0.5 microM). The change in Na+ affinity caused a +50 mV 
shift in the charge/voltage (Q/V) and relaxation time constant (tau)/voltage 
curves in the presteady-state kinetics. The presteady-state kinetics in H+ 
remained unchanged. The lower Na+ affinity resulted also in a 200-fold increase 
in the apparent K0.5 for alphaMDG and phlorizin. Replacements of K321 with 
alanine, valine, glutamine, arginine, or glutamic acid residues changed the 
steady-state kinetics in a similar way. Therefore, we suggest that K321 
determines, directly or indirectly, (i) the rate and selectivity of SGLT1 
uniport activity and (ii) the apparent affinities of SGLT1 for Na+, and 
indirectly sugar in the cotransport mode.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9800395
PMID: 9671524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]