1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jul 20;248(2):426-31. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1998.8985.

Molecular analysis of glycogen storage disease type Ib: identification of a 
prevalent mutation among Japanese patients and assignment of a putative 
glucose-6-phosphate translocase gene to chromosome 11.

Kure S(1), Suzuki Y, Matsubara Y, Sakamoto O, Shintaku H, Isshiki G, Hoshida C, 
Izumi I, Sakura N, Narisawa K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan. skure@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp

Glycogen storage disease type Ib (GSD-Ib) is an inborn error of metabolism with 
autosomal recessive inheritance, caused by defects in microsomal transport of 
glucose-6-phosphate. Recently, Gerin et al isolated a human cDNA encoding a 
putative transporter homologous to bacterial transporters of hexose-6-phosphate, 
and identified two mutations in its gene in two patients with GSD-Ib (9). 
Independently, a linkage analysis mapped the GSD-Ib gene on chromosome 11q23 
(10). It remains to be elucidated whether the two genes are identical or GSD-Ib 
is genetically heterogeneous. We first mapped the transporter gene on chromosome 
11 by using a DNA panel of human/hamster hybridoma cells. The result suggested 
that the GSD-Ib genes identified by the two distinct approaches may be identical 
and GSD-Ib was allelic. We then studied four unrelated Japanese families with 
GSD-Ib, and found three novel mutations: a four-base deletion/two-base 
insertion, a point mutation within a consensus splicing donor site, and a 
missense mutation (W118R). The W118R mutation was found in 4 out of 8 mutant 
alleles, suggesting that it is prevalent among Japanese patients.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1998.8985
PMID: 9675154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]