1. J Cell Biol. 1998 Jul 27;142(2):443-55. doi: 10.1083/jcb.142.2.443.

Iqg1p, a yeast homologue of the mammalian IQGAPs, mediates cdc42p effects on the 
actin cytoskeleton.

Osman MA(1), Cerione RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

The Rho-type GTPase Cdc42p has been implicated in diverse cellular functions 
including cell shape, cell motility, and cytokinesis, all of which involve the 
reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. Targets of Cdc42p that interface the 
actin cytoskeleton are likely candidates for mediating cellular activities. In 
this report, we identify and characterize a yeast homologue for the mammalian 
IQGAP, a cytoskeletal target for Cdc42p. The yeast IQGAP homologue, designated 
Iqg1p, displays a two-hybrid interaction with activated Cdc42p and 
coimmunoprecipitates with actin filaments. Deletion of IQG1 results in a 
temperature-sensitive lethality and causes aberrant morphologies including 
elongated and round multinucleated cells. This together with its localization at 
the mother-bud neck, suggest that Iqg1p promotes budding and cytokinesis. At 
restrictive temperatures, the vacuoles of the mutant cells enlarge and vesicles 
accumulate in the bud. Interestingly, Iqg1p shows two-hybrid interactions with 
the ankyrin repeat-containing protein, Akr1p (Kao, L.-R., J. Peterson, J. Ruiru, 
L. Bender, and A. Bender. 1996. Mol. Cell. Biol. 16:168-178), which inhibits 
pheromone signaling and appears to promote cytokinesis and/or trafficking. We 
also show two-hybrid interactions between Iqg1p and Afr1p, a septin-binding 
protein involved in projection formation (Konopka, J.B., C. DeMattei, and C. 
Davis. 1995. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15:723-730). We propose that Iqg1p acts as a 
scaffold to recruit and localize a protein complex involved in actin-based 
cellular functions and thus mediates the regulatory effects of Cdc42p on the 
actin cytoskeleton.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.142.2.443
PMCID: PMC2133066
PMID: 9679143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]