1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Aug 4;95(16):9608-13. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.16.9608.

Single-nucleotide polymorphism in the human mu opioid receptor gene alters 
beta-endorphin binding and activity: possible implications for opiate addiction.

Bond C(1), LaForge KS, Tian M, Melia D, Zhang S, Borg L, Gong J, Schluger J, 
Strong JA, Leal SM, Tischfield JA, Kreek MJ, Yu L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5251, USA.

Opioid drugs play important roles in the clinical management of pain, as well as 
in the development and treatment of drug abuse. The mu opioid receptor is the 
primary site of action for the most commonly used opioids, including morphine, 
heroin, fentanyl, and methadone. By sequencing DNA from 113 former heroin 
addicts in methadone maintenance and 39 individuals with no history of drug or 
alcohol abuse or dependence, we have identified five different single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the coding region of the mu opioid receptor gene. The 
most prevalent SNP is a nucleotide substitution at position 118 (A118G), 
predicting an amino acid change at a putative N-glycosylation site. This SNP 
displays an allelic frequency of approximately 10% in our study population. 
Significant differences in allele distribution were observed among ethnic groups 
studied. The variant receptor resulting from the A118G SNP did not show altered 
binding affinities for most opioid peptides and alkaloids tested. However, the 
A118G variant receptor binds beta-endorphin, an endogenous opioid that activates 
the mu opioid receptor, approximately three times more tightly than the most 
common allelic form of the receptor. Furthermore, beta-endorphin is 
approximately three times more potent at the A118G variant receptor than at the 
most common allelic form in agonist-induced activation of G protein-coupled 
potassium channels. These results show that SNPs in the mu opioid receptor gene 
can alter binding and signal transduction in the resulting receptor and may have 
implications for normal physiology, therapeutics, and vulnerability to develop 
or protection from diverse diseases including the addictive diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.16.9608
PMCID: PMC21386
PMID: 9689128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]