1. Biochemistry. 1998 Aug 4;37(31):10871-80. doi: 10.1021/bi980093l.

Interactions of Acanthamoeba profilin with actin and nucleotides bound to actin.

Vinson VK(1), De La Cruz EM, Higgs HN, Pollard TD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Three methods, fluorescence anisotropy of rhodamine-labeled profilin, intrinsic 
fluorescence and nucleotide exchange, give the same affinity, Kd = 0.1 microM, 
for Acanthamoeba profilins binding amoeba actin monomers with bound Mg-ATP. 
Replacement of serine 38 with cysteine created a unique site where labeling with 
rhodamine did not alter the affinity of profilin for actin. The affinity for 
rabbit skeletal muscle actin is about 4-fold lower. The affinity for both actins 
is 5-8-fold lower with ADP bound to actin rather than ATP. Pyrenyliodoacetamide 
labeling of cysteine 374 of muscle actin reduces the affinity for profilin 
10-fold. The affinity of profilin for nucleotide-free actin is approximately 
3-fold higher than for Mg-ATP-actin and approximately 24-fold higher than for 
Mg-ADP-actin. As a result, profilin binding reduces the affinity of actin 3-fold 
for Mg-ATP and 24-fold for Mg-ADP. Mg-ATP dissociates 8 times faster from 
actin-profilin than from actin and binds actin-profilin 3 times faster than 
actin. Mg-ADP dissociates 14 times faster from actin-profilin than from actin 
and binds actin-profilin half as fast as actin. Thus, profilin promotes the 
exchange of ADP for ATP. These properties allow profilin to bind a high 
proportion of unpolymerized ATP-actin in the cell, suppressing spontaneous 
nucleation but allowing free barbed ends to elongate at more than 500 
subunits/second.

DOI: 10.1021/bi980093l
PMID: 9692980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]