1. Dev Biol. 1998 Aug 15;200(2):182-97. doi: 10.1006/dbio.1998.8961.

Cdk2 activity is dispensable for the onset of DNA replication during the first 
mitotic cycles of the sea urchin early embryo.

Moreau JL(1), Marques F, Barakat A, Schatt P, Lozano JC, Peaucellier G, Picard 
A, Genevi√®re AM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Arago, URA 2156, Banyuls-sur Mer, F66650, France.

Earlier work reported the important role of Cdk2 as a regulator of DNA 
replication in somatic cells and in Xenopus extracts. In the present report we 
analyze in vivo the involvement of Cdk2 in DNA replication during early 
embryogenesis using the first mitotic cycles of sea urchin embryos. Unfertilized 
Sphaerechinus granularis eggs are arrested after the second meiotic cytokinesis. 
Fertilization resumes the block and induces DNA replication after a short lag 
period, making sea urchin early embryo a good model for studying in vivo the 
onset of DNA replication. We show that Cdk2 as well as its potential partner 
cyclin A are present in the nucleus in G1 and S phase and therefore available 
for DNA replication. In accordance with data obtained in Xenopus egg extracts we 
observed that Cdk2 kinase activity is low and stable during the entire cycle. 
However, in contrast with this in vitro system in which Cdk2 activity is 
required for the onset of DNA replication, the specific inhibition of Cdk2 
kinase by microinjection of the catalytically inactive Cdk2-K33R or the 
inhibitor p21(Cip1) does not prevent DNA replication. Because olomoucine, DMAP, 
and emetine treatments did not preclude DNA synthesis, neither cyclin A/Cdk1 nor 
cyclin B/Cdk1 kinase activities are necessary to replace the absence of Cdk2 
kinase in promoting DNA replication. These data suggest that during early 
embryogenesis Cdks activities, in particular Cdk2, are dispensable in vivo for 
the initiation step of DNA replication. However, the specific localization of 
Cdk2 in the nucleus from the beginning of M phase to the end of S phase suggests 
its involvement in other mechanisms regulating DNA replication such as 
inhibition of DNA re-replication and/or that its regulating role is achieved 
through a pathway independent of the kinase activity. We further demonstrate 
that even after inhibition of Cdk activities, the permeabilization of the 
nuclear membrane is required to allow a second round of DNA replication. 
However, in contrast to Xenopus egg extracts, re-replication can take place in 
the absence of DMAP-sensitive kinase.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/dbio.1998.8961
PMID: 9705226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]