1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):1212-6. doi: 
10.1161/01.atv.18.8.1212.

Elevated LDL triglyceride concentrations in subjects heterozygous for the 
hepatic lipase S267F variant.

Hegele RA(1), Breckenridge WC, Cox DW, Maguire GF, Little JA, Connelly PW.

Author information:
(1)Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada. 
robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

Although naturally occurring loss-of-function mutations in human hepatic lipase 
(HL) have been described, the biochemical phenotype of heterozygous HL 
deficiency remains ill defined. This may be due to the relatively small numbers 
of heterozygous adult carriers of HL mutations in index kindreds. We have 
identified several new heterozygotes for the catalytically inactive, nonsecreted 
HL variant S267F in the kindred that was originally ascertained because of 
hypertriglyceridemia due to the mutant, secreted, circulating apolipoprotein 
(apo) CII variant apo CII-T. Pairwise comparisons with family controls showed 
that only the plasma low density lipoprotein triglycerides (LDL TGs) were higher 
in 11 simple heterozygotes for HL S267F (P=0.002). In contrast, both plasma 
total TGs and LDL TGs were significantly higher in 12 simple heterozygotes for 
apo CII-T than in family-matched control subjects (P=0.005 and 0.009, 
respectively). These findings suggest that the TG content of LDL is increased by 
heterozygosity for 2 different mutations that affect different proteins involved 
in lipolysis. However, the mechanisms underlying this compositional change in 
LDL appear to be different for the 2 mutations, because the total TGs are also 
elevated in subjects heterozygous for apo CII-T but not in subjects heterozygous 
for HL S267F.

DOI: 10.1161/01.atv.18.8.1212
PMID: 9714127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]