1. J Cell Biol. 1998 Aug 24;142(4):1063-74. doi: 10.1083/jcb.142.4.1063.

Involvement of phospholipase Cgamma1 in mouse egg activation induced by a 
truncated form of the C-kit tyrosine kinase present in spermatozoa.

Sette C(1), Bevilacqua A, Geremia R, Rossi P.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Sanitá Pubblica e Biologia Cellulare, Sezione di Anatomia, 
Universitá di Roma Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Microinjection of a truncated form of the c-kit tyrosine kinase present in mouse 
spermatozoa (tr-kit) activates mouse eggs parthenogenetically, and tr-kit- 
induced egg activation is inhibited by preincubation with an inhibitor of 
phospholipase C (PLC) (Sette, C., A. Bevilacqua, A. Bianchini, F. Mangia, R. 
Geremia, and P. Rossi. 1997. Development [Camb.]. 124:2267-2274). Co-injection 
of glutathione-S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins containing the src-homology 
(SH) domains of the gamma1 isoform of PLC (PLCgamma1) competitively inhibits 
tr-kit- induced egg activation. A GST fusion protein containing the SH3 domain 
of PLCgamma1 inhibits egg activation as efficiently as the whole SH region, 
while a GST fusion protein containing the two SH2 domains is much less 
effective. A GST fusion protein containing the SH3 domain of the Grb2 adaptor 
protein does not inhibit tr-kit-induced egg activation, showing that the effect 
of the SH3 domain of PLCgamma1 is specific. Tr-kit-induced egg activation is 
also suppressed by co-injection of antibodies raised against the PLCgamma1 SH 
domains, but not against the PLCgamma1 COOH-terminal region. In transfected COS 
cells, coexpression of PLCgamma1 and tr-kit increases diacylglycerol and 
inositol phosphate production, and the phosphotyrosine content of PLCgamma1 with 
respect to cells expressing PLCgamma1 alone. These data indicate that tr-kit 
activates PLCgamma1, and that the SH3 domain of PLCgamma1 is essential for 
tr-kit-induced egg activation.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.142.4.1063
PMCID: PMC2132866
PMID: 9722617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]