1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 1;95(18):10620-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.18.10620.

Regulation of sorting and post-Golgi trafficking of rhodopsin by its C-terminal 
sequence QVS(A)PA.

Deretic D(1), Schmerl S, Hargrave PA, Arendt A, McDowell JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, 
USA. dereticd@umich.edu

Several mutations that cause severe forms of the human disease autosomal 
dominant retinitis pigmentosa cluster in the C-terminal region of rhodopsin. 
Recent studies have implicated the C-terminal domain of rhodopsin in its 
trafficking on specialized post-Golgi membranes to the rod outer segment of the 
photoreceptor cell. Here we used synthetic peptides as competitive inhibitors of 
rhodopsin trafficking in the frog retinal cell-free system to delineate the 
potential regulatory sequence within the C terminus of rhodopsin and model the 
effects of severe retinitis pigmentosa alleles on rhodopsin sorting. The 
rhodopsin C-terminal sequence QVS(A)PA is highly conserved among different 
species. Peptides that correspond to the C terminus of bovine (amino acids 
324-348) and frog (amino acids 330-354) rhodopsin inhibited post-Golgi 
trafficking by 50% and 60%, respectively, and arrested newly synthesized 
rhodopsin in the trans-Golgi network. Peptides corresponding to the cytoplasmic 
loops of rhodopsin and other control peptides had no effect. When three 
naturally occurring mutations: Q344ter (lacking the last five amino acids 
QVAPA), V345M, and P347S were introduced into the frog C-terminal peptide, the 
inhibitory activity of the peptides was no longer detectable. These observations 
suggest that the amino acids QVS(A)PA comprise a signal that is recognized by 
specific factors in the trans-Golgi network. A lack of recognition of this 
sequence, because of mutations in the last five amino acids causing autosomal 
dominant retinitis pigmentosa, most likely results in abnormal post-Golgi 
membrane formation and in an aberrant subcellular localization of rhodopsin.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.18.10620
PMCID: PMC27944
PMID: 9724753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]