1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Oct 15;1375(1-2):6-12. doi: 
10.1016/s0005-2736(98)00118-7.

Effects of the loss of capacity for N-glycosylation on the transport activity 
and cellular localization of the human reduced folate carrier.

Wong SC(1), Zhang L, Proefke SA, Matherly LH.

Author information:
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer 
Institute and the Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Wayne State 
University, 110 E. Warren Ave., Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The role of N-glycosylation in reduced folate carrier (RFC) transport and 
membrane targeting was examined in transport-deficient K562 (K500E) cells 
transfected with human RFC cDNAs. Treatment of cells expressing wild-type RFC 
with tunicamycin (0-3 microg) resulted in a progressive shift of the 
approximately 85 kDa RFC on western blots to 65 kDa. At 3 microg/ml tunicamycin, 
the nearly complete loss of glycosylated RFC was accompanied by a approximately 
25% decreased rate of methotrexate uptake. A deglycosylated RFC cDNA construct 
in which asparagine-58 was replaced by glutamine (Gln58-RFC) was expressed in 
K500E cells as a 65 kDa protein and restored transport capacity for methotrexate 
and (6S)5-formyl tetrahydrofolate. With both wild-type and Gln58-RFC constructs, 
expression of cDNA-encoded RFC protein far exceeded relative levels of RFC 
uptake. Wild-type and Gln58-RFCs containing a hemagglutinin (HA) epitope at the 
carboxyl terminus were similarly functional and, by immunofluorescence staining 
with rhodamine-conjugated anti-HA antibody, were localized to plasma membranes. 
Collectively, our results demonstrate that N-glycosylation of human RFC plays no 
significant role in either transport function or membrane targeting. The 
discrepancy between the stoichiometries of RFC expression and transport activity 
for both wild-type RFC and Gln58-RFC implies that identical regulatory controls 
and/or non-RFC transport components are necessary to completely restore 
transport function in the transfected cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0005-2736(98)00118-7
PMID: 9767079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]