1. Mol Microbiol. 1998 Sep;29(5):1275-84. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.01015.x.

Toxin binding site of the diphtheria toxin receptor: loss and gain of diphtheria 
toxin binding of monkey and mouse heparin-binding, epidermal growth factor-like 
growth factor precursors by reciprocal site-directed mutagenesis.

Cha JH(1), Brooke JS, Eidels L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas 75235-9048, USA.

The transmembrane precursor of the monkey (Mk) heparin-binding, epidermal growth 
factor-like growth factor (proHB-EGF) functions as a diphtheria toxin (DT) 
receptor, whereas the mouse (Ms) precursor does not. Previously, using chimeric 
Ms/Mk precursors, we have shown that DT resistance of cells bearing Ms proHB-EGF 
may be accounted for by several amino acid substitutions between residues 122 
and 148 within the EGF-like domain and that Glu-141 is an important amino acid 
residue for DT binding. In this study, reciprocal site-directed mutagenesis was 
performed on the major non-conserved residues in the region of 122-148, alone or 
in combination, between Mk and Ms precursors to identify more precisely which 
amino acid residues are important for DT binding. Two approaches were used. The 
first, more traditional approach was to destroy DT sensitivity and binding of Mk 
proHB-EGF by substitution(s) with the corresponding Ms residue(s). From the 
single mutations, the greatest loss of DT sensitivity was observed with 
Mk/Glu-141His (approximately 4000-fold) and the next greatest with Mk/Ile-133Lys 
(approximately fourfold). The double mutations Mk/Leu-127Phe/Glu-141His, 
Mk/Ile-133Lys/Glu-141His and Mk/His-135Leu/Glu-141His resulted in complete toxin 
resistance (> 100000-fold). The second approach, both novel and complementary, 
was to gain DT binding and sensitivity of Ms proHB-EGF by substitution(s) with 
the corresponding Mk residue(s). Surprisingly, the single mutation Ms/His-141Glu 
resulted in the gain of moderate DT sensitivity (> 260-fold). The double 
mutation Ms/Lys-133Ile/His-141Glu and the triple mutation 
Ms/Lys-133Ile/Leu-135His/His-141Glu resulted in a progressive gain in toxin 
sensitivity (> 4700-fold and >16000-fold respectively) and affinity. This triple 
mutant cell line is essentially as sensitive (IC50 = 3.1 ng ml(-1)) as the 
highly toxin-sensitive monkey Vero cell line (IC50 = 4 ng ml(-1)), indicating 
that these three Mk residues enable the Ms proHB-EGF to act as a fully 
functional DT receptor. Taken together, these results indicate that Glu-141 
plays the most critical role in DT binding and sensitivity and that two 
additional amino acid residues, Ile-133 and His-135, also play significant 
roles.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.01015.x
PMID: 9767594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]