1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 23;273(43):27879-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.43.27879.

Mutation at histidine 338 of gp91(phox) depletes FAD and affects expression of 
cytochrome b558 of the human NADPH oxidase.

Yoshida LS(1), Saruta F, Yoshikawa K, Tatsuzawa O, Tsunawaki S.

Author information:
(1)National Children's Medical Research Center, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 154-8509, 
Japan.

Defective NADPH oxidase components prevent superoxide (O-2) generation, causing 
chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). X-linked CGD patients have mutations in the 
gene encoding the gp91(phox) subunit of cytochrome b558 and usually lack 
gp91(phox) protein completely (X91(0)). gp91(phox) is considered to be a 
flavocytochrome that contains binding sites for NADPH, FAD, as well as heme. We 
here report a rare X-linked CGD patient whose neutrophils entirely failed to 
produce O-2, but presented a diminished expression of gp91(phox) containing 
about one-third of the heme present in normal individuals by Soret absorption. 
Translocation of cytosolic factors p67(phox) and p47(phox) was normal. However, 
the FAD content in his neutrophil membranes was as low as that of X91(0) 
patients, suggesting complete depletion of FAD in his gp91(phox). This was in 
agreement with the finding that a single base substitution (C1024 to T) changed 
His-338 to Tyr in gp91(phox) in a predicted FAD-binding domain of the 
flavocytochrome model. The loss of FAD could not be corrected even after 
addition of reagent FAD or a FAD-rich dehydrogenase fraction isolated from 
normal neutrophils to the patient's membranes, in a reconstitution in vitro with 
normal cytosol. These results indicate that His-338 is a very critical residue 
for FAD incorporation into the NADPH oxidase system. This is the first such 
mutation found in CGD.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.43.27879
PMID: 9774399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]