1. Biochemistry. 1998 Oct 20;37(42):14664-71. doi: 10.1021/bi981839i.

Peroxodiferric intermediate of stearoyl-acyl carrier protein delta 9 desaturase: 
oxidase reactivity during single turnover and implications for the mechanism of 
desaturation.

Broadwater JA(1), Ai J, Loehr TM, Sanders-Loehr J, Fox BG.

Author information:
(1)The Institute for Enzyme Research, Graduate School, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison 53705, USA.

Combined optical and resonance Raman studies have revealed the formation of an 
O2-adduct upon exposure of 4e- chemically reduced stearoyl-acyl carrier protein 
Delta9 desaturase to stearoyl-ACP and 1 atm O2. The observed intermediate has a 
broad absorption band at 700 nm and is remarkably stable at room temperature 
(t1/2 approximately 26 min). Resonance Raman studies using 16O2 gas reveal 
vibrational features of a bound peroxide [Vs(Fe-O2), 442 cm-1; Vas(Fe-O2), 490 
cm-1; V(O-O), 898 cm-1] that undergo the expected mass-dependent shifts when 
prepared in (16)O(18)O or 18(O2). The appearance of two Fe-O2 vibrations, each 
having a single peak of intermediate frequency with 16(O)18(O), provs that the 
peroxide is bound symmetrically between the two iron atoms in a mu-1,2 
configuration. The same results have been obtained in the accompanying resonance 
Raman study of ribonucleotide reductase isoform W48F/D84E [P. MoÃ«nne-Loccoz, J. 
Baldwin, B. A. Ley, T. M. Loehr, and J. M. Bollinger, Jr. (1998) Biochemistry 
37, 14659-14663], thus making it likely that other members of the class II 
diiron enzymes form related peroxodiferric intermediates. Study of the 
reactivity of peroxodiferric Delta9D revealed that this intermediate underwent 
2e- reduction leading to an oxidase reaction and recovery of the resting ferric 
homodimer. In contrast, biological reduction of the same enzyme preparations 
using ferredoxin reductase and [2Fe-2S] ferredoxin gave catalytic desaturation 
with a turnover number of 20-30 min-1. The profound difference in catalytic 
outcome for chemically and enzymatically reduced Delta9D suggests that 
redox-state dependent conformational changes cause partition of reactivity 
between desaturase and oxidase chemistries. The Delta9D oxidase reaction 
represents a new type of reactivity for the acyl-ACP desaturases and provides a 
two-step catalytic precedent for the "alternative oxidase" activity recently 
proposed for a membrane diiron enzyme in plants and trypanosomes.

DOI: 10.1021/bi981839i
PMID: 9778341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]