1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Oct 27;95(22):13239-41. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.22.13239.

Phenotype-genotype studies in kuru: implications for new variant 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

Cervenáková L(1), Goldfarb LG, Garruto R, Lee HS, Gajdusek DC, Brown P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Central Nervous System Studies, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.

The PRNP polymorphic (methionine/valine) codon 129 genotype influences the 
phenotypic features of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy. All tested cases 
of new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (nvCJD) have been homozygous for 
methionine, and it is conjectural whether different genotypes, if they appear, 
might have distinctive phenotypes and implications for the future "epidemic 
curve" of nvCJD. Genotype-phenotype studies of kuru, the only other orally 
transmitted transmissible spongiform encephalopathy, might be instructive in 
predicting the answers to these questions. We therefore extracted DNA from blood 
clots or sera from 92 kuru patients, and analyzed their codon 129 PRNP genotypes 
with respect to the age at onset and duration of illness and, in nine cases, to 
detailed clinical and neuropathology data. Homozygosity at codon 129 
(particularly for methionine) was associated with an earlier age at onset and a 
shorter duration of illness than was heterozygosity, but other clinical 
characteristics were similar for all genotypes. In the nine neuropathologically 
examined cases, the presence of histologically recognizable plaques was limited 
to cases carrying at least one methionine allele (three homozygotes and one 
heterozygote). If nvCJD behaves like kuru, future cases (with longer incubation 
periods) may begin to occur in older individuals with heterozygous codon 129 
genotypes and signal a maturing evolution of the nvCJD "epidemic." The clinical 
phenotype of such cases should be similar to that of homozygous cases, but may 
have less (or at least less readily identified) amyloid plaque formation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.22.13239
PMCID: PMC23768
PMID: 9789072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]