1. J Dermatol. 1998 Sep;25(9):573-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.1998.tb02461.x.

HLA class I and II alleles and susceptibility to generalized pustular psoriasis: 
significant associations with HLA-Cw1 and HLA-DQB1*0303.

Ozawa A(1), Miyahara M, Sugai J, Iizuka M, Kawakubo Y, Matsuo I, Ohkido M, 
Naruse T, Ando H, Inoko H, Kobayashi H, Ohkawara A, Takahashi H, Iizuka H, 
Morita E, Yamamoto S, Hide M, Taniguchi Y, Shimizu M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, 
Japan.

HLA alleles in generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) were investigated to clarify 
the etiology and/or pathogenesis of this disease. Not only serological typing of 
HLA class I and II antigens but also genotyping of HLA class II alleles were 
carried out in twenty-six unrelated Japanese patients with GPP. These patients 
were classified according to their history of psoriasis vulgaris (PV). 
Serological typing revealed a significantly high incidence of HLA-Cw1 (Pc = 
0.04) in the patients as compared with Japanese healthy controls. The frequency 
of HLA-B46 was particularly high in the patients with GPP and a previous history 
of PV. Genotyping of HLA class II alleles showed a highly significant increase 
in HLA-DQB1*0303 (Pc = 0.01) in the patients vs. the healthy controls. In 
particular, HLA-DQB1*0303 was significantly more frequent in the patients with 
no prior history of PV than in those with a history of PV. Analysis on linkage 
disequilibrium showed remarkably different patterns for HLA class II haplotypes 
between the patients and the healthy controls. Based on the comparative analysis 
among the amino acid sequences of the beta 1-domain of the HLA-DQB1*03 alleles, 
proline at residue 55 was suggested to be important as a common amino acid for 
determination of the susceptibility to GPP. These results revealed not only an 
association between the etiology and/or pathogenesis of GPP and HLA, but also 
different mechanisms of the immune response between the patients with GPP and 
PV.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.1998.tb02461.x
PMID: 9798343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]