1. Mutat Res. 1998 Nov;411(3):179-214. doi: 10.1016/s1383-5742(98)00013-1.

Mutations that alter RNA splicing of the human HPRT gene: a review of the 
spectrum.

O'Neill JP(1), Rogan PK, Cariello N, Nicklas JA.

Author information:
(1)University of Vermont Genetics Laboratory, 32 North Prospect Street, 
Burlington, VT 05401, USA. patrick.oneill@uvm.edu

The human HPRT gene contains spans approximately 42,000 base pairs in genomic 
DNA, has a mRNA of approximately 900 bases and a protein coding sequence of 657 
bases (initiation codon AUG to termination codon UAA). This coding sequence is 
distributed into 9 exons ranging from 18 (exon 5) to 184 (exon 3) base pairs. 
Intron sizes range from 170 (intron 7) to 13,075 (intron 1) base pairs. In a 
database of human HPRT mutations, 277 of 2224 (12.5%) mutations result in 
alterations in splicing of the mRNA as analyzed by both reverse transcriptase 
mediated production of a cDNA followed by PCR amplification and cDNA sequencing 
and by genomic DNA PCR amplification and sequencing. Mutations have been found 
in all eight 5' (donor) and 3' (acceptor) splice sequences. Mutations in the 5' 
splice sequences of introns 1 and 5 result in intron inclusion in the cDNA due 
to the use of cryptic donor splice sequences within the introns; mutations in 
the other six 5' sites result in simple exon exclusion. Mutations in the 3' 
splice sequences of introns 1, 3, 7 and 8 result in partial exon exclusion due 
to the use of cryptic acceptor splice sequences within the exons; mutations in 
the other four 3' sites result in simple exon exclusion. A base substitution in 
exon 3 (209G-->T) creates a new 5' (donor) splice site which results in the 
exclusion of 110 bases of exon 3 from the cDNA. Two base substitutions in intron 
8 (IVS8-16G-->A and IVS8-3T-->G) result in the inclusion of intron 8 sequences 
in the cDNA due to the creation of new 3' (acceptor) splice sites. Base 
substitution within exons 1, 3, 4, 6 and 8 also result in splice alterations in 
cDNA. Those in exons 1 and 6 are at the 3' end of the exon and may directly 
affect splicing. Those within exons 3 and 4 may be the result of the creation of 
nonsense codons, while those in exon 8 cannot be explained by this mechanism. 
Lastly, many mutations that affect splicing of the HPRT mRNA have pleiotropic 
effects in that multiple cDNA products are found.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B. V.

DOI: 10.1016/s1383-5742(98)00013-1
PMID: 9804951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]