1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 13;273(46):30472-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.46.30472.

Cloning of a human UDP-N-acetyl-alpha-D-Galactosamine:polypeptide 
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase that complements other GalNAc-transferases in 
complete O-glycosylation of the MUC1 tandem repeat.

Bennett EP(1), Hassan H, Mandel U, Mirgorodskaya E, Roepstorff P, Burchell J, 
Taylor-Papadimitriou J, Hollingsworth MA, Merkx G, van Kessel AG, Eiberg H, 
Steffensen R, Clausen H.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Dentistry, Copenhagen, Denmark.

A fourth human UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase, 
designated GalNAc-T4, was cloned and expressed. The genomic organization of 
GalNAc-T4 is distinct from GalNAc-T1, -T2, and -T3, which contain multiple 
coding exons, in that the coding region is contained in a single exon. GalNAc-T4 
was placed at human chromosome 12q21.3-q22 by in situ hybridization and linkage 
analysis. GalNAc-T4 expressed in Sf9 cells or in a stably transfected Chinese 
hamster ovary cell line exhibited a unique acceptor substrate specificity. 
GalNAc-T4 transferred GalNAc to two sites in the MUC1 tandem repeat sequence 
(Ser in GVTSA and Thr in PDTR) using a 24-mer glycopeptide with GalNAc residues 
attached at sites utilized by GalNAc-T1, -T2, and -T3 
(TAPPAHGVTSAPDTRPAPGSTAPPA, GalNAc attachment sites underlined). Furthermore, 
GalNAc-T4 showed the best kinetic properties with an O-glycosylation site in the 
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 molecule. Northern analysis of human organs 
revealed a wide expression pattern. Immunohistology with a monoclonal antibody 
showed the expected Golgi-like localization in salivary glands. A single base 
polymorphism, G1516A (Val to Ile), was identified (allele frequency 34%). The 
function of GalNAc-T4 complements other GalNAc-transferases in O-glycosylation 
of MUC1 showing that glycosylation of MUC1 is a highly ordered process and 
changes in the repertoire or topology of GalNAc-transferases will result in 
altered pattern of O-glycan attachments.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.46.30472
PMID: 9804815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]