1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Nov 10;95(23):13841-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.23.13841.

Catalytically inactive lipoprotein lipase expression in muscle of transgenic 
mice increases very low density lipoprotein uptake: direct evidence that 
lipoprotein lipase bridging occurs in vivo.

Merkel M(1), Kako Y, Radner H, Cho IS, Ramasamy R, Brunzell JD, Goldberg IJ, 
Breslow JL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics and Metabolism, The Rockefeller 
University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is the central enzyme in plasma triglyceride 
hydrolysis. In vitro studies have shown that LPL also can enhance lipoprotein 
uptake into cells via pathways that are independent of catalytic activity but 
require LPL as a molecular bridge between lipoproteins and proteoglycans or 
receptors. To investigate whether this bridging function occurs in vivo, two 
transgenic mouse lines were established expressing a muscle creatine kinase 
promoter-driven human LPL (hLPL) minigene mutated in the catalytic triad (Asp156 
to Asn). Mutated hLPL was expressed only in muscle and led to 3,100 and 3,500 
ng/ml homodimeric hLPL protein in post-heparin plasma but no hLPL catalytic 
activity. Less than 5 ng/ml hLPL was found in preheparin plasma, indicating that 
proteoglycan binding of mutated LPL was not impaired. Expression of inactive LPL 
did not rescue LPL knock-out mice from neonatal death. On the wild-type (LPL2) 
background, inactive LPL decreased very low density lipoprotein 
(VLDL)-triglycerides. On the heterozygote LPL knock-out background (LPL1) 
background, plasma triglyceride levels were lowered 22 and 33% in the two 
transgenic lines. After injection of radiolabeled VLDL, increased muscle uptake 
was observed for triglyceride-derived fatty acids (LPL2, 1.7x; LPL1, 1.8x), core 
cholesteryl ether (LPL2, 2.3x; LPL1, 2.7x), and apolipoprotein (LPL1, 1.8x; 
significantly less than cholesteryl ether). Skeletal muscle from transgenic 
lines had a mitochondriopathy with glycogen accumulation similar to mice 
expressing active hLPL in muscle. In conclusion, it appears that inactive LPL 
can act in vivo to mediate VLDL removal from plasma and uptake into tissues in 
which it is expressed.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.23.13841
PMCID: PMC24920
PMID: 9811888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]