1. Hypertension. 1998 Nov;32(5):935-8. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.32.5.935.

G protein beta3 subunit variant and essential hypertension in Japanese.

Kato N(1), Sugiyama T, Morita H, Kurihara H, Yamori Y, Yazaki Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan. kato@helios.jinkan.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Enhanced G protein activation has been implicated to underlie the increased 
sodium-proton transport in blood cells, an impaired characteristic observed in 
30% to 50% of patients with essential hypertension. Recently, significant 
association between a C825T polymorphism of the gene encoding the G protein 
beta3 subunit and hypertension was demonstrated in a white population, together 
with the finding that the T825 variant might be related to alternative splicing 
through unidentified mechanisms. We therefore investigated the disease relevance 
of this candidate gene by conducting an association study in a relatively large 
Japanese population. Participants comprised 718 hypertensive case subjects 
(without diabetes mellitus), 515 normotensive control subjects, and 191 
hypertensive subjects with borderline or established diabetes mellitus; all 
individuals were recruited at a single institution. Genotype distribution of the 
C825T polymorphism was compared between hypertensive subjects, with or without 
diabetes, and the control group with chi2 statistics. No significant association 
was observed in the present study. Results were still not significant when the 
case group was subdivided according to more stringent classification criteria. 
Allele frequencies of T825 proved to be almost concordant among the 3 study 
groups and higher in Japanese (49.0% to 49.6%) compared with a reported 
prevalence of 25% to 31% in whites. Our data suggest that the T825 variant of 
the G protein beta3 subunit gene is unlikely to constitute major susceptibility 
for essential hypertension in the Japanese population studied. However, further 
investigation is required to answer the question of whether the lack of 
association reflects ethnic differences in the nature of genetic susceptibility 
loci.

DOI: 10.1161/01.hyp.32.5.935
PMID: 9822456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]