1. Protein Sci. 1998 Nov;7(11):2354-8. doi: 10.1002/pro.5560071112.

Role of the electrostatic loop charged residues in Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase.

Polticelli F(1), Battistoni A, O'Neill P, Rotilio G, Desideri A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rome III, Italy.

We have expressed and characterized a mutant of Xenopus laevis Cu,Zn superoxide 
dismutase in which four highly conserved charged residues belonging to the 
electrostatic loop have been replaced by neutral side chains: Lys120 --> Leu, 
Asp130 --> Gln, Glu131 --> Gln, and Lys134 --> Thr. At low ionic strength, the 
mutant enzyme is one of the fastest superoxide dismutases ever assayed (k = 6.7 
x 10(9) M(-1) s(-1), at pH 7 and mu = 0.02 M). Brownian dynamics simulations 
give rise to identical enzyme-substrate association rates for both wild-type and 
mutant enzymes, ruling out the possibility that enhancement of the activity is 
due to pure electrostatic factors. Comparative analysis of the experimental 
catalytic rate of the quadruple and single mutants reveals the nonadditivity of 
the mutation effects, indicating that the hyperefficiency of the mutant is due 
to a decrease of the energy barrier and/or to an alternative pathway for the 
diffusion of superoxide within the active site channel. At physiological ionic 
strength the catalytic rate of the mutant at neutral pH is similar to that of 
the wild-type enzyme as it is to the catalytic rate pH dependence. Moreover, 
mutation effects are additive. These results show that, at physiological salt 
conditions, electrostatic loop charged residues do not influence the diffusion 
pathway of the substrate and, if concomitantly neutralized, are not essential 
for high catalytic efficiency of the enzyme, pointing out the role of the metal 
cluster and of the invariant Arg141 in determining the local electrostatic 
forces facilitating the diffusion of the substrate towards the active site.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560071112
PMCID: PMC2143875
PMID: 9828001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]