1. Hum Mutat. 1998;12(6):424-30. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)12:6<424::AID-HUMU9>3.0.CO;2-H.

Germline mutation profile of the VHL gene in von Hippel-Lindau disease and in 
sporadic hemangioblastoma.

Olschwang S(1), Richard S, Boisson C, Giraud S, Laurent-Puig P, Resche F, Thomas 
G.

Author information:
(1)Fondation Jean Dausset-CEPH, Paris, France. olschwang@cephb.fr

von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is a dominantly inherited disorder predisposing 
those afflicted to hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system and the 
retina, renal cell carcinomas, pheochromocytomas, and pancreatic tumors. The 
disease has been associated with mutations of the VHL gene. The screening of 92 
unrelated patients with VHL disease for point mutations in this gene revealed 61 
DNA variants. In addition, a search for EcoR1 rearrangements revealed germline 
anomalies in 5 patients. The 61 variants could be subdivided in 20 mutations 
predicted to alter the open reading frame (8 nonsense mutations, 8 frame shift 
mutations, and 4 mutations in consensus splicing sites) and 43 DNA sequence 
variants of a priori unknown biological consequence (4 in-frame insertions or 
deletions, 36 missense mutations, and 3 apparently silent variations). The 3' 
end of the coding sequence of the VHL gene, which encodes the Elongin binding 
domain was the site of 5 of 20 truncating mutations (25%) and of 18 of 41 DNA 
variants (44%) causing uncertain functional impairment. A similar screening in 
18 patients with sporadic hemangioblastoma revealed 2 missense DNA variants. In 
order to corroborate this latter observation, a systematic screening for 
germline alteration of the VHL gene might be performed in a larger series of 
sporadic hemangioblastoma. If this preliminary result is confirmed, more than 
10% of sporadic hemangioblastoma might be related to a mild VHL disease, thus a 
follow-up program similar to that recommended in cases of VHL disease should 
probably be discussed in the corresponding families.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)12:6<424::AID-HUMU9>3.0.CO;2-H
PMID: 9829912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]