1. J Cell Biochem. 1998 Dec 1;71(3):429-40.

Proteasome-mediated degradation of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and a putative 
role for SUG1 interaction with the AF-2 domain of VDR.

Masuyama H(1), MacDonald PN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Physiological Science, Saint Louis 
University Health Science Center, Missouri 63104, USA.

The AF-2 helix of nuclear receptors is essential for ligand-activated 
transcription, and it may function to couple the receptor to transcriptional 
coactivator proteins. This domain also contacts components of the proteasome 
machinery, suggesting that nuclear receptors may be targets for 
proteasome-mediated proteolysis. In the present study, we demonstrate that mSUG1 
(P45), a component of the 26S proteasome, interacts in a 1,25-(OH)2D3-dependent 
manner with the AF-2 domain of the vitamin D receptor (VDR). Furthermore, 
treatment of ROS 17/2.8 osteosarcoma cells with the proteasome inhibitors MG132 
or beta-lactone increased steady-state levels of the VDR protein. In the 
presence cycloheximide (10 microg/ml), the liganded VDR protein was degraded 
with a half-life of approximately 8 h, and this rate of degradation was 
completely blocked by 0.05 mM MG132. The role of SUG1 -VDR interaction in this 
process was investigated in transient expression studies. Overexpression of 
wild-type mSUG1 in ROS17/2.8 cells generated a novel proteolytic VDR fragment of 
approximately 50 kDa, and its production was blocked by proteasome inhibitors or 
by a nonhydrolyzable ATP analog. Parallel studies with SUG1 (K196H), a mutant 
that does not interact with the VDR, did not produce the 50 kDa VDR fragment. 
Functionally, expression of SUG1 in a VDR-responsive reporter gene assay 
resulted in a profound inhibition of 1,25-(OH)2D3-activated transcription, while 
expression of SUG1 (K196H) had no significant effect in this system. These data 
show that the AF-2 domain of VDR interacts with SUG1 in a 1,25-(OH)2D3-dependent 
fashion and that this interaction may target VDR to proteasome-mediated 
degradation as a means to downregulate the 1,25-(OH)2D3-activated 
transcriptional response.

PMID: 9831079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]