1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 11;273(50):33735-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.50.33735.

Functional symmetry of UhpT, the sugar phosphate transporter of Escherichia 
coli.

Fann MC(1), Maloney PC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, Maryland 
21205, USA.

UhpT, the sugar phosphate transporter of Escherichia coli, acts to exchange 
internal inorganic phosphate for external hexose 6-phosphate. Because of this 
operational asymmetry, we studied variants in which right-side-out (RSO) or 
inside-out (ISO) orientations could be analyzed independently to ask whether the 
inward- and outward-facing UhpT surfaces have different substrate specificities. 
To study the RSO orientation, we constructed a histidine-tagged derivative, 
His10K291C/K294N, in which the sole external tryptic cleavage site (Lys294) had 
been removed. Functional assay as well as immunoblot analysis showed that 
trypsin treatment of proteoliposomes containing His10K291C/K294N led to loss of 
about 50% of the original population, reflecting retention of only the RSO 
population. To study the ISO orientation, we used a His10V284C derivative, in 
which a newly inserted external cysteine (Cys284) conferred sensitivity to the 
thiol-reactive agent, 3-(N-maleimidylpropionyl)biocytin. In this case, 
3-(N-maleimidylpropionyl)biocytin treatment of proteoliposomes containing 
His10V284C gave about a 60% loss of activity, and immunodetection of biotin 
showed parallel modification of an equivalent fraction of the original 
population. Together, such findings indicate that the UhpT RSO and ISO 
orientations are in about equal proportion in proteoliposomes and that a single 
population can be generated by exposure of these derivatives to the appropriate 
agent. This allowed us to study proteoliposomes with UhpT functioning in RSO 
orientation (His10K291C/K294N) or ISO orientation (His10V284C) with respect to 
the kinetics of glucose 6-phosphate transport by phosphate-loaded 
proteoliposomes and also the inhibitions found with 2-deoxy-glucose 6-phosphate, 
mannose 6-phosphate, galactose 6-phosphate, fructose 6-phosphate, and inorganic 
phosphate. We found no significant differences in the behavior of UhpT in its 
different orientations, indicating that the transporter possesses an overall 
functional symmetry.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.50.33735
PMID: 9837961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]