1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Dec;63(6):1663-74. doi: 10.1086/302163.

Functional characterization of missense mutations in ATP7B: Wilson disease 
mutation or normal variant?

Forbes JR(1), Cox DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, 8-39 Medical Sciences Building, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper transport that 
causes hepatic and/or neurological disease resulting from copper accumulation in 
the liver and brain. The protein defective in this disorder is a putative 
copper-transporting P-type ATPase, ATP7B. More than 100 mutations have been 
identified in the ATP7B gene of patients with Wilson disease. To determine the 
effect of Wilson disease missense mutations on ATP7B function, we have developed 
a yeast complementation assay based on the ability of ATP7B to complement the 
high-affinity iron-uptake deficiency of the yeast mutant ccc2. We characterized 
missense mutations found in the predicted membrane-spanning segments of ATP7B. 
Ten mutations have been made in the ATP7B cDNA by site-directed mutagenesis: 
five Wilson disease missense mutations, two mutations originally classified as 
possible disease-causing mutations, two putative ATP7B normal variants, and 
mutation of the cysteine-proline-cysteine (CPC) motif conserved in 
heavy-metal-transporting P-type ATPases. All seven putative Wilson disease 
mutants tested were able to at least partially complement ccc2 mutant yeast, 
indicating that they retain some ability to transport copper. One mutation was a 
temperature-sensitive mutation that was able to complement ccc2 mutant yeast at 
30 degreesC but was unable to complement at 37 degreesC. Mutation of the CPC 
motif resulted in a nonfunctional protein, which demonstrates that this motif is 
essential for copper transport by ATP7B. Of the two putative ATP7B normal 
variants tested, one resulted in a nonfunctional protein, which suggests that it 
is a disease-causing mutation.

DOI: 10.1086/302163
PMCID: PMC1377638
PMID: 9837819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]