1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 25;273(52):35048-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.52.35048.

Dimerization/docking domain of the type Ialpha regulatory subunit of 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Requirements for dimerization and docking are 
distinct but overlapping.

Banky P(1), Huang LJ, Taylor SS.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California 92093-0654, USA.

Based on increasing evidence that the type I R subunits as well as the type II R 
subunits localize to specific subcellular sites, we have carried out an 
extensive characterization of the stable dimerization domain at the N terminus 
of RIalpha. Deletion mutants as well as alanine scanning mutagenesis were used 
to delineate critical regions as well as particular amino acids that are 
required for homodimerization. A set of nested deletion mutants defined a 
minimum core required for dimerization. Two single site mutations on the C37H 
template, RIalpha(F47A) and RIalpha(F52A), were sufficient to abolish 
dimerization. In addition to serving as a dimerization motif, this domain also 
serves as a docking surface for binding to dual specificity anchoring proteins 
(D-AKAPs) (Huang, L. J., Durick, K., Weiner, J. A., Chun, J., and Taylor, S. S. 
(1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 8057-8064; Huang, L. J., Durick, K., Weiner, J. A., 
Chun, J., and Taylor, S. S. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 
11184-11189). A similar strategy was used to map the sequence requirements for 
anchoring of RIalpha to D-AKAP1. Although dimerization appears to be essential 
for anchoring to D-AKAP1, anchoring can also be abolished by the following 
single site mutations: C37H, V20A, and I25A. These sites define "hot spots" for 
the anchoring surface since each of these dimeric proteins are deficient in 
binding to D-AKAP1. In contrast to earlier predictions, the alignment of the 
dimerization/docking domains of RIalpha and RII show striking similarities yet 
subtle differences not only in their secondary structure (Newlon, M. G., Roy, 
M., Hausken, Z. E., Scott, J. D., and Jennings. P. A. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 
23637-23644) but also in the distribution of residues important for both docking 
and dimerization functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.52.35048
PMID: 9857038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]