1. Thromb Haemost. 1998 Dec;80(6):949-55.

Identification and characterization of two thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis 
inhibitor isoforms.

Zhao L(1), Morser J, Bajzar L, Nesheim M, Nagashima M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Berlex Biosciences, Richmond, 
California 94804, USA. lei_zhao@berlex.com

Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) is synthesized by the liver 
and is thought to circulate in plasma as a plasminogen-bound zymogen. When it is 
activated by the thrombin/thrombomodulin complex, activated TAFI exhibits 
carboxypeptidase B-like activity. To study the structure-function relationship 
of TAFI, we expressed recombinant human TAFI in insect cells. During the cloning 
of TAFI cDNA from several human liver cDNA libraries, we identified a second 
TAFI cDNA which differed from the published sequence at 2 positions. One of 
these sequences resulted in a substitution of alanine for threonine at residue 
147, the other was a silent mutation. These substitutions were found in several 
cDNA libraries from different sources. Using Southern blot analysis, we 
confirmed the existence of this TAFI polymorphism in the population. In order to 
compare the activation and activity of TAFI isoforms, we expressed both isoforms 
in the baculovirus expression system, and compared the enzyme kinetics of the 
purified proteins. The molecular weight of recombinant TAFI is lower than plasma 
TAFI due to differences in glycosylation. The two recombinant TAFI isoforms had 
similar activation kinetics and the activated enzymes had similar 
carboxypeptidase B-like activity towards small molecule substrates. Their 
ability to retard clot lysis was found to be similar in a plate clot lysis 
assay.

PMID: 9869166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]