1. J Biochem. 1999 Jan;125(1):202-9. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a022260.

Mutational analysis of the reactive site loop of Streptomyces metalloproteinase 
inhibitor, SMPI.

Hiraga K(1), Seeram SS, Tate S, Tanaka N, Kainosho M, Oda K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Biology, Faculty of Textile Science, Kyoto Institute of 
Technology, Kyoto, 606-8585, Japan.

Streptomyces metalloproteinase inhibitor (SMPI) is the only inhibitor to show 
"standard mechanism inhibition" against metalloproteinases. SMPI is a globular 
protein with an exposed loop containing the reactive site, C64-V65. To analyze 
the importance of basic residues in the reactive site loop of SMPI, mutants were 
constructed for R60, K61, and R66 (R60A, K61A, R66A, R60/K61A, 60/61/66A, and 
60/61/66E). The mutants involving only R60, K61, and R60/K61 residues, 
respectively, showed strong inhibitory activity and were stable against enzyme 
activity. Both the triple mutants showed very weak inhibitory activity and 
underwent rapid degradation. The addition of basic residues to the loop (V62R 
and T63R) did not cause any further increase in inhibitory activity. These 
results suggest that basic residues in the reactive site loop play some role in 
maintaining a stable enzyme-inhibitor complex. The R66 mutant showed reduced 
activity and was rapidly degraded by enzymes. It was concluded that R66 is 
essential for maintaining a strong hydrophobic interaction with the S1' 
hydrophobic pocket of the enzyme. To investigate the roles of the disulfide 
bridge and the P68 residue near the reactive site, C64/69S and P68T mutants were 
constructed. These mutants showed very weak inhibitory activity and were rapidly 
degraded by enzymes. These results suggest that the disulfide bridge and P68 
residue are very essential for SMPI to function as an inhibitor.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a022260
PMID: 9880818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]