1. J Cell Biol. 1999 Jan 11;144(1):59-69. doi: 10.1083/jcb.144.1.59.

Vinexin: a novel vinculin-binding protein with multiple SH3 domains enhances 
actin cytoskeletal organization.

Kioka N(1), Sakata S, Kawauchi T, Amachi T, Akiyama SK, Okazaki K, Yaen C, 
Yamada KM, Aota S.

Author information:
(1)Craniofacial Developmental Biology and Regeneration Branch, National 
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Using the yeast two-hybrid system and an in vitro binding assay, we have 
identified a novel protein termed vinexin as a vinculin-binding protein. By 
Northern blotting, we identified two types of vinexin mRNA that were 3 and 2 kb 
in length. Screening for full-length cDNA clones and sequencing indicated that 
the two mRNA encode 82- and 37-kD polypeptides termed vinexin alpha and beta, 
respectively. Both forms of vinexin share a common carboxyl-terminal sequence 
containing three SH3 domains. The larger vinexin alpha contains an additional 
amino-terminal sequence. The interaction between vinexin and vinculin was 
mediated by two SH3 domains of vinexin and the proline-rich region of vinculin. 
When expressed, vinexin alpha and beta localized to focal adhesions in NIH 3T3 
fibroblasts, and to cell-cell junctions in epithelial LLC-PK1 cells. 
Furthermore, expression of vinexin increased focal adhesion size. Vinexin alpha 
also promoted upregulation of actin stress fiber formation. In addition, cell 
lines stably expressing vinexin beta showed enhanced cell spreading on 
fibronectin. These data identify vinexin as a novel focal adhesion and cell- 
cell adhesion protein that binds via SH3 domains to the hinge region of 
vinculin, which can enhance actin cytoskeletal organization and cell spreading.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.144.1.59
PMCID: PMC2148117
PMID: 9885244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]