1. Chirality. 1999;11(1):1-9. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1520-636X(1999)11:1<1::AID-CHIR1>3.0.CO;2-E.

Enantioselectivity of bunitrolol 4-hydroxylation is reversed by the change of an 
amino acid residue from valine to methionine at position 374 of cytochrome 
P450-2D6.

Narimatsu S(1), Kato R, Horie T, Ono S, Tsutsui M, Yabusaki Y, Ohmori S, Kitada 
M, Ichioka T, Shimada N, Kato R, Ishikawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 
University, Japan.

The enantioselectivity of 4-hydroxylation of bunitrolol (BTL), a 
beta-adrenoceptor blocking drug, was studied in microsomes from human liver, 
human hepatoma (Hep G2) cells expressing CYP2D6, and lymphoblastoid cells 
expressing CYP2D6. Kinetics in human liver microsomes showed that the Vmax value 
for (+)-BTL was 2.1-fold that of (-)-BTL, and that the Km value for (+)-BTL was 
lower than that for the (-)-antipode, resulting in the intrinsic clearance 
(Vmax/Km) of (+)-BTL being 2.1-fold over its (-)-antipode. CYP2D6 (CYP2D6-met) 
expressed in Hep G2 cells had a methionine residue at position 373 of the amino 
acid sequence and a rat-type N-terminal peptide (MELLNGTGLWSM) instead of the 
human-type (MGLEALVPLAVIV), and showed enantioselectivity of [(+)-BTL < (-)-BTL] 
for the rate of BTL 4-hydroxylation. In contrast, enantioselectivity [(+)-BTL > 
(-)-BTL] for Hep G2-CYP2D6 (CYP2D6-val) with a human-type N-terminal peptide 
that had a valine residue at 374, which corresponds to the methionine of the 
CYP2D6-met variant, was the same as that for human liver microsomes. We further 
confirmed that CYP2D6-met and CYP2D6-val expressed in human lymphoblastoid 
cells, both of which have methionine and valine, respectively, at position 374 
and a human-type N-terminal peptide, exhibited the same enantioselectivities as 
those obtained from CYP2D6-met and CYP2D6-val expressed in the Hep G2 cell 
system. These results indicate that the amino acid at 374 of CYP2D6 is one of 
the key factors influencing the enantioselectivity of BTL 4-hydroxylation.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1520-636X(1999)11:1<1::AID-CHIR1>3.0.CO;2-E
PMID: 9914647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]