1. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Feb;55(2):195-201. doi: 10.1124/mol.55.2.195.

Modulation of relative intrinsic activity of agonists at the alpha-2A 
adrenoceptor by mutation of residue 351 of G protein gi1alpha.

Jackson VN(1), Bahia DS, Milligan G.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Group, Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, 
Scotland, United Kingdom.

Compared with epinephrine, the relative intrinsic activity of a series of 
partial agonists to activate fusion proteins between the porcine alpha-2A 
adrenoceptor and the alpha-subunit of Gi1 was reduced after a single-point 
mutation (Cys351Gly) in the G protein. Although UK14304 was close to a full 
agonist at the fusion construct containing wild-type (Cys351)Gi1alpha, it was a 
partial agonist at that containing Gly351Gi1alpha. Moreover, although clonidine 
functioned as a good partial agonist to activate the fusion protein containing 
Cys351Gi1alpha, it was essentially an antagonist at the 
Gly351Gi1alpha-containing fusion protein. By contrast, incorporation of 
Ile351Gi1alpha into the fusion protein resulted in all partial agonists 
displaying higher intrinsic activity relative to epinephrine to activate this 
fusion protein than the one containing the wild-type G protein sequence. This is 
the first demonstration that the relative intrinsic activity of a series of 
agonists can be modified by a point mutation in a G protein rather than a 
receptor and indicates that the nature of a key contact site between a G protein 
and a receptor can selectively regulate partial agonist function. We provide a 
model for this based on the hydrophobicity of a key receptor-G protein 
alpha-subunit interaction interface.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.55.2.195
PMID: 9927608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]