1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Feb 16;96(4):1315-20. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.96.4.1315.

The retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator, RPGR, interacts with the delta 
subunit of rod cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase.

Linari M(1), Ueffing M, Manson F, Wright A, Meitinger T, Becker J.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut f√ºr Molekulare Physiologie, Abteilung Strukturelle 
Biologie, Rheinlanddamm 201, Postfach 102664, D-44026 Dortmund, Germany.

Recently, the retinitis pigmentosa 3 (RP3) gene has been cloned and named 
retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator (RPGR). The amino-terminal half of RPGR is 
homologous to regulator of chromosome condensation (RCC1), the nucleotide 
exchange factor for the small GTP-binding protein Ran. In a yeast two-hybrid 
screen we identified the delta subunit of rod cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase 
(PDEdelta) as interacting with the RCC1-like domain (RLD) of RPGR (RPGR392). The 
interaction of RPGR with PDEdelta was confirmed by pull-down assays and plasmon 
surface resonance. The binding affinity was determined to be 90 nM. Six missense 
mutations at evolutionary conserved residues within the RLD, which were found in 
RP3 patients, were analyzed by using the two-hybrid system. All missense 
mutations showed reduced interaction with PDEdelta. A non-RP3-associated 
missense substitution outside the RLD, V36F, did not abolish the interaction 
with PDEdelta. PDEdelta is widely expressed and highly conserved across 
evolution and is proposed to regulate the membrane insertion or solubilization 
of prenylated proteins, including the catalytic subunits of the PDE holoenzyme 
involved in phototransduction and small GTP-binding proteins of the Rab family. 
These results suggest that RPGR mutations give rise to retinal degeneration by 
dysregulation of intracellular processes that determine protein localization and 
protein transport.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.4.1315
PMCID: PMC15460
PMID: 9990021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]