1. J Exp Med. 1999 Mar 1;189(5):757-66. doi: 10.1084/jem.189.5.757.

Biochemical identification of a mutated human melanoma antigen recognized by 
CD4(+) T cells.

Pieper R(1), Christian RE, Gonzales MI, Nishimura MI, Gupta G, Settlage RE, 
Shabanowitz J, Rosenberg SA, Hunt DF, Topalian SL.

Author information:
(1)Surgery Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 1999 Mar 1;189(5):753-6. doi: 10.1084/jem.189.5.753.

CD4(+) T cells play a critical role in generating and maintaining immune 
responses against pathogens and alloantigens, and evidence suggests an important 
role for them in antitumor immunity as well. Although major histocompatibility 
complex class II-restricted human CD4(+) T cells with specific antitumor 
reactivities have been described, no standard method exists for cloning the 
recognized tumor-associated antigen (Ag). In this study, biochemical protein 
purification methods were used in conjunction with novel mass spectrometry 
sequencing techniques and molecular cloning to isolate a unique melanoma Ag 
recognized by a CD4(+) tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) line. The 
HLA-DRbeta1*0101-restricted Ag was determined to be a mutated glycolytic enzyme, 
triosephosphate isomerase (TPI). A C to T mutation identified by cDNA sequencing 
caused a Thr to Ile conversion in TPI, which could be detected in a tryptic 
digest of tumor-derived TPI by mass spectrometry. The Thr to Ile conversion 
created a neoepitope whose T cell stimulatory activity was enhanced at least 5 
logs compared with the wild-type peptide. Analysis of T cell recognition of 
serially truncated peptides suggested that the mutated amino acid residue was a 
T cell receptor contact. Defining human tumor Ag recognized by T helper cells 
may provide important clues to designing more effective immunotherapies for 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.189.5.757
PMCID: PMC2192954
PMID: 10049939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]