1. Curr Biol. 1999 Mar 11;9(5):265-8. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(99)80116-x.

Identification of the ras GTPase-activating protein GAP1(m) as a 
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate-binding protein in vivo.

Lockyer PJ(1), Wennstr√∂m S, Kupzig S, Venkateswarlu K, Downward J, Cullen PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of 
Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

GAP1(m) is a member of the GAP1 family of Ras GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) 
[1]. In vitro, it has been shown to bind inositol 1, 3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate 
(IP4), the water-soluble inositol head group of the lipid second messenger 
phosphatidylinositol 3,4, 5-trisphosphate (PIP3) [2] [3]. This has led to the 
suggestion that GAP1(m) might function as a PIP3 receptor in vivo [4]. Here, 
using rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells transiently transfected with a plasmid 
expressing a chimera of green fluorescent protein fused to GAP1(m) 
(GFP-GAP1(m)), we show that epidermal growth factor (EGF) induces a rapid (less 
than 60 seconds) recruitment of GFP-GAP1(m) from the cytosol to the plasma 
membrane. This recruitment required a functional GAP1(m) pleckstrin homology 
(PH) domain, because a specific point mutation (R629C) in the PH domain that 
inhibits IP4 binding in vitro [5] totally blocked EGF-induced GAP1(m) 
translocation. Furthermore, the membrane translocation was dependent on PI 
3-kinase, and the time course of translocation paralleled the rate by which EGF 
stimulates the generation of plasma membrane PIP3 [6]. Significantly, the 
PIP3-induced recruitment of GAP1(m) did not appear to result in any detectable 
enhancement in its basal Ras GAP activity. From these results, we conclude that 
GAP1(m) binds PIP3 in vivo, and it is recruited to the plasma membrane, but does 
not appear to be activated, following agonist stimulation of PI 3-kinase.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(99)80116-x
PMID: 10074452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]