1. Mol Diagn. 1998 Dec;3(4):203-209. doi: 10.154/MODI00300203.

Detection and Identification of Base Alterations Within the Region of Factor V 
Leiden by Fluorescent Melting Curves.

Lyondagger E(1), Millsondagger A, Phan T, Wittwer CT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah

Background: Factor V Leiden (G1691A) is a common cause of inherited thrombosis. 
In fluorescent melting curve analysis, the Leiden mutation is distinguished from 
the wild-type by a decrease in melting temperature (Tm) of a wild-type probe. 
Because Tm depends on the type and position of the mismatch, other base 
alterations, such as the recently described base alteration A1692C, should be 
distinguishable from the true Leiden mutation. Methods and Results: Of 2,100 
samples tested for the factor V Leiden mutation using a wild-type probe, 200 
heterozygous or homozygous mutant samples were further tested using a Leiden 
probe. The Tm of the A1692C base alteration was 1.5 degrees C greater than the 
Leiden mutation with the wild-type probe and 8 degrees C less with the Leiden 
probe. One sample was heterozygous for a new base alteration G1689A with a Tm 
0.8 degrees C greater than the Leiden mutation with the wild-type probe, and 10 
degrees C less with the Leiden probe. Tm estimates from fluorescence melting 
curve analysis have intra-assay standard deviations of approximately 0.1 degrees 
C. Conclusions: Fluorescence melting curve analysis can distinguish between 
sequence alterations with Tms differing by less than 1 degrees C. This is the 
first demonstration of a widely applicable technique that can significantly 
increase the specificity of hybridization techniques without the need for 
sequencing.

DOI: 10.154/MODI00300203
PMID: 10089278