1. Bioorg Med Chem. 1999 Apr;7(4):607-19. doi: 10.1016/s0968-0896(99)00006-1.

Synthesis and testing of azaglutamine derivatives as inhibitors of hepatitis A 
virus (HAV) 3C proteinase.

Huang Y(1), Malcolm BA, Vederas JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Hepatitis A virus (HAV) 3C proteinase is a picornaviral cysteine proteinase that 
is essential for cleavage of the initially synthesized viral polyprotein 
precursor to mature fragments and is therefore required for viral replication in 
vivo. Since the enzyme generally recognizes peptide substrates with L-glutamine 
at the P1 site, four types of analogues having an azaglutamine residue were 
chemically synthesized: hydrazo-o-nitrophenylsulfenamides A (e.g. 16); 
frame-shifted hydrazo-o-nitrophenylsulfenamides B (e.g. 25-28); the azaglutamine 
sulfonamides C (e.g. 7, 8, 11, 12); and haloacetyl azaglutamine analogues 2 and 
3. Testing of these compounds for inhibition of the HAV 3C proteinase employed a 
C24S mutant in which the non-essential surface cysteine was replaced with serine 
and which displays identical catalytic parameters to the wild-type enzyme. 
Sulfenamide 16 (type A) showed no significant inhibition. Sulfenamide 27 (type 
B) had an IC50 of ca 100 microM and gave time-dependent inactivation of the 
enzyme due to disulfide bond formation with the active site cysteine thiol, as 
demonstrated by electrospray mass spectrometry. Sulfonamide 8 (type C) was a 
weak competitive inhibitor with an IC50 of approximately 75 microM. The 
haloacetyl azaglutamine analogues 2 and 3 were time-dependent irreversible 
inactivators of HAV 3C proteinase with rate constants k(obs)/[I] of 680 M(-1) 
s(-1) and 870 M(-1) s(-1), respectively, and were shown to alkylate the active 
site thiol.

DOI: 10.1016/s0968-0896(99)00006-1
PMCID: PMC7172622
PMID: 10353640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]