1. Nat Genet. 1999 Jun;22(2):188-91. doi: 10.1038/9707.

Mutations in the gene encoding 11-cis retinol dehydrogenase cause delayed dark 
adaptation and fundus albipunctatus.

Yamamoto H(1), Simon A, Eriksson U, Harris E, Berson EL, Dryja TP.

Author information:
(1)Berman-Gund Laboratory for the Study of Retinal Degenerations and the Ocular 
Molecular Genetics Institute, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Eye & Ear 
Infirmary, Boston, USA.

The metabolic pathways that produce 11-cis retinal are important for vision 
because this retinoid is the chromophore residing in rhodopsin and the cone 
opsins. The all-trans retinal that is generated after cone and rod photopigments 
absorb photons of light is recycled back to 11-cis retinal by the retinal 
pigment epithelium and MÃ¼ller cells of the retina. Several of the enzymes 
involved have recently been purified and molecularly cloned; here we focus on 
11-cis retinol dehydrogenase (encoded by the gene RDH5; chromosome 12q13-14; 
ref. 4), the first cloned enzyme in this pathway. This microsomal enzyme is 
abundant in the retinal pigment epithelium, where it has been proposed to 
catalyse the conversion of 11-cis retinol to 11-cis retinal. We evaluated 
patients with hereditary retinal diseases featuring subretinal spots (retinitis 
punctata albescens and fundus albipunctatus) and patients with typical dominant 
or recessive retinitis pigmentosa for mutations in RDH5. Mutations were found 
only in two unrelated patients, both with fundus albipunctatus; they segregated 
with disease in the respective families. Recombinant mutant 11-cis retinol 
dehydrogenases had reduced activity compared with recombinant enzyme with 
wild-type sequence. Our results suggest that mutant alleles in RDH5 are a cause 
of fundus albipunctatus, a rare form of stationary night blindness characterized 
by a delay in the regeneration of cone and rod photopigments.

DOI: 10.1038/9707
PMID: 10369264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]