1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 25;274(26):18667-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.26.18667.

Molecular polymorphism of the syndecans. Identification of a hypo-glycanated 
murine syndecan-1 splice variant.

Romar√≠s M(1), Coomans C, Ceulemans H, Bruystens AM, Vekemans S, David G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Glycobiology and Developmental Genetics, Center for Human 
Genetics, University of Leuven and Flanders Interuniversity Institute for 
Biotechnology, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

We have identified a cDNA that encodes a variant form of murine syndecan-1. The 
variant cDNA lacks the sequence corresponding to the first 132 nucleotides of 
the third exon of the syndecan-1 gene. The corresponding message is rare. The 
alternative splice respects the reading frame and deletes 44 amino acids from 
the protein, joining the S45GS47GT sequence to a variant immediate downstream 
context. This sequence context initiates with alanine instead of glycine as 
residue 50, reducing the number of SGXG sequence motifs in the protein from two 
to one. Expression of this variant syndecan-1 in Madin-Darby canine kidney or 
MOLT-4 cells yielded a recombinant proteoglycan with a reduced number and 
clustering of the heparan sulfate chains. Both the conversions of Ala50 and of 
Lys53 into glycine enhanced the heparan sulfate substitution of the variant 
protein. These findings support the concept that serine-glycine dipeptide 
signals for glycosaminoglycan/heparan sulfate synthesis depend on sequence 
context (Zhang, L., David, G., and Esko, J. D. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 
27127-27135) and imply that alternative splicing mechanisms may in part control 
the molecular polymorphism of syndecan-1 and, therefore, the efficiency and 
versatility of this protein in its co-receptor functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.26.18667
PMID: 10373479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]