1. Biochemistry. 1999 Jul 20;38(29):9264-72. doi: 10.1021/bi9903345.

Site-directed mutagenesis and molecular modeling identify a crucial amino acid 
in specifying the heparin affinity of FGF-1.

Patrie KM(1), Botelho MJ, Franklin K, Chiu IM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Davis Medical Research Center, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

Heparin potentiates the mitogenic activity of FGF-1 by increasing the affinity 
for its receptor and by extending its biological half-life. During the course of 
labeling human FGF-1 with Na(125)I and chloramine T, it was observed that the 
protein lost its ability to bind to heparin. In contrast, bovine FGF-1 retained 
its heparin affinity even after iodination. To localize the region responsible 
for the lost heparin affinity, chimeric FGF-1 proteins were constructed from 
human and bovine FGF-1 expression constructs and tested for their heparin 
affinity after iodination. The results showed that the C-terminal region of 
human FGF-1 was responsible for the loss of heparin affinity. This region 
harbors a single tyrosine residue in human FGF-1 in contrast to a phenylalanine 
at this position in bovine FGF-1. Mutating this tyrosine residue in the human 
FGF-1 sequence to phenylalanine did not restore the heparin affinity of the 
iodinated protein. Likewise, changing the phenylalanine to tyrosine in the 
bovine FGF-1 did not reduce the ability of the iodinated protein to bind to 
heparin. In contrast, a mutant human FGF-1 that has cysteine-131 replaced with 
serine (C131S) was able to bind to heparin even after iodination while bovine 
FGF-1 (S131C) lost its binding affinity to heparin upon iodination. In addition, 
the human FGF-1 C131S mutant showed a decrease in homodimer formation when 
exposed to CuCl(2). Molecular modeling showed that the heparin-binding domain of 
FGF-1 includes cysteine-131 and that cysteine-131, upon oxidation to cysteic 
acid during the iodination procedures, would interact with lysine-126 and 
lysine-132. This interaction alters the conformation of the basic residues such 
that they no longer bind to heparin.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9903345
PMID: 10413500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]