1. Chem Biol Interact. 1999 May 14;119-120:71-8. doi: 
10.1016/s0009-2797(99)00015-0.

Human serum paraoxonase (PON1): identification of essential amino acid residues 
by group-selective labelling and site-directed mutagenesis.

Josse D(1), Xie W, Masson P, Lockridge O.

Author information:
(1)Eppley Institute, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 68198-6805, 
USA. djosse@mail.unmc.edu

Human serum paraoxonase/arylesterase (PON1, EC 3.1.8.1.) is a calcium-dependent 
enzyme which hydrolyzes a wide variety of organophosphates, including paraoxon, 
DFP, sarin and soman. Although the 3-D structure of PON has not yet been 
determined and its sequence shows no similarity with any other crystallized 
proteins, we undertook to identify some of its essential amino acid residues by 
two complementary approaches: group-specific labelling and site-directed 
mutagenesis. Group-specific labelling studies, performed on the purified native 
enzyme, indicated that one or more Trp, His and Asp/Glu are potentially 
important residues for PON activity. Based on these results, we identified some 
of these residues, conserved in the sequenced mammalian PON1, by site-directed 
mutagenesis. PON1 mutants were transiently expressed in 293T cells. The 
catalytic constants k(cat) and Km (relative to k(cat) and Km of the wild-type) 
determined with four different substrates (phenylacetate, paraoxon, diazoxon, 
chlorpyrifos oxon), were not significantly changed for the following mutants: 
W193A, W201A, W253A, H160N, H245N, H250N, H347N, E32A, E48A, D88A, D107A, D121A, 
D273A. By contrast, k(cat) was less than 1% for eight mutants: W280A, H114N, 
H133N, H154N, H242N, H284N, E52A and D53A. The essential amino acid residues 
identified in this work could be part of the PON1 active site, acting either as 
calcium ligands (E52 and D53?) or as substrate binding (W280?) or nucleophilic 
(His residues?) sites. However, we cannot rule out that the effects of mutations 
on catalytic properties resulted from a remote conformational change and/or 
misfolding of mutant proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/s0009-2797(99)00015-0
PMID: 10421440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]