1. J Lab Clin Med. 1999 Sep;134(3):215-21. doi: 10.1016/s0022-2143(99)90200-7.

Quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum: lessons from hereditary 
myeloperoxidase deficiency.

Nauseef WM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

The optimal level of oxygen-dependent microbicidal activity in human neutrophils 
depends on the generation of highly toxic products, including hypochlorous acid, 
by hydrogen peroxide in the presence of chloride anion and the neutrophil 
granule protein myeloperoxidase (MPO). The biosynthesis of MPO is normally 
restricted to the promyelocytic stage of myeloid development and includes 
N-linked glycosylation, heme insertion, proteolytic processing, subunit 
dimerization, and eventual targeting to the azurophilic granule. In the 
endoplasmic reticulum, MPO precursors interact transiently with calreticulin and 
calnexin, presumably in their capacity as molecular chaperones. In light of the 
important role of the MPO-H2O2-chloride system in human host defense, the 
relatively high prevalence of inherited MPO deficiency was an unanticipated 
insight provided by the widespread use of automated flow cytometry for the 
enumeration of leukocytes in clinical specimens. In many cases of inherited MPO 
deficiency, affected neutrophils have immunochemical evidence of precursor 
protein but lack the subunits of mature MPO, peroxidase activity, or the ability 
to chlorinate target proteins. To date, four genotypes have been reported to 
cause inherited MPO deficiency, each of which results in missense mutations. In 
the genotype Y173C, the mutant precursor is retained in the endoplasmic 
reticulum by virtue of its prolonged interaction with calnexin, and it 
eventually undergoes degradation in the 20S proteasome. In this way, the quality 
control system operating in the endoplasmic reticulum retrieves malfolded MPO 
precursors from the biosynthetic pathway and creates the biochemical phenotype 
of MPO deficiency. Thus MPO deficiency caused by Y173C joins the ranks of cystic 
fibrosis, protein C deficiency, and other genetic disorders that reflect 
abnormalities in protein folding.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-2143(99)90200-7
PMID: 10482305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]