1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Aug 20;154(1-2):111-22. doi: 
10.1016/s0303-7207(99)00080-5.

Production of recombinant rat proopiomelanocortin1-74 and characterization of 
its mitogenic action on pituitary lactotrophs.

Bert C(1), Vande Vijver V, Andries M, Verhaert P, Proost P, De Vreese B, Van 
Beeumen J, Vankelecom H, Denef C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Pharmacology, University of Leuven Medical School, 
Belgium.

We report the production of biologically active recombinant rat 
Gly-2-Ser-1-POMC1-74 (rrPOMC1-74) in a prokaryotic expression system. The 
polypeptide was produced as a fusion protein with glutathione-S-transferase 
(GST), using the pGEX-4T-1 vector and subsequently cleaved by thrombin. Amino 
acid sequencing, up to residue 45, showed a correct primary structure including 
the two additional amino acids at the N-terminus, Gly and Ser, derived from the 
thrombin cleavage site. Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry showed a Mr of 
8358.5 Da which was 14-16 Da heavier (oxidation or methylation) than the 
calculated mass. Combined digestion with trypsin and endoproteinase Glu-C 
followed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry and N-terminal sequencing of the 
separated fragments showed a correct disulphide bridge configuration. In 
reaggregate cell cultures of immature rat pituitary, rrPOMC1-74 displayed 
biological activity similar to that of natural human (h) POMC1-76 or rat 
POMC1-74: it stimulated DNA replication in lactotrophs but not in other 
pituitary cell types. However, its efficacy was significantly lower than that of 
the natural product. Gamma3-MSH, a peptide that can be generated from POMC1-74 
and a typical ligand of the melanocortin-3 (MC-3) receptor, also stimulated DNA 
replication in lactotrophs and, in contrast to rrPOMC1-74, also in somatotrophs 
and thyrotrophs. rrPOMC1-74 increased cAMP levels in 293HEK cells stably 
transfected with the MC-3 receptor with an intrinsic activity and potency 
similar to that of gamma3-MSH. However, natural hPOMC1-76 was inactive in the 
latter test system. These data show that rrPOMC1-74 mimics the selective 
mitogenic action of natural POMC1-74 on lactotrophs. Since natural POMC1-74 is 
N- and O-glycosylated and rrPOMC1-74 is not, glycosylation does not seem to 
determine the selectivity for lactotrophs. In spite of the feature that 
rrPOMC1-74 is an agonist at the MC-3 receptor and the reported evidence that the 
MC-3 receptor is expressed in the anterior pituitary, the mitogenic action of 
rrPOMC1-74 on lactotrophs does not seem to be mediated by the MC-3 receptor.

DOI: 10.1016/s0303-7207(99)00080-5
PMID: 10509806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]