1. Biochemistry. 1999 Sep 14;38(37):11866-75. doi: 10.1021/bi9910878.

Role of electrophilic and general base catalysis in the mechanism of Escherichia 
coli uracil DNA glycosylase.

Drohat AC(1), Jagadeesh J, Ferguson E, Stivers JT.

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Biotechnology, University of Maryland 
Biotechnology Institute, National Institute for Standards and Technology, 
Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.

Escherichia coli uracil DNA glycosylase (UDG) catalyzes the hydrolysis of 
premutagenic uracil bases in DNA by flipping the deoxyuridine from the DNA helix 
[Stivers, J. T., et al. (1999) Biochemistry 38, 952]. A general acid-base 
mechanism has been proposed whereby His187 facilitates leaving group departure 
by protonating the O2 of uracil and Asp64 activates a water molecule for 
nucleophilic attack at C1' of the deoxyribose. Detailed kinetic studies on the 
H187Q, H187A, and D64N mutant enzymes indicate that Asp64 and His187 stabilize 
the chemical transition state by 5.3 and 4.8 kcal/mol, respectively, with little 
effect on substrate or product binding. The pH dependence of k(cat) for 
wild-type and H187Q UDG indicates that an unprotonated group in the 
enzyme-substrate complex (pK(a) = 6.2 +/- 0.2) is required for catalysis. This 
unprotonated group has a small DeltaH of ionization (-0.4 +/- 1.7 kcal/mol) and 
is absent in the pH profile for D64N UDG, suggesting that it corresponds to the 
general base Asp64. The pH dependence of k(cat) for wild-type, H187Q, and D64N 
UDG shows no evidence for an essential protonated group over the pH range of 
5.5-10. Hence, the pK(a) of His187 must be outside this pH range if it serves as 
an electrophilic catalyst. These results support a mechanism in which Asp64 
serves as the general base and His187 acts as a neutral electrophile, 
stabilizing a developing negative charge on uracil O2 in the transition state. 
In the following paper of this issue we establish by crystallography and 
heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy that the imidazole of His187 is neutral during 
the catalytic cycle of UDG.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9910878
PMID: 10508389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]