1. Mol Microbiol. 1999 Oct;34(2):282-94. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1999.01595.x.

Modulating quorum sensing by antiactivation: TraM interacts with TraR to inhibit 
activation of Ti plasmid conjugal transfer genes.

Hwang I(1), Smyth AJ, Luo ZQ, Farrand SK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Crop Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 240 
ERML, 1201 West Gregory Drive, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Conjugal transfer of the Ti plasmid pTiC58 is regulated by a quorum-sensing 
system involving the transcriptional activator TraR and the acyl homoserine 
lactone autoinducer N-(3-oxo-octanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (AAI). Activation of 
tra gene expression by TraR and AAI is inhibited by TraM, an 11 kDa protein also 
coded for by the Ti plasmid. Previous studies suggested that TraM interferes 
with TraR activity by directly interacting with the activator protein. Using the 
yeast two-hybrid system, constructs of Saccharomyces cerevisiae containing a 
fusion of traR to the B42 domain of the prey plasmid pJG4.5 and a fusion of traM 
to the lexA gene of the bait plasmid pEG202 produced beta-galactosidase and grew 
on medium lacking leucine, both phenotypes indicative of an interaction between 
the two proteins. Early termination mutants and substitution mutants mapping to 
the C-terminus of TraM were isolated by screening for alleles unable to 
interfere with TraR activity in Agrobacterium tumefaciens. These mutants all 
failed to interact with the TraR fusion in the two-hybrid system. An N-terminal 
deletion mutant of TraM lacking the first 27 residues weakly interacted with 
TraR in the two-hybrid system whereas deletions of 48 amino acids or more 
abolished the interaction. As assessed by Western blot analysis, the mutant 
fusion proteins were produced at levels indistinguishable from that of the 
wild-type TraM in the yeast tester strain. Mutants of TraR that were not 
inhibited by TraM in A. tumefaciens were isolated and fell into two classes. In 
the first, the mutation resulted in increased expression of wild-type TraR. In 
the second, a proline residue at position 176 was changed to serine (P176 --> S) 
or to leucine (P176 --> L). The P176 --> S mutant interacted with wild-type 
TraM, but at a detectably lower level, in the two-hybrid assay. Mutants of TraR 
with N-terminal deletions as large as 105 amino acids interfered with the 
ability of TraM to inhibit wild-type TraR in A. tumefaciens. Two-hybrid assays 
indicated that these mutants, as well as a C-terminal 49 residue fragment of 
TraR, can interact with TraM. We conclude that TraM and TraR interact in vivo 
and that this interaction is responsible for inhibition of TraR-mediated 
activation. We also conclude that the two proteins interact with each other 
through domains located at their respective C-termini.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1999.01595.x
PMID: 10564472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]