1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 7;275(1):9-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.1.9.

Photoaffinity cross-linking identifies differences in the interactions of an 
agonist and an antagonist with the parathyroid hormone/parathyroid 
hormone-related protein receptor.

Behar V(1), Bisello A, Bitan G, Rosenblatt M, Chorev M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Bone and Mineral Metabolism, Charles A. Dana Laboratories, 
Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Analogs of parathyroid hormone (PTH)-related protein (PTHrP), singularly 
substituted with a photoreactive L-p-benzoylphenylalanine (Bpa) at each of the 
first 6 N-terminal positions, were pharmacologically evaluated in human 
embryonic kidney cells stably expressing the recombinant human PTH/PTHrP 
receptor. Two of these analogs, in which the photoreactive residue is either in 
position 1 or 2 (Bpa(1)- and Bpa(2)-PTHrP, respectively) displayed high affinity 
binding. Bpa(1)-PTHrP also displayed high efficacy for the stimulation of 
increased cAMP levels. Surprisingly, Bpa(2)-PTHrP was found to be a potent 
antagonist, despite the presence of the principal activation domain (sequence 
1-6). Analysis of the digestion profiles of the ligand-receptor photoconjugates 
revealed that both the agonist and the antagonist cross-link to the S-CH(3) 
group of Met(425) in transmembrane domain 6 of the human PTH/PTHrP receptor. 
However, the antagonist Bpa(2)-PTHrP also cross-links to a proximal site within 
the receptor domain Pro(415)-Met(425). Unlike the antagonist Bpa(2)-PTHrP, the 
potent agonist Bpa(2)-PTH, also bearing the Bpa residue in position 2, 
cross-links only to the S-CH(3) group of Met(425) (similar to Bpa(1)-PTHrP and 
Bpa(1)-PTH). Taken together, these results suggest that the antagonist 
Bpa(2)-PTHrP is able to distinguish between two distinct conformations of the 
receptor. The comparison between PTHrP analogs substituted by Bpa at two 
consecutive positions and across PTH and PTHrP reveals insights into the 
PTH/PTHrP ligand-receptor bimolecular interaction at the level of a single amino 
acid.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.1.9
PMID: 10617579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]