1. Biochemistry. 2000 Jan 18;39(2):479-88. doi: 10.1021/bi992014r.

Specific proteolysis of human plasminogen by a 24 kDa endopeptidase from a novel 
Chryseobacterium Sp.

Lijnen HR(1), Van Hoef B, Ugwu F, Collen D, Roelants I.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, University of Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium. roger.lijnen@med.kuleuven.ac.be

A novel single polypeptide endopeptidase of 24 kDa (24k-endopeptidase) was 
purified with a yield of 300-400 microg/L from conditioned medium of a bacterial 
strain which was identified as a new species in the genus Chryseobacterium Sp. 
on the basis of its 16S rDNA sequence and DNA:DNA hybridizations. The 
NH(2)-terminal amino acid sequence (Val-Ala-Thr-Pro-Asn-Leu-Glu-.) was not found 
in the availabe databases. The 24k-endopeptidase specifically hydrolyzed the 
Ser(441)-Val(442) peptide bond in human plasmin(ogen), with additional cleavage 
of the Lys(78)-Val(79) and Pro(447)-Val(448) peptide bonds, and a secondary 
cleavage at Lys(615)-Val(616). Thereby, plasminogen is converted into an 
angiostatin-like fragment containing kringles 1-4 (K1-4) and miniplasminogen 
(kringle 5 and the serine proteinase domain). The purified K1-4 fragment showed 
a comparable cytotoxicity toward endothelial cells as the elastase-derived K1-3 
fragment (12.7% versus 10.6% at a concentration of 10 microg/mL). Plasminogen, 
bound to monocytoid THP-1 cells, was also cleaved by the 24k-endopeptidase, 
resulting in generation of an angiostatin-like fragment and in a decreased 
capacity to generate cell-associated plasmin following activation by urokinase. 
The 24k-endopeptidase was not efficiently neutralized by specific inhibitors 
against the serine, cysteine, aspartic, or matrix metalloproteinase classes of 
enzymes. In human plasma or serum, however, it induced only very limited 
plasminogen degradation, apparently due to neutralization of its activity by 
alpha(2)-macroglobulin. Interaction of this novel 24k-endopeptidase with 
plasminogen thus yields an angiostatin-like fragment and affects 
plasmin-mediated cellular proteolytic activity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi992014r
PMID: 10631010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]