1. Mol Microbiol. 2000 Jan;35(2):397-406. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01706.x.

Induction of neutral trehalase Nth1 by heat and osmotic stress is controlled by 
STRE elements and Msn2/Msn4 transcription factors: variations of PKA effect 
during stress and growth.

Zähringer H(1), Thevelein JM, Nwaka S.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität Freiburg, 
Hermann-Herder-Str. 7, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae neutral trehalase, encoded by NTH1, controls trehalose 
hydrolysis in response to multiple stress conditions, including nutrient 
limitation. The presence of three stress responsive elements (STREs, CCCCT) in 
the NTH1 promoter suggested that the transcriptional activator proteins Msn2 and 
Msn4, as well as the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), control the 
stress-induced expression of Nth1. Here, we give direct evidence that Msn2/Msn4 
and the STREs control the heat-, osmotic stress- and diauxic shift-dependent 
induction of Nth1. Disruption of MSN2 and MSN4 abolishes or significantly 
reduces the heat- and NaCl-induced increases in Nth1 activity and transcription. 
Stress-induced increases in activity of a lacZ reporter gene put under control 
of the NTH1 promoter is nearly absent in the double mutant. In all instances, 
basal expression is also reduced by about 50%. The trehalose concentration in 
the msn2 msn4 double mutant increases less during heat stress and drops more 
slowly during recovery than in wild-type cells. This shows that 
Msn2/Msn4-controlled expression of enzymes of trehalose synthesis and hydrolysis 
help to maintain trehalose concentration during stress. However, the 
Msn2/Msn4-independent mechanism exists for heat control of trehalose metabolism. 
Site-directed mutagenesis of the three STREs (CCCCT changed to CATCT) in NTH1 
promoter fused to a reporter gene indicates that the relative proximity of STREs 
to each other is important for the function of NTH1. Elimination of the three 
STREs abolishes the stress-induced responses and reduces basal expression by 
30%. Contrary to most STRE-regulated genes, the PKA effect on the induction of 
NTH1 by heat and sodium chloride is variable. During diauxic growth, NTH1 
promoter-controlled reporter activity strongly increases, as opposed to the 
previously observed decrease in Nth1 activity, suggesting a tight but opposite 
control of the enzyme at the transcriptional and post-translational levels. 
Apparently, inactive trehalase is accumulated concomitant with the accumulation 
of trehalose. These results might help to elucidate the general connection 
between control by STREs, Msn2/Msn4 and PKA and, in particular, how these 
components play a role in control of trehalose metabolism.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01706.x
PMID: 10652100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]