1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 10;275(10):7239-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.10.7239.

Re-engineering of human urokinase provides a system for structure-based drug 
design at high resolution and reveals a novel structural subsite.

Nienaber V(1), Wang J, Davidson D, Henkin J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Illinois 
60064, USA. vicki.nienaber@abbott.com

Inhibition of urokinase has been shown to slow tumor growth and metastasis. To 
utilize structure-based drug design, human urokinase was re-engineered to 
provide a more optimal crystal form. The redesigned protein consists of residues 
Ile(16)-Lys(243) (in the chymotrypsin numbering system; for the urokinase 
numbering system it is Ile(159)-Lys(404)) and two point mutations, C122A and 
N145Q (C279A and N302Q). The protein yields crystals that diffract to ultra-high 
resolution at a synchrotron source. The native structure has been refined to 1.5 
A resolution. This new crystal form contains an accessible active site that 
facilitates compound soaking, which was used to determine the co-crystal 
structures of urokinase in complex with the small molecule inhibitors amiloride, 
4-iodo-benzo(b)thiophene-2-carboxamidine and phenylguanidine at 2. 0-2.2 A 
resolution. All three inhibitors bind at the primary binding pocket of 
urokinase. The structures of amiloride and 
4-iodo-benzo(b)thiophene-2-carboxamidine also reveal that each of their halogen 
atoms are bound at a novel structural subsite adjacent to the primary binding 
pocket. This site consists of residues Gly(218), Ser(146), and Cys(191)-Cys(220) 
and the side chain of Lys(143). This pocket could be utilized in future drug 
design efforts. Crystal structures of these three inhibitors in complex with 
urokinase reveal strategies for the design of more potent nonpeptidic urokinase 
inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.10.7239
PMID: 10702294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]