1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 31;275(13):9284-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.13.9284.

Arrestin binding to the M(2) muscarinic acetylcholine receptor is precluded by 
an inhibitory element in the third intracellular loop of the receptor.

Lee KB(1), Ptasienski JA, Pals-Rylaarsdam R, Gurevich VV, Hosey MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern 
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Desensitization of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) involves the binding of 
members of the family of arrestins to the receptors. In the model system 
involving the visual GPCR rhodopsin, activation and phosphorylation of rhodopsin 
is thought to convert arrestin from a low to high affinity binding state. 
Phosphorylation of the M(2) muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR) has been 
shown to be required for binding of arrestins 2 and 3 in vitro and for 
arrestin-enhanced internalization in intact cells (Pals-Rylaarsdam, R., and 
Hosey, M. M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 14152-14158). For the M(2) mAChR, 
arrestin binding requires phosphorylation at multiple serine and threonine 
residues at amino acids 307-311 in the third intracellular (i3) loop. Here, we 
have investigated the molecular basis for the requirement of receptor 
phosphorylation for arrestin binding. Constructs of arrestin 2 that can bind to 
other GPCRs in a phosphorylation-independent manner were unable to interact with 
a mutant M(2) mAChR in which the Ser/Thr residues at 307-311 were mutated to 
alanines. However, although phosphorylation-deficient mutants of the M(2) mAChR 
that lacked 50-157 amino acids from the i3 loop were unable to undergo 
agonist-dependent internalization when expressed alone in tsA201 cells, 
co-expression of arrestin 2 or 3 restored agonist-dependent internalization. 
Furthermore, a deletion of only 15 amino acids (amino acids 304-319) was 
sufficient to allow for phosphorylation-independent arrestin-receptor 
interaction. These results indicate that phosphorylation at residues 307-311 
does not appear to be required to activate arrestin into a high affinity binding 
state. Instead, phosphorylation at residues 307-311 appears to facilitate the 
removal of an inhibitory constraint that precludes receptor-arrestin association 
in the absence of receptor phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.13.9284
PMID: 10734068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]