1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2000 Apr;9(4):449-54.

Glutathione S-transferase M1, T1, and P1 polymorphisms as risk factors for renal 
cell carcinoma: a case-control study.

Sweeney C(1), Farrow DC, Schwartz SM, Eaton DL, Checkoway H, Vaughan TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health and Community Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA. sweeneycarol@exchange.uams.edu

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has known environmental risk factors, notably 
smoking, and enzymes that biotransform carcinogens have high levels of activity 
in the kidney. However, a possible role of polymorphisms in these enzymes in RCC 
etiology has received little study. We investigated glutathione S-transferase 
(GST) polymorphisms in a population-based case-control study of RCC. Subjects 
completed a structured interview, and DNA was isolated from pathological 
material or buccal cells for 130 cases, and from blood for 505 controls. 
Genotypes for GSTM1 and GSTT1 were determined by multiplex PCR, and for GSTP1 by 
oligonucleotide ligation assay. The frequency of GSTM1 null genotype was 50.0% 
in cases and 50.5% in controls, with an adjusted odds ratio (OR) of 1.0 [95% 
confidence interval (CI), 0.6-1.6]. For GSTP1, the frequencies of genotypes AA, 
AG, and GG representing the Ile104Val variant were: cases, 44.6%, 43.1%, and 
12.3%; controls, 43.4%, 44.0%, and 12.6%; OR for AG and GG, 1.0 (95% CI, 
0.6-1.6). An excess of the GSTT1 null genotype was observed in cases compared 
with controls, 28.6% versus 18.5% (OR, 1.9; 95% CI, 1.1-3.4). The association 
with GSTT1 was present among both smokers and nonsmokers, but was modified by 
body mass index, a recognized risk factor for RCC; among subjects in the lowest 
tertile of body mass index, the OR for GSTT1 null was 4.8 (95% CI, 1.8-13.0). 
The association between GSTT1 null and increased RCC risk in this 
population-based study suggests that activity of the GSTT1 enzyme protects 
against RCC. This contrasts with a recent report of reduced risk of RCC 
associated with GSTT1 null in a cohort of trichloroethene-exposed workers and 
suggests that specific chemical exposures alter the effect of GSTT1 on cancer 
risk.

PMID: 10794492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]