1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 4;275(31):23973-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M001032200.

Phosphorylation of collapsin response mediator protein-2 by Rho-kinase. Evidence 
for two separate signaling pathways for growth cone collapse.

Arimura N(1), Inagaki N, Chihara K, MÃ©nager C, Nakamura N, Amano M, Iwamatsu A, 
Goshima Y, Kaibuchi K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Signal Transduction, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 
8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma 630-0101, Japan.

We previously identified Rho-associated protein kinase (Rho-kinase) as a 
specific effector of Rho. In this study, we identified collapsin response 
mediator protein-2 (CRMP-2), as a novel Rho-kinase substrate in the brain. 
CRMP-2 is a neuronal protein whose expression is up-regulated during 
development. Rho-kinase phosphorylated CRMP-2 at Thr-555 in vitro. We produced 
an antibody that specifically recognizes CRMP-2 phosphorylated at Thr-555. Using 
this antibody, we found that Rho-kinase phosphorylated CRMP-2 downstream of Rho 
in COS7 cells. Phosphorylation of CRMP-2 was observed in chick dorsal root 
ganglion neurons during lysophosphatidic acid (LPA)-induced growth cone 
collapse, whereas the phosphorylation was not detected during 
semaphorin-3A-induced growth cone collapse. Both LPA-induced CRMP-2 
phosphorylation and LPA-induced growth cone collapse were inhibited by 
Rho-kinase inhibitor HA1077 or Y-32885. LPA-induced growth cone collapse was 
also blocked by a dominant negative form of Rho-kinase. On the other hand, 
semaphorin-3A-induced growth cone collapse was not inhibited by a dominant 
negative form of Rho-kinase. Furthermore, overexpression of a mutant CRMP-2 in 
which Thr-555 was replaced by Ala significantly inhibited LPA-induced growth 
cone collapse. These results demonstrate the existence of Rho-kinase-dependent 
and -independent pathways for growth cone collapse and suggest that CRMP-2 
phosphorylation by Rho-kinase is involved in the former pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M001032200
PMID: 10818093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]