1. Biochemistry. 2000 May 23;39(20):6022-32. doi: 10.1021/bi000105e.

Chemical shift mapped DNA-binding sites and 15N relaxation analysis of the 
C-terminal KH domain of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K.

Baber JL(1), Levens D, Libutti D, Tjandra N.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biophysical Chemistry, Building 3, National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0380, 
USA.

The K homology (KH) motif is one of the major classes of nucleic acid binding 
proteins. Some members of this family have been shown to interact with DNA while 
others have RNA targets. There have been no reports containing direct 
experimental evidence regarding the nature of KH module-DNA interaction. In this 
study, the interaction of the C-terminal KH domain of heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein K (KH3) with its cognate single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) are 
investigated. Chemical shift perturbation mapping indicates that the first two 
helices, the conserved GxxG loop, beta 1, and beta 2, are the primary regions 
involved in DNA binding for KH3. The nature of the KH3-ssDNA interaction is 
further illuminated by a comparison of backbone 15N relaxation data for the 
bound and unbound KH3. Relaxation data are also used to confirm that the 
backbone of wild-type KH3 is structurally identical to that of the G26R mutant 
KH3, which was previously published. Amide proton exchange experiments indicate 
that the two helices involved in DNA binding are less stable than other regions 
of secondary structure and that a large portion of KH3 backbone amide hydrogens 
are protected in some manner upon ssDNA binding. The major backbone dynamics 
features of KH3 are similar to those of the structurally comparable human 
papillomavirus-31 E2 DNA binding domain. Secondary structure information for 
ssDNA-bound wild-type KH3 is also presented and shows that binding results in no 
global changes in the protein fold.

DOI: 10.1021/bi000105e
PMID: 10821674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]