1. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Jun;267(12):3704-11. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01403.x.

Expression and characterization of recombinant human eosinophil peroxidase. 
Impact of the R286H substitution on the biosynthesis and activity of the enzyme.

Romano M(1), Baralle FE, Patriarca P.

Author information:
(1)International Center for Genetic Engineering an Biotechnology, Trieste, 
Italy. mromano@icgeb.trieste.it

Hereditary eosinophil peroxidase deficiency is a genetic abnormality 
characterized by a decrease or absence of peroxidase activity and a reduction of 
the granule matrix volume. Recently, we identified two mutations associated with 
eosinophil peroxidase deficiency in a subject and his siblings, i.e. a base 
insertion causing the appearance of a premature stop codon and a base transition 
causing the replacement of an Arg at codon 286 with a His (R286H). In this 
article we report the stable expression of both the recombinant wild-type and 
the R286H eosinophil peroxidase precursor in the K-562 cell line, and the 
effects of the R286H substitution on the structure and function of the 
eosinophil peroxidase precursor. Heme group incorporation into both the 
recombinant wild-type and the recombinant R286H eosinophil peroxidase precursor 
was comparable, as was the stability of both proteins. Instead, the recombinant 
R286H eosinophil peroxidase precursor exhibited marked alterations of the 
catalytic properties and an increased sensitivity to four peroxidase inhibitors 
with respect to both the recombinant wild-type eosinophil peroxidase precursor 
and the native enzyme. In addition, the recombinant wild-type, but not the 
R286H, eosinophil peroxidase precursor was immunoprecipitated by two 
anti-(eosinophil peroxidase) mAbs. Altogether, our results suggest a protein 
misfolding of the R286H eosinophil peroxidase precursor which might account for 
its altered catalytic properties and the absence of expression of some epitopes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01403.x
PMID: 10848988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]