1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 22;275(38):29268-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M004971200.

Direct identification of a peptide binding region in the opioid receptor-like 1 
receptor by photoaffinity labeling with [Bpa(10),Tyr(14)]nociceptin.

MoulÃ©dous L(1), Topham CM, Mazarguil H, Meunier JC.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, 31077 Toulouse, France.

The heptadecapeptide nociceptin, also known as orphanin FQ, is the endogenous 
agonist of the opioid receptor-like 1 (ORL1) G protein-coupled receptor. An 
affinity labeling approach has been implemented to probe the interactions of the 
neuropeptide with the receptor using the photolabile nociceptin derivative, 
[p-benzoyl-l-Phe(10),Tyr(14)]nociceptin ([Bpa(10),Tyr(14)]noc). In recombinant 
Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing the human ORL1 receptor, 
[Bpa(10),Tyr(14)]noc binds the receptor with high affinity (K(i) approximately 
0.7 nm) and is as potent as nociceptin in the inhibition of forskolin-induced 
cAMP synthesis (EC(50) approximately 0.5 nm). UV irradiation at 365 nm of the 
complex formed by the ORL1 receptor and radioiodinated [Bpa(10),Tyr(14)]noc 
results in the irreversible labeling of a glycoprotein of approximately 65 kDa, 
determined by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Complete digestion of the 
partially purified 65-kDa complex with kallikrein generates a single labeled 
fragment (approximately 6.5 kDa) that is readily cleaved by endoproteinase Glu-C 
to yield a labeled fragment of approximately 3.2 kDa. Kallikrein treatment of 
the photoaffinity cross-linked Glu(295) --> Asp mutant receptor also yields a 
single labeled fragment of approximately 6.5 kDa but is resistant to further 
cleavage by endoproteinase Glu-C. Based upon the expected proteolytic 
fingerprint of the labeled receptor, the photoreactive region can be identified 
as ORL1-(296-302; residues Thr-Ala-Val-Ala-Ile-Leu-Arg) spanning the C terminus 
of extracellular loop 3 and the N terminus of transmembrane helix VII. Molecular 
modeling of the ORL1 receptor complex with [Bpa(10)]noc suggests that reaction 
of the Bpa carbonyl group may occur with the side chain of Ile(300) within the 
experimentally identified photoreactive region.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M004971200
PMID: 10880520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]