1. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Jul;14(7):1099-115. doi: 10.1210/mend.14.7.0483.

Residues within transmembrane helices 2 and 5 of the human 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor contribute to agonist and antagonist 
binding.

Hoffmann SH(1), ter Laak T, Kühne R, Reiländer H, Beckers T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Research, ASTA Medica AG, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

To understand the ligand binding properties of the human GnRH receptor 
(hGnRH-R), 24 site-specific mutants within transmembrane helices (TMH) 1, 2, and 
5 and the extracellular loop 2 (E2) were generated. These mutants were analyzed 
by using a functional reporter gene assay, monitoring receptor signaling via 
adenylate cyclase to a cAMP-responsive element fused to Photinus pyralis 
luciferase. The functional behavior of 14 receptor mutants, capable of G-protein 
coupling and signaling, was studied in detail with different well described 
agonistic and antagonistic peptide ligands. Furthermore, the binding constants 
were determined in displacement binding experiments with the antagonist 
[125I]Cetrorelix. The substitution of residues K36, Q204, W205, H207, Q208, F20, 
F213, F216, and S217 for alanine had no or only a marginal effect on ligand 
binding and signaling. In contrast, substitution of N87, Eg9, D9, R179, W206, 
Y211, F214, and T215 for alanine resulted in receptor proteins neither capable 
of ligand binding nor signal transduction. Within those mutants affecting ligand 
binding and signaling to various degrees, W101A, N102A, and N212Q differentiate 
between agonists and antagonists. Thus, in addition to N102 already described, 
the residues W101 in TMH2 and N212 in TMH5 are important for the architecture of 
the ligand-binding pocket. Based on the experimental data, three-dimensional 
models for binding of the superagonist D-Trp6-GnRH (Triptorelin) and the 
antagonist Cetrorelix to the hGnRH-R are proposed. Both decapeptidic ligands are 
bound to the receptor in a bent conformation with distinct interactions within 
the binding pocket formed by all TMHs, E2, and E3. The antagonist Cetrorelix 
with bulky hydrophobic N-terminal amino acids interacts with quite different 
receptor residues, a hint at the failure to induce an active, G protein-coupling 
receptor conformation.

DOI: 10.1210/mend.14.7.0483
PMID: 10894158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]