1. Ann Hematol. 2000 Jun;79(6):296-8. doi: 10.1007/s002779900153.

The platelet alpha2-integrin (GPIa) nucleotide-807 polymorphism is not 
associated with a risk for maternal-fetal human platelet antigen-5 
incompatibility.

Panzer S(1), Janisiw M, Fischer G, Jilma B.

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Blood Group Serology, University of Vienna, Austria. 
simon.panzer@univie.ac.at

Alloimmunization against human platelet antigen (HPA)-5 may lead to neonatal 
alloimmune thrombocytopenia. The HPA-5 dimorphism is expressed on the platelet 
alpha2beta1 integrin. The density of this receptor is associated with another 
dimorphism of the 2beta1 integrin (nucleotide-807C/T). We hypothesized that 
anti-HPA-5b-induced neonatal thrombocytopenia is more likely to occur if the 
receptor is expressed at high than at low levels. Among 933 mother-child pairs, 
we identified 79 HPA-5aa mothers giving birth to a HPA-Sab offspring. Seventeen 
mothers had HPA-5b antibodies, but the offspring had a normal platelet count. We 
genotyped the offspring and mothers for the alpha2-807C/T dimorphism to evaluate 
its relationship to antibody formation. There was no difference between the 
frequency of the 807C/T dimorphism among children delivered from alloimmunized 
mothers and those from mothers without antibodies (P>0.3). The frequency of the 
807C/T dimorphism was not different in the two maternal groups. In three 
maternal-fetal incompatibilities, we observed at delivery normal platelet counts 
of platelets typed HPA-5b-alpha2807T, despite increasing maternal antibody 
titers during the pregnancy. Our data do not support the hypothesis that the 
807C/T dimorphism in the HPA-5ab children is a predisposing factor to either 
elicit alloimmunization against HPA-5b or for neonatal alloimmune 
thrombocytopenia.

DOI: 10.1007/s002779900153
PMID: 10901607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]