1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jul 26;1475(3):377-82. doi: 
10.1016/s0304-4165(00)00096-9.

Role of alpha-helical conformation of histatin-5 in candidacidal activity 
examined by proline variants.

Situ H(1), Balasubramanian SV, Bobek LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, State University of 
New York at Buffalo 14214, USA.

Human salivary histatin-5 (Hsn-5) is a potent in vitro anticandidal agent. The 
aim of this study was to investigate the importance of alpha-helical structure 
of Hsn-5 for its candidacidal activity. The following three Hsn-5 variants, 
where one or more functionally nonessential residues were replaced with proline 
(potent alpha-helix breaker), were produced by Escherichia coli expression 
system: H21P (1P), H19P/H21P (2P), and E16P/H19P/H21P (3P). The activities of 
purified proteins were determined by candidacidal assays, and the secondary 
structures by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy in trifluoroethanol (TFE) 
that is considered the helix-promoting solvent, and lysophosphatidyl-glycerol 
(LPG) micelles, the environment that more closely resembles the biological 
membranes. Our results indicated that 3P variant displayed a candidacidal 
activity which was similar to that of unaltered Hsn-5 (0P), while 1P and 2P 
variants showed lower cidal activity. The CD spectra in TFE indicated that 3P 
variant has less helical characteristics than the 0P, 1P and 2P. These results 
suggested that the alpha-helical content of Hsn-5 proline variants does not 
correlate with the candidacidal activity. Further, the CD spectral analysis of 
peptides in LPG micelles indicated the formation of beta-turn structures in 0P 
and 3P variants. In conclusion, 3P variant which exhibited comparable 
candidacidal activity to 0P contains lower percentage of alpha-helical structure 
than 1P and 2P variants, which exhibited lower candidacidal activity. This 
suggests alpha-helix may not be important for anticandidal activity of Hsn-5.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-4165(00)00096-9
PMID: 10913839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]