1. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Oct;267(20):6256-63. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01710.x.

Signal transduction pathways triggered by fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 
expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes after fibroblast growth factor 1 addition. 
Role of Grb2, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, Src tyrosine kinase, and 
phospholipase Cgamma.

Browaeys-Poly E(1), Cailliau K, Vilain JP.

Author information:
(1)Université des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, Laboratoire de Biologie du 
Développement, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

Xenopus oocytes expressing fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) were used 
as a biological model system to analyse the signal transduction pathways that 
are triggered by fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF1). Germinal vesicle breakdown 
(GVBD) and phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 2 
(ERK2) occured 15 h after FGF1 addition. These events were Ras-dependent as they 
were blocked by a Ras dominant negative form. The Ras activity was promoted by 
three upstream effectors, growth factor-bound protein 2 (Grb2), 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and Src cytoplasmic kinase. Ras activation 
was inhibited by a Grb2 dominant negative form (P49L), by PI3K inhibitors, 
including wortmannin, LY294002, the N-SH2 domain of p85alpha PI3K and by the SH2 
domain of Src. Src activation induced by FGF1 was blocked by the SH2 domain of 
Src and PP2, a specific inhibitor of Src. The Grb2 adaptor was recruited by the 
upstream Src homology 2/alpha-collagen-related (Shc) effector, as the SH2-Shc 
domain prevented the GVBD and the ERK2 phosphorylation induced by FGF1. The 
importance of another signalling pathway involving phospholipase Cgamma 
(PLCgamma) was also investigated. The use of the PLCgamma inhibitory peptide, 
neomycin and the calcium chelator BAPTA-AM on oocytes expressing FGFR1 or the 
stimulation by PDGF-BB of oocytes expressing PDGFR-FGFR1 mutated on the PLCgamma 
binding site, prevented GVBD and ERK2 phosphorylation. This study shows that the 
transduction cascade induced by the FGFR1-FGF1 interaction in Xenopus oocytes 
represents the sum of Ras-dependent and PLCgamma-dependent pathways. It 
emphasizes the role played by PI3K and Src and their connections with the Ras 
cascade in the FGFR1 signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01710.x
PMID: 11012680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]