1. Biophys Chem. 2000 Aug 30;86(2-3):191-201. doi: 10.1016/s0301-4622(00)00143-5.

Intermolecular dynamics and function in actin filaments.

Kim E(1), Reisler E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Molecular Biology Institute, 
University of California, Los Angeles 90095, USA.

Structural models of F-actin suggest that three segments in actin, the DNase I 
binding loop (residues 38-52), the hydrophobic plug (residues 262-274) and the 
C-terminus, contribute to the formation of an intermolecular interface between 
three monomers in F-actin. To test these predictions and also to assess the 
dynamic properties of intermolecular contacts in F-actin, Cys-374 pyrene-labeled 
skeletal alpha-actin and pyrene-labeled yeast actin mutants, with Gln-41 or 
Ser-265 replaced with cysteine, were used in fluorescence experiments. Large 
differences in Cys-374 pyrene fluorescence among copolymers of 
subtilisin-cleaved (between Met-47 and Gly-48) and uncleaved alpha-actin showed 
both intra- and intermolecular interactions between the C-terminus and loop 
38-52 in F-actin. Excimer band formation due to intermolecular stacking of 
pyrene probes attached to Cys-41 and Cys-265, and Cys-41 and Cys-374, in mutant 
yeast F-actin confirmed the proximity of these residues on the paired sites (to 
within 18 A) in accordance with the models of F-actin structure. The dynamic 
properties of the intermolecular interface in F-actin formed by loop 38-52, plug 
262-274 and the C-terminus may account for the observed cross-linking of these 
sites with reagents < 18 A. The functional importance of actin filament dynamics 
was demonstrated by the inhibition of the in vitro motility in the 
Gln-41-Cys-374 cross-linked actin filaments.

DOI: 10.1016/s0301-4622(00)00143-5
PMID: 11026684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]