1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Feb;68(2):347-54. doi: 10.1086/318199. Epub 2001 Jan 11.

High residual activity of PMM2 in patients' fibroblasts: possible pitfall in the 
diagnosis of CDG-Ia (phosphomannomutase deficiency).

Gr√ºnewald S(1), Schollen E, Van Schaftingen E, Jaeken J, Matthijs G.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) are a rapidly enlarging group of 
inherited diseases with abnormal N-glycosylation of glycoconjugates. Most 
patients have CDG-Ia, which is due to a phosphomannomutase (PMM) deficiency. In 
this article, we report that a significant portion (9 of 54) of patients with 
CDG-Ia had a rather high residual PMM activity in fibroblasts included in the 
normal range (means of the controls +/- 2 SD) and amounting to 35%-70% of the 
mean control value. The clinical diagnosis of CDG-Ia was made difficult by the 
fact that most (6 of 9) of these patients belong to a subgroup characterized by 
a phenotype that is milder than classical CDG-Ia. These patients lack some of 
the symptoms that are suggestive for the diagnosis, such as inverted nipples and 
abnormal fat deposition, and, as a mean, had higher residual PMM activities in 
fibroblasts (2.05+/-0.61 mU/mg protein, n=9; vs. controls 5.34+/-1.74 mU/mg 
protein, n=22), compared with patients with moderate (1.32+/-0.86 mU/mg protein, 
n=18) or severe (0.63+/-0.56 mU/mg protein, n=27, P<.001) cases. Yet they all 
showed mild mental retardation, hypotonia, cerebellar hypoplasia, and 
strabismus. All of them had an abnormal serum transferrin pattern and a 
significantly reduced PMM activity in leukocytes. Six of the nine patients with 
mild presentations were compound heterozygotes for the C241S mutation, which is 
known to reduce PMM activity by only approximately 2-fold. Our results indicate 
that intermediate PMM values in fibroblasts may mask the diagnosis of CDG-Ia, 
which is better accomplished by measurement of PMM activity in leukocytes and 
mutation search in the PMM2 gene. They also indicate that there is some degree 
of correlation between the residual activity in fibroblasts and the clinical 
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1086/318199
PMCID: PMC1235268
PMID: 11156536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]