1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Feb 15;10(4):353-60. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.4.353.

Functional analysis of BRCA1 C-terminal missense mutations identified in breast 
and ovarian cancer families.

Vallon-Christersson J(1), Cayanan C, Haraldsson K, Loman N, Bergthorsson JT, 
Brøndum-Nielsen K, Gerdes AM, Møller P, Kristoffersson U, Olsson H, Borg A, 
Monteiro AN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund, Sweden.

Germline mutations in the breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1 
are responsible for the majority of cases involving hereditary breast and 
ovarian cancer. Whereas all truncating mutations are considered as functionally 
deleterious, most of the missense variants identified to date cannot be readily 
distinguished as either disease-associated mutations or benign polymorphisms. 
The C-terminal domain of BRCA1 displays an intrinsic transactivation activity, 
and mutations linked to disease predisposition have been shown to confer loss of 
such activity in yeast and mammalian cells. In an attempt to clarify the 
functional importance of the BRCA1 C-terminus as a transcription activator in 
cancer predisposition, we have characterized the effect of C-terminal germline 
variants identified in Scandinavian breast and ovarian cancer families. Missense 
variants A1669S, C1697R, R1699W, R1699Q, A1708E, S1715R and G1738E and a 
truncating mutation, W1837X, were characterized using yeast- and mammalian-based 
transcription assays. In addition, four additional missense variants (V1665M, 
D1692N, S1715N and D1733G) and one in-frame deletion (V1688del) were included in 
the study. Our findings demonstrate that transactivation activity may reflect a 
tumor-suppressing function of BRCA1 and further support the role of BRCA1 
missense mutations in disease predisposition. We also report a discrepancy 
between results from yeast- and mammalian-based assays, indicating that it may 
not be possible to unambiguously characterize variants with the yeast assay 
alone. We show that transcription-based assays can aid in the characterization 
of deleterious mutations in the C-terminal part of BRCA1 and may form the basis 
of a functional assay.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.4.353
PMCID: PMC4756649
PMID: 11157798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]