1. Biochemistry. 2001 Feb 6;40(5):1274-83. doi: 10.1021/bi002090q.

Replacement of the axial histidine ligand with imidazole in cytochrome c 
peroxidase. 2. Effects on heme coordination and function.

Hirst J(1), Wilcox SK, Ai J, MoÃ«nne-Loccoz P, Loehr TM, Goodin DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, MB8, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The inability of imidazole to complement function in the axial histidine 
deletion mutant, H175G, of yeast cytochrome c peroxidase has been an intriguing 
but unresolved issue that impacts our understanding of the role of axial ligands 
in heme catalysis. Here we report the functional and spectroscopic properties of 
H175G and of its complexes with imidazole. Combined with the crystal structures 
for these complexes, the data provide a detailed and consistent account of the 
modes of Im binding in the H175G cavity and their dependence on buffer and pH. 
UV--vis, EPR, and resonance Raman spectra reveal multiple coordination states 
for H175G/Im which can be correlated with the crystal structures to assign the 
following heme environments: H175G/H(2)O/H(2)O, H175G/Im(d)/phosphate(c), 
H175G/Im(d)/H(2)O(c), H175G/Im(c)/H(2)O(d), and H175G/Im(c)/OH(-)(c), where 
H175G/X/Y defines the proximal species as X and the distal species as Y and c 
and d subscripts refer, where known, to the coordinated and dissociated states, 
respectively. Resonance Raman data for reduced H175G/Im show two substates for 
heme-coordinated Im differing in the strength of their hydrogen bond to Asp-235, 
in a fashion similar to WT CCP. NO binding to ferrous H175G/Im results in 
dissociation of Im from the heme but not from the cavity, while no dissociation 
is observed for WT CCP, indicating that steric tethering may, in part, control 
NO-induced dissociation of trans ligands. H175G/Im forms an oxidized compound I 
state with two distinct radical species, each with a dramatically different 
anisotropy and spin relaxation from that of the Trp-191 radical of WT CCP. It is 
suggested that these signals arise from alternate conformations of Trp191 having 
different degrees of exchange coupling to the ferryl heme, possibly mediated by 
the conformational heterogeneity of Im within the H175G cavity. The kinetics of 
the reaction of H175G/Im with H(2)O(2) are multiphasic, also reflecting the 
multiple coordination states of Im. The rate of the fastest phase is essentially 
identical to that of WT CCP, indicating that the H175G/Im(c)/H(2)O(d) state is 
fully reactive with peroxide. However, the overall rate of enzyme turnover using 
cytochrome c as a substrate is <5% of WT and is unaffected by Im coordination. 
In summary, Im coordination to H175G results in a number of conformers, one of 
which is structurally and spectroscopically very similar to WT CCP. However, 
while this form is fully reactive with peroxide, the reaction with cytochrome c 
remains inefficient, perhaps implicating the altered Trp-191 radical species.

DOI: 10.1021/bi002090q
PMID: 11170453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]