1. Exp Lung Res. 2000 Dec;26(8):581-93. doi: 10.1080/01902140150216684.

Use of p53 transgenic mice in the development of cancer models for multiple 
purposes.

Lubet RA(1), Zhang Z, Wiseman RW, You M.

Author information:
(1)Chemoprevention Branch, National Cancer Institute, Executive Plaza North, 
Room 201, 6130 Executive Boulevard, Bethesda, MD 20852, USA. rl578@nih.gov

The tumor suppressor gene p53 is perhaps the most commonly mutated gene in human 
cancer, being mutated in a high percentage of colon, breast, skin, bladder, and 
many cancers of the aerodigestive tract. Individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome, 
who routinely have a germline mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene, are at 
high risk for lung cancer, confirming its intimate role in lung tumorigenesis in 
humans. In contrast, the majority of chemically induced or spontaneous cancers 
in rodents do not contain mutations in p53. Therefore, we examined a transgenic 
mouse that contains a dominant negative mutation (Arg135Val) in the p53 gene 
placed under the control of its own endogenous promoter. The resulting mice have 
3 copies of the mutated transgene as well as 2 normal p53 alleles. In the 
chemical carcinogenesis studies, we employed mice containing the mutated p53 
gene to examine for carcinogen susceptibility. We found that mice with the p53 
mutation, on an A/J F1 background, were more susceptible to a number of 
potential lung carcinogens, including N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) and the known 
tobacco carcinogens 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) and 
benzo(a)pyrene (BP). Mice with a mutant p53 developed larger tumors and roughly 
3 times as many tumors, emphasizing the potential effects of a p53 mutation both 
on tumor initiation and progression. In addition, we examined 2 nonlung 
carcinogens, 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH), a colon carcinogen, and 
N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)-nitrosamine (OHBBN), a bladder carcinogen. 
Interestingly a germline p53 mutation increased the incidence of DMH-induced 
colon, lung, hepatic, and uterine tumors, while having limited effects on 
OHBBN-induced bladder tumors. Because of its heightened susceptibility we are 
examining the use of this model in smoke-induced tumorigenesis in A/J mice as 
well. Employing the lung adenomas induced by NNK, we found that mice with or 
without a p53 mutation were equally susceptible to the chemopreventive effects 
of dexamethasone plus myo-inisitol and green tea. These tumors, which arise in a 
highly reproducible manner in p53 transgenic mice following carcinogen 
treatment, have mutations in both p53 and the K-ras oncogene. Thus, this model 
appears useful for examining for potential chemotherapeutic agents. p53-mutated 
or wild-type mice were equally susceptible to the therapeutic effects of Taxol 
or Adriamycin. Interestingly, piroxicam was similarly effective in inhibiting 
colon tumor formation by DMH in mice with or without a mutation in the p53 tumor 
suppressor gene. In contrast, lung and uterine tumors developing in these mice 
were not susceptible to the chemopreventive effects of piroxicam. In summary, 
mice with mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene appear to be particularly 
applicable for basic mechanistic studies, for screening for potential 
carcinogens, and for screening for chemopreventive or chemotherapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.1080/01902140150216684
PMID: 11195457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]