1. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 15;166(6):4099-105. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.6.4099.

Differential roles of the NPXXY motif in formyl peptide receptor signaling.

He R(1), Browning DD, Ye RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois College of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The NPXXY motif (X represents any amino acid) in the seventh transmembrane 
domain of the chemotactic formyl peptide receptor (FPR) is highly conserved 
among G protein-coupled receptors. Recent work suggested that this motif 
contributes to G protein-coupled receptor internalization and signal 
transduction; however, its role in FPR signaling remains unclear. In this study 
we replaced Asn(297) and Tyr(301) in the NPXXY motif of the human FPR with Ala 
(N297A) and Ala/Phe (Y301A/Y301F), respectively, and determined the effects of 
the substitutions on FPR functions in transfected rat basophilic leukemia cells. 
Whereas all the mutant receptors were expressed on the cell surface, the N297A 
receptor exhibited reduced binding affinity and was unable to mediate activation 
of phospholipase C-beta and the p42/44 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP 
kinase). The Y301F receptor displayed significantly decreased ligand-stimulated 
internalization and MAP kinase activation, suggesting that the hydrogen bonding 
at Tyr(301) is critical for these functions. The Y301F receptor showed a 
chemotactic response similar to that of wild-type FPR, indicating that cell 
chemotaxis does not require receptor internalization and hydrogen bonding at the 
Tyr(301) position. In contrast, the Y301A receptor displayed a left-shifted, but 
overall reduced, chemotaxis response that peaked at 0.1-1 nM. Finally, using a 
specific MAP kinase kinase inhibitor, we found that activation of MAP kinase is 
required for efficient FPR internalization, but is not essential for chemotaxis. 
These findings demonstrate that residues within the NPXXY motif differentially 
regulate the functions of FPR.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.6.4099
PMID: 11238659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]