1. Med Sci Monit. 2001 Mar-Apr;7(2):246-50.

Search for mitochondrial A3243G tRNA(Leu) mutation in Polish patients with type 
2 diabetes mellitus.

Ma≈Çecki M(1), Klupa T, Wanic K, Frey J, Cyganek K, Sieradzki J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Medical College, Jagellonian University, 
Cracow, Poland. mmalecki@cm-uj.krakow.pl

BACKGROUND: The influences of genetic and environmental factors form a clinical 
picture of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Genetic studies of type 2 diabetes mellitus 
become increasingly important. The knowledge of the molecular background of type 
2 diabetes has been growing rapidly over recent years. One of the forms of the 
disease defined on the molecular level is maternally inherited type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. This diabetes, which is frequently accompanied by hearing impairment 
of deafness (maternally inherited diabetes with deafness-MIDD), was linked with 
sequence differences in mitochondrial DNA. The most frequent cause of MIDD is 
A3243G substitution in a mitochondrial tRNA(Leu) gene. While this mutation was 
identified in different races in several populations, it is still important and 
valuable to evaluate its prevalence in various ethnic groups. The aim of the 
project was to determine the prevalence of A3243G substitution in a 
mitochondrial tRNA(Leu) gene among Polish diabetic subjects.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In total 129 individuals, with type 2 diabetes and 12 with 
gestational diabetes were selected for this study. Two techniques based on 
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) method were used to screen for 
A3243G mutation. In the first approach, non-radioactive PCR reactions of 
mitochondrial DNA region of interest were performed using DNA of the study 
participants. This was followed by Apa I restriction enzyme digestion of the PCR 
product. Subsequently an electrophoretic separation was done on 2% agarose gel 
with ethidium bromide staining. In the second, more sensitive, modification of 
RFLP, [alpha 32P]dCTP was used for internal primer labeling and the 
electrophoresis was done on acrylamide gel. A positive sample was used to 
control the quality of the genotyping.
RESULTS: In both approaches none of the samples, except for the positive 
control, showed the evidence of the G variant.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, the A3243G mutation in mitochondrial tRNA(Leu) gene is 
not a frequent cause of diabetes in the Polish population. Further screening of 
enlarging study group is necessary to fully determine the prevalence of this 
mutation in our population. This, together with the search for other 
mitochondrial mutations, should allow to fully determine the prevalence of MIDD 
and its specific molecular background in the Polish population.

PMID: 11257730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]