1. Biochemistry. 2001 Mar 6;40(9):2647-52. doi: 10.1021/bi002641c.

Identification of hydrogen bonds between Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I 
(Klenow fragment) and the minor groove of DNA by amino acid substitution of the 
polymerase and atomic substitution of the DNA.

Spratt TE(1).

Author information:
(1)American Health Foundation, 1 Dana Road, Valhalla, New York 10595, USA. 
tomspratt@aol.com

DNA polymerases replicate DNA with high fidelity despite the small differences 
in energy between correct and incorrect base pairs. X-ray crystallographic and 
structure-activity kinetic experiments have implicated interactions with the 
minor groove of the DNA as being crucial for catalysis and fidelity. The current 
hypothesis is that polymerases check the geometry of the base pairs through 
hydrogen bonds and steric interactions with the minor groove of the DNA. The 
mechanisms by which these interactions are related to catalysis and fidelity are 
not known. In this manuscript, we have studied these interactions using a 
combination of site-specific mutagenesis of Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I 
(Klenow fragment) and atomic substitution of the DNA. Crystal structures have 
predicted hydrogen bonds from Arg668 to the terminal base on the primer (P1) and 
Gln849 to its base pair partner (T1). Kinetic studies, however, have implicated 
the minor groove of the primer terminus but not its base pair partner as being 
important to catalysis and fidelity. Hydrogen bonds between Arg668 and Gln849 to 
the DNA were probed with the site specific mutants, R668A and Q849A. Hydrogen 
bonds from the DNA were probed with three oligodeoxynucleotides which have a 
guanine or 3-deazaguanine (3DG) at P1, T1, or T2. We found that the 
pre-steady-state parameter k(pol) was decreased with R668A (40-fold) and Q849A 
(150-fold) or with 3DG at P1 (300-fold) or T2 (25-fold). When R668A was combined 
with 3DG at P1 the decrease in rate was only 80-fold, consistent with a hydrogen 
bond between Arg668 and P1. In contrast, when the 3DG substitution at P1 was 
combined with Q849A the rate reduction was 15000-fold. Similar reactions between 
R668A or Q849A and T2 showed that there are interactions between these sites 
although the interactions are not as strong as between P1 and R668.

DOI: 10.1021/bi002641c
PMID: 11258875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]