1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Mar 23;282(1):124-30. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2001.4565.

Molecular cloning, genomic organization, and expression of a C-type (Manduca 
sexta-type) allatostatin preprohormone from Drosophila melanogaster.

Williamson M(1), Lenz C, Winther AM, NÃ¤ssel DR, Grimmelikhuijzen CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Zoological Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Universitetsparken 15, Copenhagen, DK-2100, Denmark.

The insect allatostatins are a diverse group of neuropeptides that obtained 
their names by their inhibitory actions on the corpora allata (two endocrine 
glands near the insect brain), where they block the biosynthesis of juvenile 
hormone (a terpenoid important for development and reproduction). Chemically, 
the allatostatins can be subdivided into three different peptide groups: the 
large group of A-type (cockroach-type) allatostatins, which have the common 
C-terminal sequence Y/FXFGLamide; the B-type (cricket-type) allatostatins, which 
have the C-terminal sequence W(X(6))Wamide in common; and a single allatostatin 
that we now call C-type allatostatin that was first discovered in the moth 
Manduca sexta, and which has a nonamidated C terminus, and a structure unrelated 
to the A- and B-type allatostatins. We have previously cloned the preprohormones 
for the A- and B-type allatostatins from Drosophila melanogaster. Here we report 
on the cloning of a Drosophila C-type allatostatin preprohormone (DAP-C). DAP-C 
is 121 amino acid residues long and contains one copy of a peptide sequence that 
in its processed form has the sequence <EVRYRQCYFNPISCF (drostatin-C). This 
drostatin-C sequence is only one amino acid residue different (F --> Y in 
position 4) from the Manduca sexta C-type allatostatin. The DAP-C gene has three 
introns and four exons and is located at position 32D2-3 on the left arm of the 
second chromosome. Northern blots show that the gene is strongly expressed in 
larvae and adult flies, but less in pupae and embryos. In situ hybridizations of 
larvae show that the gene is expressed in various neurons of the brain and 
abdominal ganglia and in endocrine cells of the midgut. This is the first 
publication on the structure of a C-type allatostatin from insects other than 
moths and the first report on the presence of all three types of allatostatins 
in a representative of the insect order Diptera (flies).

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.4565
PMID: 11263981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]