1. Eur Respir J. 2001 Jan;17(1):27-35. doi: 10.1183/09031936.01.17100270.

Inflammation in cystic fibrosis airways: relationship to increased bacterial 
adherence.

Scheid P(1), Kempster L, Griesenbach U, Davies JC, Dewar A, Weber PP, Colledge 
WH, Evans MJ, Geddes DM, Alton EW.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Gene Therapy, Imperial College at the National Heart and Lung 
Institute, London, UK.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2001 Jan;17(1):4-5. doi: 10.1183/09031936.01.17100040.

It is unclear whether inflammation in the cystic fibrosis (CF) lung relates 
predominantly to bacterial infection, or occurs as a direct consequence of 
mutant cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein. 
Interleukin (IL)-8 secretion from CF and non-CF cell lines, and from CF and 
non-CF human primary nasal epithelial cells incubated with or without 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, was measured. Activation of nuclear factor-kappaB 
(NF-kappaB) in unstimulated CF and non-CF nasal epithelial cells, cell lines and 
murine tissues was measured by gel-shift assays. No significant difference in 
basal IL-8 production or NF-kappaB activation was observed between CF and non-CF 
primary nasal cells. However, CF cells exhibited a significantly (p<0.01) 
increased IL-8 secretion following P. aeruginosa stimulation. Equalization of 
the increased P. aeruginosa adherence observed in CF cells, to non-CF levels, 
resulted in comparable IL-8 secretion. Further, IL-8 production did not differ 
with mutations which result in either correctly localized CFTR, or in 
partial/total mislocalization of this protein. Similar levels of NF-kappaB 
activation were observed in a number of organs of wildtype and CF mice. Finally, 
IL-8 secretion and NF-kappaB activity were not consistently increased in CF cell 
lines. Cos-7 cell transfection with plasmids expressing deltaF508 or G551D 
mutant CFTR protein resulted in increased activation of a p50-containing 
NF-kappaB complex, but IL-8 secretion was similar to wild-type cells. The 
authors conclude that the stimulus produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the 
predominant inflammatory trigger in their models.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.01.17100270
PMID: 11307750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]