1. Anal Biochem. 2001 May 1;292(1):139-47. doi: 10.1006/abio.2001.5045.

An integrated system to study multiply substituted human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 reverse transcriptase.

Boretto J(1), Longhi S, Navarro JM, Selmi B, Sire J, Canard B.

Author information:
(1)Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques (AFMB), UMR 6098, 
CNRS, Universités d'Aix-Marseille I et II, 163 Avenue de Luminy, Marseille Cedex 
09, F-13288, France.

We describe a gene system allowing the facile production of multiply substituted 
reverse transcriptases (RTs), the enzymatic characterization of these purified 
RTs, and the study of these mutations in the defined genetic background of the 
macrophagetropic, non-laboratory-adapted human immunodeficiency virus type 1 
(HIV-1) AD8 strain. Thirteen unique silent restriction sites were introduced in 
the pol gene encoding HIV-1 RT, allowing easy introduction of mutations. To 
simplify genetic manipulation and generate p66/p51 heterodimers in Escherichia 
coli, a gene construct of the viral protease alone was optimized for expression 
from a separate vector carrying a p15A origin of replication. Active-site 
titration experiments using pre-steady-state kinetics showed that our system 
yields a higher proportion of active enzyme than that obtained by alternate 
methods. To facilitate phenotype/genotype correlations, the modified RT gene was 
designed to be easily reintroduced into a recombinant proviral AD8 HIV-1 DNA. 
Infectious viruses made from this vector were undistinguishable from wild-type 
AD8 HIV-1, an isolate able to infect peripheral blood mononuclear cells and 
macrophages. Thus, the pol gene can tolerate many silent mutations in the 
polymerase domain without affecting the functionality of the HIV-1 genome. The 
system was validated biochemically and virologically using the V75T substitution 
associated with stavudine resistance.

DOI: 10.1006/abio.2001.5045
PMID: 11319828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]