1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Jun;68(6):1398-407. doi: 10.1086/320594. Epub 2001 Apr
26.

A recurrent RNA-splicing mutation in the SEDL gene causes X-linked 
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda.

Tiller GE(1), Hannig VL, Dozier D, Carrel L, Trevarthen KC, Wilcox WR, Mundlos 
S, Haines JL, Gedeon AK, Gecz J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Program in Human Genetics, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. 
george.tiller@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu

Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda (SEDL) is a genetically heterogeneous 
disorder characterized by mild-to-moderate short stature and early-onset 
osteoarthritis. Both autosomal and X-linked forms have been described. 
Elsewhere, we have reported the identification of the gene for the X-linked 
recessive form, which maps to Xp22.2. We now report characterization of an 
exon-skipping mutation (IVS3+5G-->A at the intron 3 splice-donor site) in two 
unrelated families with SEDL. Using reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR, we 
demonstrated that the mutation resulted in elimination of the first 31 codons of 
the open reading frame. The mutation was not detected in 120 control X 
chromosomes. Articular cartilage from an adult who had SEDL and carried this 
mutation contained chondrocytes with abundant Golgi complexes and dilated rough 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). RT-PCR experiments using mouse/human cell hybrids 
revealed that the SEDL gene escapes X inactivation. Homologues of the SEDL gene 
include a transcribed retropseudogene on chromosome 19, as well as expressed 
genes in mouse, rat, Drosophila melanogaster Caenorhabditis elegans, and 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The latter homologue, p20, has a putative role in 
vesicular transport from ER to Golgi complex. These data suggest that SEDL 
mutations may perturb an intracellular pathway that is important for cartilage 
homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1086/320594
PMCID: PMC1226126
PMID: 11326333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]