1. Brain. 2001 May;124(Pt 5):907-15. doi: 10.1093/brain/124.5.907.

Mutations in the 5' region of the myotubularin-related protein 2 (MTMR2) gene in 
autosomal recessive hereditary neuropathy with focally folded myelin.

Houlden H(1), King RH, Wood NW, Thomas PK, Reilly MM.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurology, Royal Free and University 
College Medical School, London, UK.

Focally folded myelin has been recognized as a distinctive feature in some 
individuals with severe inherited demyelinating neuropathy, with an onset in 
childhood. Such cases have been shown to be genetically heterogeneous. 
Alterations in the myotubularin-related protein 2 (MTMR2) gene on chromosome 
11q22 have recently been shown to give rise to this phenotype. Mutations have 
been identified in the 3' region of the MTMR2 gene in four unrelated families, 
in two of whom the disorder had been mapped to chromosome 11q22 by genetic 
linkage analysis. We have sequenced the entire coding region and flanking 
intronic regions of the MTMR2 gene in eight families with early onset autosomal 
recessive neuropathies. Two novel mutations were identified in exon 4 at the 5' 
end of the MTMR2 gene in an English and an Indian family. The clinical phenotype 
and sural nerve pathology in these two families differs in severity, with the 
proband in the English family having an earlier onset and more severe neuropathy 
with prominent cranial nerve involvement. This is probably due to mutation type 
and possible involvement of small nucleotide polymorphisms in phenotype 
modulation. Detailed sural nerve pathology is presented in both cases. Mutations 
in the MTMR2 gene are thus an important cause of autosomal recessive 
demyelinating neuropathy. Identifying further mutations and defining their 
phenotype will help to clarify the genetic classification of this group of 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/124.5.907
PMID: 11335693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]