1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2001 Jan-Feb;27(1):334-41. doi: 10.1006/bcmd.2001.0384.

Genotype screening for hereditary hemochromatosis among voluntary blood donors 
in Hungary.

Andrikovics H(1), Kalmár L, Bors A, Fandl B, Petri I, Kalász L, Tordai A.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Hematology and Immunology, Budapest, Hungary.

Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is a common genetic disorder. Although it is 
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, heterozygous individuals are 
believed to be protected against iron deficiency. Screening to estimate the 
prevalence of HH was frequently performed among blood donors, not considering 
that carriers of the HH gene mutations may be present in higher proportion in 
this population. To examine the allele frequencies of the HH gene (HFE) point 
mutations, C282Y and H63D genotyping was carried out in 996 consecutive, 
first-time, and regular Hungarian blood donors by PCR-RFLP techniques. Iron 
parameters of the first-time donors and the identified C282Y heterozygotes and 
age, gender, and number of previous blood donation-matched wild-type donors were 
also determined. We were not able to demonstrate a significant increase in the 
frequency of C282Y and H63D alleles among regular blood donors, compared to 
first-time blood donors. However, there was a trend of higher C282Y allele 
frequency among women with higher number of previous blood donations (2.2 +/- 
1.5% in female blood donors with 0-8 previous blood donations compared to 4.8 
+/- 2.3% in women with more than 8 previous blood donations, P = 0.06). No 
detectable phenotypic differences were observed in serum iron, ferritin, and 
transferrin saturation values between C282Y wild-type and heterozygous groups. 
However, the single identified C282Y homozygous male (age 21) showed definite 
signs of iron overload. Our observations suggest that the protective effect of 
C282Y heterozygosity against iron deficiency may be less significant than other 
environmental (e.g., iron-rich diet) or genetic factors.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bcmd.2001.0384
PMID: 11358395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]