1. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Jun;59(6):1395-401. doi: 10.1124/mol.59.6.1395.

Arrestin effects on internalization of vasopressin receptors.

Bowen-Pidgeon D(1), Innamorati G, Sadeghi HM, Birnbaumer M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of California Los Angeles School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7115.

Arrestins have been shown to facilitate the recruitment of G protein-coupled 
receptors to the clathrin-coated vesicles that mediate their internalization. 
After (8)Arg-vasopressin-induced internalization, the human V2 vasopressin 
receptor failed to recycle to the cell surface, whereas the vasopressin type 1a 
receptor (V1a) subtype did. The possibility that the lack of recycling could 
identify a novel role for arrestins was investigated by examining the effect of 
coexpressing wild-type and dominant negative arrestins on the recycling of 
wild-type and mutant V2 and V1a receptors. Coexpression of the V1a or V2 
receptors with the last 100 amino acids of arrestin reduced significantly their 
internalization, whereas coexpression of wild-type and mutant arrestins had 
diverse effects on internalization. Arrestin3 but not arrestin2 increased the 
internalization of the V1aR without altering its recycling pattern. Both 
nonvisual arrestins enhanced vasopressin type 2 receptor (V2R) internalization, 
inducing the appearance of a pool of recycling receptor in addition to the 
nonrecycling pool. The effect of arrestins on the internalization of the 
chimeric V1a/V2 receptor and its reciprocal chimera was specified by the 
identity of the carboxyl-terminal segment. The S363A mutation that confers 
recycling to the V2R did not alter its interaction with arrestins. Truncation of 
the carboxyl-terminal segment of the V2R impaired ligand-induced internalization 
that could be fully restored by wild-type arrestins. Internalization of the V2 
and V1a receptors required dynamin GTPase activity.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.59.6.1395
PMID: 11353798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]