1. Biochem J. 2001 Jun 1;356(Pt 2):581-8. doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3560581.

Identification of a novel neuroligin in humans which binds to PSD-95 and has a 
widespread expression.

Bolliger MF(1), Frei K, Winterhalter KH, Gloor SM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zürich, 
CH-8092 Zürich, Switzerland.

Neuroligins, first discovered in rat brain, form a family of three synaptically 
enriched membrane proteins. Using reverse transcription-PCR of human brain 
polyadenylated RNA and extensive database searches, we identified the human 
homologues of the three rat neuroligins and a cDNA encoding a fourth member, 
which we named neuroligin 4. Neuroligin 4 has 63-73% amino acid identity with 
the other members of the human neuroligin family, and the same predicted domain 
structure. DNA database analyses, furthermore, indicated that a possible fifth 
neuroligin gene may be present in the human genome. Northern-blot analysis 
revealed expression of neuroligin 4 in heart, liver, skeletal muscle and 
pancreas, but barely at all in brain. Overexpression of neuroligin 4 cDNA in 
COS-7 cells led to the production of a 110 kDa protein. Immunofluorescence 
analysis demonstrated that the protein was integrated into the plasma membrane. 
Overexpression of cDNAs encoding neuroligin 4 and the PDZ-domain protein, 
PSD-95, in COS-7 cells resulted in the formation of detergent-resistant 
complexes. Neuroligin 4 did not bind to ZO-1, another PDZ-domain protein. 
Together, our data show that the human neuroligin family is composed of at least 
one additional member, and suggest that neuroligin 4 may also be produced 
outside the central nervous system.

DOI: 10.1042/0264-6021:3560581
PMCID: PMC1221872
PMID: 11368788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]