1. J Cell Biol. 2001 May 28;153(5):947-56. doi: 10.1083/jcb.153.5.947.

An atomic model of actin filaments cross-linked by fimbrin and its implications 
for bundle assembly and function.

Volkmann N(1), DeRosier D, Matsudaira P, Hanein D.

Author information:
(1)The Burnham Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, California 
92037, USA.

Actin bundles have profound effects on cellular shape, division, adhesion, 
motility, and signaling. Fimbrin belongs to a large family of actin-bundling 
proteins and is involved in the formation of tightly ordered cross-linked 
bundles in the brush border microvilli and in the stereocilia of inner ear hair 
cells. Polymorphism in these three-dimensional (3D) bundles has prevented the 
detailed structural characterization required for in-depth understanding of 
their morphogenesis and function. Here, we describe the structural 
characterization of two-dimensional arrays of actin cross-linked with human 
T-fimbrin. Structural information obtained by electron microscopy, x-ray 
crystallography, and homology modeling allowed us to build the first molecular 
model for the complete actin-fimbrin cross-link. The restriction of the arrays 
to two dimensions allowed us to deduce the spatial relationship between the 
components, the mode of fimbrin cross-linking, and the flexibility within the 
cross-link. The atomic model of the fimbrin cross-link, the cross-linking rules 
deduced from the arrays, and the hexagonal packing of actin bundles in situ were 
all combined to generate an atomic model for 3D actin-fimbrin bundles. 
Furthermore, the assembly of the actin-fimbrin arrays suggests coupling between 
actin polymerization, fimbrin binding, and crossbridge formation, presumably 
achieved by a feedback between conformational changes and changes in affinity.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.153.5.947
PMCID: PMC2174342
PMID: 11381081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]