1. Biochemistry. 2001 Jun 26;40(25):7369-81. doi: 10.1021/bi002856m.

Catalytic acid-base groups in yeast pyruvate decarboxylase. 2. Insights into the 
specific roles of D28 and E477 from the rates and stereospecificity of formation 
of carboligase side products.

Sergienko EA(1), Jordan F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Program in Cellular and Molecular Biodynamics, 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey 07102, USA.

Yeast pyruvate decarboxylase (YPDC), in addition to forming its metabolic 
product acetaldehyde, can also carry out carboligase reactions in which the 
central enamine intermediate reacts with acetaldehyde or pyruvate (instead of 
the usual proton electrophile), resulting in the formation of acetoin and 
acetolactate, respectively (typically, 1% of the total reaction). Due to the 
common mechanism shared by the acetaldehyde-forming and carboligase reactions 
through decarboxylation, a detailed analysis of the rates and stereochemistry of 
the carboligase products formed by the E477Q, D28A, and D28N active center YPDC 
variants was undertaken. While substitution at either position led to an 
approximately 2-3 orders of magnitude lower catalytic efficiency in acetaldehyde 
formation, the rate of acetoin formation by the E477Q and D28N variants was 
higher than that by wild-type enzyme. Comparison of the steady-state data for 
acetaldehyde and acetoin formation revealed that the rate-limiting step for 
acetaldehyde formation by the D28A, H114F, H115F, and E477Q variants is a step 
post-decarboxylation. In contrast to the wild-type YPDC and the E477Q variant, 
the D28A and D28N variants could synthesize acetolactate as a major product. The 
lower overall rate of side-product formation by the D28A variant than wild-type 
enzyme attests to participation of D28 in steps leading up to and including 
decarboxylation. The results also provide insight into the state of ionization 
of the side chains examined. (R)-Acetoin is produced by the variants with 
greater enantiomeric excess than by wild-type YPDC. (S)-Acetolactate is the 
predominant enantiomer produced by the D28-substituted variants, the same 
configuration as produced by the related plant acetolactate synthase.

DOI: 10.1021/bi002856m
PMID: 11412091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]