1. Biochem J. 2001 Jul 1;357(Pt 1):225-32. doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3570225.

Active-site mutations impairing the catalytic function of the catalytic subunit 
of human protein phosphatase 2A permit baculovirus-mediated overexpression in 
insect cells.

Myles T(1), Schmidt K, Evans DR, Cron P, Hemmings BA.

Author information:
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institut, Postfach 2543, Basel CH-4002, Switzerland.

Members of the phosphoprotein phosphatase (PPP) family of protein 
serine/threonine phosphatases, including protein phosphatase (PP)1, PP2A and 
PP2B, share invariant active-site residues that are critical for catalytic 
function [Zhuo, Clemens, Stone and Dixon (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 
26234-26238]. Mutation of the active-site residues Asp(88) or His(118) within 
the human PP2A catalytic subunit (PP2Ac)alpha impaired catalytic activity in 
vitro; the D88N and H118N substitutions caused a 9- and 23-fold reduction in 
specific activity respectively, when compared with wild-type recombinant PP2Ac, 
indicating an important role for these residues in catalysis. Consistent with 
this, the D88N and H118N substituted forms failed to provide PP2A function in 
vivo, because, unlike wild-type human PP2Acalpha, neither substituted for the 
endogenous PP2Ac enzyme of budding yeast. Relative to wild-type PP2Ac, the 
active-site mutants were dramatically overexpressed in High Five insect cells 
using the baculovirus system. Milligram quantities of PP2Ac were purified from 
1x10(9) High Five cells and the kinetic constants for dephosphorylation of the 
peptide RRA(pT)VA (single-letter amino-acid notation) by PP2Ac (K(m)=337.5 
microM; k(cat)=170 s(-1)) and D88N (K(m)=58.4 microM; k(cat)=2 s(-1)) were 
determined. The results show that the substitution impairs catalysis severely 
without a significant effect on substrate binding, consistent with the PPP 
catalytic mechanism. Combination of the baculovirus and yeast systems provides a 
strategy whereby the structure-function of PP2Ac may be fully explored, a goal 
which has previously proven difficult, owing to the stringent auto-regulatory 
control of PP2Ac protein levels in vivo.

DOI: 10.1042/0264-6021:3570225
PMCID: PMC1221945
PMID: 11415453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]