1. Hum Mutat. 2001;18(1):83. doi: 10.1002/humu.1153.

Identification of three novel 6-pyruvoyl-tetrahydropterin synthase gene 
mutations (226C>T, IVS3+1G>A, 116-119delTGTT) in Chinese hyperphenylalaninemia 
caused by tetrahydrobiopterin synthesis deficiency.

Liu TT(1), Chang YH, Chiang SH, Yang YL, Yu WM, Hsiao KJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetics, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

The enzyme 6-Pyruvoyl-tetrahydropterin synthase (PTS) deficiency is the major 
cause of BH(4)-deficient HPA. The frequency of BH(4)-deficient HPA was estimated 
to be around 30% among Chinese HPA population in Taiwan, which is much higher 
than that in Caucasian population (1.5-2% of HPA). Approximately 86% of Chinese 
BH(4)-deficient HPA was found to be caused by PTS-deficiency. Seven mutations - 
namely R25G, N52S, V56M, V70D, P87S, D96N, and T106M - had been identified in 
Chinese PTS-deficient patients previously. In this study, five additional 
mutations in the PTS gene, namely 200C>T (T67M), 226C>T (L76F), IVS3+1G>A 
(K54X), 116-119delTGTT (K38X) and 169-171delGTG (V57del), were identified by PCR 
and DNA sequencing in Chinese PTS-deficient patients. The 116-119delTGTT 
introduces a frameshift stop after lysine of codon 38 (K38X). The G-to-A 
transition at the consensus sequence of splicing donor site of exon 3 
(IVS3+1G>A) resulted in exon 3 skipping of the PTS transcript and caused a 
frameshift stop after lysine of codon 54 (K54X). The T67M and V57del mutations 
have been found in Caucasian PTS deficient patients, while the L76F, IVS3+1G>A, 
and K38X mutations are novel. None of 100 normal alleles screened was found to 
have the L76F substitution, which indicated that the L76F substitution is a 
mutation causing PTS deficiency. Hum Mutat 18:83, 2001.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.1153
PMID: 11438997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]