1. Biochemistry. 2001 Aug 7;40(31):9159-66. doi: 10.1021/bi010503x.

Recognition of fibronectin by the platelet integrin alpha IIb beta 3 involves an 
extended interface with multiple electrostatic interactions.

Kauf AC(1), Hough SM, Bowditch RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Oklahoma 
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73190, USA.

Normal platelet function is dependent on the ability of integrin alpha IIb beta 
3 (glycoprotein IIb/IIIa) to interact with components of the subendothelial 
matrix, such as fibronectin (Fn), exposed at sites of vascular injury. Studies 
using synthetic peptides derived from human Fn sequences Asp(1373)--Thr(1383) 
and Arg(1493)--Asp(1495) have suggested a role for both the 9th (3fn9) and 10th 
(3fn10) type III repeats of this ligand in binding to alpha IIb beta 3. In this 
study, we have taken a charge-to-alanine mutagenesis approach to evaluate the 
importance of these sites, and other charged residues, within the context of 
recombinant 3fn9--10 modules for binding to alpha IIb beta 3. To identify 
residues that are involved in Fn binding to alpha IIb beta 3, recombinantly 
expressed 3fn9--10 module pairs with alanine substitutions introduced into each 
of the 38 charged residues were individually assayed for the ability to inhibit 
Fn binding to purified alpha IIb beta 3. Substitutions at Fn residues Arg(1493) 
and Asp(1495) of the RGD sequence were found to have the greatest effect on 
alpha IIb beta 3 binding, as expected. However, Fn residues Arg(1369), 
Arg(1371), Arg(1379), Arg(1445), and Arg(1448) were needed for optimal 
interaction of the 3fn9--10 module pair with alpha IIb beta 3. All Fn residues 
found to affect binding of 3fn9--10 to alpha IIb beta 3 are located on the same 
face and extend from the surface of the molecule. Additionally, the epitopes for 
two anti-Fn monoclonal antibodies that inhibit binding of this ligand to alpha 
IIb beta 3 were found to overlap the sites identified. These results demonstrate 
that alpha IIb beta 3--Fn binding involves multiple electrostatic interactions.

DOI: 10.1021/bi010503x
PMID: 11478883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]