1. Infect Immun. 2001 Sep;69(9):5318-28. doi: 10.1128/IAI.69.9.5318-5328.2001.

Independent and coordinate effects of ADP-ribosyltransferase and 
GTPase-activating activities of exoenzyme S on HT-29 epithelial cell function.

Fraylick JE(1), La Rocque JR, Vincent TS, Olson JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Type III-mediated translocation of exoenzyme S (ExoS) into HT-29 epithelial 
cells by Pseudomonas aeruginosa causes complex alterations in cell function, 
including inhibition of DNA synthesis, altered cytoskeletal structure, loss of 
readherence, microvillus effacement, and interruption of signal transduction. 
ExoS is a bifunctional protein having both GTPase-activating (GAP) and 
ADP-ribosyltransferase (ADPRT) functional domains. Comparisons of alterations in 
HT-29 cell function caused by P. aeruginosa strains that translocate ExoS having 
GAP or ADPRT mutations allowed the independent and coordinate functions of the 
two activities to be assessed. An E381A ADPRT mutation revealed that ExoS ADPRT 
activity was required for effects of ExoS on DNA synthesis and long-term cell 
rounding. Conversely, the R146A GAP mutation appeared to have little impact on 
the cellular effects of ExoS. While transient cell rounding was detected 
following exposure to the E381A mutant, this rounding was eliminated by an 
E379A-E381A ADPRT double mutation, implying that residual ADPRT activity, rather 
than GAP activity, was effecting transient cell rounding by the E381A mutant. To 
explore this possibility, E381A and R146A-E381A mutants were examined for their 
ability to ADP-ribosylate Ras in vitro or in vivo. While no ADP-ribosylation of 
Ras was detected by either mutant in vitro, both mutants were able to modify Ras 
when translocated by the bacteria, with the R146A-E381A mutant causing more 
efficient modification than the E381A mutant, in association with increased 
inhibition of DNA synthesis. Comparisons of Ras ADP-ribosylation by wild-type 
and E381A mutant ExoS by two-dimensional electrophoresis found the former to 
ADP-ribosylate Ras at two sites, while the latter modified Ras only once. These 
studies draw attention to the key role of ExoS ADPRT activity in causing the 
effects of bacterially translocated ExoS on DNA synthesis and cell rounding. In 
addition, the studies provide insight into the enhancement of ExoS ADPRT 
activity within the eukaryotic cell microenvironment and into possible 
modulatory roles that the GAP and ADPRT domains might have on the function of 
each other.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.9.5318-5328.2001
PMCID: PMC98641
PMID: 11500401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]