1. J Exp Med. 2001 Sep 3;194(5):645-56. doi: 10.1084/jem.194.5.645.

Localized gene-specific induction of accessibility to V(D)J recombination 
induced by E2A and early B cell factor in nonlymphoid cells.

Goebel P(1), Janney N, Valenzuela JR, Romanow WJ, Murre C, Feeney AJ.

Author information:
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Immunology IMM-22, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

Accessibility of immunoglobulin (Ig) gene segments to V(D)J recombination is 
highly regulated and is normally only achieved in B cell precursors. We 
previously showed that ectopic expression of E2A or early B cell factor (EBF) 
with recombination activating gene (RAG) induces rearrangement of IgH and IgL 
genes in nonlymphoid cells. VkappaI genes throughout the locus were induced to 
rearrange after transfection with E2A, suggesting that the entire Vkappa locus 
was accessible. However, here we show that Ig loci are not opened globally but 
that recombination is localized. Gene families are interspersed in the D(H), 
Vkappa, and Vlambda loci, and we show that certain families and individual genes 
undergo high levels of recombination after ectopic expression of E2A or EBF, 
while other families within the same locus are not induced to rearrange. 
Furthermore, in some families, induction of germline transcription correlates 
with the level of induced recombination, while in others there is no 
correlation, suggesting that recombination is not simply initiated by induction 
of germline transcription. The induced repertoire seen at 24 hours does not 
change significantly over time indicating the absence of many secondary 
rearrangements and also suggesting a direct targeting mechanism. We propose that 
accessibility occurs in a local manner, and that binding sites for factors 
facilitating accessibility are therefore likely to be associated with individual 
gene segments.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.194.5.645
PMCID: PMC2195934
PMID: 11535632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]