1. Toxicology. 2001 Aug 13;165(1):27-38. doi: 10.1016/s0300-483x(01)00410-3.

Beryllium sensitivity is linked to HLA-DP genotype.

Wang Z(1), Farris GM, Newman LS, Shou Y, Maier LA, Smith HN, Marrone BL.

Author information:
(1)B-2, M888, Bioscience Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, 
NM 87545, USA.

Chronic beryllium disease (CBD) appears to arise from a combination of both 
exposure and genetic risk factors. A distinguishing feature of CBD is beryllium 
hypersensitivity, which can be measured in vitro by a lymphocyte proliferation 
test. The objective of this study was to determine whether certain allelic 
variations of the HLA-DPB1 gene, which had been observed previously in CBD, 
could be found in a group of individuals having beryllium hypersensitivity, but 
no symptoms of CBD. A flow cytometry-based Lymphocyte Proliferation Test 
combined with immunophenotyping (Immuno-LPT) was used to detect CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cell proliferation in response to in vitro stimulation with beryllium. The 
HLA-DPB1 haplotypes of the same individuals were determined by automated DNA 
sequencing. Twenty-two out of 25 beryllium-sensitive, non-CBD individuals were 
found to be carriers of the HLA-DPB1 gene having a substitution of a glutamic 
acid at position 69 in Exon 2 (Glu69), and a significantly high percentage (24%) 
were Glu69 homozygotes. Most of the CD4+ responders on the Immuno-LPT (10/14) 
carried rare, non-*0201 Glu69 DPB1 alleles; while most of the non-CD4+ 
responders (9/11) were common Glu69 carriers (*0201 or *0202) or non-Glu69 
individuals (non-Glu69/non-Glu69). This is the first direct evidence that HLA-DP 
genotype is linked to a phenotypic response that occurs in beryllium 
sensitization in the absence of clinical CBD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0300-483x(01)00410-3
PMID: 11551429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]