1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Feb 1;90(3):1132-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.90.3.1132.

Mutational analysis of the structure and biogenesis of the photosystem I 
reaction center in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803.

Smart LB(1), Warren PV, Golbeck JH, McIntosh L.

Author information:
(1)Michigan State University Department of Energy Plant Research Laboratory and 
Genetics Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1312, USA.

We have utilized the unicellular cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 to 
incorporate site-directed amino acid substitutions into the photosystem I (PSI) 
reactioncenter protein PsaB. A cysteine residue (position 565 of PsaB) proposed 
to serve as a ligand to the [4Fe-4S] center Fx was changed to serine, histidine, 
and aspartate. These three mutants--C565S, C565H, and C565D--all exhibited 
greatly reduced accumulation of PSI reaction-center proteins and failed to grow 
autotrophically, indicating that this cysteine most likely does coordinate Fx, 
which is crucial for PSI biogenesis. Interestingly, the strain C565S accumulated 
significantly more PSI than the other two cysteine mutants and displayed 
photoreduction of the [4Fe-4S] terminal electron acceptors FA and FB. Mutations 
were also introduced into a leucine zipper motif of PsaB, proposed to 
participate in reaction-center dimerization. The mutants L522V, L536M, and 
L522V/L536M all exhibited wild-type characteristics and grew autotrophically, 
whereas the L522P mutation prevented PSI accumulation. These data do not provide 
support for a major structural role of the leucine zipper in reaction-center 
dimerization or in assembly of Fx. However, the amino acid substitutions 
incorporated were conservative and might not have perturbed the leucine zipper.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.3.1132
PMCID: PMC45825
PMID: 11607363