1. Brain Dev. 2001 Dec;23 Suppl 1:S165-73. doi: 10.1016/s0387-7604(01)00345-x.

Functional analyses of MeCP2 mutations associated with Rett syndrome using 
transient expression systems.

Kudo S(1), Nomura Y, Segawa M, Fujita N, Nakao M, Dragich J, Schanen C, Tamura 
M.

Author information:
(1)Hokkaido Institute of Public Health, 060-0819, Sapporo, Japan. 
kudos@iph.pref.hokkaido.jp

Rett syndrome, an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder, is a major cause of 
mental retardation in females. Recent genetic analyses have revealed that 
mutations in the methyl-CpG-binding protein gene encoding MeCP2 are associated 
with Rett syndrome. In this study, we used transient expression systems to 
investigate the functional significance of mutations seen in patients with Rett 
syndrome. Missense mutations in the methyl-CpG-binding domain were analyzed by 
the transfection in mouse L929 cells and Drosophila SL2 cells. The L929 cells 
were utilized to investigate the effects of mutations on the affinity for 
heterochromatin, where methylated CpG dinucleotides are extremely enriched. The 
SL2 cells were utilized to analyze their effects on transcriptional repression 
activities. R106W and F155S mutations led to the substantial impairment of MeCP2 
functions, showing the loss of accumulation of the mutated protein to mouse 
heterochromatin and the reduction of the transcriptional repressive activity in 
Drosophila SL2 cells. Intriguingly, the R133C mutant retained the functionality 
equivalent to MeCP2 in these analyses. On the other hand, the T158M mutation 
exhibited the intermediate level of the impairment of functions in both 
analyses. Thus, these functional assays are useful to evaluate the consequences 
of mutation in the methyl-CpG-binding domain of MeCP2 and provide an insight 
into the relationship between the genotype and the severity of Rett syndrome.

DOI: 10.1016/s0387-7604(01)00345-x
PMID: 11738866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]