1. Int J Dev Biol. 2001 Oct;45(7):817-26.

Isolation and characterization of a Xenopus gene (XMLP) encoding a MARCKS-like 
protein.

Zhao H(1), Cao Y, Grunz H.

Author information:
(1)Dept of Zoophysiology, Essen University, Germany.

We have identified a cDNA coding for a Xenopus MARCKS-like protein (XMLP) from a 
cDNA library prepared from activin-treated ectoderm. Using whole-mount in situ 
hybridization and RT-PCR, we found XMLP maternal transcripts during the cleavage 
stages. After MBT, the signals were restricted to the neural plate. Subsequently 
XMLP was expressed predominantly in the brain, somites and pronephros. Ectopic 
expression of XMLP resulted in eye and axis defects and in a change of the 
expression pattern of Krox 20, a neural marker for rhombomeres 3 and 5. Injected 
XMLP caused apoptosis. It was characterized by loss of intercellular adhesion 
contacts, transient plasma membrane ruffling at gastrula, and epithelial 
disruption attailbud stage. Overexpression of mutant XMLPs showed that this 
phenotype was correlated with its putative PSD domain and glycine at position 2. 
The embryos injected with a morpholino oligo complementaryto XMLPmRNA showed 
malformations of the anterior axis and eye defects. Extirpation experiments 
indicated that the phenotypes might be correlated with disturbed morphorgenetic 
movements rather than an inhibition of induction process. Overexpression of 
XCYP26 resulted in a shift of the expression pattern of XMLP. In the early 
tailbud stage (stage 20) the signal stripe in the XCYP26 injected half of the 
embryo got diffuse or even disappeared. This observation suggests that retinoic 
acid plays an important role in the regulation of XMLP. Our results suggest that 
XMLP might participate in pattern formation of the embryonic axis and the 
central nervous system.

PMID: 11732841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]