1. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jan 22;107(3):201-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10142.

Association of APOE epsilon2/epsilon3/epsilon4 and promoter gene variants with 
dementia but not cardiovascular mortality in old age.

Heijmans BT(1), Slagboom PE, Gussekloo J, Droog S, Lagaay AM, Kluft C, Knook DL, 
Westendorp RG.

Author information:
(1)Gaubius Laboratory, TNO Prevention and Health, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
B.T.Heijmans@lumc.nl

The common apolipoprotein E (APOE) alleles epsilon2, epsilon3, and epsilon4 are 
associated with the risk of dementia and cardiovascular disease. Recently, two 
functional variants (- 219G/T and -491A/T) were identified in the promoter of 
the APOE gene that enable a further characterization of the role of the APOE 
locus in disease. We investigated the contribution of these APOE gene variants 
to dementia and cardiovascular mortality in old age using a population-based 
cohort of 648 subjects aged 85 years and over (Leiden 85-Plus Study). Genotypes 
containing an APOE epsilon4 allele were associated with a 4.1-fold (95% CI, 
2.2-7.7) increased risk of dementia as compared to the epsilon3/epsilon3 
genotype in old subjects. Moreover, homozygosity for the -219T allele was found 
to be associated with a 2.4-fold (95% CI, 1.0-5.8) increased risk independently 
of epsilon2 and epsilon4; the -491A/T variant was not associated with dementia. 
Over a 10-year follow-up period, the risk of cardiovascular mortality was not 
increased among epsilon4 carriers (RR, 0.6; 95% CI, 0.4-1.0) or -219T homozygous 
subjects (RR, 1.1; 95% CI, 0.7-1.7), nor did it decrease among -491T homozygous 
subjects (RR, 1.4; 95% CI, 0.6-3.1). In conclusion, both the APOE 
epsilon2/epsilon3/epsilon4 and the -219G/T variant were identified as risk 
factors for dementia but not cardiovascular mortality in old age. Our results 
support the hypothesis that both the isoform and the amount of APOE may 
influence the risk of dementia. Furthermore, they emphasize that variation at 
the APOE locus has a higher impact on the risk of dementia than on the risk of 
cardiovascular disease in old age.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.10142
PMID: 11807900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]