1. Hum Genet. 2002 Jan;110(1):41-51. doi: 10.1007/s00439-001-0630-1. Epub 2001
Nov  13.

Laminin 5 mutations in junctional epidermolysis bullosa: molecular basis of 
Herlitz vs. non-Herlitz phenotypes.

Nakano A(1), Chao SC, Pulkkinen L, Murrell D, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Pfendner E, 
Uitto J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College, 
Thomas Jefferson University, 233 S. 10th Street, Suite 450 BLSB, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB) is a group of heritable blistering 
diseases in which tissue separation occurs within the lamina lucida of the 
cutaneous basement membrane zone. Clinically, two broad subcategories have been 
recognized: The Herlitz variant (H-JEB; OMIM 226700) is characterized by early 
demise of the affected individuals, usually within the first year of life, while 
non-Herlitz (nH-JEB; OMIM 226650) patients show a milder phenotype with 
life-long blistering, yet with normal lifespan. In this study, we have examined 
a cohort of 27 families, 15 with Herlitz and 12 with non-Herlitz JEB, for 
mutations in the candidate genes, LAMA3, LAMB3, and LAMC2, encoding the subunit 
polypeptides of laminin 5. The mutation detection strategy consisted of PCR 
amplification of all exons in these genes, followed by heteroduplex scanning and 
nucleotide sequencing. We were able to identify pathogenic mutations in both 
alleles of each proband, the majority of the mutations being in the LAMB3 gene. 
Examination of the mutation database revealed that most cases with Herlitz JEB 
harbored premature termination codon (PTC) mutations in both alleles. In 
non-Herlitz cases, the PTC mutation was frequently associated with a missense 
mutation or a putative splicing mutation in trans. In three cases with putative 
splicing mutations, RT-PCR analysis revealed a repertoire of splice variants 
in-frame, predicting the synthesis of either shortened or lengthened, yet partly 
functional, polypeptides. These observations would explain the relatively mild 
phenotype in cases with splicing mutations. Collectively, these findings, 
together with the global laminin 5 mutation database, contribute to our 
understanding of the genotype/phenotype correlations explaining the Herlitz vs 
non-Herlitz phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-001-0630-1
PMID: 11810295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]