1. Int J Cancer. 2002 Mar 1;98(1):99-105. doi: 10.1002/ijc.10128.

TP53 mutation pattern of esophageal squamous cell carcinomas in a high risk area 
(Southern Brazil): role of life style factors.

PÃ¼tz A(1), Hartmann AA, Fontes PR, Alexandre CO, Silveira DA, Klug SJ, Rabes HM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich, Germany.

In an attempt to correlate the TP53 mutation pattern of squamous cell carcinomas 
of the esophagus (ESCC) and life style factors of patients from the high risk 
area Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, 135 ESCC were analyzed, after prescreening by 
p53 immunohistochemistry, by SSCP and DNA sequencing of TP53, exon 5-9. 
Forty-nine somatic TP53 mutations (and 1 case with p53 polymorphism) were 
identified as missense (n = 39), frameshift (n = 6), silent (n = 1), amber (n = 
1) or intron border mutations (n = 2) that cause splicing aberrations. They were 
preferentially found in exon 5 (36.7%) and exon 8 (32.7%). Several mutations 
were located in the mutation hot spot codons 248, 273 and 282, mainly at CpG 
sites. Transition mutations were observed in 53.1% (among them 50% G > A), 
transversion mutations in 34.7% (among them 47.1% G > T) and frameshifts in 
12.2%, the latter 2 mainly in smokers and alcohol drinkers. Transitions were 
more prevalent in females than in males (p < 0.05). TP53 mutations, mainly 
transversions, were more frequently found in heavy smokers (p = 0.03), with the 
same tendency after chronic alcohol consumption. Comparison with the worldwide 
IARC database disclosed differences in the TP53 mutation pattern of the 
Brazilian tumors, with a higher accumulation of TP53 mutations in exon 8 and a 
higher prevalence of transition mutations. Mutations at the reported hot spot 
codon 176 were missing. Although difficult because of the documented coexposure 
to various life style risk factors in most patients of this series, the 
hypothesis is proposed that besides smoking and alcohol drinking the commonly 
consumed hot mate tea in this high risk area for ESCC is responsible for this 
different pattern of TP53 mutations because of chronic hyperthermic irritation 
and inflammation in the esophagus with an endogenous formation of radicals or 
carcinogenic factors that lead to a higher prevalence of transition mutations.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.10128
PMID: 11857392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]