1. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):16837-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M201379200. Epub 
2002 Mar 4.

Regulation of arrestin-3 phosphorylation by casein kinase II.

Kim YM(1), Barak LS, Caron MG, Benovic JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Arrestins play an important role in regulating the function of G protein-coupled 
receptors including receptor desensitization, internalization, down-regulation, 
and signaling via nonreceptor tyrosine kinases and mitogen-activated protein 
kinases. Previous studies have revealed that arrestins themselves are also 
subject to regulation. In the present study, we focused on identifying potential 
mechanisms involved in regulating the function of arrestin-3. Using metabolic 
labeling, phosphoamino acid analysis, and mutagenesis studies, we found that 
arrestin-3 is constitutively phosphorylated at Thr-382 and becomes 
dephosphorylated upon beta(2)-adrenergic receptor activation in COS-1 cells. 
Casein kinase II (CKII) appears to be the major kinase mediating arrestin-3 
phosphorylation, since 1) Thr-382 is contained within a canonical consensus 
sequence for CKII phosphorylation and 2) wild type arrestin-3 but not a T382A 
mutant is phosphorylated by CKII in vitro. Functional analysis reveals that 
mutants mimicking the phosphorylated (T382E) and dephosphorylated (T382A or 
T382V) states of arrestin-3 promote beta(2)-adrenergic receptor internalization 
and bind clathrin, beta-adaptin, and Src to comparable levels as wild type 
arrestin-3. This suggests that the phosphorylation of arrestin-3 does not 
directly regulate interaction with endocytic (clathrin, beta-adaptin) or 
signaling (Src) components and is in contrast to arrestin-2, where 
phosphorylation appears to regulate interaction with clathrin and Src. However, 
additional analysis reveals that arrestin-3 phosphorylation may regulate 
formation of a large arrestin-3-containing protein complex. Differences between 
the regulatory roles of arrestin-2 and -3 phosphorylation may contribute to the 
different cellular functions of these proteins in G protein-coupled receptor 
signaling and regulation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M201379200
PMID: 11877451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]