1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Mar;87(3):1402-6. doi: 10.1210/jcem.87.3.8328.

Deletions of the homeobox gene SHOX (short stature homeobox) are an important 
cause of growth failure in children with short stature.

Rappold GA(1), Fukami M, Niesler B, Schiller S, Zumkeller W, Bettendorf M, 
Heinrich U, Vlachopapadoupoulou E, Reinehr T, Onigata K, Ogata T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany. gudrun_rappold@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Short stature, with an incidence of 3 in 100, is a fairly frequent disorder in 
children. Idiopathic short stature refers to patients who are short due to 
various unknown reasons. Mutations of a human homeobox gene, SHOX (short stature 
homeobox), have recently been shown to be associated with the short stature 
phenotype in patients with Turner syndrome and most patients with LÃ©ri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosis. This study addresses the question of the incidence and type 
of SHOX mutations in patients with short stature. We analyzed the SHOX gene for 
intragenic mutations by single strand conformation polymorphism, followed by 
sequencing, in 750 patients and for complete gene deletions by fluorescence in 
situ hybridization in 150 patients (total, 900 patients). This is the largest 
group of patients with short stature studied to date for SHOX mutations. All 
patients had a normal karyotype, and their height for chronological age were 
below the third percentile or minus 2 SD of national height standards. All were 
without obvious skeletal features reminiscent of the Leri-Weill syndrome at the 
time of diagnosis. Silent, missense, and nonsense mutations and a small deletion 
in the coding region of SHOX were identified in 9 of the 750 patients analyzed 
for intragenic mutations. Complete gene deletions were detected in 3 of the 150 
patients studied for gene deletions. At least 3 of the 9 intragenic mutations 
were judged to be functional based upon the genotype- phenotype relationship for 
the parents and normal control individuals. We conclude that SHOX mutations have 
been detected in 2.4% of children with short stature. The spectrum of SHOX 
mutations is biased, with the vast majority leading to complete gene deletions. 
The prevalence of short stature due to SHOX gene mutations among children with 
short stature appears to be similar to that of GH deficiency or Turner syndrome. 
Family studies of the children with SHOX mutations often reveal older family 
members with same mutation who exhibit mild skeletal features reminiscent of the 
Turner syndrome, such as high-arched palate, short neck, abnormal auricular 
development, cubitus valgus, genu valgum, short fourth metacarpals, and Madelung 
deformity.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.87.3.8328
PMID: 11889216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]