1. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Mar 15;108(3):177-81.

"Mowat-Wilson" syndrome with and without Hirschsprung disease is a distinct, 
recognizable multiple congenital anomalies-mental retardation syndrome caused by 
mutations in the zinc finger homeo box 1B gene.

Zweier C(1), Albrecht B, Mitulla B, Behrens R, Beese M, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, 
Rott HD, Rauch A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University of 
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jan 1;124A(1):102-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20298.

Recently mutations in the gene ZFHX1B (SIP1) were shown in patients with 
"syndromic Hirschsprung disease" with mental retardation (MR) and multiple 
congenital anomalies (MCA), but it was unclear if Hirschsprung disease is an 
obligate symptom of these mutations and if the distinct facial phenotype 
delineated by Mowat et al. [1998: J Med Genet 35: 617-623] is specific for 
ZFHX1B mutations. In order to address these open questions we analyzed the 
ZFHX1B gene in five patients, three of whom had "syndromic Hirschsprung disease" 
two with and one without the facial phenotype described by Mowat et al. [1998], 
and two of whom had the distinct facial gestalt without Hirschsprung disease. 
Analyses of microsatellite markers and newly identified SNPs, and/or FISH with 
BACs from the ZFHX1B region excluded large deletions in all five patients. 
Direct sequencing demonstrated truncating ZFHX1B mutations in all four patients 
with the characteristic facial phenotype, but not in the patient with syndromic 
Hirschsprung disease without the distinct facial appearance. We demonstrate that 
there is a specific clinical entity with a recognizable facial gestalt, mental 
retardation and variable MCAs which we propose be called the "Mowat-Wilson 
syndrome."

PMID: 11891681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]