1. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 31;277(22):19546-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M108023200. Epub 
2002 Mar 19.

Phloxine B interacts with the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator at multiple sites to modulate channel activity.

Cai Z(1), Sheppard DN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Bristol, School of Medical Sciences, 
University Walk, Bristol BS8, United Kingdom.

The fluorescein derivative phloxine B is a potent modulator of the cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Low micromolar 
concentrations of phloxine B stimulate CFTR Cl(-) currents, whereas higher 
concentrations of the drug inhibit CFTR. In this study, we investigated the 
mechanism of action of phloxine B. Phloxine B (1 microm) stimulated wild-type 
CFTR and the most common cystic fibrosis mutation, DeltaF508, by increasing the 
open probability of phosphorylated CFTR Cl(-) channels. At each concentration of 
ATP tested, the drug slowed the rate of channel closure without altering the 
opening rate. Based on the effects of fluorescein derivatives on transport 
ATPases, these data suggest that phloxine B might stimulate CFTR by binding to 
the ATP-binding site of the second nucleotide-binding domain (NBD2) to slow the 
dissociation of ATP from NBD1. Channel block by phloxine B (40 microm) was 
voltage-dependent, enhanced when external Cl(-) concentration was reduced and 
unaffected by ATP (5 mm), suggesting that phloxine B inhibits CFTR by occluding 
the pore. We conclude that phloxine B interacts directly with CFTR at multiple 
sites to modulate channel activity. It or related agents might be of value in 
the development of new treatments for diseases caused by the malfunction of 
CFTR.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M108023200
PMID: 11904291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]