1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2002 Apr;75(4):616-58. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/75.4.616.

High-dose vitamin therapy stimulates variant enzymes with decreased coenzyme 
binding affinity (increased K(m)): relevance to genetic disease and 
polymorphisms.

Ames BN(1), Elson-Schwab I, Silver EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, USA. bames@chori.org

As many as one-third of mutations in a gene result in the corresponding enzyme 
having an increased Michaelis constant, or K(m), (decreased binding affinity) 
for a coenzyme, resulting in a lower rate of reaction. About 50 human genetic 
dis-eases due to defective enzymes can be remedied or ameliorated by the 
administration of high doses of the vitamin component of the corresponding 
coenzyme, which at least partially restores enzymatic activity. Several 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms, in which the variant amino acid reduces 
coenzyme binding and thus enzymatic activity, are likely to be remediable by 
raising cellular concentrations of the cofactor through high-dose vitamin 
therapy. Some examples include the alanine-to-valine substitution at codon 222 
(Ala222-->Val) [DNA: C-to-T substitution at nucleo-tide 677 (677C-->T)] in 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (NADPH) and the cofactor FAD (in relation to 
cardiovascular disease, migraines, and rages), the Pro187-->Ser (DNA: 609C-->T) 
mutation in NAD(P):quinone oxidoreductase 1 [NAD(P)H dehy-drogenase (quinone)] 
and FAD (in relation to cancer), the Ala44-->Gly (DNA: 131C-->G) mutation in 
glucose-6-phosphate 1-dehydrogenase and NADP (in relation to favism and 
hemolytic anemia), and the Glu487-->Lys mutation (present in one-half of Asians) 
in aldehyde dehydrogenase (NAD + ) and NAD (in relation to alcohol intolerance, 
Alzheimer disease, and cancer).

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/75.4.616
PMID: 11916749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]