1. Exp Cell Res. 2002 Apr 15;275(1):9-16. doi: 10.1006/excr.2002.5494.

Ligand-independent oncogenic transformation by the EGF receptor requires kinase 
domain catalytic activity.

Danielsen AJ(1), Maihle NJ.

Author information:
(1)Tumor Biology Program, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The retroviral oncogene S3-v-erbB is a transduced, truncated form of the avian 
EGF (ErbB-1) receptor. Infection of avian fibroblasts with a retroviral vector 
expressing S3-v-ErbB results in ligand-independent cell transformation, which is 
accompanied by the assembly of a transformation-specific phosphoprotein 
signaling complex and anchorage-independent cell growth. It previously had been 
reported, using lysine-721 mutants (K721), that kinase domain function was 
required for ErbB-mediated cell transformation. However, since these initial 
reports, several studies using aspartate-813 mutants (D813) have demonstrated 
the ability of kinase-impaired ErbB receptors to induce mitogenic signal 
transduction pathways and cell transformation in a ligand-dependent manner. To 
determine the necessity of ErbB receptor kinase domain catalytic activity in 
ligand-independent cell transformation, we created S3-v-ErbB-K(-), a 
kinase-impaired oncoprotein constructed by replacing aspartate-813 with alanine 
(D813A). Subcellular routing as well as cell surface membrane and nuclear 
localization of the S3-v-ErbB-K(-) mutant receptor were unaffected by impairment 
of kinase activity. In contrast, avian fibroblasts expressing S3-v-ErbB-K(-) do 
not form the characteristic transformation-specific phosphoprotein complex, or 
induce soft agar colony growth in vitro. These results suggest that in contrast 
to ligand-dependent oncogenic signaling, ligand-independent cell transformation 
by a constitutively activated mutant form of the EGF receptor requires receptor 
kinase catalytic activity. In addition, these results demonstrate that 
phosphorylation and assembly of downstream signaling complexes require tyrosine 
phosphorylation events that are directly mediated by oncogenic forms of the EGF 
receptor.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/excr.2002.5494
PMID: 11925101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]