1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23223-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M202028200. Epub
2002  Apr 8.

His-859 is an essential residue for the activity and pH dependence of 
Escherichia coli RTX toxin alpha-hemolysin.

Cortajarena AL(1), Goñi FM, Ostolaza H.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Biofísica (CSIC-UPV/EHU), and Departamento de Bioquímica, 
Universidad del País Vasco, Aptdo. 644, 48080 Bilbao, Spain.

Escherichia coli alpha-hemolysin (HlyA) is a toxin protein that, in common with 
other members of the RTX family, contains a calcium-binding domain consisting of 
a number of Gly- and Asp-rich nonapeptides (17 in this case) repeated in tandem. 
Amino acid number 6 in these nonapeptides is almost invariably Asp, and 
occasionally Asn, but HlyA contains a His residue (number 859 in the chain) in 
position 6 of the last-but-one nonapeptide. HlyA mutants have been prepared, by 
site-directed mutagenesis, in which His-859 has been replaced by an Asn (H859N) 
or by Asp (H859D). HlyA exists in aqueous media in an aggregate-monomer 
equilibrium, but only the monomer containing bound Ca(2+) (HlyA.Ca) appears to 
be competent to achieve target membrane insertion and subsequent lysis. In 
mutant H859N, equilibrium appears to be shifted toward the aggregate, therefore 
the protein does not exchange Ca(2+) with the aqueous environment, no HlyA.Ca 
monomers are detected, and the protein lacks any membrane lytic activity. Mutant 
H859D in turn is almost indistinguishable from the wild-type regarding its 
calcium binding and membrane lytic activity, however, it differs significantly 
in its pH dependence. Wild-type HlyA activity decreases sigmoidally with pH, 
following rather closely the protonation curve of a His residue (apparent pK(a) 
approximately 6.5). With mutant H859D activity decreases almost linearly with pH 
and to a smaller extent. It can be concluded that His-859 plays a critical role 
in several aspects of HlyA activity, namely self-aggregation properties, calcium 
binding, hemolysis, and pH dependence.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M202028200
PMID: 11940597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]