1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 26;277(30):27081-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110544200. Epub
2002  May 22.

The presence of a single tyrosine residue at the carboxyl domain of vascular 
endothelial growth factor receptor-2/FLK-1 regulates its autophosphorylation and 
activation of signaling molecules.

Meyer RD(1), Dayanir V, Majnoun F, Rahimi N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, Boston University, 715 
Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)-2 plays a critical role in 
vasculogenesis during embryonic development and pathological angiogenesis, but 
little is known about the molecular mechanisms governing its functions. Here we 
investigated the role of tyrosine 1212 on mouse VEGFR-2 autophosphorylation and 
its signal transduction relay in endothelial cells. Mutation of tyrosine 1212 on 
VEGFR-2 to phenylalanine severely impaired the ligand-dependent 
autophosphorylation of VEGFR-2 and its ability to associate with and activate 
Src. This mutation also reduced the VEGFR-2 ability to phosphorylate 
phospholipase Cgamma1 and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). Unlike 
mutation of tyrosine 1212 to phenylalanine, replacement of tyrosine 1212 with 
glutamic acid preserved the ligand-dependent activation of VEGFR-2 and 
activation of VEGFR-2-associated signaling proteins including Src, phospholipase 
Cgamma1, and MAPK. Further analysis showed that Src activation is not required 
for activation of VEGFR-2, since cells co-expressing wild type receptor with 
kinase dead Src or wild type Src displayed no apparent effect in the 
ligand-dependent autophosphorylation of VEGFR-2. Similarly, expression of wild 
type VEGFR-2 in fibroblast (SYF) cells obtained from the triple knockout Src 
family kinases showed normal ligand-dependent autophosphorylation. Collectively, 
these results suggest that phosphorylation of tyrosine 1212 of VEGFR-2 plays a 
crucial role in the activation of VEGFR-2 and subsequently VEGFR-2-mediated 
angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110544200
PMID: 12023952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]