1. Carcinogenesis. 2002 Apr;23(4):671-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/23.4.669.

gamma-Glutamyl transpeptidase and glutathione biosynthesis in non-tumorigenic 
and tumorigenic rat liver oval cell lines.

Komlosh A(1), Volohonsky G, Porat N, Tuby C, Bluvshtein E, Steinberg P, Oesch F, 
Stark AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, Israel.

Corrected and republished from
    Carcinogenesis. 2001 Dec;22(12):2009-16. doi: 10.1093/carcin/22.12.2009.

Glutathione synthesis and growth properties were studied in the gamma-glutamyl 
transpeptidase(GGT)-negative, non-tumorigenic rat liver oval cell line OC/CDE22, 
and in its GGT-positive, tumorigenic counterpart line M22. 
gamma-Glutamylcysteine synthetase (GGCS) activities were comparable. Growth 
rates of M22 cells exceeded those of OC/CDE22 cells at non-limiting and limiting 
exogenous cysteine concentrations. A monoclonal antibody (Ab 5F10) that inhibits 
the transpeptidatic but not the hydrolytic activity of GGT did not affect the 
growth rates of OC/CDE22, and decreased those of M22 to the OC/CDE22 level. In 
GSH-depleted M22, but not in OC/CDE22 cells, the rate and extent of GSH 
repletion with exogenous cysteine and glutamine exceeded those obtained with 
exogenous cysteine and glutamate. With Ab 5F10, repletion with 
cysteine/glutamine was similar to that obtained with cysteine/glutamate. 
Repletion with exogenous GSH occurred only in M22 cells, and was abolished by 
the GGT inhibitor acivicin. Repletion with gamma-glutamylcysteine (GGC) in 
OC/CDE22 was resistant to acivicin whereas that in M22 was inhibited by 
acivicin. Repletion with exogenous GSH or cysteinylglycine (CG) required 
aminopeptidase activity and was lower than that obtained with cysteine. Unless 
reduced, CG disulfide did not support GSH repletion. The findings are compatible 
with the notions that (i) GGT-catalyzed transpeptidation was largely responsible 
for the growth advantage of M22 cells at limiting cysteine concentration, and 
for their high GSH content via the formation of GGC from a gamma-glutamyl donor 
(glutamine) and cyst(e)ine, and (ii) aminopeptidase/dipeptidase activity is 
rate-limiting in GSH repletion when GSH or CG serve as cysteine sources.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/23.4.669
PMID: 12075625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]