1. Br J Cancer. 2002 May 20;86(10):1592-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6600269.

Investigations on a clinically and functionally unusual and novel germline p53 
mutation.

Rutherford J(1), Chu CE, Duddy PM, Charlton RS, Chumas P, Taylor GR, Lu X, 
Barnes DM, Camplejohn RS.

Author information:
(1)Richard Dimbleby Department Cancer Research, Guy's, King's and St Thomas' 
School of Medicine, St Thomas' Hospital, London SE1 7EH, UK.

This report describes an individual with a rare choroid plexus papilloma in 
adulthood (age 29) after earlier having an osteosarcoma (age 22). The results 
from this study, and others, suggest that it may be advisable to consider the 
possibility of a germline p53 mutation in adults presenting with choroid plexus 
tumours. In the current study automated DNA sequencing of genomic DNA detected a 
novel germline 7 base pair insertion in exon 5 of the p53 gene in this patient. 
The alteration in frame would produce amino acid substitutions beginning with 
alanine to glycine at position 161 and a stop codon at position 182 in the 
mutated protein. Surprisingly two assays of p53 function gave apparently 
wild-type results on peripheral blood lymphocytes from this individual. These 
results led us to carry out more detailed functional tests on the mutant 
protein. The mutant allele was expressed either at very low levels or not at all 
in phytohaemagglutinin stimulated lymphocytes. Further, the mutant protein was 
completely non-functional in terms of its ability to transactivate a series of 
p53-responsive genes (p21(WAF1), bax, PIG3), to transrepress a target gene and 
to inhibit colony growth in transfected Saos-2 cells. However, surprisingly, 
data from irradiated peripheral blood lymphocytes and transfected Saos-2 cells, 
suggested that this truncated, mutant protein retains significant ability to 
induce apoptosis.

comCopyright 2002 Cancer Research UK

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6600269
PMCID: PMC2746598
PMID: 12085209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]