1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2002 Jul;103(1):101-6. doi: 10.1042/cs1030101.

Angiotensinogen M235T gene polymorphism and recurrent restenosis after repeated 
percutaneous transluminal coronary angiography.

Hertwig S(1), VÃ¶lzke H, Robinson DM, Motz W, Rettig R.

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Internal Medicine B, Ernst Moritz Arndt University, 
Friedrich-Loeffler Strasse 23a, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany.

The present study was designed to prospectively test the hypothesis that gene 
polymorphisms of the renin-angiotensin system are associated with recurrent 
restenosis after repeated percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty. Five 
hundred and eleven patients after first successful angioplasty were 
characterized with respect to the angiotensinogen M235T, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme insertion/deletion and angiotensin II type 1 receptor A1166C gene 
polymorphisms. In 164 of these patients repeated angioplasty on a restenotic 
lesion was performed. After repeated angioplasty, 46 patients had recurrent 
restenosis as defined by a greater than 50% progression of residual stenosis. In 
the recurrent restenosis group there was a statistically significant higher 
percentage of patients receiving cholesterol-lowering drugs compared with the 
group of patients without recurrent restenosis. The two groups of patients did 
not differ with respect to procedural and angiographic parameters. There were 
significantly more carriers of the angiotensinogen 235T allele in the recurrent 
restenosis group than in the control group without recurrent restenosis. No 
differences between the two groups were found with respect to the other gene 
polymorphisms investigated. According to the results of a multifactorial 
analysis of variance, only the 235T allele of the angiotensinogen gene and not 
cholesterol drug therapy independently affected the increase of stenosis at 
follow-up angiography. In conclusion, the angiotensinogen 235T allele may be an 
independent predictor for recurrent restenosis after repeated angioplasty.

DOI: 10.1042/cs1030101
PMID: 12095411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]