1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Jul;81(3):255-62. doi: 
10.1016/s0960-0760(02)00070-5.

Membrane reconstitution of recombinant guinea pig cytochrome P45017alpha and the 
effects of site-directed mutagenesis on androgen formation.

Owaki A(1), Takamasa A, Yamazaki T, Kominami S.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Higashihiroshima, Japan.

Although cytochrome P45017alpha catalyzes the formation of androgen from both 
pregnenolone and progesterone, the production of androstenedione from 
progesterone is a major pathway in the guinea pig, rat, mouse, and hamster. In 
contrast, human, bovine and sheep P45017alpha produce dehydroepiandrosterone 
from pregnenolone. Cytochrome P45017alphas from all of these animals have high 
homology in the amino acid sequence around the 340-370 region. To investigate 
the substrate preferences for androgen production, we replaced a few amino acids 
in the 340-370 region of guinea pig P45017alpha with those found in the other 
animals. The recombinant P45017alphas were expressed in E. coli DH5alpha, 
purified by column chromatography and incorporated into liposome membranes. The 
(His)(4) tag in the recombinant P45017alphas had little effect on the 
interaction with NADPH-P450 reductase in the membranes. The recombinant 
P45017alphas with a single-position mutation of F344I, H349R or M352L and with 
double-position mutations of F344I and H349R and triple-position mutations 
showed decreases in the production of 17alpha-hydroxypregnenolone, 
androstenedione and dehydroepiandrosterone. The activity for 
17alpha-hydroxyprogeterone production was increased significantly by the F344I 
mutation. The addition of cytochrome b5 did not have much of an effect on the 
17alpha-hydroxylation but had a significant effect on androgen production in 
both the nonmutated and mutated P45017alphas.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-0760(02)00070-5
PMID: 12163137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]