1. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 22;21(37):5704-15. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205779.

A novel p53 mutational hotspot in skin tumors from UV-irradiated Xpc mutant mice 
alters transactivation functions.

Inga A(1), Nahari D, Velasco-Miguel S, Friedberg EC, Resnick MA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, NIH, PO Box 12233, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, NC 27709, 
USA.

A mutation in codon 122 of the mouse p53 gene resulting in a T to L amino acid 
substitution (T122-->L) is frequently associated with skin cancer in 
UV-irradiated mice that are both homozygous mutant for the nucleotide excision 
repair (NER) gene Xpc (Xpc(-/-)) and hemizygous mutant for the p53 gene. We 
investigated the functional consequences of the mouse T122-->L mutation when 
expressed either in mammalian cells or in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Similar to a non-functional allele, high expression of the T122-->L allele in 
p53(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts and human Saos-2 cells failed to suppress 
growth. However, the T122-->L mutant p53 showed wild-type transactivation levels 
with Bax and MDM2 promoters when expressed in either cell type and retained 
transactivation of the p21 and the c-Fos promoters in one cell line. Using a 
recently developed rheostatable p53 induction system in yeast we assessed the 
T122-->L transactivation capacity at low levels of protein expression using 12 
different p53 response elements (REs). Compared to wild-type p53 the T122-->L 
protein manifested an unusual transactivation pattern comprising reduced and 
enhanced activity with specific REs. The high incidence of the T122-->L mutant 
allele in the Xpc(-/-) background suggests that both genetic and epigenetic 
conditions may facilitate the emergence of particular functional p53 mutations. 
Furthermore, the approach that we have taken also provides for the dissection of 
functions that may be retained in many p53 tumor alleles.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205779
PMID: 12173040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]