1. Biochemistry. 2002 Sep 24;41(38):11495-503. doi: 10.1021/bi025835w.

Role of tyrosine-103 in myoglobin peroxidase activity: kinetic and steady-state 
studies on the reaction of wild-type and variant recombinant human myoglobins 
with H(2)O(2).

Witting PK(1), Mauk AG, Lay PA.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Group, The Heart Research Institute, 145 Missenden Road, 
Camperdown, Sydney, Australia 2050. p.witting@unsw.edu.au

Myoglobin (Mb) catalyzes a range of oxidation reactions in the presence of 
hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) through a peroxidase-like cycle. C110A and Y103F 
variants of human Mb have been constructed to assess the effects of removing 
electron-rich oxidizable amino acids from the protein on the peroxidase activity 
of Mb: a point mutation at W14 failed to yield a viable protein. Point mutations 
at C110 and Y103 did not result in significant changes to structural elements of 
the heme pocket, as judged by low-temperature electron paramagnetic spectroscopy 
(EPR) studies on the ground-state ferric proteins. However, compared to the 
native protein, the yield of globin radical (globin*) was significantly 
decreased for the Y103F but not the C110A variant Mb upon reaction of the 
respective proteins with H(2)O(2). In contrast with our expectation that 
inhibiting pathways of intramolecular electron transfer may lead to enhanced Mb 
peroxidase activity, mutation of Y103 marginally decreased the rate constant for 
reaction of Mb with H(2)O(2) (1.4-fold) as judged by stopped-flow kinetic 
analyses. Consistent with this decrease in rate constant, steady-state analyses 
of Y103F Mb-derived thioanisole sulfoxidation indicated decreased V(max) and 
increased K(m) relative to the wild-type control. Additionally, thioanisole 
sulfoxidation proceeded with lower stereoselectivity, suggesting that Y103 plays 
a significant role in substrate binding and orientation in the heme pocket of 
Mb. Together, these results show that electron transfer within the globin 
portion of the protein is an important modulator of its stability and catalytic 
activity. Furthermore, the hydrogen-bonding network involving the residues that 
line the heme pocket of Mb is crucial to both efficient peroxidase activity and 
stereospecificity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi025835w
PMID: 12234193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]