1. Int J Cancer. 2002 Nov 10;102(2):137-41. doi: 10.1002/ijc.10682.

Mutation analysis of EP300 in colon, breast and ovarian carcinomas.

Bryan EJ(1), Jokubaitis VJ, Chamberlain NL, Baxter SW, Dawson E, Choong DY, 
Campbell IG.

Author information:
(1)VBCRC Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute, Locked 
Bag No. 1 A'Beckett Street, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The putative tumour suppressor gene EP300 is located on chromosome 22q13 which 
is a region showing frequent loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in colon, breast and 
ovarian cancers. We analysed 203 human breast, colon and ovarian primary tumours 
and cell lines for somatic mutations in EP300. LOH across the EP300 locus was 
detected in 38% of colon, 36% of breast, and 49% of ovarian primary tumours but 
no somatic mutations in EP300 were identified in any primary tumour. Analysis of 
17 colon, 11 breast, and 11 ovarian cancer cell lines identified truncating 
mutations in 4 colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, HT29, LIM2405 and LIM2412). We 
confirmed the presence of a previously reported frameshift mutation in HCT116 at 
codon 1699 and identified a second frameshift mutation at codon 1468. Bi-allelic 
inactivation of EP300 was also detected in LIM2405 that harbours an insC 
mutation at codon 927 as well an insA mutation at codon 1468. An insA mutation 
at codon 1468 was identified in HT29 and a CGA>TGA mutation at codon 86 was 
identified in LIM2412. Both these lines were heterozygous across the EP300 locus 
and western blot analysis confirmed the presence of an apparently wild-type 
protein. Our study has established that genetic inactivation of EP300 is rare in 
primary colorectal, breast and ovarian cancers. In contrast, mutations are 
common among colorectal cancer cell lines with 4/17 harbouring homozygous or 
heterozygous mutations. The rarity of EP300 mutations among these tumour types 
that show a high frequency of LOH across 22q13 may indicate that another gene is 
the target of the loss. It is possible that bi-allelic inactivation of EP300 is 
not necessary and that haploinsufficiency is sufficient to promote 
tumorigenesis. Alternatively, silencing of EP300 may be achieved by epigenetic 
mechanisms such as promoter methylation.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.10682
PMID: 12385008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]