1. BMC Genet. 2002 Oct 15;3:20. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-3-20. Epub 2002 Oct 15.

The human homologue of unc-93 maps to chromosome 6q27 - characterisation and 
analysis in sporadic epithelial ovarian cancer.

Liu Y(1), Dodds P, Emilion G, Mungall AJ, Dunham I, Beck S, Wells RS, Charnock 
FM, Ganesan TS.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Molecular Oncology Laboratories, Weatherall Institute of 
Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK. 
ying.liu@cancer.org.uk

BACKGROUND: In sporadic ovarian cancer, we have previously reported allele loss 
at D6S193 (62%) on chromosome 6q27, which suggested the presence of a putative 
tumour suppressor gene. Based on our data and that from another group, the 
minimal region of allele loss was between D6S264 and D6S149 (7.4 cM). To 
identify the putative tumour suppressor gene, we established a physical map 
initially with YACs and subsequently with PACs/BACs from D6S264 to D6S149. To 
accelerate the identification of genes, we sequenced the entire contig of 
approximately 1.1 Mb. Seven genes were identified within the region of allele 
loss between D6S264 and D6S149.
RESULTS: The human homologue of unc-93 (UNC93A) in C. elegans was identified to 
be within the interval of allele loss centromeric to D6S149. This gene is 24.5 
kb and comprises of 8 exons. There are two transcripts with the shorter one due 
to splicing out of exon 4. It is expressed in testis, small intestine, spleen, 
prostate, and ovary. In a panel of 8 ovarian cancer cell lines, UNC93A 
expression was detected by RT-PCR which identified the two transcripts in 2/8 
cell lines. The entire coding sequence was examined for mutations in a panel of 
ovarian tumours and ovarian cancer cell lines. Mutations were identified in 
exons 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8. Only 3 mutations were identified specifically in the 
tumour. These included a c.452G>A (W151X) mutation in exon 3, c.676C>T (R226X) 
in exon 5 and c.1225G>A(V409I) mutation in exon 8. However, the mutations in 
exon 3 and 5 were also present in 6% and 2% of the normal population 
respectively. The UNC93A cDNA was shown to express at the cell membrane and 
encodes for a protein of 60 kDa.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that no evidence for UNC93A as a tumour 
suppressor gene in sporadic ovarian cancer has been identified and further 
research is required to evaluate its normal function and role in the 
pathogenesis of ovarian cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-3-20
PMCID: PMC134458
PMID: 12381271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]