1. Oncogene. 2002 Oct 24;21(49):7605-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205812.

Absence of somatic SDHD mutations in sporadic neuroendocrine tumors and 
detection of two germline variants in paraganglioma patients.

Perren A(1), Barghorn A, Schmid S, Saremaslani P, Roth J, Heitz PU, Komminoth P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland. 
Aurel.Perren@pty.usz.ch

Allelic loss of the long arm of chromosome 11 is frequent in neuroendocrine 
tumors (NET) of different organs. However, the MEN1 gene on 11q13 is mutated 
only in a subset of NET and allelic losses on 11q frequently extend to the 
telomere. In this genetic region lies the tumor suppressor gene SDHD which is 
associated with hereditary paragangliomas (PGL1). We sought to determine whether 
SDHD plays a role in the development of sporadic NET. By mutation and deletion 
analysis of SDHD we were unable to detect any SDHD mutation in 45 NET of the 
lung, gastrointestinal tract, pancreas or parathyroid. However, we found allelic 
deletions in 20 to 50% of all tumors but parathyroid adenomas. Furthermore, we 
found heterozygous germline variants in 2/8 paragangliomas. A first case of 
variant c.149 A>G (H50R) was found in a patient with an extra-adrenal 
pheochromocytoma, the other variant c.34 G>A (G12S) in a patient with a 
paratracheal paraganglioma, C-cell hyperplasia of the thyroid and hyperplasia of 
ACTH-producing cells of the pituitary gland. Both variants were absent in 93 
controls. Our results demonstrate that somatic SDHD mutations are rare in 
sporadic NET. However, LOH alone could lead to a complete loss of function since 
SDHD is an imprinted gene. Furthermore, we describe two germline variants 
possibly causing hereditary paragangliomas.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205812
PMID: 12386824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]