1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 3;278(1):194-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M206918200. Epub 2002
Oct  29.

A nucleophilic catalysis step is involved in the hydrolysis of aryl phosphate 
monoesters by human CT acylphosphatase.

Paoli P(1), Pazzagli L, Giannoni E, Caselli A, Manao G, Camici G, Ramponi G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Sciences, University of Florence, Viale Morgagni 
50, 50134 Florence, Italy.

Acylphosphatase, one of the smallest enzymes, is expressed in all organisms. It 
displays hydrolytic activity on acyl phosphates, nucleoside di- and 
triphosphates, aryl phosphate monoesters, and polynucleotides, with acyl 
phosphates being the most specific substrates in vitro. The mechanism of 
catalysis for human acylphosphatase (the organ-common type isoenzyme) was 
investigated using both aryl phosphate monoesters and acyl phosphates as 
substrates. The enzyme is able to catalyze phosphotransfer from p-nitrophenyl 
phosphate to glycerol (but not from benzoyl phosphate to glycerol), as well as 
the inorganic phosphate-H(2)18O oxygen exchange reaction in the absence of 
carboxylic acids or phenols. In short, our findings point to two different 
catalytic pathways for aryl phosphate monoesters and acyl phosphates. In 
particular, in the aryl phosphate monoester hydrolysis pathway, an 
enzyme-phosphate covalent intermediate is formed, whereas the hydrolysis of acyl 
phosphates seems a more simple process in which the Michaelis complex is 
attacked directly by a water molecule generating the reaction products. The 
formation of an enzyme-phosphate covalent complex is consistent with the 
experiments of isotope exchange and transphosphorylation from substrates to 
glycerol, as well as with the measurements of the Br√∏nsted free energy 
relationships using a panel of aryl phosphates with different structures. His-25 
involvement in the formation of the enzyme-phosphate covalent complex during the 
hydrolysis of aryl phosphate monoesters finds significant confirmation in 
experiments performed with the H25Q mutated enzyme.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M206918200
PMID: 12409302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]