1. BMC Cancer. 2002 Nov 15;2:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-2-29. Epub 2002 Nov 15.

Methylation profiling of twenty promoter-CpG islands of genes which may 
contribute to hepatocellular carcinogenesis.

Yu J(1), Ni M, Xu J, Zhang H, Gao B, Gu J, Chen J, Zhang L, Wu M, Zhen S, Zhu J.

Author information:
(1)The State-Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer 
Institute, LN 2200/25, Xie-Tu Road, Shanghai 200032, China. gyujian@citi2.net

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) presents one of the major health 
threats in China today. A better understanding of the molecular genetics 
underlying malignant transformation of hepatocytes is critical to success in the 
battle against this disease. The methylation state of C5 of the cytosine in the 
CpG di-nucleotide that is enriched within or near the promoter region of over 50 
% of the polymerase II genes has a drastic effect on transcription of these 
genes. Changes in the methylation profile of the promoters represent an 
alternative to genetic lesions as causative factors for the tumor-specific 
aberrant expression of the genes.
METHODS: We have used the methylation specific PCR method in conjunction with 
DNA sequencing to assess the methylation state of the promoter CpG islands of 
twenty genes. Aberrant expression of these genes have been attributed to the 
abnormal methylation profile of the corresponding promoter CpG islands in human 
tumors.
RESULTS: While the following sixteen genes remained the unmethylated in all 
tumor and normal tissues: CDH1, APAF1, hMLH1, BRCA1, hTERC, VHL, RARbeta, TIMP3, 
DAPK1, SURVIVIN, p14ARF, RB1, p15INK4b, APC, RASSF1c and PTEN, varying degrees 
of tumor specific hypermethylation were associated with the p16INK4a, RASSF1a, 
CASP8 and CDH13 genes. For instance, the p16INK4a was highly methylated in HCC 
(17/29, 58.6%) and less significantly methylated in non-cancerous tissue (4/29. 
13.79%). The RASSF1a was fully methylated in all tumor tissues (29/29, 100%), 
and less frequently methylated in corresponding non-cancerous tissue (24/29, 
82.75%).
CONCLUSIONS: Furthermore, co-existence of methylated with unmethylated DNA in 
some cases suggested that both genetic and epigenetic (CpG methylation) 
mechanisms may act in concert to inactivate the p16INK4a and RASSF1a in HCC. 
Finally, we found a significant association of cirrhosis with hypermethylation 
of the p16INK4a and hypomethylation of the CDH13 genes. For the first time, the 
survey was carried out on such an extent that it would not only provide new 
insights into the molecular mechanisms underscoring the aberrant expression of 
the genes in this study in HCC, but also offer essential information required 
for a good methylation-based diagnosis of HCC.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-2-29
PMCID: PMC139988
PMID: 12433278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]