1. J Invest Dermatol. 2002 Nov;119(5):1210-3. doi: 
10.1046/j.1523-1747.2002.19528.x.

A missense mutation in CDH3, encoding P-cadherin, causes hypotrichosis with 
juvenile macular dystrophy.

Indelman M(1), Bergman R, Lurie R, Richard G, Miller B, Petronius D, Ciubutaro 
D, Leibu R, Sprecher E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Laboratory of Molecular Dermatology, Rambam 
Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.

Hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy is a rare autosomal recessive 
disorder characterized by early hair loss heralding severe degenerative changes 
of the retinal macula and culminating in blindness during the second to third 
decade of life. Recently, we identified a frameshift mutation in the CDH3 gene 
encoding P-cadherin as the proximal cause of hypotrichosis with juvenile macular 
dystrophy in four families. We report here another consanguineous family in 
which four members were diagnosed with hypotrichosis with juvenile macular 
dystrophy. Light and scanning electron microscopy revealed in all patients 
morphologic hair shaft abnormalities consistent with pili torti. Ocular fundus 
examination disclosed marked degeneration of the macular pigment epithelium. 
Electrophysiologic studies were diagnostic for severe retinal dysfunction. DNA 
sequence analysis of the entire coding sequence of CDH3 revealed in all affected 
individuals a homozygous missense mutation resulting in a single amino acid 
substitution at position 503 of P-cadherin sequence (R503H). The mutation 
completely segregated with the hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy 
phenotype in the family but was not detectable in 83 healthy, unrelated 
controls. The amino acid substitution affects a highly conserved residue and is 
predicted to alter a Ca2+ binding domain of P-cadherin. This is the first 
pathogenic missense mutation reported in CDH3 and the second mutation found to 
underlie hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy. Our data establish 
recessive mutations in CDH3 as the molecular cause of hypotrichosis with 
juvenile macular dystrophy and expand our understanding of the pathophysiology 
of this intriguing disorder.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2002.19528.x
PMID: 12445216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]