1. Int J Urol. 2002 Oct;9(10):545-53. doi: 10.1046/j.1442-2042.2002.00514.x.

Expression and somatic mutation on androgen receptor gene in prostate cancer.

Segawa N(1), Nakamura M, Shan L, Utsunomiya H, Nakamura Y, Mori I, Katsuoka Y, 
Kakudo K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Osaka Medical College, Osaka, Japan. 
uro009@poh.osaka-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Lack of androgen receptor (AR) expression or mutation on the AR gene 
creates the tendency for androgen independence and progression of prostate 
cancer. However, the association between the progression and AR expression or 
mutations is still controversial. In this study, we evaluated the prognostic 
significance of AR expression and mutations in prostate cancers.
METHODS: Forty-two prostate adenocarcinomas and three lymph node metastatic 
lesions sampled prior to hormonal therapy were included in this study; AR 
expression was analyzed immunohistochemically using an antibody against AR and 
the result was scored as the percentage of AR-positive tumor cells in the total 
tumor cells. Polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformational polymorphism 
(PCR-SSCP) analysis and DNA sequencing were used to detect AR mutations.
RESULTS: Our study revealed the average AR expression in the prostate 
adenocarcinoma was 52.2 +/- 27.1%, which was significantly lower than that in 
the adjacent non-tumorous prostate tissue (68.3 +/- 18.3% in average) (P < 
0.001). A significant correlation was obtained between progression-free survival 
and AR expression (P < 0.01). By SSCP analysis, three silent mutations (T649T, 
E709E and E711E) were detected in three separate prostate carcinomas.
CONCLUSION: : We conclude that AR expression is a useful prognostic indicator 
for tumor progression. Androgen receptor mutation may be an uncommon molecular 
event in untreated prostate cancer in Japanese men.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1442-2042.2002.00514.x
PMID: 12445232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]