1. Hypertension. 2003 Jan;41(1):25-30. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.0000047465.97065.15.

Angiotensinogen 235T allele "dosage" is associated with blood pressure 
phenotypes.

Pereira AC(1), Mota GF, Cunha RS, Herbenhoff FL, Mill JG, Krieger JE.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Cardiology, Heart Institute (InCor), 
University of São Paulo School of Medicine, São Paulo, Brazil.

The genetic mechanisms underlying interindividual blood pressure variation among 
humans may reflect, at least in part, clustering of functional gene variants 
belonging to complex blood pressure control systems. In this study, we 
investigated the association of specific functional gene variants of the 
renin-angiotensin system, ACE (I/D) and angiotensinogen (M/T) genes, with blood 
pressure phenotypes (systolic, mean, diastolic, and pulse pressure), in an 
ethnically mixed urban population in Brazil. Individuals (n=1421) were randomly 
selected from the general population of the Vitoria City Metropolitan area. 
Neither gender, age, smoking status, total cholesterol, triglycerides, 
HDL-cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, VLDL-cholesterol, or diabetes was associated 
with ACE or AGT polymorphism in univariate analysis. No association was found 
between ACE variants and blood pressure phenotypes. However, a statistically 
significant association was revealed between the AGT 235T variant and all blood 
pressure phenotypes, consistent with an additive/codominant mode of action even 
after adjustment for age and gender (P<0.01). Genotypic analysis contemplating 
both ACE and AGT variants in the same model did not show any significant 
interaction between both genetic polymorphisms. In addition, the AGT 235T allele 
was significantly associated with hypertension in a recessive model, which 
remained as an independent risk factor for hypertension even after adjustment 
for age, gender, and ethnicity (OR, 1.33; 95% CI, 1.04 to 1.70). Taken together, 
these data indicate a linear relation between AGT 235T allele number ("dosage") 
and blood pressure in an ethnically mixed urban population and confirmed its 
role as an independent risk factor for hypertension for men and women when in 
homozygosity.

DOI: 10.1161/01.hyp.0000047465.97065.15
PMID: 12511525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]