1. Immunogenetics. 2003 Feb;54(11):747-55. doi: 10.1007/s00251-002-0521-1. Epub 
2003 Jan 16.

Novel mutations in the RFXANK gene: RFX complex containing in-vitro-generated 
RFXANK mutant binds the promoter without transactivating MHC II.

Wiszniewski W(1), Fondaneche MC, Louise-Plence P, Prochnicka-Chalufour A, Selz 
F, Picard C, Le Deist F, Eliaou JF, Fischer A, Lisowska-Grospierre B.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U 429, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. 
wojtekw@imid.med.pl

MHC class II deficiency is a combined immunodeficiency caused by defects in the 
four regulatory factors, CIITA, RFXANK, RFX5 and RFXAP, that control MHC II 
expression at the transcriptional level. The RFXANK gene encodes one subunit of 
the heterotrimeric RFX complex that is involved in the assembly of several 
transcription factors on MHC II promoters. Seven different RFXANK mutations have 
previously been reported in 26 unrelated patients. The most frequent mutation, a 
26-bp deletion (752delG-25), has been identified in 21 patients. The other 
mutations are all nonsense or splice-site mutations, leading to proteins lacking 
all or part of the RFXANK ankyrin repeat region. We report two novel missense 
mutations, D121V and R212X, resulting in loss of function of the gene. We 
investigated the in vivo effects of these mutations and of three other point 
mutations on the expression of the RFXANK RNA and protein. The number of RFXANK 
transcripts was severely reduced in all patients except one. The RFXANK protein 
was barely detected in two cases. In addition, guided by a structural model of 
RFXANK, we investigated experimental mutants of the C-terminal tyrosine 224. 
Substitution Y224A, but not Y224F, led to the loss of function of RFXANK. Two 
null mutants, D121V and Y224A, were tested in protein interaction and DNA 
binding assays. The D121V mutant was unable to form the RFX complex, indicating 
that D121 is required for RFXAP binding. The Y224A mutant formed an RFX complex 
that bound normally to the MHC II promoter, but did not lead to MHC class II 
expression, whereas Y224F RFXANK retained the wild-type function. This indicates 
that an aromatic ring, but not the phenyl chain of tyrosine, is necessary at 
position 224 for normal RFXANK function. Studies on the Y224A mutant suggest 
that, in addition to the RFX subunits and CIITA, another protein is essential 
for MHC class II expression. This protein appears to interact with the fourth 
ankyrin repeat of RFXANK.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-002-0521-1
PMID: 12618906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]