1. Biochemistry. 2003 Apr 8;42(13):3766-76. doi: 10.1021/bi027257p.

The high-resolution structure of 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate 
synthase reveals a twist in the plane of bound phosphoenolpyruvate.

Shumilin IA(1), Bauerle R, Kretsinger RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
22903-2477, USA.

3-Deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate synthase (DAHPS), the first enzyme 
of the aromatic biosynthetic pathway in microorganisms and plants, catalyzes the 
aldol-like condensation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and D-erythrose 4-phosphate 
(E4P) with the formation of DAHP. The native and the 
selenomethionine-substituted forms of the phenylalanine-regulated isozyme 
[DAHPS(Phe)] from Escherichia coli were crystallized in complex with PEP and a 
metal cofactor, Mn(2+), but the crystals displayed disorder in their unit cells, 
preventing satisfactory refinement. However, the crystal structure of the E24Q 
mutant form of DAHPS(Phe) in complex with PEP and Mn(2+) has been determined at 
1.75 A resolution. Unlike the tetrameric wild-type enzyme, the E24Q enzyme is 
dimeric in solution, as a result of the mutational perturbation of four 
intersubunit salt bridges that are critical for tetramer formation. The protein 
chain conformation and subunit arrangement in the crystals of E24Q and wild-type 
DAHPS are very similar. However, the interaction of Mn(2+) and PEP in the 
enzymatically active E24Q mutant complex differs from the Pb(2+)-PEP and 
Mn(2+)-phosphoglycolate interactions in two enzymatically inactive wild-type 
complexes whose structures have been determined previously. The geometry of PEP 
bound in the active site of the E24Q enzyme deviates from planarity due to a 30 
degrees twist of the carboxylate plane relative to the enol plane. In addition, 
seven water molecules are within contact distance of PEP, two of which are close 
enough to its C2 atom to serve as the nucleophile required in the reaction.

DOI: 10.1021/bi027257p
PMID: 12667068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]