1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 13;278(24):22128-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M213149200. Epub 
2003 Mar 31.

Transcription factor GATA-4 is activated by phosphorylation of serine 261 via 
the cAMP/protein kinase a signaling pathway in gonadal cells.

Tremblay JJ(1), Viger RS.

Author information:
(1)Ontogeny and Reproduction Research Unit, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université 
Laval Research Centre and Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction, 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Université Laval, Ste-Foy, Québec G1V 
4G2, Canada.

Gonadal gene expression is regulated by pituitary hormones acting through the 
cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA) signal transduction pathway. The downstream 
molecular effectors of these signals, however, have yet to be fully understood. 
We have recently shown that cAMP stimulation of gonadal cells leads to 
phosphorylation of the transcription factor GATA-4, a key regulator of gonadal 
gene expression, thus suggesting that this factor might be a novel target for 
the cAMP/PKA signaling pathway. We now show that the rapid phosphorylation of 
GATA-4 induced by cAMP in vivo can be blocked by a PKA-specific inhibitor but 
not by mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitors, indicating that GATA-4 is 
predominantly phosphorylated by PKA in response to cAMP in gonadal cells. In 
addition, using in vitro kinase assays, we show that PKA phosphorylation of 
GATA-4 occurs predominantly on an evolutionarily conserved serine residue 
located at position 261. Phosphorylation of GATA-4 Ser261 by PKA enhances its 
transcriptional activity on different gonadal promoters, an effect that was 
markedly reduced with a S261A mutant. Moreover, the S261A mutant blunted 
cAMP-induced promoter activity in gonadal cells. Finally, PKA-dependent 
phosphorylation of GATA-4 also led to enhanced recruitment of the CREB-binding 
protein coactivator. This recruitment and transcriptional cooperation were 
dramatically impaired with the S261A mutant. Thus, our results identify GATA-4 
as a novel downstream effector of cAMP/PKA signaling in gonadal cells, where 
phosphorylation of Ser261 and recruitment of CREB-binding protein likely 
represent a key mechanism for conveying the cAMP responsiveness of gonadal genes 
that lack classical cAMP regulatory elements.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M213149200
PMID: 12670947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]