1. Exp Dermatol. 2003 Apr;12(2):191-7. doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0625.2003.120210.x.

Divergent effects of two sequence variants of GJB3 (G12D and R32W) on the 
function of connexin 31 in vitro.

Rouan F(1), Lo CW, Fertala A, Wahl M, Jost M, Rodeck U, Uitto J, Richard G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College, 
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. fatima.rouan@mail.tju.edu

Recently, we identified several missense mutations of the connexin gene GJB3 
encoding connexin 31 (Cx31) in erythrokeratodermia variabilis (EKV), an 
autosomal dominant skin disorder. These mutations include G12D, which replaces a 
conserved glycine residue in the amino-terminus of Cx31 and is associated with a 
severe EKV phenotype. In contrast, the biologic relevance of the GJB3 sequence 
variant R32W located in the first transmembrane domain of Cx31 is disputed. To 
examine the effects of these sequence variants on Cx31 biogenesis and gap 
junction activity we expressed wild type and mutant Cx31-Flag constructs in HeLa 
cells. Using immunostaining, all expression variants were detected in the 
cytoplasm and in a punctate pattern at the cell surface, indicating that G12D 
and R32W did not interfere with either protein synthesis or transport to the 
cell membrane. Similarly, oligomerization into hemichannels appeared not 
impaired when expressing either Cx31 mutant as assessed by size exclusion 
chromatography, immunoblotting and immunostaining. However, dye transfer 
experiments and monitoring of intracellular calcium levels in response to serum 
stimulation revealed that G12D-Cx31 did not form functional gap junction 
channels, probably due to incorrect assembly or altered properties of Cx31 
channels. In contrast, intercellular coupling between cells expressing R32W-Cx31 
was comparable to that of wtCx31, suggesting that R32W is a functionally 
inconsequential polymorphism of Cx31.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0625.2003.120210.x
PMID: 12702148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]