1. Blood. 2003 Aug 15;102(4):1316-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2003-01-0116. Epub 2003 
Apr 24.

Factor V New Brunswick: Ala221Val associated with FV deficiency reproduced in 
vitro and functionally characterized.

Steen M(1), Miteva M, Villoutreix BO, Yamazaki T, Dahlbäck B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Chemistry, Lund 
University, The Wallenberg Laboratory, University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

Factor V (FV) deficiency, also known as parahemophilia, is a rare bleeding 
disorder. Herein we investigate the first reported missense mutation associated 
with FV deficiency, Ala221Val, assigned as FV New Brunswick. To elucidate the 
molecular pathology associated with the Ala221Val substitution, the mutation was 
recreated in a recombinant system together with 3 FV mutants (Ala221Gly, 
Glu275Gln, and Cys220Ala/Cys301Ala) designed to help explain the Ala221Val 
phenotype. The expression pattern was analyzed by pulse-chase experiments and an 
FV-specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), the results suggesting 
the Ala221Val mutation not to interfere with the synthesis or secretion. The 
functional properties of the recombinant FV New Brunswick were evaluated in both 
plasma clotting and purified systems. The Ala221Val mutation did not affect the 
factor Xa (FXa) cofactor function; nor did it interfere with the activated 
protein C (APC)-mediated down-regulation of activated FV (FVa) activity. 
However, FV New Brunswick demonstrated reduced stability at 37 degrees C due to 
an increased rate of dissociation of light and heavy chains of FVa. In 
conclusion, this in vitro study of FV New Brunswick suggests the Ala221Val 
mutation not to impair synthesis and expression of procoagulant activity, 
indicating overall proper folding of the mutant molecule. Rather, the Ala221Val 
substitution appears to interfere with the stability of the activated FVa 
mutant, the reduced stability possibly explaining the deficiency symptoms 
associated with the mutation.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2003-01-0116
PMID: 12714495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]