1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):26580-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M212813200. Epub
2003  May 5.

Missense, nonsense, and neutral mutations define juxtaposed regulatory elements 
of splicing in cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator exon 9.

Pagani F(1), Buratti E, Stuani C, Baralle FE.

Author information:
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Padriciano 
99, Trieste 34012, Italy.

Exonic sequence variations may induce exon inclusion or exclusion from the 
mature mRNA by disrupting exonic regulatory elements and/or by affecting a 
nuclear reading frame scanning mechanism. We have carried out a systematic study 
of the effect on cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator exon 9 splicing of 
natural and site-directed sequence mutations. We have observed that changes in 
the splicing pattern were not related to the creation of premature termination 
codons, a fact that indicates the lack of a significant nuclear check of the 
reading frame in this system. In addition, the splice pattern could not be 
predicted by available Ser/Arg protein matrices score analysis. An extensive 
site-directed mutagenesis of the 3' portion of the exon has identified two 
juxtaposed splicing enhancer and silencer elements. The study of double mutants 
at these regulatory elements showed a complex regulatory activity. For example, 
one natural mutation (146C) enhances exon inclusion and overrides all of the 
downstream silencing mutations except for a C to G transversion (155G). This 
unusual effect is explained by the creation of a specific binding site for the 
inhibitory splicing factor hnRNPH. In fact, on the double mutant 146C-155G, the 
silencing effect is dominant. These results indicate a strict dependence between 
the two juxtaposed enhancer and silencer sequences and show that many point 
mutations in these elements cause changes in splicing efficiency by different 
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M212813200
PMID: 12732620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]