1. Biophys J. 2003 Jun;84(6):3717-29. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3495(03)75100-5.

Contribution of cytosolic cysteine residues to the gating properties of the 
Kir2.1 inward rectifier.

Garneau L(1), Klein H, Parent L, Sauvé R.

Author information:
(1)Département de physiologie, Groupe de recherche en transport membranaire, 
Faculté de médecine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3J7.

The topological model proposed for the Kir2.1 inward rectifier predicts that 
seven of the channel 13 cysteine residues are distributed along the N- and 
C-terminus regions, with some of the residues comprised within highly conserved 
domains involved in channel gating. To determine if cytosolic cysteine residues 
contribute to the gating properties of Kir2.1, each of the N- and C-terminus 
cysteines was mutated into either a polar (S, D, N), an aliphatic (A,V, L), or 
an aromatic (W) residue. Our patch-clamp measurements show that with the 
exception of C76 and C311, the mutation of individual cytosolic cysteine to 
serine (S) did not significantly affect the single-channel conductance nor the 
channel open probability. However, mutating C76 to a charged or polar residue 
resulted either in an absence of channel activity or a decrease in open 
probability. In turn, the mutations C311S (polar), C311R (charged), and to a 
lesser degree C311A (aliphatic) led to an increase of the channel mean closed 
time due to the appearance of long closed time intervals (T(c) >or= 500 ms) and 
to a reduction of the reactivation by ATP of rundown Kir2.1 channels. These 
changes could be correlated with a weakening of the interaction between Kir2.1 
and PIP(2), with C311R and C311S being more potent at modulating the 
Kir2.1-PIP(2) interaction than C311A. The present work supports, therefore, 
molecular models whereby the gating properties of Kir2.1 depend on the presence 
of nonpolar or neutral residues at positions 76 and 311, with C311 modulating 
the interaction between Kir2.1 and PIP(2).

DOI: 10.1016/S0006-3495(03)75100-5
PMCID: PMC1302954
PMID: 12770878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]