1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003 Sep 15;168(6):628-32. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.200303-447OC. Epub 2003 May 28.

The role of innate immunity in acute allograft rejection after lung 
transplantation.

Palmer SM(1), Burch LH, Davis RD, Herczyk WF, Howell DN, Reinsmoen NL, Schwartz 
DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. 
Palme002@mc.duke.edu

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003 Sep 15;168(6):623-4. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.2306023.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Apr 15;169(8):971; author reply 971-2. doi: 
10.1164/ajrccm.169.8.953.

Although innate immunity is crucial to pulmonary host defense and can initiate 
immune and inflammatory responses independent of adaptive immunity, it remains 
unstudied in the context of transplant rejection. To investigate the role of 
innate immunity in the development of allograft rejection, we assessed the 
impact of two functional polymorphisms in the toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) 
associated with endotoxin hyporesponsiveness on the development of acute 
rejection after human lung transplantation. Patients and donors were screened 
for the TLR4 Asp299Gly and Thr399Ile polymorphisms by polymerase chain reaction 
using sequence-specific primers. The rate of acute rejection at 6 months was 
significantly reduced in recipients, but not in donors, with the Asp299Gly or 
Thr399Ile alleles as compared with wild type (29 vs. 56%, respectively, p = 
0.05). This association was confirmed in Cox proportional hazards and 
multivariate logistic regression models. Our results suggest activation of 
innate immunity in lung transplant recipients through TLR4 contributes to the 
development acute rejection after lung transplantation. Therapies directed at 
inhibition of innate immune responses mediated by TLR4 may represent a novel and 
effective means to prevent acute rejection after lung transplantation.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200303-447OC
PMID: 12773319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]