1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003 Jul;14(7):1889-96. doi: 
10.1097/01.asn.0000073901.94759.36.

Association of the multidrug resistance-1 gene single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
with the tacrolimus dose requirements in renal transplant recipients.

Anglicheau D(1), Verstuyft C, Laurent-Puig P, Becquemont L, Schlageter MH, 
Cassinat B, Beaune P, Legendre C, Thervet E.

Author information:
(1)Unité INSERM UMR S490, Molecular Toxicology, Centre universitaire des 
Saints-Pères, Université René Descartes, 45 rue des Saints-Peres, 75006 Paris, 
France. Dany.Anglicheau@biomedicale. univ-paris5.fr

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003 Jul;14(7):1955-7. doi: 
10.1097/01.asn.0000077400.34445.cf.

The immunosuppressive drug tacrolimus, whose pharmacokinetic characteristics 
display large interindividual variations, is a substrate for P-glycoprotein 
(P-gp), the product of the multidrug resistance-1 (MDR1) gene. Some of the 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of MDR1 reported correlated with the in 
vivo activity of P-gp. Because P-gp is known to control tacrolimus intestinal 
absorption, it was postulated that these polymorphisms are associated with 
tacrolimus pharmacokinetic variations in renal transplant recipients. The 
objective of this study was to evaluate in a retrospective study of 81 renal 
transplant recipients the effect on tacrolimus dosages and concentration/dose 
ratio of four frequent MDR1 SNP possibly associated with P-gp function (T-129C 
in exon 1b, 1236C>T in exon 12, 2677G>T,A in exon 21, and 3435C>T in exon 26). 
As in the general population, the SNP in exons 12, 21, and 26 were frequent (16, 
17.3, and 22.2% for the variant homozygous genotype, respectively) and exhibited 
incomplete linkage disequilibrium. One month after tacrolimus introduction, exon 
21 SNP correlated significantly with the daily tacrolimus dose (P < or = 0.05) 
and the concentration/dose ratio (P < or = 0.02). Tacrolimus dose requirements 
were 40% higher in homozygous than wild-type patients for this SNP. The 
concentration/dose ratio was 36% lower in the wild-type patients, suggesting 
that, for a given dose, their tacrolimus blood concentration is lower. Haplotype 
analysis substantiated these results and suggested that exons 26 and 21 SNP may 
be associated with tacrolimus dose requirements. Genotype monitoring of the MDR1 
gene reliably predicts the optimal dose of tacrolimus in renal transplant 
recipients and may predict the initial daily dose needed by individual patients 
to obtain adequate immunosuppression.

DOI: 10.1097/01.asn.0000073901.94759.36
PMID: 12819250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]