1. Mol Genet Metab. 2003 Jul;79(3):201-13. doi: 10.1016/s1096-7192(03)00093-3.

Interaction between common folate polymorphisms and B-vitamin nutritional status 
modulates homocysteine and risk for a thrombotic event.

Yates Z(1), Lucock M.

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Paediatrics and Obstetrics and Gynaecology, D Floor, 
Clarendon Wing, Leeds General Infirmary, University of Leeds, Leeds, West 
Yorkshire LS2 9NS, UK.

We have assessed the relationship between homocysteine, its thiol metabolites, 
specific folate coenzymes, and vitamin B12 according to the two main 
functionally relevant genotype-genotype categories that maintain the balance 
between homocysteine transsulphuration to cysteine, and homocysteine 
remethylation via folate dependent methionine biosynthesis, namely 
2756A-->G-MS/66A-->G-MSR and 677C-->T-MTHFR/1298A-->C-MTHFR. We examined 152 
individuals who were being treated for either thromboembolic (TE) or 
non-thromboembolic (non-TE) events. Chi2 test for linear trend in odds ratio 
provides reasonable evidence for an altered risk of thromboembolism within the 
range of compound MS/MSR genotypes encountered (wt/wt-->recessive/recessive) (p< 
or =0.05), but not within the same range of MTHFR/MTHFR genotypes. Logistic 
regression analysis of the risk for a TE event gave OR=0.49 (95% CI, 0.26-0.92; 
p=0.026) for 2756A-->G-MS, OR=1.08 (95% CI, 0.65-1.78) for 66A-->G-MSR, OR=1.19 
(95% CI, 0.69-2.06) for 677C-->T-MTHFR and OR=0.98 (95% CI, 0.52-1.85) for 
1298A-->C-MTHFR. When genotypes were examined individually, one-way ANOVA showed 
only 677C-->T-MTHFR (p=0.005 [TE]) and 2756A-->G-MS (p=0.005 [non-TE] and 
p=0.0006 [all subjects]) influence homocysteine. One-way ANOVA also showed that 
MTHFR/MTHFR compound genotype significantly influences TE homocysteine 
distribution (p=0.044), but no other variable. In MS/MSR, homocysteine 
distribution is not significantly affected in TE subjects, but approaches 
significance in non-TE individuals (p=0.062). However, the increased power 
obtained when all subjects are analysed demonstrates a significant influence of 
MS/MSR upon homocysteine distribution (p=0.008). Other significant influences of 
MS/MSR were on total cellular 5-methyl-H4folate in non-TE subjects (p=0.042) and 
vitamin B12 in TE subjects (p=0.018). Given the central role of vitamin B12 in 
MS/MSR activity, 5-methyl-H4folate and homocysteine were also looked at by 
vitamin B12 quartile, independent of genotype: Vitamin B12 quartile 
significantly affected homocysteine distribution in TE (p=0.013) but not non-TE 
individuals, with no effect on 5-methyl-H4folate distributions. Similarly, the 
prevalence of clinical phenotypes (p=0.013) and of 'high risk' 2756A-->G-MS 
wildtypes (p=0.039) was associated with the disposition of homocysteine/B12 in 
TE but not non-TE subjects. Overall, results indicate compound MS/MSR genotype 
is associated with risk for a TE event. This may be related to variation in 
activity of the functional enzymes coded for by polymorphic forms of compound 
MS/MSR, resulting in altered catalytic cycling of methylcobalamin/cob(I)alamin, 
which in turn influences Hcy (and total 5-methyl-H4folate). The effect on 
vitamin B12 is greater in TE than non-TE subjects. The compound MTHFR/MTHFR 
genotype also influences variation in Hcy in TE subjects, but seemingly without 
the same level of mediation by vitamin B12. These results are consistent with 
accepted paradigms and offer a plausible explanation for the effect and 
interaction of specific SNPs in the TE phenotype. The biological implications of 
the limited number of MTHFR/MTHFR mutant alleles that can coexist, usually no 
more than two, may be explained by the serious consequences to folate status 
that these genotype combinations precipitate. We show that lowering of all 
folate 1-C pools occurs in the rare ct/cc compound genotype, except for the 
5,10-methenyl-H4folate pool, which expands. 5,10-methenyl-H4folate is the 
immediate product of 5,10-methylene-H4folate, which is likely diverted away from 
methionine biosynthesis via the aberrant MTHFR enzyme. Consequences for the 
methylation cycle may be severe, and in most cases lethal for the developing 
embryo, where methylation is required for dozens of critical processes, but 
particularly for maintaining DNA methylation patterns that are now known to 
regulate the expression of half the complement of human genes via CpG islands 
located in the 5' promotor region, or within the first few exons of the gene.

DOI: 10.1016/s1096-7192(03)00093-3
PMID: 12855226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]