1. Neuropharmacology. 2003 Sep;45(3):345-54. doi: 10.1016/s0028-3908(03)00167-9.

The mouse Chrna4 A529T polymorphism alters the ratio of high to low affinity 
alpha 4 beta 2 nAChRs.

Kim H(1), Flanagin BA, Qin C, Macdonald RL, Stitzel JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109-0316, USA.

Previously, a missense polymorphism was identified in the mouse nicotinic 
receptor alpha4 subunit gene, Chrna4. This polymorphism leads to an Ala/Thr 
variation at amino acid position 529 of the alpha4 subunit. Chrna4 A529T is 
associated with several measures of acute sensitivity to nicotine as well as 
with mouse strain differences in nicotine-stimulated (86)Rb(+) efflux from 
synaptosomes. Here, we report that the variant forms of the mouse alpha4 subunit 
confer functional differences when expressed with the beta2 subunit in a 
heterologous system. alpha4beta2 receptors containing the T529 variant of the 
alpha4 subunit exhibited a higher EC(50) value for the high affinity receptor 
population and an apparent reduced sensitivity to blockade by DHbetaE relative 
to alpha4beta2 receptors containing the A529 variant of the alpha4 subunit. 
Moreover, the proportion of the total agonist-elicited current contributed by 
the high affinity alpha4beta2 receptor population was greater for alpha4beta2 
receptors containing the alpha4(T529) variant (64%) than the alpha4beta2 
receptors containing the alpha4(A529) variant (41%). These data suggest that the 
polymorphism in the mouse alpha4 subunit is located in a previously unidentified 
functional domain of the receptor subunit that influences receptor function, 
including regulation of the affinity population ratio of alpha4beta2 receptors.

DOI: 10.1016/s0028-3908(03)00167-9
PMID: 12871652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]