1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 31;278(44):43797-806. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306199200. Epub 
2003 Aug 12.

Molecular determinants of the balance between co-repressor and co-activator 
recruitment to the retinoic acid receptor.

Benko S(1), Love JD, Bel√°di M, Schwabe JW, Nagy L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Research Center for 
Molecular Medicine, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science Center, 
Nagyerdei krt. 98, Debrecen H-4012, Hungary.

The repressive and activating states of nuclear hormone receptors are achieved 
through the recruitment of cofactor proteins. The binding of co-repressors and 
co-activators is believed to be mutually exclusive and principally regulated by 
ligand binding. To understand the molecular determinants of the switch induced 
by ligand in the retinoic acid receptor and in particular the intrinsic role of 
the ligand binding domain (LBD) in cofactor binding and release, we carried out 
extensive mutational analysis of surface residues of the LBD. As seen previously 
we found that co-repressor and co-activator molecules bind to overlapping 
docking sites on the surface of the retinoic acid receptor alpha LBD. 
Perturbation of this surface impaired both co-activator and co-repressor 
association resulting in a transcriptionally inert receptor. Unexpectedly 
mutation of two residues, Trp-225 and Ala-392, which lie outside the docking 
site, had opposite effects on co-activator and co-repressor binding. W225A was a 
constitutive repressor that failed to bind co-activator and exhibited an 
increased, and ligand-insensitive, interaction with co-repressor. A392R, on the 
other hand, had reduced affinity for co-repressors and increased affinity for 
co-activators and behaved as a constitutive, but still ligand-inducible, 
activator. Analysis of known structures showed that these mutations lie in the 
proximity of helix 12 (H12), and their effects are likely to be the result of 
perturbations in the behavior of H12. These data suggest that residues in the 
close vicinity of H12 regulate cofactor affinity and determine the basal 
activity of receptors.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M306199200
PMID: 12917445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]