1. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Sep;64(3):741-52. doi: 10.1124/mol.64.3.741.

Altered gating and local anesthetic block mediated by residues in the I-S6 and 
II-S6 transmembrane segments of voltage-dependent Na+ channels.

Kondratiev A(1), Tomaselli GF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

The cytoplasmic side of the voltage-dependent Na+ channel pore is putatively 
formed by the S6 segments of domains I to IV. The role of amino acid residues of 
I-S6 and II-S6 in channel gating and local anesthetic (LA) block was 
investigated using the cysteine scanning mutagenesis of the rat skeletal muscle 
Na+ channel (Nav1.4). G428C uniquely reduced sensitivity to rested state or 
first-pulse block by lidocaine without alterations in the voltage dependence or 
kinetics of gating that would otherwise account for the increase in the IC50 for 
block. Mutations in I-S6 (N434C and I436C) and in II-S6 (L785C and V787C) 
increased sensitivity to first-pulse block by lidocaine. Enhanced inactivation 
accounted for the increased sensitivity of N434C to lidocaine and hastening of 
inactivation of I436C in the absence of drug could account for higher affinity 
first-pulse block. Mutations in I-S6 (I424C, I425C, and F430C) and in II-S6 
(I782C and V786C) reduced the use-dependent lidocaine block. The reduction in 
use-dependent block of F430C was consistent with alterations in inactivation 
gating; the other mutants did not exhibit gating changes that could explain the 
reduced sensitivity to lidocaine. Therefore, several amino acids (I424, I425, 
G428, I782, and V786), in addition to those previously identified (Yarov-Yarovoy 
et al., 2002), alter the sensitivity of Nav1.4 to lidocaine, independent of 
mutation-induced changes in gating. The magnitude of the change in the IC50 
values, the isoform, and LA dependence of the changes in affinity suggest that 
the determinants of binding in I-S6 and II-S6 are subsidiary to those in IV-S6.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.64.3.741
PMID: 12920212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]