1. Biochem J. 2003 Nov 15;376(Pt 1):147-57. doi: 10.1042/BJ20031160.

Regulation of interleukin-3-induced substrate phosphorylation and cell survival 
by SHP-2 (Src-homology protein tyrosine phosphatase 2).

Wheadon H(1), Edmead C, Welham MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, 
UK. m.j.welham@bath.ac.uk

The cytosolic SHP-2 (Src homology protein tyrosine phosphatase 2) has previously 
been implicated in IL-3 (interleukin-3) signalling [Bone, Dechert, Jirik, 
Schrader and Welham (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 14470 -14476; Craddock and Welham 
(1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 29281-29289; Welham, Dechert, Leslie, Jirik and 
Schrader (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 23764-23768; Qu, Nguyen, Chen and Feng 
(2001) Blood 97, 911-914]. To investigate the role of SHP-2 in IL-3 signalling 
in greater detail, we have inducibly expressed WT (wild-type) or two potentially 
substrate-trapping mutant forms of SHP-2, generated by mutation of Asp-425 to 
Ala (D425A) or Cyst-459 to Ser (C459S), in IL-3-dependent BaF/3 cells. Effects 
on IL-3-induced tyrosine phosphorylation, signal transduction and functional 
responses were examined. Expression of C459S SHP-2 protected the beta-chain of 
the murine IL-3R (IL-3 receptor), the adaptor protein Gab2 (Grb2-associated 
binder 2), and a cytosolic protein of 48 kDa from tyrosine dephosphorylation, 
consistent with them being bona fide substrates of SHP-2 in IL-3 signalling. The 
tyrosine phosphorylation of a 135 kDa transmembrane protein was also protected 
upon expression of C459S SHP-2. We have identified the inhibitory immunoreceptor 
PECAM-1 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1)/CD31 (cluster 
determinant 31) as a component of this 135 kDa substrate and also show that IL-3 
can induce tyrosine phosphorylation of PECAM-1. Expression of WT, C459S and 
D425A forms of SHP-2 had little effect on IL-3-driven proliferation or STAT5 
(signal transduction and activators of transcription) phosphorylation or 
activation of protein kinase B. However, expression of WT SHP-2 increased ERK 
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) activation. Interestingly, expression of 
C459S SHP-2 decreased ERK activation at later times after IL-3 stimulation, but 
potentiated IL-3-induced activation of Jun N-terminal kinases. In addition, 
expression of C459S SHP-2 decreased cell survival in suboptimal IL-3 and upon 
IL-3 withdrawal. These findings indicate that SHP-2 plays an important role in 
mediating the anti-apoptotic effect of IL-3 and raises the possibility that 
PECAM-1 participates in the modulation of cytokine-induced signals.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20031160
PMCID: PMC1223759
PMID: 12935294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]