1. Thyroid. 2003 Jun;13(6):553-9. doi: 10.1089/105072503322238818.

Congenital secondary hypothyroidism due to a mutation C105Vfs114X 
thyrotropin-beta mutation: genetic study of five unrelated families from 
Switzerland and Argentina.

Deladoëy J(1), Vuissoz JM, Domené HM, Malik N, Gruneiro-Papendieck L, Chiesa A, 
Heinrich JJ, Mullis PE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, University Children's Hospital, Bern, 
Switzerland.

We identified five patients with congenital secondary hypothyroidism with 
isolated thyrotropin (TSH) deficiency originating from three and two unrelated 
Argentinean and Swiss families, respectively. The affected patients presented 
with both low TSH as well as low thyroid hormone levels. Further, TSH-releasing 
hormone (TRH) stimulation failed to increase serum TSH, whereas prolactin 
increased adequately. These affected children were homozygous for a 1-bp 
deletion (822delT) in the TSH-beta subunit gene leading to a cysteine 105 to 
valine conversion (C105V) and to a frameshift with a premature stop codon at 
position 114 (C105Vfs114X). In a total of 22 families five different mutations 
located within the coding region of the TSH-beta subunit gene responsible for 
congenital secondary hypothyroidism have been reported so far (E12X; G29R; Q49X; 
IVS2 +5, G --> A; C105Vfs114X). Importantly, out of 13 families, including our 
five families, the C105Vfs114X mutation has been described in 12 unrelated and 
non-consanguineous families, whereas the remaining four TSH-beta subunit gene 
mutations have been described in consanguineous families only. Therefore the 
C105Vfs114X mutation within the TSH-beta subunit gene is the most frequent 
alteration causing congenital secondary hypothyroidism (13 of 22; 59%) and 
occurs mainly in unrelated and non-consanguineous families (12 of 13; 92%). As 
we could exclude a common ancestry by microsatellite marker analysis in our five 
independent families we concluded that the codon 105 in the TSH-beta subunit 
gene might be a "hot spot," although a founder effect has been reported in 
certain cases clustered in a highly specific and restricted geographical area.

DOI: 10.1089/105072503322238818
PMID: 12930599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]