1. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2003 Jun;14(4):401-5. doi: 
10.1097/00001721-200306000-00012.

A novel type I factor X variant (factor X Cys350Phe) due to loss of a disulfide 
bond in the catalytic domain.

Vianello F(1), Lombardi AM, Bello FD, Pal√π G, Zanon E, Girolami A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Second Chair of Medicine, via 
Ospedale 105, University of Padua Medical School, Padua, Italy. fabvian@unipd.it

We report a novel mutation within the coagulation factor X (FX) that we have 
designated FX Padua 4. The phenotype and genotype of the proband and family 
members were studied. The proband was a child affected by a complex neurological 
syndrome who, after birth, experienced severe bleeding. The proband showed a 
laboratory pattern characterized by a severe reduction of FX activity and FX 
antigen, suggesting a true deficiency. Molecular analysis disclosed a new FX 
mutation localized in the catalytic domain responsible for a Cys350Phe 
substitution. The proband was homozygous for this mutation. The proband's mother 
and father showed a heterozygous pattern and had approximately one-half the 
normal FX activity and FX antigen. Residual purified FX Cys350Phe had an 
identical behavior to normal FX as showed by sodium dodecyl 
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Molecular modeling confirms that the 
mutation leads to the disruption of a disulfide bridge in the catalytic region 
of FX. Comparison with other topologically equivalent mutations in other vitamin 
K-dependent proteins suggests that this disruption could adversely affect 
protein folding/stability, accounting for the cross-reactive material negative 
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1097/00001721-200306000-00012
PMID: 12945883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]