1. Int J Cancer. 2003 Nov 20;107(4):652-7. doi: 10.1002/ijc.11432.

Interactions between genetic polymorphism of cytochrome P450-1B1, 
sulfotransferase 1A1, catechol-o-methyltransferase and tobacco exposure in 
breast cancer risk.

Saintot M(1), Malaveille C, Hautefeuille A, Gerber M.

Author information:
(1)Groupe d'Epidémiologie Métabolique, INSERM-CRLC, Montpellier, France.

Genetic polymorphisms of enzymes involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics and 
estrogens might play a role in breast carcinogenesis related to environmental 
exposures. In a case-only study on 282 women with breast cancer, we studied the 
interaction effects (ORi) between smoking habits and the gene polymorphisms of 
Cytochrome P450 1B1 (Val432Leu CYP1B1), Phenol-sulfotransferase 1A1 (Arg213His 
SULT1A1) and Catechol-O-methyltransferase (Val158Met COMT). The smokers carrying 
the Val CYP1B1 allele associated with a high hydroxylation activity had a higher 
risk of breast cancer than never smokers with the Leu/Leu genotype (ORi=2.32, 
95%CI: 1.00-5.38). Also, the smokers carrying the His SULT1A1 allele associated 
with a low sulfation activity had a 2-fold excess risk compared to never smokers 
carrying Arg/Arg SULT1A1 common genotype (ORi= 2.55, 95%CI: 1.21-5.36). The His 
SULT1A1 allele increased the risk only in premenopausal patients. The Met COMT 
allele with a lower methylation activity than Val COMT did not modify the risk 
among smokers. The excess risk due to joint effect could result from a higher 
exposure to activated tobacco-compounds for women homo/heterozygous for the Val 
CYP1B1 allele. Also, a lower sulfation of the tobacco carcinogens among women 
with His SULT1A1 could increase exposure to genotoxic compounds. Alternatively, 
the Val CYP1B1 or His SULT1A1 allele with modified ability to metabolize 
estrogens could increase the level of genotoxic catechol estrogen (i.e., 
4-hydroxy-estradiol) among smokers. Our study showed that gene polymorphisms of 
CYP1B1 and SULT1A1 induce an individual susceptibility to breast cancer among 
current smokers.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.11432
PMID: 14520706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]