1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Dec 1;12(23):3055-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg334. Epub 2003
Oct  7.

A frameshifting mutation in CHRNE unmasks skipping of the preceding exon.

Ohno K(1), Milone M, Shen XM, Engel AG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. ohnok@mayo.edu

A frameshifting 7 bp deletion (epsilon553del7) in exon 7 of CHRNE encoding the 
acetylcholine receptor epsilon subunit, observed in seven congenital myasthenic 
syndrome patients, enhances expression of an aberrantly spliced transcript that 
skips the preceding 101 bp exon 6. To recapitulate the aberrant splicing, we 
cloned the entire CHRNE spanning 12 exons and 11 introns and expressed it in COS 
cells. Scanning mutagenesis revealed that epsilon553del7 does not disrupt an 
exonic splicing enhancer. Inhibition of protein synthesis and of 
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) by anisomycin shows that even wild-type CHRNE 
produces an exon 6-skipped transcript, and that even epsilon553del7-CHRNE yields 
a normally spliced transcript. Both transcripts, however, are degraded by NMD 
due to a premature stop codon. In contrast, the normally spliced transcript from 
wild-type CHRNE and the exon 6-skipped transcript from epsilon553del7-CHRNE 
carry no premature stop codon and hence are immune to NMD. Optimization of 
splicing signals for exon 6 prevents it being skipped even in the presence of 
anisomycin and/or epsilon553del7, indicating that inherently weak splicing 
signals for exon 6 account for its skipping. We suggest that a similar mechanism 
probably operates in other genes in skipping of remote exons. The presence of 
weak splicing signals for exon 6 also prompted us to search for mutations in 
exon 6 that disrupt an exonic splicing enhancer. Indeed, we found that 
epsilonEF157V and epsilonE154X in exon 6, observed in two other patients, caused 
aberrant splicing of exon 6.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg334
PMID: 14532324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]