1. Clin Genet. 2003 Nov;64(5):433-8. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2003.00148.x.

Association of EDNRA, but not WNK4 or FKBP1B, polymorphisms with essential 
hypertension.

Benjafield AV(1), Katyk K, Morris BJ.

Author information:
(1)Basic & Clinical Genomics Laboratory, School of Medical Sciences and 
Institute of Biomedical Research, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.

In a study of the genetic basis of essential hypertension (HT), we tested four 
variants in three candidate genes not previously investigated in HT. These 
encoded the endothelin receptor type A (EDNRA), which transduces most of the 
vasoconstrictive properties of endothelin-1, protein kinase lysine deficient 4 
(WNK4) whose gene resides in a HT linkage region on chromosome 17, and 
FK506-binding protein 1B (FKBP1B), which can reduce blood pressure by increasing 
nitric oxide. The variants were: for EDNRA, a G-->A in the 5'-UTR and C-->T in 
exon 8; for WNK4, a tetranucleotide repeat in intron 10; and for FKBP1B, a T-->C 
in exon 4. Subjects were Anglo-Celtic white Australians and included 155 HTs 
with two HT parents and 245 normotensives (NTs) whose parents were both NT. For 
EDNRA, we found a weak association of the exon 8 variant with HT (p = 0.019) and 
association of the 5'-UTR variant with elevation in systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure (BP) (p = 0.038 and 0.0031, respectively). The WNK4 intron 10 variant 
and the FKP1B exon 4 variant showed no association with HT, but tracking with BP 
was seen for the latter (p = 0.015 and 0.0011 for systolic and diastolic BP, 
respectively). Our study thus suggests possible involvement of EDNRA in 
essential HT.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2003.00148.x
PMID: 14616768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]