1. Eur J Neurosci. 2003 Oct;18(7):1786-96. doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02907.x.

Characterization of the rat A2A adenosine receptor gene: a 4.8-kb 
promoter-proximal DNA fragment confers selective expression in the central 
nervous system.

Lee YC(1), Chien CL, Sun CN, Huang CL, Huang NK, Chiang MC, Lai HL, Lin YS, Chou 
SY, Wang CK, Tai MH, Liao WL, Lin TN, Liu FC, Chern Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

We isolated and characterized a 4.8-kb 5' flanking region of the rat A2A 
adenosine receptor (A2A-R) gene in the present study. Promoter activity was 
observed with this DNA fragment in PC12 cells and C6 cells which contain 
endogenous A2A-Rs. A fusion fragment consisting of the 4.8-kb promoter-proximal 
DNA fragment of the A2A-R gene, and the coding region of lacZ was utilized to 
produce mice harbouring the fusion gene. In three independent founder lines, 
proteins and transcripts of the transgene were found in many areas of the 
central nervous system (CNS), but not in three peripheral tissues examined. 
Double immunohistochemical analyses revealed that the transgene was coexpressed 
with endogenous A2A-R and proper neuronal markers in the brain. Specifically, 
the transgene in the striatum was found in the enkephalin-containing GABAergic 
neurons and in the cholinergic neurons as was found for the endogenous A2A-R. 
However, a selectively enriched striatal expression of the transgene was not 
found as was observed for the endogenous A2A-R. Collectively, the 4.8-kb 
promoter-proximal DNA fragment of the rat A2A-R gene contains important 
element(s) to direct its expression in the CNS where functional A2A-R are found, 
but were not sufficient to confer the highly concentrated expression of the 
striatal A2A-R. Furthermore, expressions of A2A-R and the transgene were found 
in both neurons and astrocytes, suggesting that adenosine might mediate its 
function through A2A-R in both cell types.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02907.x
PMID: 14622213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]