1. Biochemistry. 2003 Nov 25;42(46):13637-45. doi: 10.1021/bi035344r.

Elimination of the disulfide bridge in the Rieske iron-sulfur protein allows 
assembly of the [2Fe-2S] cluster into the Rieske protein but damages the 
ubiquinol oxidation site in the cytochrome bc1 complex.

Merbitz-Zahradnik T(1), Zwicker K, Nett JH, Link TA, Trumpower BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire 
03755, USA.

The [2Fe-2S] cluster of the Rieske iron-sulfur protein is held between two loops 
of the protein that are connected by a disulfide bridge. We have replaced the 
two cysteines that form the disulfide bridge in the Rieske protein of 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae with tyrosine and leucine, and tyrosine and valine, to 
evaluate the effects of the disulfide bridge on assembly, stability, and 
thermodynamic properties of the Rieske iron-sulfur cluster. EPR spectra of the 
Rieske proteins lacking the disulfide bridge indicate the iron-sulfur cluster is 
assembled in the absence of the disulfide bridge, but there are significant 
shifts in all g values, indicating a change in the electronic structure of the 
[2Fe-2S] iron-sulfur center. In addition, the midpoint potential of the 
iron-sulfur cluster is lowered from 265 mV in the Rieske protein from wild-type 
yeast to 150 mV in the protein from the C164Y/C180L mutant and to 160 mV in the 
protein from the C164Y/C180V mutant. Ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase activities 
of the bc(1) complexes with Rieske proteins lacking the disulfide bridge are 
less than 1% of the activity of the bc(1) complex from wild-type yeast, even 
though normal amounts of the iron-sulfur protein are present as judged by 
Western blot analysis. These activities are lower than the 105-115 mV decrease 
in the midpoint potential of the Rieske iron-sulfur cluster can account for. 
Pre-steady-state reduction of the bc(1) complexes with menadiol indicates that 
quinol is not oxidized through center P but is oxidized through center N. In 
addition, the levels of stigmatellin and UHDBT binding are markedly diminished, 
while antimycin binding is unaffected, in the bc(1) complexes with Rieske 
proteins lacking the disulfide bridge. Taken together, these results indicate 
that the ubiquinol oxidation site at center P is damaged in the bc(1) complexes 
with Rieske proteins lacking the disulfide bridge even though the iron-sulfur 
cluster is assembled into the Rieske protein.

DOI: 10.1021/bi035344r
PMID: 14622010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]