1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Oct 31;1617(1-2):96-108. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2003.09.007.

The F-G loop region of cytochrome P450scc (CYP11A1) interacts with the 
phospholipid membrane.

Headlam MJ(1), Wilce MC, Tuckey RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Biomedical and 
Chemical Sciences, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, 
Crawley, WA 6009, Australia.

Erratum in
    Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Mar 9;1661(2):219.

Cytochrome P450scc (CYP11A1) is a protein attached to the inner surface of the 
inner mitochondrial membrane that uses cholesterol from the membrane phase as 
its substrate for the first step in steroid hormone synthesis. We investigated 
the mechanism by which CYP11A1 interacts with the membrane. Hydrophobicity 
profiles of CYP11A1 and two other mitochondrial cytochromes P450, plus a model 
structure of CYP11A1 using CYP2C5 as template, suggest that CYP11A1 has a 
monotopic association with the membrane which may involve the A' helix and the 
F-G loop. Deletion of the A' helix reduced the proportion of expressed CYP11A1 
associated with the bacterial membrane fraction, indicating a role for the A' 
helix in membrane binding. However, introduction of a cysteine residue in this 
helix at position 24 (L24C) and subsequent labelling with the fluorescent probe 
N'-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxal,3-diazol-4-yl)ethylenediamine (NBD) failed to show a 
membrane localisation. Cysteine mutagenesis and fluorescent labelling of other 
residues appearing on the distal surface of the CYP11A1 model revealed that 
V212C and L219C have enhanced fluorescence and a blue shift following 
association of the mutant CYP11A1 with phospholipid vesicles. This indicates 
that these residues, which are located in the F-G loop, become localised to a 
more hydrophobic environment following membrane binding. Analysis of the 
quenching of tryptophan residues in CYP11A1 by acrylamide indicates that at 
least one and probably two tryptophans are involved in membrane binding. We 
conclude that CYP11A1 has a monotopic association with the membrane that is 
mediated, at least in part, by the F-G loop region.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2003.09.007
PMID: 14637024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]