1. Cell Tissue Res. 2004 Feb;315(2):249-57. doi: 10.1007/s00441-003-0834-x. Epub 
2003 Dec 2.

Gene expression profiling of mouse Sertoli cell lines.

Strothmann K(1), Simoni M, Mathur P, Siakhamary S, Nieschlag E, Gromoll J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Reproductive Medicine, Münster University, Domagkstrasse 11, 
48149 Münster, Germany.

The proliferation and differentiation of Sertoli cells is regulated by 
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). The molecular events following FSH 
stimulation are only partially known. To investigate FSH action in Sertoli 
cells, we established two novel FSH-responsive mouse Sertoli-cell-derived lines 
expressing human wild-type (WT) FSH receptor (FSHR) or overexpressing mutated 
(Asp567Gly) constitutively active FSHR (MUT). Gene expression profiling with 
commercially available cDNA arrays, including 588 mouse genes, revealed 146 
genes expressed in both cell lines. Compared with the expression pattern of WT 
cells, 20 genes were identified as being either up- or down-regulated 
(>two-fold) in the MUT cells. We observed a strong differential expression of 
factors involved in cellular proliferation, e.g. cyclin D2 (repressed to nearly 
undetectable levels), proliferating cell nuclear antigen (2.5-fold repression) 
and Eps-8 (six-fold repression), and in genes involved in cellular 
differentiation, e.g. cytokeratin-18 (13-fold induction). The cDNA array results 
for six representative genes were confirmed by Northern blotting, which also 
included the parental SK-11 cell line devoid of FSHR expression. We found no 
further acute FSH- or forskolin-induced change in expression levels after 3-h 
stimulations, suggesting that the observed differences between the two cell 
lines is a consequence of mild, chronically increased, cAMP production in MUT 
cells. These results provide a platform for the further investigation of 
selected candidate genes in primary cultures and/or in vivo.

DOI: 10.1007/s00441-003-0834-x
PMID: 14652734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]