1. Biochemistry. 2003 Dec 16;42(49):14460-8. doi: 10.1021/bi035408y.

Phosphorylation and mutation of human cardiac troponin I deferentially 
destabilize the interaction of the functional regions of troponin I with 
troponin C.

Li MX(1), Wang X, Lindhout DA, Buscemi N, Van Eyk JE, Sykes BD.

Author information:
(1)CIHR Group in Protein Structure and Function, Department of Biochemistry, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2H7.

We have utilized 2D [(1)H,(15)N]HSQC NMR spectroscopy to elucidate the binding 
of three segments of cTnI in native, phosphorylated, and mutated states to cTnC. 
The near N-terminal region (cRp; residues 34-71) contains the protein kinase C 
(PKC) phosphorylation sites S41 and S43, the inhibitory region (cIp; residues 
128-147) contains another PKC site T142 and a familial hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy (FHC) mutation R144G, and the switch region (cSp; residues 
147-163) contains the novel p21-activated kinase (PAK) site S149 and another FHC 
mutation R161W. While S41/S43 phosphorylation of cRp had minimal disruption in 
the interaction of cRp and cTnC.3Ca(2+), T142 phosphorylation reduced the 
affinity of cIp for cCTnC.2Ca(2+) by approximately 14-fold and S149 
phosphorylation reduced the affinity of cSp for cNTnC.Ca(2+) by approximately 
10-fold. The mutation R144G caused an approximately 6-fold affinity decrease of 
cIp for cCTnC.2Ca(2+) and mutation R161W destabilized the interaction of cSp and 
cNTnC.Ca(2+) by approximately 1.4-fold. When cIp was both T142 phosphorylated 
and R144G mutated, its affinity for cCTnC.2Ca(2+) was reduced approximately 
19-fold, and when cSp was both S149 phosphorylated and R161W mutated, its 
affinity for cNTnC.Ca(2+) was reduced approximately 4-fold. Thus, while the FHC 
mutation R144G enhances the effect of T142 phosphorylation on the interaction of 
cIp and cCTnC.2Ca(2+), the FHC mutation R161W suppresses the effect of S149 
phosphorylation on the interaction of cSp and cNTnC.Ca(2+), demonstrating 
linkages between the FHC mutation and phosphorylation of cTnI. The observed 
alterations corroborate well with structural data. These results suggest that 
while the modifications in the cRp region have minimal influence, those in the 
key functional cIp-cSp region have a pronounced effect on the interaction of 
cTnI and cTnC, which may correlate with the altered myofilament function and 
cardiac muscle contraction under pathophysiological conditions.

DOI: 10.1021/bi035408y
PMID: 14661957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]