1. Breast Cancer Res. 2004;6(1):R8-R17. doi: 10.1186/bcr658. Epub 2003 Oct 24.

A combined analysis of outcome following breast cancer: differences in survival 
based on BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation status and administration of adjuvant treatment.

Robson ME(1), Chappuis PO, Satagopan J, Wong N, Boyd J, Goffin JR, Hudis C, 
Roberge D, Norton L, BÃ©gin LR, Offit K, Foulkes WD.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of McGill University Health Centre, Cancer Prevention 
Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2004;6(1):E7. doi: 10.1186/bcr748.

BACKGROUND: The prognostic significance of germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 
in women with breast cancer remains unclear. A combined analysis was performed 
to address this uncertainty.
METHODS: Two retrospective cohorts of Ashkenazi Jewish women undergoing 
breast-conserving treatment for invasive cancer between 1980 and 1995 (n = 584) 
were established. Archived tissue blocks were used as the source of DNA for 
Ashkenazi Jewish BRCA1/BRCA2 founder mutation analysis. Paraffin-embedded tissue 
and follow-up information was available for 505 women.
RESULTS: Genotyping was successful in 496 women, of whom 56 (11.3%) were found 
to carry a BRCA1/BRCA2 founder mutation. After a median follow-up period of 116 
months, breast cancer specific survival was worse in women with BRCA1 mutations 
than in those without (62% at 10 years versus 86%; P < 0.0001), but not in women 
with the BRCA2 mutation (84% versus 86% at 10 years; P = 0.76). Germline BRCA1 
mutations were an independent predictor of breast cancer mortality in 
multivariate analysis (hazard ratio 2.4, 95% confidence interval 1.2-4.8; P = 
0.01). BRCA1 status predicted breast cancer mortality only among women who did 
not receive chemotherapy (hazard ratio 4.8, 95% confidence interval 2.0-11.7; P 
= 0.001). The risk for metachronous ipsilateral cancer was not greater in women 
with germline BRCA1/BRCA2 founder mutations than in those without mutations (P = 
0.68).
CONCLUSION: BRCA1 mutations, but not BRCA2 mutations, are associated with 
reduced survival in Ashkenazi women undergoing breast-conserving treatment for 
invasive breast cancer, but the poor prognosis associated with germline BRCA1 
mutations is mitigated by adjuvant chemotherapy. The risk for metachronous 
ipsilateral disease does not appear to be increased for either BRCA1 or BRCA2 
mutation carriers, at least up to 10 years of follow up.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr658
PMCID: PMC314444
PMID: 14680495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]