1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2003 Oct;41(10):724-7.

[A novel KCNQ1 mutation in Chinese with congenital long QT syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Liang L(1), Du ZD, Cai LL, Wu JX, Zheng T, Qi TX.

Author information:
(1)Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing 100020, China.

OBJECTIVE: Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is an inherited disorder of 
cardiac repolarization characterized by prolongation of QT interval and 
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia torsade de pointes (TdP) in the 
electrocardiogram (ECG). Clinical symptoms include recurrent syncope, seizure or 
even sudden death. It is caused by mutations of at least seven genes, six of 
them encoding ion channels that determine the duration of ventricular action 
potentials. One of these genes, KCNQ1, encodes an alpha-subunit of cardiac 
slowly activated delayed rectifier potassium channel. Patients carrying 
mutations of KCNQ1 are named as LQT1, which accounts for 42% of patients with 
LQTS. This study sought to analyze the clinical data of Chinese with LQTS and to 
screen for the mutations of KCNQ1.
METHODS: The universally accepted phenotypic criteria of LQTS was used for 
identification of probands. There were six families with LQTS. They were 
enrolled in this study. Clinical and ECG data of each family member were 
recorded. Genomic DNA was prepared from peripheral blood lymphocytes. Polymerase 
chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism analysis was used to 
screen for mutations throughout the whole coding region of KCNQ1 and DNA 
sequencing was performed to determine the exact mutation site.
RESULTS: There were totally 13 patients in the six LQTS families. Five were male 
and eight female. One suffered from sudden death, 10 had syncope and 2 were 
asymptomatic. Eleven of the 13 patients had ECG data. Their QT and QTc (mean +/- 
SD) were (0.460 +/- 0.058) s and (0.516 +/- 0.058) s, respectively. TdP was 
observed in 3 patients (27%) during the syncope attack. By PCR-SSCP analysis, 
two novel KCNQ1 deletion mutations 356-357 Delta QQ and 626-631 Delta GSGGPP 
were identified in 7 patients of 2 families. None of 50 normal individuals 
carried these mutations, indicating these two mutations were likely to cause the 
disease. In addition, P448R was found in one affected and some unaffected 
members in other two families and in 7 of 50 (14%) normal individuals, 
indicating that this might be a polymorphism. All the three mutations located in 
C-terminal domain of KCNQ1 protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Two novel deletion mutations and one novel polymorphism of KCNQ1 
gene were identified among 6 Chinese families with LQTS.

PMID: 14731347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]