1. Hum Genet. 2004 Mar;114(4):386-90. doi: 10.1007/s00439-003-1080-8. Epub 2004
Jan  22.

TP53 haplotype-based analysis and incidence of post-angioplasty restenosis.

Zee RY(1), Cook NR, Kim CA, Fernandez-Cruz A, Lindpaintner K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. rzee@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Erratum in
    Hum Genet. 2004 Nov;115(6):530.

The tumor suppressor gene product, in particular tumor suppressor protein p53 
(TP53), has been suggested to play a role in post-angioplasty restenosis. 
However, no genetic-epidemiological studies relating to TP53 gene 
polymorphism(s) and the incidence of post-angioplasty restenosis are available. 
TP53 11951_11966dup16bp, R72P, and 13494G>A polymorphisms were characterized in 
a cohort of 779 patients, of whom 342 cases had developed restenosis (as defined 
by >50% loss of lumen compared with immediate post-procedure results) at repeat 
quantitative coronary angiography at six months post angioplasty. The 
haplotype-frequency distribution was marginally different between cases and 
controls with restenosis risk (chi(2)(7df)=13.08, P=0.070). Multivariable 
haplotype-based logistic regression indicated that haplotypes 16bp(-) 
-P72-G13494 [corrected], and 16bp(+) -P72-A13494 [corrected] exhibit protective 
effects on restenosis risk (odds ratio=0.58, 95%CI=0.40-0.83, P=0.0033; odds 
ratio=0.69, 95%CI=0.48-0.99, P=0.049, respectively). Multivariable 
haplotype-based linear regression again showed similar, significant association 
with degree of lumen loss. The present findings indicate protective effects of 
TP53 16bp(-) -P72-G13494 [corrected], and 16bp(+) -P72-A13494 [corrected] 
haplotypes in the incidence of restenosis after angioplasty. Furthermore, our 
study demonstrates that a haplotype-based approach can be more informative than 
a single-marker or marker-by-marker analysis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-003-1080-8
PMID: 14740296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]