1. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2003 Dec;38(12):1217-22. doi:
10.1080/00365520310006504.

IL-1 RN 2/2 genotype and simultaneous carriage of genotypes IL-1 RN 2/2 and 
IL-1beta-511 T/T associated with oesophagitis in Helicobacter pylori-negative 
patients.

Koivurova OP(1), Karhukorpi JM, Joensuu ET, Koistinen PO, Valtonen JM, Karttunen 
TJ, Niemel√§ SE, Karttunen RA.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Internal Medicine, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland. 
ollipekka.koivurova@oulu.fi

BACKGROUND: Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist genotype 2/2 is associated with a 
prolonged and enhanced inflammatory response. It is suspected of being a risk 
factor for atrophic gastritis and gastric cancer and for some autoimmune 
diseases. No specific genetic risk factors for oesophagitis have been identified 
so far and there are no reports of IL-1 polymorphism in relation to oesophageal 
disease.
METHODS: We studied the IL-1RN, IL-1beta-511 and IL-1beta + 3953 polymorphisms 
in an unselected series of 142 adult patients scheduled for gastrointestinal 
endoscopy because of dyspepsia. The control group consisted of university staff 
and students (n = 179). Helicobacter pylori status was determined by antibody 
testing and bacterial detection.
RESULTS: Endoscopic oesophagitis was noted in 40 patients. The IL-1RN 2/2 
genotype was significantly more prevalent in the patients with H. 
pylori-negative oesophagitis than in the control subjects (27% versus 9%; OR 
3.574, CI 1.23-10.35, P = 0.034) or in the dyspeptic patients (27% versus 7%; OR 
5.089. CI 1.51-17.11, P = 0.009). IL-1beta-511 T/T genotype tended to be more 
frequent in the H. pylori-negative patients with oesophagitis than in the 
control subjects (P = 0.071). The strongest association was between the 
simultaneous carriage of genotypes IL-1RN 2/2 and IL-1beta -511 T/T and H. 
pylori-negative oesophagitis. where the combined genotype was more prevalent 
than in the control subjects (23% versus 6%; OR 4.492, CI 1.40-14.46, P = 0.012) 
or the dyspeptic patients without oesophagitis (23% versus 3%: OR 9.706. CI 
2.12-44.42, P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that the IL-1RN 2/2 genotype and the carriage 
of combined genotypes IL-1RN 2/2 + IL-1beta-511 T/T are associated with H. 
pylori-negative oesophagitis. This is the first report on the association 
between IL-1 gene polymorphism and oesophagitis.

DOI: 10.1080/00365520310006504
PMID: 14750640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]