1. Neth J Med. 2003 Nov;61(11):365-9.

Candida-specific interferon-gamma deficiency and toll-like receptor 
polymorphisms in patients with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis.

van der Graaf CA(1), Netea MG, Drenth IP, te Morsche RH, van der Meer JW, 
Kullberg BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (541), University Medical Centre St Radboud, 
PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) is a group of disorders, characterised 
by persistent mucocutaneous infections with Candida species. The underlying 
defect of CMC has not been elucidated, but a defective cytokine response may be 
involved. Therefore, we investigated whether an imbalance between IFNgamma and 
IL-10 may play a role in this disorder. We assessed the cytokine production in 
whole-blood cultures from CMC patients using Candida albicans, 
lipopolysaccharide and phytohaemagglutinin as stimuli. As the Toll-like 
receptors are important pattern recognition receptors for Candida species, we 
also investigated Toll-like receptor polymorphisms in these patients. Patients 
with CMC had a significantly decreased IFNgamma production when whole blood was 
stimulated with C. albicans (232 +/- 120 vs 2279 +/- 609 pg/ml, p<0.02). When 
stimulated with phytohaemagglutinin, the differences were not significant (3549 
+/- 1320 vs 7631 +/- 1790 pg/ml). The Candida-stimulated production of IL-10 
tended to be higher in CMC patients, whereas TNF and IL-1beta production were 
similar in patients and controls. Stimulation with LPS showed no differences in 
cytokine production between patients and controls. Two out of seven patients had 
the TLR4 Asp299Gly polymorphism and none had the TLR2 Arg677Trp polymorphism. 
These data support the hypothesis that deficient IFNgamma production is involved 
in the pathogenesis of CMC, whereas a role for genetic polymorphisms of 
Toll-like receptor 2 and 4 is not obvious in these patients.

PMID: 14768719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]