1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Feb;89(2):971-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2003-031282.

Insulin promoter factor-1 mutations and diabetes in Trinidad: identification of 
a novel diabetes-associated mutation (E224K) in an Indo-Trinidadian family.

Cockburn BN(1), Bermano G, Boodram LL, Teelucksingh S, Tsuchiya T, Mahabir D, 
Allan AB, Stein R, Docherty K, Bell GI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science and Agriculture, University 
of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Republic of Trinidad and Tobago. 
bcockburn@fans.uwi.tt

This study investigated the prevalence of insulin promoter factor-1(IPF-1) 
mutations in familial early-onset diabetes mellitus in Trinidad. We screened 264 
unrelated subjects with type 2 diabetes diagnosed before 40 yr of age and a 
family history of diabetes for mutations in the minimal promoter and coding 
region of the IPF-1 gene (IPF1). This study population included 169 patients of 
East Indian descent (Indo-Trinidadians), 66 of African descent 
(Afro-Trinidadians), and 29 of mixed ancestry. We identified five IPF1 variants, 
including one new missense mutation E224K, the previously described 
diabetes-associated duplication P242 P243dupP, two silent mutations in the 
codons for Leu54 (c.162G>A) and Ala256 (c.768C>A), and a substitution in the 
5'-untranslated region (c.-18C>T). The E224K mutation was found in two unrelated 
diabetic Indo-Trinidadians and 0 of 60 controls. It was present on the same 
haplotype in both patients suggesting a founder effect. The E224K mutation 
cosegregated with early-onset diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance in a large 
family, suggestive of the type 4 form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
rather than type 2 diabetes. Functional studies of E224K showed reduced 
transactivation activity. IPF1 mutations leading to synthesis of a mutant 
protein may contribute to the development of familial early-onset 
diabetes/maturity-onset diabetes of the young in Indo-Trinidadians.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2003-031282
PMID: 14764823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]