1. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 7;279(19):19649-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313457200. Epub
2004  Feb 27.

Enhanced adhesive capacities of the naturally occurring Ile249-Met280 variant of 
the chemokine receptor CX3CR1.

Daoudi M(1), Lavergne E, Garin A, Tarantino N, Debré P, Pincet F, Combadière C, 
Deterre P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie Cellulaire, INSERM U543, Faculté de Médecine 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, 91 Boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France.

It was recently shown that individuals carrying the naturally occurring mutant 
CX3CR1-Ile(249)-Met(280) (hereafter called CX3CR1-IM) have a lower risk of 
cardiovascular disease than individuals homozygous for the wild-type 
CX3CR1-Val(249)-Thr(280) (CX3CR1-VT). We report here that peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMC) from individuals with the CX3CR1-IM haplotype adhered 
more potently to membrane-bound CX3CL1 than did PBMC from homozygous CX3CR1-VT 
donors. Similar excess adhesion was observed with CX3CR1-IM-transfected human 
embryonic kidney (HEK) cell lines tested with two different methods: the 
parallel plate laminar flow chamber and the dual pipette aspiration technique. 
Suppression of the extra adhesion in the presence of pertussis toxin indicates 
that G-protein mediated the underlying transduction pathway, in contrast to the 
G-protein-independent adhesion previously described for CX3CR1-VT. Surprisingly, 
HEK and PBMC that expressed CX3CR1-IM and -VT were indistinguishable when tested 
with the soluble form of CX3CL1 for chemotaxis, calcium release, and binding 
capacity. In conclusion, only the membrane-anchored form of CX3CL1 functionally 
discriminated between these two allelic isoforms of CX3CR1. These results 
suggest that each form of this ligand may lead to a different signaling pathway. 
The extra adhesion of CX3CR1-IM may be related to immune defenses and to 
atherogenesis, both of which depend substantially on adhesive intercellular 
events.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M313457200
PMID: 14990582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]