1. J Virol. 2004 Apr;78(8):3851-62. doi: 10.1128/jvi.78.8.3851-3862.2004.

RoXaN, a novel cellular protein containing TPR, LD, and zinc finger motifs, 
forms a ternary complex with eukaryotic initiation factor 4G and rotavirus NSP3.

Vitour D(1), Lindenbaum P, Vende P, Becker MM, Poncet D.

Author information:
(1)Virologie Moléculaire et Structurale, Unité Mixte de Recherche, CNRS-INRA, 
91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Rotavirus mRNAs are capped but not polyadenylated, and viral proteins are 
translated by the cellular translation machinery. This is accomplished through 
the action of the viral nonstructural protein NSP3, which specifically binds the 
3' consensus sequence of viral mRNAs and interacts with the eukaryotic 
translation initiation factor eIF4G I. To further our understanding of the role 
of NSP3 in rotavirus replication, we looked for other cellular proteins capable 
of interacting with this viral protein. Using the yeast two-hybrid assay, we 
identified a novel cellular protein-binding partner for rotavirus NSP3. This 
110-kDa cellular protein, named RoXaN (rotavirus X protein associated with 
NSP3), contains a minimum of three regions predicted to be involved in 
protein-protein or nucleic acid-protein interactions. A tetratricopeptide repeat 
region, a protein-protein interaction domain most often found in multiprotein 
complexes, is present in the amino-terminal region. In the carboxy terminus, at 
least five zinc finger motifs are observed, further suggesting the capacity of 
RoXaN to bind other proteins or nucleic acids. Between these two regions exists 
a paxillin leucine-aspartate repeat (LD) motif which is involved in 
protein-protein interactions. RoXaN is capable of interacting with NSP3 in vivo 
and during rotavirus infection. Domains of interaction were mapped and 
correspond to the dimerization domain of NSP3 (amino acids 163 to 237) and the 
LD domain of RoXaN (amino acids 244 to 341). The interaction between NSP3 and 
RoXaN does not impair the interaction between NSP3 and eIF4G I, and a ternary 
complex made of NSP3, RoXaN, and eIF4G I can be detected in rotavirus-infected 
cells, implicating RoXaN in translation regulation.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.78.8.3851-3862.2004
PMCID: PMC374268
PMID: 15047801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]