1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2004 Apr;60(4):470-5. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2004.02003.x.

Variability in anterior pituitary size within members of a family with GH 
deficiency due to a new splice mutation in the GHRH receptor gene.

Alba M(1), Hall CM, Whatmore AJ, Clayton PE, Price DA, Salvatori R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, and The Ilyssa Center for Molecular and Cellular 
Endocrinology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21287, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the GHRH receptor (GHRHR) gene (GHRHR) cause autosomal 
recessive isolated GH deficiency (IGHD), and are usually associated with 
anterior pituitary hypoplasia (APH) (defined as pituitary height more than 2 SDS 
below normal). We searched for GHRHR mutations and studied pituitary morphology 
in three prepubertal sibs with severe IGHD, who were born from consanguineous 
parents.
DESIGN: We sequenced the 13 exons and the intron-exon boundaries of the GHRHR of 
the index patient. After identifying a novel mutation, we sequenced the same 
area in the other family members. In addition, we performed magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) study of the pituitary (at age 8, 4 and 3 years) in the three 
affected subjects.
RESULTS: The three children were homozygous for a new GHRHR mutation that alters 
the second base of the invariant 5' splice site (GT) of intron 12 [IVS12 + 
2T-->A]. The parents and an unaffected sibling were heterozygous for the same 
change. MRI did not show frank APH (by height criteria) in any of the subjects: 
pituitary height was normal (5.6 mm, +1.8 SDS) in the oldest sibling, and it was 
low but not below 2 SDS by age-adjusted criteria in the second (3 mm, -1.4 SDS), 
and third sibling (2.8 mm, -1.7 SDS). Calculated pituitary volume was below -2 
SDS in the youngest patient.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that pituitary height may fall within 2 SDS 
from the norm in patients with severe IGHD due to a homozygous GHRHR mutation, 
and that pituitary size may vary within patients with identical mutations who 
belong to the same family.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2004.02003.x
PMID: 15049962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]