1. Circ Res. 2004 Jun 11;94(11):1474-82. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000129179.66631.00.
 Epub 2004 Apr 22.

Small heat-shock protein Hsp20 phosphorylation inhibits beta-agonist-induced 
cardiac apoptosis.

Fan GC(1), Chu G, Mitton B, Song Q, Yuan Q, Kranias EG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0575, USA.

Activation of the sympathetic nervous system is a common compensatory feature in 
heart failure, but sustained beta-adrenergic activation induces cardiomyocyte 
death, leading to cardiac remodeling and dysfunction. In mouse cardiomyocytes, 
we recently reported that prolonged exposure to beta-agonists is associated with 
transient increases in expression and phosphorylation of a small heat-shock 
protein, Hsp20. To determine the functional significance of Hsp20, we 
overexpressed this protein and its constitutively phosphorylated (S16D) or 
nonphosphorylated (S16A) mutant in adult rat cardiomyocytes. Hsp20 protected 
cardiomyocytes from apoptosis triggered by activation of the cAMP-PKA pathway, 
as indicated by decreases in the number of pyknotic nuclei, terminal 
deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling, and DNA laddering, 
which were associated with inhibition of caspase-3 activity. These protective 
effects were further increased by the constitutively phosphorylated Hsp20 mutant 
(S16D), which conferred full protection from apoptosis. In contrast, the 
nonphosphorylatable mutant (S16A) exhibited no antiapoptotic properties. 
Immunostaining studies and immunoprecipitations with Hsp20 or actin antibodies 
demonstrated that Hsp20 translocated to cytoskeleton and associated with actin 
on isoproterenol stimulation. These findings suggest that Hsp20 and its 
phosphorylation at Ser16 may provide cardioprotection against 
beta-agonist-induced apoptosis. Thus, Hsp20 may represent a novel therapeutic 
target in the treatment of heart failure.

DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000129179.66631.00
PMID: 15105294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]