1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2004 Aug;12(8):673-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201190.

Genetic and phenotypic characterization of mutations in myosin-binding protein C 
(MYBPC3) in 81 families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: total or 
partial haploinsufficiency.

Andersen PS(1), Havndrup O, Bundgaard H, Larsen LA, Vuust J, Pedersen AK, 
Kjeldsen K, Christiansen M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

Mutations in the MYBPC3 gene, encoding the sarcomere protein myosin-binding 
protein C, are among the most frequent causes of autosomal dominant familial 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC). We studied the frequency, type, and 
pathogenetic mechanism of MYBPC3 mutations in an unselected cohort of 81 FHC 
families, consecutively enrolled at a tertiary referral center. Nine mutations, 
six of which were novel, were found in 10 (12.3%) of the families using 
single-strand conformation polymorphism and DNA sequencing. A frameshift 
mutation in exon 2 clearly suggests that haploinsufficiency is a pathogenetic 
mechanism in FHC. In addition, splice site mutations in exon 6 and intron 31, a 
deletion in exon 13, and a nonsense mutation in exon 25, all lead to premature 
termination codons, most likely causing loss of function and haploinsufficiency. 
Furthermore, there were two missense mutations (D228N and A833 T) and one 
in-frame deletion (DeltaLys813). A considerable intrafamilial variation in 
phenotypic expression of MYBPC3-based FHC was noted, and we suggest that 
mutations influencing stability of mRNA could play a role in the variable 
penetrance and expressivity of the disease, perhaps via partial 
haploinsuffciency.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201190
PMID: 15114369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]