1. Hum Mutat. 2004 Jun;23(6):540-5. doi: 10.1002/humu.20039.

Identification and characterization of ANKK1: a novel kinase gene closely linked 
to DRD2 on chromosome band 11q23.1.

Neville MJ(1), Johnstone EC, Walton RT.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK General Practice Research Group, Department of Clinical 
Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. mneville@molbiol.ox.ac.uk

The dopamine D2 receptor has been extensively studied in relation to alcoholism, 
substance abuse, and nicotine dependence. The most frequently examined 
polymorphism linked to this gene is the Taq1A restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (RFLP) (dbSNP rs1800497; g.32806C>T in GenBank AF050737.1), which 
has been associated with a reduction in D2 receptor density, although this is 
not universally accepted. The Taq1A RFLP lies 10 kB downstream of DRD2 and may 
therefore fall within a different coding region than the DRD2 gene or within a 
regulatory region. Within this downstream region, we have identified a novel 
kinase gene, named ankyrin repeat and kinase domain containing 1 (ANKK1), which 
contains a single serine/threonine kinase domain and is expressed at low levels 
in placenta and whole spinal cord RNA. This gene is a member of an extensive 
family of proteins involved in signal transduction pathways. The DRD2 Taq1A RFLP 
is a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) that causes an amino acid substitution 
within the 11th ankyrin repeat of ANKK1 (p.Glu713Lys), which, while unlikely to 
affect structural integrity, may affect substrate-binding specificity. If this 
is the case, then changes in ANKK1 activity may provide an alternative 
explanation for previously described associations between the DRD2 Taq1A RFLP 
and neuropsychiatric disorders such as addiction.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20039
PMID: 15146457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]