1. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Jun 10;296(2):145-50. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.02.008.

Rapid inactivation of alpha-1-proteinase inhibitor by neutrophil specific 
leukolysin/membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase 6.

Nie J(1), Pei D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 
USA.

Leukolysin/MT6-MMP is a GPI-anchored matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) primarily 
expressed by neutrophils. It is stored in intracellular granules at resting 
state, but rapidly discharged upon stimulations into the extracellular milieu, 
presumably to promote tissue remodeling or destruction. The proteolytic targets 
for leukolysin at the inflammatory sites remain unknown. Here, we show that 
alpha-1-proteinase inhibitor, or alpha1-PI, a known protective shield against 
destructive serine proteinases, is a physiological target for leukolysin. We 
show that alpha1-PI failed to accumulate in media conditioned by cells 
co-expressing alpha1-PI and leukolysin. Purified leukolysin cleaves alpha1-PI 
efficiently at the Phe376Leu and Pro381Met bonds and the cleaved alpha1-PI lost 
its anti-proteolytic activity against human neutrophil elastase, cathepsin G 
(CatG) and proteinase 3 (PR3). In fact, leukolysin preferentially cleaves 
alpha1-PI when co-incubated with other extracellular molecules such as laminin 
and gelatin. Kinetically, leukolysin is more active than two known neutrophil 
MMPs, MMP8 and MMP9, in cleaving and inactivating alpha1-PI. Taken together, 
these results suggest that neutrophils may mediate tissue destruction by 
deploying leukolysin to weaken the alpha1-PI protective shield at inflammatory 
sites.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.02.008
PMID: 15149845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]