1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2004 May;13(5):787-94.

Common gene polymorphisms in the metabolic folate and methylation pathway and 
the risk of acute lymphoblastic leukemia and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in adults.

Gemmati D(1), Ongaro A, Scapoli GL, Della Porta M, Tognazzo S, Serino ML, Di 
Bona E, Rodeghiero F, Gilli G, Reverberi R, Caruso A, Pasello M, Pellati A, De 
Mattei M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Advanced Therapies, Center Study for 
Hemostasis and Thrombosis, University of Ferrara, C.so Giovecca 203, I-44100 
Ferrara, Italy. d.gemmati@unife.it

Folate and methionine metabolism is involved in DNA synthesis and methylation 
processes. Polymorphisms in the genes of folate metabolism enzymes have been 
associated with some forms of cancer. In a case-control study, we evaluated 
whether four common polymorphisms in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR 
C677T and A1298C), methionine synthase (MS A2756G), and methionine synthase 
reductase (MTRR A66G) genes may have a role in altering susceptibility to adult 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). We analyzed 
DNA of 120 adult ALL, 200 NHL, and 257 healthy control subjects. Individual 
carrying the MTHFR 677TT genotype showed a 3.6-fold decreased ALL risk [odds 
ratio (OR) 0.28, 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 0.12-0.72] than wild-types. 
Similarly, MS 2756GG individuals showed a 5.0-fold decreased ALL risk (OR 0.20, 
95% CI 0.02-1.45) than wild-types. In combined results, subjects with the MTHFR 
677CT/TT and MS 2756AG/GG genotypes revealed a 3.6-fold ALL risk reduction (OR 
0.28, 95% CI 0.14-0.58) and those with the MTHFR 677TT and MTRR 66AG genotypes 
revealed a 4.2-fold ALL risk reduction (OR 0.24, 95% CI 0.06-0.81). Finally, 
those with the MS 2756AG/GG and MTRR 66AG/GG genotypes revealed a 2.2-fold ALL 
risk reduction (OR 0.45, 95% CI 0.10-0.85). Single analysis for NHL did not show 
any significant difference for all the polymorphisms investigated, but in the 
low-grade NHL subgroup, we found a 2.0-fold risk reduction for the MTRR 66GG 
homozygous genotype (OR 0.50, 95% CI 0.25-0.99), which was higher (OR 0.37, 95% 
CI 0.14-0.85) when analyzed in combination with MS 2756AA genotype. These data 
are in accordance with the hypothesis that polymorphisms in the genes for folate 
and methionine metabolism might play a greater role in the occurrence of ALL 
than NHL by influencing DNA synthesis and/or DNA methylation.

PMID: 15159311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]