1. J Exp Med. 2004 Jun 21;199(12):1709-18. doi: 10.1084/jem.20040432.

Cytotoxic T lymphocyte-based control of simian immunodeficiency virus 
replication in a preclinical AIDS vaccine trial.

Matano T(1), Kobayashi M, Igarashi H, Takeda A, Nakamura H, Kano M, Sugimoto C, 
Mori K, Iida A, Hirata T, Hasegawa M, Yuasa T, Miyazawa M, Takahashi Y, Yasunami 
M, Kimura A, O'Connor DH, Watkins DI, Nagai Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. matano@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Recently, encouraging AIDS vaccine trials in macaques have implicated cytotoxic 
T lymphocytes (CTLs) in the control of the simian human immunodeficiency virus 
SHIV89.6P that induces acute CD4(+) T cell depletion. However, none of these 
vaccine regimens have been successful in the containment of replication of the 
pathogenic simian immunodeficiency viruses (SIVs) that induce chronic disease 
progression. Indeed, it has remained unclear if vaccine-induced CTL can control 
SIV replication. Here, we show evidence suggesting that vaccine-induced CTLs 
control SIVmac239 replication in rhesus macaques. Eight macaques vaccinated with 
DNA-prime/Gag-expressing Sendai virus vector boost were challenged intravenously 
with SIVmac239. Five of the vaccinees controlled viral replication and had 
undetectable plasma viremia after 5 wk of infection. CTLs from all of these five 
macaques rapidly selected for escape mutations in Gag, indicating that 
vaccine-induced CTLs successfully contained replication of the challenge virus. 
Interestingly, analysis of the escape variant selected in three vaccinees that 
share a major histocompatibility complex class I haplotype revealed that the 
escape variant virus was at a replicative disadvantage compared with SIVmac239. 
These findings suggested that the vaccine-induced CTLs had "crippled" the 
challenge virus. Our results indicate that vaccine induction of highly effective 
CTLs can result in the containment of replication of a highly pathogenic 
immunodeficiency virus.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20040432
PMCID: PMC2212812
PMID: 15210746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]