1. J Immunol. 2004 Aug 1;173(3):1868-75. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.3.1868.

Histidines are critical for heparin-dependent activation of mast cell tryptase.

Hallgren J(1), Bäckström S, Estrada S, Thuveson M, Pejler G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Biomedical Centre, Swedish 
University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Mast cell tryptase is a tetrameric serine protease that is stored in complex 
with negatively charged heparin proteoglycans in the secretory granule. Tryptase 
has potent proinflammatory properties and has been implicated in diverse 
pathological conditions such as asthma and fibrosis. Previous studies have shown 
that tryptase binds tightly to heparin, and that heparin is required in the 
assembly of the tryptase tetramer as well as for stabilization of the active 
tetramer. Because the interaction of tryptase with heparin is optimal at acidic 
pH, we investigated in this study whether His residues are of importance for the 
heparin binding, tetramerization, and activation of the tryptase mouse mast cell 
protease 6. Molecular modeling of mouse mast cell protease 6 identified four His 
residues, H35, H106, H108, and H238, that are conserved among pH-dependent 
tryptases and are exposed on the molecular surface, and these four His residues 
were mutated to Ala. In addition, combinations of different mutations were 
prepared. Generally, the single His-Ala mutations did not cause any major 
defects in heparin binding, activation, or tetramerization, although some effect 
of the H106A mutation was observed. However, when several mutations were 
combined, large defects in all of these parameters were observed. Of the 
mutants, the triple mutant H106A/H108A/H238A was the most affected with an 
almost complete inability to bind to heparin and to form active tryptase 
tetramers. Taken together, this study shows that surface-exposed histidines 
mediate the interaction of mast cell tryptase with heparin and are of critical 
importance in the formation of active tryptase tetramers.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.3.1868
PMID: 15265919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]