1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2004 Oct;4(10-11):1329-41. doi: 
10.1016/j.intimp.2004.05.017.

C5a differentially stimulates the ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK phosphorylation through 
independent signaling pathways to induced chemotactic migration in RAW264.7 
macrophages.

Chiou WF(1), Tsai HR, Yang LM, Tsai WJ.

Author information:
(1)National Research Institute of Chinese Medicine, 155-1, Li-Nung Street 
Section 2, Shih-Pai, Taipei 112, Taiwan. wfchiou@cma23.nricm.edu.tw

We elucidate the roles of various protein kinases involved in complement 5a 
(C5a)-induced cell migration. Results showed that extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase1/2 (ERK1/2), p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) and 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (P13K) were necessary for C5a-induced migration, 
whereas protein kinase C and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) were nonessential. 
C5a-induced migration was also suppresses by phospholipase C (PLC) inhibitor 
U73122 and pertussis toxin (PTX). We found that C5a-induced, time-dependent (1) 
ERK1/2 phosphorylation was markedly diminished by PTX, U73122, P13K inhibitors 
wortmannin and LY294002 and ERK1/2 inhibitor PD98059; (2) Akt phosphorylation 
was also attenuated by the above inhibitors except PD98059; (3) p38 MAPK 
phosphorylation was only affected by PTX. Furthermore, C5a also stimulated 
PLCbeta(2) membrane translocation in a time-dependent manner that occurred early 
prior to Akt phosphorylation and could be abolished only by PTX and U73122. 
These results suggest that C5a, through the activation of PTX-sensitive G 
protein, to differentially stimulate ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK phosphorylation and 
evoke cell migration. That is, ERK1/2 but not p38 MAPK phosphorylation is down 
stream of P13K/Akt and modulated by PLC. Additionally, beta(2) isoform may be 
one of the participates in C5a signal and acts more upstream of P13K/Akt.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2004.05.017
PMID: 15313431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]