1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 19;279(47):49045-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M409358200. Epub 
2004 Aug 24.

Direct binding of DNA by tumor suppressor menin.

La P(1), Silva AC, Hou Z, Wang H, Schnepp RW, Yan N, Shi Y, Hua X.

Author information:
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Cancer Biology and 
Signal Transduction Program, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19104-6160, USA.

Menin is a tumor suppressor that is mutated in patients with multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type I (MEN1), an inherited tumor-prone syndrome. Because there is no 
obvious conserved structural domain in menin that suggests a biochemical 
function, little is known as to how menin suppresses tumorigenesis. Although 
menin interacts with a variety of nuclear proteins including transcription 
factors, it is unknown whether menin itself can directly bind DNA. Here we show 
that menin directly binds to double-stranded DNA. It also binds a variety of DNA 
structures, including Y-structures, branched structures, and 4-way junction 
structures. The COOH terminus of menin mediates binding to DNA, but MEN1 
disease-derived mutations in the COOH terminus abolish the ability of menin to 
bind DNA. Importantly, these MEN1 disease-related menin mutants also fail to 
repress cell proliferation as well as cell cycle progression at the G2/M phase. 
Furthermore, detailed mutagenesis studies indicate that positively charged 
residues in two nuclear localization signals mediate direct DNA binding as well 
as repression of cell proliferation. Collectively, these results demonstrate, 
for the first time, a novel biochemical activity of menin, binding to DNA, and 
link its DNA binding to the regulation of cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M409358200
PMCID: PMC2858586
PMID: 15331604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]