1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2004 Oct;43(5):568-70. doi: 10.1002/pbc.20098.

NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 null genotype is not associated with pediatric 
de novo acute leukemia.

Sirma S(1), Agaoglu L, Yildiz I, Cayli D, Horgusluoglu E, Anak S, Yuksel L, 
Unuvar A, Celkan T, Apak H, Karakas Z, Devecioglu O, Ozbek U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Experimental Medical Research (DETAE), 
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase1 (NQO1) is a two-electron reductase 
that detoxifies quinones derived from the oxidation of phenolic metabolites of 
benzene. Exposure to benzene metabolites increases the risk of hematotoxicity 
and leukemia. NQO1 enzyme activity protects the cells against metabolites of 
benzene. C to T base substitution at nucleotide 609 of NQO1 cDNA (C609T) results 
in loss of enzyme activity. Low NQO1 activity may play a role in etiology of 
acute leukemia.
PROCEDURE: We analyzed NQO1 C609T gene polymorphism using the PCR-RFLP method in 
273 patients with de novo acute leukemia (189 acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
(ALL), and 84 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 286 healthy volunteers to 
investigate the role of NQO1 polymorphism in the etiology of acute leukemia.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The frequency of homozygosity for NOQ1 C609T 
polymorphism was 3.5% in the healthy control population and 2.5% in pediatric 
acute leukemia. The NQO1 C609T allele frequency was not statistically different 
in the children with acute leukemia in comparison to the controls (odds ratio 
(OR), 0.76; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.58-1.01; P = 0.06). The distribution 
of NQO1 genotypes among children with acute leukemia was not statistically 
different from the control group (P = 0.13). These findings do not support the 
role of NQO1 C609T polymorphism in the etiology of de novo pediatric acute 
leukemia.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.20098
PMID: 15382274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]