1. Clin Genet. 2004 Nov;66(5):452-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2004.00325.x.

High prevalence of V37I genetic variant in the connexin-26 (GJB2) gene among 
non-syndromic hearing-impaired and control Thai individuals.

Wattanasirichaigoon D(1), Limwongse C, Jariengprasert C, Yenchitsomanus PT, 
Tocharoenthanaphol C, Thongnoppakhun W, Thawil C, Charoenpipop D, Pho-iam T, 
Thongpradit S, Duggal P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. radwc@mahidol.ac.th

Hearing loss is highly prevalent with a worldwide incidence of 1-2 per 1000 
newborns. Several previous studies have demonstrated that mutations of connexin 
26 (Cx26 or GJB2) are responsible for most cases of the recessive non-syndromic 
sensorineural hearing loss (NSSHL). Certain mutations have been described 
frequently among various populations, which include 35delG, 167delT, and 
235delC. Recently, a missense mutation, V37I, was reported as a pathogenic 
change in East Asian affected individuals. To identify genetic variants 
associated with NSSHL in Thai population, we performed mutation analysis of Cx26 
in 166 unrelated probands with NSSHL and 205 controls. We identified seven novel 
genetic variants in Cx26. We also identified a high prevalence of the V37I 
mutation among both affected probands (11.1%) and control subjects (8.5%), which 
suggests that the pathologic role of V37I may be modified by other genes. Our 
data support previous studies that show heterogeneity in the frequencies and 
types of mutations in Cx26 within populations and among ethnicities and that 
before clinical significance and causality can be attributed to a genetic 
variant, functional characterization is necessary.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2004.00325.x
PMID: 15479191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]