1. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Oct;50(10):3153-60. doi: 10.1002/art.20552.

A human COL2A1 gene with an Arg519Cys mutation causes osteochondrodysplasia in 
transgenic mice.

Sahlman J(1), Pitkänen MT, Prockop DJ, Arita M, Li SW, Helminen HJ, Långsjö TK, 
Puustjärvi K, Lammi MJ.

Author information:
(1)Seinäjoki Central Hospital, Seinäjoki, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: An arginine-to-cysteine substitution at position 519 of the COL2A1 
gene causes early generalized osteoarthritis with mild chondrodysplasia in 
humans. In this study, a human COL2A1 gene with the same mutation was introduced 
into a murine genome having 1 or no alleles of the murine Col2a1 gene, and the 
skeletal phenotypes of the transgenic mice were compared with those of control 
mice.
METHODS: Mice with 1 allele of the normal murine Col2a1 gene and 1 allele of the 
mutated human COL2A1 gene (n = 10), those with no murine Col2a1 gene and 2 
alleles of the mutated human COL2A1 gene (n = 13), those with no murine Col2a1 
gene and only 1 allele of the mutated COL2A1 gene (n = 9), and normal control 
mice (n = 11) were studied for skeletal abnormalities, using radiographic 
imaging and light microscopic analyses of histologic sections. The collagen 
network of cartilage was also investigated with transmission electron 
microscopy.
RESULTS: At 2 months of age, all transgenic mice had dysplastic changes in their 
long bones, flattened vertebral bodies, and osteoarthritic changes in their 
joints. The intervertebral discs of the transgenic animals were degenerated, and 
their histologic structure was disturbed. The changes were more severe in mice 
with no murine Col2a1 allele.
CONCLUSION: The human COL2A1 gene with the Arg519Cys mutation causes 
osteochondrodysplasia in mice, as it does in humans.

Copyright 2004 American College of Rheumatology

DOI: 10.1002/art.20552
PMID: 15476249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]