1. Blood. 2005 Mar 1;105(5):1970-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2004-04-1469. Epub 2004
Oct  26.

Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2-mediated endothelial 
cell activation by Axl tyrosine kinase receptor.

Gallicchio M(1), Mitola S, Valdembri D, Fantozzi R, Varnum B, Avanzi GC, 
Bussolino F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Pharmacology and Forensic Medicine, University of 
Turin, C. so Massimo D'azeglio 52, 10100 Torino, Italy. 
margherita.gallicchio@unito.it

GAS6, the product of a growth arrest specific (GAS) gene, is the ligand of the 
tyrosine kinase receptor Axl. GAS6 and Axl are both expressed in endothelial 
cells, where they are involved in many processes such as leukocyte 
transmigration through capillaries and neointima formation in injured vessels. 
Here, we show that Axl stimulation by GAS6 results in inhibition of the 
ligand-dependent activation of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
receptor 2 and the consequent activation of an angiogenic program in vascular 
endothelial cells. GAS6 inhibits chemotaxis of endothelial cells stimulated by 
VEGF-A isoforms, but not that triggered by fibroblast growth factor-2 or 
hepatocyte growth factor. Furthermore, it inhibits endothelial cell 
morphogenesis on Matrigel and VEGF-A-dependent vascularization of chick chorion 
allantoid membrane. GAS6 activates the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 (SH2 
domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase 2), which is instrumental in the negative 
feedback exerted by Axl on VEGF-A activities. A dominant-negative SHP-2 mutant, 
in which Cys 459 is substituted by Ser, reverted the effect of GAS6 on 
stimulation of VEGF receptor 2 and endothelial chemotaxis triggered by VEGF-A. 
These studies provide the first demonstration of a cross talk between Axl and 
VEGF receptor 2 and add new information on the regulation of VEGF-A activities 
during tissue vascularization.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2004-04-1469
PMID: 15507525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]