1. Genet Med. 2004 Nov-Dec;6(6):495-502. doi: 10.1097/01.gim.0000145045.17711.1c.

Radiological features in 82 patients with nevoid basal cell carcinoma (NBCC or 
Gorlin) syndrome.

Kimonis VE(1), Mehta SG, Digiovanna JJ, Bale SJ, Pastakia B.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Studies Section, Skin Biology Laboratory, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE: Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) is an autosomal-dominant 
disorder characterized by multiple basal cell carcinomas, jaw cysts, 
palmar/plantar pits, calcification of the falx cerebri, and spine and rib 
anomalies. NBCCS is due to mutations in PTCH1, the human homologue of the 
Drosophila segment polarity gene patched. Mutations are detected in 
approximately 60% to 85% of individuals tested by sequencing of PTCH1; 
therefore, clinical examination and x-rays remain important in diagnosis of 
NBCCS.
METHODS: We studied 82 NBCCS patients and 38 of their unaffected siblings at the 
NIH between 1985 and 1994. Chest, rib, spine, skull, hand and foot x-rays, brain 
MRI or CT, and pelvic ultrasound (in females) were obtained in the affected 
individuals and compared to their unaffected relatives.
RESULTS: The following features were significantly more frequent in those with 
NBCCS: calcification of the falx cerebri, the most frequent radiological 
feature, was present in 79% of patients > 20 years and in 37% <20 years, 
calcification of the tentorium cerebellum was present in 20%, bridging of the 
sella in 68%, and abnormal frontal sinus aeration in 18% of affected 
individuals. Bifid ribs most often involving the third, fourth, and fifth ribs 
were seen in 26%; splayed, fused, and misshapen ribs in a further 16%, and 
widened ends of clavicles in 12%. Spine X-rays revealed calcification of the 
nuchal ligament in 18%, fusion of vertebrae in 10%, and hemivertebrae in 15%. 
Flame-shaped lucencies of the metacarpals and/or phalanges were present in 30%, 
modeling deformities of the phalanges in 14%, and polydactyly of the feet in 4%. 
The frequency of scoliosis, cervical ribs, absent or rudimentary ribs, spina 
bifida occulta, or short 4th metacarpal was not higher in the affected 
individuals as compared to their unaffected relatives. Except for falx 
calcification, the frequency of radiological manifestations was similar in 
different age groups. Cranial CT or MRI in 42 affected individuals revealed 
asymmetric or dilated ventricles in 24%, cerebral atrophy in 10%, cavum septum 
pellucidum in 19%, dysgenesis or agenesis of the corpus callosum in 10%, and 
meningioma in 5%. Ovarian fibromas were detected in 17% of females.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports the varied radiological manifestations of NBCCS. 
In the absence of major features such as basal cell carcinomas, jaw cysts, or 
falx calcification, which is often not evident until the teen years, other 
radiological manifestations of the disorder can permit early diagnosis of NBCCS 
in childhood. This will allow optimum surveillance for medulloblastoma and other 
neoplasms (cardiac fibromas and basal cell carcinomas) associated with NBCCS.

DOI: 10.1097/01.gim.0000145045.17711.1c
PMID: 15545745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]