1. Blood. 2005 Mar 15;105(6):2380-3. doi: 10.1182/blood-2004-09-3752. Epub 2004
Nov  16.

The single nucleotide polymorphism Ser128Arg in the E-selectin gene is 
associated with enhanced coagulation during human endotoxemia.

Jilma B(1), Marsik C, Kovar F, Wagner OF, Jilma-Stohlawetz P, Endler G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Clinical Institute for Medical and 
Chemical Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical University Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 
18-20, A-1090 Wien, Austria. bernd.jilma@meduniwien.ac.at

The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) Ser128Arg in the E-selectin gene is 
overrepresented in certain patient groups with atherosclerosis or restenosis. We 
hypothesized and tested whether it may affect cytokine-induced levels of soluble 
(s) E-selectin, or be associated with proinflammatory or procoagulant properties 
in a well-standardized inflammation model. Healthy male volunteers (n = 157) 
received a lipopolysaccharide (LPS) infusion and were genotyped for the S128R 
SNP, and outcome parameters were measured by enzyme immunoassays and real-time 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR, Taqman). The S128R SNP had no pronounced 
effects on basal or inducible sE-selectin levels, or levels of tumor necrosis 
factor or interleukin-6. However, carriers of the S128R SNP had 20% higher 
monocyte counts at 24 hours after LPS infusion. Importantly, the S128R allele 
enhanced thrombin generation by 50% to 80%, as measured by prothrombin fragment 
F(1+2) (P < .01), and hence fibrin formation (D-dimer) 2-fold (P = .01 to P = 
.002). However, tissue factor (TF) mRNA levels were not affected. The S128R 
E-selectin genotype is associated with procoagulant effects in a human model of 
endotoxin-induced, TF-triggered coagulation. This could contribute to its 
linkage with various thrombotic cardiovascular disorders.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2004-09-3752
PMID: 15546947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]