1. Hematol J. 2004;5(6):524-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.thj.6200553.

Spectrum and haplotypes of the HFE hemochromatosis gene in Iran: H63D in 
beta-thalassemia major and the first E277K homozygous.

Karimi M(1), Yavarian M, Delbini P, Harteveld CL, Farjadian S, Fiorelli G, 
Giordano PC.

Author information:
(1)Hemostasis and thrombosis Unit, Hematology Research Center, School of 
Medicine, University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

We present the molecular analysis of HFE gene in 400 Southwest Iranian 
individuals. We have studied 43 newborn, selected for the presence of HbBart's 
at birth, 203 normal adult and 154 transfused patients affected with 
beta-thalassemia. Mutation analysis consisted of amplification and direct 
sequencing using two different pairs of forward and reverse primers. The C282Y 
and S65C mutations were not found. The H63D mutation was present with an allele 
frequency of 0.10 in newborns, 0.082 in normal adults and 0.080 in the 
beta-thalassemia major populations, respectively. No differences were found 
between normal adults and thalassemia major patients suggesting that this 
mutation does not increase mortality in beta-thalassemia. The H63D mutation was 
found associated with haplotype VI in 41% of the chromosomes. Other haplotypes 
were found suggesting a multicentric origin rather than a single mutation of 
European origin. While sequencing exon 4, a G --> A transition was found in the 
proximity of the C282Y mutation. The effect of this single base substitution 
(E277K) previously reported in an Asian individual and now found in homozygous 
form in a young transfused and chelated homozygous beta-thalassemia patient is 
not yet known.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.thj.6200553
PMID: 15570296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]