1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2005 Jan 15;433(2):447-53. doi:
10.1016/j.abb.2004.09.036.

Key NAD+-binding residues in human 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase.

Cho H(1), Hamza A, Zhan CG, Tai HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0082, USA.

NAD(+)-dependent 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH), a member of 
the short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) family, catalyzes the first step 
in the catabolic pathways of prostaglandins and lipoxins, and is believed to be 
the key enzyme responsible for the biological inactivation of these biologically 
potent eicosanoids. The enzyme utilizes NAD(+) specifically as a coenzyme. 
Potential amino acid residues involved in binding NAD(+) and facilitating enzyme 
catalysis have been partially identified. In this report, we propose that three 
more residues in 15-PGDH, Ile-17, Asn-91, and Val-186, are also involved in the 
interaction with NAD(+). Site-directed mutagenesis was used to examine their 
roles in binding NAD(+). Several mutants (I17A, I17V, I17L, I17E, I17K, N91A, 
N91D, N91K, V186A, V186I, V186D, and V186K) were prepared, expressed as 
glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion enzymes in Escherichia coli, and purified 
by GSH-agarose affinity chromatography. Mutants I17E, I17K, N91L, N91K, and 
V186D were found to be inactive. Mutants N91A, N91D, V186A, and V186K exhibited 
comparable activities to the wild type enzyme. However, mutants I17A, I17V, 
I17L, and V186I had higher activity than the wild type. Especially, the 
activities of I17L and V186I were increased nearly 4- and 5-fold, respectively. 
The k(cat)/K(m) ratios of all active mutants for PGE(2) were similar to that of 
the wild type enzyme. However, the k(cat)/K(m) ratios of mutants I17A and N91A 
for NAD(+) were decreased 5- and 10-fold, respectively, whereas the k(cat)/K(m) 
ratios of mutants I17V, N91D, V186I, and V186K for NAD(+) were comparable to 
that of the wild type enzyme. The k(cat)/K(m) ratios of mutants I17L and V186A 
for NAD(+) were increased over nearly 2-fold. These results suggest that Ile-17, 
Asn-91, and Val-186 are involved in the interaction with NAD(+) and contribute 
to the full catalytic activity of 15-PGDH.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2004.09.036
PMID: 15581601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]