1. J Exp Med. 2005 Jan 3;201(1):95-104. doi: 10.1084/jem.20041912. Epub 2004 Dec 
28.

Identification of poxvirus CD8+ T cell determinants to enable rational design 
and characterization of smallpox vaccines.

Tscharke DC(1), Karupiah G, Zhou J, Palmore T, Irvine KR, Haeryfar SM, Williams 
S, Sidney J, Sette A, Bennink JR, Yewdell JW.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
davidT@qimr.edu.au

The large size of poxvirus genomes has stymied attempts to identify determinants 
recognized by CD8+ T cells and greatly impeded development of mouse smallpox 
vaccination models. Here, we use a vaccinia virus (VACV) expression library 
containing each of the predicted 258 open reading frames to identify five 
peptide determinants that account for approximately half of the VACV-specific 
CD8+ T cell response in C57BL/6 mice. We show that the primary immunodominance 
hierarchy is greatly affected by the route of VACV infection and the poxvirus 
strain used. Modified vaccinia virus ankara (MVA), a candidate replacement 
smallpox vaccine, failed to induce responses to two of the defined determinants. 
This could not be predicted by genomic comparison of viruses and is not due 
strictly to limited MVA replication in mice. Several determinants are 
immunogenic in cowpox and ectromelia (mousepox) virus infections, and 
immunization with the immunodominant determinant provided significant protection 
against lethal mousepox. These findings have important implications for 
understanding poxvirus immunity in animal models and bench-marking immune 
responses to poxvirus vaccines in humans.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20041912
PMCID: PMC2212779
PMID: 15623576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]