1. Hum Genet. 2005 Mar;116(4):247-54. doi: 10.1007/s00439-004-1233-4. Epub 2005
Jan  6.

Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) and susceptibility for 
(pre)neoplastic cervical disease.

Zoodsma M(1), Nolte IM, Schipper M, Oosterom E, van der Steege G, de Vries EG, 
te Meerman GJ, van der Zee AG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology, University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 
30.001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is a critical enzyme regulating the 
metabolism of folate and methionine. The potential influence of MTHFR activity 
on DNA methylation and on the availability of uridylates and thymidylates for 
DNA synthesis and repair presents MTHFR as a candidate for being a 
cancer-predisposing gene. In the present study, we have examined a large study 
population to determine whether the C677T polymorphism at the MTHFR locus 
affects susceptibility for cervical cancer or its precursor, cervical 
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). In addition, we have investigated whether this 
polymorphism is causal, and not merely associated, by typing microsatellite 
markers in the region surrounding the MTHFR gene. A total of 311 CIN and 695 
cervical cancer patients and 115 family-based and 586 unrelated controls was 
analysed. Association analysis showed a decreased cervical cancer risk for 
individuals heterozygous or homozygous for the T-allele, both for squamous cell 
carcinoma (heterozygous odds ration [OR] 0.66 [0.51-0.86]; homozygous OR 0.76 
[0.49-1.16]) and adenocarcinoma (heterozygous OR 0.71 [0.49-1.03]; homozygous OR 
0.34 [0.14-0.81]). No difference was found for high grade CIN (heterozygous OR 
1.03 [0.76-1.40]; homozygous OR 0.91 [0.54-1.55]). A microsatellite haplotype 
containing the C allele was associated with an increased risk for cervical 
cancer and CIN (both among squamous cell carcinomas, adenocarcinomas and CIN 
II-III; OR = 2.61 [1.59-4.27]). Our study thus lends further support to the 
hypothesis that the MTHFR C677T polymorphism is involved in susceptibility 
cervical cancer but also illustrates that, despite the large sample size 
analysed, still larger studies are needed to establish fully the nature of this 
association.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-004-1233-4
PMID: 15635481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]