1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jan 18;102(3):553-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0408210101. Epub 2005 Jan 7.

The carboligation reaction of acetohydroxyacid synthase II: steady-state 
intermediate distributions in wild type and mutants by NMR.

Tittmann K(1), Vyazmensky M, HÃ¼bner G, Barak Z, Chipman DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 84105 
Beer-Sheva, Israel.

The thiamin diphosphate (ThDP)-dependent enzyme acetohydroxyacid synthase (AHAS) 
catalyzes the first common step in branched-chain amino acid biosynthesis. By 
specific ligation of pyruvate with the alternative acceptor substrates 
2-ketobutyrate and pyruvate, AHAS controls the flux through this branch point 
and determines the relative rates of synthesis of isoleucine, valine, and 
leucine, respectively. We used detailed NMR analysis to determine microscopic 
rate constants for elementary steps in the reactions of AHAS II and mutants 
altered at conserved residues Arg-276, Trp-464, and Met-250. In Arg276Lys, both 
the condensation of the enzyme-bound hydroxyethyl-ThDP carbanion/enamine 
(HEThDP) with the acceptor substrates and acetohydroxyacid release are slowed 
several orders of magnitude relative to the wild-type enzyme. We propose that 
the interaction of the guanidinium moiety of Arg-264 with the carboxylate of the 
acceptor ketoacid provides an optimal alignment of substrate and HEThDP orbitals 
in the reaction trajectory for acceptor ligation, whereas its interaction with 
the carboxylate of the covalent HEThDP-acceptor adduct plays a similar role in 
product release. Both Trp-464 and Met-250 affect the acceptor specificity. The 
high preference for ketobutyrate in the wild-type enzyme is lost in Trp464Leu as 
a consequence of similar forward rate constants of carboligation and product 
release for the alternative acceptors. In Met250Ala, the turnover rate is 
determined by the condensation of HEThDP with pyruvate and release of the 
acetolactate product, whereas the parallel steps with 2-ketobutyrate are 
considerably faster. We speculate that the specificity of carboligation and 
product liberation may be cumulative if the former is not completely committed.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0408210101
PMCID: PMC545553
PMID: 15640355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]