1. Biochem J. 2005 May 15;388(Pt 1):387-92. doi: 10.1042/BJ20042064.

Residue 234 in glutathione transferase T1-1 plays a pivotal role in the 
catalytic activity and the selectivity against alternative substrates.

Shokeer A(1), Larsson AK, Mannervik B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Uppsala University, Biomedical Center, Box 576, 
SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.

GST (glutathione transferase) T1-1 plays an important role in the 
biotransformation of halogenated alkanes, which are used in large quantities as 
solvents and occur as environmental pollutants. Many reactions that are 
catalysed by GST T1-1 qualify as detoxification processes, but some reactions 
with dihalogenated alkanes lead to reactive products more toxic than the 
substrates. Murine GST T1-1 is particularly active with dichloromethane, which 
may explain the high carcinogenicity of dichloromethane in the mouse. Human GST 
T1-1 activity is considerably lower with halogenated hydrocarbons and some 
related substrates. Human GST T1-1 is polymorphic with a frequent null 
phenotype, suggesting that it is advantageous, under some circumstances, to lack 
the functional enzyme, which catalyses GSH conjugations that may cause 
bioactivation. The present study shows that amino acid residue 234 is a 
determinant of the differences in catalytic efficiency between the human and the 
rodent enzymes. The replacement of Trp234 in human GST T1-1 by arginine, found 
in the rodent enzyme, enhanced the alkyltransferase activity by an order of 
magnitude with a series of homologous iodoalkanes and some typical GST 
substrates. The specific activity of the alternative mutant Trp234-->Lys was 
lower than for the parental human GST T1-1 with many substrates, showing that a 
positive charge is not sufficient for increased activity. The enhanced activity 
of Trp234-->Arg with alkylating agents was dependent on the substrate tested, 
whereas no increase of the peroxidase activity with cumene hydroperoxide was 
noted. Residue 234 therefore is also involved in the control of the substrate 
selectivity of GST T1-1.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20042064
PMCID: PMC1186729
PMID: 15683365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]