1. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Jan 31;38(1):77-81. doi:
10.5483/bmbrep.2005.38.1.077.

Association analysis of monocyte chemotactic protein-3 (MCP3) polymorphisms with 
asthmatic phenotypes.

Park BL(1), Kim LH, Choi YH, Cheong HS, Park HS, Hong SJ, Choi BW, Lee JH, Uh 
ST, Park CS, Shin HD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Epidemiology, SNP Genetics, Inc., Korea.

The monocyte chemotactic protein-3 (MCP3), on chromosome 17q11.2-q12, is a 
secreted chemokine, which attracts macrophages during inflammation and 
metastasis. In an effort to discover additional polymorphism(s) in genes whose 
variant(s) have been implicated in asthma, we scrutinized the genetic 
polymorphisms in MCP3 to evaluate it as a potential candidate gene for asthma 
host genetic study. By direct DNA sequencing in twenty-four individuals, we 
identified four sequence variants within the 3 kb full genome including 1,000bp 
promoter region of MCP3; one in promoter region (-420T>C), three in intron 
(+136C>G, +563C>T, +984G>A) respectively. The frequencies of those four SNPs 
were 0.020 (-420T>C), 0.038 (+136C>G), 0.080 (+563C>T), 0.035 (+984G>A), 
respectively, in Korean population (n = 598). Haplotypes, their frequencies and 
linkage disequilibrium coefficients (|D'|) between SNP pairs were estimated. The 
associations with the risk of asthma, skin-test reactivity and total serum IgE 
levels were analyzed. Using statistical analyses for association of MCP3 
polymorphisms with asthma development and asthma-related phenotypes, no 
significant signals were detected. In conclusion, we identified four genetic 
polymorphisms in the important MCP3 gene, but no significant associations of 
MCP3 variants with asthma phenotypes were detected. MCP3 variation/haplotype 
information identified in this study will provide valuable information for 
future association studies of other allergic diseases.

DOI: 10.5483/bmbrep.2005.38.1.077
PMID: 15715950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]