1. Neurosci Lett. 2005 Mar 22;377(1):69-74. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2004.11.070.
Epub  2004 Dec 22.

Negative symptoms of schizophrenia could explain discrepant data on the 
association between the 5-HT2A receptor gene and response to antipsychotics.

Hamdani N(1), Bonnière M, Adès J, Hamon M, Boni C, Gorwood P.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Louis Mourier (AP-HP), Service de Psychiatrie, 178 rue des 
Renouillers, 92700 Colombes, France.

Pharmacogenetic studies assessing the role of 5-HT(2A) receptor gene in 
antipsychotic efficacy yielded conflicting data. Phenotypical heterogeneity of 
schizophrenia might explain such discrepancies. For example, negative symptoms 
are known to reflect severity of illness and to restrain therapeutic response. 
On this basis, we re-assessed the possible influence of the -1438A/G 
polymorphism of the 5-HT(2A) receptor gene on the clinical efficacy of atypical 
antipsychotics with focus on several relevant dimensions. One hundred and 
sixteen French schizophrenic subjects treated for at least 1 month by atypical 
antipsychotics were screened for treatment response according to the May and 
Dencker scale. Gender, age at onset, duration and severity of illness, intensity 
of negative and positive symptoms at discharge were investigated. The intensity 
of negative symptoms at discharge was the only variable explaining May and 
Dencker score (p < 0.001), and was significantly associated with the AA genotype 
of the -1438A/G polymorphism of the 5-HT(2A) receptor gene (p = 0.03). However, 
the A allele was not independently associated with refractoriness to atypical 
antipsychotics. Accordingly, the score reached in the Scale for the Assessment 
of Negative Symptoms (SANS) appeared as a confounding factor between therapeutic 
response and the -1438A/G polymorphism of the 5-HT(2A) receptor gene, at least 
in our sample. This data indicate that negative symptoms are worth being 
systematically assessed in pharmacogenetic studies aimed at analysing candidate 
genes in schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2004.11.070
PMID: 15722190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]