1. Menopause. 2005 Mar;12(2):136-43. doi: 10.1097/00042192-200512020-00006.

Plasminogen-activator inhibitor-1 polymorphisms are associated with obesity and 
fat distribution in the Quebec Family Study: evidence of interactions with 
menopause.

Bouchard L(1), Mauriège P, Vohl MC, Bouchard C, Pérusse L.

Author information:
(1)Division of Kinesiology, Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Menopause. 2005 Mar;12(2):121-2. doi: 10.1097/00042192-200512020-00002.

OBJECTIVE: Obesity is associated with increased plasma levels of 
plasminogen-activator inhibitor-1 (PAI1), the major fibrinolysis inhibitor. PAI1 
levels are also increased at menopause, a condition that is associated with fat 
mass gain, especially in the abdominal area.
DESIGN: We hypothesized that genetic variations within PAI1 gene are related to 
the amount of body fat and its regional distribution. We genotyped 666 subjects 
of the Quebec Family Study for five PAI1 gene polymorphisms. Stratified analyses 
were performed with analysis of covariance in men (n = 280) and women (n = 386) 
separately.
RESULTS: PAI1-675 4G/5G polymorphism was strongly associated with body mass 
index (P < or = 0.01) and fat mass (P < or = 0.05) in women. The PAI1-675 4G/5G 
promoter polymorphism and the c.43G<A (p.A15T, rs6092) variant within the exon 1 
were associated with abdominal visceral fat but only in postmenopausal women (P 
< or = 0.05). More specifically, homozygotes for the -675 5G and the 43A alleles 
had about 50% more visceral fat compared to carriers of the -675 4G allele as 
well as carriers of the 43G allele. No association was observed in men.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results suggest that the PAI1 gene is 
associated with obesity and may modulate the changes in adipose tissue 
distribution generally observed at menopause.

DOI: 10.1097/00042192-200512020-00006
PMID: 15772559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]