1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2005 May;39(5):473-7. doi: 10.1002/ppul.20208.

Pulmonary sarcoidosis in a child with cystic fibrosis.

Burton CM(1), Pressler T, Milman N.

Author information:
(1)Division of Lung Transplantation, Department of Medicine B, Rigshospitalet, 
University of Copenhagen, Denmark. cmburton@doctors.net.uk

The co-occurrence of cystic fibrosis (CF) and sarcoidosis is rare. This case 
report describes a patient with both diseases. A 13-year-old girl with known CF 
(homozygous delta F508 defect) presented with a sudden decline in lung function. 
FEV1 decreased from 80% to 64% predicted, and FVC from 90% to 80% predicted. 
Diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (D(L)CO) was 92% predicted. There was no 
history of cough, dyspnea, or reduced exercise tolerance, but she had arthralgia 
of the knee- and ankle-joints. A chest radiograph and CT scan of the thorax 
demonstrated pronounced bilateral hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, 
compatible with pulmonary sarcoidosis. Histological examination of lymph node 
biopsy specimens obtained at mediastinoscopy demonstrated noncaseating 
epithelioid-cell granuloma. The majority of lymphocytes were CD4+ T lymphocytes, 
with a CD4+/CD8+ ratio of 5:1. The patient showed a prompt response to treatment 
with oral corticosteroids, and lung function returned to baseline levels. 
Subsequent radiographic appearances showed almost complete regression of 
mediastinal lymphadenopathy. The probability that CF and sarcoidosis would 
coexist by chance in a Danish child of this age is approximately 1:10(9). The 
collective incidence and geographic distribution of previously described 
patients with coexistent CF and sarcoidosis lend support to an association 
between the two diseases.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.20208
PMID: 15786441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]