1. J Mol Biol. 2005 Apr 15;347(5):965-78. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2005.02.008.

Evidence for structural plasticity of heavy chain complementarity-determining 
region 3 in antibody-ssDNA recognition.

Schuermann JP(1), Prewitt SP, Davies C, Deutscher SL, Tanner JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65211, 
USA.

Anti-DNA antibodies play important roles in the pathogenesis of autoimmune 
diseases. They also represent a unique and relatively unexplored class of 
DNA-binding protein. Here, we present a study of conformational changes induced 
by DNA binding to an anti-ssDNA Fab known as DNA-1. Three crystal structures are 
reported: a complex of DNA-1 bound to dT3, and two structures of the ligand-free 
Fab. One of the ligand-free structures was determined from crystals exhibiting 
perfect hemihedral twinning, and the details of structure determination are 
provided. Unexpectedly, five residues (H97-H100A) in the apex of heavy chain 
complementarity-determining region 3 (HCDR3) are disordered in both ligand-free 
structures. Ligand binding also caused a 2-4A shift of the backbone of Tyr L92 
and ordering of the L92 side-chain. In contrast, these residues are highly 
ordered in the Fab/dT3 complex, where Tyr H100 and Tyr H100A form intimate 
stacking interactions with DNA bases, and L92 forms the 5' end of the binding 
site. The structures suggest that HCDR3 is very flexible and adopts multiple 
conformations in the ligand-free state. These results are discussed in terms of 
induced fit and pre-existing equilibrium theories of ligand binding. Our results 
allow new interpretations of existing thermodynamic and mutagenesis data in 
terms of conformational entropy and the volume of conformational space 
accessible to HCDR3 in the ligand-free state. In the context of autoimmune 
disease, plasticity of the ligand-free antibody could provide a mechanism by 
which anti-DNA antibodies bind diverse host ligands, and thereby contribute to 
pathogenicity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2005.02.008
PMID: 15784256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]