1. Carcinogenesis. 2005 Aug;26(8):1368-73. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgi085. Epub 2005 
Mar 31.

Aurora-A/STK15 T+91A is a general low penetrance cancer susceptibility gene: a 
meta-analysis of multiple cancer types.

Ewart-Toland A(1), Dai Q, Gao YT, Nagase H, Dunlop MG, Farrington SM, Barnetson 
RA, Anton-Culver H, Peel D, Ziogas A, Lin D, Miao X, Sun T, Ostrander EA, 
Stanford JL, Langlois M, Chan JM, Yuan J, Harris CC, Bowman ED, Clayman GL, 
Lippman SM, Lee JJ, Zheng W, Balmain A.

Author information:
(1)UCSF Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA 
94115, USA.

STK15 (Aurora-A) is a serine/threonine kinase involved in mitotic chromosomal 
segregation. A genetic variant in STK15 T+91A (resulting in the amino acid 
substitution F31I) is associated with increased aneuploidy in colon tumors and 
cell transformation in vitro. Since this polymorphism plays a role in mitotic 
control-a process critical for all cancer types-we conducted association 
analyses for risk of cancer development of the colon, breast, prostate, skin, 
lung and esophagus in 10 independent case-control populations. We carried out a 
meta-analysis of these 10 case-control studies together with 5 additional 
published studies for a total of 9549 cases of breast, colon, ovarian, prostate, 
lung, esophageal and non-melanoma skin cancer and 8326 population or 
hospital-based controls. Meta-analysis of three colorectal cancer studies showed 
an increased risk in T+91A homozygotes (OR=1.50; 95% CI of 1.14-1.99). 
Meta-analysis of four breast cancer studies showed increased risk for T+91A 
homozygotes (OR=1.35, 95% CI of 1.12-1.64). The results of the multiple cancer 
type meta-analysis for all 15 studies combined were significant for cancer risk 
in both homozygotes and heterozygotes. The T+91A heterozygotes show an OR of 
1.10 (95% CI of 1.03-1.18, P-value=0.006) and the T+91A homozygotes show an OR 
of 1.40 (95% CI of 1.22-1.59, P-value<0.001) for cancer risk. These results 
confirm that the STK15 T+91A variant is a low penetrance cancer susceptibility 
allele affecting multiple cancer types, and provide genetic evidence from 
large-scale human population studies that genetic stability at the chromosome 
level is an important determinant of cancer susceptibility. The data also 
underline the advantages of comparative association studies involving study 
populations from different ethnic groups for determination of disease risk.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgi085
PMID: 15802297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]