1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2005 Apr 8;6:91. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-6-91.

A restraint molecular dynamics and simulated annealing approach for protein 
homology modeling utilizing mean angles.

Möglich A(1), Weinfurtner D, Maurer T, Gronwald W, Kalbitzer HR.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biophysik und physikalische Biochemie, Universität Regensburg, 
Universitätsstr. 31, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany. andreas.moeglich@unibas.ch

BACKGROUND: We have developed the program PERMOL for semi-automated homology 
modeling of proteins. It is based on restrained molecular dynamics using a 
simulated annealing protocol in torsion angle space. As main restraints defining 
the optimal local geometry of the structure weighted mean dihedral angles and 
their standard deviations are used which are calculated with an algorithm 
described earlier by Doker et al. (1999, BBRC, 257, 348-350). The overall 
long-range contacts are established via a small number of distance restraints 
between atoms involved in hydrogen bonds and backbone atoms of conserved 
residues. Employing the restraints generated by PERMOL three-dimensional 
structures are obtained using standard molecular dynamics programs such as DYANA 
or CNS.
RESULTS: To test this modeling approach it has been used for predicting the 
structure of the histidine-containing phosphocarrier protein HPr from E. coli 
and the structure of the human peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma 
(Ppar gamma). The divergence between the modeled HPr and the previously 
determined X-ray structure was comparable to the divergence between the X-ray 
structure and the published NMR structure. The modeled structure of Ppar gamma 
was also very close to the previously solved X-ray structure with an RMSD of 
0.262 nm for the backbone atoms.
CONCLUSION: In summary, we present a new method for homology modeling capable of 
producing high-quality structure models. An advantage of the method is that it 
can be used in combination with incomplete NMR data to obtain reasonable 
structure models in accordance with the experimental data.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-6-91
PMCID: PMC1127110
PMID: 15819976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]