1. Int J Cancer. 2005 Oct 10;116(6):984-91. doi: 10.1002/ijc.21105.

Association of estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms with breast cancer risk in 
older Caucasian women.

Modugno F(1), Zmuda JM, Potter D, Cai C, Ziv E, Cummings SR, Stone KL, Morin PA, 
Greene D, Cauley JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. modugno+@pitt.edu

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2006 May 1;118(9):2371.

Estrogens exert their effect on the breast through the estrogen receptor. We 
prospectively investigated breast cancer risk associated with 2 polymorphic 
sites in the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1). A total of 4,248 Caucasian 
women from the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures were genotyped for the -401 T/C 
and -354 A/G polymorphisms in ESR1. Cox proportional hazards models were used to 
estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the 
associations between genotypes and breast cancer. During a mean follow-up of 
12.4 years, 252 (5.9%) women developed breast cancer. The HR (95% CI) for breast 
cancer were 0.928 (0.708, 1.22) and 0.834 (0.538, 1.29) for the -354 A/G and A/A 
genotypes, respectively. Interactions with -354 variant were observed for 
smoking (HR = 1.52 and 1.56 for A/G and A/A smokers, respectively; HR = 0.74 and 
0.60 for A/G and A/A non-smokers, respectively; interaction p = 0.03) and 
walking (HR = 0.75 and 1.15 for A/G and A/A walkers, respectively; HR = 0.18 and 
0.49 for A/G and A/A non-walkers, respectively; interaction p = 0.01). There 
were no differences in the HR for the -401 T/C genotypes. An interaction between 
parity and carriage of the T allele was found (HR = 0.60 vs. 1.12 for 
nulliparous vs. parous women; interaction p = 0.03). ESR1 polymorphisms in 
combination with lifestyle factors may be associated with breast cancer risk in 
older Caucasian women.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.21105
PMID: 15856463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]