1. FEBS J. 2005 May;272(9):2304-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04658.x.

Endogenous expression and protein kinase A-dependent phosphorylation of the 
guanine nucleotide exchange factor Ras-GRF1 in human embryonic kidney 293 cells.

Norum JH(1), MÃ©thi T, Mattingly RR, Levy FO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oslo, Norway.

We have previously reported the Ras-dependent activation of the 
mitogen-activated protein kinases p44 and p42, also termed extracellular 
signal-regulated kinases (ERK)1 and 2 (ERK1/2), mediated through Gs-coupled 
serotonin receptors transiently expressed in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 
cells. Whereas Gi- and Gq-coupled receptors have been shown to activate Ras 
through the guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) called Ras-GRF1 (CDC25Mm) 
by binding of Ca2+/calmodulin to its N-terminal IQ domain, the mechanism of Ras 
activation through Gs-coupled receptors is not fully understood. We report the 
endogenous expression of Ras-GRF1 in HEK293 cells. Serotonin stimulation of 
HEK293 cells transiently expressing Gs-coupled 5-HT7 receptors induced protein 
kinase A-dependent phosphorylation of the endogenous human Ras-GRF1 on Ser927 
and of transfected mouse Ras-GRF1 on Ser916. Ras-GRF1 overexpression increased 
basal and serotonin-stimulated ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Mutations of Ser916 
inhibiting (Ser916Ala) or mimicking (Ser916Asp/Glu) phosphorylation did not 
alter these effects. However, the deletion of amino acids 1-225, including the 
Ca2+/calmodulin-binding IQ domain, from Ras-GRF1 reduced both basal and 
serotonin-stimulated ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Furthermore, serotonin treatment of 
HEK293 cells stably expressing 5-HT7 receptors increased [Ca2+]i, and the 
serotonin-induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation was Ca2+-dependent. Therefore, both 
cAMP and Ca2+ may contribute to the Ras-dependent ERK1/2 activation after 5-HT7 
receptor stimulation, through activation of a guanine nucleotide exchange factor 
with activity towards Ras.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04658.x
PMID: 15853814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]