1. Carcinogenesis. 2005 Sep;26(9):1536-41. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgi115. Epub 2005 
May 5.

Polymorphisms in DNA repair genes in the molecular pathogenesis of esophageal 
(Barrett) adenocarcinoma.

Casson AG(1), Zheng Z, Evans SC, Veugelers PJ, Porter GA, Guernsey DL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. 
alan.casson@dal.ca

To test the hypothesis that aberrations of DNA repair contribute to 
susceptibility for the progression of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) 
into Barrett esophagus (BE) and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EADC), we studied the 
frequency of polymorphisms of selected DNA repair genes in patients with GERD (n 
= 126), BE (n = 125) and EADC (n = 56) enrolled in a 2-year prospective 
case-control study. Controls comprised 95 strictly asymptomatic healthy 
individuals. Using genomic DNA extracted from blood samples, we identified 
wild-type and polymorphic variants of XPD (Arg156Arg and Lys751Gln), XRCC1 
(Arg194Trp and Arg399Gln) and XRCC3 (Thr241Met), and the poly (AT) 
insertion/deletion of XPC (PAT). Allelic frequencies were compared between cases 
and controls using logistic regression to calculate age, gender, smoking and 
alcohol-adjusted odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Patients 
with EADC demonstrated a significantly higher frequency of the XPC PAT 
homozygous variant genotype compared with asymptomatic controls (OR = 3.82; 95% 
CI = 1.05-13.93). Significantly reduced frequencies were seen for the XPD 
Lys751Gln homozygous variant genotype in patients with EADC (OR = 0.24; 95% CI = 
0.07-0.88), and for the XRCC1 Arg399Gln homozygous variant genotype in patients 
with BE (OR = 0.38; 95% CI = 0.12-0.64) and GERD (OR = 0.29; 95% CI = 
0.12-0.66). We conclude that the malignant phenotype probably results from a 
summation of polymorphic nucleotide excision repair genes showing opposing 
effects (an increased risk of XPC versus a protective effect of XPD). The 
protective effect of the homozygous variant of XRCC1 Arg399Gln for GERD and BE 
suggests that base excision repair alterations may occur early in progression to 
EADC, likely in response to GERD-induced endogenous oxidative or inflammatory 
DNA damage. As GERD and BE are highly prevalent in the general population, this 
protective effect may well explain why only a fraction of individuals with GERD 
and BE progress into invasive EADC.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgi115
PMID: 15878910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]