1. Neuroscience. 2005;133(2):393-403. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005.02.026.

Protein kinase Calpha modulates depolarizaton-evoked changes of intracellular 
Ca2+ concentration in a rat pheochromocytoma cell line.

Fontainhas AM(1), Obukhov AG, Nowycky MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Medicine and 
Dentistry New Jersey-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07101-1709, USA.

Conventional protein kinase C (cPKC) isoforms are activated by a coincident rise 
in cytosolic Ca(2+) and membrane-bound diacylglycerol. In excitable cells, cPKC 
may be activated by Ca(2+) influx through voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels (VGCC). 
cPKCs, in turn, are known to modulate the activity of VGCC. We examined whether 
PKCalpha, a cPKC, could be activated by depolarization in a neuroendocrine cell 
line and whether activation occurred on a time scale that modulated the 
depolarization-evoked intracellular Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)](i)) signal. 
Pheochromocytoma cells (PC12 cells) were transfected with wild-type and mutant 
forms of PKCalpha labeled with yellow fluorescent protein to monitor kinase 
translocation. Simultaneously, [Ca(2+)](i) changes were monitored with fura-2. 
Two point mutations that render PKCalpha inactive, D187A in the Ca(2+) binding 
site and K368R in the ATP binding site, significantly prolonged the time-to-peak 
of the depolarization-evoked [Ca(2+)](i) signal. A mutation that modulates 
membrane insertion (W58G) and two mutations of an autophosphorylation site 
(S657A, S657E) had no effect on the kinetics of the [Ca(2+)](i) signal. We 
conclude that in PC12 cells, Ca(2+) entry through VGCC rapidly activates 
PKCalpha, and that PKCalpha can modulate the Ca(2+) signal on a physiologically 
relevant time scale. Point mutations of PKCalpha can be used as specific and 
potent modulators of the PKC signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005.02.026
PMID: 15878642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]