1. Ann Neurol. 2005 Jul;58(1):50-7. doi: 10.1002/ana.20514.

A PD-1 polymorphism is associated with disease progression in multiple 
sclerosis.

Kroner A(1), Mehling M, Hemmer B, Rieckmann P, Toyka KV, Mäurer M, Wiendl H.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Group for Multiple Sclerosis and Neuroimmunology, 
Department of Neurology, Bayerische Julius-Maximilians Universität, Würzburg, 
Germany.

T cells are considered to play a pivotal role in orchestrating the self-reactive 
immune responses in multiple sclerosis (MS). Programmed death 1 (PD-1) is a 
member of the B7/CD28 superfamily of costimulatory molecules exerting inhibitory 
functions on T cells. Recently, an intronic 7146G/A polymorphism within the PD-1 
gene was described and suggested to be associated with autoimmunity. We 
investigated whether this genetic polymorphism is a genetic modifier for risk 
and progression of MS. Blood samples from 939 German MS patients (mean age, 39 
years; range, 13-71; 566 patients [60%] with relapsing-remitting MS, 279 (30%) 
with secondary, and 94 (10%) with primary progressive MS) and 272 healthy white 
controls were tested. Genotyping was performed by polymerase chain reaction and 
restriction enzyme digestion; results were confirmed by automatic sequencing. A 
significant association of the mutated allele with a progressive disease course 
was detected (44% 7146G vs 56% 7146A, chi(2) p = 0.002). Consequences of the 
PD-1 mutation for T-cell function were assessed ex vivo in some patients using 
microsphere-stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes and purified CD4 cells. 
Importantly, PD-1-mediated inhibition of T-cell cytokine secretion 
(interferon-gamma) is impaired in patients carrying the PD-1 polymorphism. In 
conclusion, our data suggest that PD-1 polymorphism is a genetic modifier of the 
progression of MS, possibly through inducing a partial defect in PD-1-mediated 
inhibition of T-cell activation.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.20514
PMID: 15912506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]