1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Jul 15;14(14):1965-75. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi202. Epub 2005 
May 25.

Functional dissection of sequence-specific NKX2-5 DNA binding domain mutations 
associated with human heart septation defects using a yeast-based system.

Inga A(1), Reamon-Buettner SM, Borlak J, Resnick MA.

Author information:
(1)Chromosome Stability Section, Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, NIH, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709, USA.

Human heart development requires an orderly coordination of transcriptional 
programs, with the homeodomain protein NKX2-5 being one of the key transcription 
factors required for the differentiation of mesodermal progenitor cells. Indeed, 
lack of Nkx2-5 in mice arrests heart development prior to looping, resulting in 
embryonic lethality. There are 28 germline NKX2-5 mutations identified in humans 
that are associated with congenital heart disease, and we recently reported 
multiple somatic mutations in patients with complex cardiac malformations. To 
address the functional consequences of single and multiple mutations of NKX2-5, 
we developed a functional assay in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 
which could determine transactivation capacity and specificity of expressed 
NKX2-5 alleles towards targeted response element (RE) sequences. We focused on 
mutants of the third helix, which provides DNA binding specificity, and 
characterized mutations that were highly associated with either ventricular 
(VSD) or atrioventricular (AVSD) septal defects. Individual mutants exhibited 
partial to complete loss of function and differences in transactivation capacity 
between the various REs. The mutants also exhibited gene dosage rather than 
dominant effects on transcription. Surprisingly, all AVSD patients (22/23) had a 
single K183E mutation in the DNA binding domain, which resulted in 
transcriptional inactivation. None of the VSD patients had this mutation; yet 
14/29 had at least one mutation in the third helix leading to either 
inactivation or reduction of NKX2-5 transactivation. Therefore, mutations of 
somatic origin in the binding domains of NKX2-5 were associated specifically 
with AVSD or VSD and resulted in loss of protein function.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi202
PMID: 15917268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]