1. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005 Jul 1;62(3):665-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.11.026.

Gastrostomy in oropharyngeal cancer patients with ERCC4 (XPF) germline variants.

Kornguth DG(1), Garden AS, Zheng Y, Dahlstrom KR, Wei Q, Sturgis EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA.

PURPOSE: ERCC4 (XPF) plays a role in both recombinant DNA repair and nucleotide 
excision repair, which involve repairing radiation-induced genetic damage. We 
hypothesized that two ERCC4 single-nucleotide polymorphisms are associated with 
normal-tissue toxicity in patients treated with radiotherapy for oropharyngeal 
squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC).
METHODS AND MATERIALS: A retrospective review of the medical records of 130 
patients with OPSCC who were prospectively recruited into a molecular 
epidemiologic study was performed to determine whether a long-term percutaneous 
feeding gastrostomy (LPFG) tube (a tube required for more than 180 days) had 
been used during and after definitive radiotherapy. We determined the genotype 
of the ERCC4 G1244A and T2505C polymorphisms using standard polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment-length polymorphism techniques on DNA extracted 
from peripheral blood lymphocytes.
RESULTS: Of 130 patients, 100 (77%) were evaluable for the ERCC4 G1244A 
polymorphism in exon 8, and 122 (94%) were evaluable for the ERCC4 T2505C 
polymorphism in exon 11. The ERCC4 G1244A polymorphism was associated with a 
decreased need for LPFG, but this was not statistically significant (adjusted 
odds ratio = 0.53; 95% confidence interval, 0.10-2.78). Sixteen (32%), 9 (14%), 
and 1 (10%) of patients with the wild-type homozygous TT genotype of ERCC4 
T2505C, the heterozygous TC genotype, and the homozygous CC polymorphic 
genotype, respectively, required LPFG. These results suggest that the ERCC4 
2505C allele was associated with a reduced need for LPFG (adjusted odds ratio = 
0.20; 95% confidence interval, 0.06-0.67). Furthermore, the need for LPFG was 
reduced by having more than 1 ERCC4 2505C allele and further for having both the 
ERCC4 1244A and 2505C polymorphic alleles, but this was not statistically 
significant. In addition, the actual time of gastrostomy dependence was 
associated with the T2505C polymorphism based on the Kaplan-Meier method (p = 
0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the ERCC4 T2505C polymorphism may be 
associated with improved recovery from radiation treatment toxicity in patients 
with OPSCC. Further study with larger sample sizes and prospective measure of 
radiotherapy-induced toxicity is warranted.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.11.026
PMID: 15936543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]