1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2005 Jul 2;6:167. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-6-167.

Prediction of twin-arginine signal peptides.

Bendtsen JD(1), Nielsen H, Widdick D, Palmer T, Brunak S.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, BioCentrum-DTU, Technical University 
of Denmark, Building 208, DK-2800, Lyngby, Denmark. jannick@cbs.dtu.dk

BACKGROUND: Proteins carrying twin-arginine (Tat) signal peptides are exported 
into the periplasmic compartment or extracellular environment independently of 
the classical Sec-dependent translocation pathway. To complement other methods 
for classical signal peptide prediction we here present a publicly available 
method, TatP, for prediction of bacterial Tat signal peptides.
RESULTS: We have retrieved sequence data for Tat substrates in order to train a 
computational method for discrimination of Sec and Tat signal peptides. The TatP 
method is able to positively classify 91% of 35 known Tat signal peptides and 
84% of the annotated cleavage sites of these Tat signal peptides were correctly 
predicted. This method generates far less false positive predictions on various 
datasets than using simple pattern matching. Moreover, on the same datasets TatP 
generates less false positive predictions than a complementary rule based 
prediction method.
CONCLUSION: The method developed here is able to discriminate Tat signal 
peptides from cytoplasmic proteins carrying a similar motif, as well as from Sec 
signal peptides, with high accuracy. The method allows filtering of input 
sequences based on Perl syntax regular expressions, whereas hydrophobicity 
discrimination of Tat- and Sec-signal peptides is carried out by an artificial 
neural network. A potential cleavage site of the predicted Tat signal peptide is 
also reported. The TatP prediction server is available as a public web server at 
http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TatP/.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-6-167
PMCID: PMC1182353
PMID: 15992409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]