1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jul 19;33(13):4007-15. doi: 10.1093/nar/gki710. Print 
2005.

Functional studies on the ATM intronic splicing processing element.

Lewandowska MA(1), Stuani C, Parvizpur A, Baralle FE, Pagani F.

Author information:
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Padriciano 99, 
34012 Trieste, Italy.

In disease-associated genes, the understanding of the functional significance of 
deep intronic nucleotide variants may represent a difficult challenge. We have 
previously reported a new disease-causing mechanism that involves an intronic 
splicing processing element (ISPE) in ATM, composed of adjacent consensus 5' and 
3' splice sites. A GTAA deletion within ISPE maintains potential adjacent splice 
sites, disrupts a non-canonical U1 snRNP interaction and activates an aberrant 
exon. In this paper, we demonstrate that binding of U1 snRNA through 
complementarity within a approximately 40 nt window downstream of the ISPE 
prevents aberrant splicing. By selective mutagenesis at the adjacent consensus 
ISPE splice sites, we show that this effect is not due to a resplicing process 
occurring at the ISPE. Functional comparison of the ATM mouse counterpart and 
evaluation of the pre-mRNA splicing intermediates derived from affected cell 
lines and hybrid minigene assays indicate that U1 snRNP binding at the ISPE 
interferes with the cryptic acceptor site. Activation of this site results in a 
stringent 5'-3' order of intron sequence removal around the cryptic exon. 
Artificial U1 snRNA loading by complementarity to heterologous exonic sequences 
represents a potential therapeutic method to prevent the usage of an aberrant 
CFTR cryptic exon. Our results suggest that ISPE-like intronic elements binding 
U1 snRNPs may regulate correct intron processing.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki710
PMCID: PMC1178006
PMID: 16030351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]