1. PLoS Biol. 2005 Sep;3(9):e277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0030277. Epub 2005
Aug  16.

Functional identification of catalytic metal ion binding sites within RNA.

Hougland JL(1), Kravchuk AV, Herschlag D, Piccirilli JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 3:e310.

The viability of living systems depends inextricably on enzymes that catalyze 
phosphoryl transfer reactions. For many enzymes in this class, including several 
ribozymes, divalent metal ions serve as obligate cofactors. Understanding how 
metal ions mediate catalysis requires elucidation of metal ion interactions with 
both the enzyme and the substrate(s). In the Tetrahymena group I intron, 
previous work using atomic mutagenesis and quantitative analysis of metal ion 
rescue behavior identified three metal ions (MA, MB, and MC) that make five 
interactions with the ribozyme substrates in the reaction's transition state. 
Here, we combine substrate atomic mutagenesis with site-specific 
phosphorothioate substitutions in the ribozyme backbone to develop a powerful, 
general strategy for defining the ligands of catalytic metal ions within RNA. In 
applying this strategy to the Tetrahymena group I intron, we have identified the 
pro-SP phosphoryl oxygen at nucleotide C262 as a ribozyme ligand for MC. Our 
findings establish a direct connection between the ribozyme core and the 
functionally defined model of the chemical transition state, thereby extending 
the known set of transition-state interactions and providing information 
critical for the application of the recent group I intron crystallographic 
structures to the understanding of catalysis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0030277
PMCID: PMC1184590
PMID: 16092891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no conflicts of 
interest exist.