1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 21;280(42):35119-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M505895200. Epub 
2005 Aug 22.

Disease-related modifications in tau affect the interaction between Fyn and Tau.

Bhaskar K(1), Yen SH, Lee G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of 
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Microtubule-associated protein tau is the major component of the neurofibrillary 
tangles of Alzheimer disease (AD) and is genetically linked to frontotemporal 
dementias (FTDP-17). We have recently shown that tau interacts with the SH3 
domain of Fyn, an Src family non-receptor tyrosine kinase, and is 
tyrosine-phosphorylated by Fyn on Tyr-18. Also, tyrosine-phosphorylated tau is 
present in the neuropathology of AD. To determine whether alterations in the 
tau-Fyn interaction might correlate with disease-related factors in AD and 
FTDP-17, we have performed real-time surface plasmon resonance studies on a 
panel of 21 tau constructs with Fyn SH3. We report that the interaction between 
Fyn SH3 and 3R-tau was 20-fold higher than that with 4R-tau. In addition, the 
affinity between 4R-tau and Fyn SH3 was increased 25-45-fold by 
phosphorylation-mimicking mutations or by FTDP-17 mutations. In vitro kinase 
reactions show that tau, with lower affinity SH3 interactions, exhibited a lower 
level of Tyr-18 phosphorylation under our reaction conditions. Lastly, we have 
demonstrated that tau is phosphorylated on Tyr-18 in the tau P301L mouse model 
for tauopathy (JNPL3). In summary, our results suggest that disease-related 
phosphorylation and missense mutations of tau increase association of tau with 
Fyn. Because these effects are mediated through the 4R component of the tau 
population, these results also have implications for the FTDP-17 diseases caused 
by increased expression of 4R-tau. Our data support a role for the Fyn-tau 
interaction in neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M505895200
PMID: 16115884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]