1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Oct 1;14(19):2881-92. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi320. Epub 2005
Aug  22.

FcgammaRIIB Ile232Thr transmembrane polymorphism associated with human systemic 
lupus erythematosus decreases affinity to lipid rafts and attenuates inhibitory 
effects on B cell receptor signaling.

Kono H(1), Kyogoku C, Suzuki T, Tsuchiya N, Honda H, Yamamoto K, Tokunaga K, 
Honda Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Graduate School 
of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

The B cell inhibitory receptor FcgammaRIIB plays crucial roles in the 
maintenance of self-tolerance. We have identified a polymorphism FCGR2B c.695T>C 
that results in the non-conservative replacement of 232Ile at the transmembrane 
helix to Thr and demonstrated the association of the polymorphism with 
susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in Asians. In this study, 
we examined the impact of FCGR2B c.695T>C on the functional properties of 
FcgammaRIIB by expressing each allele product in a human B cell line ST486 
lacking endogenous FcgammaRIIB. FcgammaRIIB 232Thr was found to be significantly 
less potent than wild-type 232Ile in inhibiting B cell receptor (BCR)-mediated 
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate accumulation, Akt and PLCgamma2 
activation and calcium mobilization, and to display decreased levels of tyrosine 
phosphorylation and SH2-containing 5'-inositolphosphate phosphatase recruitment 
compared with 232Ile after IgG Fc-mediated coligation with BCR. Notably, a 
quantitative analysis of the subcellular distribution of FcgammaRIIB using 
125I-labeled anti-FcgammaRIIB revealed that FcgammaRIIB 232Thr is less 
effectively distributed to detergent-insoluble lipid rafts than 232Ile, findings 
in accordance with the importance of the transmembrane amino acid residues, in 
particular large hydrophobic amino acids including Ile, in the association of 
membrane proteins with lipid rafts. Given the crucial roles of lipid rafts in 
integrating BCR signaling, decreased association of FcgammaRIIB 232Thr could 
contribute to its impaired inhibitory potential. Collectively, the present 
findings indicate that the Ile232Thr substitution affects the localization and 
function of FcgammaRIIB and that the molecular mechanism may link the 
polymorphism and susceptibility to SLE.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi320
PMID: 16115811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]