1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):36326-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M505059200. Epub 
2005 Aug 23.

The homophilic binding of junctional adhesion molecule-C mediates tumor 
cell-endothelial cell interactions.

Santoso S(1), Orlova VV, Song K, Sachs UJ, Andrei-Selmer CL, Chavakis T.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, NCI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA.

The junctional adhesion molecule C (JAM-C) was recently shown to undergo a 
heterophilic interaction with the leukocyte beta2 integrin Mac-1, thereby 
mediating interactions between vascular cells in inflammatory cell recruitment. 
Here, the homophilic interaction of JAM-C is presented and functionally 
characterized to mediate tumor cell-endothelial cell interactions. Recombinant 
soluble JAM-C in fluid phase bound to immobilized JAM-C as assessed in a 
purified system; moreover, JAM-C-transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells 
adhered to immobilized JAM-C. The homophilic interaction of JAM-C was mediated 
by the isolated amino-terminal Ig domain (D1), but not the carboxyl-terminal Ig 
domain (D2), of the molecule. Dimerization of JAM-A is dependent on the sequence 
RVE in the amino-terminal Ig domain. This motif is conserved in JAM-C 
(Arg64-Ile65-Glu66), and a single amino acid mutation in this motif (E66R) 
abolished the homophilic interaction of JAM-C. The lung carcinoma cell line 
NCI-H522 was found to express JAM-C. NCI-H522 cells adhered to immobilized 
JAM-C, as well as to JAM-C-transfected CHO cells, but not to mock-transfected 
CHO cells or to CHO cells transfected with the JAM-C mutant (E66R). Adhesion of 
NCI-H522 cells to JAM-C protein or JAM-C-transfected CHO cells was abolished in 
the presence of soluble JAM-C or the isolated D1. Furthermore, the adhesion of 
NCI-H522 cells to endothelial cells was significantly blocked by soluble JAM-C 
or the isolated D1. Thus, JAM-C undergoes a homophilic interaction via the 
Arg64-Ile65-Glu66 motif on the membrane-distal Ig domain of the molecule. The 
homophilic interaction of JAM-C can mediate tumor cell-endothelial cell 
interactions and may thereby be involved in the process of tumor cell 
metastasis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M505059200
PMID: 16118203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]