1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 11;280(45):37995-8004. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M508305200. Epub
 2005 Aug 25.

Endoplasmic reticulum retention and associated degradation of a GABAA receptor 
epilepsy mutation that inserts an aspartate in the M3 transmembrane segment of 
the alpha1 subunit.

Gallagher MJ(1), Shen W, Song L, Macdonald RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, 
USA.

A GABA(A) receptor alpha1 subunit epilepsy mutation (alpha1(A322D)) introduces a 
negatively charged aspartate residue into the hydrophobic M3 transmembrane 
domain of the alpha1 subunit. We reported previously that heterologous 
expression of alpha1(A322D)beta2gamma2 receptors in mammalian cells resulted in 
reduced total and surface alpha1 subunit protein. Here we demonstrate the 
mechanism of this reduction. Total alpha1(A322D) subunit protein was reduced 
relative to wild type protein by a similar amount when expressed alone (86 +/- 
6%) or when coexpressed with beta2 and gamma2S subunits (78 +/- 6%), indicating 
an expression reduction prior to subunit oligomerization. In alpha1beta2gamma2S 
receptors, endoglycosidase H deglycosylated only 26 +/- 5% of alpha1 subunits, 
consistent with substantial protein maturation, but in alpha1(A322D)beta2gamma2S 
receptors, endoglycosidase H deglycosylated 91 +/- 4% of alpha1(A322D) subunits, 
consistent with failure of protein maturation. To determine the cellular 
localization of wild type and mutant subunits, the alpha1 subunit was tagged 
with yellow (alpha1-YFP) or cyan (alpha1-CFP) fluorescent protein. Confocal 
microscopic imaging demonstrated that 36 +/- 4% of alpha1-YFPbeta2gamma2 but 
only 5 +/- 1% alpha1(A322D)-YFPbeta2gamma2 colocalized with the plasma membrane, 
whereas the majority of the remaining receptors colocalized with the endoplasmic 
reticulum (55 +/- 4% alpha1-YFPbeta2gamma2S, 86 +/- 3% alpha1(A322D)-YFP). 
Heterozygous expression of alpha1-CFPbeta2gamma2S and 
alpha1(A322D)-YFPbeta2gamma2S or alpha1-YFPbeta2gamma2S and 
alpha1(A322D)-CFPbeta2gamma2S receptors showed that membrane GABA(A) receptors 
contained primarily wild type alpha1 subunits. These data demonstrate that the 
A322D mutation reduces alpha1 subunit expression after translation, but before 
assembly, resulting in endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation and membrane 
alpha1 subunits that are almost exclusively wild type subunits.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M508305200
PMID: 16123039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]