1. Eur Spine J. 2006 May;15(5):613-9. doi: 10.1007/s00586-005-0988-1. Epub 2005
Aug  17.

Intervertebral disc degeneration in relation to the COL9A3 and the IL-1ss gene 
polymorphisms.

Solovieva S(1), Lohiniva J, Leino-Arjas P, Raininko R, Luoma K, Ala-Kokko L, 
Riihim√§ki H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Finnish Institute of 
Occupational Health, 00250 Helsink, Finland. Svetlana.Solovieva@ttl.fi

Disc degeneration is a complex condition in which environmental factors and 
multiple genes are expected to act together to determine the degenerative 
phenotype. Recently associations of COL9A2 (Trp2 allele) and COL9A3 (Trp3 
allele) polymorphisms with lumbar disc disease characterized by sciatica have 
been reported. However, it is not known whether the Trp2 or Trp3 alleles 
contribute to disc degeneration (DD). In this study, the association between the 
collagen genes polymorphisms and lumbar DD was investigated. Furthermore, the 
influence of the IL-1beta(C(3954)-T) polymorphism on the association of collagen 
genes polymorphisms with DD was examined. Lumbar intervertebral discs of 135 
middle-aged occupationally active men were evaluated with magnetic resonance 
imaging, using decreased signal intensity of the nucleus pulposus, disc bulges, 
and decreased disc height as signs of degeneration. Blood samples were analysed 
for the presence of COL9A3 and COL9A2 tryptophan alleles (Trp3 and Trp2 
alleles). The COL11A2, COL2A1 and IL-1beta(C(3954)-T) polymorphisms were also 
analysed. Multivariate logistic regression analysis allowing for occupation and 
body mass index showed that the carriage of the Trp3 allele in the absence of 
the IL-1betaT(3954) allele increased the risk of dark nucleus pulposus (OR 7.0, 
95% CI 1.3-38.8) and joint occurrence of degenerative changes (OR 8.0, 95% CI 
1.4-44.7). There was no effect of the Trp3 allele on DD in the presence of the 
IL-1betaT(3954) allele. The carriers of the COL11A2 minor allele had an 
increased risk of disc bulges (OR 2.1, 95% CI 1.0-4.2) as compared with 
non-carriers. The results suggest that the effect of the COL9A3 gene 
polymorphism on DD might be modified by the IL-1beta gene polymorphism.

DOI: 10.1007/s00586-005-0988-1
PMCID: PMC3489335
PMID: 16133074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]