1. Hypertension. 2005 Nov;46(5):1103-10. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000185462.08685.da.
 Epub 2005 Oct 3.

Endothelial NO synthase polymorphisms and postural tachycardia syndrome.

Garland EM(1), Winker R, Williams SM, Jiang L, Stanton K, Byrne DW, Biaggioni I, 
Cascorbi I, Phillips JA 3rd, Harris PA, RÃ¼diger H, Robertson D.

Author information:
(1)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 
37232-2195, USA. emily.garland@vanderbilt.edu

Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a heterogeneous disorder characterized 
by an excessive rise in heart rate and symptoms consistent with cerebral 
hypoperfusion in the upright position. NO produced by endothelial NO synthase is 
a significant factor in the regulation of blood flow. Genetic polymorphisms in 
the promoter region (T-786C) and exon 7 (E298D) of the NO synthase isoform 3 
gene affect enzyme activity and have been associated with a number of 
cardiovascular diseases. Because some findings in POTS suggest aberrant 
NO-mediated functions, we postulated that the variant genotypes of these 
polymorphisms may increase the risk of developing POTS and correlate with more 
severe symptoms. We genotyped 136 patients with POTS (mean age 32.2+/-9.9 years; 
46 men and 90 women) from Nashville, Tenn, and Vienna, Austria, and compared 
them with 191 healthy volunteers (mean age 29.1+/-8.0 years; 127 men and 64 
women). Participants also underwent orthostatic testing with blood pressure, 
heart rate, and plasma norepinephrine measurements while supine and upright. The 
frequencies of the -786CC and 298DD genotypes were significantly lower in 
patients with POTS than in control subjects (odds ratio [OR], 0.28; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 0.14 to 0.57; P=0.001 for -786CC; and OR, 0.44; 95% 
CI, 0.21 to 0.91; P=0.033 for 298DD). According to 2-locus genotype analyses, 
patients with -786CC and 298EE or 298ED experienced the largest changes in heart 
rate and plasma norepinephrine with standing. These results indicate that NO may 
influence the development of POTS and the severity of POTS symptoms.

DOI: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000185462.08685.da
PMID: 16203873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]