1. Antiviral Res. 2005 Dec;68(3):116-23. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2005.07.008.
Epub  2005 Sep 9.

Polymer-bound 6' sialyl-N-acetyllactosamine protects mice infected by influenza 
virus.

Gambaryan AS(1), Boravleva EY, Matrosovich TY, Matrosovich MN, Klenk HD, 
Moiseeva EV, Tuzikov AB, Chinarev AA, Pazynina GV, Bovin NV.

Author information:
(1)M.P. Chumakov Institute of Poliomyelitis and Viral Encephalitides, Russian 
Academy of Medical Sciences, 142782 Moscow, Russia.

To develop a mouse model for testing receptor attachment inhibitors of human 
influenza viruses, the human clinical virus isolate in MDCK cells A/NIB/23/89M 
(H1N1) was adapted to mice by serial passaging through mouse lungs. The 
adaptation enhanced the viral pathogenicity for mice, but preserved the virus 
receptor binding phenotype, preferential binding to 2-6-linked sialic acid 
receptors and low affinity for 2-3-linked receptors. Sequencing of the HA gene 
of the mouse-adapted virus A/NIB/23/89-MA revealed a loss of the glycosylation 
sites in positions 94 and 163 of HA1 and substitutions 275Asp-->Gly in HA1 and 
145Asn-->Asp in HA2. The four mouse strains tested differed significantly in 
their sensitivity to A/NIB/23/89-MA with the sensitivity increasing in the order 
of BALB/cJCitMoise, C57BL/6LacSto, CBA/CaLacSto and A/SnJCitMoise strains. 
Testing of protective efficacy of the polyacrylamide conjugate bearing 
Neu5Acalpha2-6Galbeta1-4GlcNAc trisaccharide under conditions of lethal or 
sublethal virus infection demonstrated a strong protective effect of this 
preparation. In particular, aerosol treatment of mice with the polymeric 
attachment inhibitor on 24-110 h after infection completely prevented mortality 
in sensitive animals and lessened disease symptoms in more resistant mouse 
strains.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2005.07.008
PMID: 16214231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]