1. Hepatol Res. 2005 Dec;33(4):306-12. doi: 10.1016/j.hepres.2005.09.037. Epub
2005  Nov 10.

The role of FABP2 gene polymorphism in alcoholic cirrhosis.

Salguero ML(1), Leon RE, Santos A, Roman S, Segura-Ortega JE, Panduro A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Civil Hospital of Guadalajara Fray Antonio 
Alcalde, Universitary Center for the Health Sciences, University of Guadalajara, 
P.O. Box 2-500, Guadalajara, 44280 Jalisco, Mexico; Institute of Molecular 
Biology in Medicine, Universitary Center for the Health Sciences, University of 
Guadalajara, Sierra Mojada 950, Guadalajara, 44340 Jalisco, Mexico.

Hypertriglyceridemia and dietary lipids have been suggested to modulate the 
severity of alcoholic liver disease and the progression to alcoholic cirrhosis 
(AC). The intestinal fatty acid binding protein (IFABP) is the main transporter 
of dietary fatty acids into the enterocyte and has a genetic polymorphism, FABP2 
A54T that has been associated with hypertriglyceridemia. We determined the 
frequency of the FABP2 gene polymorphism using PCR-RFLP and measured serum 
triglycerides, HDL, LDL, total lipids and cholesterol in 67 patients with AC and 
in 124 unrelated healthy individuals. Frequencies of genotypes and alleles were 
similar between the two groups. The healthy subjects, who were homozygous for 
the Thr54 genotype had significantly higher mean triglyceride serum 
concentrations than those homozygous for the Ala54 genotype (P<0.05). However, 
AC patients who were homozygous for the Thr54 genotype, had lower mean 
triglyceride serum concentrations (P<0.01), and had a significantly longer 
period of continued alcohol abuse prior to the diagnosis of liver cirrhosis 
compared to the AC patients homozygous for the Ala54 genotype (P<0.05). Our data 
suggests that the polymorphism Thr54 of the FABP2 gene is associated with a 
later onset of AC in the lower economic status Mexican population studied.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hepres.2005.09.037
PMID: 16289894