1. Int J Immunogenet. 2005 Dec;32(6):383-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1744-313X.2005.00542.x.

Polymorphisms in the interleukin-4 and IL-4 receptor genes and multiple 
sclerosis: a study in Spanish-Basque, Northern Irish and Belgian populations.

Suppiah V(1), Goris A, Alloza I, Heggarty S, Dubois B, Carton H, Antig√ºedad A, 
Mendibe M, McDonnell G, Droogan A, Hawkins S, Graham C, Vandenbroeck K.

Author information:
(1)Applied Genomics Group, McClay Research Centre, School of Pharmacy, The 
Queen's University of Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.

Cytokine gene polymorphisms are known to influence susceptibility and disease 
course of many autoimmune diseases. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic 
autoimmune disease of the central nervous system white matter characterized by 
inflammation, demyelination and axonal damage. We analysed both the well-known 
intronic variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) and +33 C/T single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP) in the IL-4 gene, as well as the functional Q551R SNP in the 
IL4-R gene in a cohort of three distinct populations comprising sporadic cases 
and controls from the northern Spanish Basque Country and Northern Ireland, as 
well as family trios from Belgium. The IL-4 +33 TT genotype was decreased in 
primary progressive (PP) versus relapsing-remitting (RR) patients in the 
Northern Irish population (OR = 0.14; 95% CI = 0.018-1.09). Two-marker haplotype 
distribution of the VNTR and +33 C/T SNP in PP patients differed from that seen 
in RR patients in Northern Ireland (P = 0.03). The R allele of the Q551R SNP was 
significantly under-transmitted in the Belgian trio families (P = 0.003), 
although this effect was not seen in the Northern Irish and Basque data sets. We 
did not identify IL-4-IL4-R gene-gene interaction in determining susceptibility 
or clinical parameters of MS. Disease or genetic heterogeneity or both may be 
responsible for the observed lack of reproduction in different populations. Our 
data reinforce recent findings for a role of IL4-R in susceptibility to MS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1744-313X.2005.00542.x
PMID: 16313303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]