1. PLoS Genet. 2005 Dec;1(6):e61. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0010061. Epub 2005
Dec  2.

A network of multi-tasking proteins at the DNA replication fork preserves genome 
stability.

Budd ME(1), Tong AH, Polaczek P, Peng X, Boone C, Campbell JL.

Author information:
(1)Braun Laboratories, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, 
USA.

To elucidate the network that maintains high fidelity genome replication, we 
have introduced two conditional mutant alleles of DNA2, an essential DNA 
replication gene, into each of the approximately 4,700 viable yeast deletion 
mutants and determined the fitness of the double mutants. Fifty-six 
DNA2-interacting genes were identified. Clustering analysis of genomic synthetic 
lethality profiles of each of 43 of the DNA2-interacting genes defines a network 
(consisting of 322 genes and 876 interactions) whose topology provides clues as 
to how replication proteins coordinate regulation and repair to protect genome 
integrity. The results also shed new light on the functions of the query gene 
DNA2, which, despite many years of study, remain controversial, especially its 
proposed role in Okazaki fragment processing and the nature of its in vivo 
substrates. Because of the multifunctional nature of virtually all proteins at 
the replication fork, the meaning of any single genetic interaction is 
inherently ambiguous. The multiplexing nature of the current studies, however, 
combined with follow-up supporting experiments, reveals most if not all of the 
unique pathways requiring Dna2p. These include not only Okazaki fragment 
processing and DNA repair but also chromatin dynamics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0010061
PMCID: PMC1298934
PMID: 16327883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.