1. Hum Genet. 2006 Mar;119(1-2):29-37. doi: 10.1007/s00439-005-0078-9. Epub 2005 
Dec 8.

Towards compendia of negative genetic association studies: an example for 
Alzheimer disease.

Blomqvist ME(1), Reynolds C, Katzov H, Feuk L, Andreasen N, Bogdanovic N, 
Blennow K, Brookes AJ, Prince JA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Karolinska Institute, Berzeliusvag 
35, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Most genetic sequence variants that contribute to variability in complex human 
traits will have small effects that are not readily detectable with population 
samples typically used in genetic association studies. A potentially valuable 
tool in the gene discovery process is meta-analysis of the accumulated published 
data, but in order to be valid these require a sample of studies representative 
of the true genetic effect and thus hypothetically should include some positive 
and an abundance of negative reports. A survey of the literature on association 
studies for Alzheimer disease (AD) from January 2004-April 2005, identified 138 
studies, 86 of which reported positive findings other than for apolipoprotein E 
(APOE), strongly indicative of publication bias. We report here an analysis of 
62 genetic markers, tested for association with AD risk as well as for possible 
effects upon quantitative indices of AD severity (mini-mental state examination 
scores, age-at-onset, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) beta-amyloid (Abeta) and CSF 
tau proteins). Within this set, only modest signals were present that, with the 
exception of APOE are easily lost when corrections for multiple hypotheses are 
applied. In isolation, results are thus broadly negative. Genes studied 
encompass both novel candidates as well as several recently claimed to be 
associated with AD (e.g. urokinase plasminogen activator (PLAU) and 
acetyl-coenzyme A acetyltransferase 1 (ACAT1)). By reporting these data we hope 
to encourage the publication of gene compendia to guide further studies and aid 
future meta-analyses aimed at resolving the involvement of genes in complex 
human traits.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-005-0078-9
PMID: 16341549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]