1. J Leukoc Biol. 2006 Mar;79(3):611-5. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0705416. Epub 2005 Dec
30.

Role of the pyrin M694V (A2080G) allele in acute myocardial infarction and 
longevity: a study in the Sicilian population.

Grimaldi MP(1), Candore G, Vasto S, Caruso M, Caimi G, Hoffmann E, 
Colonna-Romano G, Lio D, Shinar Y, Franceschi C, Caruso C.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Metodologie Biomediche, Universit√° di Palermo, 
Italy.

A proinflammatory genotype seems to contribute significantly to the risk of 
developing coronary heart disease (CHD). Conversely, the susceptibility alleles 
to inflammatory disease should be infrequent in the genetic background favoring 
longevity. In fact, in a modern environment, attainment of longevity is 
facilitated by an anti-inflammatory status. To evaluate whether inflammatory 
alleles of pyrin, the gene responsible for familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) 
may play an opposite role in CHD and in longevity, we examined three 
FMF-associated mutations, M694V (A2080G), M694I (G2082A), and V726A (T2177C), 
encoded by the FMF gene (MEFV) in 121 patients affected by acute myocardial 
infarction (AMI), in 68 centenarians, and in 196 age-matched controls from 
Sicily. None of the Sicilian subjects studied carried the V726A and the M694I 
FMF-related mutations. The proinflammatory M694V (A2080G) mutation was the only 
one we found, which was over-represented significantly in CHD patients and 
under-represented in oldest old, and intermediate values were in healthy, young 
controls. After adjustment for well-recognized AMI risk factors, the M694V 
allele still predicted a significant risk to develop AMI. So, according to these 
results, we suggest that carrying the proinflammatory M694V pyrin allele may 
increase the risk to develop AMI. Conversely, the wild-type pyrin genotype may 
predispose to a greater chance to live longer in a modern environment with 
reduced pathogen load and improved control of severe infections by antibiotics. 
All these data indicate a strong relationship among inflammation, genetics, CHD, 
and longevity.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0705416
PMID: 16387839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]