1. Pharmacogenomics J. 2006 May-Jun;6(3):200-10. doi: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500362.

Relevance of frequent mu-opioid receptor polymorphisms for opioid activity in 
healthy volunteers.

LÃ¶tsch J(1), Geisslinger G.

Author information:
(1)pharmazentrum frankfurt/ZAFES, Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Johann 
Wolfgang Goethe-University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. 
j.loetsch@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Polymorphisms in the mu-opioid receptor gene (OPRM1) are primary candidate 
sources of clinical variability in opioid therapy. Apart from the 118A>G single 
nucleotide polymorphism, nothing is known about the role of OPRM1 mutations in 
opioid therapy. The influence of the OPRM1 mutations on opioid pharmacodynamics 
was assessed in pooled data from 31 healthy volunteers obtained in previous 
studies with available plasma concentrations and pupil diameters after 
intravenous administration of morphine or morphine-6-glucuronide (M6G). A total 
of 24 candidate ORPM1 mutations were screened for and those found at an allelic 
frequency of at least 5% in the 31 subjects were analyzed for functional 
consequences, using population pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modeling of the 
miotic effects of the opioids as a reliable and sensitive surrogate parameter of 
the central nervous opioid effects. Polymorphisms at an allelic frequency of > 
or =5% (n=310) were 118A>G in exon 1 (11.5%), the IVS2-31G>A (8.9%) and 
IVS2-691C>G (44.5%) SNPs in intron 2. The 118A>G SNP significantly increased the 
values of EC50 by a factor of more than 2 (non-mutated: EC50,morphine=30 nmol/l, 
EC50,M6G=750 nmol/l, 118G carriers: EC50,morphine=66 nmol/l, EC50,M6G=1650 
nmol/l), whereas the IVS2-691C>G SNP had no effect. Based on morphine and M6G, 
the present analysis encourages focusing on the 118A>G SNP when investigating 
the role of OPRM1 mutations for the activity of opioid analgesics. Other OPRM1 
mutations are probably less important either owing to low allelic frequency or 
due to poor indications for functional consequences. This applies to opioid 
potency in the context of opioid therapy but not to pain processing or substance 
addiction, in which opioid receptors are involved but other or additional OPRM1 
mutations may be important.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500362
PMID: 16415919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]