1. Vet Microbiol. 2006 May 31;114(3-4):225-39. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2005.12.008.
 Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Suitability of canine herpesvirus as a vector for oral bait vaccination of 
foxes.

Reubel GH(1), Wright J, Pekin J, French N, Strive T.

Author information:
(1)Pest Animal Control Cooperative Research Centre, CSIRO Sustainable 
Ecosystems, GPO Box 284, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.

Studies were conducted to evaluate the feasibility of using canine herpesvirus 
(CHV) as a vaccine vector for bait-delivered oral vaccination of wild foxes. To 
test the viability of CHV in baits, CHV was freeze-dried, incorporated into 
different baits, stored, and the remaining viral infectivity tested in cell 
culture after varying periods of time at different storage temperatures. 
Experimental baits (mouse carcasses) and commercial baits (FOXOFF and PROBAIT) 
were prepared with either liquid or freeze-dried CHV and tested in two fox 
trials for their capacity to induce CHV-specific antibodies following oral 
baiting. Freeze-drying and storage temperatures below 0 degrees C had a 
stabilizing effect to virus infectivity. When stored at -20 degrees C, 
freeze-dried CHV retained its full infectivity for up to 3 months in PROBAIT 
baits, the remaining infectivity in FOXOFF baits was 100-fold less. Oral baiting 
with CHV induced antiviral serum antibodies in all vaccinated foxes (20/20). 
None of the vaccinated foxes became ill or shed infectious virus into the 
environment although viral DNA was detected in body secretions as evaluated by 
PCR. The results indicate that CHV can be freeze-dried and stored over extended 
periods of time without loosing much of its infectivity. This is the first 
report of CHV being used for oral bait vaccination of foxes. It appears that CHV 
is well suited for use as a recombinant vector for wild canids.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2005.12.008
PMCID: PMC7126022
PMID: 16417978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]