1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Feb 9;34(3):928-38. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkj477. Print
2006.

Mechanisms of transcriptional repression of cell-cycle G2/M promoters by p63.

Testoni B(1), Mantovani R.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomolecolari e Biotecnologie, Universit√† di Milano 
Via Celoria 26, 20133 Milano, Italy.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jan;42(2):1391.
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Aug 11;51(14):7705-7708. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad542.

p63 is a developmentally regulated transcription factor related to p53, which 
activates and represses specific genes. The human AEC 
(Ankyloblepharon-Ectodermal dysplasia-Clefting) and EEC (Ectrodactyly-Ectodermal 
dysplasia-Cleft lip/palate) syndromes are caused by missense mutations of p63, 
within the DNA-binding domain (EEC) or in the C-terminal sterile alpha motif 
domain (AEC). We show here that p63 represses transcription of cell-cycle G(2)/M 
genes by binding to multiple CCAAT core promoters in immortalized and primary 
keratinocytes. The CCAAT-activator NF-Y and DeltaNp63alpha are associated in 
vivo and a conserved alpha-helix of the NF-YC histone fold is required. p63 AEC 
mutants, but not an EEC mutant, are incapable to bind NF-Y. DeltaNp63alpha, but 
not the AEC mutants repress CCAAT-dependent transcription of G(2)/M genes. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation recruitment assays establish that the AEC mutants 
are not recruited to G(2)/M promoters, while normally present on 14-3-3sigma, 
which contains a sequence-specific binding site. Surprisingly, the EEC C306R 
mutant activates transcription. Upon keratinocytes differentiation, NF-Y and p63 
remain bound to G(2)/M promoters, while HDACs are recruited, histones 
deacetylated, Pol II displaced and transcription repressed. Our data indicate 
that NF-Y is a molecular target of p63 and that inhibition of growth activating 
genes upon differentiation is compromised by AEC missense mutations.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkj477
PMCID: PMC1363772
PMID: 16473849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]