1. Biochemistry. 2006 Apr 4;45(13):4231-9. doi: 10.1021/bi052064y.

Role of conserved prolines in the structure and function of the 
Na+/dicarboxylate cotransporter 1, NaDC1.

Joshi AD(1), Pajor AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555-0645, USA.

The Na+/dicarboxylate cotransporter 1 (NaDC1) is a low-affinity transporter for 
citric acid cycle intermediates such as succinate and citrate. The sequence of 
NaDC1 contains a number of conserved proline residues in predicted transmembrane 
helices (TMs) 7 and 10. These transmembrane domains are of particular importance 
because they may be involved in determining the substrate or cation-binding 
affinity in NaDC1. Four conserved proline residues in TMs 7 and 10 of rabbit 
NaDC1 were replaced with alanine to promote ideal alpha helix or glycine to 
promote free conformation, and the mutant transporters were expressed in the 
HRPE cell line. Mutations of prolines in TM 10 produced decreased protein 
expression and activity, whereas mutations of prolines in TM 7 completely 
abolished protein expression and activity. The chemical chaperone glycerol was 
found to improve the expression of the Pro-351 mutants in TM 7, suggesting that 
these mutants had defects in trafficking. The inactive mutant transporters at 
position 351 could also be rescued by the addition of a proline at a second 
site. For example, the P351A-F347P mutant had restored activity, although its 
substrate specificity was altered. We conclude that, in TM 7, Pro-327 may be of 
particular importance in the function of the transporter, whereas Pro-351 may 
affect protein targeting. The prolines in TM 10, at positions 523 and 524, may 
not be directly involved in the transporter function but may be necessary for 
maintaining structure.

DOI: 10.1021/bi052064y
PMCID: PMC2547120
PMID: 16566597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]