1. Am J Hypertens. 2006 Apr;19(4):331-8. doi: 10.1016/j.amjhyper.2005.10.003.

HindIII(+/-) polymorphism of the Y chromosome, blood pressure, and serum lipids: 
no evidence of association in three white populations.

Russo P(1), Venezia A, Lauria F, Strazzullo P, Cappuccio FP, Iacoviello L, Barba 
G, Siani A.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Epidemiology & Population Genetics, Institute of Food Sciences, CNR, 
Avellino, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Male sex is associated with elevated levels of cardiovascular risk 
factors, including higher blood pressure (BP). Genetic variants on the Y 
chromosome may contribute to explain the sexual dimorphism in cardiovascular 
diseases. Among them, the HindIII(+/-) polymorphism of the male-specific region 
of the Y chromosome has been associated with BP and serum cholesterol levels, 
with conflicting results. We evaluated the association between the HindIII(+/-) 
polymorphism, prevalence of hypertension, BP, and serum lipid levels in a large 
sample of white men and the previously reported epistatic interaction between 
HindIII(+/-) and the -344C/T polymorphism of the aldosterone synthase gene 
(CYP11B2) on BP.
METHODS: From three European populations (UK n = 422; Belgium n = 313; Italy n = 
1248) 1983 white men were phenotyped for BP and serum lipids and genotyped for 
HindIII(+/-) site and for -344C/T polymorphism in the promoter of CYP11B2 by 
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
RESULTS: A higher frequency of the HindIII (+) was found in Italians (63%) as 
compared to both British (31%) and Belgians (28%) (P < .0001). We found no 
evidence of association of the HindIII(+/-) site with prevalence of 
hypertension, BP, and serum lipids in any of the three European populations 
examined and in the entire sample. Finally, we did not observe any interaction 
between the HindIII(+/-) polymorphism and the -344C/T variant of CYP11B2 on BP.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data do not support the hypothesis that the HindIII(+/-) site 
of the Y chromosome is a marker of cardiovascular risk in white men, 
highlighting the need for replication in genetic association studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjhyper.2005.10.003
PMID: 16580565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]