1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Apr;1764(4):824-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2006.02.008. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

The role of tyrosine 177 in human 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 in 
substrate and inhibitor binding: an unlikely hydrogen bond donor for the 
substrate.

Kim KW(1), Wang Z, Busby J, Tsuruda T, Chen M, Hale C, Castro VM, Svensson S, 
Nybo R, Xiong F, Wang M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Disorders, Amgen Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, Mail 
Stop 29-1-A, Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA.

The catalytic motif (YSASK) at the active site of 11beta-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 1 (11beta-HSD1) is conserved across different species. The 
crystal structures of the human, guinea pig and mouse enzymes have been resolved 
to help identify the non-conserved residues at the active site. A tyrosine 
residue (Y177) upstream of the catalytic motif in human 11beta-HSD1 represents 
the largest difference at the active sites between the human and the rodent 
enzyme where the corresponding residue is glutamine. Although Y177 was 
postulated as a potential hydrogen bond donor in substrate binding in crystal 
structure-based modeling, no experimental evidence is available to support this 
notion. Here, we report that Y177 is not a hydrogen bond donor in substrate 
binding because removal of the hydroxyl group from its side chain by mutagenesis 
(Y177F) did not significantly change the Km value for cortisone. However, 
removal of the hydrophobic side chain by changing tyrosine to alanine (Y177A) or 
substitution with a hydrophilic side chain by changing tyrosine to glutamine 
(Y177Q) increased Km values for cortisone. These data suggest that Y177 is 
involved in substrate binding through its hydrophobic side chain but not by 
hydrogen bonding. In addition, the three mutations had little effect on the 
binding of the rodent substrate 11-dehydrocorticosterone, suggesting that Y177 
does not confer substrate specificity. However, the same mutations reduced the 
affinity of the licorice derived 11beta-HSD1 inhibitor glycyrrhetinic acid by 
about 6- to 10-fold. Interestingly, the affinity of carbenoxolone, the 
hemisuccinate ester of glycyrrhetinic acid with a similar potency against the 
wildtype enzyme, was not drastically affected by the same mutations at Y177. 
These data suggest that Y177 has a unique role in inhibitor binding. Molecular 
modeling with glycyrrhetinic acid led to findings consistent with the 
experimental data and provided potential interaction mechanisms. Our data 
suggest that Y177 plays an important role in both substrate and inhibitor 
binding but it is unlikely a hydrogen bond donor for the substrate.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2006.02.008
PMID: 16580270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]