1. PLoS Med. 2006 Jun;3(6):e168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030168. Epub 2006 May
 9.

Linkage disequilibrium mapping of CHEK2: common variation and breast cancer 
risk.

Einarsdóttir K(1), Humphreys K, Bonnard C, Palmgren J, Iles MM, Sjölander A, Li 
Y, Chia KS, Liu ET, Hall P, Liu J, Wedrén S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Checkpoint kinase 2 (CHEK2) averts cancer development by promoting 
cell cycle arrest and activating DNA repair in genetically damaged cells. 
Previous investigation has established a role for the CHEK2 gene in breast 
cancer aetiology, but studies have largely been limited to the rare 1100delC 
mutation. Whether common polymorphisms in this gene influence breast cancer risk 
remains unknown. In this study, we aimed to assess the importance of common 
CHEK2 variants on population risk for breast cancer by capturing the majority of 
diversity in the gene using haplotype tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(tagSNPs).
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We analyzed 14 common SNPs spanning 52 kilobases (kb) of 
the CHEK2 gene in 92 Swedish women. Coverage evaluation indicated that these 
typed SNPs would efficiently convey association signal also from untyped SNPs in 
the same region. Six of the 14 SNPs predicted well both the haplotypic and 
single SNP variations within CHEK2. We genotyped these six tagSNPs in 1,577 
postmenopausal breast cancer cases and 1,513 population controls, but found no 
convincing association between any common CHEK2 haplotype and breast cancer 
risk. The 1100delC mutation was rare in our Swedish population--0.7% in cases 
and 0.4% in controls--with a corresponding odds ratio for carriers versus 
noncarriers of 2.26 (95% confidence interval, 0.99-5.15). Estimates of the 
population frequency and the odds ratio of 1100delC indicate that our sample is 
representative of a Northern European population.
CONCLUSIONS: Notwithstanding the involvement of the CHEK2 gene in breast cancer 
aetiology, we show that common polymorphisms do not influence postmenopausal 
breast cancer risk.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030168
PMCID: PMC1457009
PMID: 16671833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.