1. Pediatr Transplant. 2006 May;10(3):362-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3046.2005.00464.x.

Successful transplantation in a child with rapid progression of autosomal 
recessive polycystic kidney disease associated with a novel mutation.

Prelog M(1), Bergmann C, Ausserlechner MJ, Fischer H, Margreiter R, Gassner I, 
Brunner A, Jungraithmayr TC, Zerres K, Sergi C, Zimmerhackl LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

Erratum in
    Pediatr Transplant. 2008 Mar;12(2):256. Sergi, E Consolato [corrected to 
Sergi, Consolato].

Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is the most common 
pediatric renal cystic disease with liver involvement. The vast majority of 
patients with ARPKD carry mutations in the recently characterized PKHD1 gene on 
chromosome 6p12. A Turkish female demonstrated rapid growth of both kidneys 
after delivery. Accelerated growth of both kidneys and increasing respiratory 
distress necessitated right-sided nephrectomy at the age of three months. 
Because of persistent dyspnea and ongoing growth of the remaining kidney, the 
second kidney also had to be removed one month later. Biopsies taken from the 
kidney and the liver confirmed the diagnosis of ARPKD histologically. Renal 
ultrasound of the patient's consanguineous parents and her older brother showed 
normal results. PKHD1 mutation analysis yielded a novel homozygous missense 
mutation (c.1116C >G, F372L) in exon 14, coding for an Ig-like domain (TIG), 
possibly involved in the increased growth of the kidneys. Peritoneal dialysis 
was performed for 12 months. The patient had successful transplantation at the 
age of 15 months and is doing well with actual immunosuppression with 
cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, and prednisolone. In conclusion, the 
present case clearly demonstrates the favorable outcome of a child with severe 
ARPKD after bilateral nephrectomy, pre-emptive dialysis, and successful 
transplantation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3046.2005.00464.x
PMID: 16677362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]