1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 May 22;34(9):2736-50. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkl361. Print 
2006.

Downstream signaling mechanism of the C-terminal activation domain of 
transcriptional coactivator CoCoA.

Kim JH(1), Yang CK, Stallcup MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern 
California Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA. jeongkim@usc.edu

The coiled-coil coactivator (CoCoA) is a transcriptional coactivator for nuclear 
receptors and enhances nuclear receptor function by the interaction with the 
bHLH-PAS domain (AD3) of p160 coactivators. The C-terminal activation domain 
(AD) of CoCoA possesses strong transactivation activity and is required for the 
coactivator function of CoCoA with nuclear receptors. To understand how CoCoA AD 
transmits its activating signal to the transcription machinery, we defined 
specific subregions, amino acid motifs and protein binding partners involved in 
the function of CoCoA AD. The minimal transcriptional AD was mapped to 
approximately 91 C-terminal amino acids and consists of acidic, 
serine/proline-rich and phenylalanine-rich subdomains. Transcriptional 
activation by the CoCoA AD was p300-dependent, and p300 interacted physically 
and functionally with CoCoA AD and was recruited to a promoter by the 
interaction with CoCoA AD. The FYDVASAF motif in the CoCoA AD was critical for 
the transcriptional activity of CoCoA AD, the interaction of CoCoA with p300, 
the coactivator function of CoCoA for estrogen receptor alpha and GRIP1 and the 
transcriptional synergy among coactivators GRIP1, CARM1, p300 and CoCoA. Taken 
together these data extend our understanding of the mechanism of downstream 
signaling by the essential C-terminal AD of the nuclear receptor coactivator 
CoCoA; they indicate that p300 is a functionally important interaction partner 
of CoCoA AD and that their interaction potentiates transcriptional activation by 
the p160 coactivator complex.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkl361
PMCID: PMC1464418
PMID: 16717280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]