1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Jun 15;88(12):5237-41. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.88.12.5237.

Molecular mechanism of slow acetylation of drugs and carcinogens in humans.

Blum M(1), Demierre A, Grant DM, Heim M, Meyer UA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Basel, Switzerland.

The acetylation polymorphism is one of the most common genetic variations in the 
transformation of drugs and chemicals. More than 50% of individuals in Caucasian 
populations are homozygous for a recessive trait and are of the "slow 
acetylator" phenotype. They are less efficient than "rapid acetylators" in the 
metabolism of numerous drugs and environmental and industrial chemicals. The 
acetylation polymorphism is associated with an increased risk of drug toxicity 
and with an increased frequency of certain cancers. We report the identification 
of the primary mutations in two alleles of the gene for the N-acetyltransferase 
(NAT; acetyl-CoA:arylamine N-acetyltransferase, EC 2.3.1.5) isozyme NAT2 
associated with slow acetylation. These alleles, M1 and M2, account for more 
than 90% of slow acetylator alleles in the European population we have studied. 
M1 and M2 were identified by restriction fragment length polymorphisms with Kpn 
I and Msp I and subsequently cloned and sequenced. M1 and M2 each are 
characterized by a combination of two different point mutations, one causing an 
amino acid substitution (Ile-113----Thr in M1, Arg-197----Gln in M2), the other 
being silent (C 481----T in M1, C 282----T in M2). Functional expression of M1 
and M2 and of chimeric gene constructs between mutant and wild-type NAT2 in 
COS-1 cells suggests that M1 causes a decrease of NAT2 protein in the liver by 
defective translation, whereas M2 produces an unstable enzyme. On the basis of 
the mutations described here and a rare mutant allele (M3) reported recently, we 
have developed a simple DNA amplification assay that allows the predictive 
genotyping of more than 95% of slow and rapid acetylator alleles and the 
identification of individuals at risk.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.12.5237
PMCID: PMC51847
PMID: 1675794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]