1. Int J Biol Sci. 2006;2(4):179-85. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.2.179. Epub 2006 Jun 10.

The inhibition and treatment of breast cancer with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 
(PARP-1) inhibitors.

De Soto JA(1), Wang X, Tominaga Y, Wang RH, Cao L, Qiao W, Li C, Xu X, 
Skoumbourdis AP, Prindiville SA, Thomas CJ, Deng CX.

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Development and Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, USA.

BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations are responsible for most familial breast carcinomas. 
Recent reports carried out in non-cancerous mouse BRCA1- or BRCA2-deficient 
embryonic stem (ES) cells, and hamster BRCA2-deficient cells have demonstrated 
that the targeted inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP-1) kills BRCA 
mutant cells with high specificity. Although these studies bring hope for BRCA 
mutation carriers, the effectiveness of PARP-1 inhibitors for breast cancer 
remains elusive. Here we present the first in vivo demonstration of PARP-1 
activity in BRCA1-deficient mammary tumors and describe the effects of PARP-1 
inhibitors (AG14361, NU1025, and 3-aminobenzamide) on BRCA1-deficient ES cells, 
mouse and human breast cancer cells. AG14361 was highly selective for BRCA1-/- 
ES cells; however, NU1025 and 3-aminobenzamide were relatively non-selective. In 
allografts of na√Øve ES BRCA1-/- cells there was either partial or complete 
remission of tumors. However, in allografts of mouse, BRCA1-/- mammary tumors, 
there was no tumor regression or remission although a partial inhibition of 
tumor growth was observed in both the BRCA1-/- and BRCA1+/+ allografts. In human 
tumor cells, PARP-1 inhibitors showed no difference in vitro in limiting the 
growth of mammary tumors irrespective of their BRCA1 status. These results 
suggest that PARP-1 inhibitors may non-specifically inhibit the growth of 
mammary tumors.

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.2.179
PMCID: PMC1483123
PMID: 16810332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.