1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007 Jan;32(1):162-70. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301151. 
Epub 2006 Jun 28.

Impact of catechol-O-methyltransferase on prefrontal brain functioning in 
schizophrenia spectrum disorders.

Ehlis AC(1), Reif A, Herrmann MJ, Lesch KP, Fallgatter AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Wuerzburg, 
Wuerzburg, Germany. Ehlis_A@klinik.uni-wuerzburg.de

The enzyme catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) has attracted increasing interest 
regarding a genetic disposition towards schizophrenias and as a modulator of 
prefrontal brain function. A common SNP in the COMT gene causes a Val to Met 
transition at AA158/AA108 (Val158Met), resulting in reduced COMT activity in Met 
allele carriers. An impact of COMT genotype on cognition has been well 
established; however, the exact nature of this influence has yet to be 
elucidated. The aim of this study was to determine whether COMT genotype affects 
an electrophysiological marker of prefrontal activation and neuropsychological 
frontal lobe measures in schizophrenia. To this end, 56 acutely psychotic 
in-patients with schizophrenia spectrum disorders were investigated. Patients 
with the COMT 1947AA (Met/Met) genotype (n=13) were compared to a carefully 
matched sample of patients with a G1947A (Val/Met) genotype (n=15); matching 
criteria included patients' age, handedness, gender distribution, diagnosis, and 
medication status. A small group of six homozygous Val allele carriers was 
additionally included to allow an assessment of possible gene-dosage effects. 
P300 amplitudes and latencies, as well as an electrophysiological marker of 
prefrontal brain function (NoGo-Anteriorization/NGA) and neuropsychological 
measures (Stroop Test, Verbal Fluency, Trail Making Test) were regarded. 
Homozygous Met allele carriers had significantly increased NGA values and 
fronto-central Nogo amplitudes compared to patients with at least one Val 
allele. They also tended to perform better in the Stroop task, as compared to 
the matched group of Val/Met patients. These results indicate that COMT genotype 
exerts a strong impact on prefrontal functioning and executive control in 
schizophrenia spectrum disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301151
PMID: 16823382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]