1. J Mol Biol. 2006 Aug 4;361(1):168-79. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.063. Epub
2006  Jun 13.

Conformational transition between four and five-stranded phenylalanine zippers 
determined by a local packing interaction.

Liu J(1), Zheng Q, Deng Y, Kallenbach NR, Lu M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New 
York, NY 10021, USA.

Alpha-helical coiled coils play a crucial role in mediating specific 
protein-protein interactions. However, the rules and mechanisms that govern 
helix-helix association in coiled coils remain incompletely understood. Here we 
have engineered a seven heptad "Phe-zipper" protein (Phe-14) with phenylalanine 
residues at all 14 hydrophobic a and d positions, and generated a further 
variant (Phe-14(M)) in which a single core Phe residue is substituted with Met. 
Phe-14 forms a discrete alpha-helical pentamer in aqueous solution, while 
Phe-14(M) folds into a tetrameric helical structure. X-ray crystal structures 
reveal that in both the tetramer and the pentamer the a and d side-chains 
interlock in a classical knobs-into-holes packing to produce parallel 
coiled-coil structures enclosing large tubular cavities. However, the presence 
of the Met residue in the apolar interface of the tetramer markedly alters its 
local coiled-coil conformation and superhelical geometry. Thus, short-range 
interactions involving the Met side-chain serve to preferentially select for 
tetramer formation, either by inhibiting a nucleation step essential for 
pentamer folding or by abrogating an intermediate required to form the pentamer. 
Although specific trigger sequences have not been clearly identified in dimeric 
coiled coils, higher-order coiled coils, as well as other oligomeric 
multi-protein complexes, may require such sequences to nucleate and direct their 
assembly.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.063
PMID: 16828114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]