1. Biochem J. 2006 Dec 1;400(2):245-53. doi: 10.1042/BJ20060749.

A single mutation at Tyr143 of human S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase renders 
the enzyme thermosensitive and affects the oxidation state of bound cofactor 
nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide.

Beluzić R(1), Cuk M, Pavkov T, Fumić K, Barić I, Mudd SH, Jurak I, Vugrek O.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Institute Ruder Bosković, Bijenicka 54, 10000 
Zagreb, Croatia.

Recently, we have described the first human case of AdoHcyase 
(S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase) deficiency. Two point mutations in the 
AdoHcyase gene, the missense mutation p.Y143C (AdoHcyase in which Tyr143 is 
replaced by cysteine) and the truncation mutation p.W112stop (AdoHcyase in which 
Trp112 is replaced by opal stop codon) were identified [Barić, Fumić, Glenn, 
Cuk, Schulze, Finkelstein, James, Mejaski-Bosnjak, Pazanin, Pogribny et al. 
(2004) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 4234-4239]. To elucidate the molecular 
and catalytic properties of AdoHcyase, we have made recombinant wild-type and 
mutant p.Y143C (AdoHcyase in which Tyr143 is replaced by cysteine) enzymes for a 
comparative analysis. The catalytic rates of p.Y143C protein in the directions 
of S-adenosylhomocysteine synthesis or hydrolysis are decreased from 65% to 75%. 
Further, the oxidation states of coenzyme NAD differ between mutant and 
wild-type protein, with an increased NADH accumulation in the mutant p.Y143C 
enzyme of 88% NADH (wild-type contains 18% NADH). Quantitative binding of NAD is 
not affected. Native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis showed, that mutant 
p.Y143C subunits are able to form the tetrameric complex as is the wild-type 
enzyme. CD analysis showed that the p.Y143C mutation renders the recombinant 
protein thermosensitive, with an unfolding temperature significantly reduced by 
7 degrees C compared with wild-type protein. Change of Glu115 to lysine in 
wild-type protein causes a change in thermosensitivity almost identical with 
that found in the p.Y143C enzyme, indicating that the thermosensitivity is due 
to a missing hydrogen bond between Tyr143 and Glu115. We emphasize involvement 
of this particular hydrogen bond for subunit folding and/or holoenyzme 
stability. In summary, a single mutation in the AdoHcyase affecting both the 
oxidation state of bound co-factor NAD and enzyme stability is present in a 
human with AdoHcyase deficiency.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20060749
PMCID: PMC1652816
PMID: 16872278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]