1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):33939-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M605819200. Epub 
2006 Sep 5.

Activation of Ras up-regulates pro-apoptotic BNIP3 in nitric oxide-induced cell 
death.

An HJ(1), Maeng O, Kang KH, Lee JO, Kim YS, Paik SG, Lee H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Chungnam 
National University, Daejeon, Korea.

Nitric oxide (NO) produced by NO synthases causes nitration and nitrosylation of 
cellular factors. We have shown previously that endogenously produced or 
exogenously added NO induces expression of BNIP3 (Bcl-2/adenovirus E1B 19 
kDa-interacting protein 3), leading to death of macrophages (Yook, Y.-H., Kang, 
K.-H., Maeng, O., Kim, T.-R., Lee, J.-O., Kang, K.-i., Kim, Y.-S., Paik, S.-G., 
and Lee, H. (2004) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 321, 298-305). We now provide 
evidence that Ras mediates NO-induced BNIP3 expression via the 
MEK/ERK/hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 pathway. (a) ras-Q61L, a constitutively 
active form of Ras, up-regulated BNIP3 protein expression by enhancing Bnip3 
promoter activity, and ras-S17N, a dominant-negative form, and ras-C118S, an 
S-nitrosylation mutant, blocked NO-induced BNIP3 expression, suggesting that Ras 
acts downstream of NO and that NO activates Ras by nitrosylation. (b) U0126, a 
specific MEK inhibitor, completely abolished BNIP3 expression and the 
stimulation of promoter activity by NO and Ras, whereas 
1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazolo[4,3-a]quinoxalin-1-one, SB203580, and wortmannin, specific 
inhibitors of soluble guanylyl cyclase, p38 MAPK, and phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase, respectively, had no effect. Ras, MEK1/2, and ERK1/2 were sequentially 
activated by NO treatment of macrophages. (c) Mutation of the HIF-1-binding site 
(hypoxia-response element) in the Bnip3 promoter abolished BNIP3 induction, and 
HIF-1alpha was strongly induced by NO. (d) Transient expression of activated Ras 
promoted macrophage death, as did NO, and this Ras-mediated cell death was 
inhibited by silencing BNIP3 expression. These results suggest that NO-induced 
death of macrophages is mediated, at least in part, by BNIP3 induction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M605819200
PMID: 16954213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]