1. J Neurosci. 2006 Sep 27;26(39):10068-78. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0896-06.2006.

Cytosolic catechols inhibit alpha-synuclein aggregation and facilitate the 
formation of intracellular soluble oligomeric intermediates.

Mazzulli JR(1), Mishizen AJ, Giasson BI, Lynch DR, Thomas SA, Nakashima A, 
Nagatsu T, Ota A, Ischiropoulos H.

Author information:
(1)The Joseph Stokes Jr. Research Institute, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia and The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19104, USA.

Aberrant aggregation of alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) to form fibrils and 
insoluble aggregates has been implicated in the pathogenic processes of many 
neurodegenerative diseases. Despite the dramatic effects of dopamine in 
inhibiting the formation of alpha-syn fibrils by stabilization of oligomeric 
intermediates in cell-free systems, no studies have examined the effects of 
intracellular dopamine on alpha-syn aggregation. To study this process and its 
association with neurodegeneration, intracellular catechol levels were increased 
to various levels by expressing different forms of tyrosine hydroxylase, in 
cells induced to form alpha-syn aggregates. The increase in the steady-state 
dopamine levels inhibited the formation of alpha-syn aggregates and induced the 
formation of innocuous oligomeric intermediates. Analysis of transgenic mice 
expressing the disease-associated A53T mutant alpha-syn revealed the presence of 
oligomeric alpha-syn in nondegenerating dopaminergic neurons that do contain 
insoluble alpha-syn. These data indicate that intraneuronal dopamine levels can 
be a major modulator of alpha-syn aggregation and inclusion formation, with 
important implications on the selective degeneration of these neurons in 
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0896-06.2006
PMCID: PMC6674486
PMID: 17005870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]