1. Diabetes. 2006 Oct;55(10):2909-14. doi: 10.2337/db06-0434.

Role of a proline insertion in the insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF1) gene in 
African Americans with type 2 diabetes.

Elbein SC(1), Wang X, Karim MA, Freedman BI, Bowden DW, Shuldiner AR, Brancati 
FL, Kao WH.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Section, Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, Little 
Rock, Arkansas, USA. elbeinstevenc@uams.edu

African Americans have twice the prevalence of type 2 diabetes as Caucasians and 
much greater genetic diversity. We identified an inframe insertion of a proline 
in the insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF1) gene (InsCCG243), which was relatively 
common (minor allele frequency approximately 0.08) in African Americans and 
showed a trend to association with type 2 diabetes in preliminary studies. An 
earlier French study identified InsCCG243 as a cause of autosomal dominant 
diabetes. To determine the role of this variant in African Americans, we 
examined an additional population from North Carolina (n = 368) and a subset of 
African-American participants from the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities 
(ARIC) study (n = 1,741). We also looked for segregation in 66 African-American 
families and for a role in insulin secretion in 112 nondiabetic subjects. 
InsCCG243 did not increase the risk of type 2 diabetes (P = 0.16 in North 
Carolina; P = 0.97 in the ARIC study) and did not segregate with type 2 diabetes 
in families. However, we found suggestive evidence for reduced insulin response 
to glucose (P = 0.05). Neither indirect measures of beta-cell mass nor beta-cell 
compensation were altered (P > 0.1). InsCCG243 does not act in a dominant, 
highly penetrant fashion in African Americans and is not a significant risk 
factor for type 2 diabetes in this population.

DOI: 10.2337/db06-0434
PMID: 17003361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]