1. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Mar;28(3):665-71. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgl160. Epub 2006
Oct  13.

The association of sequence variants in DNA repair and cell cycle genes with 
cancers of the upper aerodigestive tract.

Hall J(1), Hashibe M, Boffetta P, Gaborieau V, Moullan N, Chabrier A, Zaridze D, 
Shangina O, Szeszenia-Dabrowska N, Mates D, Janout V, Fabiánová E, Holcatova I, 
Hung RJ, McKay J, Canzian F, Brennan P.

Author information:
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.

Cancers of the upper aerodigestive tract (UADT), comprising the oral cavity, 
pharynx, larynx and oesophagus, account for 5.2% of all cancers cases worldwide. 
The major risk factors, tobacco and alcohol can directly or indirectly generate 
DNA damage, which if unrepaired can give rise to mutations, unregulated cell 
growth and apoptosis induction. To clarify the role of DNA repair and cell cycle 
control proteins in UADT cancer susceptibility, we studied the risk in relation 
to 28 SNPs in 18 DNA repair enzymes and 9 SNPs in 7 cell cycle control genes. A 
case-control study was conducted from 2000 to 2002 in six centers from Romania, 
Poland, Russia, Slovakia and the Czech Republic. Patients diagnosed with 
squamous cell carcinoma of the UADT (n=811) and controls with a recent diagnosis 
of diseases unrelated to tobacco and alcohol (n=1083) were recruited. For UADT 
cancer risk, associations were observed for the homozygous carriers of the 
variant alleles of MGMT L84F [odds ratio (OR) 2.35, 95% confidence interval (CI) 
1.32-4.20], MGMT 171C > T (OR 2.24, 95% CI 1.20-4.17) and OGG1 S326C (OR 2.07, 
95% CI 1.15-3.73) whilst three variants were associated with a protective effect 
(XPA 23G > A, P for trend 0.022, APEX Q51H, P for trend 0.036, CHEK2 intron 
9-200T > C, P for trend 0.009). Several other sequence variants showed 
associations with specific cancers without an overall association with UADT 
cancer. While some of these associations are consistent with previous studies, 
we cannot rule out the possibility of false-positive associations. The positive 
findings should be explored in another large-scale study on UADT cancers.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgl160
PMID: 17040931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]