1. Br J Cancer. 2006 Oct 23;95(8):1070-5. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6603396.

Novel heteroduplex method using small cytology specimens with a remarkably high 
success rate for analysing EGFR gene mutations with a significant correlation to 
gefitinib efficacy in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Oshita F(1), Matsukuma S, Yoshihara M, Sakuma Y, Ohgane N, Kameda Y, Saito H, 
Yamada K, Tsuchiya E, Miyagi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Kanagawa Cancer Center, Nakao 1-1-2, 
Asahi-ku, Yokohama 241-0815, Japan. foshita@kcch.jp

We conducted a feasibility study to examine whether small numbers of cancer 
cells could be utilised for analysis of the EGFR gene status using the 
loop-hybrid mobility shift assay, which is a modified heteroduplex technique. 
Cytology specimens obtained by transbronchial abrasion were successfully used 
for analysis of the EGFR gene status in 50 of 52 (96.2%) patients diagnosed with 
class V non-small-cell carcinoma. Furthermore, the relationship between the EGFR 
gene status and clinical outcome was analysed in 25 patients treated with 
gefitinib. Overall, 10 of 11 patients with EGFR mutations in exon 19 or 21 
showed tumour regression with gefitinib treatment, compared to only two of 14 
patients with wild-type EGFR. The response rate was significantly higher in the 
EGFR mutation group than in the wild-type EGFR group (90.9 vs 14.3%, P=0.00014). 
Logistic regression analysis revealed that EGFR mutations in cytology specimens 
represented an independent predictor of the gefitinib response. The overall and 
progression-free survivals were significantly longer in the EGFR mutation group 
than in the wild-type EGFR group (P<0.05). In conclusion, cytology specimens 
could be useful for analysing the EGFR status in the majority of patients with 
non-small-cell lung cancer to determine whether they are likely to benefit from 
gefitinib treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6603396
PMCID: PMC2360725
PMID: 17047654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]