1. J Mol Biol. 2007 Jan 26;365(4):1033-46. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.10.033. Epub 
2006 Oct 13.

The thioredoxin specificity of Drosophila GPx: a paradigm for a 
peroxiredoxin-like mechanism of many glutathione peroxidases.

Maiorino M(1), Ursini F, Bosello V, Toppo S, Tosatto SC, Mauri P, Becker K, 
Roveri A, Bulato C, Benazzi L, De Palma A, Floh√© L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Padova, I-35121 Padova, 
Italy. matilde.maiorino@unipd.it

Some members of the glutathione peroxidase (GPx) family have been reported to 
accept thioredoxin as reducing substrate. However, the selenocysteine-containing 
ones oxidise thioredoxin (Trx), if at all, at extremely slow rates. In contrast, 
the Cys homolog of Drosophila melanogaster exhibits a clear preference for Trx, 
the net forward rate constant, k'(+2), for reduction by Trx being 1.5x10(6) 
M(-1) s(-1), but only 5.4 M(-1) s(-1) for glutathione. Like other CysGPxs with 
thioredoxin peroxidase activity, Drosophila melanogaster (Dm)GPx oxidized by 
H(2)O(2) contained an intra-molecular disulfide bridge between the active-site 
cysteine (C45; C(P)) and C91. Site-directed mutagenesis of C91 in DmGPx 
abrogated Trx peroxidase activity, but increased the rate constant for 
glutathione by two orders of magnitude. In contrast, a replacement of C74 by Ser 
or Ala only marginally affected activity and specificity of DmGPx. Furthermore, 
LC-MS/MS analysis of oxidized DmGPx exposed to a reduced Trx C35S mutant yielded 
a dead-end intermediate containing a disulfide between Trx C32 and DmGPx C91. 
Thus, the catalytic mechanism of DmGPx, unlike that of selenocysteine (Sec)GPxs, 
involves formation of an internal disulfide that is pivotal to the interaction 
with Trx. Hereby C91, like the analogous second cysteine in 2-cysteine 
peroxiredoxins, adopts the role of a "resolving" cysteine (C(R)). Molecular 
modeling and homology considerations based on 450 GPxs suggest peculiar features 
to determine Trx specificity: (i) a non-aligned second Cys within the fourth 
helix that acts as C(R); (ii) deletions of the subunit interfaces typical of 
tetrameric GPxs leading to flexibility of the C(R)-containing loop. Based of 
these characteristics, most of the non-mammalian CysGPxs, in functional terms, 
are thioredoxin peroxidases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.10.033
PMID: 17098255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]