1. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2006 Dec;63(4):188-96. doi: 10.1002/arch.20156.

Mosquito ribosomal protein S3 lacks a critical glutamine residue associated with 
DNA repair activity in homologous Drosophila proteins.

Li L(1), Fallon AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota 55108, 
USA.

In Drosophila melanogaster, ribosomal protein RpS3 has extra-ribosomal 
activities including apurinic/apyrimidinic lyase activity and N-glycosylase 
activity that participate in DNA repair. It has been suggested that these 
activities couple DNA repair to the translational machinery. To establish a 
basis for participation of RpS3 in DNA repair in mosquitoes, we cloned RpS3 
cDNAs from Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquito cell lines. The sequence 
data were used to reconstruct the homologous gene from the Anopheles gambiae 
database. Mosquito RpS3 is a single copy gene, which in Aedes albopictus, lacks 
introns in the amino acid coding region. Although RpS3 proteins are 
well-conserved among eukaryotes, a critical glutamine residue, Q59, essential to 
robust DNA repair activity in the Drosophila protein, is replaced by an 
asparagine (N) in all three mosquito RpS3 proteins. In this respect, the 
mosquito protein resembles human RpS3, which has relatively modest DNA repair 
activity. None of the insect RpS3 proteins available in the database, other than 
those from Drosophila, contain glutamine at position 59. However, in the 
Lepidoptera, N59 is consistently replaced by serine (S), and the putative 
interactive site at position 134 is replaced by arginine (R). These data suggest 
that in the case of RpS3, the Drosophila protein may be uniquely unusual in 
having robust DNA repair activities that are unlikely to be common to RpS3 from 
other insects.

DOI: 10.1002/arch.20156
PMID: 17103402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]