1. Genes Brain Behav. 2007 Feb;6(1):107-12. doi:
10.1111/j.1601-183X.2006.00237.x.

Possible association of beta-arrestin 2 gene with methamphetamine use disorder, 
but not schizophrenia.

Ikeda M(1), Ozaki N, Suzuki T, Kitajima T, Yamanouchi Y, Kinoshita Y, Kishi T, 
Sekine Y, Iyo M, Harano M, Komiyama T, Yamada M, Sora I, Ujike H, Inada T, Iwata 
N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, Aichi, 
Japan. ikeda-ma@fujita-hu.ac.jp

Recent investigations suggest that the AKT/glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) 
signaling cascade may be associated with the pathophysiology of schizophrenia 
and methamphetamine (METH) use disorder. One important molecule related to this 
cascade is beta-arrestin 2 (ARRB2). We therefore conducted a genetic 
case-control association analysis of the gene for ARRB2 with schizophrenia and 
METH use disorder in a Japanese population (547 people with schizophrenia, 177 
with METH use disorder and 546 controls). A possible association of 'tag single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)' was found in METH use disorder (rs1045280: 
P(genotype) = 0.0118, P(allele) = 0.00351; rs2036657: P(allele) = 0.0431; 
rs4790694: P(genotype) = 0.0167, P(allele) = 0.0202), but no association was 
found with schizophrenia. We also evaluated the gene-gene interactions among 
ARRB2, AKT1, and GSK3B, which we previously reported for each of these diseases. 
However, no interaction was seen in our samples. This is the first association 
analysis of ARRB2, and our results indicate that ARRB2 may play a role in the 
pathophysiology of METH use disorder.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2006.00237.x
PMID: 17233643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]