1. Thromb Res. 2007;120(4):567-73. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2006.12.013. Epub 2007
 Jan 23.

Modulation of the risk of coronary sclerosis/myocardial infarction by the 
interaction between factor XIII subunit A Val34Leu polymorphism and fibrinogen 
concentration in the high risk Hungarian population.

Bereczky Z(1), Balogh E, Katona E, Pocsai Z, Czuriga I, Széles G, Kárpáti L, 
Adány R, Edes I, Muszbek L.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Center, Haemostasis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology 
Research Group of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Medical and Health Science 
Center, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.

INTRODUCTION: The results on the association of factor XIII (FXIII) A subunit 
(FXIII-A) Val34Leu polymorphism with the risk of myocardial infarction (MI) are 
rather inconclusive. The original paper and confirmatory reports demonstrated a 
protective effect of the mutation, but results demonstrating the lack of 
protection have also been published. Gene-gene and gene-environmental 
interactions have been proposed to be responsible for the opposing results. As 
the rate of change in fibrin clot permeability with increasing fibrinogen 
concentrations decreased stepwise with increasing number of Leu34 alleles it was 
proposed that the protection by Val34Leu polymorphism become effective only at 
higher fibrinogen concentrations. However, this hypothesis has not been tested 
on patients with coronary artery disease.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 955 consecutive patients admitted for coronary angiography 
were categorized according to the presence or absence of significant coronary 
sclerosis (CS) and according to positive or negative history of MI. The 
frequency of FXIII-A Val34Leu polymorphism, and a number of risk factors, 
including fibrinogen were determined in the patients. FXIII-A Val34Leu 
polymorphism was also investigated in a population control group of 1146 
subjects.
RESULTS: The presence of FXIII-A Leu34 allele or homozygous Leu34 genotype did 
not change the risk of CS or MI in the general Hungarian population. However, 
when patients with fibrinogen level in the upper quartile were separately 
investigated, the Leu34 allele provided a statistically significant protection 
against MI.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrinogen concentration modulates the effect of Leu34 allele on 
the risk of MI; its protective effect emerges at increasing fibrinogen 
concentration.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2006.12.013
PMID: 17250879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]