1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Apr;15(4):405-10. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201777. Epub
2007  Jan 31.

FGFR2, FGF8, FGF10 and BMP7 as candidate genes for hypospadias.

Beleza-Meireles A(1), Lundberg F, Lagerstedt K, Zhou X, Omrani D, Frisén L, 
Nordenskjöld A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. ana.beleza@ki.se

Hypospadias is a common malformation, which results from failure of urethral 
tube closure, and whose molecular mechanisms are still largely unknown. The 
normal genital development is orchestrated by the urethral plate epithelium 
(UPE), at the genital tubercle (GT), which has polarizing activity, controlling 
a network of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, which, when disturbed, may 
lead to hypospadias. Homeobox proteins (HOXs), fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) 
and bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) are essential in this process. Hypospadias 
in the Hoxa13 -/- mice occurs as a result of the combined loss of Fgf8 and Bmp7 
expression in the UPE. In both Fgf10 and Fgfr2 deficient mutant hypospadic male 
mice, cell proliferation is arrested prematurely and the maturation of the 
urethral epithelium is disrupted. Fgf8, Fgf10, and their receptor Fgfr2 are 
downstream targets of androgens (AR) during external genital development, an 
important fact given the pivotal role of AR in male sex differentiation. 
Therefore, we examined FGFR2, FGF10, FGF8, and BMP7 as candidate genes for 
hypospadias. DNA from 60 boys with familial, isolated, hypospadias was screened 
for mutations in FGFR2, FGF10, FGF8, and BMP7 genes, using DHPLC and DNA 
sequence analysis. The sequence variations c.590C>G and c.582-62G>A in FGF8, 
and, c.550+27C>T, c.727+180T>G, c.830T>C (p.Me186Thr), and c.2454C>T in FGFR2 
were found uniquely in patients with hypospadias, as compared with 96 controls. 
No genetic variant in the other genes was detected. These results indicate that 
mutations are rare in FGF8 and FGFR2 in hypospadias, but gene variants may 
influence the risk.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201777
PMID: 17264867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]