1. J Med Genet. 2007 Mar;44(3):e70. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.044511. Epub 2007 Feb
7.

New VMD2 gene mutations identified in patients affected by Best vitelliform 
macular dystrophy.

Marchant D(1), Yu K, Bigot K, Roche O, Germain A, Bonneau D, Drouin-Garraud V, 
Schorderet DF, Munier F, Schmidt D, Le Neindre P, Marsac C, Menasche M, Dufier 
JL, Fischmeister R, Hartzell C, Abitbol M.

Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche thérapeutique en ophtalmologie, équipe d'accueil 2502 
MENRT, Université René Descartes Paris V, Faculté de Médecine Necker-Enfants 
Malades, Paris, France.

PURPOSE: The mutations responsible for Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) 
are found in a gene called VMD2. The VMD2 gene encodes a transmembrane protein 
named bestrophin-1 (hBest1) which is a Ca(2+)-sensitive chloride channel. This 
study was performed to identify disease-specific mutations in 27 patients with 
BVMD. Because this disease is characterised by an alteration in Cl(-) channel 
function, patch clamp analysis was used to test the hypothesis that one of the 
VMD2 mutated variants causes the disease.
METHODS: Direct sequencing analysis of the 11 VMD2 exons was performed to detect 
new abnormal sequences. The mutant of hBest1 was expressed in HEK-293 cells and 
the associated Cl(-) current was examined using whole-cell patch clamp analysis.
RESULTS: Six new VMD2 mutations were identified, located exclusively in exons 
four, six and eight. One of these mutations (Q293H) was particularly severe. 
Patch clamp analysis of human embryonic kidney cells expressing the Q293H mutant 
showed that this mutant channel is non-functional. Furthermore, the Q293H mutant 
inhibited the function of wild-type bestrophin-1 channels in a dominant negative 
manner.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides further support for the idea that mutations in 
VMD2 are a necessary factor for Best disease. However, because variable 
expressivity of VMD2 was observed in a family with the Q293H mutation, it is 
also clear that a disease-linked mutation in VMD2 is not sufficient to produce 
BVMD. The finding that the Q293H mutant does not form functional channels in the 
membrane could be explained either by disruption of channel conductance or 
gating mechanisms or by improper trafficking of the protein to the plasma 
membrane.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2006.044511
PMCID: PMC2598027
PMID: 17287362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.