1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(5):1432-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkl1142. Epub 2007 Feb
 6.

Interplay between CRP-cAMP and PII-Ntr systems forms novel regulatory network 
between carbon metabolism and nitrogen assimilation in Escherichia coli.

Mao XJ(1), Huo YX, Buck M, Kolb A, Wang YP.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Protein Engineering and Plant Genetic Engineering, 
College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China.

In Escherichia coli, utilization of carbon sources is regulated by the 
phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phosphotransferase system (PTS), which modulates 
the intracellular levels of cAMP. The cAMP receptor protein (CRP) controls the 
transcription of many catabolic genes. The availability of nitrogen is sensed by 
the PII protein at the level of intracellular glutamine. Glutamine is 
transported mainly by GlnHPQ, and synthesized by glutamine synthetase (GS) 
encoded by glnA. Previous studies suggest that CRP affects nitrogen 
assimilation. Here we showed that at least two mechanisms are involved. First, 
CRP activates glnHp1 via synergistic binding with sigma 70 RNA polymerase 
(Esigma(70)) and represses glnHp2. As a consequence, in the presence of 
glutamine, the overall enhancement of glnHPQ expression alters GlnB signalling 
and de-activates glnAp2. Second, in vitro studies show that CRP can be recruited 
by sigma 54 holoenzyme (Esigma(54)) to a site centred at -51.5 upstream of 
glnAp2. CRP-induced DNA-bending prevents the nitrogen regulation protein C 
(NtrC) activator from approaching the activator-accessible face of the 
promoter-bound Esigma(54) closed complex, and inhibits glnAp2. Therefore, as the 
major transcriptional effector of the 'glucose effect', CRP affects both the 
signal transduction pathway and the overall geometry of the transcriptional 
machinery of components of the nitrogen regulon.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkl1142
PMCID: PMC1865078
PMID: 17284458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]