1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2007 Jul 5;144B(5):660-6. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30491.

The fatty acid amide hydrolase C385A (P129T) missense variant in cannabis users: 
studies of drug use and dependence in Caucasians.

Tyndale RF(1), Payne JI, Gerber AL, Sipe JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

A genetic variation in fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), C385A (P129T), has 
been previously associated with risk for problem street drug use. FAAH is a 
mammalian enzyme that inactivates neuromodulatory-signaling lipids including the 
endogenous cannabinoid 1 receptor agonist anandamide. We investigated in adult 
Caucasians (N = 749) whether this FAAH variant altered the risk for trying, 
regular use of or dependence on cannabis, alcohol or nicotine, traditional 
"gateway" drugs. Consistent with our knowledge that the A/A genotype results in 
reduced FAAH expression and activity in humans, subjects with the A/A genotype 
were less likely to be THC dependent than subjects with either a C/C or C/A 
genotype (11% vs. 26%, P < 0.05). No association was observed between the A/A 
genotype and risk for alcohol or tobacco regular use, or DSM IV dependence. 
Controlling for regular use of nicotine and sedatives, both identified as 
confounders, those with the A/A genotype were at significantly reduced risk for 
being THC dependent (OR 0.25, 95% CI: 0.07-0.88) as compared with those with the 
C/A or C/C genotype, supporting a link between alterations in the 
endocannabinoid system and THC dependence. Unexpectedly, we found an increased 
risk for regular use of sedatives among the A/A genotype group. The relationship 
between the FAAH A/A genotype and risk for drug dependence in this study was 
drug class specific, suggesting it is not part of a more general drug abuse 
effect. These results, particularly the observation of altered risk for sedative 
drug use, should be investigated further in multiple ethnic populations.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30491
PMID: 17290447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]