1. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 May;71(5):1312-8. doi: 10.1124/mol.106.033092. Epub 2007
Feb  26.

Agonist-driven conformational changes in the inner beta-sheet of alpha7 
nicotinic receptors.

McLaughlin JT(1), Fu J, Rosenberg RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7365, USA.

Cys-loop ligand-gated ion channels assemble as pentameric proteins, and each 
monomer contributes two structural elements: an extracellular ligand-binding 
domain (LBD) and a transmembrane ion channel domain. Models of receptor 
activation include rotational movements of subunits leading to opening of the 
ion channel. We tested this idea using substituted cysteine accessibility to 
track conformational changes in the inner beta sheet of the LBD. Using a 
nondesensitizing chick alpha7 background (L(247)T), we constructed 18 
consecutive cysteine replacement mutants (Leu(36) to Ile(53)) and tested each 
for expression of acetylcholine (ACh)-evoked currents and functional sensitivity 
to thiol modification. We measured rates of modification in the presence and 
absence of ACh to identify conformational changes associated with receptor 
activation. Resting modification rates of eight substituted cysteines in the 
beta1 and beta2 strands and the sequence between them (loop 2) varied over 
several orders of magnitude, suggesting substantial differences in the 
accessibility or electrostatic environment of individual side chains. These 
differences were in general agreement with structural models of the LBD. Eight 
of 18 cysteine replacements displayed ACh-dependent changes in modification 
rates, indicating a change in the accessibility or electrostatic environment of 
the introduced cysteine during activation. We were surprised that the effects of 
agonist exposure were difficult to reconcile with rotational models of 
activation. Acetylcholine reduced the modification rate of M(40)C but increased 
it at N(52)C despite the close physical proximity of these residues. Our results 
suggest that models that depend strictly on rigid-body rotation of the LBD may 
provide an incomplete description of receptor activation.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.106.033092
PMID: 17325129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]