1. Scand J Rheumatol. 2006 Nov-Dec;35(6):435-40. doi: 10.1080/03009740600904284.

Tumour necrosis factor (TNF)alpha -308 G/G promoter polymorphism and TNFalpha 
levels correlate with a better response to adalimumab in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis.

Cuchacovich M(1), Soto L, Edwardes M, Gutierrez M, Llanos C, Pacheco D, Sabugo 
F, Alamo M, Fuentealba C, Villanueva L, Gatica H, Schiattino I, Salazaro L, 
Catalan D, Valenzuela O, Salazar-Onfray F, Aguill√≥n JC.

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Section, Department of Medicine, Clinical Hospital University of 
Chile, Santiago. mcuchaco@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of -308 tumour necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNFalpha) promoter polymorphism and circulating TNFalpha levels in the clinical 
response to adalimumab treatment in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Eighty-one patients with active RA were genotyped for the -308 TNFalpha 
polymorphism by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis and subdivided into two groups for each 
polymorphism (G/A and G/G genotype). All received 40 mg of adalimumab 
subcutaneously every other week. We compared the groups' clinical responses to 
adalimumab at 8, 16, and 24 weeks using the Disease Activity Score in 28 joints 
(DAS28).
RESULTS: Both groups showed a significant improvement from baseline. A 
significant difference between groups was found at week 24. We found that 88.2% 
of G/G versus 68.4% of G/A for the -308 polymorphism were DAS28 responders (p = 
0.05). The score improvement at week 24 was 2.5 +/- 1.3 in the G/G group and 1.8 
+/- 1.3 in the G/A group for the -308 polymorphism (p = 0.04). The median of 
serum TNFalpha levels of the G/A group were lower than those of the G/G group, 
and statistically different at weeks 8 and 24 (p < 0.039 and p < 0.043). When 
comparing baseline levels to those achieved at 8, 16, and 24 weeks for the whole 
group, only responder patients showed a statistically significant overall 
increase in TNFalpha over time (p < 0.000001).
CONCLUSION: A relationship between DAS28 improvement, the -308 G/G polymorphism, 
and increased circulating TNFalpha levels was found in Chilean RA patients 
treated with adalimumab.

DOI: 10.1080/03009740600904284
PMID: 17343250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]