1. J Virol. 2007 May;81(10):5181-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02827-06. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Amino acid 226 in the hemagglutinin of H9N2 influenza viruses determines cell 
tropism and replication in human airway epithelial cells.

Wan H(1), Perez DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Maryland, College Park, 8075 
Greenmead Drive, College Park, MD 20742, USA.

Influenza A viruses of the H9N2 subtype are endemic in poultry in many Eurasian 
countries and have occasionally caused clinical respiratory diseases in humans. 
While some avian H9N2 viruses have glutamine (Q) at amino acid position 226 of 
the hemagglutinin (HA) receptor-binding site, an increasing number of isolates 
have leucine (L) at this position, which has been associated with the 
establishment of stable lineages of the H2 and H3 subtypes of viruses in humans. 
Little is known about the importance of this molecular trait in the infection of 
H9N2 viruses in humans. We show here that during the course of a single cycle of 
infection in human airway epithelial (HAE) cells cultured in vitro, the 
L-226-containing H9N2 viruses displayed human virus-like cell tropisms 
(preferentially infecting nonciliated cells) different from the tropisms showed 
by Q-226-containing H9N2 isolates (which infect both ciliated and nonciliated 
cells at ratios of 1:1 to 3:2) or other waterfowl viruses (which preferentially 
infect ciliated cells). During multiple cycles of replication in HAE cultures, 
L-226-containing H9N2 isolates grew consistently more efficiently and reached 
approximately 100-fold-higher peak titers than those containing Q-226, although 
peak titers were significantly lower than those induced by human H3N2 viruses. 
Our results suggest that the variation in residue 226 in the HA affects both 
cell tropism and replication of H9N2 viruses in HAE cells and may have 
implications for the abilities of these viruses to infect humans.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02827-06
PMCID: PMC1900221
PMID: 17344280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]