1. Hypertens Res. 2006 Dec;29(12):961-7. doi: 10.1291/hypres.29.961.

Effects of angiotensin II type 1 receptor gene polymorphisms on insulin 
resistance in a Japanese general population: the Tanno-Sobetsu study.

Akasaka H(1), Katsuya T, Saitoh S, Sugimoto K, Fu Y, Takagi S, Ohnishi H, Rakugi 
H, Ura N, Shimamoto K, Ogihara T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Suita, Japan.

Although gene polymorphisms in the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) are 
predisposing factors for cardiovascular diseases, the precise mechanisms and 
interactions among confounding factors have not been clarified. We investigated 
whether genetic variants of RAS are involved in insulin sensitivity in a 
Japanese general population. During a medical checkup in 2001, participants 
(n=550) were recruited from among the residents of the towns of Tanno and 
Sobetsu, and written informed consent was obtained to participate in the genetic 
analysis and the epidemiological study. The insertion/deletion (lID) 
polymorphism of the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene (ACE), the Met235Thr 
polymorphism of the angiotensinogen gene (AGT), and the A1166C polymorphism of 
the angiotensin II type 1 receptor gene (AGTR1) were determined by gel 
electrophoresis or the TaqMan PCR method. We assessed insulin sensitivity using 
the homeostasis model assessment insulin resistance (HOMA-IR). The RAS gene 
polymorphisms were not associated with log-transformed values of HOMA-IR, 
whereas borderline association (p=0.02) was found between the A1166C 
polymorphism and dichotomous categorization of insulin resistance (defined as 
HOMA-IR > or =1.73). Our results suggested that the A1166C polymorphism of AGTR1 
might affect insulin resistance by altering the responsiveness to angiotensin II 
signaling, though this mechanism is as yet inconclusive. Further study is 
required to confirm these findings in a larger, multi-ethnic population.

DOI: 10.1291/hypres.29.961
PMID: 17378368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]