1. Protein Sci. 2007 Apr;16(4):662-70. doi: 10.1110/ps.062666607.

The S2 subsites of cathepsins K and L and their contribution to collagen 
degradation.

Lecaille F(1), Chowdhury S, Purisima E, Br√∂mme D, Lalmanach G.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U 618, Tours, F-37000, France.

The exchange of residues 67 and 205 of the S2 pocket of human cysteine 
cathepsins K and L induces a permutation of their substrate specificity toward 
fluorogenic peptide substrates. While the cathepsin L-like cathepsin K 
(Tyr67Leu/Leu205Ala) mutant has a marked preference for Phe, the 
Leu67Tyr/Ala205Leu cathepsin L variant shows an effective cathepsin K-like 
preference for Leu and Pro. A similar turnaround of inhibition was observed by 
using specific inhibitors of cathepsin K 
[1-(N-Benzyloxycarbonyl-leucyl)-5-(N-Boc-phenylalanyl-leucyl)carbohydrazide] and 
cathepsin L 
[N-(4-biphenylacetyl)-S-methylcysteine-(D)-Arg-Phe-beta-phenethylamide]. 
Molecular modeling studies indicated that mutations alter the character of both 
S2 and S3 subsites, while docking calculations were consistent with kinetics 
data. The cathepsin K-like cathepsin L was unable to mimic the 
collagen-degrading activity of cathepsin K against collagens I and II, 
DQ-collagens I and IV, and elastin-Congo Red. In summary, double mutations of 
the S2 pocket of cathepsins K (Y67L/L205A) and L (L67Y/A205L) induce a switch of 
their enzymatic specificity toward small selective inhibitors and peptidyl 
substrates, confirming the key role of residues 67 and 205. However, mutations 
in the S2 subsite pocket of cathepsin L alone without engineering of binding 
sites to chondroitin sulfate are not sufficient to generate a cathepsin K-like 
collagenase, emphasizing the pivotal role of the complex formation between 
glycosaminoglycans and cathepsin K for its unique collagenolytic activity.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.062666607
PMCID: PMC2203344
PMID: 17384231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]