1. Genet Test. 2007 Spring;11(1):75-83. doi: 10.1089/gte.2006.0502.

Molecular analysis of alpha/beta-thalassemia in a southern Chinese population.

Ye BC(1), Zhang Z, Lei Z.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, Department of Food Science 
and Engineering, East China University of Science & Technology, Shanghai, China. 
bcye@ecust.edu.cn

Thalassemia is endemic to many regions in southern China. The screening of 
severe determinants of thalassemia is of critical importance in management and 
control of thalassemia. We designed a protocol based on microarray technology to 
screen for a spectrum of alpha/beta-globin gene mutations in the Chinese 
population. A total of 38 probes were capable of screening 98% of 
alpha/beta-globin gene mutations in the China population, including 16 mutations 
of beta-globin [beta(41-42)(-TCTT), IVSII-654(C-->T), beta17(A-->T), -28(A-->G), 
beta(71-72)(+A), beta(71-72)(+T), HbE26(G-->A), -29(A-->G), beta(27-28)(+C), 
IVSI-1(G-->T), IVSI-5(G-->C), beta(14-15)(+G), IVSII-5(G-->C), beta41(+T), 
37(G-->A), and beta43(G-->T)] and five mutations of alpha/beta[three deletions 
of -alpha;(3.7), -alpha(4.2), and --(SEA); two nondeletions of alpha(Quong Sze) 
codon alpha125(T-->C) and alpha(Constant Spring) codon alpha142(T-->C)]. 
Multiplex PCR products were amplified from human genomic DNA and allowed to 
hybridize with the oligonucleotide array. alpha/beta-Globin genotypes were 
assigned by quantitative analysis of the hybridization results. The protocol, 
standardized by analysis of 100 thalassemia samples with known mutations and 13 
recombinant plasmids, was 100% reliable in genotyping all mutant alleles. In 
subsequent screening of 2,030 Chinese with unknown mutations, the protocol was 
100% accurate. This method provides unambiguous detection of complex 
combinations of heterozygous, compound heterozygous, and homozygous 
alpha/beta-thalassemia genotypes. The protocol was also flexible, detecting 
globin gene mutations from different population groups.

DOI: 10.1089/gte.2006.0502
PMID: 17394396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]