1. J Neurochem. 2007 Apr;101(1):17-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.04343.x.

Differential role of extracellular histidines in copper, zinc, magnesium and 
proton modulation of the P2X7 purinergic receptor.

Acuña-Castillo C(1), Coddou C, Bull P, Brito J, Huidobro-Toro JP.

Author information:
(1)Departamentos de Fisiología, Centro de Regulación Celular y Patología J.V. 
Luco, Instituto Milenio de Biología Fundamental y Aplicada MIFAB, Chile.

The P2X7 receptor is a non-selective cationic channel activated by extracellular 
ATP, belonging to the P2X receptor family. To assess the role of extracellular 
histidines on the allosteric modulation of the rat P2X7 receptor by divalent 
metals (copper, zinc and magnesium) and protons, these amino acid residues were 
singly substituted for corresponding alanines. Wild-type and mutated receptors 
were injected to Xenopus laevis oocytes; metal-related effects were evaluated by 
the two-electrode voltage-clamp technique. Copper inhibited the ATP-gated 
currents with a median inhibitory concentration of 4.4 +/- 1.0 micromol/L. The 
inhibition was non-competitive and time-dependent; copper was 60-fold more 
potent than zinc. The mutant H267A, resulted in a copper resistant receptor; 
mutants H201A and H130A were less sensitive to copper inhibition (p < 0.05). The 
rest of the mutants examined, H62A, H85A, and H219A, conserved the 
copper-induced inhibition. Only mutants H267A and H219A were less sensitive to 
the modulator action of zinc. Moreover, the magnesium-induced inhibition was 
abolished exclusively on the H130A and H201A mutants, suggesting that this metal 
may act at a novel cationic modulator site. Media acidification inhibited the 
ATP-gated current 87 +/- 3%; out of the six mutants examined, only H130A was 
significantly less sensitive to the change in pH, suggesting that His-130 could 
be involved as a pH sensor. In conclusion, while His-267 is critically involved 
in the copper or zinc allosteric modulation, the magnesium inhibitory effects is 
related to His-130 and His-201, His-130 is involved in proton sensing, 
highlighting the role of defined extracellular histidines in rat P2X7 receptor 
allosteric modulation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.04343.x
PMID: 17394459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]