1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 20;282(29):21448-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M609777200. Epub 
2007 Apr 10.

NMR investigation of Tyr105 mutants in TEM-1 beta-lactamase: dynamics are 
correlated with function.

Doucet N(1), Savard PY, Pelletier JN, Gagné SM.

Author information:
(1)Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7.

The existence of coupled residue motions on various time scales in enzymes is 
now well accepted, and their detailed characterization has become an essential 
element in understanding the role of dynamics in catalysis. To this day, a 
handful of enzyme systems has been shown to rely on essential residue motions 
for catalysis, but the generality of such phenomena remains to be elucidated. 
Using NMR spectroscopy, we investigated the electronic and dynamic effects of 
several mutations at position 105 in TEM-1 beta-lactamase, an enzyme responsible 
for antibiotic resistance. Even in absence of substrate, our results show that 
the number and magnitude of short and long range effects on (1)H-(15)N chemical 
shifts are correlated with the catalytic efficiencies of the various Y105X 
mutants investigated. In addition, (15)N relaxation experiments on mutant Y105D 
show that several active-site residues of TEM-1 display significantly altered 
motions on both picosecond-nanosecond and microsecond-millisecond time scales 
despite many being far away from the site of mutation. The altered motions among 
various active-site residues in mutant Y105D may account for the observed 
decrease in catalytic efficiency, therefore suggesting that short and long range 
residue motions could play an important catalytic role in TEM-1 beta-lactamase. 
These results support previous observations suggesting that internal motions 
play a role in promoting protein function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M609777200
PMID: 17426035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]