1. Dig Dis Sci. 2007 Sep;52(9):2368-74. doi: 10.1007/s10620-006-9136-y. Epub 2007
 Apr 10.

The clinicopathological profile of Indian patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) is different from that in the West.

Duseja A(1), Das A, Das R, Dhiman RK, Chawla Y, Bhansali A, Kalra N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Sector 12, Chandigarh 060012, India.

There are limited data on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) from India. 
The clinicopathological profile of Indian patients with NAFLD may be different 
from that of Western patients. One hundred NAFLD patients with increased liver 
enzymes were prospectively evaluated for clinical presentation, associated 
diseases, overweight/obesity, central obesity (n=54), presence of diabetes 
mellitus, lipid abnormalities, insulin resistance (n=39), metabolic syndrome 
(n=54), serum iron, serum ferritin, and transferrin saturation (n=60), and HFE 
gene mutations (n=30). Risk factors for the grade and stage of the disease on 
histology were studied in 38 biopsy-proven patients. Patients were treated with 
lifestyle modifications and ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA). Seventeen nonresponder 
patients were treated with metformin. The majority of patients were males 
(n=70). Twenty percent of patients were overweight, 68% had obesity, and 78% had 
central obesity. Abnormal cholesterol, HDL, and triglycerides were present in 
36%, 66%, and 53% of patients, respectively. Twelve percent of patients had 
diabetes mellitus and 16% patients had various associated diseases. All 22 
(100%) patients studied by ITT and all but 1 (98%) studied by HOMA-IR were found 
to have reduced insulin sensitivity and 50% were found to have metabolic 
syndrome by the modified ATP III criteria. Two (3%) patients were found to have 
high serum iron, 4 (7%) patients had high ferritin, 5 (8%) patients had 
increased transferrin saturation, and 4 (13%) patients were found to be 
heterozygotes for H63D HFE gene mutation. Twenty patients of 38 (53%) had 
histological evidence of NASH (class 3=6, class 4=14). The other 18 (47%) 
qualified for class I (n=1) or class II (n=17) NAFLD. Four (10.5%) patients had 
bridging fibrosis and none had evidence of cirrhosis liver. Seventy-four (74%) 
patients achieved a biochemical response to lifestyle modification and UDCA. All 
17 patients treated with metformin had a reduction in ALT level and 10 (59%) of 
them had normalization of their enzymes. We conclude that the 
clinicopathological profile of NAFLD in Indian patients is different from that 
in the West.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-006-9136-y
PMID: 17420951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]