1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Jan 30;87(5):336-40.

[The effect of two newly Chinese presenilin-1 mutations on the sensitivity to 
trophic factor withdrawal in human neuroblastoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Fang BY(1), Jia JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital University of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing 100053, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of two novel presenilin-1 (PS1) mutations, V97L 
and A136G, discovered in 2 families of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in China, on 
human neuroblastoma cells and the protective role of insulin-like growth 
factor-1 (IGF-1).
METHODS: Two mutation type (MT) PS-1 genes with the mutational sites V97L and 
A136G were established. These 2 MT genes, wild type (WT) PS-1 gene, and mock 
were stably transfected into the human neuroblastoma cells of the line SH-SY5Y. 
The 4 kinds of transfected cells were divided into 3 subgroups: (1) control 
subgroup, cultured in normal medium with serum, (2) serum deprivation subgroup, 
cultured in the medium without serum, and (3) serum deprivation + IGF-1 
subgroup, cultured in serum deprivation medium plus IGF-1. Twenty-four hours 
later MTT colorimetry was used to calculate the cell survival rate. Hoechst33258 
method and phosphatidylinositol/annexin V-FITC double staining flow cytometry 
were used to observe the cell apoptosis. The glucose uptake was measured. 
Western blotting was used to analyze the protein expression of glucose 
transporter protein (GLUT)-1 in the cell membrane.
RESULTS: Different tests all showed that the cell survival rates of the V97L and 
A136G serum deprivation subgroups were both significantly lower than those of 
the corresponding WT and Mock subgroups (P < 0.01, P < 0.05), the cell survival 
rates of the all serum deprivation + IGF-1 subgroups were significantly higher 
than those of the corresponding serum deprivation subgroups (all P < 0.01); The 
glucose uptake rate was not significantly different among different subgroups, 
but IGF-1 addition made the glucose uptake increase by about 25% (all P > 0.05). 
The GLUT1 expression in the cell membrane of the serum deprivation + IGF-I 
subgroups increased by 15% - 20% respectively, however, without significant 
differences.
CONCLUSION: Enhanced sensitivity to trophic withdrawal in the cells with the two 
Chinese PS1 mutations most likely contributes to the neuron loss in AD. The 
sensitivity to apoptosis is not caused by impaired glucose metabolism, but IGF-1 
still can protect cells from serum deprivation that compensates the negative 
effect through enhancing glucose transport and mitochondria activities.

PMID: 17456364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]