1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2007 Jul-Aug;39(1):70-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2007.03.002.
 Epub 2007 Apr 25.

Characterization of the -16C>G sequence variation in the promoters of both HBG1 
and HBG2: convergent evolution of the human gamma-globin genes.

de Vooght KM(1), van Wijk R, Ploos van Amstel HK, van Solinge WW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Haematology, Laboratory for Red Blood 
Cell Research, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

We encountered a homozygous -16C>G mutation in cis at identical positions in the 
promoters of both human gamma-globin genes in a subject who was also homozygous 
for Hemoglobin C (HbC). Subsequent analysis of normal control individuals of 
African American ancestry revealed that both mutations were always present in 
cis with an allelic frequency of 3%. Furthermore, 10 out of 11 HbC subjects 
carried the -16C>G sequence variations, suggesting an association with HbC. The 
-16C>G mutation disrupts a putative CACCC box positioned between the TATA box 
and the transcriptional start site. However, the absence of high levels of HbF 
in HbC subjects homozygous and heterozygous for the -16C>G sequence variation 
suggested no effect of this mutation on gamma-globin gene expression in the 
adult stage of development. Further functional characterization by means of 
transient transfections in human erythroleukemic K562 cells showed that the 
-16C>G promoter sequence variation did not have an effect on gamma-globin 
expression in the fetal stage of development either. We therefore conclude that 
the -16C>G gamma-globin sequence variations are not beneficial to the clinical 
phenotype of HbC. The unique concurrent presence of this non-functional sequence 
variation is likely the result of a gene conversion event, and supports the 
concept of sequence homogenization between the two human gamma-globin genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2007.03.002
PMID: 17462922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]