1. Biochemistry. 2007 May 29;46(21):6277-87. doi: 10.1021/bi700083z. Epub 2007
May  3.

Phosphorylation of serine 264 impedes active site accessibility in the E1 
component of the human pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex.

Seifert F(1), Ciszak E, Korotchkina L, Golbik R, Spinka M, Dominiak P, Sidhu S, 
Brauer J, Patel MS, Tittmann K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Biotechnologie, Martin-Luther-Universität 
Halle-Wittenberg, Kurt-Mothes-Strasse 3, 06120 Halle/Saale, Germany.

At the junction of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle in cellular metabolism, the 
pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex (PDHc) catalyzes the oxidative 
decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA. In mammals, PDHc is tightly regulated 
by phosphorylation-dephosphorylation of three serine residues in the 
thiamin-dependent pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1) component. In vivo, inactivation 
of human PDHc correlates mostly with phosphorylation of serine 264, which is 
located at the entrance of the substrate channel leading to the active site of 
E1. Despite intense investigations, the molecular mechanism of this inactivation 
has remained enigmatic. Here, a detailed analysis of microscopic steps of 
catalysis in human wild-type PDHc-E1 and pseudophosphorylation variant Ser264Glu 
elucidates how phosphorylation of Ser264 affects catalysis. Whereas the 
intrinsic reactivity of the active site in catalysis of pyruvate decarboxylation 
remains nearly unaltered, the preceding binding of substrate to the enzyme's 
active site via the substrate channel and the subsequent reductive acetylation 
of the E2 component are severely slowed in the phosphorylation variant. The 
structure of pseudophosphorylation variant Ser264Glu determined by X-ray 
crystallography reveals no differences in the three-dimensional architecture of 
the phosphorylation loop or of the active site, when compared to those of the 
wild-type enzyme. However, the channel leading to the active site is partially 
obstructed by the side chain of residue 264 in the variant. By analogy, a 
similar obstruction of the substrate channel can be anticipated to result from a 
phosphorylation of Ser264. The kinetic and thermodynamic results in conjunction 
with the structure of Ser264Glu suggest that phosphorylation blocks access to 
the active site by imposing a steric and electrostatic barrier for substrate 
binding and active site coupling with the E2 component. As a Ser264Gln variant, 
which carries no charge at position 264, is also selectively deficient in 
pyruvate binding and reductive acetylation of E2, we conclude that mostly steric 
effects account for inhibition of PDHc by phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi700083z
PMID: 17474719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]