1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Jul;1768(7):1822-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2007.04.006. Epub 2007 Apr 14.

Regulation of intestinal hPepT1 (SLC15A1) activity by phosphodiesterase 
inhibitors is via inhibition of NHE3 (SLC9A3).

Anderson CM(1), Thwaites DT.

Author information:
(1)Epithelial Research Group, Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, 
Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK. catriona.anderson@ncl.ac.uk

The H(+)-coupled transporter hPepT1 (SLC15A1) mediates the transport of 
di/tripeptides and many orally-active drugs across the brush-border membrane of 
the small intestinal epithelium. Incubation of Caco-2 cell monolayers (15 min) 
with the dietary phosphodiesterase inhibitors caffeine and theophylline 
inhibited Gly-Sar uptake across the apical membrane. Pentoxifylline, a 
phosphodiesterase inhibitor given orally to treat intermittent claudication, 
also decreased Gly-Sar uptake through a reduction in capacity (V(max)) without 
any effect on affinity (K(m)). The reduction in dipeptide transport was 
dependent upon both extracellular Na(+) and apical pH but was not observed in 
the presence of the selective Na(+)/H(+) exchanger NHE3 (SLC9A3) inhibitor 
S1611. Measurement of intracellular pH confirmed that caffeine was not directly 
inhibiting hPepT1 but rather having an indirect effect through inhibition of 
NHE3 activity. NHE3 maintains the H(+)-electrochemical gradient which, in turn, 
acts as the driving force for H(+)-coupled solute transport. Uptake of 
beta-alanine, a substrate for the H(+)-coupled amino acid transporter hPAT1 
(SLC36A1), was also inhibited by caffeine. The regulation of NHE3 by 
non-nutrient components of diet or orally-delivered drugs may alter the function 
of any solute carrier dependent upon the H(+)-electrochemical gradient and may, 
therefore, be a site for both nutrient-drug and drug-drug interactions in the 
small intestine.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2007.04.006
PMCID: PMC2428106
PMID: 17498647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]