1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2007 Dec 5;144B(8):1042-7. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30541.

Catechol-O-methyltransferase polymorphism (COMT) in suicide attempters: a 
possible gender effect on anger traits.

Baud P(1), Courtet P, Perroud N, Jollant F, Buresi C, Malafosse A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. 
patrick.baud@hcuge.ch

Anger-related personality traits are considered contributory risk factors for 
suicidal behavior. According to twin studies, they are partially under genetic 
control and their various clinical expressions have been associated with 
serotonergic and catecholaminergic activities. A functional polymorphism on the 
human catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene, which codes for the 
catecholamines inactivating enzyme COMT, has been shown to influence aggressive 
and anger-related traits in various clinical populations. The aim of the present 
study was to investigate the association between anger traits (as characterized 
by the State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory, STAXI) and COMT Val158Met 
polymorphism in suicide attempters (n = 427) and control subjects (n = 185). 
Results showed that the high activity genotype (Val/Val) was more frequent in 
suicide attempters than in normal controls. Moreover, the Val/Val genotype 
markedly affected the scores on two STAXI subscales--Trait Anger and Anger 
Control--in female suicide attempters, thus suggesting a possible gender effect 
of the COMT genotype on a stable personality trait. These results are discussed 
in the light of recently published data on the effect of COMT Val158Met 
polymorphism on different cognitive and behavioral traits.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30541
PMID: 17510945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]