1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2007 Dec 5;144B(8):1054-62. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30549.

Prediction of psychosis onset in Alzheimer disease: the role of depression 
symptom severity and the HTR2A T102C polymorphism.

Wilkosz PA(1), Kodavali C, Weamer EA, Miyahara S, Lopez OL, Nimgaonkar VL, 
DeKosky ST, Sweet RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.

Psychotic symptoms in Alzheimer disease (AD + P) identify a heritable phenotype 
associated with a more severe course. We recently found an association of AD + P 
with depression symptom severity. Reports have shown an association of a 
serotonin-2A receptor (HTR2A) gene T102C polymorphism with AD + P and with 
depression during AD. We examined the interaction of this common genetic 
polymorphism with depression and increased psychosis risk. Subjects with 
possible or probable AD or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) without psychosis at 
study entry were genotyped for the HTR2A T102C polymorphism and reassessed every 
6 months until psychosis onset. Psychotic and depressive symptoms were rated 
using the CERAD behavioral rating scale (CBRS). Cox proportional hazard models 
with time-dependent covariates were used to examine associations with psychosis 
onset. A total of 324 Caucasian subjects completed at least one follow-up exam. 
Depressive symptom severity was a strong predictor of psychosis onset. Neither 
psychosis onset nor depression severity was associated with the HTR2A genotype. 
Genotype interacted with depression severity to moderate the risk of AD + P 
onset. This did not result from an interaction of HTR2A genotype with 
antidepressant use. Psychosis onset in AD is strongly associated with severity 
of depressive symptoms, an association that may be modified by HTR2A genotype.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30549
PMCID: PMC2818007
PMID: 17525976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]