1. Biophys J. 2007 Oct 1;93(7):2315-24. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.106.102509. Epub
2007  May 25.

The protonation state of the Glu-71/Asp-80 residues in the KcsA potassium 
channel: a first-principles QM/MM molecular dynamics study.

Bucher D(1), Guidoni L, Rothlisberger U.

Author information:
(1)Federal Institute of Technology EPFL, Institute of Chemical Sciences and 
Engineering, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Although a few x-ray structures of the KcsA K(+) channel have been crystallized 
several issues concerning the mechanisms of the ionic permeation and the 
protonation state of the selectivity filter ionizable side chains are still 
open. Using a first-principles quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical 
simulation approach, we have investigated the protonation state of Glu-71 and 
Asp-80, two important residues located in the vicinity of the selectivity 
filter. Results from the dynamics show that a proton is shared between the two 
residues, with a slight preference for Glu-71. The proton is found to exchange 
on the picosecond timescale, an interesting phenomenon that cannot be observed 
in classical molecular dynamics. Simulations of different ionic loading states 
of the filter show that the probability for the proton transfer is correlated 
with the filter occupancy. In addition, the Glu-71/Asp-80 pair is able to 
modulate the potential energy profile experienced by a K(+) ion as it translates 
along the pore axis. These theoretical predictions, along with recent 
experimental results, suggest that changes of the filter structure could be 
associated with a shift in the Glu-Asp protonation state, which in turn would 
influence the ion translocation.

DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.106.102509
PMCID: PMC1965436
PMID: 17526559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]