1. Mol Microbiol. 2007 Jul;65(1):27-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2007.05753.x.

Gene encoding a deubiquitinating enzyme is mutated in artesunate- and 
chloroquine-resistant rodent malaria parasites.

Hunt P(1), Afonso A, Creasey A, Culleton R, Sidhu AB, Logan J, Valderramos SG, 
McNae I, Cheesman S, do Rosario V, Carter R, Fidock DA, Cravo P.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Immunology and Infection Research, School of Biological 
Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Ashworth Laboratory, Kings Buildings, 
Edinburgh EH9 3JT, UK. Paul.Hunt@ed.ac.uk

Artemisinin- and artesunate-resistant Plasmodium chabaudi mutants, AS-ART and 
AS-ATN, were previously selected from chloroquine-resistant clones AS-30CQ and 
AS-15CQ respectively. Now, a genetic cross between AS-ART and the 
artemisinin-sensitive clone AJ has been analysed by Linkage Group Selection. A 
genetic linkage group on chromosome 2 was selected under artemisinin treatment. 
Within this locus, we identified two different mutations in a gene encoding a 
deubiquitinating enzyme. A distinct mutation occurred in each of the clones 
AS-30CQ and AS-ATN, relative to their respective progenitors in the AS lineage. 
The mutations occurred independently in different clones under drug selection 
with chloroquine (high concentration) or artesunate. Each mutation maps to a 
critical residue in a homologous human deubiquitinating protein structure. 
Although one mutation could theoretically account for the resistance of AS-ATN 
to artemisinin derivates, the other cannot account solely for the resistance of 
AS-ART, relative to the responses of its sensitive progenitor AS-30CQ. Two lines 
of Plasmodium falciparum with decreased susceptibility to artemisinin were also 
selected. Their drug-response phenotype was not genetically stable. No mutations 
in the UBP-1 gene encoding the P. falciparum orthologue of the deubiquitinating 
enzyme were observed. The possible significance of these mutations in parasite 
responses to chloroquine or artemisinin is discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2007.05753.x
PMCID: PMC1974797
PMID: 17581118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]