1. Ann Oncol. 2007 Jun;18 Suppl 6:vi86-92. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdm233.

High prevalence of BRCA1 deletions in BRCAPRO-positive patients with high 
carrier probability.

Veschi S(1), Aceto G, Scioletti AP, Gatta V, Palka G, Cama A, Mariani-Costantini 
R, Battista P, CalÃ² V, Barbera F, Bazan V, Russo A, Stuppia L.

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence on Aging, University G. d'Annunzio University 
Foundation, Chieti, Pescara.

Mutation screening of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in probands with familial 
breast/ovarian cancer has been greatly improved by the multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay able to evidence gene 
rearrangements not detectable by standard screening methods. However, no 
criteria for selection of cases to be submitted to the MLPA test have been 
reported yet. We used the BRCAPro software for the selection of familial 
breast/ovarian cancer probands investigated with the MLPA approach after 
negative BRCA1/2 conventional mutation screening. One hundred and seventy-seven 
probands were investigated for germline BRCA1/2 mutations after assessment of 
genetic risk using BRCAPro. Probands were classified as BRCAPro positive (n = 
67) when the carrier probability (CP) was >10% and as BRCAPro negative (n = 
110), when the CP was <10%. Conventional mutational analyses of the BRCA1/2 
genes and, in one case, of p53 identified 22 pathogenetic germline mutations, 12 
in BRCA1, 9 in BRCA2 and 1 in p53, in 22/177 (12.4%) probands. All the mutations 
except one were detected in BRCAPro-positive patients. In the 46 
BRCAPro-positive cases that resulted negative by BRCA1/2 mutation, screening 
analysis of rearrangements within BRCA1/2 by MLPA was carried out. Three 
patients with a very high CP showed BRCA1 deletions, consisting of deletions of 
exons 1-2 in two probands and of exon 24 in the third proband. In one case, the 
exons 1-2 deletion was shown to cosegregate with disease in the family. No BRCA2 
rearrangements were detected, but one patient showed the 1100delC of the CHEK2 
gene, whose probe is present in the BRCA2 kit. In our series, the highest 
carrier detection rate of mutation screening plus MLPA analysis (52.3%) was in 
patients with a BRCAPro CP >50%.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdm233
PMID: 17591842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]