1. BMC Struct Biol. 2007 Jun 26;7:42. doi: 10.1186/1472-6807-7-42.

X-ray structures of Na-GST-1 and Na-GST-2 two glutathione S-transferase from the 
human hookworm Necator americanus.

Asojo OA(1), Homma K, Sedlacek M, Ngamelue M, Goud GN, Zhan B, Deumic V, Asojo 
O, Hotez PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, College of Medicine Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-6495, USA. oasojo@unmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Human hookworm infection is a major cause of anemia and malnutrition 
of adults and children in the developing world. As part of on-going efforts to 
control hookworm infection, The Human Hookworm Vaccine Initiative has identified 
candidate vaccine antigens from the infective L3 larval stages and adult stages 
of the parasite. Adult stage antigens include the cytosolic 
glutathione-S-transferases (GSTs). Nematode GSTs facilitate the inactivation and 
degradation of a variety of electrophilic substrates (drugs) via the 
nucleophilic addition of reduced glutathione. Parasite GSTs also play 
significant roles in multi-drug resistance and the modulation of host-immune 
defense mechanisms.
RESULTS: The crystal structures of Na-GST-1 and Na-GST-2, two major GSTs from 
Necator americanus the main human hookworm parasite, have been solved at the 
resolution limits of 2.4 A and 1.9 A respectively. The structure of Na-GST-1 was 
refined to R-factor 18.9% (R-free 28.3%) while that of Na-GST-2 was refined to 
R-factor 17.1% (R-free 21.7%). Glutathione usurped during the fermentation 
process in bound in the glutathione binding site (G-site) of each monomer of 
Na-GST-2. Na-GST-1 is uncomplexed and its G-site is abrogated by Gln 50. These 
first structures of human hookworm parasite GSTs could aid the design of novel 
hookworm drugs.
CONCLUSION: The 3-dimensional structures of Na-GST-1 and Na-GST-2 show two views 
of human hookworm GSTs. While the GST-complex structure of Na-GST-2 reveals a 
typical GST G-site that of Na-GST-1 suggests that there is some conformational 
flexibility required in order to bind the substrate GST. In addition, the 
overall binding cavities for both are larger, more open, as well as more 
accessible to diverse ligands than those of GSTs from organisms that have other 
major detoxifying mechanisms. The results from this study could aid in the 
design of novel drugs and vaccine antigens.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6807-7-42
PMCID: PMC1924862
PMID: 17594497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]