1. J Neurochem. 2007 Oct;103(1):334-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04759.x.
Epub  2007 Jul 10.

Sensitive ELISA detection of amyloid-beta protofibrils in biological samples.

Englund H(1), Sehlin D, Johansson AS, Nilsson LN, Gellerfors P, Paulie S, 
Lannfelt L, Pettersson FE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health/Molecular Geriatrics, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Amyloid-beta (Abeta) protofibrils are known intermediates of the in vitro Abeta 
aggregation process and the protofibrillogenic Arctic mutation (APPE693G) 
provides clinical support for a pathogenic role of Abeta protofibrils in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). To verify their in vivo relevance and to establish a 
quantitative Abeta protofibril immunoassay, Abeta conformation dependent 
monoclonal antibodies were generated. One of these antibodies, mAb158 (IgG2a), 
was used in a sandwich ELISA to specifically detect picomolar concentrations of 
Abeta protofibrils without interference from Abeta monomers or the amyloid 
precursor protein (APP). The specificity and biological significance of this 
ELISA was demonstrated using cell cultures and transgenic mouse models 
expressing human APP containing the Swedish mutation (APPKN670/671ML), or the 
Swedish and Arctic mutation in combination. The mAb158 sandwich ELISA analysis 
revealed presence of Abeta protofibrils in both cell and animal models, proving 
that Abeta protofibrils are formed not only in vitro, but also in vivo. 
Furthermore, elevated Abeta protofibril levels in the Arctic-Swedish samples 
emphasize the usefulness of the Arctic mutation as a model of enhanced 
protofibril formation. This assay provides a novel tool for investigating the 
role of Abeta protofibrils in AD and has the potential of becoming an important 
diagnostic assay.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04759.x
PMID: 17623042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]