1. Saline Syst. 2007 Jul 25;3:6. doi: 10.1186/1746-1448-3-6.

Transcriptional profiling of the model Archaeon Halobacterium sp. NRC-1: 
responses to changes in salinity and temperature.

Coker JA(1), DasSarma P, Kumar J, MÃ¼ller JA, DasSarma S.

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute, Center of Marine 
Biotechnology, Baltimore, MD 21202, USA. coker@umbi.umd.edu

BACKGROUND: The model halophile Halobacterium sp. NRC-1 was among the first 
Archaea to be completely sequenced and many post-genomic tools, including whole 
genome DNA microarrays are now being applied to its analysis. This extremophile 
displays tolerance to multiple stresses, including high salinity, extreme 
(non-mesophilic) temperatures, lack of oxygen, and ultraviolet and ionizing 
radiation.
RESULTS: In order to study the response of Halobacterium sp. NRC-1 to two common 
stressors, salinity and temperature, we used whole genome DNA microarrays to 
assay for changes in gene expression under differential growth conditions. 
Cultures grown aerobically in rich medium at 42 degrees C were compared to 
cultures grown at elevated or reduced temperature and high or low salinity. The 
results obtained were analyzed using a custom database and microarray analysis 
tools. Growth under salt stress conditions resulted in the modulation of genes 
coding for many ion transporters, including potassium, phosphate, and iron 
transporters, as well as some peptide transporters and stress proteins. Growth 
at cold temperature altered the expression of genes involved in lipid 
metabolism, buoyant gas vesicles, and cold shock proteins. Heat shock showed 
induction of several known chaperone genes. The results showed that 
Halobacterium sp. NRC-1 cells are highly responsive to environmental changes at 
the level of gene expression.
CONCLUSION: Transcriptional profiling showed that Halobacterium sp. NRC-1 is 
highly responsive to its environment and provided insights into some of the 
specific responses at the level of gene expression. Responses to changes in salt 
conditions appear to be designed to minimize the loss of essential ionic species 
and abate possible toxic effects of others, while exposure to temperature 
extremes elicit responses to promote protein folding and limit factors 
responsible for growth inhibition. This work lays the foundation for further 
bioinformatic and genetic studies which will lead to a more comprehensive 
understanding of the biology of a model halophilic Archaeon.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-1448-3-6
PMCID: PMC1971269
PMID: 17651475