1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 14;104(33):13283-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0702654104. Epub 2007 Aug 7.

The Btk tyrosine kinase is a major target of the Bcr-Abl inhibitor dasatinib.

Hantschel O(1), Rix U, Schmidt U, Bürckstümmer T, Kneidinger M, Schütze G, 
Colinge J, Bennett KL, Ellmeier W, Valent P, Superti-Furga G.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 
Lazarettgasse 19, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Dasatinib is a small-molecule kinase inhibitor used for the treatment of 
imatinib-resistant chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). We have analyzed the 
kinases targeted by dasatinib by using an unbiased chemical proteomics approach 
to detect binding proteins directly from lysates of CML cells. Besides Abl and 
Src kinases, we have identified the Tec kinases Btk and Tec, but not Itk, as 
major binders of dasatinib. The kinase activity of Btk and Tec, but not of Itk, 
was inhibited by nanomolar concentrations of dasatinib in vitro and in cultured 
cells. We identified the gatekeeper residue as the critical determinant of 
dasatinib susceptibility. Mutation of Thr-474 in Btk to Ile and Thr-442 in Tec 
to Ile conferred resistance to dasatinib, whereas mutation of the corresponding 
residue in Itk (Phe-435) to Thr sensitized the otherwise insensitive Itk to 
dasatinib. The configuration of this residue may be a predictor for dasatinib 
sensitivity across the kinome. Analysis of mast cells derived from Btk-deficient 
mice suggested that inhibition of Btk by dasatinib may be responsible for the 
observed reduction in histamine release upon dasatinib treatment. Furthermore, 
dasatinib inhibited histamine release in primary human basophils and secretion 
of proinflammatory cytokines in immune cells. The observed inhibition of Tec 
kinases by dasatinib predicts immunosuppressive (side) effects of this drug and 
may offer therapeutic opportunities for inflammatory and immunological 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0702654104
PMCID: PMC1940229
PMID: 17684099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.