1. Can J Cardiol. 2007 Aug;23(10):788-90. doi: 10.1016/s0828-282x(07)70828-0.

A p.R870H mutation in the beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain 7 gene causes familial 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in several members of an Indian family.

Bashyam MD(1), Savithri GR, Gopikrishna M, Narasimhan C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and 
Diagnostics (CDFD), Nacharam, India. bashyam@cdfd.org.in

Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder 
characterized mainly by left ventricular hypertrophy and myocyte disarray; it is 
the most common cause of sudden death in otherwise healthy individuals. More 
than 270 mutations in genes encoding the cardiac sarcomere have been identified. 
Attempts to establish a genotype-phenotype correlation for each of the mutations 
have not been highly successful. It has been suggested that additional genetic 
loci, as well as nongenetic factors such as lifestyle, gender and age, may play 
a role in modulating the clinical presentation of the disease. The p.R870H 
mutation has been identified as the cause of familial hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy in an Indian family. The results indicate that the disease 
phenotype varied among various affected members of the family, and the variation 
may be attributed to factors, such as gender and gene dosage.

La myocardiopathie hypertrophique familiale est un trouble génétique autosomique 
dominant caractérisé surtout par une hypertrophie ventriculaire gauche et une 
désorganisation des myocytes. C’est la principale cause de mort subite chez les 
personnes autrement en santé. On a trouvé plus de 270 mutations des gènes qui 
encodent le sarcomère cardiaque. Les tentatives pour établir une corrélation 
génotype-phénotype à chacune des mutations n’ont pas obtenu beaucoup de succès. 
On avance que des locus génétiques supplémentaires, de même que des facteurs non 
génétiques comme le mode de vie, le sexe et l’âge, peuvent participer à la 
modulation de la présentation clinique de la maladie. On a déterminé que la 
mutation p.R870H est responsable de la myocardiopathie hypertrophique d’une 
famille indienne. Selon les résultats, le phénotype de la maladie variait entre 
les divers membres de la famille qui étaient atteints, et cette variation peut 
être attribuée à des facteurs comme le sexe et le dosage génique.

DOI: 10.1016/s0828-282x(07)70828-0
PMCID: PMC2651383
PMID: 17703256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]