1. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 1;179(5):2989-98. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.5.2989.

Staphylococcal complement inhibitor: structure and active sites.

Rooijakkers SH(1), Milder FJ, Bardoel BW, Ruyken M, van Strijp JA, Gros P.

Author information:
(1)Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands. s.h.m.rooijakkers@umcutrecht.nl

The pathogenic bacterium Staphylococcus aureus counteracts the host immune 
defense by excretion of the 85 residue staphylococcal complement inhibitor 
(SCIN). SCIN inhibits the central complement convertases; thereby, it reduces 
phagocytosis following opsonization and efficiently blocks all downstream 
effector functions. In this study, we present the crystal structure of SCIN at 
1.8 A resolution and the identification of its active site. Functional 
characterization of structure based chimeric proteins, consisting of SCIN and 
the structurally but nonfunctional homologue open reading frame-D, indicate an 
18-residue segment (Leu-31-Gly-48) crucial for SCIN activity. In all complement 
activation pathways, chimeras lacking these SCIN residues completely fail to 
inhibit production of the potent mediator of inflammation C5a. Inhibition of 
alternative pathway-mediated opsonization (C3b deposition) and formation of the 
lytic membrane attack complex (C5b-9 deposition) are strongly reduced for these 
chimeras as well. For inhibition of the classical/lectin pathway-mediated C3b 
and C5b-9 deposition, the same residues are critical although additional sites 
are involved. These chimeras also display reduced capacity to stabilize the C3 
convertases of both the alternative and the classical/lectin pathway indicating 
the stabilizing effect is pivotal for the complement inhibitory activity of 
SCIN. Because SCIN specifically and efficiently inhibits complement, it has a 
high potential in anti-inflammatory therapy. Our data are a first step toward 
the development of a second generation molecule suitable for such therapeutic 
complement intervention.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.5.2989
PMID: 17709514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]