1. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2007 Nov;389(6):1967-77. doi: 10.1007/s00216-007-1584-5.
Epub  2007 Sep 22.

Development of an open-tubular trypsin reactor for on-line digestion of 
proteins.

Stigter EC(1), de Jong GJ, van Bennekom WP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Analysis, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Faculty of Sciences, Utrecht University, Sorbonnelaan 16, 3584 CA, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands. e.c.a.stigter@uu.nl

A study was initiated to construct a micro-reactor for protein digestion based 
on trypsin-coated fused-silica capillaries. Initially, surface plasmon resonance 
was used both for optimization of the surface chemistry applied in the 
preparation and for monitoring the amount of enzyme that was immobilized. The 
highest amount of trypsin was immobilized on dextran-coated SPR surfaces which 
allowed the covalent coupling of 11 ng mm(-2) trypsin. Fused-silica capillaries 
were modified in a similar manner and the resulting open-tubular 
trypsin-reactors having a pH optimum of pH 8.5, display a high activity when 
operated at 37 degrees C and are stable for at least two weeks when used 
continuously. Trypsin auto-digestion fragments, sample carry-over, and loss of 
signal due to adsorption of the protein were not observed. On-line digestion 
without prior protein denaturation, followed by micro-LC separation and 
photodiode array detection, was tested with horse-heart cytochrome C and horse 
skeletal-muscle myoglobin. The complete digestion of 20 pmol microL(-1) horse 
cytochrome C was observed when the average residence time of the protein sample 
in a 140 cm x 50 microm capillary immobilized enzyme reactor (IMER) was 165 s. 
Mass spectrometric identification of the injected protein on the basis of the 
tryptic peptides proved possible. Protein digestion was favorable with respect 
to reaction time and fragments formed when compared with other on-line and 
off-line procedures. These results and the easy preparation of this 
micro-reactor provide possibilities for miniaturized enzyme-reactors for on-line 
peptide mapping and inhibitor screening.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-007-1584-5
PMCID: PMC2117336
PMID: 17899035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]