1. Genes Dev. 2007 Oct 1;21(19):2399-409. doi: 10.1101/gad.1553207.

A role for AGL ubiquitination in the glycogen storage disorders of Lafora and 
Cori's disease.

Cheng A(1), Zhang M, Gentry MS, Worby CA, Dixon JE, Saltiel AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Life Sciences Institute, University of 
Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Cori's disease is a glycogen storage disorder characterized by a deficiency in 
the glycogen debranching enzyme, 
amylo-1,6-glucosidase,4-alpha-glucanotransferase (AGL). Here, we demonstrate 
that the G1448R genetic variant of AGL is unable to bind to glycogen and 
displays decreased stability that is rescued by proteasomal inhibition. AGL 
G1448R is more highly ubiquitinated than its wild-type counterpart and forms 
aggresomes upon proteasome impairment. Furthermore, the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
Malin interacts with and promotes the ubiquitination of AGL. Malin is known to 
be mutated in Lafora disease, an autosomal recessive disorder clinically 
characterized by the accumulation of polyglucosan bodies resembling poorly 
branched glycogen. Transfection studies in HepG2 cells demonstrate that AGL is 
cytoplasmic whereas Malin is predominately nuclear. However, after depletion of 
glycogen stores for 4 h, approximately 90% of transfected cells exhibit partial 
nuclear staining for AGL. Furthermore, stimulation of cells with agents that 
elevate cAMP increases Malin levels and Malin/AGL complex formation. Refeeding 
mice for 2 h after an overnight fast causes a reduction in hepatic AGL levels by 
48%. Taken together, these results indicate that binding to glycogen crucially 
regulates the stability of AGL and, further, that its ubiquitination may play an 
important role in the pathophysiology of both Lafora and Cori's disease.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1553207
PMCID: PMC1993871
PMID: 17908927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]