1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Oct;16(10):2128-35. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-07-0208.

Responses of biomarkers of folate and riboflavin status to folate and riboflavin 
supplementation in healthy and colorectal polyp patients (the FAB2 Study).

Powers HJ(1), Hill MH, Welfare M, Spiers A, Bal W, Russell J, Duckworth Y, 
Gibney E, Williams EA, Mathers JC.

Author information:
(1)Human Nutrition Unit, Section of Oncology, University of Sheffield, UK. 
h.j.powers@sheffield.ac.uk

Epidemiologic data suggest that increasing folate intake may protect against 
colorectal cancer. Riboflavin may interact with folate to modulate the effect. A 
double-blind randomized placebo-controlled intervention study (the FAB2 Study) 
was carried out in healthy controls and patients with colorectal polyps 
(adenomatous and hyperplastic) to examine effects of folic acid and riboflavin 
supplements on biomarkers of nutrient status and on putative biomarkers of 
colorectal cancer risk (DNA methylation and DNA damage; to be reported 
elsewhere). Ninety-eight healthy controls and 106 patients with colorectal 
polyps were stratified for the thermolabile variant of methylene 
tetrahydrofolate reductase, MTHFR C677T, and were randomized to receive 400 
microg of folic acid, 1,200 microg of folic acid, or 400 microg of folic acid 
plus 5 mg of riboflavin or placebo for 6 to 8 weeks. Blood samples and colon 
biopsy samples were collected for the measurement of biomarkers of folate and 
riboflavin status. Supplementation with folic acid elicited a significant 
increase in mucosal 5-methyl tetrahydrofolate, and a marked increase in RBC and 
plasma, with a dose-response. Measures of riboflavin status improved in response 
to riboflavin supplementation. Riboflavin supplement enhanced the response to 
low-dose folate in people carrying at least one T allele and having polyps. The 
magnitude of the response in mucosal folate was positively related to the 
increase in plasma 5-methyl tetrahydrofolate but was not different between the 
healthy group and polyp patients. Colorectal mucosal folate concentration 
responds to folic acid supplementation to an extent comparable to that seen in 
plasma, but with a suggestion of an upper limit.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-07-0208
PMID: 17932361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]