1. Immunogenetics. 2007 Nov;59(11):833-7. doi: 10.1007/s00251-007-0255-1. Epub
2007  Oct 23.

Influence of the inducible nitric oxide synthase gene (NOS2A) on inflammatory 
bowel disease susceptibility.

Martín MC(1), Martinez A, Mendoza JL, Taxonera C, Díaz-Rubio M, 
Fernández-Arquero M, de la Concha EG, Urcelay E.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Inmunología Clínica, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, 1a planta Sur, 
c/ Profesor Martín Lagos s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain. cmartal@terra.es

The great amount of nitric oxide (NO) produced by the inducible isoform of NO 
synthase (iNOS) exerts deleterious effects, and iNOS expression is raised in the 
colonic mucosa of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients. This is the first 
association analysis of polymorphisms within the NOS2A extended gene with IBD 
susceptibility. We analyzed 336 patients of Crohn's disease (CD), 355 of 
ulcerative colitis (UC), and 536 healthy controls from a Spanish population. We 
tested a (CCTTT)n microsatellite, a (-/TAAA) insertion, and two single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) flanking them (rs2779251 and rs2779248) in the 
NOS2A promoter, together with two SNPs in the coding region: one within exon 10, 
D385D (rs1137933), and another mapping to exon 16, S608L (rs2297518). Analysis 
of these markers evidenced differences among IBD patients and healthy controls. 
Allele (CCTTT) 13 is related to higher UC risk (p = 0.001; odds ratio [OR] [95% 
confidence interval, CI] = 1.64 [1.20-2.23]). Carriers of minor alleles of the 
two promoter SNPs analyzed showed an association with UC predisposition, and 
common allele homozygotes of the two exonic SNPs were more frequent among CD 
patients than among controls. Concordantly, one out of the three haplotypes 
carrying both exonic risk alleles was found to increase CD susceptibility (p = 
0.007; OR [95%CI] = 1.74 [1.13-2.67]). Therefore, the NOS2A gene seems to be 
involved in IBD aetiology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-007-0255-1
PMID: 17955236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]