1. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2008 May;35(5-6):546-51. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2007.04822.x. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

A genetic variant of apolipoprotein M increases susceptibility to coronary 
artery disease in a Chinese population.

Xu WW(1), Zhang Y, Tang YB, Xu YL, Zhu HZ, Ferro A, Ji Y, Chen Q, Fan LM.

Author information:
(1)Atherosclerosis Research Center, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

1. High-density lipoprotein (HDL) is widely accepted as a lipoprotein that 
protects against coronary artery and other atherosclerotic diseases. Recently, a 
new apolipoprotein encoded by the APOM gene, which plays an important role in 
affecting the intrinsic properties of HDL, has been reported. Genetic variations 
exist in the APOM gene, but their significance is presently unclear. The aim of 
the present study was to elucidate whether the APOM T-855C mutant allele is 
implicated in coronary artery disease (CAD). 2. In the present study, 418 
patients with CAD and 372 controls were studied, all of whom were Han Chinese 
from Jiangsu Province, China. Plasma levels of triglycerides (TG), total 
cholesterol (TC), HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) and low-density 
lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) were evaluated. Genomic DNA from the whole blood 
from these subjects was subjected to polymerase chain reaction amplification and 
restriction enzyme digestion to determine genotype with respect to the APOM 
T-855C polymorphism. 3. The allelic frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium. Plasma HDL levels were significantly lower in subjects with CAD 
than in control subjects (1.08 +/- 0.31 vs 1.25 +/- 0.32, respectively; P < 
0.001) and the distribution of genotypes and allelic frequencies was 
significantly different in the two groups (P = 0.013 and 0.005, respectively). 
Multiple logistic regression analysis after adjustment for age, gender, smoking, 
body mass index, hypertension and serum glucose showed that, compared with the 
wild-type TT genotype, carriers of the C allele had an increased risk of CAD 
(odds ratio = 1.819, 95% confidence interval 1.142-2.898; P = 0.012). 4. In 
conclusion, the results of the present study suggest that the APOM T-855C 
polymorphism carries an increased risk for CAD in this Chinese population.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1681.2007.04822.x
PMID: 17973931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]