1. Biochemistry. 2007 Dec 18;46(50):14638-49. doi: 10.1021/bi7012036. Epub 2007
Nov  21.

Two interferons alpha influence each other during their interaction with the 
extracellular domain of human type interferon receptor subunit 2.

Schmeisser H(1), Gorshkova I, Brown PH, Kontsek P, Schuck P, Zoon KC.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and National Institute 
of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. hschmeisser@niaid.nih.gov

The interaction between two human interferons alpha (IFN-alphas) and the 
extracellular (EC) domain of human type I IFN receptor subunit 2 (IFNAR2) was 
analyzed. Previous experiments using Daudi cells showed that IFN-alpha21b and 
some IFN-alpha hybrids (made from IFN-alpha2c and 21b) competed poorly for the 
IFN-alpha2b binding site. This study examined the causes of the poor competition 
between these IFN-alphas. IFN-alpha2c and the IFN hybrid CM3 
{IFN-alpha21b(1-75)(81-95)/IFN-alpha2c(76-80) (96-166), Y86K} were selected for 
this study based on their cell binding and biological properties. Competitive 
binding ELISA, native electrophoresis followed by Western blot, electrospray 
ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS), surface plasmon resonance biosensor (SPR) 
analysis, as well as neutralization of antiproliferative activities on Daudi 
cells in the presence of soluble IFNAR2-EC show evidence that each of the 
described IFN-alpha subtypes affected the binding of the other IFN-alpha to 
IFNAR2-EC by affecting the stability of the complex, i.e., dissociation of the 
complex. Moreover, native electrophoresis with different IFNAR2-EC mutants 
showed that IFN-alpha2c and CM3 utilize different amino acids in the binding 
domain of IFNAR2-EC. In addition to that, analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) 
revealed differences in the oligomeric state of the two studied interferons. Our 
results demonstrated that two individual IFN-alphas interact differentially with 
IFNAR2-EC and influence each other during this interaction. This study 
contributes to the understanding of the mutual interaction between multiple 
IFN-alpha subtypes during the competition for binding to the receptor.

DOI: 10.1021/bi7012036
PMCID: PMC2570179
PMID: 18027911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]