1. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Feb;19(2):572-86. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e07-06-0587. Epub 2007 
Nov 28.

Sequestration of mutated alpha1-antitrypsin into inclusion bodies is a 
cell-protective mechanism to maintain endoplasmic reticulum function.

Granell S(1), Baldini G, Mohammad S, Nicolin V, Narducci P, Storrie B, Baldini 
G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.

A variant alpha1-antitrypsin with E342K mutation has a high tendency to form 
intracellular polymers, and it is associated with liver disease. In the 
hepatocytes of individuals carrying the mutation, alpha1-antitrypsin localizes 
both to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and to membrane-surrounded inclusion 
bodies (IBs). It is unclear whether the IBs contribute to cell toxicity or 
whether they are protective to the cell. We found that in hepatoma cells, 
mutated alpha1-antitrypsin exited the ER and accumulated in IBs that were 
negative for autophagosomal and lysosomal markers, and contained several ER 
components, but not calnexin. Mutated alpha1-antitrypsin induced IBs also in 
neuroendocrine cells, showing that formation of these organelles is not cell 
type specific. In the presence of IBs, ER function was largely maintained. 
Increased levels of calnexin, but not of protein disulfide isomerase, inhibited 
formation of IBs and lead to retention of mutated alpha1-antitrypsin in the ER. 
In hepatoma cells, shift of mutated alpha1-antitrypsin localization to the ER by 
calnexin overexpression lead to cell shrinkage, ER stress, and impairment of the 
secretory pathway at the ER level. We conclude that segregation of mutated 
alpha1-antitrypsin from the ER to the IBs is a protective cell response to 
maintain a functional secretory pathway.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e07-06-0587
PMCID: PMC2230602
PMID: 18045994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]