1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Feb;294(2):E232-40. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00592.2007. Epub 2007 Dec 4.

Diabetes models by screen for hyperglycemia in phenotype-driven ENU mouse 
mutagenesis projects.

Aigner B(1), Rathkolb B, Herbach N, Hrab√© de Angelis M, Wanke R, Wolf E.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology, Hackerstrasse 27, 
Oberschleissheim, Germany. b.aigner@gen.vetmed.uni-muenchen.de

More than 150 million people suffer from diabetes mellitus worldwide, and this 
number is expected to rise substantially within the next decades. Despite its 
high prevalence, the pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus is not completely 
understood. Therefore, appropriate experimental models are essential tools to 
gain more insight into the genetics and pathogenesis of the disease. Here, we 
describe the current efforts to establish novel diabetes models derived from 
unbiased, phenotype-driven, large-scale N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) mouse 
mutagenesis projects started a decade ago using hyperglycemia as a 
high-throughput screen parameter. Mouse lines were established according to 
their hyperglycemia phenotype over several generations, thereby revealing a 
mutation as cause for the aberrant phenotype. Chromosomal assignment of the 
causative mutation and subsequent candidate gene analysis led to the detection 
of the mutations that resulted in novel alleles of genes already known to be 
involved in glucose homeostasis, like glucokinase, insulin 2, and insulin 
receptor. Additional ENU-induced hyperglycemia lines are under genetic analysis. 
Improvements in screen for diabetic animals are implemented to detect more 
subtle phenotypes. Moreover, diet challenge assays are being employed to uncover 
interactions between genetic and environmental factors in the pathogenesis of 
diabetes mellitus. The new mouse mutants recovered in phenotype-driven ENU mouse 
mutagenesis projects complement the available models generated by targeted 
mutagenesis of candidate genes, all together providing the large resource of 
models required for a systematic dissection of the pathogenesis of diabetes 
mellitus.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00592.2007
PMID: 18056790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]