1. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Dec 6;8:74. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-8-74.

Association of autism with polymorphisms in the paired-like homeodomain 
transcription factor 1 (PITX1) on chromosome 5q31: a candidate gene analysis.

Philippi A(1), Tores F, Carayol J, Rousseau F, Letexier M, Roschmann E, 
Lindenbaum P, Benajjou A, Fontaine K, Vazart C, Gesnouin P, Brooks P, Hager J.

Author information:
(1)IntegraGen SA, 5 rue Henri Desbru√®res, Genopole Campus 1, Genavenir 8, 91000 
Evry, France. anne.philippi@integragen.com

BACKGROUND: Autism is a complex, heterogeneous, behaviorally-defined disorder 
characterized by disruptions of the nervous system and of other systems such as 
the pituitary-hypothalamic axis. In a previous genome wide screen, we reported 
linkage of autism with a 1.2 Megabase interval on chromosome 5q31. For the 
current study, we hypothesized that 3 of the genes in this region could be 
involved in the development of autism: 1) paired-like homeodomain transcription 
factor 1 (PITX1), which is a key regulator of hormones within the 
pituitary-hypothalamic axis, 2) neurogenin 1, a transcription factor involved in 
neurogenesis, and 3) histone family member Y (H2AFY), which is involved in 
X-chromosome inactivation in females and could explain the 4:1 male:female 
gender distortion present in autism.
METHODS: A total of 276 families from the Autism Genetic Resource Exchange 
(AGRE) repository composed of 1086 individuals including 530 affected children 
were included in the study. Single nucleotide polymorphisms tagging the three 
candidate genes were genotyped on the initial linkage sample of 116 families. A 
second step of analysis was performed using tightly linked SNPs covering the 
PITX1 gene. Association was evaluated using the FBAT software version 1.7.3 for 
single SNP analysis and the HBAT command from the same package for haplotype 
analysis respectively.
RESULTS: Association between SNPs and autism was only detected for PITX1. 
Haplotype analysis within PITX1 showed evidence for overtransmission of the A-C 
haplotype of markers rs11959298 - rs6596189 (p = 0.0004). Individuals homozygous 
or heterozygous for the A-C haplotype risk allele were 2.54 and 1.59 fold more 
likely to be autistic than individuals who were not carrying the allele, 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Strong and consistent association was observed between a 2 SNPs 
within PITX1 and autism. Our data suggest that PITX1, a key regulator of 
hormones within the pituitary-hypothalamic axis, may be implicated in the 
etiology of autism.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-8-74
PMCID: PMC2222245
PMID: 18053270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]