1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Apr 5;147(3):343-50. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30603.

Comprehensive evaluation of positional candidates in the IL-18 pathway reveals 
suggestive associations with schizophrenia and herpes virus seropositivity.

Shirts BH(1), Wood J, Yolken RH, Nimgaonkar VL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Interactions between genetic variation and environmental factors have been 
invoked in schizophrenia genesis, but pathways linking them are uncertain. We 
used a pathway-oriented approach to evaluate six genes mediating IL18 function 
(IL-18, IL18BP, IL18R1, IL18RAP, IL12B, and IL12A). The first five are also 
localized to regions previously linked with schizophrenia. Fifty-four 
representative tag SNPs were selected from comprehensive sequence data and 
genotyped in 478 patients with schizophrenia/schizoaffective disorder (DSM IV 
criteria) and 501 unscreened control individuals. Exposure to three herpes 
viruses previously suggested as risk factors for schizophrenia was estimated 
simultaneously among the cases. Five SNPs in four genes were associated with 
schizophrenia, most prominently rs2272127 at IL18RAP (P = 0.0007, odds ratio for 
C allele 1.49, 95% CI: 1.18-1.87; P = 0.03 following correction for multiple 
comparisons). Exploratory analysis revealed that rs2272127 was also associated 
with herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV1) seropositivity in cases (P = 0.04, OR for G 
allele 1.58, 95% CI: 1.04-2.39). Similar patterns were observed at another 
correlated SNP (rs11465702, P = 0.005 and 0.006, respectively for associations 
with schizophrenia and HSV1 seropositivity). We suggest plausible, testable 
hypotheses linking IL-18 signaling and HSV1 in schizophrenia pathogenesis.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30603
PMID: 18092318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]