1. Asian J Androl. 2008 Jul;10(4):687-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-7262.2008.00376.x. 
Epub 2007 Dec 20.

Novel mutation in the ligand-binding domain of the androgen receptor gene 
(l790p) associated with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome.

Raicu F(1), Giuliani R, Gatta V, Palka C, Franchi PG, Lelli-Chiesa P, Tumini S, 
Stuppia L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences and Imaging, G d'Annunzio University 
Foundation, Chieti-Pescara, Italy.

Mutations in the X-linked androgen receptor (AR) gene cause androgen 
insensitivity syndrome (AIS), resulting in an impaired embryonic sex 
differentiation in 46,XY genetic men. Complete androgen insensitivity (CAIS) 
produces a female external phenotype, whereas cases with partial androgen 
insensitivity (PAIS) have various ambiguities of the genitalia. Mild androgen 
insensitivity (MAIS) is characterized by undermasculinization and gynecomastia. 
Here we describe a 2-month-old 46,XY female patient, with all of the 
characteristics of CAIS. Defects in testosterone (T) and dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT) synthesis were excluded. Sequencing of the AR gene showed the presence in 
exon 6 of a T to C transition in the second base of codon 790, nucleotide 
position 2369, causing a novel missense Leu790Pro mutation in the ligand-binding 
domain of the AR protein. The identification of a novel AR mutation in a girl 
with CAIS provides significant information due to the importance of missense 
mutations in the ligand-binding domain of the AR, which are able to induce 
functional abnormalities in the androgen binding capability, stabilization of 
active conformation, or interaction with coactivators.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1745-7262.2008.00376.x
PMID: 18097502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]