1. Traffic. 2008 Apr;9(4):574-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2008.00701.x. Epub
2008  Jan 7.

The itinerary of autophagosomes: from peripheral formation to kiss-and-run 
fusion with lysosomes.

Jahreiss L(1), Menzies FM, Rubinsztein DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Cambridge, Wellcome/MRC Building, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills 
Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.

Macroautophagy, a constitutive process in higher eukaryotic cells, mediates 
degradation of many long-lived proteins and organelles. The actual events 
occurring during the process in the dynamic system of a living cell have never 
been thoroughly investigated. We aimed to develop a live-cell assay in which to 
follow the complete itinerary of an autophagosome. Our experiments show that 
autophagosomes are formed randomly in peripheral regions of the cell. They then 
move bidirectionally along microtubules, accumulating at the 
microtubule-organizing centre, in a similar way to lysosomes. Their centripetal 
movement is dependent on the motor protein dynein and is important for their 
fusion with lysosomes. Initially, autophagosomes dock on to lysosomes, 
independent of lysosomal acidification. Two kinds of fusion then occur: complete 
fusions, creating a hybrid organelle, or more often kiss-and-run fusions, i.e. 
transfer of some content while still maintaining two separate vesicles. 
Surprisingly, the autophagolysosomal compartment seems to be more long lived 
than expected. Our study documents many aspects of autophagosome behaviour, 
adding to our understanding of the mechanism and control of autophagy. Indeed, 
although the formation of autophagosomes is completely different from any other 
vesicular structures, their later itinerary appears to be very similar to those 
of other trafficking pathways.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2008.00701.x
PMCID: PMC2329914
PMID: 18182013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]