1. BMC Cancer. 2008 Jan 22;8:17. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-17.

Ovarian carcinomas with genetic and epigenetic BRCA1 loss have distinct 
molecular abnormalities.

Press JZ(1), De Luca A, Boyd N, Young S, Troussard A, Ridge Y, Kaurah P, 
Kalloger SE, Blood KA, Smith M, Spellman PT, Wang Y, Miller DM, Horsman D, Faham 
M, Gilks CB, Gray J, Huntsman DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. drjpress@telus.net

BACKGROUND: Subclassification of ovarian carcinomas can be used to guide 
treatment and determine prognosis. Germline and somatic mutations, loss of 
heterozygosity (LOH), and epigenetic events such as promoter hypermethylation 
can lead to decreased expression of BRCA1/2 in ovarian cancers. The mechanism of 
BRCA1/2 loss is a potential method of subclassifying high grade serous 
carcinomas.
METHODS: A consecutive series of 49 ovarian cancers was assessed for mutations 
status of BRCA1 and BRCA2, LOH at the BRCA1 and BRCA2 loci, methylation of the 
BRCA1 promoter, BRCA1, BRCA2, PTEN, and PIK3CA transcript levels, PIK3CA gene 
copy number, and BRCA1, p21, p53, and WT-1 immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Eighteen (37%) of the ovarian carcinomas had germline or somatic BRCA1 
mutations, or epigenetic loss of BRCA1. All of these tumours were high-grade 
serous or undifferentiated type. None of the endometrioid (n = 5), clear cell (n 
= 4), or low grade serous (n = 2) carcinomas showed loss of BRCA1, whereas 47% 
of the 38 high-grade serous or undifferentiated carcinomas had loss of BRCA1. It 
was possible to distinguish high grade serous carcinomas with BRCA1 mutations 
from those with epigenetic BRCA1 loss: tumours with BRCA1 mutations typically 
had decreased PTEN mRNA levels while those with epigenetic loss of BRCA1 had 
copy number gain of PIK3CA. Overexpression of p53 with loss of p21 expression 
occurred significantly more frequently in high grade serous carcinomas with 
epigenetic loss of BRCA1, compared to high grade serous tumors without loss of 
BRCA1.
CONCLUSION: High grade serous carcinomas can be subclassified into three groups: 
BRCA1 loss (genetic), BRCA1 loss (epigenetic), and no BRCA1 loss. Tumors in 
these groups show distinct molecular alterations involving the PI3K/AKT and p53 
pathways.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-17
PMCID: PMC2245962
PMID: 18208621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]