1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 12;105(6):2070-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0709662105. Epub 2008 Jan 28.

The T790M mutation in EGFR kinase causes drug resistance by increasing the 
affinity for ATP.

Yun CH(1), Mengwasser KE, Toms AV, Woo MS, Greulich H, Wong KK, Meyerson M, Eck 
MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Lung cancers caused by activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) are initially responsive to small molecule tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKIs), but the efficacy of these agents is often limited because of 
the emergence of drug resistance conferred by a second mutation, T790M. 
Threonine 790 is the "gatekeeper" residue, an important determinant of inhibitor 
specificity in the ATP binding pocket. The T790M mutation has been thought to 
cause resistance by sterically blocking binding of TKIs such as gefitinib and 
erlotinib, but this explanation is difficult to reconcile with the fact that it 
remains sensitive to structurally similar irreversible inhibitors. Here, we show 
by using a direct binding assay that T790M mutants retain low-nanomolar affinity 
for gefitinib. Furthermore, we show that the T790M mutation activates WT EGFR 
and that introduction of the T790M mutation increases the ATP affinity of the 
oncogenic L858R mutant by more than an order of magnitude. The increased ATP 
affinity is the primary mechanism by which the T790M mutation confers drug 
resistance. Crystallographic analysis of the T790M mutant shows how it can adapt 
to accommodate tight binding of diverse inhibitors, including the irreversible 
inhibitor HKI-272, and also suggests a structural mechanism for catalytic 
activation. We conclude that the T790M mutation is a "generic" resistance 
mutation that will reduce the potency of any ATP-competitive kinase inhibitor 
and that irreversible inhibitors overcome this resistance simply through 
covalent binding, not as a result of an alternative binding mode.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0709662105
PMCID: PMC2538882
PMID: 18227510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: M.J.E. and M.M. 
are consultants for and receive research funding from Novartis Institutes for 
Biomedical Research.