1. Neuroscience. 2009 Jan 12;158(1):78-88. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.12.047.  Epub 2008 Jan 18.

Comparative analysis of the pharmacology of GluR1 in complex with transmembrane 
AMPA receptor regulatory proteins gamma2, gamma3, gamma4, and gamma8.

Kott S(1), Sager C, Tapken D, Werner M, Hollmann M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry I-Receptor Biochemistry, Building NC, Room 6/171, 
Ruhr University Bochum, Universit√§tsstr. 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany.

AMPA receptors (AMPARs) mediate the majority of fast synaptic transmission in 
the CNS of vertebrates. They are believed to be associated with members of the 
transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory protein (TARP) family. TARPs mediate the 
delivery of AMPA receptors to the plasma membrane and mediate their synaptic 
trafficking. Moreover, TARPs modulate essential electrophysiological properties 
of AMPA receptors. Here, we compare the influence of rat TARPs (gamma2, gamma3, 
gamma4, and gamma8) on pharmacological properties of rat GluR1(Q)flip. We show 
that agonist potencies are increased by all TARPs, but to individually different 
extents. On the other hand, all TARPs increase agonist potencies at the 
virtually non-desensitizing mutant GluR1-L479Y almost identically. Comparison of 
the influence of individual TARPs on relative agonist efficacies confirmed that 
the TARPs can be functionally subdivided into two subgroups, one consisting of 
gamma2 and gamma3 and one consisting of gamma4 and gamma8. Surprisingly, we 
found that TARPs convert certain AMPA receptor antagonists to agonists. The 
potency of one of these converted antagonists is dependent on the particular 
TARP. Moreover, TARPs (except gamma4) reduce the ion channel block by the 
synthetic Joro spider toxin analog 1-naphthylacetyl spermine (NASP). In 
addition, TARPs increase the permeability of the receptor to calcium, indicating 
that TARPs directly modulate important ion pore properties. In summary, the data 
presented herein will illustrate and help to understand the previously 
unexpected complexities of modulation of AMPA receptor pharmacological 
properties by TARPs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.12.047
PMID: 18304748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]