1. Blood. 2008 May 15;111(10):5086-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-06-098079. Epub
2008  Feb 28.

Ki11502, a novel multitargeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, induces 
growth arrest and apoptosis of human leukemia cells in vitro and in vivo.

Nishioka C(1), Ikezoe T, Yang J, Miwa A, Tasaka T, Kuwayama Y, Togitani K, 
Koeffler HP, Yokoyama A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi University, Kochi, 
Japan.

Ki11502 is a novel multitargeted receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) inhibitor with 
selectivity against platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha/beta 
(PDGFRalpha/beta). Ki11502 (0.1-1 nM, 2 days) profoundly caused growth arrest, 
G(0)/G(1) cell-cycle arrest, and apoptosis associated with down-regulation of 
Bcl-2 family proteins in the eosinophilic leukemia EOL-1 cells having the 
activated FIP1-like 1/PDGFRalpha fusion gene. Ki11502 decreased levels of 
p-PDGFRalpha and its downstream signals, including p-Akt, p-ERK, and p-STAT5, in 
EOL-1 cells. Of note, Ki11502 was also active against imatinib-resistant 
PDGFRalphaT674I mutant. In addition, Ki11502 inhibited proliferation of 
biphenotipic leukemia MV4-11 and acute myelogenous leukemia MOLM13 and freshly 
isolated leukemia cells having activating mutations in FMS-like tyrosine kinase 
3 (FLT3). This occurred in parallel with the drug inhibiting FLT3 and its 
downstream signal pathways, as measured by fluorescence-activated cell sorting 
using the phospho-specific antibodies. In addition, Ki11502 totally inhibited 
proliferation of EOL-1 cells growing as tumor xenografts in SCID mice without 
any noticeable adverse effects. Taken together, Ki11502 has profound 
antiproliferative effects on select subsets of leukemia including those 
possessing imatinib-resistant mutation.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2007-06-098079
PMCID: PMC2384135
PMID: 18309036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]