1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Oct 5;147B(7):1310-3. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30736.

Association of PIP5K2A with schizophrenia: a study in an indonesian family 
sample.

Saggers-Gray L(1), Heriani H, Handoko HY, Irmansyah I, Kusumawardhani AA, 
Widyawati I, Amir N, Nasrun MW, Schwab SG, Wildenauer DB.

Author information:
(1)Western Australian Institute for Medical Research, Centre for Medical 
Research, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.

PIP5K2A variants have been shown to be associated with schizophrenia in 
Caucasian populations. This study tested 12 PIP5K2A SNPs for association with 
schizophrenia in a sample of 152 sib-pair families of Indonesian descent. All 
SNPs had previously been tested for association with schizophrenia in a German 
family sample by Schwab et al. [2006; Mol Psychiatry] and seven SNPs were 
nominally associated with schizophrenia in this previous study. The purpose of 
the study was to examine whether previously implicated PIP5K2A variants 
influence susceptibility to schizophrenia in populations of non-European 
descent. No single markers showed nominal association with schizophrenia in this 
Indonesian family sample, however multi-marker haplotypes including a previously 
associated exonic SNP marker revealed nominally significant association (P = 
0.03). Power to detect association was greater than 80% for all previously 
implicated variants except for rs11013052, where power was greatly reduced due 
to the low minor allele frequency of this marker in the Indonesian sample. An 
explorative study combining the results of this study with those of our previous 
study indicated that rs11013052 was significantly associated with schizophrenia 
in the combined sample (P = 0.002). The results of this study suggest that any 
contribution of previously implicated DNA variants within the PIP5K2A gene to 
schizophrenia susceptibility in the Indonesian population is only minor.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30736
PMID: 18314871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]