1. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Apr 10;9:25. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-25.

N-acetyltransferase 8, a positional candidate for blood pressure and renal 
regulation: resequencing, association and in silico study.

Juhanson P(1), Kepp K, Org E, Veldre G, Kelgo P, Rosenberg M, Viigimaa M, Laan 
M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. peeter.juhanson@ut.ee

BACKGROUND: Kidneys have an important function in blood pressure (BP) regulation 
and elevated BP may lead to kidney failure. Chr2p12-p13 region linked to BP 
traits in multiple studies harbours a potential candidate for BP and renal 
function, N-acetyltransferase 8 (NAT8) expressed in embryonic and adult kidney 
and associated with nephrotoxicity response.
METHODS/RESULTS: We report the first study exploring NAT8 as a potential 
candidate gene for blood pressure and kidney function. The resequencing (n = 42, 
random Estonian samples) identified 15 NAT8 polymorphisms, including 6 novel 
variants. The diversity of NAT8 5' upstream region (pi/bp = 0.00320) exceeded up 
to 10 times the variation in the NAT8 genic region (pi/bp = 0.00037) as well as 
the average variation (pi/bp = 0.00040) for the promoters of 29 reference genes 
associated with hypertension. We suggest that a potential source for such high 
variation could be an active gene conversion process from NAT8B duplicate gene 
to NAT8. Similarly to NAT8, several reference genes with the most variable 
upstream regions have also duplicate copies. The NAT8 promoter SNPs were 
targeted with pilot quantitative association studies for blood pressure (n = 
137, healthy unrelated individuals) and for the index of kidney function - 
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR; n = 157 hypertensives with and 
without nephropathy). Minor alleles of these polymorphisms revealed a 
significant protective effect against elevated systolic BP as well as kidney 
failure in hypertension patients (p < 0.05; linear regression model, addictive 
effect).
CONCLUSION: The full resequencing and pilot association study of a novel 
positional candidate gene for blood pressure and renal function, human 
N-acetyltransferase 8, suggested a contribution of highly variable NAT8 promoter 
polymorphisms in determination of systolic blood pressure and eGFR. Based on in 
silico analysis, we raise the hypothesis that the alternative SNP alleles of the 
NAT8 upstream region may have differential effect on gene expression.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-25
PMCID: PMC2330028
PMID: 18402670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]