1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 6;283(23):15694-700. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800548200. Epub 
2008 Apr 8.

The Hsp60-(p.V98I) mutation associated with hereditary spastic paraplegia SPG13 
compromises chaperonin function both in vitro and in vivo.

Bross P(1), Naundrup S, Hansen J, Nielsen MN, Christensen JH, KruhÃ¸ffer M, 
Palmfeldt J, Corydon TJ, Gregersen N, Ang D, Georgopoulos C, Nielsen KL.

Author information:
(1)Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby, 
Brendstrupgaardsvej 100, Arhus 8200, Denmark. peter.bross@Kl.au.dk

We have previously reported the association of a mutation (c.292G > A/p.V98I) in 
the human HSPD1 gene that encodes the mitochondrial Hsp60 chaperonin with a 
dominantly inherited form of hereditary spastic paraplegia. Here, we show that 
the purified Hsp60-(p.V98I) chaperonin displays decreased ATPase activity and 
exhibits a strongly reduced capacity to promote folding of denatured malate 
dehydrogenase in vitro. To test its in vivo functions, we engineered a bacterial 
model system that lacks the endogenous chaperonin genes and harbors two plasmids 
carrying differentially inducible operons with human Hsp10 and wild-type Hsp60 
or Hsp10 and Hsp60-(p.V98I), respectively. Ten hours after shutdown of the 
wild-type chaperonin operon and induction of the Hsp60-(p.V98I)/Hsp10 mutant 
operon, bacterial cell growth was strongly inhibited. No globally increased 
protein aggregation was observed, and microarray analyses showed that a number 
of genes involved in metabolic pathways, some of which are essential for robust 
aerobic growth, were strongly up-regulated in Hsp60-(p.V98I)-expressing 
bacteria, suggesting that the growth arrest was caused by defective folding of 
some essential proteins. Co-expression of Hsp60-(p.V98I) and wild-type Hsp60 
exerted a dominant negative effect only when the chaperonin genes were expressed 
at relatively low levels. Based on our in vivo and in vitro data, we propose 
that the major effect of heterozygosity for the Hsp60-(p.V98I) mutation is a 
moderately decreased activity of chaperonin complexes composed of mixed 
wild-type and Hsp60-(p.V98I) mutant subunits.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M800548200
PMCID: PMC3259655
PMID: 18400758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]