1. Inorg Chem. 2008 May 19;47(10):3993-4004. doi: 10.1021/ic702414m. Epub 2008
Apr  24.

Spectroscopic and computational insights into second-sphere amino-acid tuning of 
substrate analogue/active-site interactions in iron(III) superoxide dismutase.

Grove LE(1), Xie J, Yikilmaz E, Karapetyan A, Miller AF, Brunold TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706, USA.

In this study, the mechanism by which second-sphere residues modulate the 
structural and electronic properties of substrate-analogue complexes of the 
Fe-dependent superoxide dismutase (FeSOD) has been explored. Both spectroscopic 
and computational methods were used to investigate the azide (N3(-)) adducts of 
Fe(3+)SOD (N3-Fe(3+)SOD) and its Q69E mutant, as well as Fe(3+)-substituted 
MnSOD (N3-Fe(3+)(Mn)SOD) and its Y34F mutant. Electronic absorption, circular 
dichroism, and magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopic data reveal that the 
energy of the dominant N3(-)-->Fe(3+) ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) 
transition decreases in the order N3-Fe(3+)(Mn)SOD>N3-Fe(3+)SOD>Q69E 
N3-Fe(3+)SOD. Intriguingly, the LMCT transition energies correlate almost 
linearly with the Fe(3+/2+) reduction potentials of the corresponding 
Fe(3+)-bound SOD species in the absence of azide, which span a range of 
approximately 1 V (see the preceding paper). To explore the origin of this 
correlation, combined quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) geometry 
optimizations were performed on complete enzyme models. The INDO/S-CI computed 
electronic transition energies satisfactorily reproduce the experimental trend 
in LMCT transition energies, indicating that the QM/MM optimized active-site 
models are reasonable. Density functional theory calculations on these 
experimentally validated active-site models reveal that the differences in 
spectral and electronic properties among the four N 3(-) adducts arise primarily 
from differences in the hydrogen-bond network involving the conserved 
second-sphere Gln (mutated to Glu in Q69E FeSOD) and the solvent ligand. The 
implications of our findings with respect to the mechanism by which the 
second-coordination sphere modulates substrate-analogue binding as well as the 
catalytic properties of FeSOD are discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/ic702414m
PMCID: PMC6501593
PMID: 18433119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]