1. Biochemistry. 2008 Jun 3;47(22):5976-85. doi: 10.1021/bi800319r. Epub 2008 May
 6.

Factor Va alters the conformation of the Na+-binding loop of factor Xa in the 
prothrombinase complex.

Yang L(1), Manithody C, Qureshi SH, Rezaie AR.

Author information:
(1)Edward A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saint Louis 
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri 63104, USA.

Structural and mutagenesis data have indicated that the 220-loop of thrombin is 
stabilized by a salt-bridge between Glu-217 and Lys-224, thereby facilitating 
the octahedral coordination of Na (+) with contributions from two carbonyl O 
atoms of Arg-221a and Lys-224. All three residues are also conserved in fXa and 
the X-ray crystal structure of fXa indicates that both Glu-217 and Lys-224 are 
within hydrogen-bonding distance from one another. To investigate the role of 
these three residues in the catalytic function of fXa and their contribution to 
interaction with Na (+), we substituted them with Ala and characterized their 
properties in both amidolytic and proteolytic activity assays. The results 
indicate that the affinity of all three mutants for interaction with Na (+) has 
been impaired. The mutant with the greatest loss of affinity for Na (+) (E217A 
or E217Q) also exhibited a dramatic impairment ( approximately 3-4 orders of 
magnitude) in its activity toward both synthetic and natural substrates. 
Interestingly, factor Va (fVa) restored most of the catalytic defect with 
prothrombin, but not with the synthetic substrate. Both Glu-217 mutants 
exhibited a near normal affinity for fVa in the prothrombinase assay, but a 
markedly lower affinity for the cofactor in a direct-binding assay. These 
results suggest that, similar to thrombin, an ionic interaction between Glu-217 
and Lys-224 stabilizes the 220-loop of fXa for binding Na (+). They further 
support the hypothesis that the Na (+) and fVa-binding sites of fXa are 
energetically linked and that a cofactor function for fVa in the prothrombinase 
complex involves inducing a conformational change in the 220-loop of fXa that 
appears to stabilize this loop in the Na (+)-bound active conformation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi800319r
PMCID: PMC2440691
PMID: 18457426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]