1. Respir Res. 2008 May 28;9(1):46. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-9-46.

Could a defective epithelial sodium channel lead to bronchiectasis.

Fajac I(1), Viel M, Sublemontier S, Hubert D, Bienvenu T.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Explorations Fonctionnelles, AP-HP, HÃ´pital Cochin, Paris, France. 
ifajac@cochin.univ-paris5.fr

BACKGROUND: Bronchiectasis is defined as a permanent dilation of the airways 
arising from chronic bronchial inflammation/infection. In 50% of cases, no 
etiology can be identified. Recently, the role of the epithelial sodium channel 
ENaC has been pointed out in the pathophysiology of cystic fibrosis, a disease 
due to mutations in the CFTR gene and causing bronchiectasis in the airways. 
Moreover, it was found that transgenic mice overexpressing ENaCbeta present 
cystic fibrosis-like lung disease symptoms. Our aim was to evaluate if a 
defective ENaC protein could be involved in the development of bronchiectasis.
METHODS: We extensively analysed ENaCbeta and gamma genes in 55 patients with 
idiopathic bronchiectasis and without two mutations in the coding regions of 
CFTR. Thirty-eight patients presented functional abnormalities suggesting 
impaired sodium transport (abnormal sweat chloride concentration or nasal 
potential difference measurement), and 17 had no such evidence.
RESULTS: Sequencing of the exons and flanking introns of the ENaCbeta and gamma 
gene identified five different amino-acid changes (p.Ser82Cys, p.Pro369Thr, 
p.Asn288Ser in ENaCbeta ; and p.Gly183Ser, p.Glu197Lys in ENaCgamma) in 
heterozygous state in 8 patients. The p.Ser82Cys amino-acid change was found in 
3 unrelated patients who were also heterozygous for a CFTR mutation or variant 
(1 p.F508del, 1 IVS8-5T, and 1 IVS8-5T:1716G>A (p.E528E)). The other mutations 
were found in patients without CFTR mutation, the p.Glu197Lys mutation in 2 
patients and the other variants in single patients. Among the 8 patients bearing 
an ENaC mutation, 5 had functional abnormalities suggesting impaired sodium 
transport.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that several variants in ENaCbeta and gamma 
genes might be deleterious for ENaC function and lead to bronchiectasis, 
especially in patients who are trans-heterozygotes for ENaCbeta/CFTR mutations 
or variants.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-9-46
PMCID: PMC2435537
PMID: 18507830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]