1. Oncogene. 2008 Sep 25;27(43):5753-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.194. Epub 2008 Jun 
16.

Cis-acting genomic elements of the Pas1 locus control Kras mutability in lung 
tumors.

Manenti G(1), Trincucci G, Pettinicchio A, Amendola E, Scarf√≤ M, Dragani TA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Laboratories, Fondazione IRCCS 
Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

The Pas1 locus is the major tumor modifier of lung tumorigenesis in mouse inbred 
strains. Of six genes contained in a conserved haplotype, three (Casc1, Kras and 
Ifltd1) have been proposed as Pas1 candidates, but mechanistic evidence is 
sparse. Herein, we examined urethane-induced lung tumorigenesis in a new mouse 
model developed by replacing the Kras gene with an Hras gene in the susceptible 
A/J-type Pas1 locus and crossing these mice with either C57BL/6J or A/J mice. 
Heterozygous mice carrying the Hras-replacement gene were more susceptible than 
wild-type mice to lung carcinogenesis, indicating that Hras replacement not only 
compensates for Kras functions, but is more active. Indeed, most lung tumors 
carried a Gln61Leu mutation in the Hras-replacement gene, whereas no mutations 
were observed in the endogenous Hras gene. Thus, the context of the Kras locus 
determined mutability of ras genes. In mice carrying the Hras-replacement gene, 
the mutation frequency affecting the wild-type Kras gene was much higher when 
this gene was located in the A/J type than in the C57BL/6J-type Pas1 locus (12 
versus 0%, -log P=5.0). These findings identify cis-acting elements in the Pas1 
locus as the functional components controlling genetic susceptibility to lung 
tumorigenesis by modulating mutability of the Kras gene.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2008.194
PMID: 18560355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]