1. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2008 Sep-Oct;44(8-9):357-67. doi: 
10.1007/s11626-008-9122-0. Epub 2008 Jul 2.

BRCA1 185delAG truncation protein, BRAt, amplifies caspase-mediated apoptosis in 
ovarian cells.

O'Donnell JD(1), Johnson NC, Turbeville TD, Alfonso MY, Kruk PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, MDC Box 11, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Breast and ovarian cancer patients with germline mutations in BRCA1 respond more 
favorably to initial chemotherapy. We previously reported that cells from women 
carrying the BRCA1 185delAG founder mutation undergo an enhanced 
caspase-3-mediated apoptotic response. Here, we report on the transient and 
stable transfection of cDNA coding for the putative truncated protein product of 
the BRCA1 185delAG mutant gene into BRCA1 wild-type human ovarian surface 
epithelial cells and ovarian cancer cells, resulting in cells with a 
heterozygous background containing two BRCA1 wild-type alleles and the BRCA1 
185delAG transcript. The BRCA1 185delAG truncation (BRAt) protein did not alter 
epithelial cell morphology or induce tumorigenesis. However, upon treatment with 
staurosporine, BRAt cells showed increased levels of active caspase-3 and 
increased cleavage of caspase-3 substrates, PARP and DFF45. Additionally, XIAP 
and cIAP-1 protein are at reduced levels in untreated BRAt cells as compared to 
control cells. BRAt also reduced levels of phosphorylated Akt and overexpression 
of activated Akt in BRAt cells restored caspase-3 activity to that seen in 
wild-type cells. Further, BRAt expression increased chemosensitivity in 
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cells. Taken together, our data demonstrate 
that truncated proteins arising from BRCA1 185delAG mutation increase 
Akt-mediated apoptosis, suggesting a possible mechanism by which ovarian cancer 
patients with this germline BRCA1 mutation may respond better to initial 
chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s11626-008-9122-0
PMID: 18594935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]