1. J Hum Genet. 2008;53(9):842-849. doi: 10.1007/s10038-008-0319-6. Epub 2008 Jul
 15.

VSX1 gene variants are associated with keratoconus in unrelated Korean patients.

Mok JW(1)(2), Baek SJ(1)(2), Joo CK(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Department of Ophthalmology 
and Visual Science, Catholic Research Institutes of Medical Science, Catholic 
University Medical College, The Catholic University of Korea, 505 Banpo-dong, 
Seocho-ku, Seoul, 137-701, South Korea.
(2)Korea Eye Tissue and Gene Bank, St. Mary's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Department of Ophthalmology 
and Visual Science, Catholic Research Institutes of Medical Science, Catholic 
University Medical College, The Catholic University of Korea, 505 Banpo-dong, 
Seocho-ku, Seoul, 137-701, South Korea. ckjoo@catholic.ac.kr.
(4)Korea Eye Tissue and Gene Bank, St. Mary's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea. 
ckjoo@catholic.ac.kr.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, St. Mary's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea. 
ckjoo@catholic.ac.kr.

Keratoconus is a bilateral ectatic disorder characterized by the central 
thinning of corneal tissue leading to visual impairment. To investigate the 
possibility of visual system homeobox 1 (VSXI) as a candidate susceptibility 
gene for Korean patients with keratoconus, we performed a mutation screening of 
the VSXI gene in 249 unrelated patients with keratoconus and 208 control 
subjects without the ocular disorder. We found two heterozygous novel missense 
mutations in exon 2: N151S and G160V. The G160V mutation was identified in 13 
keratoconus patients (5.3%), and the N151S mutation was found in only one 
keratoconus patient (0.4%). We also detected three synonymous polymorphisms and 
four intragenic polymorphisms. The IVS1-11*a allele was associated with a 
significantly increased risk of keratoconus in Korean patients [3.6 vs. 0.5%, p 
= 0.001, odds ratio (OR) = 7.76, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.989-30.241). 
Other polymorphisms did not show an association with keratoconus risk. Our data 
is the first reported VSX1 mutation screening in Korean keratoconus patients. We 
detected two novel missense mutations and one intragenic polymorphism in the 
VSX1 gene, which show a strong statistical association with unrelated 
keratoconus patients. Consequently, our study suggests that VSX1 gene variants 
seem to be significant genetic variants for keratoconus predisposition in 
unrelated Korean patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10038-008-0319-6
PMID: 18626569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]