1. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2008 Oct;35(10):1252-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2008.04999.x. Epub 2008 Jul 9.

An S296R mutation in the human androgen receptor causes activation of the 
receptor by non-androgenic steroids and stronger inhibition by the nuclear 
receptor corepressor N-coR.

Li YD(1), Lu Y, Chen GC, Lu J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 
China.

Mutation of the androgen receptor (AR) is believed to contribute to 
androgen-independent growth of prostate cancer. In the present study, we 
examined the functional changes associated with the novel somatic mutation S296R 
in the N-terminal domain of the AR identified from one recurrent prostate cancer 
sample. The results indicate that the S296R mutation does not differ obviously 
from the wild-type AR in its ability to bind the synthetic androgen 
methyltrienolone, or in its transcriptional activity induced by 
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in the absence or presence of the overexpression of 
coactivators (steroid receptor coactivator-1, transcription intermediary 
factor-2, cAMP response element-binding protein-binding protein and p300). 
However, S296R was found to differ from wild-type AR in that its transcriptional 
activity could be activated by high concentrations (1 micromol/L) of 
17beta-oestradiol and progesterone and its transactivity induced by DHT was more 
obviously inhibited by overexpression of the nuclear receptor corepressor N-coR 
in CV-1 cells. These findings indicate that a point mutation (S296R) in the 
N-terminal domain of the AR can decrease the ligand specificity of the AR and 
alter the interaction between S296R and the corepressor N-coR.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1681.2008.04999.x
PMID: 18637017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]