1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 19;283(38):26059-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803230200. Epub 
2008 Jul 21.

Interaction with the 5D3 monoclonal antibody is regulated by intramolecular 
rearrangements but not by covalent dimer formation of the human ABCG2 multidrug 
transporter.

Ozvegy-Laczka C(1), Laczkó R, Hegedus C, Litman T, Várady G, Goda K, Hegedus T, 
Dokholyan NV, Sorrentino BP, Váradi A, Sarkadi B.

Author information:
(1)Membrane Research Group of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Semmelweis 
University and National Blood Center, 1113 Budapest, Hungary.

Human ABCG2 is a plasma membrane glycoprotein working as a homodimer or 
homo-oligomer. The protein plays an important role in the 
protection/detoxification of various tissues and may also be responsible for the 
multidrug-resistant phenotype of cancer cells. In our previous study we found 
that the 5D3 monoclonal antibody shows a function-dependent reactivity to an 
extracellular epitope of the ABCG2 transporter. In the current experiments we 
have further characterized the 5D3-ABCG2 interaction. The effect of chemical 
cross-linking and the modulation of extracellular S-S bridges on the transporter 
function and 5D3 reactivity of ABCG2 were investigated in depth. We found that 
several protein cross-linkers greatly increased 5D3 labeling in ABCG2 expressing 
HEK cells; however, there was no correlation between covalent dimer formation, 
the inhibition of transport activity, and the increase in 5D3 binding. 
Dithiothreitol treatment, which reduced the extracellular S-S bridge-forming 
cysteines of ABCG2, had no effect on transport function but caused a significant 
decrease in 5D3 binding. When analyzing ABCG2 mutants carrying Cys-to-Ala 
changes in the extracellular loop, we found that the mutant C603A (lacking the 
intermolecular S-S bond) showed comparable transport activity and 5D3 reactivity 
to the wild-type ABCG2. However, disruption of the intramolecular S-S bridge (in 
C592A, C608A, or C592A/C608A mutants) in this loop abolished 5D3 binding, 
whereas the function of the protein was preserved. Based on these results and ab 
initio folding simulations, we propose a model for the large extracellular loop 
of the ABCG2 protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M803230200
PMCID: PMC3258862
PMID: 18644784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]