1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Jul;7(7):2233-40. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0067.

Effect of antigen turnover rate and expression level on antibody penetration 
into tumor spheroids.

Ackerman ME(1), Pawlowski D, Wittrup KD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Building 
E19-551, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Poor tissue penetration is a significant obstacle to the development of 
successful antibody drugs for immunotherapy of solid tumors, and diverse 
alterations to the properties of antibody drugs have been made to improve 
penetration and homogeneity of exposure. However, in addition to properties of 
the antibody drug, mathematical models of antibody transport predict that the 
antigen expression level and turnover rate significantly influence penetration. 
As intrinsic antigen properties are likely to be difficult to modify, they may 
set inherent limits to penetration. Accordingly, in this study, we assess their 
contribution by evaluating the distance to which antibodies penetrate spheroids 
when these antigen properties are systematically varied. Additionally, the 
penetration profiles of antibodies against carcinoembryonic antigen and A33, two 
targets of clinical interest, are compared. The results agree well with the 
quantitative predictions of the model and show that localizing antibody to 
distal regions of tumors is best achieved by selecting slowly internalized 
targets that are not expressed above the level necessary for recruiting a toxic 
dose of therapeutic. Each antibody-bound antigen molecule that is turned over or 
present in excess incurs a real cost in terms of penetration depth-a limiting 
factor in the development of effective therapies for treating solid tumors.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0067
PMCID: PMC2831054
PMID: 18645032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]