1. Pediatr Cardiol. 2008 Nov;29(6):1033-42. doi: 10.1007/s00246-008-9267-3. Epub 
2008 Jul 26.

Cardiac remodeling after enzyme replacement therapy with acid alpha-glucosidase 
for infants with Pompe disease.

Levine JC(1), Kishnani PS, Chen YT, Herlong JR, Li JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston and Pediatrics, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. jami.levine@cardio.chboston.org

BACKGROUND: Infantile Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type 2) is a fatal 
disorder caused by deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase. This deficiency results 
in glycogen accumulation in the lysosomes of many tissues including cardiac 
muscle. The disease is characterized by profound hypotonia, poor growth, 
organomegaly, and cardiomegaly. Severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy often is 
present in early infancy, and most patients die of cardiac or respiratory 
failure in the first year of life. This report describes the cardiac response of 
infants with Pompe disease to a phase 2 trial of enzyme replacement therapy 
(ERT).
METHODS: Eight patients with classical infantile Pompe disease were given 
intravenous recombinant human GAA (rhGAA) for 1 year. Cardiac monitoring 
included echocardiography, electrocardiograms (ECGs), chest radiographs, and 
clinical cardiac evaluation at 4, 8, 12, 24, 36, and 52 weeks. At 52 weeks, 6 
patients were alive.
RESULTS: Most of the treated patients had rapid regression of ventricular 
hypertrophy in response to ERT, with near normalization of posterior wall 
thickness, ventricular mass, and ventricular size. Systolic ventricular function 
was preserved despite rapid changes in ventricular mass and size. Concomitantly, 
ECGs documented lengthening of the PR interval and decreased ventricular 
voltages, whereas chest radiographs documented a decreased cardiothoracic ratio. 
Symptoms of pulmonary congestion were diminished, and survival was improved.
CONCLUSION: The cardiovascular system responds quickly and strikingly to ERT 
with rhGAA, suggesting rapid reversal of excessive glycogen storage in cardiac 
muscle cells. Changes in ventricular mass and function are maintained throughout 
1 year of follow-up evaluation and associated with decreased morbidity and 
prolonged survival.

DOI: 10.1007/s00246-008-9267-3
PMCID: PMC2683920
PMID: 18661169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]