1. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Sep-Oct;95(1-2):39-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.06.002.
 Epub 2008 Aug 3.

Short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCAD) deficiency: an examination of the 
medical and neurodevelopmental characteristics of 14 cases identified through 
newborn screening or clinical symptoms.

Waisbren SE(1), Levy HL, Noble M, Matern D, Gregersen N, Pasley K, Marsden D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA. susan.waisbren@childrens.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Dec;95(4):241-2. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.09.003.

The medical and neurodevelopmental characteristics of 14 children with 
short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SCADD) are described. Eight were 
detected as neonates by newborn screening. Three children diagnosed on the basis 
of clinical symptoms had normal newborn screening results while three were born 
in states that did not screen for SCADD. Treatment included frequent feedings 
and a low fat diet. All children identified by newborn screening demonstrated 
medical and neuropsychological development within the normative range on 
follow-up, although one child had a relative weakness in the motor area and 
another child exhibited mild speech delay. Of the three clinically identified 
children with newborn screening results below the cut-off value, two were 
healthy and performed within the normal range on cognitive and motor tests at 
follow-up. Four clinically identified children with SCADD experienced persistent 
symptoms and/or developmental delay. However, in each of these cases, there were 
supplementary or alternative explanations for medical and neuropsychological 
deficits. Results indicated no genotype-phenotype correlations. These findings 
suggest that SCADD might be benign and the clinical symptoms ascribed to SCADD 
reflective of ascertainment bias or that early identification and treatment 
prevented complications that may have occurred due to interaction between 
genetic susceptibility and other genetic factors or environmental stressors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.06.002
PMCID: PMC4204643
PMID: 18676165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]