1. Oncogene. 2008 Dec 4;27(53):6770-81. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.284. Epub 2008 Aug 
11.

Deletion analysis and alternative splicing define a transactivation inhibitory 
domain in human oncoprotein REL.

Leeman JR(1), Weniger MA, Barth TF, Gilmore TD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Misregulation of REL, a nuclear factor-kappaB family transcription factor, has 
been implicated in several human lymphoid malignancies. REL has a conserved 
N-terminal DNA-binding/dimerization domain called the Rel homology domain (RHD) 
and a C-terminal transactivation domain (TAD). Here, we define the sequences 
(amino acids (aa) 323-422) between the RHD and TAD as a REL inhibitory domain 
(RID) because deletion of these sequences increases both REL transactivation and 
DNA binding. Furthermore, we have characterized two REL mRNA splice variants 
that encode proteins with alterations near RID: one lacking exon 9 sequences (aa 
308-330; RELDelta9) and one with an exonized Alu fragment insertion of 32 aa 
after aa 307 (REL+Alu). Deletion of RID or exon 9-encoded sequences increases 
transactivation by GAL4-REL by approximately threefold. Moreover, deletion of 
RID or exon 9 sequences increases transactivation by full-length REL from 
certain kappaB site-containing promoters and increases DNA binding by REL. 
Deletion of RID does not affect REL's ability to transform chicken spleen cells. 
Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of mRNA from both 
primary lymphoma samples and several transformed tissue culture cell lines 
indicates that the RELDelta9 splice variant is preferentially expressed in 
lymphoma, suggesting that the REL transcript lacking exon 9 could serve as a 
marker for certain types of lymphoid tumors.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2008.284
PMCID: PMC2832920
PMID: 18695674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]