1. Nature. 2008 Sep 18;455(7211):401-5. doi: 10.1038/nature07213. Epub 2008 Aug
24.

Regulatory networks define phenotypic classes of human stem cell lines.

MÃ¼ller FJ(1), Laurent LC, Kostka D, Ulitsky I, Williams R, Lu C, Park IH, Rao 
MS, Shamir R, Schwartz PH, Schmidt NO, Loring JF.

Author information:
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. fj.mueller@zip-kiel.de

Stem cells are defined as self-renewing cell populations that can differentiate 
into multiple distinct cell types. However, hundreds of different human cell 
lines from embryonic, fetal and adult sources have been called stem cells, even 
though they range from pluripotent cells-typified by embryonic stem cells, which 
are capable of virtually unlimited proliferation and differentiation-to adult 
stem cell lines, which can generate a far more limited repertoire of 
differentiated cell types. The rapid increase in reports of new sources of stem 
cells and their anticipated value to regenerative medicine has highlighted the 
need for a general, reproducible method for classification of these cells. We 
report here the creation and analysis of a database of global gene expression 
profiles (which we call the 'stem cell matrix') that enables the classification 
of cultured human stem cells in the context of a wide variety of pluripotent, 
multipotent and differentiated cell types. Using an unsupervised clustering 
method to categorize a collection of approximately 150 cell samples, we 
discovered that pluripotent stem cell lines group together, whereas other cell 
types, including brain-derived neural stem cell lines, are very diverse. Using 
further bioinformatic analysis we uncovered a protein-protein network (PluriNet) 
that is shared by the pluripotent cells (embryonic stem cells, embryonal 
carcinomas and induced pluripotent cells). Analysis of published data showed 
that the PluriNet seems to be a common characteristic of pluripotent cells, 
including mouse embryonic stem and induced pluripotent cells and human oocytes. 
Our results offer a new strategy for classifying stem cells and support the idea 
that pluripotency and self-renewal are under tight control by specific molecular 
networks.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07213
PMCID: PMC2637443
PMID: 18724358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]