1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2008;10(5):R103. doi: 10.1186/ar2495. Epub 2008 Sep 1.

A polymorphism in the human serotonin 5-HT2A receptor gene may protect against 
systemic sclerosis by reducing platelet aggregation.

Beretta L(1), Cossu M, Marchini M, Cappiello F, Artoni A, Motta G, Scorza R.

Author information:
(1)Referral Center for Systemic Autoimmune Diseases, University of Milan & 
Fondazione IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Via 
Pace 9, 20122 Milan, Italy. lorberimm@hotmail.com

Comment in
    Arthritis Res Ther. 2009;11(2):403; author reply 404. doi: 10.1186/ar2606.

INTRODUCTION: Platelet aggregation may contribute to the pathogenesis of 
systemic sclerosis: following activation, platelets release significant amounts 
of serotonin - which promotes vasoconstriction and fibrosis, and further 
enhances aggregation. The C+1354T polymorphism in the exonic region of the 
serotonin 2A receptor gene determining the His452Tyr substitution was associated 
with blunted intracellular responses after serotonin stimulation, and may have a 
role in susceptibility to scleroderma.
METHODS: One hundred and fifteen consecutive systemic sclerosis patients and 140 
well-matched healthy control individuals were genotyped by sequence-specific 
primer-PCR for the His452Tyr substitution of the serotonin 2A receptor gene, and 
associations were sought with scleroderma and its main clinical features. The 
functional relevance of the His452Tyr substitution was also assessed by 
evaluating the aggregation of platelet-rich plasma from His452/His452 and 
His452/Tyr452 healthy individuals after stimulation with adenosine diphosphate 
+/- serotonin.
RESULTS: The T allele of the C+1354T polymorphism was underrepresented in 
scleroderma patients compared with control individuals (5.2% versus 12.4%, P < 
0.001, chi-square test and 1,000-fold permutation test) and its carriage reduced 
the risk for systemic sclerosis (odds ratio = 0.39, 95% confidence interval = 
0.19 to 0.85, P < 0.01). Platelets from His452/Tyr452 healthy subjects more 
weakly responded to serotonin stimulation compared with platelets from 
His452/His452 individuals (3.2 +/- 2.6-fold versus 9.6 +/- 8.6-fold increase in 
aggregation, P = 0.017 by Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and P = 0.003 after correction 
for baseline adenosine diphosphate-induced aggregation values).
CONCLUSION: The His452Tyr substitution may influence susceptibility to systemic 
sclerosis by altering platelet aggregation in response to serotonin.

DOI: 10.1186/ar2495
PMCID: PMC2592780
PMID: 18761744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]