1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 23;105(38):14488-91. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0803657105. Epub 2008 Sep 8.

Natural selection of FLT1 alleles and their association with malaria resistance 
in utero.

Muehlenbachs A(1), Fried M, Lachowitzer J, Mutabingwa TK, Duffy PE.

Author information:
(1)Mother-Offspring Malaria Studies Project, Seattle Biomedical Research 
Institute, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 23;105(38):14243-4. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0807932105.

Placental malaria (PM) caused by Plasmodium falciparum contributes significantly 
to infant mortality in sub-Saharan Africa and is associated with pregnancy loss. 
We hypothesized that fetal genes that modify PM would be associated with fetal 
fitness. During PM, placental trophoblasts produce soluble fms-like tyrosine 
kinase 1 (sFlt1), also known as soluble VEGF receptor 1, an angiogenesis 
inhibitor associated with preeclampsia. Here we present a study examining the 
genotype of the fms-related tyrosine kinase 1 (FLT1) 3' UTR in Tanzanian 
mother-infant pairs. First-time mothers suffer the most PM, and newborn FLT1 
genotype distribution differed by birth order, with newborns of first-time 
mothers outside of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) during peak PM season. Among 
first-time but not other mothers, maternal FLT1 genotype was associated with a 
history of prior pregnancy loss. During PM, newborn FLT1 genotype was associated 
with low birth weight and placental inflammatory gene expression. FLT1 genotype 
was also associated with Flt1 levels among study subjects and in vitro. Thus, 
FLT1 variants confer fetal fitness in utero and are associated with the maternal 
immune response during PM. This indicates that FLT1 is under natural selection 
in a malaria endemic area and that human exposure to malaria can influence the 
evolutionary genetics of the maternal-fetal relationship.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0803657105
PMCID: PMC2567167
PMID: 18779584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.