1. J Mol Graph Model. 2008 Nov;27(4):452-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2008.08.001. Epub
 2008 Aug 9.

Molecular basis of agonicity and antagonicity in the androgen receptor studied 
by molecular dynamics simulations.

Bisson WH(1), Abagyan R, Cavasotto CN.

Author information:
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

Treatment of prostate cancer patients with antiandrogens is initially 
successful, though the therapy often becomes refractory over the time. This 
mechanism is not fully understood, but the presence of androgen receptor (AR) 
mutant forms which are activated by antiandrogens and other endogenous ligands, 
and overexpression of the receptor have been suggested. In an attempt to explain 
the molecular basis for agonicity and antagonicity in the androgen receptor, and 
the changes on biological activity of subtle modifications at the ligand and 
receptor (mutations) level, molecular dynamics simulations were performed on the 
androgen receptor wild type (WT), and T877A and W741 mutant forms, complexed 
with several non-steroidal androgens. The stabilizing role of residues from 
helices 3, 5, 11 and 12 was observed in non-steroidal androgens R-3, S-1, and 
R-bicalutamide and hydroxyflutamide in resistant mutations. In the AR WT 
antiandrogen R-bicalutamide complex, destabilization of M895 by both W741 and 
the sulfonyl linkage of the ligand may be responsible for reported antagonism. 
Changes in the ligand or mutations alleviating this effect were observed to 
stabilize the receptor in the active conformation, thus developing resistance to 
R-bicalutamide. The results presented provide a plausible explanation for the 
molecular basis of agonicity and antagonicity in the androgen receptor, and 
complement previous studies using static crystal structures, incorporating for 
the first time protein dynamics into the analysis. Thus, our results provide a 
valuable framework for the structure-based design of improved antiandrogens.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2008.08.001
PMID: 18805032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]