1. Rinsho Byori. 2008 Aug;56(8):698-704.

[Role of resistin in insulin resistance].

[Article in Japanese]

Onuma H(1), Osawa H, Makino H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Ehime University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Toon 791-0295.

Insulin resistance is a major cause of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). To 
determine the role of human resistin in T2DM, we analyzed single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP) in the human resistin gene. We found that the G/G genotype 
of a resistin SNP at -420 in the promoter region was associated with T2DM (546 
cases and 564 controls). Meta-analysis of 1,888 cases and 1,648 controls 
confirmed this association. Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors specifically 
recognize 420G and enhance promoter activity in vitro. Resistin SNP-420 
determines its monocyte mRNA and serum resistin levels. In 198 T2DM and 157 
controls, fasting serum resistin levels were higher in subjects with T2DM than 
the control, and they were higher in subjects who carried -420G/G genotypes. 
Multiple regression analysis revealed that the SNP-420 genotype was the 
strongest determinant of serum resistin. The level of serum resistin is in the 
order of G/G, G/C and C/C genotypes, starting with the highest in the 2,078 
community-dwelling Japanese subjects. Serum resistin level was correlated with 
insulin resistance, lower HDL cholesterol, and high-sensitivity C-reactive 
protein in the Japanese general population. Furthermore, serum resistin level 
was correlated with the number of microangiopathies and the accumulation of 
metabolic syndrome factor in T2DM. Together, the specific recognition of 420G by 
Sp1/3 increases human resistin promoter activity in monocytes, leading to 
enhanced serum resistin levels, thereby inducing insulin resistance, T2DM, and 
its complications.

PMID: 18800626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]