1. Gut. 2009 Jan;58(1):90-6. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.155473. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

CpG island methylator phenotype, microsatellite instability, BRAF mutation and 
clinical outcome in colon cancer.

Ogino S(1), Nosho K, Kirkner GJ, Kawasaki T, Meyerhardt JA, Loda M, Giovannucci 
EL, Fuchs CS.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Oncologic Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA. 
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), characterised by 
widespread promoter methylation, is associated with microsatellite instability 
(MSI) and BRAF mutation in colorectal cancer. The independent effect of CIMP, 
MSI and BRAF mutation on prognosis remains uncertain.
METHODS: Utilising 649 colon cancers (stage I-IV) in two independent cohort 
studies, we quantified DNA methylation in eight CIMP-specific promoters 
(CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1) as well as 
CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, MINT31, p14, and WRN by using MethyLight 
technology. We examined MSI, KRAS and BRAF status. Cox proportional hazard 
models computed hazard ratios (HRs) for colon cancer-specific and overall 
mortalities, adjusting for patient characteristics and tumoral molecular 
features.
RESULTS: After adjustment for other predictors of patient survival, patients 
with CIMP-high cancers (126 (19%) tumours with >or=6/8 methylated CIMP-specific 
promoters) experienced a significantly low colon cancer-specific mortality 
(multivariate HR 0.44, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.22 to 0.88), whereas the 
BRAF mutation was significantly associated with a high cancer-specific mortality 
(multivariate HR 1.97, 95% CI 1.13 to 3.42). A trend toward a low 
cancer-specific mortality was observed for MSI-high tumours (multivariate HR 
0.70, 95% CI 0.36 to 1.37). In stratified analyses, CIMP-high tumours were 
associated with a significant reduction in colon cancer-specific mortality, 
regardless of both MSI and BRAF status. The relation between CIMP-high and lower 
mortality appeared to be consistent across all stages. KRAS mutation was 
unrelated to prognostic significance.
CONCLUSION: CIMP-high appears to be an independent predictor of a low colon 
cancer-specific mortality, while BRAF mutation is associated with a high colon 
cancer-specific mortality.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2008.155473
PMCID: PMC2679586
PMID: 18832519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]