1. Brain Res. 2008 Dec 15;1245:61-73. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.09.037. Epub 
2008 Sep 20.

Localization of CB1 cannabinoid receptor mRNA in the brain of the chick (Gallus 
domesticus).

Stincic TL(1), Hyson RL.

Author information:
(1)Program in Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, Florida State University, 
Tallahassee, FL 32306-1270, USA.

The cannabinoid receptor one (CB1) is prevalent in the brains of many species. 
Receptor binding, in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical surveys have 
described the distribution of this receptor in a limited number of species. The 
current study used in situ hybridization to examine the expression of CB1 mRNA 
in the chick brain, a non-mammalian vertebrate. The results were compared to the 
observed patterns of expression for CB1 mRNA, protein, and agonist binding that 
have been reported for other avian species and mammals. Importantly, since CB1 
receptors are typically located on neuronal terminals, comparison of the somatic 
mRNA expression with previously reported descriptions of the location of 
functional receptors, allows speculation about the circuits that make use of 
these receptors. The expression pattern for CB1 mRNA appears to be highly 
conserved across species in key areas such as the cerebellum and portions of the 
forebrain. For example, high levels of expression were observed in the avian 
amygdala and hippocampus, areas which express high levels of CB1 in mammals. The 
avian substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, however, showed specific 
labeling. This finding is in stark contrast to the high levels of receptor 
binding or CB1 protein, but not CB1 mRNA in these areas of the mammalian brain. 
Moderate labeling was also seen throughout the hyperpallium and mesopallium. 
Throughout the brain, a number of regions that are known to be involved in 
visual processing displayed high levels of expression. For example, the tectum 
also had strong mRNA expression within layers 9-11 of the stratum griseum et 
fibrosum superficale and stratum album centrale.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.09.037
PMCID: PMC2636724
PMID: 18835551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]