1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2008 Oct 15;3:28. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-28.

Congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy with progressive sensorineural 
deafness (Harboyan syndrome).

Desir J(1), Abramowicz M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, HÃ´pital Erasme, ULB, Brussels, Belgium. 
jdesir@ulb.ac.be

Harboyan syndrome is a degenerative corneal disorder defined as congenital 
hereditary endothelial dystrophy (CHED) accompanied by progressive, postlingual 
sensorineural hearing loss. To date, 24 cases from 11 families of various origin 
(Asian Indian, South American Indian, Sephardi Jewish, Brazilian Portuguese, 
Dutch, Gypsy, Moroccan, Dominican) have been reported. More than 50% of the 
reported cases have been associated with parental consanguinity. The ocular 
manifestations in Harboyan syndrome include diffuse bilateral corneal edema 
occurring with severe corneal clouding, blurred vision, visual loss and 
nystagmus. They are apparent at birth or within the neonatal period and are 
indistinguishable from those characteristic of the autosomal recessive CHED 
(CHED2). Hearing deficit in Harboyan is slowly progressive and typically found 
in patients 10-25 years old. There are no reported cases with prelinglual 
deafness, however, a significant hearing loss in children as young as 4 years 
old has been detected by audiometry, suggesting that hearing may be affected 
earlier, even at birth. Harboyan syndrome is caused by mutations in the SLC4A11 
gene located at the CHED2 locus on chromosome 20p13-p12, indicating that CHED2 
and Harboyan syndrome are allelic disorders. A total of 62 different SLC4A11 
mutations have been reported in 98 families (92 CHED2 and 6 Harboyan). All 
reported cases have been consistent with autosomal recessive transmission. 
Diagnosis is based on clinical criteria, detailed ophthalmological assessment 
and audiometry. A molecular confirmation of the clinical diagnosis is feasible. 
A variety of genetic, metabolic, developmental and acquired diseases presenting 
with clouding of the cornea should be considered in the differential diagnosis 
(Peters anomaly, sclerocornea, limbal dermoids, congenital glaucoma). Audiometry 
must be performed to differentiate Harboyan syndrome from CHED2. Autosomal 
recessive types of CHED (CHED2 and Harboyan syndrome) should carefully be 
distinguished from the less severe autosomal dominant type CHED1. The ocular 
abnormalities in patients with Harboyan syndrome may be treated with topical 
hyperosmolar solutions. However, corneal transplantation (penetrating 
keratoplasty) represents definitive treatment. Corneal transplantation produces 
a substantial visual gain and has a relatively good surgical prognosis. 
Audiometric monitoring should be offered to all patients with CHED2. Hearing 
aids may be necessary in adolescence.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-28
PMCID: PMC2576053
PMID: 18922146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]