1. Genet Test. 2008 Dec;12(4):549-56. doi: 10.1089/gte.2008.0018.

Molecular mechanisms underlying thalassemia intermedia in Iran.

Neishabury M(1), Azarkeivan A, Oberkanins C, Esteghamat F, Amirizadeh N, 
Najmabadi H.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. neisha@uswr.ac.ir

To improve the differentiation of thalassemia intermedia from other 
hemoglobinopathies in Iran, four known genetic mechanisms-XmnI (G)gamma 
polymorphism, inheritance of mild and silent beta-thalassemia alleles, delta 
beta deletion, and coinheritance of alpha- and beta-thalassemia-were 
investigated in 52 Iranian individuals suspected to have thalassemia intermedia 
based on clinical and hematological characteristics. Beta-globin mutations were 
studied using a reverse-hybridization assay and sequencing of the total 
beta-globin gene. The XmnI (G)gamma polymorphism, the Sicilian delta beta 
deletion, and four alpha-globin mutations (-a(3.7), -a(4.2), -(MED), 
aaa(anti-3.7)) were studied using PCR-based techniques. The inheritance of the 
XmnI (G)gamma polymorphism with severe beta-thalassemia alleles in the 
homozygous or compound heterozygous state was the predominant mechanism observed 
in 27 individuals (55.3%). In five cases, this status overlapped with the 
-a(3.7)/aa genotype. The second most frequent cause for thalassemia intermedia 
(14.8%) was the inheritance of mild beta-thalassemia alleles, including IVS-I-6 
(T > C), -88 (C > A), and + 113 (A > G). In three subjects (4.3%) the Sicilian 
delta beta deletion was identified. HbS in association with 
beta-zero-thalassemia was found in three patients with thalassemia intermedia 
phenotype. In 11 cases (21.3%) no causative genetic alteration could be 
identified. Our results reflect the diversity underlying thalassemia intermedia, 
and the limitations of the applied clinical, hematological, and molecular 
approaches for correct diagnosis. Some of the unresolved cases will offer an 
opportunity to discover additional molecular mechanisms leading to thalassemia 
intermedia.

DOI: 10.1089/gte.2008.0018
PMID: 18939939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]