1. Hypertension. 2008 Dec;52(6):1142-8. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.108.114082. 
Epub 2008 Oct 20.

A polymorphism regulates CYP4A11 transcriptional activity and is associated with 
hypertension in a Japanese population.

Sugimoto K(1), Akasaka H, Katsuya T, Node K, Fujisawa T, Shimaoka I, Yasuda O, 
Ohishi M, Ogihara T, Shimamoto K, Rakugi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

CYP4A11 oxidizes arachidonic acid to 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid, a 
metabolite with renovascular and tubular function in humans. A previous study 
demonstrated a significant association between the CYP4A11 gene polymorphism and 
hypertension; however, the precise mechanism of the association has not been 
clarified. To assess the involvement of CYP4A11 in the pathogenesis of 
hypertension, we sought to identify a functional polymorphism of CYP4A11 and 
examined its impact on predisposition to hypertension in the Tanno-Sobetsu 
Study. The -845A/G polymorphism was identified in the promoter region of CYP4A11 
by direct sequencing. Luciferase expression driven by the promoter of CYP4A11 
containing the wild-type -845GG genotype was 30% lower than expression with the 
variant -845AA genotype. Gel mobility shift assays with nuclear protein extracts 
showed specific binding to probes containing the variant -845GG. To assess the 
effect of CYP4A11 polymorphisms on hypertension, we also carried out a 
case-control study using 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms (-845A/G, -366C/T, 
7119C/T, and 8590T/C) in the Tanno-Sobetsu Study. The odds ratio for 
hypertension in participants with the AG+GG genotype of -845A/G was 1.42 
(P=0.008), and the odds ratio for hypertension of the TT genotype of 7119C/T was 
1.37 (P=0.037) after adjusting for confounding factors. The haplotype-based 
case-control analysis using 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms revealed a 
significant haplotype (G-C-T-T) that was significantly associated with 
hypertension, with an odds ratio of 1.44 (P=0.006) after adjusting for 
confounding factors. We have identified a functional variant (-845A/G) of 
CYP4A11 that is significantly associated with hypertension and that appears to 
be a novel candidate for a predisposing factor for hypertension.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.108.114082
PMID: 18936345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]