1. FASEB J. 2009 Feb;23(2):575-85. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-117069. Epub 2008 Oct 28.

Identification of cyclic peptides able to mimic the functional epitope of 
IgG1-Fc for human Fc gammaRI.

Bonetto S(1), Spadola L, Buchanan AG, Jermutus L, Lund J.

Author information:
(1)MedImmune, Research, Granta Park, Milstein Bldg., Cambridge, CB21 6GH, UK.

Identification of short, structured peptides able to mimic potently 
protein-protein interfaces remains a challenge in drug discovery. We report here 
the use of a naive cyclic peptide phage display library to identify peptide 
ligands able to recognize and mimic IgG1-Fc functions with Fc gammaRI. Selection 
by competing off binders to Fc gammaRI with IgG1 allowed the isolation of a 
family of peptides sharing the common consensus sequence 
TX(2)CXXthetaPXLLGCPhiXE (theta represents a hydrophobic residue, Phi is usually 
an acidic residue, and X is any residue) and able to inhibit IgG1 binding to Fc 
gammaRI. In soluble form, these peptides antagonize superoxide generation 
mediated by IgG1. In complexed form, they trigger phagocytosis and a superoxide 
burst. Unlike IgG, these peptides are strictly Fc gammaRI-specific among the Fc 
gammaRs. Molecular modeling studies suggest that these peptides can adopt 2 
distinct and complementary conformers, each able to mimic the discontinuous 
interface contacts constituted by the Cgamma2-A and -B chains of Fc for Fc 
gammaRI. In addition, by covalent homodimerization, we engineered a synthetic 
bivalent 37-mer peptide that retains the ability to trigger effector functions. 
We demonstrate here that it is feasible to maintain IgG-Fc function within a 
small structured peptide. These peptides represent a new format for modulation 
of effector functions.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.08-117069
PMCID: PMC2633172
PMID: 18957574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]