1. Mol Vis. 2008;14:1906-11. Epub 2008 Oct 24.

A new mutation in BFSP2 (G1091A) causes autosomal dominant congenital lamellar 
cataracts.

Ma X(1), Li FF, Wang SZ, Gao C, Zhang M, Zhu SQ.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

PURPOSE: We sought to identify the genetic defect in a four-generation Chinese 
family with autosomal dominant congenital lamellar cataracts and demonstrate the 
functional analysis with biosoftware of a candidate gene in the family.
METHODS: Family history data were recorded. Clinical and ophthalmologic 
examinations were performed on family members. All the members were genotyped 
with microsatellite markers at loci considered to be associated with cataracts. 
Two-point LOD scores were calculated by using the Linkage Software after 
genotyping. A mutation was detected by using gene-specific primers in direct 
sequencing. Wild type and mutant proteins were analyzed with Online 
Bio-Software.
RESULTS: Affected members of this family had lamellar cataracts. Linkage 
analysis was obtained at markers D3S2322 (LOD score [Z]=7.22, recombination 
fraction [theta]=0.0) and D3S1541 (Z=5.42, theta=0.0). Haplotype analysis 
indicated that the cataract gene was closely linked to these two markers. 
Sequencing the beaded filament structural protein 2 (BFSP2) gene revealed a G>A 
transversion in exon 5, which caused a conservative substitution of Arg to His 
at codon 339 (P.R339H). This mutation cosegregated with the disease phenotype in 
all affected individuals and was not observed in the unaffected family members 
or in 100 normal, unrelated individuals. Bioinformatic analyses showed that a 
highly conserved region was located around Arg339. Data generated with Online 
Bio-Software revealed that the mutation altered the protein's hydrophobicity, 
hydrophobic moment, and chaperone and regulation activities.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first reported case of a congenital lamellar cataract 
phenotype associated with the mutation of Arg339His (P.R339H) in BFSP2. It 
highlights the physiologic importance of the beaded filament protein and 
demonstrates a possible mechanism of action for the mutant gene.

PMCID: PMC2573734
PMID: 18958306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]