1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2008 Dec 1;16(23):10061-74. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2008.10.013. 
Epub 2008 Oct 11.

Substituted hippurates and hippurate analogs as substrates and inhibitors of 
peptidylglycine alpha-hydroxylating monooxygenase (PHM).

Merkler DJ(1), Asser AS, Baumgart LE, Carballo N, Carpenter SE, Chew GH, Cosner 
CC, Dusi J, Galloway LC, Lowe AB, Lowe EW Jr, King L 3rd, Kendig RD, Kline PC, 
Malka R, Merkler KA, McIntyre NR, Romero M, Wilcox BJ, Owen TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida, 4202 E. Fowler Ave., 
Tampa, FL 33620, USA. merkler@cas.usf.edu

Peptidyl alpha-hydroxylating monooxygenase (PHM) functions in vivo towards the 
biosynthesis of alpha-amidated peptide hormones in mammals and insects. PHM is a 
potential target for the development of inhibitors as drugs for the treatment of 
human disease and as insecticides for the management of insect pests. We show 
here that relatively simple ground state analogs of the PHM substrate hippuric 
acid (C(6)H(5)-CO-NH-CH(2)-COOH) inhibit the enzyme with K(i) values as low as 
0.5microM. Substitution of sulfur atom(s) into the hippuric acid analog 
increases the affinity of PHM for the inhibitor. Replacement of the 
acetylglycine moiety, -CO-NH-CH(2)-COOH with an S-(thioacetyl)thioglycolic acid 
moiety, -CS-S-CH(2)-COOH, yields compounds with the highest PHM affinity. Both 
S-(2-phenylthioacetyl)thioglycolate and S-(4-ethylthiobenzoyl)thioglycolic acid 
inhibit the proliferation of cultured human prostate cancer cells at 
concentrations >100-fold excess of their respective K(i) values. Comparison of 
K(i) values between mammalian PHM and insect PHM shows differences in potency 
suggesting that a PHM-based insecticide with limited human toxicity can be 
developed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2008.10.013
PMCID: PMC2668526
PMID: 18952446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]