1. J Gen Physiol. 2008 Nov;132(5):537-46. doi: 10.1085/jgp.200810065.

Rescue of volume-regulated anion current by bestrophin mutants with altered 
charge selectivity.

Chien LT(1), Hartzell HC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Mutations in human bestrophin-1 are linked to various kinds of retinal 
degeneration. Although it has been proposed that bestrophins are 
Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) channels, definitive proof is lacking partly because mice 
with the bestrophin-1 gene deleted have normal Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) currents. 
Here, we provide compelling evidence to support the idea that bestrophin-1 is 
the pore-forming subunit of a cell volume-regulated anion channel (VRAC) in 
Drosophila S2 cells. VRAC was abolished by treatment with RNAi to Drosophila 
bestrophin-1. VRAC was rescued by overexpressing bestrophin-1 mutants with 
altered biophysical properties and responsiveness to sulfhydryl reagents. In 
particular, the ionic selectivity of the F81C mutant changed from anionic to 
cationic when the channel was treated with the sulfhydryl reagent, sodium 
(2-sulfonatoethyl) methanethiosulfonate (MTSES(-)) (P(Cs)/P(Cl) = 0.25 for 
native and 2.38 for F81C). The F81E mutant was 1.3 times more permeable to Cs(+) 
than Cl(-). The finding that VRAC was rescued by F81C and F81E mutants with 
different biophysical properties shows that bestrophin-1 is a VRAC in S2 cells 
and not simply a regulator or an auxiliary subunit. F81C overexpressed in HEK293 
cells also exhibits a shift of ionic selectivity after MTSES(-) treatment, 
although the effect is quantitatively smaller than in S2 cells. To test whether 
bestrophins are VRACs in mammalian cells, we compared VRACs in peritoneal 
macrophages from wild-type mice and mice with both bestrophin-1 and bestrophin-2 
disrupted (best1(-/-)/best2(-/-)). VRACs were identical in wild-type and 
best1(-/-)/best2(-/-) mice, showing that bestrophins are unlikely to be the 
classical VRAC in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.200810065
PMCID: PMC2571971
PMID: 18955594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]