1. J Mol Biol. 2009 Jan 23;385(3):867-88. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.037. Epub
2008  Oct 19.

Kinetic and X-ray structural evidence for negative cooperativity in substrate 
binding to nicotinate mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (NMAT) from Bacillus 
anthracis.

Sershon VC(1), Santarsiero BD, Mesecar AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy & the Center for 
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60607, USA.

Biosynthesis of NAD(P) in bacteria occurs either de novo or through one of the 
salvage pathways that converge at the point where the reaction of nicotinate 
mononucleotide (NaMN) with ATP is coupled to the formation of nicotinate adenine 
dinucleotide (NaAD) and inorganic pyrophosphate. This reaction is catalyzed by 
nicotinate mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (NMAT), which is essential for 
bacterial growth, making it an attractive drug target for the development of new 
antibiotics. Steady-state kinetic and direct binding studies on NMAT from 
Bacillus anthracis suggest a random sequential Bi-Bi kinetic mechanism. 
Interestingly, the interactions of NaMN and ATP with NMAT were observed to 
exhibit negative cooperativity, i.e. Hill coefficients <1.0. Negative 
cooperativity in binding is supported by the results of X-ray crystallographic 
studies. X-ray structures of the B. anthracis NMAT apoenzyme, and the NaMN- and 
NaAD-bound complexes were determined to resolutions of 2.50 A, 2.60 A and 1.75 
A, respectively. The X-ray structure of the NMAT-NaMN complex revealed only one 
NaMN molecule bound in the biological dimer, supporting negative cooperativity 
in substrate binding. The kinetic, direct-binding, and X-ray structural studies 
support a model in which the binding affinity of substrates to the first monomer 
of NMAT is stronger than that to the second, and analysis of the three X-ray 
structures reveals significant conformational changes of NMAT along the 
enzymatic reaction coordinate. The negative cooperativity observed in B. 
anthracis NMAT substrate binding is a unique property that has not been observed 
in other prokaryotic NMAT enzymes. We propose that regulation of the NAD(P) 
biosynthetic pathway may occur, in part, at the reaction catalyzed by NMAT.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.037
PMCID: PMC2654404
PMID: 18977360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]