1. Br J Haematol. 2009 Jan;144(1):120-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07416.x. 
Epub 2008 Nov 1.

A large kindred with X-linked neutropenia with an I294T mutation of the 
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome gene.

Beel K(1), Cotter MM, Blatny J, Bond J, Lucas G, Green F, Vanduppen V, Leung DW, 
Rooney S, Smith OP, Rosen MK, Vandenberghe P.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Human Genetics/Department of Haematology, University Hospital 
Leuven and University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

X-linked neutropenia (XLN, OMIM #300299) is a rare form of severe congenital 
neutropenia. It was originally described in a three-generation family with five 
affected members that had an L270P mutation in the GTP-ase binding domain (GBD) 
of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) [Devriendt et al (2001) Nature 
Genetics, Vol. 27, 313-317]. Here, we report and describe a large 
three-generation family with XLN, with 10 affected males and eight female 
carriers. A c.882T>C mutation was identified in the WAS gene, resulting in an 
I294T mutation. The infectious course is variable and mild in view of the 
profound neutropenia. In addition to the original description, low-normal IgA 
levels, low to low-normal platelet counts and reduced natural killer (NK)-cell 
counts also appear as consistent XLN features. However, inverted CD4/CD8 ratios 
were not found in this family, nor were cases identified with myelodysplastic 
syndrome or acute myeloid leukaemia. Female carriers exhibited a variable 
attenuated phenotype. Like L270P WASP, I294T WASP is constitutively active 
towards actin polymerization. In conclusion, this largest XLN kindred identified 
to date provides new independent genetic evidence that mutations disrupting the 
auto-inhibitory GBD of WASP are the cause of XLN. Reduced NK cells, low to low 
normal platelet counts and low to low-normal IgA levels are also features of 
XLN.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07416.x
PMCID: PMC3125974
PMID: 19006568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]