1. Stroke. 2009 Feb;40(2):363-8. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.521328. Epub 2008 Nov
 20.

Gene variants associated with ischemic stroke: the cardiovascular health study.

Luke MM(1), O'Meara ES, Rowland CM, Shiffman D, Bare LA, Arellano AR, Longstreth 
WT Jr, Lumley T, Rice K, Tracy RP, Devlin JJ, Psaty BM.

Author information:
(1)Celera, Alameda, California 94502, USA. may.luke@celera.com

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether 74 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which had been associated with coronary 
heart disease, are associated with incident ischemic stroke.
METHODS: Based on antecedent studies of coronary heart disease, we prespecified 
the risk allele for each of the 74 SNPs. We used Cox proportional hazards models 
that adjusted for traditional risk factors to estimate the associations of these 
SNPs with incident ischemic stroke during 14 years of follow-up in a 
population-based study of older adults: the Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS).
RESULTS: In white CHS participants, the prespecified risk alleles of 7 of the 74 
SNPs (in HPS1, ITGAE, ABCG2, MYH15, FSTL4, CALM1, and BAT2) were nominally 
associated with increased risk of stroke (one-sided P<0.05, false discovery 
rate=0.42). In black participants, the prespecified risk alleles of 5 SNPs (in 
KRT4, LY6G5B, EDG1, DMXL2, and ABCG2) were nominally associated with stroke 
(one-sided P<0.05, false discovery rate=0.55). The Val12Met SNP in ABCG2 was 
associated with stroke in both white (hazard ratio, 1.46; 90% CI, 1.05 to 2.03) 
and black (hazard ratio, 3.59; 90% CI, 1.11 to 11.6) participants of CHS. 
Kaplan-Meier estimates of the 10-year cumulative incidence of stroke were 
greater among Val allele homozygotes than among Met allele carriers in both 
white (10% versus 6%) and black (12% versus 3%) participants of CHS.
CONCLUSIONS: The Val12Met SNP in ABCG2 (encoding a transporter of sterols and 
xenobiotics) was associated with incident ischemic stroke in white and black 
participants of CHS.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.521328
PMCID: PMC2881155
PMID: 19023099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures M.M.L., C.M.R., D.S., L.A.B., 
A.R.A., and J.J.D. are employees with ownership interest in Celera and have 
contributed to the study design, interpretation of data, and writing of the 
manuscript.