1. J Mol Biol. 1991 Jun 20;219(4):623-34. doi: 10.1016/0022-2836(91)90659-t.

In vivo interaction of Escherichia coli lac repressor N-terminal fragments with 
the lac operator.

Khoury AM(1), Nick HS, Lu P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104.

Escherichia coli lac repressor is a tetrameric protein composed of 360 amino 
acid subunits. Considerable attention has focused on its N-terminal region which 
is isolated by cleavage with proteases yielding N-terminal fragments of 51 to 59 
amino acid residues. Because these short peptide fragments bind operator DNA, 
they have been extensively examined in nuclear magnetic resonance structural 
studies. Longer N-terminal peptide fragments that bind DNA cannot be obtained 
enzymatically. To extend structural studies and simultaneously verify proper 
folding in vivo, the DNA sequence encoding longer N-terminal fragments were 
cloned into a vector system with the coliphage T7 RNA polymerase/promoter. In 
addition to the wild-type lacI gene sequence, single amino acid substitutions 
were generated at positions 3 (Pro3----Tyr) and 61 (Ser61----Leu) as well as the 
double substitution in a 64 amino acid N-terminal fragment. These mutations were 
chosen because they increase the DNA binding affinity of the intact lac 
repressor by a factor of 10(2) to 10(4). The expression of these lac repressor 
fragments in the cell was verified by radioimmunoassays. Both wild-type and 
mutant lac repressor N termini bound operator DNA as judged by reduced 
beta-galactosidase synthesis and methylation protection in vivo. These 
observations also resolve a contradiction in the literature as to the location 
of the operator-specific, inducer-dependent DNA binding domain.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(91)90659-t
PMID: 1905359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]