1. World J Surg. 2009 Apr;33(4):710-5. doi: 10.1007/s00268-008-9826-z.

CXCR2 and RET single nucleotide polymorphisms in pancreatic cancer.

Donahue TR(1), Hines OJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of General Surgery, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) Medical Center, 72-170 
CHS, Los Angeles, CA 90095-6904, USA.

Enhanced angiogenesis and perineural invasion are markers of poor prognosis in 
patients with pancreatic cancer. Systemic therapies for pancreatic cancer have 
been largely ineffective, and thus improved, targeted therapies are needed. 
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are DNA sequence variations that result in 
vast diversity of disease susceptibility and response to disease. CXCR2 is an 
important mediator of CXC chemokine-induced angiogenesis and is upregulated in 
pancreatic cancer. In a preclinical corneal micropocket assay, treatment of 
pancreatic cancer cell lines that express CXCR2 with anti-CXCR2 antibody 
inhibited angiogenesis. To date, there have not been any CXCR2 SNP associated 
with pancreatic cancer, but CXCR2 SNP has been postulated to be associated with 
angiogenesis in systemic sclerosis. The receptor tyrosine kinase encoded by the 
RET gene and its ligand glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) are upregulated 
in pancreatic cancer. In vitro treatment of pancreatic cancer cell lines that 
express RET with anti-RET antibody or RET siRNA-inhibited GDNF-induced 
invasiveness. G691S RET SNP has been previously shown to be associated with 
enhanced pancreatic cancer invasiveness. We suggest that molecular profiling of 
each patient's tumor for G691S RET SNP, potentially CXCR2 SNP, and also other 
yet-to-be identified SNP associated with pancreatic cancer will allow for both 
improved understanding of individual prognosis and allow for utilization of more 
personalized, targeted adjuvant therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00268-008-9826-z
PMID: 19057948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]