1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Dec;7(12):3729-38. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0074.

A novel mode of action of YC-1 in HIF inhibition: stimulation of FIH-dependent 
p300 dissociation from HIF-1{alpha}.

Li SH(1), Shin DH, Chun YS, Lee MK, Kim MS, Park JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 plays a key role in tumor promotion by inducing 
approximately 60 genes required for tumor adaptation to hypoxia; thus, it is 
viewed as a target for cancer therapy. For this reason, YC-1, which 
down-regulates HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha at the post-translational level, is 
being developed as a novel anticancer drug. We here found that YC-1 acts in a 
novel manner to inhibit HIF-1. In the Gal4 reporter system, which is not 
degraded by YC-1, YC-1 was found to significantly inactivate the COOH-terminal 
transactivation domain (CAD) of HIF-1alpha, whereas it failed to inactivate 
CAD(N803A) mutant. In coimmunoprecipitation assays, YC-1 stimulated factor 
inhibiting HIF (FIH) binding to CAD even in hypoxia, whereas it failed to 
increase the cellular levels of hydroxylated Asn803 of CAD. It was also found 
that YC-1 prevented p300 recruitment by CAD in mammalian two-hybrid and 
coimmunoprecipitation assays. The involvement of FIH in YC-1-induced CAD 
inactivation was confirmed in EPO-enhancer and Gal4 reporter systems using FIH 
small interfering RNA and dimethyloxalylglycine FIH inhibitor. Indeed, FIH 
inhibition rescued HIF target gene expressions repressed by YC-1. In cancer cell 
lines other than Hep3B, YC-1 inhibits HIF-1alpha via the FIH-dependent CAD 
inactivation as well as via the protein down-regulation. Given these results, we 
suggest that the functional inactivation of HIF-alpha contributes to the 
YC-1-induced deregulation of hypoxia-induced genes.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0074
PMID: 19074848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]