1. Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 15;68(24):10315-23. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1984.

Overexpression of OATP1B3 confers apoptotic resistance in colon cancer.

Lee W(1), Belkhiri A, Lockhart AC, Merchant N, Glaeser H, Harris EI, Washington 
MK, Brunt EM, Zaika A, Kim RB, El-Rifai W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA. wooin.lee@uky.edu

Organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B3 (OATP1B3, SLCO1B3) is normally 
expressed in hepatocytes. In this study, we showed frequent overexpression of 
OATP1B3 in colorectal adenocarcinomas. Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR 
analysis of 17 colon tumors indicated tumoral overexpression of OATP1B3 by 
approximately 100-fold, compared with 20 normal colon samples (P < 0.0001). 
Using immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray containing 93 evaluable colon 
tumor specimens, we detected immunostaining of OATP1B3 in 75 colon 
adenocarcinomas (81%) and no immunostaining in normal samples. To determine the 
functional effects of OATP1B3 expression on drug-induced apoptosis, we used 
camptothecin and oxaliplatin on a panel of colorectal cancer cell lines stably 
overexpressing OATP1B3. The results indicated that OATP1B3 overexpression 
enhanced cell survival in RKO, HCT-8, and HCT116(p53+/+) cells that harbor 
wild-type p53 but not in Caco-2 and HCT116(p53-/-) cells that lack p53, compared 
with the respective empty vector controls (P < 0.01). The terminal 
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated nick-end labeling assay confirmed that 
HCT116(p53+/+) cells overexpressing OATP1B3 had significantly lower apoptotic 
levels compared with empty vector control (P < 0.001). The overexpression of 
OATP1B3 reduced the transcriptional activity of p53, with subsequent reductions 
in transcript and protein levels of its downstream transcription targets 
(P21WAF1 and PUMA). Overexpression of a point mutation (G583E) variant of 
OATP1B3 lacking transport activity did not confer an antiapoptotic effect or 
affect p53 transcriptional activity, suggesting that the antiapoptotic effect of 
OATP1B3 may be associated with its transport activity. Taken together, our 
results suggest that OATP1B3 overexpression in colorectal cancer cells may 
provide a survival advantage by altering p53-dependent pathways.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1984
PMCID: PMC2605661
PMID: 19074900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]