1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Ann Nutr Metab. 2008;53(3-4):215-22. doi: 10.1159/000184439. Epub 2008 Dec 12.

Impact of lifestyle and dietary habits on hypovitaminosis D in type 1 diabetes 
mellitus and healthy children from Qatar, a sun-rich country.

Bener A(1), Alsaied A, Al-Ali M, Hassan AS, Basha B, Al-Kubaisi A, Abraham A, 
Mian M, Guiter G, Tewfik I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, Hamad General Hospital, 
Hamad Medical Corporation, Weill Cornell Medical College Qatar, Doha, Qatar. 
abener@hmc.org.qa

Retraction in
    Ann Nutr Metab. 2015;67(2):133. doi: 10.1159/000440891.

BACKGROUND: There are no population-based studies that have examined the 
association between vitamin D and type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) and the role 
of lifestyle habits and dietary factors in young children in the Arabian Gulf 
and Middle East region. Little data on the intake of these nutrients in 
Mediterranean countries exist, and predictors of their suboptimal intake are not 
well defined.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to determine the association between 
vitamin D status and T1DM and assess the impact of lifestyle and dietary habits 
on hypovitaminosis D in the young population of the State of Qatar. A matched 
case-control study was carried out among T1DM children and healthy subjects <16 
years of age at the pediatric endocrinology outpatient clinics of the Hamad 
General Hospital and the primary health care clinics center. The survey was 
conducted over a period from 6 August to 25 December 2007. The sample included 
170 cases and 170 controls matched by age, gender and ethnicity.
METHODS: Face to face interviews were based on a questionnaire that included 
variables such as sociodemographic information, assessment of non-dietary 
covariates, assessment of dietary intake including vitamin D, type of feeding, 
clinical manifestations and laboratory investigations. Their health status was 
assessed by medical conditions, family history, body mass index, past or present 
clinical manifestations, serum 25(OH) vitamin D, calcium, alkaline phosphates, 
phosphorus, hemoglobin A1C, parathyroid hormone, magnesium and creatinine 
analysis.
RESULTS: The study revealed that the incidence of severe vitamin D deficiency 
was considerably higher in T1DM (28.8%) compared with healthy children (17.1%). 
Although the mean serum level of vitamin D was significantly lower in T1DM 
children (15.80+/-9.23 ng/ml), compared with nondiabetic children (18.45+/-9.56 
ng/ml), both groups belonged to the mild-moderate vitamin D deficiency category. 
A family history of vitamin D deficiency (35.3%; p=0.012) and diabetes mellitus 
(56.5%; p<0.001) was significantly higher in diabetic children. More than half 
of the diabetic (67.1%) and healthy children (51.2%) had no physical activity in 
their daily life. Both groups (65.9 vs. 62.9%) had very limited exposure to 
sunlight. Vitamin D supplement intake was very poor in diabetic children 
compared with healthy children; 60% of diabetic and 40.6% of healthy children 
never had any vitamin D supplement. The study revealed that vitamin D serum 
concentration, phosphorus, hemoglobin A1C, magnesium and creatinine show 
statistically significant differences between T1DM and healthy control subjects. 
A significant difference was noted between diabetic and healthy children for 
fractures (p=0.005), weakness (p=0.001) and gastroenteritis (p=0.025).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study revealed that vitamin D deficiency is a common 
problem in Qatari children, but the incidence of vitamin D deficiency becomes 
very severe in T1DM children, compared with healthy children. This suggests that 
there is an association between vitamin D deficiency and T1DM. The data show 
that vitamin D status is dependent on sunshine exposure and dietary vitamin D 
intake. The results suggest the necessity of nutrition education to promote 
healthy eating habits among adolescents and their parents.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000184439
PMID: 19077420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]