1. PLoS One. 2008;3(12):e3975. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003975. Epub 2008 Dec
18.

Polymorphisms in the regulatory region of the Cyclophilin A gene influence the 
susceptibility for HIV-1 infection.

Rits MA(1), van Dort KA, Kootstra NA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Sanquin Research, Landsteiner 
Laboratory, and Center for Infectious Diseases and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), 
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated an association between 
polymorphisms in the regulatory regions of Cyclophilin A (CypA) and 
susceptibility to both HIV-1 infection and disease progression. Here we studied 
whether these polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to HIV-1 
infection and disease progression in the Amsterdam Cohort on HIV-1 infection and 
AIDS (ACS) in a group of men having sex with men (MSM) and drug users (DU).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We screened participants of the ACS for the 
C1604G and A1650G polymorphisms in the regulatory regions of CypA. The 
prevalence of the 1650G allele was significantly higher in high risk 
seronegative MSM than in HIV-1 infected MSM. However, C1604G or A1650G were not 
associated with the clinical course of infection in MSM of the ACS. 
Interestingly, participants of the ACS-DU who carried the 1604G allele showed a 
significantly accelerated progression when viral RNA load above 10(4.5) copies 
per ml plasma was used as an endpoint in survival analysis.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The results obtained in this study suggest that the 
A1650G polymorphism in the regulatory region of the CypA gene may be associated 
with protection from HIV-1 infection, while the 1604G allele may have a weak 
association with the clinical course of infection in DU.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003975
PMCID: PMC2599883
PMID: 19092998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.