1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Feb;37(3):945-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn1015. Epub 2008 
Dec 23.

The A-rich RNA sequences of HIV-1 pol are important for the synthesis of viral 
cDNA.

Keating CP(1), Hill MK, Hawkes DJ, Smyth RP, Isel C, Le SY, Palmenberg AC, 
Marshall JA, Marquet R, Nabel GJ, Mak J.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Virology, Macfarlane Burnet Institute for Medical Research and 
Public Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The bias of A-rich codons in HIV-1 pol is thought to be a record of 
hypermutations in viral genomes that lack biological functions. Bioinformatic 
analysis predicted that A-rich sequences are generally associated with minimal 
local RNA structures. Using codon modifications to reduce the amount of A-rich 
sequences within HIV-1 genomes, we have reduced the flexibility of RNA sequences 
in pol to analyze the functional significance of these A-rich 'structurally 
poor' RNA elements in HIV-1 pol. Our data showed that codon modification of 
HIV-1 sequences led to a suppression of virus infectivity by 5-100-fold, and 
this defect does not correlate with, viral entry, viral protein expression 
levels, viral protein profiles or virion packaging of genomic RNA. Codon 
modification of HIV-1 pol correlated with an enhanced dimer stability of the 
viral RNA genome, which was associated with a reduction of viral cDNA synthesis 
both during HIV-1 infection and in a cell free reverse transcription assay. Our 
data provided direct evidence that the HIV-1 A-rich pol sequence is not merely 
an evolutionary artifact of enzyme-induced hypermutations, and that HIV-1 has 
adapted to rely on A-rich RNA sequences to support the synthesis of viral cDNA 
during reverse transcription, highlighting the utility of using 'structurally 
poor' RNA domains in regulating biological process.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn1015
PMCID: PMC2647285
PMID: 19106143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]