1. BMC Res Notes. 2008 Dec 29;1:137. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-1-137.

SR proteins and the nonsense-mediated decay mechanism are involved in human GLB1 
gene alternative splicing.

Santamaria R(1), Vilageliu L, Grinberg D.

Author information:
(1)Departament de Gen√®tica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain. dgrinberg@ub.edu.

BACKGROUND: The human GLB1 gene is known to give rise to two alternatively 
spliced mRNAs, which encode two different proteins: lysosomal beta-galactosidase 
(beta-gal) and elastin-binding protein (EBP). The beta-gal transcript includes 
the 16 exons of the GLB1 gene. In the EBP transcript, exons 3, 4 and 6 are 
skipped, while exon 5 has a different reading frame. However, little is known on 
how this alternative splicing is regulated.
FINDINGS: Cycloheximide treatment of HeLa cells and human fibroblasts revealed 
the presence of new transcripts that are otherwise degraded by nonsense-mediated 
decay (NMD). A minigene carrying the exons involved in the alternative splicing 
of GLB1 was constructed. Improving the acceptor-site scores of exons 3 or 4 
increased the relative inclusion of these exons, but did not stop them being 
skipped in some transcripts. Overexpression of different SR proteins altered the 
relative proportion of the different transcripts produced by the minigene, 
indicating a possible mechanism for the regulation of the alternative splicing 
of GLB1. Finally, a comparison of this gene among different species was 
performed.
CONCLUSION: In the processing of the GLB1 RNA several transcripts are generated, 
but only those with a correct reading frame are not degraded. The differential 
inclusion/exclusion of exons could be partially explained by the relatively weak 
splice sites in the exons involved. Different SR proteins have an effect on the 
process of skipping of these exons, at least in the minigene conditions, 
indicating a possible mechanism for the regulation of the alternative splicing 
of the GLB1 gene.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-1-137
PMCID: PMC2631023
PMID: 19114006