1. PLoS One. 2008;3(12):e4078. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004078. Epub 2008 Dec
31.

Model of For3p-mediated actin cable assembly in fission yeast.

Wang H(1), Vavylonis D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA.

Formin For3p nucleates actin cables at the tips of fission yeast cells for 
polarized cell growth. The results of prior experiments have suggested a 
possible mechanism for actin cable assembly that involves association of For3p 
near cell tips, For3p-mediated actin polymerization, retrograde flow of actin 
cables toward the cell center, For3p dissociation from cell tips, and cable 
disassembly. We used analytical and computational modeling to test the validity 
and implications of the proposed coupled For3p/actin mechanism. We compared the 
model to prior experiments quantitatively and generated predictions for the 
expected behavior of the actin cable system upon changes of parameter values. We 
found that the model generates stable steady states with realistic values of 
rate constants and actin and For3p concentrations. Comparison of our results to 
previous experiments monitoring the FRAP of For3p-3GFP and the response of actin 
cables to treatments with actin depolymerizing drugs provided further support 
for the model. We identified the set of parameter values that produces results 
in agreement with experimental observations. We discuss future experiments that 
will help test the model's predictions and eliminate other possible mechanisms. 
The results of the model suggest that flow of actin cables may establish actin 
and For3p concentration gradients in the cytoplasm that could be important in 
global cell patterning.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004078
PMCID: PMC2605553
PMID: 19116660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.