1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jan 6;106(1):226-31. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0808358106. Epub 2008 Dec 29.

From the Cover: Whole-genome association study identifies STK39 as a 
hypertension susceptibility gene.

Wang Y(1), O'Connell JR, McArdle PF, Wade JB, Dorff SE, Shah SJ, Shi X, Pan L, 
Rampersaud E, Shen H, Kim JD, Subramanya AR, Steinle NI, Parsa A, Ober CC, 
Welling PA, Chakravarti A, Weder AB, Cooper RS, Mitchell BD, Shuldiner AR, Chang 
YP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Hypertension places a major burden on individual and public health, but the 
genetic basis of this complex disorder is poorly understood. We conducted a 
genome-wide association study of systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP and 
DBP) in Amish subjects and found strong association signals with common variants 
in a serine/threonine kinase gene, STK39. We confirmed this association in an 
independent Amish and 4 non-Amish Caucasian samples including the Diabetes 
Genetics Initiative, Framingham Heart Study, GenNet, and Hutterites 
(meta-analysis combining all studies: n = 7,125, P < 10(-6)). The higher 
BP-associated alleles have frequencies > 0.09 and were associated with increases 
of 3.3/1.3 mm Hg in SBP/DBP, respectively, in the Amish subjects and with 
smaller but consistent effects across the non-Amish studies. Cell-based 
functional studies showed that STK39 interacts with WNK kinases and 
cation-chloride cotransporters, mutations in which cause monogenic forms of BP 
dysregulation. We demonstrate that in vivo, STK39 is expressed in the distal 
nephron, where it may interact with these proteins. Although none of the 
associated SNPs alter protein structure, we identified and experimentally 
confirmed a highly conserved intronic element with allele-specific in vitro 
transcription activity as a functional candidate for this association. Thus, 
variants in STK39 may influence BP by increasing STK39 expression and 
consequently altering renal Na(+) excretion, thus unifying rare and common 
BP-regulating alleles in the same physiological pathway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0808358106
PMCID: PMC2629209
PMID: 19114657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.