1. PLoS One. 2009;4(1):e4165. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004165. Epub 2009 Jan 9.

Common and distinct genetic properties of ESCRT-II components in Drosophila.

Herz HM(1), Woodfield SE, Chen Z, Bolduc C, Bergmann A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Genes & Development 
Graduate Program, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Genetic studies in yeast have identified class E vps genes that form 
the ESCRT complexes required for protein sorting at the early endosome. In 
Drosophila, mutations of the ESCRT-II component vps25 cause endosomal defects 
leading to accumulation of Notch protein and increased Notch pathway activity. 
These endosomal and signaling defects are thought to account for several 
phenotypes. Depending on the developmental context, two different types of 
overgrowth can be detected. Tissue predominantly mutant for vps25 displays 
neoplastic tumor characteristics. In contrast, vps25 mutant clones in a 
wild-type background trigger hyperplastic overgrowth in a non-autonomous manner. 
In addition, vps25 mutant clones also promote apoptotic resistance in a 
non-autonomous manner.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we genetically characterize the remaining ESCRT-II 
components vps22 and vps36. Like vps25, mutants of vps22 and vps36 display 
endosomal defects, accumulate Notch protein and--when the tissue is 
predominantly mutant--show neoplastic tumor characteristics. However, despite 
these common phenotypes, they have distinct non-autonomous phenotypes. While 
vps22 mutations cause strong non-autonomous overgrowth, they do not affect 
apoptotic resistance. In contrast, vps36 mutations increase apoptotic 
resistance, but have little effect on non-autonomous proliferation. Further 
characterization reveals that although all ESCRT-II mutants accumulate Notch 
protein, only vps22 and vps25 mutations trigger Notch activity.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The ESCRT-II components vps22, vps25 and vps36 display 
common and distinct genetic properties. Our data redefine the role of Notch for 
hyperplastic and neoplastic overgrowth in these mutants. While Notch is required 
for hyperplastic growth, it appears to be dispensable for neoplastic 
transformation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004165
PMCID: PMC2613530
PMID: 19132102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.