1. J Nutr. 2009 Mar;139(3):439-46. doi: 10.3945/jn.108.096461. Epub 2009 Jan 13.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids modulate the effect of TCF7L2 gene variants on 
postprandial lipemia.

Warodomwichit D(1), Arnett DK, Kabagambe EK, Tsai MY, Hixson JE, Straka RJ, 
Province M, An P, Lai CQ, Borecki I, Ordovas JM.

Author information:
(1)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, 
Boston, MA 02111, USA.

The transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) has been recently associated with 
diabetes risk, and it may exert its effect through metabolic syndrome 
(MetS)-related traits and be subjected to modification by environmental factors. 
We investigated the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), rs7903146 
and rs12255372, within the TCF7L2 locus on postprandial lipemia and other 
MetS-related traits and their modulation by dietary fat. Data were collected 
from 1083 European Americans participating in the Genetics of Lipid Lowering 
Drugs and Diet Network Study. Carriers of the minor T allele at the C/T 
rs7903146 SNP had higher fasting plasma glucose (P = 0.012), lower homeostasis 
model assessment of beta cell function (P = 0.041), higher plasma VLDL (P = 
0.035), and lower large LDL particle (P = 0.007) concentrations and higher risk 
of MetS (P = 0.011) than CC individuals. Moreover, we identified significant 
interactions between this SNP and PUFA intake modulating fasting VLDL particle 
concentrations (P = 0.016) and postprandial triglycerides (TG) (P = 0.028), 
chylomicrons (P = 0.025), total VLDL (P = 0.026), and large VLDL (P = 0.018) 
concentrations. Thus, only T allele carriers with a PUFA intake > or = 7.36% of 
energy had elevated fasting plasma VLDL concentrations and postprandial TG-rich 
lipoproteins. These variables did not differ in T allele carriers and 
noncarriers in the low-PUFA intake group. Moreover, these significant 
interactions were due exclusively to (n-6) PUFA intake. In summary, high (n-6) 
PUFA intakes (> or = 6.62% of energy intake) were associated with atherogenic 
dyslipidemia in carriers of the minor T allele at the TCF7L2 rs7903146 SNP and 
may predispose them to MetS, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.108.096461
PMCID: PMC2714378
PMID: 19141698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]