1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Feb;84(2):123-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.12.019. Epub 
2009 Jan 29.

Common variation in the beta-carotene 15,15'-monooxygenase 1 gene affects 
circulating levels of carotenoids: a genome-wide association study.

Ferrucci L(1), Perry JR, Matteini A, Perola M, Tanaka T, Silander K, Rice N, 
Melzer D, Murray A, Cluett C, Fried LP, Albanes D, Corsi AM, Cherubini A, 
Guralnik J, Bandinelli S, Singleton A, Virtamo J, Walston J, Semba RD, Frayling 
TM.

Author information:
(1)Longitudinal Studies Section, Clinical Research Branch, National Institute on 
Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States of 
America. ferruccilu@grc.nia.nih.gov

Low plasma levels of carotenoids and tocopherols are associated with increased 
risk of chronic disease and disability. Because dietary intake of these 
lipid-soluble antioxidant vitamins is only poorly correlated with plasma levels, 
we hypothesized that circulating carotenoids (vitamin A-related compounds) and 
tocopherols (vitamin E-related compounds) are affected by common genetic 
variation. By conducting a genome-wide association study in a sample of Italians 
(n = 1190), we identified novel common variants associated with circulating 
carotenoid levels and known lipid variants associated with alpha-tocopherol 
levels. Effects were replicated in the Women's Health and Aging Study (n = 615) 
and in the alpha-Tocopherol, beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) study (n = 
2136). In meta-analyses including all three studies, the G allele at rs6564851, 
near the beta-carotene 15,15'-monooxygenase 1 (BCMO1) gene, was associated with 
higher beta-carotene (p = 1.6 x 10(-24)) and alpha-carotene (p = 0.0001) levels 
and lower lycopene (0.003), zeaxanthin (p = 1.3 x 10(-5)), and lutein (p = 7.3 x 
10(-15)) levels, with effect sizes ranging from 0.10-0.28 SDs per allele. 
Interestingly, this genetic variant had no significant effect on plasma retinol 
(p > 0.05). The SNP rs12272004, in linkage disequilibrium with the S19W variant 
in the APOA5 gene, was associated with alpha-tocopherol (meta-analysis p = 7.8 x 
10(-10)) levels, and this association was substantially weaker when we adjusted 
for triglyceride levels (p = 0.002). Our findings might shed light on the 
controversial relationship between lipid-soluble anti-oxidant nutrients and 
human health.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.12.019
PMCID: PMC2668002
PMID: 19185284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]