1. J Korean Med Sci. 2009 Jan;24 Suppl(Suppl 1):S30-7. doi: 
10.3346/jkms.2009.24.S1.S30. Epub 2009 Jan 28.

The heme oxygenase-1 genotype is a risk factor to renal impairment of IgA 
nephropathy at diagnosis, which is a strong predictor of mortality.

Chin HJ(1), Cho HJ, Lee TW, Na KY, Yoon HJ, Chae DW, Kim S, Jeon US, Do JY, Park 
JW, Yoon KW, Shin YT, Lee KW, Na KR, Cha DR, Kang YS; Progressive REnal disease 
and Medical Informatics and gEnomics Research (PREMIER) members.

Collaborators: Jang EH, Kim W, Kim NH, Bae WK, Kim HY, Shin YT, Lee KW, Na KR, 
Ahn KS, Cho JT, Lee EK, Kim KH, An W, Kim SE, Bog CG, Kim SJ, Chung WK, Lee HH, 
Yang J, Kim S, Chang SH, Noh JW, Lee YK, Kim SG, Oh J, Song YR, Kim MJ, Lee SW, 
Kim YH, Park WD, Kim HC, Park SB, Kim KS, Cho WY, Kim HK, Jo SK, Ryong CD, Sun 
YJ, Kwon YJ, Kim YL, Park SH, Kim CD, Yang DH, Kwak IS, Lee SB, Lee DW, Song SH, 
Seoung EY, Yoon SJ, Chae DW, Na KY, Chin HJ, Lim CS, Oh YK, Oh KH, Joo KW, Kim 
YS, Ahn C, Han JS, Kim S, Yoon HJ, Lee KB, Kim YG, Lee JE, Lee SK, Do JY, Park 
JW, Yoon KW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Korea.

The induction of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) ameliorates oxidative stress and 
inflammatory process, which play important roles in IgA nephropathy. We 
hypothesized length polymorphism in the promoter region of the HO-1 gene, which 
is related to the level of gene transcription, is associated with disease 
severity of IgA nephropathy. The subjects comprised 916 patients with IgA 
nephropathy and gene data. Renal impairment was defined as an estimated 
glomerular filtration rate less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m(2) at diagnosis. The short 
(S: <23), medium (M: 23-28), and long (L: >28) (GT) repeats in the HO-1 gene was 
determined. The frequencies of S/S, S/M, M/M, S/L, L/M, and L/L genotypes were 
7.2%, 6.9%, 3.1%, 30.8%, 22.7%, and 29.4%, respectively. The baseline 
characteristics were not different. In the S/S genotypic group, the renal 
impairment rate was 18.2%, which was lower than 32.2% in the group with M/M, 
L/M, or L/L genotype. The odds ratio of renal impairment in S/S genotype, 
compared to that in M/M, L/M, or L/L genotype, was 0.216 (95% confidence 
interval, 0.060-0.774, p=0.019). The HO-1 gene promoter length polymorphism was 
related to the renal impairment of IgA nephropathy at diagnosis, which is an 
important risk factor for mortality in IgA nephropathy patients.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2009.24.S1.S30
PMCID: PMC2633190
PMID: 19194559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]