1. Am J Hypertens. 2009 May;22(5):577-80. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2009.7. Epub 2009 Feb 
19.

Association of a common variant of the leptin gene with blood pressure in an 
obese Brazilian population.

Genelhu VA(1), Celoria BM, Pimentel MM, Duarte SF, Cabello PH, Francischetti EA.

Author information:
(1)Hypertension Clinic, Laboratory of Clinical and Experimental Pathophysiology 
(CLINEX), School of Medicine, Rio de Janeiro State University, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.

Comment in
    Am J Hypertens. 2009 May;22(5):467. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2009.37.

BACKGROUND: This study assessed in obese Brazilians subjects whether a common 
variant of leptin gene, -2548G>A, is associated with blood pressure changes.
METHODS: A total of 140 subjects, 99 women; mean age of 45.2 +/- 12.4 years; 
body mass index (BMI) = 38.5 +/- 8.0 kg/m2 were included. Blood pressure was 
recorded using Dinamap 1846 (Critikon, Tampa, FL). Molecular analysis was made 
by use of PCR and restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis. Plasma 
insulin and leptin concentrations were determined by radioimmunoassay.
RESULTS: AA homozygotes, in comparison with the G-allele carriers, showed 
significant lower levels of systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial pressure (120 
+/- 10 vs. 132 +/- 17 mm Hg, P = 0.01; 75 +/- 6 vs. 84 +/- 12 mm Hg, P = 0.009; 
92 +/- 7 vs. 100 +/- 12 mm Hg, P = 0.007, respectively). The differences in 
blood pressure remained significant after adjusting for the influence of gender, 
age, obesity, and body fat distribution as well as for leptin, insulin, and 
homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance. A stepwise regression 
analysis confirmed that the LEP AA genotype independently predicted blood 
pressure changes. On the other hand, in GG homozygotes, insulinemia showed a 
significant association with blood pressure values. This suggests that common 
LEP genotype carriers exhibiting high insulin levels, reflecting an 
insulin-resistant state, were particularly prone to higher blood pressure 
levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showing that higher blood pressure levels were found 
with the most prevalent -2548G>A genotype, whereas patients with the AA genotype 
seemed to be protected from hypertension, indicate that the -2548G>A 
polymorphism of LEP appears to be an important mediator of obesity hypertension.

DOI: 10.1038/ajh.2009.7
PMID: 19229195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]