1. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Oct;11(10):4822-9. doi: 10.1128/mcb.11.10.4822-4829.1991.

Dominant inhibitory mutations in the Mg(2+)-binding site of RasH prevent its 
activation by GTP.

Farnsworth CL(1), Feig LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tufts University Health Sciences Campus, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02111.

We have previously demonstrated that substitution of Asn for Ser at position 17 
of RasH yields a dominant inhibitory protein whose expression in cells 
interferes with endogenous Ras function (L. A. Feig, and G. M. Cooper, Mol. 
Cell. Biol. 8:3235-3243, 1988). Subsequent structural studies have shown that 
the hydroxyl group of Ser-17 contributes to the binding of Mg2+ associated with 
bound nucleotide. In this report, we show that more subtle amino acid 
substitutions at this site that would be expected to interfere with complexing 
Mg2+, such as Cys or Ala, also generated dominant inhibitory mutants. In 
contrast, a Thr substitution that conserves a reactive hydroxyl group maintained 
normal Ras function. These results argue that the defect responsible for the 
inhibitory activity is improper coordination of Mg2+. Preferential affinity for 
GDP, observed in the original Asn-17 mutant, was found exclusively in inhibitory 
mutants. However, this binding specificity did not completely block the mutant 
proteins from binding GTP in vivo since introduction of the autophosphorylation 
site, Thr-59, in 17N Ras resulted in the phosphorylation of the double mutant in 
cells. Furthermore, inhibitory mutants failed to activate a model downstream 
target, yeast adenylate cyclase, even when bound to GTP. Thus, the consequence 
of improper complexing of Mg2+ was to lock the protein in a constitutively 
inactive state. A model is presented to explain how these properties could cause 
the mutant protein to inhibit the activation of endogenous Ras by competing for 
a guanine nucleotide-releasing factor.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.11.10.4822-4829.1991
PMCID: PMC361448
PMID: 1922022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]