1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Aug;50(8):3743-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-3151. 
Epub 2009 Feb 21.

Correction of the disease phenotype of myocilin-causing glaucoma by a natural 
osmolyte.

Jia LY(1), Gong B, Pang CP, Huang Y, Lam DS, Wang N, Yam GH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

PURPOSE: To characterize a novel Asp384Asn (D384N) mutant myocilin (MYOC) that 
causes juvenile-onset open-angle glaucoma (JOAG) and investigate the correction 
of mutant phenotype by a natural osmolyte, trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO).
METHODS: A Chinese JOAG family was recruited and genomic DNA was extracted from 
peripheral blood obtained from 44 family members. Coding regions of the MYOC 
were sequenced. Two hundred individuals (>60 years old) without ocular 
hypertension or glaucoma were the control subjects. Full-length human wild-type 
MYOC cDNA was cloned in p3xFLAG-myc-CMV-25 and missense mutation was introduced 
by site-directed mutagenesis. Transfected human trabecular meshwork cells were 
treated with small-molecule chemical chaperones. Secreted MYOC was analyzed by 
combined immunoprecipitation-Western blot analysis. Intracellular myocilin was 
fractionated into Triton X-100-soluble and insoluble fractions, and analyzed by 
Western blot analysis. Intracellular aggregate and apoptosis were assayed by 
immunofluorescence. The effect of TMAO on subcellular myocilin distribution was 
analyzed by density gradient fractionation, followed by Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: A novel c.1150G>A change of MYOC was identified. Screening of 
optineurin, WDR36, and CYP1B1 showed an absence of disease-causing 
polymorphisms. Mutated D384N myocilin had reduced solubility and was 
aggregation-prone and nonsecreted. Treatment of transfected cells with TMAO 
improved the solubility of the D384N mutant, which was corrected for secretion 
in a dose-response manner. TMAO reduced the distribution of the D384N mutant in 
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), alleviated ER stress, and rescued cells from 
apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that TMAO, with chaperoning activity, 
facilitated the folding and secretion of mutant MYOC. This therapeutic approach 
assisted by a chemical chaperone can be developed for treating glaucoma.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.08-3151
PMID: 19234343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]