1. Protein Expr Purif. 2009 Jul;66(1):66-72. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2009.02.003. Epub
 2009 Feb 14.

Super induction of dengue virus NS1 protein in E. coli.

Das D(1), Mongkolaungkoon S, Suresh MR.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Alberta, 
11304-89 Avenue, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

The non-structural protein 1 (NS1) of dengue virus is a useful target for 
diagnostics of dengue infection since the protein is abundantly circulating in 
blood during the acute phase of the disease. Prior work has established that 
secreted NS1 levels in plasma correlates with viremia levels and hence can also 
be used to diagnose patients at the risk for developing dengue hemorrhagic 
fever. Thus detection of non-structural dengue antigens may be of benefit for an 
early rapid diagnosis of dengue infection due to its long half life in the 
blood. Here we describe a simple and efficient method for the expression of NS1 
in Escherichia coli, which could potentially be used to develop monoclonal and 
bispecific antibodies for point of care diagnostics. E. coli codon optimized 
synthetic full-length NS1 gene of dengue serotype 1 (DEN-1) was successfully 
cloned and expressed in very high-level as inclusion bodies. The NS1 protein was 
successfully affinity purified and refolded as a recombinant NS1 (rNS1) protein 
in E. coli and yield was 230-250 mg/L of bacterial culture. The rNS1 protein was 
used to immunize mice for hybridoma development. The polyclonal antiserum from 
animals immunized with this rNS1 protein was found to specifically recognize the 
rNS1, thus demonstrating the immunogenic nature of the protein. The rNS1 protein 
purified from E. coli could be useful for developing a sensitive serum 
diagnostic assay to monitor dengue outbreaks.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2009.02.003
PMCID: PMC7129434
PMID: 19232392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]