1. Yeast. 2009 Mar;26(3):185-92. doi: 10.1002/yea.1658.

Small epitope-linker modules for PCR-based C-terminal tagging in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Funakoshi M(1), Hochstrasser M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06520-8114, USA.

PCR-mediated gene modification is a powerful approach to the functional analysis 
of genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. One application of this method is 
epitope-tagging of a gene to analyse the corresponding protein by immunological 
methods. However, the number of epitope tags available in a convenient format is 
still low, and interference with protein function by the epitope, particularly 
if it is large, is not uncommon. To address these limitations and broaden the 
utility of the method, we constructed a set of convenient template plasmids 
designed for PCR-based C-terminal tagging with 10 different, relatively short 
peptide sequences that are recognized by commercially available monoclonal 
antibodies. The encoded tags are FLAG, 3 x FLAG, T7, His-tag, Strep-tag II, 
S-tag, Myc, HSV, VSV-G and V5. The same pair of primers can be used to construct 
tagged alleles of a gene of interest with any of the 10 tags. In addition, a 
six-glycine linker sequence is inserted upstream of these tags to minimize the 
influence of the tag on the target protein and maximize its accessibility for 
antibody binding. Three marker genes, HIS3MX6, kanMX6 and hphMX4, are available 
for each epitope. We demonstrate the utility of the new tags for both 
immunoblotting and one-step affinity purification of the regulatory particle of 
the 26S proteasome. The set of plasmids has been deposited in the non-profit 
plasmid repository Addgene (http://www.addgene.org).

DOI: 10.1002/yea.1658
PMCID: PMC2673350
PMID: 19243080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]