1. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2009 Jul;73(1):106-11. doi: 
10.1016/j.saa.2009.01.028. Epub 2009 Feb 6.

Typing SNP based on the near-infrared spectroscopy and artificial neural 
network.

Ren L(1), Wang WP, Gao YZ, Yu XW, Xie HP.

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Forensic Medicine, Medical 
School, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, PR China.

Based on the near-infrared spectra (NIRS) of the measured samples as the 
discriminant variables of their genotypes, the genotype discriminant model of 
SNP has been established by using back-propagation artificial neural network 
(BP-ANN). Taking a SNP (857G>A) of N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) as an example, 
DNA fragments containing the SNP site were amplified by the PCR method based on 
a pair of primers to obtain the three-genotype (GG, AA, and GA) modeling 
samples. The NIRS-s of the amplified samples were directly measured in 
transmission by using quartz cell. Based on the sample spectra measured, the two 
BP-ANN-s were combined to obtain the stronger ability of the three-genotype 
classification. One of them was established to compress the measured NIRS 
variables by using the resilient back-propagation algorithm, and another network 
established by Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm according to the compressed NIRS-s 
was used as the discriminant model of the three-genotype classification. For the 
established model, the root mean square error for the training and the 
prediction sample sets were 0.0135 and 0.0132, respectively. Certainly, this 
model could rightly predict the three genotypes (i.e. the accuracy of prediction 
samples was up to 100%) and had a good robust for the prediction of unknown 
samples. Since the three genotypes of SNP could be directly determined by using 
the NIRS-s without any preprocessing for the analyzed samples after PCR, this 
method is simple, rapid and low-cost.

DOI: 10.1016/j.saa.2009.01.028
PMID: 19264539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]