1. J Neurol Sci. 2009 Jun 15;281(1-2):85-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.01.025. Epub
 2009 Mar 10.

Mitochondrial DNA G8363A mutation in the tRNA Lys gene: clinical, biochemical 
and pathological study.

Virgilio R(1), Ronchi D, Bordoni A, Fassone E, Bonato S, Donadoni C, Torgano G, 
Moggio M, Corti S, Bresolin N, Comi GP.

Author information:
(1)Dino Ferrari Centre, Department of Neurological Sciences, University of 
Milan, IRCCS Foundation Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli and Regina 
Elena, Milan, Italy.

The G8363A is a very rare mtDNA tRNA(Lys) gene mutation that has been associated 
to MERRF-like syndrome, cardiomyopathy or Leigh syndrome. Here, we describe the 
clinical and molecular features of a new large multigenerational family and we 
review the literature of cases with this mutation. In our family seven members 
presented a heterogeneous mitochondrial disease phenotype, from MERRF-like 
syndrome to isolated psychiatric disorder, associated with the G8363A mutation. 
The two probands are dizygotic twin sisters affected by mental retardation, 
neural deafness, myopathy, myoclonic epilepsy and ataxia. Twins' muscle biopsies 
showed a severe cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency and ragged-red fibers. 
Their mitochondrial respiratory chain was defective in complexes I and IV in 
muscle. A severe reduction in complex IV activity was also observed in 
fibroblasts and myoblasts. Molecular analysis showed a G8363A transition in the 
mtDNA tRNA(Lys) gene. The mutation was almost homoplasmic (>90%) in muscle and 
blood of the twins and heteroplasmic (55+/-8%) in blood sample from affected 
maternal relatives. Based on our family data and the meta-analysis of the 
literature, we confirm that mutational load directly correlates with severity of 
the disease (severe vs mild/moderate phenotype; P=0.00168) and with disease 
onset (P<0.00001). However the presence of several exceptions and overlaps among 
patients with different clinical severity limits the clinical usefulness of this 
observation. Although the pathogenicity of the G8363A mutation is well 
established, counselling is a difficult task for clinicians because of the large 
phenotypical variability. Our study contributes further data on the clinical 
spectrum and its relation with the level of G8363A tRNA(Lys) mtDNA mutation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.01.025
PMID: 19278689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]