1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1991 Nov 15;291(1):9-14. doi: 
10.1016/0003-9861(91)90098-4.

Enzymological evidence for the indispensability of small intestine in the 
synthesis of arginine from glutamate. II. N-acetylglutamate synthase.

Wakabayashi Y(1), Iwashima A, Yamada E, Yamada R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Japan.

We describe here a concise assay procedure for N-acetylglutamate (AGA) synthase 
(AGAS) and its application to an extensive study of tissue distribution of AGAS 
activity. Crude mitochondria from several tissues were incubated in a pair of 
assay mixtures with [14C]glutamate in the absence and presence of acetyl-CoA at 
15 degrees C for 10 min. Anionic components including [14C]AGA were first 
isolated from glutamate by a cation exchanger column. In order to remove anionic 
contaminants such as succinate, the AGA was converted to glutamate enzymatically 
by aminoacylase, and then the glutamate was isolated by cation exchange 
chromatography and counted. Recoveries were corrected individually. The 
difference between the pair incubations was taken as the activity. An extensive 
survey of AGAS activity in rats showed that, although the liver expressed the 
highest activity, the small intestine, testis, lung and submaxillary gland also 
exhibited considerable activity. Sexual differences in activity were not found 
in the liver and small intestine. We also detected activity in the human small 
intestine for the first time. Optimization of incubation temperature and time 
and the presence of arginine in an assay mixture was essential and we 
demonstrated that the AGAS reaction with crude mitochondria as an enzyme source 
was unstable without arginine and at higher temperatures. This procedure appears 
suitable for studying the physiological and nutritional role of AGAS in 
non-hepatic tissues. In the accompanying paper we applied this procedure to 
study the ontogeny of AGAS in developing rat tissues.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(91)90098-4
PMID: 1929439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]