1. J Phys Chem B. 2009 Apr 9;113(14):4837-45. doi: 10.1021/jp810642d.

Quantifying green fluorescent protein diffusion in Escherichia coli by using 
continuous photobleaching with evanescent illumination.

Slade KM(1), Steele BL, Pielak GJ, Thompson NL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina 27599-3290, USA.

Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching and fluorescence correlation 
spectroscopy are the primary means for studying translational diffusion in 
biological systems. Both techniques, however, present numerous obstacles for 
measuring translational mobility in structures only slightly larger than optical 
resolution. We report a new method using through-prism total internal reflection 
fluorescence microscopy with continuous photobleaching to overcome these 
obstacles. Small structures, such as prokaryotic cells or isolated eukaryotic 
organelles, containing fluorescent molecules are adhered to a surface. This 
surface is continuously illuminated by an evanescent wave created by total 
internal reflection. The characteristic length describing the decay of the 
evanescent intensity with distance from the surface is smaller than the 
structures. The fluorescence decay rate resulting from continuous evanescent 
illumination is monitored as a function of the excitation intensity. The data at 
higher excitation intensities provide apparent translational diffusion 
coefficients for the fluorescent molecules within the structures because the 
decay results from two competing processes (the intrinsic photobleaching 
propensity and diffusion in the small structures). We present the theoretical 
basis for the technique and demonstrate its applicability by measuring the 
diffusion coefficient, 6.3 +/- 1.1 microm(2)/s, of green fluorescent protein in 
Escherichia coli cells.

DOI: 10.1021/jp810642d
PMCID: PMC2752987
PMID: 19296673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]