1. PLoS Genet. 2009 Mar;5(3):e1000429. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000429. Epub
2009  Mar 20.

A genome-wide association study of pulmonary function measures in the Framingham 
Heart Study.

Wilk JB(1), Chen TH, Gottlieb DJ, Walter RE, Nagle MW, Brandler BJ, Myers RH, 
Borecki IB, Silverman EK, Weiss ST, O'Connor GT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA. jwilk@bu.edu

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 5:e421.

The ratio of forced expiratory volume in one second to forced vital capacity 
(FEV(1)/FVC) is a measure used to diagnose airflow obstruction and is highly 
heritable. We performed a genome-wide association study in 7,691 Framingham 
Heart Study participants to identify single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
associated with the FEV(1)/FVC ratio, analyzed as a percent of the predicted 
value. Identified SNPs were examined in an independent set of 835 Family Heart 
Study participants enriched for airflow obstruction. Four SNPs in tight linkage 
disequilibrium on chromosome 4q31 were associated with the percent predicted 
FEV(1)/FVC ratio with p-values of genome-wide significance in the Framingham 
sample (best p-value = 3.6e-09). One of the four chromosome 4q31 SNPs 
(rs13147758; p-value 2.3e-08 in Framingham) was genotyped in the Family Heart 
Study and produced evidence of association with the same phenotype, percent 
predicted FEV(1)/FVC (p-value = 2.0e-04). The effect estimates for association 
in the Framingham and Family Heart studies were in the same direction, with the 
minor allele (G) associated with higher FEV(1)/FVC ratio levels. Results from 
the Family Heart Study demonstrated that the association extended to FEV(1) and 
dichotomous airflow obstruction phenotypes, particularly among smokers. The SNP 
rs13147758 was associated with the percent predicted FEV(1)/FVC ratio in 
independent samples from the Framingham and Family Heart Studies producing a 
combined p-value of 8.3e-11, and this region of chromosome 4 around 145.68 
megabases was associated with COPD in three additional populations reported in 
the accompanying manuscript. The associated SNPs do not lie within a gene 
transcript but are near the hedgehog-interacting protein (HHIP) gene and several 
expressed sequence tags cloned from fetal lung. Though it is unclear what gene 
or regulatory effect explains the association, the region warrants further 
investigation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000429
PMCID: PMC2652834
PMID: 19300500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EKS received an honorarium for a talk on COPD 
genetics in 2006, grant support for two studies of COPD genetics (2004–2008), 
and consulting fees (2006–2008) from GlaxoSmithKline. EKS received an honorarium 
from Wyeth for a talk on COPD genetics in 2004. EKS received an honorarium from 
Bayer for a symposium at the ERS Meeting in 2005. EKS received honoraria for 
talks in 2007 and 2008 and consulting fees in 2008 from AstraZeneca.