1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2007 Sep;5(3):180-6. doi: 10.2174/157015907781695982.

Allosteric modulation of the calcium-sensing receptor.

Jensen AA(1), Br√§uner-Osborne H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 2, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

The calcium (Ca(2+))-sensing receptor (CaR) belongs to family C of the G-protein 
coupled receptors (GPCRs). The receptor is activated by physiological levels of 
Ca(2+) (and Mg(2+)) and positively modulated by a range of proteinogenic 
L-alpha-amino acids. Recently, several synthetic allosteric modulators of the 
receptor have been developed, which either act as positive modulators (termed 
calcimimetics) or negative modulators (termed calcilytics). These ligands do not 
activate the wild-type receptor directly, but rather shift the 
concentration-response curves of Ca(2+) to the left or right, respectively. Like 
other family C GPCRs, the CaR contains a large amino-terminal domain and a 
7-transmembrane domain. Whereas the endogenous ligands for the receptor, Ca(2+), 
Mg(2+) and the L-alpha-amino acids, bind to the amino-terminal domain, most if 
not all of the synthetic modulators published so far bind to the 7-transmembrane 
domain. The most prominent physiological function of the CaR is to maintain the 
extracellular Ca(2+) level in a very tight range via control of secretion of 
parathyroid hormone (PTH). Influence on e.g. secretion of calcitonin from 
thyroid C-cells and direct action on the tubule of the kidney also contribute to 
the control of the extracellular Ca(2+) level. This control over PTH and Ca(2+) 
levels is partially lost in patients suffering from primary and secondary 
hyperparathyroidism. The perspectives in CaR as a therapeutic target have been 
underlined by the recent approval of the calcimimetic cinacalcet for the 
treatment of certain forms of primary and secondary hyperparathyroidism. 
Cinacalcet is the first clinically administered allosteric modulator acting on a 
GPCR, and thus the compound constitutes an important proof-of-concept for future 
development of allosteric modulators on other GPCR drug targets.

DOI: 10.2174/157015907781695982
PMCID: PMC2656812
PMID: 19305800