1. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 Jul;17(4):357-62. doi: 
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181955b37.

Immunohistochemical marker for Na+ CP type Valpha (C-20) and heterozygous 
nonsense SCN5A mutation W822X in a sudden cardiac death induced by mild 
anaphylactic reaction.

Turillazzi E(1), Pomara C, La Rocca G, Neri M, Riezzo I, Karch SB, Anzalone R, 
Lo Iacono M, Fineschi V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Pathology, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy.

A sudden death likely due to mild anaphylactic reaction in a young man is 
described. Autoptic, histologic, immunohistochemical, and laboratory findings 
were strongly consistent with the diagnosis of a mild anaphylactic reaction. 
Genetic molecular analysis, performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
tissues, showed a mutation described as W822X in a family with 
electrocardiographic pattern typical of Brugada Syndrome. It results in a 
nonsense mutation generating a truncated form of the channel protein. The 
mutation is due to a point substitution of a guanine with an adenine residue 
(G2466A). Immunohistochemistry and laser scanning confocal microscopy on 
sections from heart formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues led us to confirm 
the cellular localization of the Na+ CP type Valpha (C-20) at the intercalated 
disks of ventricular myocytes and nearly 50% reduction in Na+ channels 
expression in ventricular myocytes when compared with control cases. We suggest 
that the anaphylactic reaction that occurred in the young man could serve as a 
trigger mechanism, responsible for his sudden death with a SCN5A mutation 
associated with the Brugada syndrome.

DOI: 10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181955b37
PMID: 19318916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]