1. J Physiol Sci. 2009 May;59(3):217-25. doi: 10.1007/s12576-009-0029-7. Epub
2009  Mar 3.

Late Na+ current produced by human cardiac Na+ channel isoform Nav1.5 is 
modulated by its beta1 subunit.

Maltsev VA(1), Kyle JW, Undrovinas A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular Research, Henry Ford Hospital 
Detroit, Education and Research Bldg. Room 4015, 2799 West Grand Boulevard, 
Detroit, MI 48202-2689, USA.

Experimental data accumulated over the past decade show the emerging importance 
of the late sodium current (I(NaL)) for the function of both normal and, 
especially, failing myocardium, in which I(NaL) is reportedly increased. While 
recent molecular studies identified the cardiac Na(+) channel (NaCh) alpha 
subunit isoform (Na(v)1.5) as a major contributor to I (NaL), the molecular 
mechanisms underlying alterations of I(NaL) in heart failure (HF) are still 
unknown. Here we tested the hypothesis that I(NaL) is modulated by the NaCh 
auxiliary beta subunits. tsA201 cells were transfected simultaneously with human 
Na(v)1.5 (former hH1a) and cardiac beta(1) or beta(2) subunits, and whole-cell 
patch-clamp experiments were performed. We found that I(NaL) decay kinetics were 
significantly slower in cells expressing alpha + beta(1) (time constant tau = 
0.73 +/- 0.16 s, n = 14, mean +/- SEM, P < 0.05) but remained unchanged in cells 
expressing alpha + beta(2) (tau = 0.52 +/- 0.09 s, n = 5), compared with cells 
expressing Na(v)1.5 alone (tau = 0.54 +/- 0.09 s, n = 20). Also, beta(1), but 
not beta(2), dramatically increased I(NaL) relative to the maximum peak current, 
I(NaT) (2.3 +/- 0.48%, n = 14 vs. 0.48 +/- 0.07%, n = 6, P < 0.05, respectively) 
and produced a rightward shift of the steady-state availability curve. We 
conclude that the auxiliary beta(1) subunit modulates I(NaL), produced by the 
human cardiac Na(+) channel Na(v)1.5 by slowing its decay and increasing I(NaL) 
amplitude relative to I(NaT). Because expression of Na(v)1.5 reportedly 
decreases but beta(1) remains unchanged in chronic HF, the relatively higher 
expression of beta(1) may contribute to the known I(NaL) increase in HF via the 
modulation mechanism found in this study.

DOI: 10.1007/s12576-009-0029-7
PMCID: PMC2744134
PMID: 19340536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]