1. Microbiology (Reading). 2009 Jun;155(Pt 6):1847-1857. doi: 
10.1099/mic.0.027219-0. Epub 2009 Apr 21.

Folding and trimerization of signal sequence-less mature TolC in the cytoplasm 
of Escherichia coli.

Masi M(1)(2), Duret G(3), Delcour AH(3), Misra R(2).

Author information:
(1)Unité des Membranes Bactériennes CNRS 2172, Département de Microbiologie, 
Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-4501, USA.
(3)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 
77204, USA.

TolC is a multifunctional outer-membrane protein (OMP) of Escherichia coli that 
folds into a unique alpha/beta-barrel structure. Previous studies have shown 
that unlike the biogenesis of beta-barrel OMPs, such as porins, TolC assembles 
independently from known periplasmic folding factors. Yet, the assembly of TolC, 
like that of beta-barrel OMPs, is dependent on BamA and BamD, two essential 
components of the beta-barrel OMP assembly machinery. We have investigated the 
folding properties and cellular trafficking of a TolC derivative that lacks the 
entire signal sequence (TolCDelta2-22). A significant amount of TolCDelta2-22 
was found to be soluble in the cytoplasm, and a fraction of it folded and 
trimerized into a conformation similar to that of the normal outer 
membrane-localized TolC protein. Some TolCDelta2-22 was found to associate with 
membranes, but failed to assume a wild-type-like folded conformation. The null 
phenotype of TolCDelta2-22 was exploited to isolate suppressor mutations, the 
majority of which mapped in secY. In the secY suppressor background, 
TolCDelta2-22 resumed normal function and folded like wild-type TolC. Proper 
membrane insertion could not be achieved upon in vitro incubation of 
cytoplasmically folded TolCDelta2-22 with purified outer membrane vesicles, 
showing that even though TolC is intrinsically capable of folding and 
trimerization, for successful integration into the outer membrane these events 
need to be tightly coupled to the insertion process, which is mediated by the 
Bam machinery. Genetic and biochemical data attribute the unique folding and 
assembly pathways of TolC to its large soluble alpha-helical domain.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.027219-0
PMCID: PMC2885749
PMID: 19383696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]