1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Jan;119(2):443-52. doi:
10.1007/s10549-009-0396-z.  Epub 2009 Apr 29.

ATM germline mutations in women with familial breast cancer and a relative with 
haematological malignancy.

Paglia LL(1), Laugé A, Weber J, Champ J, Cavaciuti E, Russo A, Viovy JL, 
Stoppa-Lyonnet D.

Author information:
(1)Service de Génétique, Institut Curie-Hôpital, 75248 Paris, France.

Biallelic inactivation of the ATM gene causes ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), a 
complex neurological disease associated with a high risk of leukaemias and 
lymphomas. Mothers of A-T children, obligate ATM heterozygote mutation carriers, 
have a breast cancer (BC) relative risk of about 3. The frequency of ATM 
carriers in BC women with a BC family history has been estimated to be 2.70%. To 
further our clinical understanding of familial BC and examine whether 
haematological malignancies are predictive of ATM germline mutation, we 
estimated the frequency of heterozygote mutation carriers in a series of 122 BC 
women with a family history of both BC and haematological malignancy and without 
BRCA1/2 mutation. The gene screening was performed with a new high throughput 
method, EMMA (enhanced mismatch mutation analysis). Amongst 28 different ATM 
variants, eight mutations have been identified in eight patients: two mutations 
leading to a putative truncated protein and six being likely deleterious 
mutations. One of the truncating mutations was initially interpreted as a 
missense mutation, p.Asp2597Tyr, but is actually a splice mutation 
(c.7789G>T/p.Asp2597_Lys2643>LysfsX3). The estimated frequency of ATM 
heterozygote mutation carriers in our series is 6.56% (95% CI: 2.16-10.95), a 
significantly higher figure than that observed in the general population, 
estimated to be between 0.3 and 0.6%. Although a trend towards an increased 
frequency of ATM carriers was observed, it was not different from that observed 
in a population of familial BC women not selected for haematological malignancy 
as the frequency of ATM carriers was 2.70%, a value situated in the confidence 
interval of our study.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-009-0396-z
PMID: 19404735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]