1. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jul 15;125(2):438-45. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24345.

A new pulsed electric field therapy for melanoma disrupts the tumor's blood 
supply and causes complete remission without recurrence.

Nuccitelli R(1), Chen X, Pakhomov AG, Baldwin WH, Sheikh S, Pomicter JL, Ren W, 
Osgood C, Swanson RJ, Kolb JF, Beebe SJ, Schoenbach KH.

Author information:
(1)Frank Reidy Research Center for Bioelectrics, Old Dominion University, 
Norfolk, VA 23510, USA.

We have discovered a new, ultrafast therapy for treating skin cancer that is 
extremely effective with a total electric field exposure time of only 180 
microsec. The application of 300 high-voltage (40 kV/cm), ultrashort (300 nsec) 
electrical pulses to murine melanomas in vivo triggers both necrosis and 
apoptosis, resulting in complete tumor remission within an average of 47 days in 
the 17 animals treated. None of these melanomas recurred during a 4-month period 
after the initial melanoma had disappeared. These pulses generate small, 
long-lasting, rectifying nanopores in the plasma membrane of exposed cells, 
resulting in increased membrane permeability to small molecules and ions, as 
well as an increase in intracellular Ca(2+), DNA fragmentation, disruption of 
the tumor's blood supply and the initiation of apoptosis. Apoptosis was 
indicated by a 3-fold increase in Bad labeling and a 72% decrease in Bcl-2 
labeling. In addition, microvessel density within the treated tumors fell by 
93%. This new therapy utilizing nanosecond pulsed electric fields has the 
advantages of highly localized targeting of tumor cells and a total exposure 
time of only 180 microsec. These pulses penetrate into the interior of every 
tumor cell and initiate DNA fragmentation and apoptosis while at the same time 
reducing blood flow to the tumor. This new physical tumor therapy is drug free, 
highly localized, uses low energy, has no significant side effects and results 
in very little scarring.

Copyright 2009 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24345
PMCID: PMC2731679
PMID: 19408306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]