1. J Neurosci. 2009 May 13;29(19):6285-95. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5885-08.2009.

Blockade of Nogo receptor ligands promotes functional regeneration of sensory 
axons after dorsal root crush.

Harvey PA(1), Lee DH, Qian F, Weinreb PH, Frank E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

A major impediment for regeneration of axons within the CNS is the presence of 
multiple inhibitory factors associated with myelin. Three of these factors bind 
to the Nogo receptor, NgR, which is expressed on axons. Administration of 
exogenous blockers of NgR or NgR ligands promotes the regeneration of descending 
axonal projections after spinal cord hemisection. A more detailed analysis of 
CNS regeneration can be made by examining the growth of specific classes of 
sensory axons into the spinal cord after dorsal root crush injury. In this 
study, we assessed whether administration of a soluble peptide fragment of the 
NgR (sNgR) that binds to and blocks all three NgR ligands can promote 
regeneration after brachial dorsal root crush in adult rats. Intraventricular 
infusion of sNgR for 1 month results in extensive regrowth of myelinated sensory 
axons into the white and gray matter of the dorsal spinal cord, but unmyelinated 
sensory afferents do not regenerate. In concert with the anatomical growth of 
sensory axons into the cord, there is a gradual restoration of synaptic function 
in the denervated region, as revealed by extracellular microelectrode recordings 
from the spinal gray matter in response to stimulation of peripheral nerves. 
These positive synaptic responses are correlated with substantial improvements 
in use of the forelimb, as assessed by paw preference, paw withdrawal to tactile 
stimuli and the ability to grasp. These results suggest that sNgR may be a 
potential therapy for restoring sensory function after injuries to sensory 
roots.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5885-08.2009
PMCID: PMC2883456
PMID: 19439606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]