1. Dev Biol. 2009 Jul 15;331(2):292-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.546. Epub
2009  May 15.

Kit signaling via PI3K promotes ovarian follicle maturation but is dispensable 
for primordial follicle activation.

John GB(1), Shidler MJ, Besmer P, Castrillon DH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 75390-9072, USA.

In mammals, primordial follicles are generated early in life and remain dormant 
for prolonged intervals. Their growth resumes via a process known as primordial 
follicle activation. Recent genetic studies have demonstrated that 
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) is the essential signaling pathway controlling 
this process throughout life, acting via Akt to regulate nucleocytoplasmic 
shuttling of Foxo3, which functions as a downstream molecular switch. The 
receptor tyrosine kinase Kit has been implicated by numerous studies as the 
critical upstream regulator of primordial follicle activation via PI3K/Akt. Here 
we present a genetic analysis of the contribution of Kit in regulating 
primordial follicle activation and early follicle growth, employing a knock-in 
mutation (Kit(Y719F)) that completely abrogates signaling via PI3K. 
Surprisingly, homozygous Kit(Y719F) female mice undergo primordial follicle 
activation and are fertile, demonstrating that Kit signaling via PI3K is 
dispensable for this process. However, other abnormalities were identified in 
Kit(Y719F) ovaries, including accelerated primordial follicle depletion and 
accumulation of morphologically abnormal primary/secondary follicles with 
persistent nuclear Foxo3 localization. These findings reveal specific roles of 
Kit in the maintenance of the primordial follicle reserve and in the primary to 
secondary follicle transition, but argue that Kit is dispensable in primordial 
follicle activation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.546
PMCID: PMC2726617
PMID: 19447101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]