1. Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 1;69(11):4791-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0615.

Bacterial cytosine deaminase mutants created by molecular engineering show 
improved 5-fluorocytosine-mediated cell killing in vitro and in vivo.

Fuchita M(1), Ardiani A, Zhao L, Serve K, Stoddard BL, Black ME.

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences and Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Washington State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-6534, USA.

Cytosine deaminase is used in combination with 5-fluorocytosine as an 
enzyme-prodrug combination for targeted genetic cancer treatment. This approach 
is limited by inefficient gene delivery and poor prodrug conversion activities. 
Previously, we reported individual point mutations within the substrate binding 
pocket of bacterial cytosine deaminase (bCD) that result in marginal 
improvements in the ability to sensitize cells to 5-fluorocytosine (5FC). Here, 
we describe an expanded random mutagenesis and selection experiment that yielded 
enzyme variants, which provide significant improvement in prodrug sensitization. 
Three of these mutants were evaluated using enzyme kinetic analyses and then 
assayed in three cancer cell lines for 5FC sensitization, bystander effects, and 
formation of 5-fluorouracil metabolites. All variants displayed 18- to 19-fold 
shifts in substrate preference toward 5FC, a significant reduction in IC(50) 
values and improved bystander effect compared with wild-type bCD. In a xenograft 
tumor model, the best enzyme mutant was shown to prevent tumor growth at much 
lower doses of 5FC than is observed when tumor cells express wild-type bCD. 
Crystallographic analyses of this construct show the basis for improved activity 
toward 5FC, and also how two different mutagenesis strategies yield closely 
related but mutually exclusive mutations that each result in a significant 
alteration of enzyme specificity.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0615
PMCID: PMC2765227
PMID: 19487291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]