1. Mol Genet Metab. 2009 Aug;97(4):297-304. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.05.003.
Epub  2009 May 13.

Phenotypic expression of maternally inherited deafness is affected by RNA 
modification and cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins.

Bykhovskaya Y(1), Mengesha E, Fischel-Ghodsian N.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Ahmanson Department of Pediatrics, Steven 
Spielberg Pediatric Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and David 
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

The homoplasmic mitochondrial A1555G mutation in the 12S rRNA gene leads to a 
mitochondrial translation disorder associated with deafness. The absence of 
disease in non-cochlear tissues in all patients, and in the cochlea in some 
patients, is not well understood. We used a system-based approach, including 
whole genome expression and biological function analysis, to elucidate the 
pathways underlying tissue specificity and clinical severity of this condition. 
Levels of over 48K RNA transcripts from EBV-transformed lymphoblasts of deaf and 
hearing individuals with the A1555G mutation and controls were obtained. 
Differentially expressed transcripts were functionally grouped using gene set 
enrichment analysis. Over 50 RNA binding proteins were differentially expressed 
between deaf and hearing individuals with the A1555G mutation (P-value of 
2.56E-7), confirming previous genetic data implicating this pathway in the 
determination of the severity of hearing loss. Unexpectedly, the majority of 
cytoplasmic ribosomal genes were up-regulated in a coordinated fashion in 
individuals with the A1555G mutation versus controls (P-value of 3.91E-135). 
This finding was verified through real time RT-PCR, and through measuring of 
protein levels by flow cytometry. Analysis of expression levels of other 
differentially expressed genes suggests that this coordinated over-expression of 
cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins might occur through the Myc/Max pathway. We 
propose that expression levels of RNA binding proteins help determine the 
severity of the cochlear phenotype, and that coordinated up-regulation of the 
cytoplasmic translation apparatus operates as a compensation mechanism in 
unaffected tissues of patients with maternal deafness associated with the A1555G 
mutation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.05.003
PMCID: PMC2728627
PMID: 19482502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]