1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2008 Sep;6(3):193-202. doi: 10.2174/157015908785777238.

The TNF-alpha system: functional aspects in depression, narcolepsy and 
psychopharmacology.

Berthold-Losleben M(1), Himmerich H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, RWTH Aachen University, 
Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52074 Aachen, Germany.

Changes of the tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) system have been shown to 
be involved in the development of psychiatric disorders and are additionally 
associated with changes in body weight as well as endocrine and metabolic 
changes in psychiatric patients. TNF-alpha might, for example, contribute to the 
pathogenesis of depression by an activation of the 
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) axis, an activation of neuronal 
serotonin transporters and the stimulation of the indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 
which leads to tryptophan depletion. On the other hand, during an acute 
depressive episode, an elevated HPA axis activity may suppress TNF-alpha system 
activity, while after remission, when HPA axis activity has normalized the 
suppression of the TNF-alpha system has been shown not to be apparent any 
more.In narcoleptic patients, soluble TNF receptor (sTNF-R) p75 plasma levels 
have been shown to be elevated, suggesting a functional role of the TNF-alpha 
system in the development of this disorder.Additionally, psychotropic drugs 
influence the TNF-alpha system as well as the secretion and the effect of 
hormones which counteract or interact with the TNF-alpha system such as the 
intestinal hormone ghrelin. However, only preliminary studies with restricted 
sample sizes exist on these issues, and many open questions remain.

DOI: 10.2174/157015908785777238
PMCID: PMC2687935
PMID: 19506720