1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Mar 5;153B(2):376-386. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30990.

ADH1A variation predisposes to personality traits and substance dependence.

Zuo L(1)(2), Gelernter J(1)(2)(3), Kranzler HR(4), Stein MB(5), Zhang H(1)(2), 
Wei F(1)(2), Sen S(1), Poling J(1)(2), Luo X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut.
(2)VA Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven Campus, Connecticut.
(3)Departments of Genetics and Neurobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut.
(4)Alcohol Research Center, Department of Psychiatry, University of Connecticut 
School of Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut.
(5)Departments of Psychiatry and Family & Preventive Medicine, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California.

Human personality traits are strong predictors or characteristics of many 
psychiatric disorders including substance dependence (SD). Recently, significant 
associations between alcohol dehydrogenase type 1A gene (ADH1A) and SD have been 
reported, which led us to investigate the impact of ADH1A variation on 
personality traits and risk of SD. Five hundred fifty-eight subjects with SD 
[398 European-Americans (EAs) and 160 African-Americans (AAs)], 517 college 
students (384 EAs and 133 European-origin Hispanics), and 448 healthy subjects 
(385 EAs, 48 AAs, and 15 European-origin Hispanics) participated. Personality 
traits were assessed in 247 subjects with SD (179 EAs and 68 AAs), all 517 
college students, and 332 healthy subjects (285 EAs, 40 AAs, and 7 
European-origin Hispanics). The relationships between ADH1A and personality 
traits were comprehensively examined using stepwise multivariate analysis of 
covariance (MANCOVA), and then decomposed by stepwise analysis of covariance 
(ANCOVA). The relationship between ADH1A and SD was examined using stepwise 
logistic regression analysis. Admixture effects on analyses were considered. 
Overall, Agreeableness and Conscientiousness were associated with the 
diplotypes, haplotypes, genotypes, and/or alleles of ADH1A in three of four 
phenotype groups including EA SD subjects, healthy subjects, and AA SD subjects 
(1.7 x 10(-4) <or= P <or= 0.055), but not college students. Neuroticism was 
associated with diplotype, haplotypes and genotypes in AA SD subjects (0.001 
<or= P <or= 0.031). In addition, SD was associated with diplotypes, haplotypes, 
genotypes, and/or alleles of ADH1A (0.008 <or= P <or= 0.060). The present study 
demonstrates that the ADH1A variation may contribute to the genetic component of 
variation in personality traits and SD.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30990
PMCID: PMC2861415
PMID: 19526455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]