1. Am J Hematol. 2009 Aug;84(8):480-3. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21456.

Patterns of hepatic iron distribution in patients with chronically transfused 
thalassemia and sickle cell disease.

Ghugre NR(1), Gonzalez-Gomez I, Butensky E, Noetzli L, Fischer R, Williams R, 
Harmatz P, Coates TD, Wood JC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of 
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90027-0034, 
USA.

Comment in
    Am J Hematol. 2009 Aug;84(8):471-2. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21467.

Patients with sickle cell disease (SCD) appear to be at lower risk of 
endocrinopathies and cardiac dysfunction than those with thalassemia major (TM). 
Circulating redox active iron is lower in these patients, possibly due to 
increased systemic inflammation and circulating cytokines. Hepcidin synthesis is 
upregulated during chronic inflammation, reducing intestinal iron absorption and 
promoting retention of iron in the reticuloendothelial cells. Hence, we 
hypothesized that livers of patients with SCD would exhibit greater iron 
deposition in sinusoidal spaces relative to hepatocytes and less in portal 
tracts when compared to patients with TM. To test this hypothesis, iron scoring 
analysis was performed on 70 clinically indicated liver biopsy specimens from 
children and young adults with the two syndromes. Sinusoidal scores were lower 
in around 1 of 4 patients with TM but the relative iron loading in hepatocytes, 
and portal tracts was identical in both diseases. Sinusoidal iron burdens 
saturated at low hepatic iron concentration (HIC) while hepatocyte and portal 
iron depots increased proportionally to HIC. Liver fibrosis was increased in 
patients with TM regardless of their chronic hepatitis status. Overall, liver 
iron distribution was relatively insensitive to differences in disease type and 
to the presence or absence of hepatitis.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.21456
PMCID: PMC2884400
PMID: 19536851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Dr. Wood, Dr. Coates, and 
Dr. Harmatz have research funding from Novartis and had received speakers 
honoraria from Novartis and Apotex.