1. J Neurosci. 2009 Jun 17;29(24):7929-43. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6093-08.2009.

Regulation of postsynaptic structure and function by an A-kinase anchoring 
protein-membrane-associated guanylate kinase scaffolding complex.

Robertson HR(1), Gibson ES, Benke TA, Dell'Acqua ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Colorado 
Denver, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

A-kinase anchoring protein (AKAP) 79/150 is a scaffold protein found in 
dendritic spines that recruits the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and 
protein phosphatase 2B-calcineurin (CaN) to membrane-associated guanylate kinase 
(MAGUK)-linked AMPA receptors (AMPARs) to control receptor phosphorylation and 
synaptic plasticity. However, AKAP79/150 may also coordinate regulation of AMPAR 
activity with spine structure directly through MAGUK binding and 
membrane-cytoskeletal interactions of its N-terminal targeting domain. In 
cultured hippocampal neurons, we observed that rat AKAP150 expression was low 
early in development but then increased coincident with spine formation and 
maturation. Overexpression of human AKAP79 in immature or mature neurons 
increased the number of dendritic filopodia and spines and enlarged spine area. 
However, RNA interference knockdown of AKAP150 decreased dendritic spine area 
only in mature neurons. Importantly, AKAP79 overexpression in immature neurons 
increased AMPAR postsynaptic localization and activity. Neither the AKAP79 PKA 
nor CaN anchoring domain was required for increasing dendritic protrusion 
numbers, spine area, or AMPAR synaptic localization; however, an internal region 
identified as the MAGUK binding domain was found to be essential as shown by 
expression of a MAGUK binding mutant that formed mainly filopodia and decreased 
AMPAR synaptic localization and activity. Expression of the AKAP79 N-terminal 
targeting domain alone also increased filopodia numbers but not spine area. 
Overall, these results demonstrate a novel structural role for AKAP79/150 in 
which the N-terminal targeting domain induces dendritic filopodia and binding to 
MAGUKs promotes spine enlargement and AMPAR recruitment.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6093-08.2009
PMCID: PMC2716089
PMID: 19535604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]