1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 14;284(33):22123-22132. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.023713.
Epub  2009 Jun 23.

Identification of a disulfide bridge essential for transport function of the 
human proton-coupled amino acid transporter hPAT1.

Dorn M(1), Weiwad M(2), Markwardt F(3), Laug L(4), Rudolph R(5), Brandsch M(4), 
Bosse-Doenecke E(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry/Biotechnology, Faculty of Science I, D-06120 Halle; 
Biozentrum, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, D-06120 Halle.
(2)Max-Planck Research Unit-Enzymology of Protein Folding, Weinbergweg 22, 
D-06120 Halle.
(3)Julius-Bernstein-Institute for Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, D-06097 Halle, Germany.
(4)Biozentrum, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, D-06120 Halle.
(5)Institute of Biochemistry/Biotechnology, Faculty of Science I, D-06120 Halle.

The proton-coupled amino acid transporter 1 (PAT1, SLC36A1) mediates the uptake 
of small neutral amino acids at the apical membrane of intestinal epithelial 
cells after protein digestion. The transporter is currently under intense 
investigation, because it is a possible vehicle for oral drug delivery. 
Structural features of the protein such as the number of transmembrane domains, 
the substrate binding site, or essential amino acids are still unknown. In the 
present study we use mutagenesis experiments and biochemical approaches to 
determine the role of the three putative extracellular cysteine residues on 
transport function and their possible involvement in the formation of a 
disulfide bridge. As treatment with the reducing reagent dithiothreitol impaired 
transport function of hPAT1 wild type protein, substitution of putative 
extracellular cysteine residues Cys-180, Cys-329, and Cys-473 by alanine or 
serine was performed. Replacement of the two highly conserved cysteine residues 
Cys-180 and Cys-329 abolished the transport function of hPAT1 in Xenopus laevis 
oocytes. Studies of wild type and mutant transporters expressed in human retinal 
pigment epithelial (HRPE) cells suggested that the binding of the substrate was 
inhibited in these mutants. Substitution of the third putative extracellular 
nonconserved cysteine residue Cys-473 did not affect transport function. All 
mutants were expressed at the plasma membrane. Biotinylation of free sulfhydryl 
groups using maleimide-PEG(11)-biotin and SDS-PAGE analysis under reducing and 
nonreducing conditions provided direct evidence for the existence of an 
essential disulfide bond between Cys-180 and Cys-329. This disulfide bridge is 
very likely involved in forming or stabilizing the substrate binding site.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.023713
PMCID: PMC2755936
PMID: 19549785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]