1. Oncogene. 2009 Sep 10;28(36):3177-87. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.174. Epub 2009 Jun
 29.

Accelerated mammary maturation and differentiation, and delayed MMTVneu-induced 
tumorigenesis of K303R mutant ERalpha transgenic mice.

Herynk MH(1), Lewis MT, Hopp TA, Medina D, Corona-Rodriguez A, Cui Y, Beyer AR, 
Fuqua SA.

Author information:
(1)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.

We identified a somatic mutation in estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) in breast 
cancer causing a lysine to arginine transition (K303R) resulting in 
hypersensitivity to estrogen, altered associations with coactivators and 
corepressors and altered posttranslational modifications of ERalpha. We have 
developed a transgenic mouse expressing the K303R mutant ERalpha under control 
of the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter. At 4 months of age, K303R 
ERalpha transgenic animals demonstrate precocious alveolar budding compared with 
wild-type ERalpha transgenic mice or nontransgenic littermates. Despite these 
morphologic differences, K303R ERalpha transgenic mice displayed no differences 
in levels of ERalpha, progesterone receptor or proliferation at this time-point. 
Pregnancy or chronic estrogen plus progesterone exposure in K303R ERalpha 
transgenic mice also resulted in significantly more alveolar budding, increased 
beta-casein production and dilated ducts when compared with nontransgenic 
littermates. To examine the effects of mutant expression on tumorigenesis, 
mutant ERalpha mice were crossed with FVB-MMTVneu mice and significantly delayed 
time to neu-mediated tumorigenesis in bigenic animals. In contrast, mutant 
expression did not affect carcinogen-induced tumorigenesis. Collectively, these 
data demonstrate that aberrant estrogenic signaling through the K303R ERalpha 
mutation may lead to precocious alveolar budding in virgin mice, and to an 
expedited maturation and differentiation phenotype in the mammary glands of 
hormonally stimulated animals.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2009.174
PMCID: PMC4484624
PMID: 19561644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]