1. Cancer. 2009 Oct 1;115(19):4488-503. doi: 10.1002/cncr.24491.

Wnt antagonist gene polymorphisms and renal cancer.

Hirata H(1), Hinoda Y, Nakajima K, Kikuno N, Yamamura S, Kawakami K, Suehiro Y, 
Tabatabai ZL, Ishii N, Dahiya R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic silencing of several wingless-type mouse mammary tumor 
virus integration site (Wnt) pathway-related genes has been reported in renal 
cancer. Except for the T-cell factor 4 gene TCF4, there are no reports regarding 
Wnt pathway gene polymorphisms in renal cancer. Therefore, the authors of this 
report hypothesized that the polymorphisms in Wnt signaling genes may be risk 
factors for renal cancer.
METHODS: In total, 210 patients (145 men and 65 women) with pathologically 
confirmed renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and 200 age-matched and sex-matched control 
individuals were enrolled in this study. We genotyped 14 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 6 genes. including Dickkopf 2 (DKK2) (reference SNP 
identification number 17037102 [rs17037102], rs419558, and rs447372), DKK3 
(rs3206824, rs11022095, rs1472189, rs7396187, and rs2291599), DKK4 (rs2073664), 
secreted frizzled-related protein 4 (sFRP4) (rs1802073 and rs1802074), mothers 
against decapentaplegic homolog (SMAD) family member 7 or SMAD7 (rs12953717), 
and disheveled associated activator of morphogenesis 2 or DAAM2 (rs6937133 and 
rs2504106) using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism analysis and direct sequencing in the patients with RCC and in the 
healthy, age-matched control group. The relations also were tested between these 
polymorphisms and clinicopathologic data, including sex, tumor grade, tumor 
stage, lymph node involvement, distant metastasis, and overall survival.
RESULTS: A significant decrease in the frequency of the guanine/adenine (G/A) + 
A/A genotypes in the DKK3 codon 335 rs3206824 was observed in the patients with 
RCC compared with the control group. The frequency of the rs3206824 (G/A) 
A-rs7396187 (guanine/cytosine [G/C]) C haplotype was significantly lower in 
patients with RCC compared with other haplotypes. In addition, DKK3 rs1472189 
cytosine/thymine (C/T) was associated with distant metastasis, and, DKK2 
rs17037102 G-homozygous patients had a decreased risk for death in multivariate 
Cox regression analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: To the authors' knowledge, this is the first report documenting 
that DKK3 polymorphisms are associated with RCC and that the DKK2 rs17037102 
polymorphism may be a predictor for survival in patients with RCC after radical 
nephrectomy.

2009 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24491
PMCID: PMC3940366
PMID: 19562778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]