1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Mar;47(3):189-93.

[Analysis of gene mutations in Chinese patients with methylmalonic acidemia and 
homocysteinemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang F(1), Han LS, Hu YH, Yang YL, Ye J, Qiu WJ, Zhang YF, Gao XL, Wang Y, Gu 
XF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinologic, Genetic and Metabolic Diseases, 
Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China.

OBJECTIVE: Methylmalonic acidemia complicated with homocysteinemia, cblC type, 
is the most common inborn error of cobalamin metabolism. The gene MMACHC (OMIM 
277400) is located on chromosome 1p34.1 with four coding exons and a 5th 
non-coding exon. It encodes for a protein with 282 amino acid residues. So far, 
more than 40 mutations have been detected, in which 271dupA (R91KfsX14) is the 
hot spot of MMACHC gene. However, there have not been relevant reports in China. 
The present study aimed to identify the mutation types of MMACHC gene and 
analyze the genotype-phenotype correlations in Chinese patients.
METHOD: The diagnosis of this disease mainly depends on the measurement of C3 
propionylcarnitine, C3/C0 (free carnitine) and C3/C2 (acetylcarnitine) in the 
blood by tandem mass spectrometry, the detection of methylmalonic acid in the 
urine by gas-chromatography mass spectrometry, the determination of total 
homocysteine in the serum, and the loading test of vitamin B12. The entire 
coding region of MMACHC gene was screened by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
combined with DNA direct sequencing in 28 Chinese patients. Genomic DNA was 
extracted using phenol-chloroform method from the peripheral blood leukocytes of 
each patient. PCR amplification products were checked by 1.8% agarose gel 
electrophoresis and were subsequently sequenced with both the forward and 
reverse primers. Mutational analyses were performed using normal human genomic 
MMACHC sequence as a reference (GenBank ID: 25974).
RESULT: In this study, ten mutations were identified in 27 of 28 Chinese 
patients. Most of them were located in exons 3 and 4 (91.3%). We detected four 
mutations reported, which were 609G>A (W203X), 217C>T (R73X), 271dupA 
(R91KfsX14), and 394C>T (R132X), and six novel mutations, which were 1A>G, 
365A>T, 658_660delAAG, 301-3_327del 30, 567_568insT, and 625_626insT. The 609G>A 
(W203X) is the most common mutation, which was detected in 30 of 56 alleles 
(53.6%), including 10 homozygote mutations and 10 heterozygote mutations. In 
addition, three gene polymorphisms were detected, namely, -302T>G (rs3748643), 
-234A>G (rs3728644), and 321G>A (rs2275276). These mutations include missense 
mutations, nonsense mutations, duplication, deletions, and insertions.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we found a part of gene mutations spectrum in Chinese 
patients with methylmalonic acidemia and homocysteinemia, in which the 609G>A 
(W203X) may be the hotspot mutation of MMACHC gene. This would be helpful in the 
prenatal diagnosis and gene screening programs of methylmalonic acidemia and 
homocystinemia.

PMID: 19573432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]