1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2009 Oct;48(10):865-85. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20692.

Identifying the molecular signature of the interstitial deletion 7q subgroup of 
uterine leiomyomata using a paired analysis.

Hodge JC(1), Park PJ, Dreyfuss JM, Assil-Kishawi I, Somasundaram P, Semere LG, 
Quade BJ, Lynch AM, Stewart EA, Morton CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Uterine leiomyomata (UL), the most common neoplasm in reproductive-age women, 
have recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities including interstitial deletion of 7q. 
To develop a molecular signature, matched del(7q) and non-del(7q) tumors 
identified by FISH or karyotyping from 11 women were profiled with expression 
arrays. Our analysis using paired t tests demonstrates this matched design is 
critical to eliminate the confounding effects of genotype and environment that 
underlie patient variation. A gene list ordered by genome-wide significance 
showed enrichment for the 7q22 target region. Modification of the gene list by 
weighting each sample for percent of del(7q) cells to account for the mosaic 
nature of these tumors further enhanced the frequency of 7q22 genes. Pathway 
analysis revealed two of the 19 significant functional networks were associated 
with development and the most represented pathway was protein ubiquitination, 
which can influence tumor development by stabilizing oncoproteins and 
destabilizing tumor suppressor proteins. Array CGH (aCGH) studies determined the 
only consistent genomic imbalance was deletion of 9.5 megabases from 
7q22-7q31.1. Combining the aCGH data with the del(7q) UL mosaicism-weighted 
expression analysis resulted in a list of genes that are commonly deleted and 
whose copy number is correlated with significantly decreased expression. These 
genes include the proliferation inhibitor HPB1, the loss of expression of which 
has been associated with invasive breast cancer, as well as the mitosis 
integrity-maintenance tumor suppressor RINT1. This study provides a molecular 
signature of the del(7q) UL subgroup and will serve as a platform for future 
studies of tumor pathogenesis.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.20692
PMCID: PMC2778251
PMID: 19603527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]