1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 25;106(34):14327-32. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0907840106. Epub 2009 Aug 10.

Ultraslow oligomerization equilibria of p53 and its implications.

Natan E(1), Hirschberg D, Morgner N, Robinson CV, Fersht AR.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Protein Engineering, Cambridge CB2 0QH, 
United Kingdom.

The tumor suppressor p53 is in equilibrium at cellular concentrations between 
dimers and tetramers. Oncogenic mutant p53 (mut) exerts a dominant-negative 
effect on co-expression of p53 wild-type (wt) and mut alleles in cancer cells. 
It is believed that wt and mut form hetero-tetramers of attenuated activity, via 
their tetramerization domains. Using electrospray mass spectrometry on 
isotopically labeled samples, we measured directly the composition and rates of 
formation of p53 complexes in the presence and absence of response element DNA. 
The dissociation of tetramers was unexpectedly very slow (t(1/2) = 40 min) at 37 
degrees C, matched by slow association of dimers, which is approximately four 
times longer than the half-life of spontaneous denaturation of wt p53. On mixing 
wt tetramers with the oncogenic contact mutant R273H of low DNA affinity, we 
observed the same slow formation of only wt(4), wt(2)mut(2), and mut(4), in the 
ratio 1:2:1, on a cellular time scale. On mixing wt and mut with response 
element DNAs P21 and BAX, we observed only the complexes wt(4)xDNA, 
wt(2)mut(2)xDNA, and mut(4)xDNA, with relative dissociation constants 1:4:71 and 
1:13:85, respectively, accounting for the dominant-negative effect by weakened 
affinity. p53 dimers assemble rapidly to tetramers on binding to response 
element DNA, initiated by the p53 DNA binding domains. The slow oligomerization 
of free p53, competing with spontaneous denaturation, has implications for the 
possible regulation of p53 by binding proteins and DNA that affect 
tetramerization kinetics as well as equilibria.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907840106
PMCID: PMC2731847
PMID: 19667193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.