1. Circ J. 2009 Oct;73(10):1934-8. doi: 10.1253/circj.cj-09-0228. Epub 2009 Aug
7.

Interaction of ADIPOQ genetic polymorphism with blood pressure and plasma 
cholesterol level on the risk of coronary artery disease.

Chang YC(1), Jiang JY, Jiang YD, Chiang FT, Hwang JJ, Lien WP, Chuang LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Yunlin 
Branch.

BACKGROUND: The protective effect of +45T >G polymorphism in the adiponectin 
gene (ADIPOQ) on coronary artery disease (CAD) has been demonstrated in European 
populations, so this study investigated the effect of +45T >G polymorphism on 
the risk of CAD and its interactions with other metabolic risk factors in a 
Chinese population.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The +45T >G polymorphism (rs2241766) of ADIPOQ was 
genotyped in 600 patients with angiographically diagnosed CAD and in 718 
controls. The G allele at the +45T >G polymorphism was associated with a lower 
risk of CAD (odds ratio (OR), 0.76; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.64-0.89; 
P=0.001). The protective effect of the G allele at +45T >G polymorphism was 
magnified at blood pressure <140/90 mmHg (OR, 0.65; 95%CI, 0.51-0.82; P=0.0004), 
but disappeared at blood pressure >or=140/90 mmHg (OR, 0.98; 95%CI, 0.76-1.28; 
P=0.93), indicating an interaction between +45T >G polymorphism and blood 
pressure on CAD risk (P=0.02 for interaction). A similar interaction was also 
observed between plasma cholesterol level and the +45T >G polymorphism.
CONCLUSIONS: An association of ADIPOQ genetic polymorphism with CAD risk is 
modified by traditional risk factors, such as blood pressure and plasma 
cholesterol level.

DOI: 10.1253/circj.cj-09-0228
PMID: 19661719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]