1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2009 Nov;37(11):2262-9. doi: 10.1124/dmd.109.028175. Epub 
2009 Aug 6.

Identification of new CYP2C19 variants exhibiting decreased enzyme activity in 
the metabolism of S-mephenytoin and omeprazole.

Lee SJ(1), Kim WY, Kim H, Shon JH, Lee SS, Shin JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacogenomics Research Center, Inje 
University College of Medicine, Inje University Busan Paik Hospital, Jin-gu, 
Busan, Korea.

Although many cases of interindividual variation in the metabolism of CYP2C19 
drugs are explained by the CYP2C19*2, *3, and *17, a wide range of metabolic 
variation still occurs in people who do not carry these genetic variants. The 
objectives of this study were to identify new genetic variants and to 
characterize functional consequences of these variants in metabolism of CYP2C19 
substrates. In total, 21 single-nucleotide polymorphisms including three new 
coding variants, V394M, E405K, and D256N, were identified by direct DNA 
sequencing in 50 randomly selected subjects and in individuals who exhibited an 
outlier phenotype response in the omeprazole study. Recombinant proteins 
produced from the coding variants V394M, E405K, and D256N were prepared by using 
an Escherichia coli expression system and purified. Metabolism of S-mephenytoin 
and omeprazole by V394M was comparable with that of the wild-type protein. E405K 
showed a moderate decrease in metabolism of the substrates. However, D256N 
exhibited a significantly decreased activity in S-mephenytoin metabolism, 
resulting in 50 and 76% decreases in V(max) and intrinsic clearance, 
respectively, compared with the wild type. This variant also exhibited a 
significant decrease in omeprazole metabolism in vivo. CYP2C19 D256N and E405K 
were assigned as CYP2C19*26 and *2D, respectively, by the Cytochrome P450 
Nomenclature Committee. In summary, this report characterizes the allele 
frequency and haplotype distribution of CYP2C19 in a Korean population and 
provides functional analysis of new coding variants of the CYP2C19 gene. Our 
findings suggest that individuals carrying CYP2C19*26 would have lower activity 
for metabolizing CYP2C19 substrate drugs.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.109.028175
PMID: 19661214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]