1. J Mol Biol. 2009 Oct 23;393(2):397-408. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.07.086. Epub 
2009 Aug 4.

Crystal structure of the three tandem FF domains of the transcription elongation 
regulator CA150.

Lu M(1), Yang J, Ren Z, Sabui S, Espejo A, Bedford MT, Jacobson RH, Jeruzalmi D, 
McMurray JS, Chen X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

FF domains are small protein-protein interaction modules that have two flanking 
conserved phenylalanine residues. They are present in proteins involved in 
transcription, RNA splicing, and signal transduction, and often exist in tandem 
arrays. Although several individual FF domain structures have been determined by 
NMR, the tandem nature of most FF domains has not been revealed. Here we report 
the 2.7-A-resolution crystal structure of the first three FF domains of the 
human transcription elongation factor CA150. Each FF domain is composed of three 
alpha-helices and a 3(10) helix between alpha-helix 2 and alpha-helix 3. The 
most striking feature of the structure is that an FF domain is connected to the 
next by an alpha-helix that continues from helix 3 to helix 1 of the next. The 
consequent elongated arrangement allows exposure of many charged residues within 
the region that can be engaged in interaction with other molecules. Binding 
studies using a peptide ligand suggest that a specific conformation of the FF 
domains might be required to achieve higher-affinity binding. Additionally, we 
explore potential DNA binding of the FF construct used in this study. Overall, 
we provide the first crystal structure of an FF domain and insights into the 
tandem nature of the FF domains and suggest that, in addition to protein 
binding, FF domains might be involved in DNA binding.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.07.086
PMCID: PMC3319151
PMID: 19660470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]