1. Neuropharmacology. 2009 Dec;57(7-8):694-701. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2009.08.002. Epub 2009 Aug 19.

Novel and functional norepinephrine transporter protein variants identified in 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Hahn MK(1), Steele A, Couch RS, Stein MA, Krueger JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN 37232, USA. maureen.hahn@vanderbilt.edu

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a highly heritable disorder 
of impaired behavioral inhibition, increased motor activity, and inattention. 
The norepinephrine transporter (NET, SLC6A2) represents an important candidate 
gene for contribution to ADHD because it regulates catecholamine extracellular 
and tissue concentrations and contributes to executive functions disrupted in 
ADHD, and NET is a target for most effective ADHD therapeutics. We identified 
four NET coding single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in two ADHD sample sets; 
two SNPs produce protein variants (T283M, V245I), one of which, T283M, is a 
novel variant. Examination of the maternal family members through whom the T283M 
mutation was transmitted, provided no additional ADHD diagnoses. Given the 
previous identification of a NET mutation that contributes to a familial 
tachycardia syndrome, we examined autonomic function to reveal in the proband 
the highest standing-induced increase in heart rate among the ADHD subjects 
examined. We measured [3H]NE and [3H]dopamine transport for T283M, V245I, and a 
previously identified NET variant, T283R. T283M and V245I demonstrated decreased 
substrate transport, as did T283R, suggesting that the T283 residue is sensitive 
to mutation. Identification of polymorphic sites within NET, specifically those 
that produce functional consequences, is one critical step in elucidating the 
genetic variation contributing to the heritable component of diseases such as 
ADHD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2009.08.002
PMCID: PMC2801604
PMID: 19698724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]