1. Vet Microbiol. 2010 Jan 6;140(1-2):161-6. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.07.028. 
Epub 2009 Aug 8.

Partial sequencing of recent Portuguese myxoma virus field isolates exhibits a 
high degree of genetic stability.

Muller A(1), Silva E, Abrantes J, Esteves PJ, Ferreira PG, Carvalheira JC, 
Nowotny N, Thompson G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinics, Institute of Biomedical Science Abel 
Salazar (ICBAS), University of Porto, P-4099-003 Porto, Portugal. 
amuller@mail.icav.up.pt

To study genetic changes underlying myxoma virus evolution in its new host, the 
European rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus), we sequenced selected genomic regions 
of nine recent virulent field strains and a live attenuated vaccine strain 
("MAV", Germany). DNA was extracted from cell culture passaged myxoma virus. A 
total of 4863 bp (approximately 3% of the genome) of 10 regions spanning 12 
genes of the myxoma viruses was sequenced and compared to the original virulent 
strain "Lausanne" and its attenuated field derivative strain "6918". The field 
strains displayed a maximum of three (strains C43, C95) and a minimum of one 
(strains CD01, CD05) nucleotide substitutions. These were distributed through 
all analysed coding regions, except gene M022L (major envelope protein), where 
all strains were identical to "Lausanne" and "6918". Two new single nucleotide 
insertions were observed in some of the field strains: within the intergenic 
region M014L/M015L and within gene M009L, where it leads to a frameshift. These 
insertions were located after homopolymeric regions. The vaccine strain 
displayed 37 nucleotide substitutions, predominantly (95%) located in genes 
M022L and M036L. Interestingly, regions M009L and M014L/M015L of the vaccine 
were not amplified successfully, suggesting major genomic changes that could 
account for its attenuated phenotype. Our results support a high degree of 
genetic stability of myxoma virus over the past five decades. None of the 
analysed genome regions by its own seems sufficient for the genetic 
characterisation of field strains.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.07.028
PMID: 19709821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]