1. J Bacteriol. 2009 Nov;191(22):6865-76. doi: 10.1128/JB.00818-09. Epub 2009 Sep
 11.

Genetic and biochemical analysis of the interaction of Bacillus subtilis CodY 
with branched-chain amino acids.

Villapakkam AC(1), Handke LD, Belitsky BR, Levdikov VM, Wilkinson AJ, Sonenshein 
AL.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Molecular Microbiology, Sackler School of Graduate 
Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Bacillus subtilis CodY protein is a DNA-binding global transcriptional regulator 
that responds to branched-chain amino acids (isoleucine, leucine, and valine) 
and GTP. Crystal structure studies have shown that the N-terminal region of the 
protein includes a GAF domain that contains a hydrophobic pocket within which 
isoleucine and valine bind. This region is well conserved in CodY homologs. 
Site-directed mutagenesis was employed to understand the roles of some of the 
residues in the GAF domain and hydrophobic pocket in interaction with isoleucine 
and GTP. The F40A, F71E, and F98A forms of CodY were inactive in vivo. They were 
activatable by GTP but to a much lesser extent by branched-chain amino acids in 
vitro. The CodY mutant R61A retained partial repression of target promoters in 
vivo and was able to respond to GTP in vitro but also responded poorly to 
branched-chain amino acids in vitro unless GTP was simultaneously present. Thus, 
the GAF domain includes residues essential for full activation of CodY by 
branched-chain amino acids, but these residues are not critical for activation 
by GTP. Binding studies with branched-chain amino acids and their analogs 
revealed that an amino group at position 2 and a methyl group at position 3 of 
valine are critical components of the recognition of the amino acids by CodY.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00818-09
PMCID: PMC2772489
PMID: 19749041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]