1. Biochem J. 2009 Dec 10;424(3):479-90. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090766.

Nucleic-acid-binding properties of the C2-L1Tc nucleic acid chaperone encoded by 
L1Tc retrotransposon.

Heras SR(1), Thomas MC, Macias F, Patarroyo ME, Alonso C, López MC.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina 
López Neyra, CSIC, 18001 Granada, Spain.

It has been reported previously that the C2-L1Tc protein located in the 
Trypanosoma cruzi LINE (long interspersed nuclear element) L1Tc 3' terminal end 
has NAC (nucleic acid chaperone) activity, an essential activity for 
retrotransposition of LINE-1. The C2-L1Tc protein contains two cysteine motifs 
of a C2H2 type, similar to those present in TFIIIA (transcription factor IIIA). 
The cysteine motifs are flanked by positively charged amino acid regions. The 
results of the present study show that the C2-L1Tc recombinant protein has at 
least a 16-fold higher affinity for single-stranded than for double-stranded 
nucleic acids, and that it exhibits a clear preference for RNA binding over DNA. 
The C2-L1Tc binding profile (to RNA and DNA) corresponds to a 
non-co-operative-binding model. The zinc fingers present in C2-L1Tc have a 
different binding affinity to nucleic acid molecules and also different NAC 
activity. The RRR and RRRKEK [NLS (nuclear localization sequence)] sequences, as 
well as the C2H2 zinc finger located immediately downstream of these basic 
stretches are the main motifs responsible for the strong affinity of C2-L1Tc to 
RNA. These domains also contribute to bind single- and double-stranded DNA and 
have a duplex-stabilizing effect. However, the peptide containing the zinc 
finger situated towards the C-terminal end of C2-L1Tc protein has a slight 
destabilization effect on a mismatched DNA duplex and shows a strong preference 
for single-stranded nucleic acids, such as C2-L1Tc. These results provide 
further insight into the essential properties of the C2-L1Tc protein as a NAC.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20090766
PMCID: PMC2805920
PMID: 19751212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]