1. PLoS Genet. 2009 Sep;5(9):e1000660. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000660. Epub
2009  Sep 25.

A genome-wide association analysis identified a novel susceptible locus for 
pathological myopia at 11q24.1.

Nakanishi H(1), Yamada R, Gotoh N, Hayashi H, Yamashiro K, Shimada N, 
Ohno-Matsui K, Mochizuki M, Saito M, Iida T, Matsuo K, Tajima K, Yoshimura N, 
Matsuda F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

Myopia is one of the most common ocular disorders worldwide. Pathological 
myopia, also called high myopia, comprises 1% to 5% of the general population 
and is one of the leading causes of legal blindness in developed countries. To 
identify genetic determinants associated with pathological myopia in Japanese, 
we conducted a genome-wide association study, analyzing 411,777 SNPs with 830 
cases and 1,911 general population controls in a two-stage design (297 cases and 
934 controls in the first stage and 533 cases and 977 controls in the second 
stage). We selected 22 SNPs that showed P-values smaller than 10(-4) in the 
first stage and tested them for association in the second stage. The 
meta-analysis combining the first and second stages identified an SNP, rs577948, 
at chromosome 11q24.1, which was associated with the disease (P = 2.22x10(-7) 
and OR of 1.37 with 95% confidence interval: 1.21-1.54). Two genes, BLID and 
LOC399959, were identified within a 200-kb DNA encompassing rs577948. RT-PCR 
analysis demonstrated that both genes were expressed in human retinal tissue. 
Our results strongly suggest that the region at 11q24.1 is a novel 
susceptibility locus for pathological myopia in Japanese.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000660
PMCID: PMC2735651
PMID: 19779542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.