1. Neurobiol Aging. 2011 Aug;32(8):1409-19. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.08.012. Epub 2009 Sep 22.

Expression of the HFE allelic variant H63D in SH-SY5Y cells affects tau 
phosphorylation at serine residues.

Hall EC 2nd(1), Lee SY, Mairuae N, Simmons Z, Connor JR.

Author information:
(1)George M. Leader Family Laboratory, Department of Neurosurgery, Pennsylvania 
State University College of Medicine/Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, 
PA 17033, USA.

A number of genetic association studies have appeared that address HFE gene 
variants in neurodegenerative disorders. However, the cellular impact of HFE in 
the nervous system has received little attention. To begin to address the role 
of the HFE allelic variants on cellular events associated with 
neurodegeneration, we examined the hypothesis that HFE polymorphisms are 
associated with alterations in tau phosphorylation in a human neuroblastoma cell 
line (SH-SY5Y). The results show that in a cell culture model, the H63D allele 
is associated with increased tau phosphorylation. The mechanisms responsible for 
these changes appear related to increased glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3β 
activity. GSK-3β activity is up-regulated in the cells expressing H63D HFE and 
can be modified by the addition of iron or treatment with an iron chelator in 
SH-SY5Y cells expressing wild-type HFE. Oxidative stress, also associated with 
elevated cellular iron, is associated with increased tau phosphorylation at the 
same sites as seen in H63D cells and treatment with Trolox, an anti-oxidant, 
lowered tau phosphorylation. These results suggest H63D HFE increases tau 
phosphorylation via GSK-3β activity and iron-mediated oxidative stress.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.08.012
PMID: 19775775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]