1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Oct;5(10):e1000613. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000613. Epub 
2009 Oct 2.

HIV-1 Vpr triggers natural killer cell-mediated lysis of infected cells through 
activation of the ATR-mediated DNA damage response.

Ward J(1), Davis Z, DeHart J, Zimmerman E, Bosque A, Brunetta E, Mavilio D, 
Planelles V, Barker E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, State University of New York, 
Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York, United States of America.

Natural killer (NK) cells are stimulated by ligands on virus-infected cells. We 
have recently demonstrated that NK cells respond to human immunodeficiency virus 
type-1 (HIV-1)-infected autologous T-cells, in part, through the recognition of 
ligands for the NK cell activating receptor NKG2D on the surface of the infected 
cells. Uninfected primary CD4(pos) T-cell blasts express little, if any, NKG2D 
ligands. In the present study we determined the mechanism through which ligands 
for NKG2D are induced on HIV-1-infected cells. Our studies reveal that 
expression of vpr is necessary and sufficient to elicit the expression of NKG2D 
ligands in the context of HIV-1 infection. Vpr specifically induces surface 
expression of the unique-long 16 binding proteins (ULBP)-1 and ULBP-2, but not 
ULBP-3, MHC class I-related chain molecules (MIC)-A or MIC-B. In these studies 
we also demonstrated that Vpr increases the level of ULBP-1 and ULBP-2 mRNA in 
primary CD4(pos) T-cell blasts. The presence of ULBP-1 and ULBP-2 on HIV-1 
infected cells is dependent on the ability of Vpr to associate with a protein 
complex know as Cullin 4a (Cul4a)/damaged DNA binding protein 1 (DDB1) and 
Cul4a-associated factor-1(DCAF-1) E3 ubiquitin ligase (Cul4a(DCAF-1)). ULBP-1 
and -2 expression by Vpr is also dependent on activation of the DNA damage 
sensor, ataxia telangiectasia and rad-3-related kinase (ATR). When T-cell blasts 
are infected with a vpr-deficient HIV-1, NK cells are impaired in killing the 
infected cells. Thus, HIV-1 Vpr actively triggers the expression of the ligands 
to the NK cell activation receptor.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000613
PMCID: PMC2747015
PMID: 19798433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.