1. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2010 Feb;51(2):180-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-7610.2009.02177.x. Epub 2009 Oct 7.

Chronic and acute stress, gender, and serotonin transporter gene-environment 
interactions predicting depression symptoms in youth.

Hammen C(1), Brennan PA, Keenan-Miller D, Hazel NA, Najman JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California-Los Angeles, CA 90095, 
USA. Hammen@psych.ucla.edu

BACKGROUND: Many recent studies of serotonin transporter gene by environment 
effects predicting depression have used stress assessments with undefined or 
poor psychometric methods, possibly contributing to wide variation in findings. 
The present study attempted to distinguish between effects of acute and chronic 
stress to predict depressive symptoms at age 20 among 346 youth varying in 
polymorphisms of the 5HTT gene who had been assessed at ages 15 and 20.
METHODS: Interview measures assessed major acute life events between 15 and 19, 
and multiple interviews and questionnaires with youths and their parents at 
youth age 15 provided an index of chronic family stress. Lg alleles were 
reclassified as S.
RESULTS: Chronic family stress at age 15 predicted higher depression scores at 
20 among those with one or two S alleles, and the effects of genetic moderation 
were significant only for females. Gene-environment interactions with acute 
stress were nonsignificant.
CONCLUSIONS: Careful measurement and separation of the effects of chronic and 
acute stress, and gender, are encouraged in the study of mechanisms of the 
stress-depression association.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2009.02177.x
PMCID: PMC2883453
PMID: 19811586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflicts of 
interest to declare.