1. J Nutr. 2009 Dec;139(12):2315-21. doi: 10.3945/jn.109.109710. Epub 2009 Oct 7.

Body mass index is an important determinant of methylation biomarkers in women 
of reproductive ages.

van Driel LM(1), Eijkemans MJ, de Jonge R, de Vries JH, van Meurs JB, Steegers 
EA, Steegers-Theunissen RP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Obstetrics and Prenatal 
Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

B vitamin deficiencies lead to moderate hyperhomocysteinemia, which has been 
associated with health and disease. However, concomitant derangements in 
cellular methylation, reflected by altered plasma S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) or 
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) concentrations, may be the primary cause. 
Therefore, we identified determinants of homocysteine, SAM, and SAH 
concentrations in 336 women, aged 20-48 y, as part of a large study focusing on 
risk factors for reproductive disorders. Blood was obtained to determine plasma 
SAM, SAH, and total homocysteine (tHcy), serum vitamin B-12 and folate, RBC 
folate concentrations, and the related single nucleotide polymorphisms 
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677C > T and 1298A > C, 
methionine synthase reductase (MTRR) 66A > G, and nicotinamide 
N-methyltransferase IVS1-151G > A. Questionnaires provided information on 
demographics, lifestyles, and nutrient intakes. Correlation coefficients were 
calculated and multivariable associations were assessed with a general linear 
model. Serum folate was positively correlated with SAM concentrations (r = 
0.159; P = 0.004). Folate and vitamin B-12 were not correlated with SAH 
concentrations or the SAM:SAH ratio but were inversely correlated with tHcy 
concentrations (serum folate r = -0.324; RBC folate r = -0.294; vitamin B-12 r = 
-0.307; P < 0.01). From the multivariable analysis, BMI was the strongest 
determinant of SAM (standardized beta = 19.145; P < 0.001) and SAH 
concentrations (standardized beta = 3.241; P = 0.010). MTHFR 677TT (standardized 
beta = 0.195; P = 0.001), B vitamin supplement use (standardized beta = -0.156; 
P < 0.001) and dietary protein intake (standardized beta = -0.011; P < 0.001) 
were the strongest determinants of tHcy concentrations. Thus, the determinants 
of SAM and SAH differ from those of tHcy concentrations. Given that BMI was a 
strong determinant of SAM concentrations, it should be included in future 
studies on cellular methylation.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.109.109710
PMID: 19812220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]