1. J Nutr. 2009 Dec;139(12):2301-8. doi: 10.3945/jn.109.109900. Epub 2009 Oct 14.

Apolipoprotein A5 polymorphisms interact with total dietary fat intake in 
association with markers of metabolic syndrome in Puerto Rican older adults.

Mattei J(1), Demissie S, Tucker KL, Ordovas JM.

Author information:
(1)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Friedman School of 
Nutrition Science and Policy, Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

APOA5 -1131T > C and S19W single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) have been 
consistently associated with plasma lipid concentration and metabolic syndrome 
(MetS), alone and in modulation by dietary factors. Puerto Ricans have a high 
prevalence of metabolic conditions and high minor allele frequency for these 
SNP, suggesting a possible role in disease for this population. We aimed to 
determine the association of APOA5 -1131T > C and S19W with plasma lipids and 
markers of MetS, alone and in interaction with total fat intake, as a percent of 
total energy intake, in Puerto Ricans. Anthropometric and demographic data, FFQ, 
and blood samples were collected at baseline from participants in the Boston 
Puerto Rican Health Study (n = 802, 45-75 y). APOA5 S19W was associated with 
plasma HDL cholesterol (HDL-C) (P = 0.044); minor allele carriers had lower 
HDL-C [1.12 +/- 0.03 (mean +/- SE)] than those with the common variant (1.18 +/- 
0.01 mmol/L), even after adjustment for plasma triglycerides (TG) (P = 0.012). 
Neither polymorphism was associated with TG or other lipids. Interaction of the 
-1131T > C SNP with total fat energy intake was observed for plasma TG (P = 
0.032) and total cholesterol (P = 0.034). APOA5 S19W interacted with total fat 
intake in association with systolic (P = 0.002) and diastolic (P = 0.007) blood 
pressure. Neither SNP was associated with MetS in the overall analysis or after 
stratifying by total energy intake as fat. In conclusion, Puerto Ricans present 
a distinctive lipid profile in association with APOA5 polymorphisms. Dietary fat 
intake seems to modulate these associations. The results contribute to the 
understanding of health disparities in this population.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.109.109900
PMCID: PMC2777477
PMID: 19828688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]