1. Cell Mol Bioeng. 2009 Mar 1;2(1):57-65. doi: 10.1007/s12195-009-0050-1.

Modulation of elasticity in functionally distinct domains of the tropomyosin 
coiled-coil.

Lakkaraju SK(1), Hwang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station 
TX 77843 Tel.: +1-979-458-0178, , hwm@tamu.edu.

Alpha-helical coiled-coils are common protein structural motifs. Whereas vast 
information is available regarding their structure, folding, and stability, far 
less is known about their elastic properties, even though they play mechanical 
roles in many cases such as tropomyosin in muscle contraction or neck stalks of 
kinesin or myosin motor proteins. Using computer simulations, we characterized 
elastic properties of coiled-coils, either globally or locally. Global bending 
stiffness of standard leucine zipper coiled-coils was calculated using normal 
mode analysis. Mutations in hydrophobic residues involved in the knob-into-hole 
interface between the two alpha-helices affect elasticity significantly, whereas 
charged side chains forming inter-helical salt bridges do not. This suggests 
that coiled-coils with less regular heptad periodicity may have regional 
variations in flexibility. We show this by the flexibility map of tropomyosin, 
which was constructed by a local fluctuation analysis. Overall, flexibility 
varies by more than twofold and increases towards the C-terminal region of the 
molecule. Describing the coiled-coil as a twisted tape, it is generally more 
flexible in the splay bending than in the bending of the broad face. Actin 
binding sites in alpha zones show local rigidity minima. Broken core regions due 
to acidic residues at the hydrophobic face such as the Asp137 and the Glu218 are 
found to be the most labile with moduli for splay and broad face bending as 70 
nm and 116 nm respectively. Such variation in flexibility could be relevant to 
the tropomyosin function, especially for moving across the non-uniform surface 
of F-actin to regulate myosin binding.

DOI: 10.1007/s12195-009-0050-1
PMCID: PMC2760843
PMID: 19830262