1. Hematology. 2009 Oct;14(5):290-6. doi: 10.1179/102453309X439845.

Molecular variants and clinical importance of beta-thalassaemia traits found in 
the state of Orissa, India.

Nishank SS(1), Ranjit M, Kar SK, Chhotray GP.

Author information:
(1)Regional Medical Research Centre, Indian Council of Medical Research, 
Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar-751023, Orissa, India. nishank75@yahoo.com

Prevention of beta thalassaemia implies knowledge of the molecular spectrum 
occurring in the population at risk. This knowledge is necessary, especially 
when a prevention protocol is applied to a multiethnic population. For this 
purpose, we carried out molecular analysis of 431 beta thalassaemia subjects 
belonging to tribal (aboriginal) and non-tribal communities of Orissa, a part of 
peninsular India and found six types of mutation (four previously unreported and 
two reported). Molecular analysis of beta gene mutation showed that out of 431 
beta thalassaemia cases (265 beta thalassaemia traits, 64 beta thalassaemia 
major, 47 haemoglobin E-beta thalassaemia, 55 haemoglobin S-beta thalassaemia 
cases), 71% of cases (n=306) showed the IVS I-5(G-->C) mutation, 12% of cases 
(n=52) showed FS 41/42(-CTTT), 7% of cases (n=30) showed CD 15(G-->A), 4.8% of 
cases (n=21) showed CD 30 (G-->C), 3% of cases (n=13) showed FS 8/9 (+G), and 2% 
of cases (n=9) showed IVSI-1(G-->T). The tribal populations possess only the IVS 
I-5(G-->C) mutation whereas the non-tribal groups possess the FS 41/42(-CTTT), 
FS 8/9 (+G), IVS I-1(G-->T), CD30(G-->C) and IVS I-5(G-->C) mutations. Among the 
non-tribal communities, Muslims did not have the IVS I-1 (G-->T) mutation. 
Clinically, anaemia was mild to moderate in beta thalassaemia trait and was 
found to be associated with the majority of abnormalities such as pyrexial 
episodes, fatigue, headache, lethargy and pallor. However, there were no 
differences in the incidence of clinical abnormalities between tribal and 
non-tribal populations and also among the different molecular variants of beta 
gene. This is the first report from Orissa on the prevalence of different 
molecular variants of beta thalassaemia. The clinical presentation of beta 
thalassaemia trait cases and their variation from other population have been 
discussed with reference to the different genetic variants.

DOI: 10.1179/102453309X439845
PMID: 19843386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]