1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 3;106(44):18545-50. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0907454106. Epub 2009 Oct 21.

Bothnia dystrophy is caused by domino-like rearrangements in cellular 
retinaldehyde-binding protein mutant R234W.

He X(1), Lobsiger J, Stocker A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, 
Switzerland.

Cellular retinaldehyde-binding protein (CRALBP) is essential for mammalian 
vision by routing 11-cis-retinoids for the conversion of photobleached opsin 
molecules into photosensitive visual pigments. The arginine-to-tryptophan 
missense mutation in position 234 (R234W) in the human gene RLBP1 encoding 
CRALBP compromises visual pigment regeneration and is associated with Bothnia 
dystrophy. Here we report the crystal structures of both wild-type human CRALBP 
and of its mutant R234W as binary complexes complemented with the endogenous 
ligand 11-cis-retinal, at 3.0 and 1.7 A resolution, respectively. Our structural 
model of wild-type CRALBP locates R234 to a positively charged cleft at a 
distance of 15 A from the hydrophobic core sequestering 11-cis-retinal. The 
R234W structural model reveals burial of W234 and loss of dianion-binding 
interactions within the cleft with physiological implications for membrane 
docking. The burial of W234 is accompanied by a cascade of side-chain flips that 
effect the intrusion of the side-chain of I238 into the ligand-binding cavity. 
As consequence of the intrusion, R234W displays 5-fold increased resistance to 
light-induced photoisomerization relative to wild-type CRALBP, indicating 
tighter binding to 11-cis-retinal. Overall, our results reveal an unanticipated 
domino-like structural transition causing Bothnia-type retinal dystrophy by the 
impaired release of 11-cis-retinal from R234W.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907454106
PMCID: PMC2774026
PMID: 19846785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.