1. Genes Immun. 2010 Jun;11(4):343-50. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.81. Epub 2009 Oct
29.

Multiple sclerosis susceptibility alleles in African Americans.

Johnson BA(1), Wang J, Taylor EM, Caillier SJ, Herbert J, Khan OA, Cross AH, De 
Jager PL, Gourraud PA, Cree BC, Hauser SL, Oksenberg JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, 
USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune demyelinating disease characterized by 
complex genetics and multifaceted gene-environment interactions. Compared to 
whites, African Americans have a lower risk for developing MS, but African 
Americans with MS have a greater risk of disability. These differences between 
African Americans and whites may represent differences in genetic susceptibility 
and/or environmental factors. SNPs from 12 candidate genes have recently been 
identified and validated with MS risk in white populations. We performed a 
replication study using 918 cases and 656 unrelated controls to test whether 
these candidate genes are also associated with MS risk in African Americans. 
CD6, CLEC16a, EVI5, GPC5, and TYK2 contained SNPs that are associated with MS 
risk in the African American data set. EVI5 showed the strongest association 
outside the major histocompatibility complex (rs10735781, OR=1.233, 95% 
CI=1.06-1.43, P-value=0.006). In addition, RGS1 seems to affect age of onset 
whereas TNFRSF1A seems to be associated with disease progression. None of the 
tested variants showed results that were statistically inconsistent with the 
effects established in whites. The results are consistent with shared disease 
genetic mechanisms among individuals of European and African ancestry.

DOI: 10.1038/gene.2009.81
PMCID: PMC2880217
PMID: 19865102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None of the authors have a 
conflict of interest.