1. Cell Signal. 2010 Mar;22(3):366-76. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.10.005.

RGS14 is a multifunctional scaffold that integrates G protein and Ras/Raf 
MAPkinase signalling pathways.

Shu FJ(1), Ramineni S, Hepler JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30322-3090, USA.

MAPkinase signalling is essential for cell growth, differentiation and cell 
physiology. G proteins and tyrosine kinase receptors each modulate MAPkinase 
signalling through distinct pathways. We report here that RGS14 is an integrator 
of G protein and MAPKinase signalling pathways. RGS14 contains a GPR/GoLoco (GL) 
domain that forms a stable complex with inactive Gialpha1/3-GDP, and a tandem 
(R1, R2) Ras binding domain (RBD). We find that RGS14 binds and regulates the 
subcellular localization and activities of H-Ras and Raf kinases in cells. 
Activated H-Ras binds RGS14 at the R1 RBD to form a stable complex at cell 
membranes. RGS14 also co-localizes with and forms a complex with Raf kinases in 
cells. The regulatory region of Raf-1 binds the RBD region of RGS14, and H-Ras 
and Raf each facilitate one another's binding to RGS14. RGS14 selectively 
inhibits PDGF-, but not EGF- or serum-stimulated Erk phosphorylation. This 
inhibition is dependent on H-Ras binding to RGS14 and is reversed by 
co-expression of Gialpha1, which binds and recruits RGS14 to the plasma 
membrane. Gialpha1 binding to RGS14 inhibits Raf binding, indicating that 
Gialpha1 and Raf binding to RGS14 are mutually exclusive. Taken together, these 
findings indicate that RGS14 is a newly appreciated integrator of G protein and 
Ras/Raf signalling pathways.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.10.005
PMCID: PMC2795083
PMID: 19878719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]