1. Korean J Physiol Pharmacol. 2009 Jun;13(3):215-20. doi: 
10.4196/kjpp.2009.13.3.215. Epub 2009 Jun 30.

Block of HERG k channel by classic histamine h(1) receptor antagonist 
chlorpheniramine.

Hong HK(1), Jo SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Kangwon 
National University College of Medicine, Chuncheon 200-701, Korea.

Chlorpheniramine is a potent first-generation histamine H(1) receptor antagonist 
that can increase action potential duration and induce QT prolongation in 
several animal models. Since block of cardiac human ether-a-go-go-related gene 
(hERG) channels is one of leading causes of acquired long QT syndrome, we 
investigated the acute effects of chlorpheniramine on hERG channels to determine 
the electrophysiological basis for its proarrhythmic potential. We examined the 
effects of chlorpheniramine on the hERG channels expressed in Xenopus oocytes 
using two-microelectrode voltage-clamp techniques. Chlorpheniramine induced a 
concentration-dependent decrease of the current amplitude at the end of the 
voltage steps and hERG tail currents. The IC(50) of chlorpheniramine-dependent 
hERG block in Xenopus oocytes decreased progressively relative to the degree of 
depolarization. Chlorpheniramine affected the channels in the activated and 
inactivated states but not in the closed states. The S6 domain mutations Y652A 
and F656A partially attenuated (Y652A) or abolished (F656A) the hERG current 
block. These results suggest that the H(1) antihistamine, chlorpheniramine is a 
blocker of the hERG channels, providing a molecular mechanism for the 
drug-induced arrhythmogenic side effects.

DOI: 10.4196/kjpp.2009.13.3.215
PMCID: PMC2766741
PMID: 19885040