1. Futur HIV Ther. 2008 Nov 1;2(6):525-537. doi: 10.2217/17469600.2.6.525.

Etravirine: a second-generation NNRTI for treatment-experienced adults with 
resistant HIV-1 infection.

Minuto JJ(1), Haubrich R.

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Diego, Division of Infectious Diseases, 
Antiviral Research Center, 150 Washington Street, Suite 100, San Diego, CA 
92103, USA, Tel.: +1 619 543 8080; ; jminuto@ucsd.edu.

Etravirine, a second-generation non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor 
(NNRTI), was approved in the USA in January, 2008, with approval in Europe 
expected later this year. It is dosed at 200 mg (two 100 mg tablets) twice daily 
foll owing a meal. It is approved for treatment of HIV-1 infection in adults 
failing a stable antiretroviral regimen with resistance to other NNRTIs and 
other antiretroviral agents. Etravirine is active against HIV with single 
mutations in the reverse transcriptase (e.g., K103N) that confer class 
resistance to first-generation NNRTIs. Clinical efficacy in Phase III trials has 
been demonstrated for up to 48 weeks of follow-up. In these Phase III trials, 
rash was the only adverse event that was significantly more prevalent with 
etravirine than with placebo. Etravirine has a tolerability and safety profile 
comparable to placebo with the exception of rash. Rash was generally grade 1 or 
2, was not associated with prior NNRTI-related rash, was more common in women 
than in men, appeared a median of 12 days after treatment initiation and 
resolved spontaneously with continued therapy. Etravirine is the first agent in 
the NNRTI class that can be used for HIV-1 virus with resistance to other NNRTIs 
owing to a higher genetic barrier to resistance.

DOI: 10.2217/17469600.2.6.525
PMCID: PMC2770189
PMID: 19881888