1. J Clin Lab Anal. 2009;23(6):387-93. doi: 10.1002/jcla.20346.

CXCL12 rs1801157 polymorphism in patients with breast cancer, Hodgkin's 
lymphoma, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

de Oliveira KB(1), Oda JM, Voltarelli JC, Nasser TF, Ono MA, Fujita TC, Matsuo 
T, Watanabe MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathological Sciences, Biological Sciences Center, Londrina 
State University, Londrina, Paran√°, Brazil.

Chemokines and their receptors regulate the trafficking of immune cells during 
their development, inflammation, and tissue repair. The single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) rs1801157 (previously known as CXCL12-A/ stromal cell-derived 
factor-1 (SDF1)-3'A) in CXCL12/SDF1 gene was assessed in breast cancer, 
Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL), and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), since the chemokine 
CXCL12, previously known as SDF1, and its receptor CXCR4 regulate leukocyte 
trafficking and many essential biological processes, including tumor growth, 
angiogenesis, and metastasis of different types of tumors. Genotyping was 
performed by PCR-RFLP (polymerase chain reaction followed by restriction 
fragment length polymorphism) using a restriction enzyme HpaII cleavage. No 
significant difference was observed in genotype distribution between breast 
cancer patients (GG: 57.3%; GA: 39.8%; AA: 2.9%) and healthy female controls 
(GG: 62.9%; GA: 33%; AA: 4.1%) nor between HL patients (GG: 61.1%; GA:27.8%; AA: 
11.1%) and healthy controls (GG: 65.6%; GA: 28.9%; AA: 5.5%), whereas a 
significant difference was observed in genotype distribution between NHL 
patients (GG: 51.4%; GA: 47.1%; AA: 1.5%) and healthy controls (GG: 65.6%; GA: 
28.9%; AA: 5.5%). Further studies will be necessary to elucidate the cancer 
chemokine network. However, this study suggests that CXCL12 rs1801157 
polymorphism may have important implications in the pathogenesis of NHL.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.20346
PMCID: PMC6649101
PMID: 19927352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]