1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009 Dec 16;101(24):1725-9. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djp412.

Estrogen receptor-alpha phosphorylation at serine-118 and tamoxifen response in 
breast cancer.

Kok M(1), Holm-Wigerup C, Hauptmann M, Michalides R, St√•l O, Linn S, Landberg G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Therapy, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Feb 3;102(3):208.

Although estrogen receptor-alpha (ER) [corrected] is a marker used to identify 
breast cancer patients most likely to benefit from endocrine therapy, 
approximately 50% of ER-positive [corrected] breast carcinomas are resistant to 
tamoxifen. Preclinical studies have shown that phosphorylation of ER [corrected] 
at serine-118 (ER alpha S118-P) is required for tamoxifen-mediated inhibition of 
ER-induced [corrected] gene expression. We evaluated the association between 
recurrence-free survival after tamoxifen treatment and ER alpha S118-P 
expression by use of Cox proportional hazards regression. Data were from 239 
premenopausal patients with breast cancer who participated in a randomized trial 
of 2 years of adjuvant tamoxifen treatment vs no systemic treatment. ER alpha 
S118-P expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry and categorized by use of 
the Allred score (low expression = score of 0-6; high expression = score of 
7-8). All statistical tests were two-sided. Compared with systemically untreated 
patients, we found evidence of a benefit from adjuvant tamoxifen among patients 
whose tumors had high ER alpha S118-P expression (23.7 recurrences per 1000 
person-years versus 72.2 recurrences per 1000 person-years, hazard ratio [HR] of 
recurrence = 0.36, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.20 to 0.65) but not among 
patients whose tumors had low expression (51.0 recurrences per 1000 person-years 
versus 57.0 recurrences per 1000 person-years, HR of recurrence = 0.87, 95% CI = 
0.51 to 1.48), a statistically significant difference (P for interaction = 
.037). ER alpha 118-P was not associated with recurrence-free survival among 
untreated patients. Thus, ER alpha S118-P expression appears to be associated 
with response to tamoxifen. [corrected]

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djp412
PMID: 19940281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]