1. BMC Cell Biol. 2009 Nov 30;10:84. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-10-84.

Aberrant trafficking of NSCLC-associated EGFR mutants through the endocytic 
recycling pathway promotes interaction with Src.

Chung BM(1), Raja SM, Clubb RJ, Tu C, George M, Band V, Band H.

Author information:
(1)Eppley Institute for Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, 985950 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5950, USA. 
chungj@unmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) controls a wide range of 
cellular processes, and altered EGFR signaling contributes to human cancer. EGFR 
kinase domain mutants found in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are 
constitutively active, a trait critical for cell transformation through 
activation of downstream pathways. Endocytic trafficking of EGFR is a major 
regulatory mechanism as ligand-induced lysosomal degradation results in 
termination of signaling. While numerous studies have examined mutant EGFR 
signaling, the endocytic traffic of mutant EGFR within the NSCLC milieu remains 
less clear.
RESULTS: This study shows that mutant EGFRs in NSCLC cell lines are 
constitutively endocytosed as shown by their colocalization with the 
early/recycling endosomal marker transferrin and the late endosomal/lysosomal 
marker LAMP1. Notably, mutant EGFRs, but not the wild-type EGFR, show a 
perinuclear accumulation and colocalization with recycling endosomal markers 
such as Rab11 and EHD1 upon treatment of cells with endocytic recycling 
inhibitor monensin, suggesting that mutant EGFRs preferentially traffic through 
the endocytic recycling compartments. Importantly, monensin treatment enhanced 
the mutant EGFR association and colocalization with Src, indicating that 
aberrant transit through the endocytic recycling compartment promotes mutant 
EGFR-Src association.
CONCLUSION: The findings presented in this study show that mutant EGFRs undergo 
aberrant traffic into the endocytic recycling compartment which allows mutant 
EGFRs to engage in a preferential interaction with Src, a critical partner for 
EGFR-mediated oncogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2121-10-84
PMCID: PMC2790444
PMID: 19948031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]