1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Apr;51(4):2067-76. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4567. 
Epub 2009 Dec 3.

Adenoviral gene transfer of active human transforming growth factor-{beta}2 
elevates intraocular pressure and reduces outflow facility in rodent eyes.

Shepard AR(1), Millar JC, Pang IH, Jacobson N, Wang WH, Clark AF.

Author information:
(1)Alcon Research, Ltd., Fort Worth, Texas, USA. allan.shepard@alconlabs.com

Purpose. Glaucoma is a leading cause worldwide of blindness and visual 
impairment. Transforming growth factor-beta2 (TGFbeta2) has been implicated in 
the pathogenesis of primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) based on elevated levels 
in glaucomatous aqueous humor and its ability to induce extracellular matrix 
(ECM) remodeling in the trabecular meshwork (TM). The goal of this study was to 
generate a rodent model of POAG using viral gene transfer of human TGFbeta2. 
Methods. Latent (hTGFbeta2(WT)) or active (C226S, C228S; hTGFbeta2(226/228)) 
TGFbeta2-encoding cDNA was cloned into the pac.Ad5.CMV.K-N.pA shuttle vector for 
generation of replication-deficient adenovirus. Empty adenovirus 
(Ad5.CMV.K-N.pA) was used as a control. Adenoviral expression of active and 
total TGFbeta2 was assayed in vitro by the transduction of Chinese hamster ovary 
and trabecular meshwork cells. BALB/cJ mice or Wistar rats were injected either 
intracamerally or intravitreally with the adenovectors and assessed for changes 
in intraocular pressure (IOP) using the rebound tonometer. At peak IOP, aqueous 
outflow facility and total TGFbeta2 levels in aqueous humor were measured. Mouse 
eye morphology was assessed by hematoxylin and eosin staining. Results. 
Adenoviral gene transfer of hTGFbeta2(226/228), but not hTGFbeta2(WT), to the 
rodent eye elevated IOP in rat (43%, P < 0.001) and mouse (110%, P < 0.001) and 
reduced aqueous humor outflow facility in the mouse. The TGFbeta2-induced ocular 
hypertension correlated with anterior segment TGFbeta2 expression levels (P < 
0.0001). Conclusions. The adenoviral TGFbeta2 rodent model displays the glaucoma 
risk factors of elevated IOP and decreased aqueous outflow facility and may 
potentially serve as a model for studying glaucoma.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.09-4567
PMID: 19959644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]