1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 12;285(7):4798-805. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.078535. Epub 
2009 Dec 3.

Potassium channel silencing by constitutive endocytosis and intracellular 
sequestration.

Feliciangeli S(1), Tardy MP, Sandoz G, Chatelain FC, Warth R, Barhanin J, 
Bendahhou S, Lesage F.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, and Université de 
Nice Sophia-Antipolis, Sophia-Antipolis, 06560 Valbonne, France.

Tandem of P domains in a weak inwardly rectifying K(+) channel 1 (TWIK1) is a 
K(+) channel that produces unusually low levels of current. Replacement of 
lysine 274 by a glutamic acid (K274E) is associated with stronger currents. This 
mutation would prevent conjugation of a small ubiquitin modifier peptide to 
Lys-274, a mechanism proposed to be responsible for channel silencing. However, 
we found no biochemical evidence of TWIK1 sumoylation, and we showed that the 
conservative change K274R did not increase current, suggesting that K274E 
modifies TWIK1 gating through a charge effect. Now we rule out an eventual 
effect of K274E on TWIK1 trafficking, and we provide convincing evidence that 
TWIK1 silencing results from its rapid retrieval from the cell surface. TWIK1 is 
internalized via a dynamin-dependent mechanism and addressed to the recycling 
endosomal compartment. Mutation of a diisoleucine repeat located in its 
cytoplasmic C terminus (I293A,I294A) stabilizes TWIK1 at the plasma membrane, 
resulting in robust currents. The effects of I293A,I294A on channel trafficking 
and of K274E on channel activity are cumulative, promoting even more currents. 
Activation of serotoninergic receptor 5-HT(1)R or adrenoreceptor alpha2A-AR 
stimulates TWIK1 but has no effect on TWIK1I293A,I294A, suggesting that G(i) 
protein activation is a physiological signal for increasing the number of active 
channels at the plasma membrane.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.078535
PMCID: PMC2836085
PMID: 19959478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]