1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Feb;30(2):353-9. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.196402. Epub 2009 Dec 3.

Identification of two common variants contributing to serum apolipoprotein B 
levels in Mexicans.

Weissglas-Volkov D(1), Plaisier CL, Huertas-Vazquez A, Cruz-Bautista I, 
Ria√±o-Barros D, Herrera-Hernandez M, Riba L, Cantor RM, Sinsheimer JS, 
Aguilar-Salinas CA, Tusie-Luna T, Pajukanta P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, Calif 90095-7088, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Although the Mexican population has a high 
predisposition to dyslipidemias and premature coronary artery disease, this 
population is underinvestigated for the genetic factors conferring the high 
susceptibility. This study attempted to determine these genetic factors.
METHODS AND RESULTS: First, we investigated apolipoprotein B (apoB) levels in 
Mexican extended families with familial combined hyperlipidemia using a two-step 
testing strategy. In the screening step, we screened 5721 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) for linkage signals with apoB. In the test step, we 
analyzed the 130 SNPs residing in regions of suggestive linkage signals for 
association with apoB. We identified significant associations with two SNPs (ie, 
rs1424032 [P=6.07x10(-6)] and rs1349411 [P=2.72x10(-4)]) that surpassed the 
significance level for the number of tests performed in the test step 
(P<3.84x10(-4)). Second, these SNPs were tested for replication in Mexican 
hyperlipidemic case-control samples. The same risk alleles as in the families 
with familial combined hyperlipidemia were significantly associated (P<0.05) 
with apoB in the case-control samples. The rs1349411 resides near the apoB 
messenger RNA editing enzyme (APOBEC1) involved in the processing of APOB 
messenger RNA in the small intestine. The rs1424032 resides in a highly 
conserved noncoding region predicted to function as a regulatory element.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified two novel variants, rs1349411 and rs1424032, for 
serum apoB levels in Mexicans.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.196402
PMCID: PMC2809779
PMID: 19965785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures No conflicts to disclose