1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Dec 22;106(51):21777-82. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0902174106. Epub 2009 Dec 9.

Chromogranin B P413L variant as risk factor and modifier of disease onset for 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Gros-Louis F(1), Andersen PM, Dupre N, Urushitani M, Dion P, Souchon F, D'Amour 
M, Camu W, Meininger V, Bouchard JP, Rouleau GA, Julien JP.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, 
Département de psychiatrie et neurosciences, Université Laval, Ste-Foy, QC, 
Canada G1V 4G2.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 11;107(19):E77; author reply E78. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1002512107.

Recently, chromogranins were reported to interact specifically with mutant forms 
of superoxide dismutase that are linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). 
This interaction led us to analyze the frequencies of sequence variants of the 
CHGB gene in ALS patients and matched controls from three different countries. 
Of particular interest was the finding of the P413L CHGB variant present in 10% 
of ALS patients (n = 705) as compared to 4.5% in controls (n = 751), conferring 
a 2.2-fold greater relative risk to develop the disease (P < 0.0001). This 
effect was mainly contributed by the samples of French origin that yielded a 
frequency of the P413L variation at 17% in ALS (n = 289) and 5% in controls (n = 
448), conferring a 3.3-fold greater risk to develop ALS. Furthermore, the P413L 
CHGB variant is associated with an earlier age of onset by almost a decade in 
both sporadic ALS and familial ALS cases. Genetic variation influencing age of 
onset in ALS had not previously been reported. Expression of fusion CHGB-EGFP 
constructs in SHSY-5Y cells revealed that the P413L variation can cause 
defective sorting of CHGB into secretory granules. The finding that CHGB may act 
as a susceptibility gene and modifier of onset in ALS is consistent with the 
emerging view that dysfunction of the secretory pathway may contribute to 
increased vulnerability of motor neurons.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0902174106
PMCID: PMC2799865
PMID: 20007371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.