1. Blood. 2010 Feb 11;115(6):1238-46. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-222869. Epub
2009  Dec 10.

Ras-induced reactive oxygen species promote growth factor-independent 
proliferation in human CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Hole PS(1), Pearn L, Tonks AJ, James PE, Burnett AK, Darley RL, Tonks A.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Haematology, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, 
UK.

Excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a feature of human 
malignancy and is often triggered by activation of oncogenes such as activated 
Ras. ROS act as second messengers and can influence a variety of cellular 
process including growth factor responses and cell survival. We have examined 
the contribution of ROS production to the effects of N-Ras(G12D) and H-Ras(G12V) 
on normal human CD34(+) progenitor cells. Activated Ras strongly up-regulated 
the production of both superoxide and hydrogen peroxide through the stimulation 
of NADPH oxidase (NOX) activity, without affecting the expression of endogenous 
antioxidants or the production of mitochondrially derived ROS. Activated Ras 
also promoted both the survival and the growth factor-independent proliferation 
of CD34(+) cells. Using oxidase inhibitors and antioxidants, we found that 
excessive ROS production by these cells did not contribute to their enhanced 
survival; rather, ROS promoted their growth factor-independent proliferation. 
Although Ras-induced ROS production specifically activated the p38(MAPK) 
oxidative stress response, this failed to induce expression of the cell-cycle 
inhibitor, p16(INK4A); instead, ROS promoted the expression of D cyclins. These 
data are the first to show that excessive ROS production in the context of 
oncogene activation can promote proliferative responses in normal human 
hematopoietic progenitor cells.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-222869
PMID: 20007804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]