1. Neurogenetics. 2010 Jul;11(3):305-12. doi: 10.1007/s10048-009-0229-6. Epub
2009  Dec 15.

Analysis of exon dosage using MLPA in South African Parkinson's disease 
patients.

Keyser RJ(1), Lombard D, Veikondis R, Carr J, Bardien S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Stellenbosch, Tygerberg, Cape Town, South Africa. 
rowenak@sun.ac.za

Genomic rearrangements (exon dosage) are common mutations reported in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. In the present study, we aimed to investigate 
the prevalence of genomic rearrangements in 88 South African patients with 
predominantly early-onset PD (age-at-onset <or=50 years). The multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification method was used to detect exon dosage 
changes. Two commercially available probe kits, SALSA P051 and P052, were used 
and together the kits consisted of probes for exons of alpha-synuclein, parkin, 
PINK1, DJ-1, LRRK2, UCH-L1, ATP13A2, LPA, TNFRSF9, CAV2, CAV1, GCH1, and 
two-point mutations. We identified exonic rearrangements in parkin and 
alpha-synuclein in 8% of South African patients from different ethnic groups. 
One patient had a whole-gene triplication of alpha-synuclein; representing only 
the fourth family with this mutation reported to date. We found six patients 
with parkin mutations who had either heterozygous duplications and deletions, or 
homozygous deletions. A false positive result of an exonic deletion detected in 
one patient turned out to be homozygous point mutation (Y258X) in PINK1. No 
exonic rearrangements were found in four of the PD genes; LRRK2, PINK1, DJ-1, 
and ATP13A2. Mutations in parkin were the predominant genetic cause; however, 
the frequency of exon dosage in our study group is low compared with previous 
studies. This indicates the possible involvement of other as yet unidentified PD 
genes in the development of the disease in the South African population.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-009-0229-6
PMID: 20013014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]