1. BMC Microbiol. 2009 Dec 17;9:262. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-262.

Molecular and biochemical characterization of urease and survival of Yersinia 
enterocolitica biovar 1A in acidic pH in vitro.

Bhagat N(1), Virdi JS.

Author information:
(1)Microbial Pathogenicity Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, University of 
Delhi South Campus, Benito Juarez Road, New Delhi - 110 021, 
India.neeru_bhagat@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Yersinia enterocolitica, an important food- and water-borne enteric 
pathogen is represented by six biovars viz. 1A, 1B, 2, 3, 4 and 5. Despite the 
lack of recognized virulence determinants, some biovar 1A strains have been 
reported to produce disease symptoms resembling that produced by known 
pathogenic biovars (1B, 2-5). It is therefore imperative to identify 
determinants that might contribute to the pathogenicity of Y. enterocolitica 
biovar 1A strains. Y. enterocolitica invariably produces urease and the role of 
this enzyme in the virulence of biovar 1B and biovar 4 strains has been reported 
recently. The objective of this work was to study genetic organization of the 
urease (ure) gene complex of Y. enterocolitica biovar 1A, biochemical 
characterization of the urease, and the survival of these strains under acidic 
conditions in vitro.
RESULTS: The ure gene complex (ureABCEFGD) of Y. enterocolitica biovar 1A 
included three structural and four accessory genes, which were contiguous and 
was flanked by a urea transport (yut) gene on the 3' side. Differences were 
identified in ure gene complex of biovar 1A strain compared to biovar 1B and 4 
strains. This included a smaller ureB gene and larger intergenic regions between 
the structural genes. The crude urease preparation exhibited optimal pH and 
temperature of 5.5 and 65 degrees C respectively, and Michaelis-Menten kinetics 
with a Km of 1.7 +/- 0.4 mM urea and Vmax of 7.29 +/- 0.42 micromol of ammonia 
released/min/mg protein. The urease activity was dependent on growth temperature 
and growth phase of Y. enterocolitica biovar 1A, and the presence of nickel in 
the medium. The molecular mass of the enzyme was > 545 kDa and an isoelectric 
point of 5.2. The number of viable Y. enterocolitica biovar 1A decreased 
significantly when incubated at pH 2.5 for 2 h. However, no such decrease was 
observed at this pH in the presence of urea.
CONCLUSIONS: The ure gene cluster of biovar 1A strains though similar to biovar 
1B and 4 strains, exhibited important differences. The study also showed the 
ability of biovar 1A strains of Y. enterocolitica to survive at highly acidic pH 
in vitro in the presence of urea.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-262
PMCID: PMC2806259
PMID: 20017936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]