1. Mol Vis. 2009 Dec 10;15:2710-9.

Polymorphisms in the VEGFA and VEGFR-2 genes and neovascular age-related macular 
degeneration.

Fang AM(1), Lee AY, Kulkarni M, Osborn MP, Brantley MA Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

PURPOSE: Genetic factors influence an individual's risk for developing 
neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD), a leading cause of 
irreversible blindness. Previous studies on the potential genetic link between 
AMD and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a key regulator of 
angiogenesis and vascular permeability, have yielded conflicting results. In the 
present case-control association study, we aimed to determine whether VEGF or 
its main receptor tyrosine kinase VEGFR-2 is genetically associated with 
neovascular AMD.
METHODS: A total of 515 Caucasian patients with neovascular AMD and 253 
ethically-matched controls were genotyped for polymorphisms in the VEGFA and 
VEGFR-2 genes. A tagging single nucleotide polymorphism (tSNP) approach was 
employed to cover each gene plus two kilobases on each side, spanning the 
promoter and 3' untranslated regions. SNPs with a minimum allele frequency of 
10% were covered by seven tSNPs in VEGFA and 20 tSNPs in VEGFR-2. Two VEGFA SNPs 
previously linked with AMD, rs1413711 and rs3025039, were also analyzed.
RESULTS: The 29 VEGFA and VEGFR-2 SNPs analyzed in our cohort demonstrated no 
significant association with neovascular AMD. A single rare haplotype in the 
VEGFR-2 gene was associated with the presence of neovascular AMD (p=0.034).
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to investigate the association of VEGFR-2 
polymorphisms with AMD and evaluates VEGFA genetic variants in the largest 
neovascular AMD cohort to date. Despite the angiogenic and 
permeability-enhancing effects of VEGF/VEGFR-2 signaling, we found minimal 
evidence of a significant link between polymorphisms in the VEGFA and VEGFR-2 
genes and neovascular AMD.

PMCID: PMC2793900
PMID: 20019880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]