1. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Mar 3;41(1):78-81. doi: 
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00199.2009. Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Interaction between SNPs in the NRF2 gene and elite endurance performance.

Eynon N(1), Alves AJ, Sagiv M, Yamin C, Sagiv M, Meckel Y.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Life Sciences Division, Zinman 
College of Physical Education and Sport Sciences, Wingate Institute, Netanya, 
Israel. eynon@wincol.ac.il

Erratum in
    Physiol Genomics. 2010 Sep;42(1):78.

Comment in
    Physiol Genomics. 2011 Feb 24;43(4):187. doi: 
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00252.2010.

Nuclear respiratory factor 2 (NRF2), a member of the Cap-N-Collar family of 
transcription factors, plays an important role in the mitochondrial biogenesis, 
and variants of NRF2 gene have been associated with endurance performance. The 
aims of the present study were 1) to compare NRF2 A/C (rs12594956) and NRF2 C/T 
(rs8031031) genotype and allele frequencies between athletes of sports with 
different demands (endurance vs. sprinters) as well as between competitive 
levels (elite level vs. national level) and 2) to analyze the interaction of 
these two polymorphisms and its influence on the level of endurance performance. 
One hundred and fifty-five track and field athletes (74 endurance athletes and 
81 sprinters) and 240 nonathletic healthy individuals participated in this 
study. Endurance athletes presented a higher frequency of the AA (rs12594956) 
and CT (rs8031031) genotypes than sprinters and the control group, as well as 
higher A and T alleles, respectively. These differences did not appear between 
the sprinters and control subjects. The odds ratio for harboring the "optimal 
genotype" (NRF2 AA+ NRF2 CT) was 4.53 (95% confidence interval 1.23-16.6) in the 
whole cohort of endurance athletes and 6.55 (95% confidence interval 1.12-38.25) 
in elite-level endurance athletes, compared with control subjects and both 
levels of sprinters. In conclusion, our data indicate that the NRF2 A/C and NRF2 
C/T single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated, separately and in 
combination, with elite endurance athletes, which supports the notion that these 
specific gene variants might belong to a growing group of SNPs that are 
associated with endurance performance.

DOI: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00199.2009
PMID: 20028934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]