1. J Neurooncol. 2010 Aug;99(1):13-24. doi: 10.1007/s11060-009-0105-0. Epub 2010 
Jan 9.

Vascular gene expression patterns are conserved in primary and metastatic brain 
tumors.

Liu Y(1), Carson-Walter EB, Cooper A, Winans BN, Johnson MD, Walter KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Rochester, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 
670, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Malignant primary glial and secondary metastatic brain tumors represent distinct 
pathological entities. Nevertheless, both tumor types induce profound angiogenic 
responses in the host brain microvasculature that promote tumor growth. We 
hypothesized that primary and metastatic tumors induce similar microvascular 
changes that could function as conserved angiogenesis based therapeutic targets. 
We previously isolated glioma endothelial marker genes (GEMs) that were 
selectively upregulated in the microvasculature of proliferating glioblastomas. 
We sought to determine whether these genes were similarly induced in the 
microvasculature of metastatic brain tumors. RT-PCR and quantitative RT-PCR were 
used to screen expression levels of 20 candidate GEMs in primary and metastatic 
clinical brain tumor specimens. Differentially regulated GEMs were further 
evaluated by immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization to localize gene 
expression using clinical tissue microarrays. Thirteen GEMs were upregulated to 
a similar degree in both primary and metastatic brain tumors. Most of these 
genes localize to the cell surface (CXCR7, PV1) or extracellular matrix (COL1A1, 
COL3A1, COL4A1, COL6A2, MMP14, PXDN) and were selectively expressed by the 
microvasculature. The shared expression profile between primary and metastatic 
brain tumors suggests that the molecular pathways driving the angiogenic 
response are conserved, despite differences in the tumor cells themselves. 
Anti-angiogenic therapies currently in development for primary brain tumors may 
prove beneficial for brain metastases and vice versa.

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-009-0105-0
PMCID: PMC2904485
PMID: 20063114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]