1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 12;285(11):8383-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.094060. Epub 
2010 Jan 12.

A small molecule inhibits Akt through direct binding to Akt and preventing Akt 
membrane translocation.

Kim D(1), Sun M, He L, Zhou QH, Chen J, Sun XM, Bepler G, Sebti SM, Cheng JQ.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Molecular Oncology, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2016 Oct 21;291(43):22856. doi: 10.1074/jbc.A109.094060.

The Akt pathway is frequently hyperactivated in human cancer and functions as a 
cardinal nodal point for transducing extracellular and intracellular oncogenic 
signals and, thus, presents an exciting target for molecular therapeutics. Here 
we report the identification of a small molecule Akt/protein kinase B inhibitor, 
API-1. Although API-1 is neither an ATP competitor nor substrate mimetic, it 
binds to pleckstrin homology domain of Akt and blocks Akt membrane 
translocation. Furthermore, API-1 treatment of cancer cells results in 
inhibition of the kinase activities and phosphorylation levels of the three 
members of the Akt family. In contrast, API-1 had no effects on the activities 
of the upstream Akt activators, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, 
phosphatidylinositol-dependent kinase-1, and mTORC2. Notably, the kinase 
activity and phosphorylation (e.g. Thr(P)(308) and Ser(P)(473)) levels of 
constitutively active Akt, including a naturally occurring mutant AKT1-E17K, 
were inhibited by API-1. API-1 is selective for Akt and does not inhibit the 
activation of protein kinase C, serum and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase, 
protein kinase A, STAT3, ERK1/2, or JNK. The inhibition of Akt by API-1 resulted 
in induction of cell growth arrest and apoptosis selectively in human cancer 
cells that harbor constitutively activated Akt. Furthermore, API-1 inhibited 
tumor growth in nude mice of human cancer cells in which Akt is elevated but not 
of those cancer cells in which it is not. These data indicate that API-1 
directly inhibits Akt through binding to the Akt pleckstrin homology domain and 
blocking Akt membrane translocation and that API-1 has anti-tumor activity in 
vitro and in vivo and could be a potential anti-cancer agent for patients whose 
tumors express hyperactivated Akt.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.094060
PMCID: PMC2832988
PMID: 20068047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]