1. Thromb Haemost. 2010 Mar;103(3):630-7. doi: 10.1160/TH09-07-0453. Epub 2010
Jan  13.

Polymorphisms in platelet glycoproteins Ia and IIIa are associated with arterial 
thrombosis and carotid atherosclerosis in type 2 diabetes.

Pellitero S(1), Reverter JL, Tàssies D, Pizarro E, Monteagudo J, Salinas I, 
Aguilera E, Sanmartí A, Reverter JC.

Author information:
(1)1Endocrinology and Nutrition Service, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Germans Trias i Pujol University Hospital, 
Badalona, Barcelona, Spain.

To determine the genotype distributions of the polymorphisms in platelet 
glycoproteins (GP) Ib-alpha, Ia/IIa and IIb/IIIa and their association with 
clinical arterial thrombosis and preclinical carotid atherosclerosis in type 2 
diabetes we studied 229 patients with type 2 diabetes and 229 controls matched 
by age, gender and ethnicity. Biochemical and haemostasis analyses were 
performed. The GP Ib-alpha VNTR, GP Ia 807 C/T and GP IIIa Pl(A) polymorphisms 
were determined by PCR. Thrombotic events were registered and carotid 
atherosclerosis was evaluated by ultrasound examination. A total of 107 patients 
had clinical atherothrombosis (CA), 65 subclinical atherosclerosis (SA), and 57 
had no evidence of atherosclerosis (NA). There were no differences in allele 
frequencies and the genotype distribution of platelet GP polymorphisms between 
diabetic patients and controls. The VNTR Ib-alpha polymorphism was not 
associated with CA. We found a significant association between CA and the 807T 
(odds ratio [OR]: 2.86, confidence interval [CI]: 1.65-4.93; p<0.001) and PlA2 
(OR: 2.03, CI: 1.13-3.65; p=0.03) alleles (in GP Ia and GP IIIa, respectively) 
in comparison to SA and NA group. Diabetic patients with the coexistence of the 
807T and PlA2 alleles presented the highest risk of CA (OR: 3.59, CI: 1.64-7.8; 
p<0.001). The coexistence of both 807T and PlA2 alleles was also associated with 
the presence of SA (OR: 9.00, CI: 1.10-73.42; p=0.04). In conclusion, the 807T 
allele of GP Ia and the PlA2 allele of GP IIIa, and specially its combination, 
may confer an additional risk for development of carotid atherosclerosis and 
arterial thrombosis in type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1160/TH09-07-0453
PMID: 20076847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]