1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Apr 1;88(7):2946-50. doi:
10.1073/pnas.88.7.2946.

Identification of a point mutation in type IIB von Willebrand disease 
illustrating the regulation of von Willebrand factor affinity for the platelet 
membrane glycoprotein Ib-IX receptor.

Ware J(1), Dent JA, Azuma H, Sugimoto M, Kyrle PA, Yoshioka A, Ruggeri ZM.

Author information:
(1)Roon Research Laboratory for Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, Department of 
Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Research Institute of Scripps Clinic, La 
Jolla, CA 92037.

von Willebrand factor (vWF) supports platelet adhesion on thrombogenic surfaces 
by binding to platelet membrane glycoprotein (GP) Ib in the GP Ib-IX receptor 
complex. This interaction is physiologically regulated so that it does not occur 
between circulating vWF and platelets but, rather, only at a site of vascular 
injury. The abnormal vWF found in type IIB von Willebrand disease, however, has 
a characteristically increased affinity for GP Ib and binds to circulating 
platelets. We have analyzed the molecular basis of this abnormality by sequence 
analysis of a type IIB vWF cDNA and have identified a single amino acid change, 
Trp550 to Cys550, located in the GP Ib-binding domain of the molecule comprising 
residues 449-728. Bacterial expression of recombinant fragments corresponding to 
this vWF domain yielded molecules that, whether containing a normal Trp550 or a 
mutant Cys550 residue, bound directly to GP Ib in the absence of modulators and 
with similar affinity. In contrast, mammalian cell expression of the same 
segment of sequence yielded molecules that, when containing the normal Trp550, 
did not bind to GP Ib directly but, like native vWF, bound in the presence of 
ristocetin. However, molecules containing the point mutation (Cys550) behaved 
like type IIB vWF--namely, bound to GP Ib even without ristocetin modulation 
and, in the presence of ristocetin, had 10-fold higher affinity than molecules 
with normal sequence. These results identify a region of vWF that, although not 
thought to be directly involved in binding to GP Ib, may modulate the 
interaction through conformational changes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.7.2946
PMCID: PMC51357
PMID: 2011604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]