1. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2009 Nov;31(11):831-5.

[Association of single nucleotide polymorphism of MnSOD gene with carcinogenesis 
and development of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng YJ(1), Wang YD, Liu Q, Dong ZM, Wu FP, Yang XR, Qiao XY, Zhang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Therapy, the Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical 
Univercity, Shijiazhuang 050011, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) of manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) gene with carcinogenesis and 
progression of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
METHODS: The MnSOD9 T-->C SNP was genotyped by polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis in 103 
patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and 195 healthy controls.
RESULTS: A significant difference was observed in the MnSOD allelotype 
distribution among esophageal squamous cell carcinomas and healthy controls 
(chi(2) = 4.645, P < 0.05). Individuals with the 9 C allele had a significantly 
higher risk to develop esophageal squamous cell carcinoma compared with those 
with the TT allele. The frequency of C allelotype among patients with lesions of 
different lengths (</= 5 cm and > 5 cm) was 16.3% and 36.7%, respectively. A 
significant difference was observed in the MnSOD allelotype distribution between 
patients with lesions of different lengths (chi(2) = 5.147, P < 0.05). No 
significant association of the MnSOD polymorphism at 9 T-->C with the tumor 
site, maximal length and clinical staging was found in esophageal squamous cell 
carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of MnSOD gene may be correlated 
with the susceptibility and disease progression of esophageal squamous cell 
carcinoma, and may become a tumor marker for prediction of this cancer.

PMID: 20137347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]