1. FEBS Lett. 1991 Mar 25;280(2):216-20. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(91)80296-f.

P1 variant antithrombins Glasgow (393 Arg to His) and Pescara (393 Arg to Pro) 
have increased heparin affinity and are resistant to catalytic cleavage by 
elastase. Implications for the heparin activation mechanism.

Owen MC(1), George PM, Lane DA, Boswell DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Christchurch Hospital, New Zealand.

The heparin affinity of normal and two P1 variants of antithrombin-III (AT) was 
studied by gradient elution with NaCl in Tris buffer on heparin-Sepharose. At pH 
7.4 normal AT eluted at [Na+] 0.78 mol/l and the variants both showed increased 
affinity with AT Pescara eluting at [Na+] 0.86 mol/l and AT Glasgow at [Na+] 
0.92 mol/l. We have earlier proposed a model for heparin activation in which the 
native state of AT maintains a salt bridge involving the P1 Arg-393 residue. 
Binding of heparin induces a higher heparin affinity conformation in which the 
salt bridge is disrupted to reveal the reactive centre for inhibition of 
thrombin. The Glasgow and Pescara variants, lacking a reactive centre P1 basic 
residue, would be unable to form this salt bridge, and we suggested that the 
high affinity conformation which they adopt as their native state would resemble 
the heparin induced conformation. To examine this model, we measured the heparin 
induced fluorescence of two P1 variants and tested the susceptibility of their 
reactive loops to catalytic cleavage. Both variants had fluorescence spectra 
indistinguishable from normal AT. In the absence of heparin, neither variant was 
more susceptible than normal to catalytic cleavage by human neutrophil elastase. 
These findings suggest that the conformation of these P1 variants is different 
to that of fully heparinized normal AT.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(91)80296-f
PMID: 2013315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]