1. Hum Immunol. 2010 May;71(5):468-74. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.02.014. Epub
2010  Mar 10.

Identification of broad binding class I HLA supertype epitopes to provide 
universal coverage of influenza A virus.

Alexander J(1), Bilsel P, del Guercio MF, Marinkovic-Petrovic A, Southwood S, 
Stewart S, Ishioka G, Kotturi MF, Botten J, Sidney J, Newman M, Sette A.

Author information:
(1)Pharmexa-Epimmune Inc., San Diego, California, USA. jalexander@paxvax.com

Influenza virus remains a significant health concern, with current circulating 
strains that affect millions each year plus the threat of newly emerging 
strains, such as swine-origin H1N1 and avian H5N1. Our hypothesis is that 
influenza-derived HLA-class I-restricted epitopes can be identified for use as a 
reagent to monitor and quantitate human CD8(+) T-cell responses and for vaccine 
development to induce protective cellular immunity. Protein sequences from 
influenza A virus strains currently in circulation, agents of past pandemics and 
zoonotic infections of man were evaluated for sequences predicted to bind to 
alleles representative of the most frequent HLA-A and -B (class I) types 
worldwide. Peptides that bound several different HLA molecules and were 
conserved among diverse influenza subtypes were tested for their capacity to 
recall influenza-specific immune responses using human donor PBMC. Accordingly, 
28 different epitopes antigenic for human donor PBMC were identified and 25 were 
100% conserved in the newly emerged swine-origin H1N1 strain. The epitope set 
defined herein should provide a reagent applicable to quantitate CD8(+) T cell 
human responses irrespective of influenza subtype and HLA composition of the 
responding population. In addition, these epitopes may be suitable for vaccine 
applications directed at the induction of cellular immunity.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.02.014
PMCID: PMC2856764
PMID: 20156506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]