1. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2010 Feb;13(1):43-56. doi: 10.1375/twin.13.1.43.

Variation at 8q24 and 9p24 and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer.

White KL(1), Sellers TA, Fridley BL, Vierkant RA, Phelan CM, Tsai YY, Kalli KR, 
Berchuck A, Iversen ES, Hartmann LC, Liebow M, Armasu S, Fredericksen Z, Larson 
MC, Duggan D, Couch FJ, Schildkraut JM, Cunningham JM, Goode EL.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The chromosome 8q24 region (specifically, 8q24.21.a) is known to harbor variants 
associated with risk of breast, colorectal, prostate, and bladder cancers. In 
2008, variants rs10505477 and rs6983267 in this region were associated with 
increased risk of invasive ovarian cancer (p < 0.01); however, three subsequent 
ovarian cancer reports of 8q24 variants were null. Here, we used a multi-site 
case-control study of 940 ovarian cancer cases and 1,041 controls to evaluate 
associations between these and other single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
this 8q24 region, as well as in the 9p24 colorectal cancer associated-region 
(specifically, 9p24.1.b). A total of 35 SNPs from previous reports and 
additional tagging SNPs were assessed using an Illumina GoldenGate array and 
analyzed using logistic regression models, adjusting for population structure 
and other potential confounders. We observed no association between genotypes 
and risk of ovarian cancer considering all cases, invasive cases, or invasive 
serous cases. For example, at 8q24 SNPs rs10505477 and rs6983267, analyses 
yielded per-allele invasive cancer odds ratios of 0.95 (95% confidence interval 
(CI) 0.82-1.09, p trend 0.46) and 0.97 (95% CI 0.84-1.12, p trend 0.69), 
respectively. Analyses using an approach identical to that of the first positive 
8q24 report also yielded no association with risk of ovarian cancer. In the 9p24 
region, no SNPs were associated with risk of ovarian cancer overall or with 
invasive or invasive serous disease (all p values > 0.10). These results 
indicate that the SNPs studied here are not related to risk of this gynecologic 
malignancy and that the site-specific nature of 8q24.21.a associations may not 
include ovarian cancer.

DOI: 10.1375/twin.13.1.43
PMCID: PMC2932441
PMID: 20158306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicts of interest.