1. J Psychiatr Res. 2010 Sep;44(12):795-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2010.01.012.
 Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Evidence of association of KIBRA genotype with episodic memory in families of 
psychotic patients and controls.

Vassos E(1), Bramon E, Picchioni M, Walshe M, Filbey FM, Kravariti E, McDonald 
C, Murray RM, Collier DA, Toulopoulou T.

Author information:
(1)King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, Department of Psychological 
Medicine and Psychiatry and NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK. 
evangelos.vassos@kcl.ac.uk

The first genome-wide association study of human memory identified an 
association between a common T/C polymorphism of the KIBRA gene (rs17070145) and 
episodic memory performance in normal individuals; subsequent studies have 
implicated the same polymorphism in Alzheimer's disease. Since impaired 
neurocognitive performance, including memory, may be both a core feature of 
schizophrenia and a candidate endophenotype, we attempted to replicate this 
association in a total sample of 544 subjects (including patients with 
psychosis, their unaffected relatives as well as normal individuals). In the 
combined sample there was a significant association between the KIBRA T allele 
and better performance in the single principle component of the memory measures, 
which included immediate and delayed logical and visual memory from the Wechsler 
Memory Scale (p=0.019). In the unaffected individuals (patients' relatives and 
healthy controls) we observed an association of KIBRA with immediate and delayed 
logical memory (p=0.020 and 0.025, respectively), while in patients with 
psychosis with delayed visual memory (p=0.05). This study replicates the 
association between the KIBRA gene and episodic memory and suggests a possibly 
differential effect of the polymorphism in psychotic and non-psychotic 
individuals.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2010.01.012
PMID: 20185150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]