1. Int J Legal Med. 2010 Jul;124(4):301-6. doi: 10.1007/s00414-010-0428-6. Epub 
2010 Mar 3.

A common FMO3 polymorphism may amplify the effect of nicotine exposure in sudden 
infant death syndrome (SIDS).

Poetsch M(1), Czerwinski M, Wingenfeld L, Vennemann M, Bajanowski T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Legal Medicine, University Hospital Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 
45122 Essen, Germany. micaela.poetsch@uk-essen.de

Smoking during pregnancy has been identified as one of the major modifiable risk 
factors of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). It has been demonstrated that 
the risk of SIDS increases with increasing cigarette consumption. A variety of 
hypotheses have been proposed for explanation, including a genetic 
predisposition. The flavin-monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) is one of the enzymes 
metabolising nicotine, and several polymorphisms have already been described in 
this gene. Here, we studied variations in the exons and introns of the FMO3 gene 
by direct sequencing analysis and minisequencing in 159 SIDS cases and 170 
controls. The three common variants G472A (E158K), G769A (V257M) and A923G 
(E308G) in the exons of the FMO3 gene were identified. The homozygote 472AA 
genotype occurred more frequently in SIDS cases than in controls (p = 0.0054) 
and was more frequent in those SIDS cases for which the mothers reported heavy 
smoking (p = 0.0084). This study is the first to demonstrate a gene-environment 
interaction in SIDS. The findings suggest that the common polymorphism G472A of 
FMO3 could act as an additional genetic SIDS risk factor in children whose 
mothers smoke. Parents who could pass on the 472A allele should be informed of 
the increased risk associated with smoking. Smoking mothers should be strongly 
advised to give up smoking during pregnancy and for at least the first year of 
the child's life.

DOI: 10.1007/s00414-010-0428-6
PMID: 20198379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]