1. J Pharm Sci. 2010 Aug;99(8):3594-600. doi: 10.1002/jps.22102.

Comparison of two nitroxide labile esters for delivering electron paramagnetic 
resonance probes into mouse brain.

Miyake M(1), Burks SR, Weaver J, Tsai P, Liu W, Bigio D, Bauer KS, Liu KJ, Rosen 
GM, Kao JP.

Author information:
(1)Center of Biomedical Research Excellence, College of Pharmacy, University of 
New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA.

In vivo quantitation of O(2) in brain has been hindered by a lack of suitable 
imaging modalities. Development of low-frequency electron paramagnetic resonance 
(EPR) spectrometers that can detect free radicals in animals in real time makes 
it feasible to image paramagnetic oximetry probes such as nitroxides in brain 
tissue. We have shown that masking the carboxyl group of 
3-carboxy-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-1-pyrrolidinyloxyl (nitroxide 1) as an 
esterase-labile acetoxymethyl ester yields 
3-acetoxymethoxycarbonyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-1-pyrrolidinyloxyl (nitroxide 2). 
Nitroxide 2 can cross the blood-brain barrier and is then hydrolyzed in situ by 
esterases to regenerate nitroxide 1, which becomes entrapped in brain tissue. 
Seeking to improve the loading of nitroxides into brain, we synthesized the more 
lipophilic pentanoyloxymethyl ester, 
3-pentanoyloxymethoxycarbonyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-1-pyrrolidinyloxyl (nitroxide 
3). We report that the higher lipophilicity of nitroxide 3 does not 
significantly increase its ability to generate EPR signals in the mouse brain. 
Therefore, irrespective of whether nitroxide 2 or 3 was injected, similar levels 
of nitroxide were entrapped in brain tissue. These findings suggest that 
nitroxides 2 and 3 perform comparably well as proimaging agents for measuring 
O(2) distribution in brain.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc. and the American Pharmacists Association

DOI: 10.1002/jps.22102
PMCID: PMC2928933
PMID: 20201101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]