1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010 Oct;136(10):1517-25. doi: 
10.1007/s00432-010-0809-8. Epub 2010 Mar 15.

Polymorphisms in DNA repair genes XRCC1, XRCC3 and XPD, and colorectal cancer 
risk: a case-control study in an Indian population.

Wang J(1), Zhao Y, Jiang J, Gajalakshmi V, Kuriki K, Nakamura S, Akasaka S, 
Ishikawa H, Suzuki S, Nagaya T, Tokudome S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Nagoya City University Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan. wjw@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

PURPOSE: Genetic polymorphisms in DNA repair genes may influence variations in 
individual DNA repair capacity, which could be associated with the development 
of cancer. We detected the distributions of three single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (XRCC1 Arg399Gln, XRCC3 Thr241Met and XPD Lys751Gln) in DNA repair 
genes, and assessed the associations of these genetic polymorphisms with colon 
and rectal cancer susceptibility as well as evaluated the interactions of 
gene-gene and gene-environment in a case-control study of an Indian population.
METHODS: This case-control study was conducted with 302 cases (including 59 
colon and 243 rectal cancer patients) and 291 cancer-free healthy controls. 
Genotypes were determined by PCR-RLFP assays. The effects [odds ratios (ORs) and 
95% confidence intervals (95% CIs)] of genetic polymorphisms on colorectal 
cancer were estimated using unconditional logistic regression.
RESULTS: The XRCC1 399Gln allele was found to be associated with a significantly 
increased rectal cancer risk among men (OR = 1.65, 95% CI 1.04-2.64). Whereas 
the XRCC3 241Met allele showed a protective tendency against rectal cancer (OR = 
0.68, 95% CI 0.46-1.02) for both men and women. Furthermore, a combination of 
the XRCC1 399Gln allele with XRCC3 Thr/Thr genotype and the XPD 751Gln allele 
demonstrated the highest rectal cancer risk (OR = 3.52, 95% CI 1.43-9.44).
CONCLUSIONS: The combined effects of putative risk alleles/genotypes for 
different DNA repair pathways may strengthen the susceptibility to rectal 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-010-0809-8
PMID: 20229274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]