1. J Clin Virol. 2010 May;48(1):36-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2010.02.008. Epub 2010
Mar  11.

Identification of influenza A pandemic (H1N1) 2009 variants during the first 
2009 influenza outbreak in Mexico City.

Zepeda HM(1), Perea-Araujo L, Zarate-Segura PB, Vázquez-Pérez JA, Miliar-García 
A, Garibay-Orijel C, Domínguez-López A, Badillo-Corona JA, López-Orduña E, 
García-González OP, Villaseñor-Ruíz I, Ahued-Ortega A, Aguilar-Faisal L, Bravo 
J, Lara-Padilla E, García-Cavazos RJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Medicina de Conservación, Escuela Superior de Medicina, 
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Plan de San Luis y Díaz Mirón s/n, Col. Casco de 
Santo, Mexico City 11340, Mexico. hzepeda@ipn.mx

BACKGROUND: In March 2009, public health surveillance detected increased numbers 
of influenza-like illness presenting to hospitals in Mexico City. The 
aetiological agent was subsequently determined to be a novel influenza A (H1N1) 
triple reassortant, which has spread worldwide. As a consequence the World 
Health Organisation has declared the first Influenza pandemic of the 21st 
century.
OBJECTIVES: To describe clinically and molecularly the first outbreak of 
influenza A pH1N1 (2009) during 1-5 May to establish a baseline of 
epidemiological data for pH1N1. Also, to monitor for the emergence of antiviral 
resistance, and mutations affecting virulence and transmissibility.
STUDY DESIGN: Samples were collected from 751 patients with influenza-like 
symptoms throughout Mexico City and were tested for influenza A pH1N1 (2009) 
using real-time PCR. In the samples that were positive for influenza A pH1N1 
(2009) fragments from the haemagglutinin (H1) and neuraminidase (N1) genes were 
sequenced.
RESULTS: A total of 203/751 (27%) patients were positive for the pandemic H1N1 
(2009) virus (53% male and 47% female). The 0-12-year-old group was the most 
affected 85/751 (42%). Sequence analysis showed five new variants of the 
pandemic H1N1 (2009) virus for NA: G249E (GQ292900), M269I (GQ292892), Y274H 
(GQ292913), T332A (GQ292933), N344K (GQ292882), and four variants for HA: N461K 
(GQ293006), K505R (GQ292989), I435V (GQ292995), I527N (GQ292997).
CONCLUSIONS: We have provided a baseline of epidemiological data from the first 
outbreak of influenza A pH1N1 (2009) during 1-5 May in Mexico City. The 
sequencing of partial fragments of the HA and NA genes did not show the presence 
of previously described mutations affecting known sites of antiviral resistance 
in seasonal influenza A such as the H275Y (oseltamivir resistance), R293 or N295 
etc.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2010.02.008
PMID: 20226730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]