1. Hered Cancer Clin Pract. 2004 Jul 15;2(3):139-45. doi: 
10.1186/1897-4287-2-3-139.

Intronic TP53 Germline Sequence Variants Modify the Risk in German 
Breast/Ovarian Cancer Families.

Liu X(1), Sinn HP, Ulmer HU, Scott RJ, Hamann U.

Author information:
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Division of Molecular Genome Analysis, 
B055, Im Neuenheimer Feld 580, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. 
u.hamann@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

To establish the contribution of TP53 germline mutations to familial 
breast/ovarian cancer in Germany we screened the complete coding region of the 
TP53 gene in a series of German breast/ovarian cancer families negative for 
mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes.Two different intronic TP53 sequence 
variants were identified in 6/48 (12.5%) breast/ovarian cancer families. A novel 
A to T nucleotide change at position 17708 in intron 10 segregating with the 
disease was detected in three breast cancer families (6.2%). One 17708 
A>T-associated breast tumour showed loss of the wild-type allele. This variant 
was also found in 5/112 (4.5%) healthy controls indicating that it is a 
polymorphism. A second sequence variant changing a G to C at position 13964 in 
intron 6 not segregating with the disease was found in two breast cancer 
families and one breast-ovarian cancer family (6.2%). This variant has 
previously been shown to occur at an elevated frequency in hereditary breast 
cancer patients from North America and to be of functional importance leading to 
inhibition of apoptosis and prolongation of cell survival after DNA-damage. 
Screening of 185 consecutive unselected German breast cancer patients revealed 
the 13964 G>C variant in four patients (2.2%). Immunohistochemical analysis of 
the TP53 protein showed negative immunoreactivity in normal and tumour tissues 
of one 17708 A>T and six 13964 G>C carriers. TP53 overexpression was detected in 
the tumour tissue of one sporadic breast cancer patient carrying the 13964 G>C 
variant. Our results show that intronic changes of the TP53 gene may act as or 
be associated with risk modifiers in familial breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1897-4287-2-3-139
PMCID: PMC4392522
PMID: 20233468