1. Planta. 2010 Apr;231(5):1101-11. doi: 10.1007/s00425-010-1115-z. Epub 2010 Feb
 21.

Identification of an essential cysteinyl residue for the structure of glutamine 
synthetase alpha from Phaseolus vulgaris.

Estivill G(1), Guardado P, Buser R, Betti M, Márquez AJ.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica Vegetal y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Química, 
Universidad Sevilla, Seville, Spain.

We have studied the possible role, in a plant glutamine synthetase (GS), of the 
different cysteinyl residues present in this enzyme. For this purpose we carried 
out the site-directed mutagenesis of the cDNA for alpha-GS polypeptide from 
Phaseolus vulgaris in the positions corresponding to Cys-92, Cys-159, and 
Cys-179, followed by heterologous expression in E. coli and enzymatic 
characterisation of WT and mutant proteins. The results show that neither Cys-92 
nor Cys-179 residues were essential for enzyme activity, but the replacement of 
Cys-159 by alanine or serine strongly affects the quaternary structure and 
function of the GS enzyme molecule, resulting in a complete loss of enzymatic 
activity. Other studies using sulfhydryl specific reagents such as pHMB 
(p-hydroxymercuribenzoate) or DTNB (5,5'-dithiobis-2-nitrobenzoate) confirmed 
that the profound inhibition produced is associated with an important alteration 
of the quaternary structure of GS, and suggest that Cys-159 might be the residue 
responsible for the enzyme inhibition. All these results suggest that the 
Cys-159 residue is essential for the enzyme structure. The results are also 
consistent with previous reports based on classical biochemistry studies 
indicating the presence of essential cysteinyl residues for the enzyme activity 
of higher plant GS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-010-1115-z
PMID: 20237895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]