1. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2010 Mar 24;9:13. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-9-13.

PPARgamma gene C161T substitution alters lipid profile in Chinese patients with 
coronary artery disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Wan J(1), Xiong S, Chao S, Xiao J, Ma Y, Wang J, Roy S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
430071, China.

BACKGROUND: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) is a 
ligand-activated transcription factor, which regulates gene expression of the 
key proteins involved in lipid metabolism, vascular inflammation, and 
proliferation. PPARgamma may contribute to attenuating atherogenesis and 
postangioplasty restenosis. PPARgamma C161-->T substitution is associated with a 
reduced risk of coronary artery disease (CAD). Whether or not the gene 
substitution alters the risk of CAD in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients 
remains unclear.
METHODS: A total of 556 unrelated subjects from a Chinese Han population, 
including 89 healthy subjects, 78 CAD patients, 86 T2DM patients, and 303 CAD 
combined with T2DM patients, were recruited to enroll in this study. 
PPARgammaC161-->T gene polymorphism was determined by polymerase chain reaction 
and restriction fragment length polymorphisms. Plasma levels of lipoproteins, 
apolipoproteins, glucose, and insulin were measured by ELISA or radioimmunoassay 
(RIA). The coronary artery lesions were evaluated by coronary angiography.
RESULTS: The frequency of the 161T allele in CAD, T2DM, and CAD combined with 
T2DM patients was similar to that observed in the healthy control group. 
However, in CAD combined with T2DM patients, the group with angiographically 
documented moderate stenoses had a higher frequency of the 161T allele in 
comparison to the group with severe stenoses (P < 0.05). Moreover, in CAD with 
T2DM patients, the triglyceride levels and apoB in CC homozygote carriers were 
significantly higher than those in "T" allele carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: PPARgammaC161-->T genotypes weren't significantly associated with 
the risk of CAD, but were markedly correlated with severity of disease vessels 
in patients with CAD and T2DM. Furthermore, PPARgammaC161-->T substitution was 
associated with an altered adipose, but not glucose metabolism. These results 
indicate that the PPARgamma C161-->T polymorphism may reduce the risk of severe 
atherogenesis by modulation of adipose metabolism, especially triglycerides and 
apoB, in Chinese patients with CAD and T2DM.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2840-9-13
PMCID: PMC2859850
PMID: 20334678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]