1. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 May 15;21(10):1686-97. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e10-01-0055. Epub 
2010 Mar 31.

Regulation of lens gap junctions by Transforming Growth Factor beta.

Boswell BA(1), VanSlyke JK, Musil LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Gap junction-mediated intercellular communication (GJIC) is essential for the 
proper function of many organs, including the lens. GJIC in lens epithelial 
cells is increased by FGF in a concentration-dependent process that has been 
linked to the intralenticular gradient of GJIC required for lens transparency. 
Unlike FGF, elevated levels of TGF-beta are associated with lens dysfunction. We 
show that TGF-beta1 or -2 up-regulates dye coupling in serum-free primary 
cultures of chick lens epithelial cells (dissociated cell-derived monolayer 
cultures [DCDMLs]) via a mechanism distinct from that utilized by other growth 
factors. Remarkably, the ability of TGF-beta and of FGF to up-regulate GJIC is 
abolished if DCDMLs are simultaneously exposed to both factors despite 
undiminished cell-cell contact. This reduction in dye coupling is attributable 
to an inhibition of gap junction assembly. Connexin 45.6, 43, and 56-containing 
gap junctions are restored, and intercellular dye coupling is increased, if the 
activity of p38 kinase is blocked. Our data reveal a new type of cross-talk 
between the FGF and TGF-beta pathways, as well as a novel role for TGF-beta and 
p38 kinase in the regulation of GJIC. They also provide an explanation for how 
pathologically increased TGF-beta signaling could contribute to cataract 
formation.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e10-01-0055
PMCID: PMC2869375
PMID: 20357001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]