1. Lung. 2010 Aug;188(4):339-47. doi: 10.1007/s00408-010-9236-5. Epub 2010 Mar
30.

Association of tumor necrosis factor-alpha-863C/A gene polymorphism with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Chen YC(1), Liu SF, Chin CH, Wu CC, Chen CJ, Chang HW, Wang YH, Chung YH, Chao 
TY, Lin MC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical Center, Chang Gung 
University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC. yunghechen@yahoo.com.tw

The aim of this study was to investigate genetic effects on the pathogenesis of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The study was conducted as a 
prospective case-control study in a medical center in southern Taiwan. The 
patient group consisted of 145 male patients with smoking-related COPD and a 
control group of 139 resistant smokers from July 2004 to September 2009. We 
compared allele and genotype frequencies of three tag single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP) of the TNF-alpha gene promoter region at -308, -863, and 
-1031 in all subjects. We also analyzed the influence of each genetic variant on 
pulmonary function parameters, body mass index (BMI), serum TNF-alpha levels, 
and outcomes among heavy smokers with or without COPD. COPD patients had a 
significantly lower A allele frequency (9.7 vs. 15.1%, OR = 0.6, p = 0.048, 
false discovery rate q = 0.144) and a significantly lower A carrier genotype 
frequency (19.3 vs. 30.2%, OR = 0.52, p = 0.042, q = 0.135) than resistant 
smokers. The -863 CA genotype was associated with a better FEV(1)/FVC ratio (79 
vs. 71.5%, p = 0.034), and higher BMI (24.9 vs. 23.6 kg/m(2), p = 0.048). In 
addition, COPD patients with the -1031 C carrier genotype had higher serum 
TNF-alpha levels (20.9 vs. 16.2 pg/ml, p = 0.01). BMI (hazard ratio = 0.84, 95% 
CI = 0.74-0.96, p = 0.008) was the only independent predictor for mortality. The 
TNF-alpha -863 A allele may confer a degree of resistance to the susceptibility 
to and muscle wasting of COPD among heavy smokers.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-010-9236-5
PMID: 20352242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]