1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Aug;38(15):5206-16. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq231. Epub 2010
 Apr 12.

Solution structure of the dimerization domain of ribosomal protein P2 provides 
insights for the structural organization of eukaryotic stalk.

Lee KM(1), Yu CW, Chan DS, Chiu TY, Zhu G, Sze KH, Shaw PC, Wong KB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Centre for Protein Science and Crystallography, 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

The lateral stalk of ribosome is responsible for kingdom-specific binding of 
translation factors and activation of GTP hydrolysis that drives protein 
synthesis. In eukaryotes, the stalk is composed of acidic ribosomal proteins P0, 
P1 and P2 that constitute a pentameric P-complex in 1: 2: 2 ratio. We have 
determined the solution structure of the N-terminal dimerization domain of human 
P2 (NTD-P2), which provides insights into the structural organization of the 
eukaryotic stalk. Our structure revealed that eukaryotic stalk protein P2 forms 
a symmetric homodimer in solution, and is structurally distinct from the 
bacterial counterpart L12 homodimer. The two subunits of NTD-P2 form extensive 
hydrophobic interactions in the dimeric interface that buries 2400 A(2) of 
solvent accessible surface area. We have showed that P1 can dissociate P2 
homodimer spontaneously to form a more stable P1/P2 1 : 1 heterodimer. By 
homology modelling, we identified three exposed polar residues on helix-3 of P2 
are substituted by conserved hydrophobic residues in P1. Confirmed by 
mutagenesis, we showed that these residues on helix-3 of P1 are not involved in 
the dimerization of P1/P2, but instead play a vital role in anchoring P1/P2 
heterodimer to P0. Based on our results, models of the eukaryotic stalk complex 
were proposed.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq231
PMCID: PMC2926600
PMID: 20385603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]