1. Haemophilia. 2010 Sep 1;16(5):771-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2010.02246.x.
Epub  2010 Apr 8.

Thrombin generation in patients with factor XI deficiency and clinical bleeding 
risk.

Rugeri L(1), Qu√©lin F, Chatard B, De Mazancourt P, Negrier C, Dargaud Y.

Author information:
(1)Unite d'Hemostase Clinique, Hopital Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France.

Factor XI (FXI) deficiency is a rare bleeding disorder. Most patients with FXI 
deficiency are mild bleeders but certain patients with similar FXI activity 
exhibit different bleeding phenotype. Routine laboratory assays do not help 
physicians to estimate the individual bleeding risk in these patients. Thrombin 
generation test (TGT) is a more comprehensive, global function test of the 
clotting system. We investigated whether or not the bleeding tendency of 
patients with FXI deficiency is correlated with features of the TGT. Twenty-four 
patients with FXI deficiency were divided in two groups: (i) severe bleeders (n 
= 9) and (ii) mild or non-bleeders (n = 15). All severe bleeders had a personal 
history of surgery-related severe bleeding. Thrombin generation (TG) was 
measured in platelet-rich plasma (PRP) using a low concentration of tissue 
factor 0.5 pm. In patients exhibiting severe bleeding tendency, independently of 
their FXI level, a dramatically impaired TG was observed. For example, despite a 
low plasma FXI = 1 IU dl(-1), a clinically non-bleeding individual exhibited 
normal TG results whereas another patient with severe bleeding history and FXI = 
40 IU dl(-1) had a very low TG capacity. Low velocity and delayed TG were the 
main parameters suggesting a higher bleeding risk. DNA analysis of patients 
reported eight novel mutations of the FXI gene but neither mutation location nor 
secretion or not of the variant correlated with the bleeding tendency. The 
results of this study suggest that TG measurement in PRP may be a useful tool to 
predict bleeding risk in FXI deficiency and should be studied further in larger 
prospective clinical studies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2010.02246.x
PMID: 20398070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]