1. Mol Microbiol. 2010 Jun 1;76(5):1222-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07160.x.  Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Crystal structure of Helicobacter pylori MinE, a cell division topological 
specificity factor.

Kang GB(1), Song HE, Kim MK, Youn HS, Lee JG, An JY, Chun JS, Jeon H, Eom SH.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science, Gwangju Institute of Science & Technology (GIST), 
Gwangju 500-712, Korea.

In Gram-negative bacteria, proper placement of the FtsZ ring, mediated by 
nucleoid occlusion and the activities of the dynamic oscillating Min proteins 
MinC, MinD and MinE, is required for correct positioning of the cell division 
septum. MinE is a topological specificity factor that counters the activity of 
MinCD division inhibitor at the mid-cell division site. Its structure consists 
of an anti-MinCD domain and a topology specificity domain (TSD). Previous NMR 
analysis of truncated Escherichia coli MinE showed that the TSD domain contains 
a long alpha-helix and two anti-parallel beta-strands, which mediate formation 
of a homodimeric alpha/beta structure. Here we report the crystal structure of 
full-length Helicobacter pylori MinE and redefine its TSD based on that 
structure. The N-terminal region of the TSD (residues 19-26), previously defined 
as part of the anti-MinCD domain, forms a beta-strand (betaA) and participates 
in TSD folding. In addition, H. pylori MinE forms a dimer through the 
interaction of anti-parallel betaA-strands. Moreover, we observed serial 
dimer-dimer interactions within the crystal packing, resulting in the formation 
of a multimeric structure. We therefore redefine the functional domain of MinE 
and propose that a multimeric filamentous structure is formed through 
anti-parallel beta-strand interactions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07160.x
PMCID: PMC2883074
PMID: 20398219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]