1. Blood Rev. 2010 May;24(3):123-34. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2010.03.003. Epub 2010
Apr  20.

The genetic basis of von Willebrand disease.

Goodeve AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Haemostasis Research Group, Department of Cardiovascular Science, University 
of Sheffield, UK. a.goodeve@shef.ac.uk

The common autosomally inherited mucocutaneous bleeding disorder, von Willebrand 
disease (VWD) results from quantitative or qualitative defects in plasma von 
Willebrand factor (VWF). Mutation can affect VWF quantity or its functions 
mediating platelet adhesion and aggregation at sites of vascular damage and 
carrying pro-coagulant factor VIII (FVIII). Phenotype and genotype analysis in 
patients with the three VWD types has aided understanding of VWF structure and 
function. Investigation of patients with specific disease types has identified 
mutations in up to 70% of type 1 and 100% of type 3 VWD cases. Missense 
mutations predominate in type 1 VWD and act through mechanisms including rapid 
clearance and intracellular retention. Many mutations are incompletely penetrant 
and attributing pathogenicity is challenging. Other factors including blood 
group O contribute to low VWF level. Missense mutations affecting platelet- or 
FVIII-binding through a number of mechanisms are responsible for the four type 2 
subtypes; 2A, 2B, 2M and 2N. In contrast, mutations resulting in a lack of VWF 
expression predominate in recessive type 3 VWD. This review explores the genetic 
basis of each VWD type, relating mutations identified to disease mechanism. 
Additionally, utility of genetic analysis within the different disease types is 
explored.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2010.03.003
PMID: 20409624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]