1. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(13):6769-81. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00458-10. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

Neuraminidase receptor binding variants of human influenza A(H3N2) viruses 
resulting from substitution of aspartic acid 151 in the catalytic site: a role 
in virus attachment?

Lin YP(1), Gregory V, Collins P, Kloess J, Wharton S, Cattle N, Lackenby A, 
Daniels R, Hay A.

Author information:
(1)Virology Division, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, 
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom. lyipu@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Changes in the receptor binding characteristics of human H3N2 viruses have been 
evident from changes in the agglutination of different red blood cells (RBCs) 
and the reduced growth capacity of recently isolated viruses, particularly in 
embryonated eggs. An additional peculiarity of viruses circulating in 2005 to 
2009 has been the poor inhibition of hemagglutination by postinfection ferret 
antisera for many viruses isolated in MDCK cells, including homologous reference 
viruses. This was shown not to be due to an antigenic change in hemagglutinin 
(HA) but was shown to be the result of a mutation in aspartic acid 151 of 
neuraminidase (NA) to glycine, asparagine, or alanine, which caused an 
oseltamivir-sensitive agglutination of RBCs. The D151G substitution was shown to 
cause a change in the specificity of NA such that it acquired the capacity to 
bind receptors, which were refractory to enzymatic cleavage, without altering 
its ability to remove receptors for HA. Thus, the inhibition of NA-dependent 
agglutination by the inclusion of oseltamivir carboxylate in the assay was 
effective in restoring the anti-HA specificity of the hemagglutination 
inhibition (HI) assay for monitoring antigenic changes in HA. Since the 
NA-dependent binding activity did not affect virus neutralization, and virus 
populations in clinical specimens possessed, at most, low levels of the "151 
mutant," the biological significance of this feature of NA in, for example, 
immune evasion is unclear. It is apparent, however, that an important role of 
aspartic acid 151 in the activity of NA may be to restrict the specificity of 
the NA interaction and its receptor-destroying activity to complement that of HA 
receptor binding.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00458-10
PMCID: PMC2903250
PMID: 20410266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]