1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;21(1):141-54. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-100123.

Polymorphic variation in cytochrome oxidase subunit genes.

Lu J(1), Wang K, Rodova M, Esteves R, Berry D, E L, Crafter A, Barrett M, 
Cardoso SM, Onyango I, Parker WD, Fontes J, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas 
City, KS 66160, USA.

Cytochrome oxidase (COX) activity varies between individuals and low activities 
associate with Alzheimer's disease. Whether genetic heterogeneity influences 
function of this multimeric enzyme is unknown. To explore this we sequenced 
three mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and ten nuclear COX subunit genes from at least 
50 individuals. 20% had non-synonymous mtDNA COX gene polymorphisms, 12% had a 
COX4I1 non-synonymous G to A transition, and other genes rarely contained 
non-synonymous polymorphisms. Frequent untranslated region (UTR) polymorphisms 
were seen in COX6A1, COX6B1, COX6C, and COX7A1; heterogeneity in a COX7A1 5' UTR 
Sp1 site was extensive. Synonymous polymorphisms were common and less frequent 
in the more conserved COX1 than the less conserved COX3, suggesting at least in 
mtDNA synonymous polymorphisms experience selection pressure and are not 
functionally silent. Compound gene variations occurred within individuals. To 
test whether variations could have functional consequences, we studied the 
COX4I1 G to A transition and an AGCCCC deletion in the COX7A1 5' UTR Sp1 site. 
Cells expressing the COX4I1 polymorphism had reduced COX Vmax activity. In 
reporter construct-transduced cells where green fluorescent protein expression 
depended on the COX7A1 Sp1 site, AGCCCC deletion reduced fluorescence. Our 
findings indicate COX subunit gene heterogeneity is pervasive and may mediate 
COX functional variation.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-100123
PMCID: PMC2910218
PMID: 20413852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]