1. Am J Pathol. 2010 Jul;177(1):261-70. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090741. Epub
2010  May 14.

Differential effects of myopathy-associated caveolin-3 mutants on growth factor 
signaling.

Brauers E(1), Dreier A, Roos A, Wormland B, Weis J, Krüttgen A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Medical Faculty, Rheinisch-Westfälische 
Technische Hochschule (RWTH) Aachen University, Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52074 Aachen, 
Germany.

Caveolin-3 is an important scaffold protein of cholesterol-rich caveolae. 
Mutations of caveolin-3 cause hereditary myopathies that comprise remarkably 
different pathologies. Growth factor signaling plays an important role in muscle 
physiology; it is influenced by caveolins and cholesterol-rich rafts and might 
thus be affected by caveolin-3 dysfunction. Prompted by the observation of a 
marked chronic peripheral neuropathy in a patient suffering from rippling muscle 
disease due to the R26Q caveolin-3 mutation and because TrkA is expressed by 
neuronal cells and skeletal muscle fibers, we performed a detailed comparative 
study on the effect of pathogenic caveolin-3 mutants on the signaling and 
trafficking of the TrkA nerve growth factor receptor and, for comparison, of the 
epidermal growth factor receptor. We found that the R26Q mutant slightly and the 
P28L strongly reduced nerve growth factor signaling in TrkA-transfected cells. 
Surface biotinylation experiments revealed that the R26Q caveolin-3 mutation 
markedly reduced the internalization of TrkA, whereas the P28L did not. 
Moreover, P28L expression led to increased, whereas R26Q expression decreased, 
epidermal growth factor signaling. Taken together, we found differential effects 
of the R26Q and P28L caveolin-3 mutants on growth factor signaling. Our findings 
are of clinical interest because they might help explain the remarkable 
differences in the degree of muscle lesions caused by caveolin-3 mutations and 
also the co-occurrence of peripheral neuropathy in the R26Q caveolinopathy case 
presented.

DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090741
PMCID: PMC2893669
PMID: 20472890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]