1. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 May 27;4:74. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-74.

Co-expression module analysis reveals biological processes, genomic gain, and 
regulatory mechanisms associated with breast cancer progression.

Shi Z(1), Derow CK, Zhang B.

Author information:
(1)Advanced Computing Center for Research & Education, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN 37240, USA.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression signatures are typically identified by correlating 
gene expression patterns to a disease phenotype of interest. However, individual 
gene-based signatures usually suffer from low reproducibility and 
interpretability.
RESULTS: We have developed a novel algorithm Iterative Clique Enumeration (ICE) 
for identifying relatively independent maximal cliques as co-expression modules 
and a module-based approach to the analysis of gene expression data. Applying 
this approach on a public breast cancer dataset identified 19 modules whose 
expression levels were significantly correlated with tumor grade. The 
correlations were reproducible for 17 modules in an independent breast cancer 
dataset, and the reproducibility was considerably higher than that based on 
individual genes or modules identified by other algorithms. Sixteen out of the 
17 modules showed significant enrichment in certain Gene Ontology (GO) 
categories. Specifically, modules related to cell proliferation and immune 
response were up-regulated in high-grade tumors while those related to cell 
adhesion was down-regulated. Further analyses showed that transcription factors 
NYFB, E2F1/E2F3, NRF1, and ELK1 were responsible for the up-regulation of the 
cell proliferation modules. IRF family and ETS family proteins were responsible 
for the up-regulation of the immune response modules. Moreover, inhibition of 
the PPARA signaling pathway may also play an important role in tumor 
progression. The module without GO enrichment was found to be associated with a 
potential genomic gain in 8q21-23 in high-grade tumors. The 17-module signature 
of breast tumor progression clustered patients into subgroups with significantly 
different relapse-free survival times. Namely, patients with lower cell 
proliferation and higher cell adhesion levels had significantly lower risk of 
recurrence, both for all patients (p = 0.004) and for those with grade 2 tumors 
(p = 0.017).
CONCLUSIONS: The ICE algorithm is effective in identifying relatively 
independent co-expression modules from gene co-expression networks and the 
module-based approach illustrated in this study provides a robust, 
interpretable, and mechanistic characterization of transcriptional changes.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-74
PMCID: PMC2902438
PMID: 20507583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]