1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Sep 1;334(3):830-8. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.167940. 
Epub 2010 Jun 3.

WJD008, a dual phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/mammalian target of 
rapamycin inhibitor, prevents PI3K signaling and inhibits the proliferation of 
transformed cells with oncogenic PI3K mutant.

Li T(1), Wang J, Wang X, Yang N, Chen SM, Tong LJ, Yang CH, Meng LH, Ding J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Anti-Tumor Pharmacology, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, 
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
People's Republic of China.

The phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)-protein kinase B (Akt)-mammalian target 
of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway is often constitutively activated in 
various human cancers, providing validated targets for cancer therapy. Among a 
series of 5-cyano-6-morpholino-4-substituted-pyrimidine analogs designed and 
synthesized based on PI3K target, 
4-(2-(dimethylamino)vinyl)-2-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-6-morpholinopyrimidine-5-carbonitrile 
(WJD008) was selected for further pharmacological characterization because of 
its potent activity against PI3K signaling. WJD008 inhibited kinase activity of 
PI3Kalpha and mTOR with less activity against PIKK family members. In cellular 
settings, WJD008 abrogated insulin-like growth factor-I-activated PI3K-Akt-mTOR 
signaling cascade and blocked the membrane translocation of a pleckstrin 
homology domain containing enhanced green fluorescent protein-general receptor 
for phosphoinositides, isoform 1-pleckstrin homology fusion protein, suggesting 
down-regulation of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate output induced by 
WJD008 resulted in inactivation of PI3K pathway. Consequently, WJD008 arrested 
cells in G(1) phase without induction of apoptosis. Furthermore, WJD008 reversed 
the hyperactivation of the PI3K pathway caused by the oncogenic mutation of 
p110alpha H1047R and suppressed the proliferation and clonogenesis of 
transformed RK3E cells harboring this mutant. WJD008 was superior to the 
pan-PI3K inhibitor wortmannin against proliferation of a panel of cancer cells 
independently of their status of PI3K pathway or tissue originations. In 
summary, WJD008 is a potent dual PI3K/mTOR modulator with antiproliferative and 
anticlonogenic activity in tumor cells and transformed cells with PIK3CA mutant, 
which provides new clues for the design and development of this chemical 
scaffold as an anticancer drug.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.110.167940
PMID: 20522531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]