1. Blood. 2010 Sep 16;116(11):1971-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-02-269134. Epub
2010  Jun 10.

PKCzeta decreases eNOS protein stability via inhibitory phosphorylation of ERK5.

Nigro P(1), Abe J, Woo CH, Satoh K, McClain C, O'Dell MR, Lee H, Lim JH, Li JD, 
Heo KS, Fujiwara K, Berk BC.

Author information:
(1)Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Medicine, University 
of Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Ave., Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

PKCζ has emerged as a pathologic mediator of endothelial cell dysfunction, based 
on its essential role in tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα)-mediated inflammation. 
In contrast, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 (ERK5) function is required 
for endothelial cell homeostasis as shown by activation of Krüppel-like factor 2 
(KLF2), increased endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) expression, and 
inhibition of apoptosis. We hypothesized that protein kinase C ζ (PKCζ) 
activation by TNFα would inhibit the ERK5/KLF2/eNOS pathway. TNFα inhibited the 
steady laminar flow-induced eNOS expression, and this effect was reversed by the 
dominant-negative form of PKCζ (Ad.DN-PKCζ). In addition, ERK5 function was 
inhibited by either TNFα or the transfection of the catalytic domain of PKCζ. 
This inhibition was reversed by PKCζ small interfering RNA. PKCζ was found to 
bind to ERK5 under basal conditions with coimmunoprecipitation and the mammalian 
2-hybrid assay. Furthermore, PKCζ phosphorylates ERK5, and mutation analysis 
showed that the preferred site is S486. Most importantly, we found that the 
predominant effect of TNFα stimulation of PKCζ was to decrease eNOS protein 
stability that was recapitulated by transfecting Ad.ERK5S486A mutant. Finally, 
aortic en face analysis of ERK5/PKCζ activity showed high PKCζ and ERK5 staining 
in the athero-prone region. Taken together our results show that PKCζ binds and 
phosphorylates ERK5, thereby decreasing eNOS protein stability and contributing 
to early events of atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-02-269134
PMCID: PMC3173991
PMID: 20538799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]