1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 6;285(32):24548-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.117333. Epub 
2010 Jun 9.

The JmjN domain of Jhd2 is important for its protein stability, and the plant 
homeodomain (PHD) finger mediates its chromatin association independent of H3K4 
methylation.

Huang F(1), Chandrasekharan MB, Chen YC, Bhaskara S, Hiebert SW, Sun ZW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Histone lysine methylation is a dynamic process that plays an important role in 
regulating chromatin structure and gene expression. Recent studies have 
identified Jhd2, a JmjC domain-containing protein, as an H3K4-specific 
demethylase in budding yeast. However, important questions regarding the 
regulation and functions of Jhd2 remain unanswered. In this study, we show that 
Jhd2 has intrinsic activity to remove all three states of H3K4 methylation in 
vivo and can dynamically associate with chromatin to modulate H3K4 methylation 
levels on both active and repressed genes and at the telomeric regions. We found 
that the plant homeodomain (PHD) finger of Jhd2 is important for its chromatin 
association in vivo. However, this association is not dependent on H3K4 
methylation and the H3 N-terminal tail, suggesting the presence of an 
alternative mechanism by which Jhd2 binds nucleosomes. We also provide evidence 
that the JmjN domain and its interaction with the JmjC catalytic domain are 
important for Jhd2 function and that Not4 (an E3 ligase) monitors the structural 
integrity of this interdomain interaction to maintain the overall protein levels 
of Jhd2. We show that the S451R mutation in human SMCX (a homolog of Jhd2), 
which has been linked to mental retardation, and the homologous T359R mutation 
in Jhd2 affect the protein stability of both of these proteins. Therefore, our 
findings provide a mechanistic explanation for the observed defects in patients 
harboring this SMCX mutant and suggest the presence of a conserved pathway 
involving Not4 that modulates the protein stability of both yeast Jhd2 and human 
SMCX.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.117333
PMCID: PMC2915691
PMID: 20538609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]