1. J Virol. 2010 Sep;84(17):8422-32. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00599-10. Epub 2010 Jun 10.

Vaccinia virus A25 and A26 proteins are fusion suppressors for mature virions 
and determine strain-specific virus entry pathways into HeLa, CHO-K1, and L 
cells.

Chang SJ(1), Chang YX, Izmailyan R, Tang YL, Chang W.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan, 
Republic of China.

Mature vaccinia virus enters cells through either fluid-phase 
endocytosis/macropinocytosis or plasma membrane fusion. This may explain the 
wide range of host cell susceptibilities to vaccinia virus entry; however, it is 
not known how vaccinia virus chooses between these two pathways and which viral 
envelope proteins determine such processes. By screening several recombinant 
viruses and different strains, we found that mature virions containing the 
vaccinia virus A25 and A26 proteins entered HeLa cells preferentially through a 
bafilomycin-sensitive entry pathway, whereas virions lacking these two proteins 
entered through a bafilomycin-resistant pathway. To investigate whether the A25 
and A26 proteins contribute to entry pathway specificity, two mutant vaccinia 
viruses, WRDeltaA25L and WRDeltaA26L, were subsequently generated from the 
wild-type WR strain. In contrast to the WR strain, both the WRDeltaA25L and 
WRDeltaA26L viruses became resistant to bafilomycin, suggesting that the removal 
of the A25 and A26 proteins bypassed the low-pH endosomal requirement for mature 
virion entry. Indeed, WRDeltaA25L and WRDeltaA26L virus infections of HeLa, 
CHO-K1, and L cells immediately triggered cell-to-cell fusion at a neutral pH at 
1 to 2 h postinfection (p.i.), providing direct evidence that viral fusion 
machinery is readily activated after the removal of the A25 and A26 proteins to 
allow virus entry through the plasma membrane. In summary, our data support a 
model that on vaccinia mature virions, the viral A25 and A26 proteins are 
low-pH-sensitive fusion suppressors whose inactivation during the endocytic 
route results in viral and cell membrane fusion. Our results also suggest that 
during virion morphogenesis, the incorporation of the A25 and A26 proteins into 
mature virions may help restrain viral fusion activity until the time of 
infections.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00599-10
PMCID: PMC2919003
PMID: 20538855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]