1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Aug;31(8):975-82. doi: 10.1002/humu.21301.

Identification of Lynch syndrome mutations in the MLH1-PMS2 interface that 
disturb dimerization and mismatch repair.

Kosinski J(1), Hinrichsen I, Bujnicki JM, Friedhoff P, Plotz G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Protein Engineering, International Institute 
of Molecular and Cell Biology, Warsaw, Poland. Jan.Kosinski@uniroma1.it

Missense alterations of the mismatch repair gene MLH1 have been identified in a 
significant proportion of individuals suspected of having Lynch syndrome, a 
hereditary syndrome that predisposes for cancer of colon and endometrium. The 
pathogenicity of many of these alterations, however, is unclear. A number of 
MLH1 alterations are located in the C-terminal domain (CTD) of MLH1, which is 
responsible for constitutive dimerization with PMS2. We analyzed which 
alterations may result in pathogenic effects due to interference with 
dimerization. We used a structural model of CTD of MLH1-PMS2 heterodimer to 
select 19 MLH1 alterations located inside and outside two candidate dimerization 
interfaces in the MLH1-CTD. Three alterations (p.Gln542Leu, p.Leu749Pro, 
p.Tyr750X) caused decreased coexpression of PMS2, which is unstable in the 
absence of interaction with MLH1, suggesting that these alterations interfere 
with dimerization. All three alterations are located within the dimerization 
interface suggested by our model. They also compromised mismatch repair, 
suggesting that defects in dimerization abrogate repair and confirming that all 
three alterations are pathogenic. Additionally, we provided biochemical evidence 
that four alterations with uncertain pathogenicity (p.Ala586Pro, p.Leu636Pro, 
p.Thr662Pro, and p.Arg755Trp) are deleterious because of poor expression or poor 
repair efficiency, and confirm the deleterious effect of eight further 
alterations.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21301
PMCID: PMC2908215
PMID: 20533529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]