1. Ren Fail. 2010 Jul;32(6):666-72. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2010.485289.

Lack of association between transient receptor potential cation channel 6 
polymorphisms and primary membranous glomerulonephritis.

Chen WC(1), Chen SY, Chen CH, Chen HY, Lin YW, Ho TJ, Huang YC, Shen JL, Tsai 
FJ, Chen YH.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Integrated Medicine, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.

Membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN) is one common cause of idiopathic nephrotic 
syndrome. Transient receptor potential cation channel 6 (TRPC6) has been 
identified as causing a familial form of progressive focal and segmental 
glomerulosclerosis. The objective was to clarify the relationship between TRPC6 
polymorphisms and MGN. We recruited a cohort of 134 biopsy-diagnosed MGN 
patients and 265 healthy subjects. Genotyping of TRPC6 polymorphisms was 
performed using allele-specific polymerase chain reaction methods. We then 
analyzed associations between TRPC6 gene polymorphisms and clinical 
manifestations and pathogenesis of MGN. There was no statistically significant 
difference of TRPC6 gene rs3824935 C/T, rs17096918 C/T, and rs4326755 A/G 
polymorphisms between controls and patients with MGN. There was no statistical 
significance of allele frequencies in these two groups. The characteristics of 
clinical parameters in TRPC6 gene (rs3284935) C/T polymorphism revealed no 
difference except proteinuria (p < 0.0005) between CC and non-CC genotype in MGN 
patients. Besides, no apparent statistically significant differences of 
rs17096918 C/T (TT and non-TT) and rs4326755 A/G (AA and non-AA) polymorphisms 
between genotypes were found in the clinical parameters. There is no different 
genotype distribution between normal controls and patients with MGN of TRPC6 
gene. The data also show that TRPC6 gene may not be associated with disease 
clinical course of MGN.

DOI: 10.3109/0886022X.2010.485289
PMID: 20540633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]