1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2011 Mar;46(3):400-7. doi: 10.1038/bmt.2010.135. Epub 
2010 Jun 14.

Relationship between TNFA, TNFB and TNFRII gene polymorphisms and outcome after 
unrelated hematopoietic cell transplantation in a Chinese population.

Xiao HW(1), Lai XY, Luo Y, Shi JM, Tan YM, He JS, Xie WZ, Li L, Zhu XL, Zhu JJ, 
Sun J, Wei GQ, Jin L, Liu LZ, Wu KN, Yu XH, Cai Z, Lin MF, Ye XJ, Huang H.

Author information:
(1)Bone Marrow Transplantation Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.

This study aimed to analyze the association between cytokine gene polymorphisms 
and outcome following allogeneic hematopoietic SCT (allo-HSCT). A total of 138 
unrelated donor/recipient pairs who underwent allo-HSCT from 2001 to 2009 were 
tested for TNFA-1031 (T>C), -863 (C>A), -857 (C>T), -238 (G>A), TNFB+252 (A>G) 
and TNFRII codon 196 (T>G) single nucleotide polymorphisms by multiplex SnaPshot 
analysis. Transplantation involving recipients and/or donors with TNFA-857 C/C 
genotype or TNFB+252 G allele-positivity resulted in a higher incidence of acute 
GVHD (aGVHD), which was independent of HLA mismatching. In multivariate 
analysis, TNFA-857 C/C genotype donors (relative risk (RR)=2.29, P=0.006) and 
TNFB+252 G allele-positive recipients (RR=1.789, P=0.036) were found to be 
significantly associated with an increased incidence of aGVHD. TNFA-857 C/C 
genotype donors (RR=3.748, P=0.002) and TNFB+252 G allele-positive recipients 
(RR=1.823, P=0.063) were also associated with the development of grades II-IV 
aGVHD. TNFRII polymorphism in recipients was also related to relapse rate, but 
no significant associations were found between TNFA, TNFB or TNFRII 196 genotype 
and cGVHD, relapse or overall survival after transplantation. These results 
provide the first report of an association between TNFA, TNFB and TNFRII 
polymorphic features and outcome of allo-HSCT in a Chinese population, and 
suggest an interaction between TNFA-857 and TNFB+252 genotypes and risk of 
aGVHD.

DOI: 10.1038/bmt.2010.135
PMID: 20548340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]