1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jun 10;6(6):e1000951. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000951.

Epigenetic repression of p16(INK4A) by latent Epstein-Barr virus requires the 
interaction of EBNA3A and EBNA3C with CtBP.

Skalska L(1), White RE, Franz M, Ruhmann M, Allday MJ.

Author information:
(1)Section of Virology, Division of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, 
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

As an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases, p16(INK4A) is an important tumour 
suppressor and inducer of cellular senescence that is often inactivated during 
the development of cancer by promoter DNA methylation. Using newly established 
lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) expressing a conditional EBNA3C from 
recombinant EBV, we demonstrate that EBNA3C inactivation initiates chromatin 
remodelling that resets the epigenetic status of p16(INK4A) to permit 
transcriptional activation: the polycomb-associated repressive H3K27me3 histone 
modification is substantially reduced, while the activation-related mark H3K4me3 
is modestly increased. Activation of EBNA3C reverses the distribution of these 
epigenetic marks, represses p16(INK4A) transcription and allows proliferation. 
LCLs lacking EBNA3A express relatively high levels of p16(INK4A) and have a 
similar pattern of histone modifications on p16(INK4A) as produced by the 
inactivation of EBNA3C. Since binding to the co-repressor of transcription CtBP 
has been linked to the oncogenic activity of EBNA3A and EBNA3C, we established 
LCLs with recombinant viruses encoding EBNA3A- and/or EBNA3C-mutants that no 
longer bind CtBP. These novel LCLs have revealed that the chromatin remodelling 
and epigenetic repression of p16(INK4A) requires the interaction of both EBNA3A 
and EBNA3C with CtBP. The repression of p16(INK4A) by latent EBV will not only 
overcome senescence in infected B cells, but may also pave the way for 
p16(INK4A) DNA methylation during B cell lymphomagenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000951
PMCID: PMC2883600
PMID: 20548956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.