1. Anal Biochem. 2010 Oct 15;405(2):246-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2010.06.020. Epub 
2010 Jun 16.

Molecular imaging of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta and casein kinase-1alpha 
kinases.

Nyati S(1), Ranga R, Ross BD, Rehemtulla A, Bhojani MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3beta) and casein kinase-1alpha (CK1alpha) 
are multifunctional kinases that play critical roles in the regulation of a 
number of cellular processes. In spite of their importance, molecular imaging 
tools for noninvasive and real-time monitoring of their kinase activities have 
not been devised. Here we report development of the bioluminescent GSK3beta and 
CK1alpha reporter (BGCR) based on firefly luciferase complementation. Treatment 
of SW620 cells stably expressing the reporter with inhibitors of GSK3beta 
(SB415286 and LiCl) or CK1alpha (CKI-7) resulted in dose- and time-dependent 
increases in BGCR activity that were validated using Western blotting. No 
increase in bioluminescence was observed in the case of S37A mutant (GSK3beta 
inhibitors) or S45A mutant (CKI-7), demonstrating the specificity of the 
reporter. Imaging of mice tumor xenograft generated with BGCR-expressing SW620 
cells following treatment with LiCl showed unique oscillations in GSK3beta 
activity that were corroborated by phosphorylated GSK3beta immunoblotting. Taken 
together, the BGCR is a novel molecular imaging tool that reveals unique insight 
into GSK3beta and CK1alpha kinase activities and may provide a powerful tool in 
experimental therapeutics for rapid optimization of dose and schedule of 
targeted therapies and for monitoring therapeutic response.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2010.06.020
PMCID: PMC2922438
PMID: 20561505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]