1. Bioconjug Chem. 2010 Jul 21;21(7):1190-205. doi: 10.1021/bc900569u.

Functionalized congeners of P2Y1 receptor antagonists: 2-alkynyl 
(N)-methanocarba 2'-deoxyadenosine 3',5'-bisphosphate analogues and conjugation 
to a polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer carrier.

de Castro S(1), Maruoka H, Hong K, Kilbey SM 2nd, Costanzi S, Hechler B, Brown 
GG Jr, Gachet C, Harden TK, Jacobson KA.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Recognition Section and Laboratory of Biological Modeling, National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, 
Maryland, 20892-0810, USA.

The P2Y(1) receptor is a prothrombotic G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) 
activated by ADP. Preference for the North (N) ring conformation of the ribose 
moiety of adenine nucleotide 3',5'-bisphosphate antagonists of the P2Y(1) 
receptor was established by using a ring-constrained methanocarba (a 
bicyclo[3.1.0]hexane) ring as a ribose substitute. A series of covalently 
linkable N(6)-methyl-(N)-methanocarba-2'-deoxyadenosine-3',5'-bisphosphates 
containing extended 2-alkynyl chains was designed, and binding affinity at the 
human (h) P2Y(1) receptor determined. The chain of these functionalized 
congeners contained hydrophilic moieties, a reactive substituent, or biotin, 
linked via an amide. Variation of the chain length and position of an 
intermediate amide group revealed high affinity of carboxylic congener 8 (K(i) 
23 nM) and extended amine congener 15 (K(i) 132 nM), both having a 
2-(1-pentynoyl) group. A biotin conjugate 18 containing an extended 
epsilon-aminocaproyl spacer chain exhibited higher affinity than a shorter 
biotinylated analogue. Alternatively, click coupling of terminal alkynes of 
homologous 2-dialkynyl nucleotide derivatives to alkyl azido groups produced 
triazole derivatives that bound to the P2Y(1) receptor following deprotection of 
the bisphosphate groups. The preservation of receptor affinity of the 
functionalized congeners was consistent with new P2Y(1) receptor modeling and 
ligand docking. Attempted P2Y(1) antagonist conjugation to PAMAM dendrimer 
carriers by amide formation or palladium-catalyzed reaction between an alkyne on 
the dendrimer and a 2-iodopurine-derivatized nucleotide was unsuccessful. A 
dialkynyl intermediate containing the chain length favored in receptor binding 
was conjugated to an azide-derivatized dendrimer, and the conjugate inhibited 
ADP-promoted human platelet aggregation. This is the first example of attaching 
a strategically functionalized P2Y receptor antagonist to a PAMAM dendrimer to 
produce a multivalent conjugate exhibiting a desired biological effect, i.e., 
antithrombotic action.

DOI: 10.1021/bc900569u
PMCID: PMC2912410
PMID: 20565071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]