1. Nat Chem Biol. 2010 Aug;6(8):602-9. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.402. Epub 2010 Jun
27.

Iron traffics in circulation bound to a siderocalin (Ngal)-catechol complex.

Bao G(1), Clifton M, Hoette TM, Mori K, Deng SX, Qiu A, Viltard M, Williams D, 
Paragas N, Leete T, Kulkarni R, Li X, Lee B, Kalandadze A, Ratner AJ, Pizarro 
JC, Schmidt-Ott KM, Landry DW, Raymond KN, Strong RK, Barasch J.

Author information:
(1)College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, New 
York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Chem Biol. 2010 Aug;6(8):568-70. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.411.

The lipocalins are secreted proteins that bind small organic molecules. Scn-Ngal 
(also known as neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin, siderocalin, 
lipocalin 2) sequesters bacterial iron chelators, called siderophores, and 
consequently blocks bacterial growth. However, Scn-Ngal is also prominently 
expressed in aseptic diseases, implying that it binds additional ligands and 
serves additional functions. Using chemical screens, crystallography and 
fluorescence methods, we report that Scn-Ngal binds iron together with a small 
metabolic product called catechol. The formation of the complex blocked the 
reactivity of iron and permitted its transport once introduced into circulation 
in vivo. Scn-Ngal then recycled its iron in endosomes by a pH-sensitive 
mechanism. As catechols derive from bacterial and mammalian metabolism of 
dietary compounds, the Scn-Ngal-catechol-Fe(III) complex represents an 
unforeseen microbial-host interaction, which mimics Scn-Ngal-siderophore 
interactions but instead traffics iron in aseptic tissues. These results 
identify an endogenous siderophore, which may link the disparate roles of 
Scn-Ngal in different diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/nchembio.402
PMCID: PMC2907470
PMID: 20581821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]