1. Alcohol. 2010 Aug;44(5):415-23. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2010.06.002. Epub 2010 
Jul 2.

Distribution of ADH1B, ALDH2, CYP2E1 *6, and CYP2E1 *7B genotypes in Turkish 
population.

Kayaaltı Z(1), Söylemezoğlu T.

Author information:
(1)Ankara University, Institute of Forensic Medicine, Turkey. 
kayaalti@medicine.ankara.edu.tr

The most well-known metabolic pathways from ethanol to acetaldehyde include 
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and the microsomal ethanol oxidizing system that 
involves cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1). Acetaldehyde is further oxidized to 
acetate by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). The genetic variation of ADH1B, ALDH2, 
and CYP2E1 is different among racial populations and cause difference in 
elimination rates of alcohol. The aim of this study was to determine the 
polymorphisms of ADH1B (rs1229984; Arg47His), ALDH2 (rs671; Glu487Lys), CYP2E1*6 
(rs6413432; T7632A), and CYP2E1*7B (rs6413420; G-71T) in unrelated healthy 
Turkish population and compare it with other populations. ADH1B and ALDH2 
polymorphisms were analyzed with an allele-specific polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) assay, and CYP2E1*6 and CYP2E1*7B polymorphisms were genotyped by 
PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism method. ADH1B polymorphism analysis 
yielded the genotype distribution as 83.9% ADH1B*1/1 and 16.1% ADH1B*1/2, and no 
individuals with ALDH2*1/2 and ALDH2*2/2 genotypes were found in Turkish 
population. The genotype frequencies for CYP2E1*6 polymorphism were found as 
85.3% for homozygote common, 14.1% for heterozygote, and 0.6% for homozygote 
uncommon. For CYP2E1*7B polymorphism, the genotype frequencies were determined 
to be 86.5% G/G, 13.5% for G/T; however, no individuals with homozygote uncommon 
genotype were detected. According to our study results, the genotype 
distributions of ADH1B, ALDH2, CYP2E1*6, and CYP2E1*7B in Turkish population 
were similar compared with Caucasian and some European populations, whereas 
differed significantly from East Asian populations. This study may be useful in 
epidemiological studies of the influence of ADH1B, ALDH2, CYP2E1*6, and 
CYP2E1*7B polymorphisms on diseases, including several types of cancer related 
to alcohol consumption and alcohol dependence.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2010.06.002
PMID: 20598484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]