1. Oncol Rep. 2010 Aug;24(2):579-85.

PPARgamma polymorphisms and cancer risk: a meta-analysis involving 32,138 
subjects.

Xu W(1), Li Y, Wang X, Chen B, Liu S, Wang Y, Zhao W, Wu J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, PR China.

The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) has been 
suggested to act as a tumor suppressor gene. Two common variations of PPARgamma, 
P12A (Pro12Ala, rs1801282) and C161T (His447His, rs3856806), are thought to have 
an effect on susceptibility to various carcinomas but the results are 
inconsistent. In this meta-analysis, we assessed published studies of the 
association between two common PPARgamma polymorphisms and cancer risk from 26 
studies with 27,677 subjects for PPARgamma P12A, from 4 studies with 4,461 
subjects for C161T. No significant associations were found in carriers of the 
rare Ala allele of the P12A polymorphism versus the common Pro/Pro genotype 
among the studies. In the subgroup analyses by cancer types, carriers of the Ala 
variant of P12A polymorphism were associated with protection from colorectal 
cancer (OR=0.84, 95% CI=0.72-0.98, Pheterogeneity = 0.014), but the inverse 
association was found in gastric cancer (OR=2.31, 95% CI=1.59-3.36, 
Pheterogeneity = 0.941). In the stratified analysis by ethnicity, no significant 
risks were found among Asians, Americans and Caucasians. For PPARgamma C161T, no 
significant associations were found in any of the studies (OR=1.08, 95% 
CI=0.95-1.23, Pheterogeneity = 0.430) or subgroups. This meta-analysis suggests 
that the Ala allele of the PPARgamma P12A polymorphism might be a protective 
factor for colorectal cancer, but a risk factor for gastric cancer. The 
PPARgamma C161T is marginally associated with cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 20596649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]