1. J Med Food. 2010 Oct;13(5):1081-5. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2009.0243.

A single-dose resveratrol treatment in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

Markert CD(1), Kim E, Gifondorwa DJ, Childers MK, Milligan CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North 
Carolina 27157, USA. cmarkert@wfubmc.edu

The underlying causes of denervation of the neuromuscular junction and eventual 
motor neuron death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) have not been 
resolved. The superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1)(G93A) mutant mouse is a frequently 
used animal model of ALS. We hypothesized that resveratrol (RSV), a polyphenolic 
molecule that enhances mammalian NAD(+)-dependent SIRT1 deacetylases and may 
increase life span, would improve motor function and survival in the SOD1 mouse 
model via modulation of p53 acetylation. Data were collected for mean survival 
times, neuromuscular performance on the ROTOR-RODâ„¢ (San Diego Instruments, San 
Diego, CA, USA), body weight, and p53 acetylation. Mean survival times were not 
statistically different (P=.23) between control and experimental (RSV-fed) 
groups (mean +/- SD, control [n=11] 138 +/- 6 days vs. experimental [n=10] 135 
+/- 8 days). Performance was not significantly different between groups at time 
points corresponding to 50%, 80%, and 90% mean life span (P=.46), nor did RSV 
treatment attenuate body weight loss. Thus although manipulation of SIRT1 
deacetylase activity has effects at the protein level in healthy aging 
organisms, we conclude that RSV treatment does not lead to functional 
improvement or increased longevity in a mouse model of ALS. We speculate that 
RSV-mediated modulation of p53 acetylation is either incapable of increasing or 
insufficient to increase motor performance and longevity in this model of ALS.

DOI: 10.1089/jmf.2009.0243
PMID: 20626250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]