1. Br J Pharmacol. 2010 Aug;160(7):1652-61. doi:
10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.00822.x.

Identification of sites responsible for the potentiating effect of niflumic acid 
on ClC-Ka kidney chloride channels.

Zifarelli G(1), Liantonio A, Gradogna A, Picollo A, Gramegna G, De Bellis M, 
Murgia AR, Babini E, Camerino DC, Pusch M.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Biofisica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Genova, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: ClC-K kidney Cl(-) channels are important for renal and 
inner ear transepithelial Cl(-) transport, and are potentially interesting 
pharmacological targets. They are modulated by niflumic acid (NFA), a 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, in a biphasic way: NFA activates ClC-Ka at 
low concentrations, but blocks the channel above approximately 1 mM. We 
attempted to identify the amino acids involved in the activation of ClC-Ka by 
NFA.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We used site-directed mutagenesis and two-electrode 
voltage clamp analysis of wild-type and mutant channels expressed in Xenopus 
oocytes. Guided by the crystal structure of a bacterial CLC homolog, we screened 
97 ClC-Ka mutations for alterations of NFA effects.
KEY RESULTS: Mutations of five residues significantly reduced the potentiating 
effect of NFA. Two of these (G167A and F213A) drastically altered general gating 
properties and are unlikely to be involved in NFA binding. The three remaining 
mutants (L155A, G345S and A349E) severely impaired or abolished NFA 
potentiation.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The three key residues identified (L155, G345, 
A349) are localized in two different protein regions that, based on the crystal 
structure of bacterial CLC homologs, are expected to be exposed to the 
extracellular side of the channel, relatively close to each other, and are thus 
good candidates for being part of the potentiating NFA binding site. 
Alternatively, the protein region identified mediates conformational changes 
following NFA binding. Our results are an important step towards the development 
of ClC-Ka activators for treating Bartter syndrome types III and IV with 
residual channel activity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.00822.x
PMCID: PMC2936838
PMID: 20649569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]