1. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2010 Jul;33(4):191-7. doi: 10.1097/WNF.0b013e3181de8966.

Labile anger during interferon alfa treatment is associated with a polymorphism 
in tumor necrosis factor alpha.

Lotrich FE(1), Ferrell RE, Rabinovitz M, Pollock BG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. 
lotrichfe@upmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Inflammatory cytokines may influence both labile anger and 
depression. Both psychiatric conditions can occur during interferon alfa-based 
treatments. Evidence also indicates a central nervous system role for tumor 
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), whose expression may be increased by 
interferon alfa. A polymorphism in the promoter region of TNF-alpha has been 
associated with various inflammatory illnesses. We therefore hypothesized that 
this TNF-alpha polymorphism would influence susceptibility to psychiatric 
symptoms during interferon alfa therapy.
METHODS: One hundred five patients with hepatitis C, initially without active 
major depression (major depressive disorder), were treated with interferon alfa 
and then prospectively monitored using the Structured Clinical Interview for 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, the Beck 
Depression Inventory II, the Anger Irritability and Assault Questionnaire, and 
circulating TNF-alpha levels. The A-308G polymorphism (rs1800629) was determined 
using the 5'-nuclease assay. Repeated-measure mixed-effect analyses compared 
changes in symptoms over time.
RESULT: Beck Depression Inventory II score increased during interferon alfa 
therapy (F = 6.2; P < 0.001), with 27% developing MDD. The TNF-alpha A allele 
was associated with worsened labile anger (F = 2.5; P < 0.05) and fatigue (F = 
2.9; P < 0.05) during treatment but not with major depression incidence (chi = 
0.0; P = 0.99) or increased Beck Depression Inventory II (F = 1.2; P = 0.31). 
Labile anger was not predicted by the serotonin transporter polymorphism (F = 
0.8; P = 0.59).
DISCUSSION: During treatment with an exogenous cytokine, vulnerability to 
worsening labile anger-distinct from major depression-is associated with genetic 
variability in TNF-alpha. This has implications both for patients being treated 
with interferon alfa and our understanding of genetic vulnerability for 
different subtypes of dysphoric and mood disorders.

DOI: 10.1097/WNF.0b013e3181de8966
PMCID: PMC2911643
PMID: 20661026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]