1. Biochemistry. 2010 Sep 14;49(36):7839-46. doi: 10.1021/bi100560q.

Tyrosine 112 is essential for organic cation transport by the plasma membrane 
monoamine transporter.

Ho HT(1), Wang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 
98195, USA.

Plasma membrane monoamine transporter (PMAT) is a polyspecific organic cation 
transporter in the solute carrier 29 (SLC29) family. Previous studies suggested 
that the major substrate recognition sites are located within transmembrane 
domains (TM) 1-6, and interaction of PMAT with organic cations may involve 
aromatic residues. In this study, we analyzed the roles of tyrosine and 
tryptophan residues located within TM1-6 with a goal of identifying potential 
residues involved in substrate recognition and translocation. The six tyrosines 
and one tryptophan in this region were each mutated to alanine followed by 
analysis of the mutant's membrane localization and transport activity toward 
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)), serotonin (5-HT), and dopamine. Two 
mutants, Y85A and Y112A, exhibited normal cell surface expressions but lost 
their transport activities toward organic cations. At position Y85, aromatic 
substitution with phenylalanine or tryptophan fully restored organic cation 
transport activity. Interestingly, at position Y112, phenylalanine substitution 
was not allowed. Tryptophan substitution at Y112 partially restored transport 
activity toward 5-HT and dopamine but severely impaired MPP(+) transport. 
Detailed kinetic analyses revealed that tryptophan substitution at Y85 and Y112 
affected the apparent binding affinity (K(m)) and maximal transport velocity 
(V(max)) in a substrate-dependent manner. Together, our data suggest that Y85 
and Y112 are important molecular determinants for PMAT function, and Y112 is 
indispensable for optimal interaction with organic cation substrates. Our 
analyses also suggest the involvement of transmembrane domains 1 and 2 in 
forming the substrate permeation pathway of PMAT.

DOI: 10.1021/bi100560q
PMCID: PMC2995015
PMID: 20687515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]