1. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Oct;10(5):418-26. doi: 
10.1097/ACI.0b013e32833dc75e.

Genome-wide approaches to the etiology of eczema.

Esparza-Gordillo J(1), Marenholz I, Lee YA.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The present review summarizes the new discoveries in the 
genetics of eczema, focusing on the results from the recently published first 
genome-wide association study.
RECENT FINDINGS: The first genome-wide association study for eczema included 10 
000 individuals and provided strong evidence for a new susceptibility locus for 
eczema in chromosome 11q13.5 (P = 7.6 x 10). Importantly, this finding has been 
confirmed by an independent research group. Homozygous carriers of the risk 
allele rs7927894[A] represent 11% of the population and their risk of developing 
eczema is 1.47 times higher than in no-carriers. This polymorphism also confers 
risk to Crohn's disease, suggesting the locus may be related to epithelial 
immunity or differentiation. This study also detected association with the 
epidermal differentiation complex in 1q21 and suggests that additional risk 
factors exist in this region apart from the well established mutations in the 
filaggrin gene.
SUMMARY: The first genome-wide association study for eczema has convincingly 
identified a new susceptibility locus for eczema. However, the exit from this 
study was limited, as only one new locus was identified. Complementary 
strategies aiming to distinguish the 'true-association' signals from the false 
positive results, together with larger sample sizes are required in order to 
achieve the full potential of this promising approach.

DOI: 10.1097/ACI.0b013e32833dc75e
PMID: 20706116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]