1. Biochemistry. 2010 Sep 14;49(36):7854-66. doi: 10.1021/bi1008408.

Modeling of the endosomolytic activity of HA2-TAT peptides with red blood cells 
and ghosts.

Lee YJ(1), Johnson G, Pellois JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

HA2-TAT is a peptide-based delivery agent that combines the pH-sensitive HA2 
fusion peptide from influenza and the cell-penetrating peptide TAT from HIV. 
This chimeric peptide is engineered to induce the cellular uptake of 
macromolecules into endosomes via the TAT moiety and to respond to the 
acidifying lumen of endosomes to cause membrane leakage and release of 
macromolecules into cells via the HA2 moiety. The question of how HA2 and TAT 
affect the properties of one another remains, however, unanswered, and the 
behavior of the peptide inside endosomes is mostly uncharacterized. To address 
these issues, the binding and membrane leakage activity of a glutamic 
acid-enriched analogue E5-TAT was assessed with red blood cells and giant 
unilamellar vesicles as membrane models for endosomes. Hemolysis and microscopy 
assays reveal that E5-TAT binds to membranes in a pH-dependent manner and causes 
membrane leakage by inducing the formation of pores through which macromolecules 
can escape. The TAT moiety contributes to this activity by causing a shift in 
the pH response of E5 and by binding to negatively charged phospholipids. On the 
other hand, TAT binding to glycosaminoglycans reduces the lytic activity of 
E5-TAT. Addition of TAT to the C-terminus of E5 can therefore either increase or 
inhibit the activity of E5 depending on the cellular components present at the 
membrane. Taken together, these results suggest a model for the endosomolytic 
activity of the peptide and provide the basis for the molecular design of future 
delivery agents.

DOI: 10.1021/bi1008408
PMCID: PMC3053598
PMID: 20704453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]