1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Dec;38(22):8370-6. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq700. Epub 2010 
Aug 11.

Atomic resolution structure of CAG RNA repeats: structural insights and 
implications for the trinucleotide repeat expansion diseases.

Kiliszek A(1), Kierzek R, Krzyzosiak WJ, Rypniewski W.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Noskowskiego 
12/14, 61-704 Poznan, Poland.

CAG repeats occur predominantly in the coding regions of human genes, which 
suggests their functional importance. In some genes, these sequences can undergo 
pathogenic expansions leading to neurodegenerative polyglutamine (poly-Q) 
diseases. The mutant transcripts containing expanded CAG repeats possibly 
contribute to pathogenesis in addition to the well-known pathogenic effects of 
mutant proteins. We have analysed two crystal forms of RNA duplexes containing 
CAG repeats: (GGCAGCAGCC)(2). One of the structures has been determined at 
atomic resolution (0.95 Å) and the other at 1.9 Å. The duplexes include 
non-canonical A-A pairs that fit remarkably well within a regular A-helix. All 
the adenosines are in the anti-conformation and the only interaction within each 
A-A pair is a single C2-H2···N1 hydrogen bond. Both adenosines in each A-A pair 
are shifted towards the major groove, although to different extents; the A which 
is the H-bond donor stands out more (the 'thumbs-up' conformation). The main 
effect on the helix conformation is a local unwinding. The CAG repeats and the 
previously examined CUG structures share a similar pattern of electrostatic 
charge distribution in the minor groove, which could explain their affinity for 
the pathogenesis-related MBNL1 protein.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq700
PMCID: PMC3001072
PMID: 20702420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]