1. Biol Chem. 2010 Oct;391(10):1115-30. doi: 10.1515/BC.2010.125.

Multiplex analysis of mitochondrial DNA pathogenic and polymorphic sequence 
variants.

Poole JC(1), Procaccio V, Brandon MC, Merrick G, Wallace DC.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular and Mitochondrial Medicine and Genetics, University of 
California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encompasses two classes of functionally important 
sequence variants: recent pathogenic mutations and ancient adaptive 
polymorphisms. To rapidly and cheaply evaluate both classes of single nucleotide 
variants (SNVs), we have developed an integrated system in which mtDNA SNVs are 
analyzed by multiplex primer extension using the SNaPshot system. A multiplex 
PCR amplification strategy was used to amplify the entire mtDNA, a computer 
program identifies optimal extension primers, and a complete global haplotyping 
system is also proposed. This system genotypes SNVs on multiplexed mtDNA PCR 
products or directly from enriched mtDNA samples and can quantify heteroplasmic 
variants down to 0.8% using a standard curve. With this system, we have 
developed assays for testing the common pathogenic mutations in four multiplex 
panels: two genotype the 13 most common pathogenic mtDNA mutations and two 
genotype the 10 most common Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy mutations along 
with haplogroups J and T. We use a hierarchal system of 140 SNVs to delineate 
the major global mtDNA haplogroups based on a global phylogenetic tree of coding 
region polymorphisms. This system should permit rapid and inexpensive genotyping 
of pathogenic and lineage-specific mtDNA SNVs by clinical and research 
laboratories.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2010.125
PMCID: PMC4023691
PMID: 20707610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]