1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Aug 5;6(8):e1001028. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001028.

A limited number of antibody specificities mediate broad and potent serum 
neutralization in selected HIV-1 infected individuals.

Walker LM(1), Simek MD, Priddy F, Gach JS, Wagner D, Zwick MB, Phogat SK, 
Poignard P, Burton DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science and IAVI Neutralizing Antibody 
Center, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of 
America.

A protective vaccine against HIV-1 will likely require the elicitation of a 
broadly neutralizing antibody (bNAb) response. Although the development of an 
immunogen that elicits such antibodies remains elusive, a proportion of HIV-1 
infected individuals evolve broadly neutralizing serum responses over time, 
demonstrating that the human immune system can recognize and generate NAbs to 
conserved epitopes on the virus. Understanding the specificities that mediate 
broad neutralization will provide insight into which epitopes should be targeted 
for immunogen design and aid in the isolation of broadly neutralizing monoclonal 
antibodies from these donors. Here, we have used a number of new and established 
technologies to map the bNAb specificities in the sera of 19 donors who exhibit 
among the most potent cross-clade serum neutralizing activities observed to 
date. The results suggest that broad and potent serum neutralization arises in 
most donors through a limited number of specificities (1-2 per donor). The major 
targets recognized are an epitope defined by the bNAbs PG9 and PG16 that is 
associated with conserved regions of the V1, V2 and V3 loops, an epitope 
overlapping the CD4 binding site and possibly the coreceptor binding site, an 
epitope sensitive to a loss of the glycan at N332 and distinct from that 
recognized by the bNAb 2G12 and an epitope sensitive to an I165A substitution. 
In approximately half of the donors, key N-linked glycans were critical for 
expression of the epitopes recognized by the bNAb specificities in the sera.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001028
PMCID: PMC2916884
PMID: 20700449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare competing financial 
interests. LMW, SKP, PP, and DRB are inventors on a patent describing the human 
broadly neutralizing antibodies PG9 and PG16 (U.S. provisional patent 
application numbers USSN 61/161,010; USSN 61/165,829; and USSN 61/224,739).