1. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2010 Aug;3(4):314-22. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.937805.

Prevalence of desmosomal protein gene mutations in patients with dilated 
cardiomyopathy.

Elliott P(1), O'Mahony C, Syrris P, Evans A, Rivera Sorensen C, Sheppard MN, 
Carr-White G, Pantazis A, McKenna WJ.

Author information:
(1)Inherited Cardiac Diseases Unit, University College London/The Heart Hospital 
(UCL Hospitals NHS trust), London, UK. perry.elliott@ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy is a familial disorder in 25% to 
50% of patients, but the genetic basis in the majority of cases remains unknown. 
Genes encoding desmosomal proteins, currently regarded as synonymous with 
another disorder, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, are known to 
cause left ventricular dysfunction, but their importance in unselected patients 
with unequivocal dilated cardiomyopathy is unknown. The objective of this study 
was to determine the prevalence of mutations in 5 desmosomal protein genes in 
patients with dilated cardiomyopathy.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied 100 unrelated patients with idiopathic dilated 
cardiomyopathy consecutively referred to a dedicated cardiomyopathy unit. 
Patients underwent clinical evaluation, ECG, echocardiography, exercise testing, 
24-hour ambulatory ECG monitoring, and mutation screening of 5 genes implicated 
in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy: plakoglobin, desmoplakin, 
plakophilin-2, desmoglein-2, and desmocollin-2. Of the 100 patients (mean age at 
evaluation, 46.8+/-13.8 years; range, 17.0 to 72.8 years; male sex, 63%), 5 were 
found to carry pathogenic desmosomal protein gene mutations. An additional 13 
patients had sequence variants of uncertain pathogenic significance and were 
excluded from further comparative analysis. Patients harboring desmosomal gene 
mutations had a phenotype indistinguishable from the 82 noncarriers, with the 
exception of exercise-induced ventricular ectopy, which was more frequent in the 
desmosomal mutation carriers (P=0.033). None of the 5 carriers of desmosomal 
mutations fulfilled current diagnostic criteria for arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy, but 1 had fibrofatty change in the left ventricle at 
autopsy.
CONCLUSIONS: Heart failure caused by a dilated, poorly contracting left 
ventricle and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy have been 
considered distinct clinicopathologic entities. This study suggests that both 
clinical presentations can be caused by mutations in desmosomal protein genes.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.110.937805
PMID: 20716751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]