1. Anal Chem. 2010 Sep 1;82(17):7485-91. doi: 10.1021/ac101806e.

Analysis of isoaspartic Acid by selective proteolysis with Asp-N and electron 
transfer dissociation mass spectrometry.

Ni W(1), Dai S, Karger BL, Zhou ZS.

Author information:
(1)Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis and Department of 
Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

A ubiquitous yet underappreciated protein post-translational modification, 
isoaspartic acid (isoAsp, isoD, or beta-Asp), generated via the deamidation of 
asparagine or isomerization of aspartic acid in proteins, plays a diverse and 
crucial role in aging, as well as autoimmune, cancer, neurodegeneration, and 
other diseases. In addition, formation of isoAsp is a major concern in protein 
pharmaceuticals, as it may lead to aggregation or activity loss. The scope and 
significance of isoAsp have, up to now, not been fully explored, as an unbiased 
screening of isoAsp at low abundance remains challenging. This difficulty is due 
to the subtle difference in the physicochemical properties between isoAsp and 
Asp, e.g., identical mass. In contrast, endoprotease Asp-N (EC 3.4.24.33) 
selectively cleaves aspartyl peptides but not the isoaspartyl counterparts. As a 
consequence, isoaspartyl peptides can be differentiated from those containing 
Asp and also enriched by Asp-N digestion. Subsequently, the existence and site 
of isoaspartate can be confirmed by electron transfer dissociation (ETD) mass 
spectrometry. As little as 0.5% of isoAsp was detected in synthetic beta-amyloid 
and cytochrome c peptides, even though both were initially assumed to be free of 
isoAsp. Taken together, our approach should expedite the unbiased discovery of 
isoAsp.

DOI: 10.1021/ac101806e
PMCID: PMC2936825
PMID: 20712325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]