1. DNA Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;29(11):675-80. doi: 10.1089/dna.2010.1034. Epub 2010
Aug  25.

Association between polymorphisms at small ubiquitin-like modifier 1 and 
nonsyndromic orofacial clefts in Western China.

Jia ZL(1), Li Y, Meng T, Shi B.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Disease and Department of Cleft Lip and Palate 
Surgery, West China College of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR 
China.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier 1 (SUMO1) has been shown to be associated with 
cleft lip and palate in animal models. However, rarely studies have linked SUMO1 
to nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate in humans. The purpose of 
this study was to confirm the contribution of SUMO1 to nonsyndromic orofacial 
clefts in western Han Chinese. Four single-nucleotide polymorphisms were 
investigated in 246 case trios in western China using conditional logistic 
regression, transmission disequilibrium test, and case-parent trio design. 
Strong evidence of linkage disequilibrium was found between these markers and 
the disease in both single-nucleotide polymorphism analysis (G allele at 
rs6761131 [p=0.0008, odds ratio (OR)â€‰= 1.92, 95% confidence interval (CI): 
1.31-2.81], C allele at rs7580433 [p<0.0001, OR=2.79, 95% CI: 1.93-4.03], and G 
allele at rs10185956 [p=0.0069, OR=1.61, 95% CI: 1.14-2.27]) and haplotype 
analysis (A-C for rs6709162-rs7580433 [p=0.00024], C-G for rs7580433-rs10185956 
[p=0.00091], and A-C-A for rs6709162-rs7580433-rs10185956 [p=0.004], among 
others). The risk factors identified in this study may provide a better 
understanding of the etiological role of SUMO1 in nonsyndromic cleft lip with or 
without cleft palate incidence.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2010.1034
PMID: 20738159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]