1. Brain Res. 2010 Oct 21;1357:91-6. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.08.053. Epub
2010  Aug 21.

Association of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Val66Met) genetic polymorphism 
with methamphetamine dependence in a Malaysian population.

Sim MS(1), Mohamed Z, Hatim A, Rajagopal VL, Habil MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. garethsim1983@yahoo.com

Methamphetamine is a highly addictive psychostimulant that has surged in 
popularity worldwide in the last decade. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF), a member of the neurotrophic factor family, is widely expressed in the 
adult mammalian brain and plays an important role in the long-term survival, 
differentiation, and outgrowth of neurons. Previous studies suggested that the 
BDNF gene may be involved in the mechanisms underlying substance dependence. 
This study investigated the association of the BDNF gene Val66Met polymorphism 
with methamphetamine dependence and with psychosis in a Malaysian population 
with different ethnicities. The BDNF Val66Met polymorphism was genotyped by 
PCR-RFLP in 186 male methamphetamine-dependent subjects and in 154 male controls 
of four different ethnicities, namely, Malay, Chinese, Kadazan-Dusun, and Bajau. 
Our results showed that the distribution of the BDNF Val66Met genotype in 
Chinese subjects with methamphetamine dependence (OR=2.6, p=0.015) and 
methamphetamine psychosis (OR=0.2, p = 0.034) were significant compared with 
controls. The frequency of the 66Val allele in methamphetamine-dependent 
subjects was higher than that in the control group, suggesting that the 66Val 
carriers are more susceptible to methamphetamine dependence. However, 66Val 
allele frequency in other ethnicities was not significantly different from the 
controls. The results of the study also showed that in the Chinese 
methamphetamine-dependent subjects, there was a difference in allele frequency 
when comparing those who developed psychosis and those who did not. Our findings 
suggest that the BDNF Val66Met polymorphism may contribute to methamphetamine 
dependence and psychosis in the Chinese population but not in other Malaysian 
ethnicities.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.08.053
PMID: 20736000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]