1. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Sep 1;4:122. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-122.

A systematic investigation of Escherichia coli central carbon metabolism in 
response to superoxide stress.

Rui B(1), Shen T, Zhou H, Liu J, Chen J, Pan X, Liu H, Wu J, Zheng H, Shi Y.

Author information:
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of 
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, 
China.

BACKGROUND: The cellular responses of bacteria to superoxide stress can be used 
to model adaptation to severe environmental changes. Superoxide stress promotes 
the excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that have detrimental 
effects on cell metabolic and other physiological activities. To antagonize such 
effects, the cell needs to regulate a range of metabolic reactions in a 
coordinated way, so that coherent metabolic responses are generated by the 
cellular metabolic reaction network as a whole. In the present study, we have 
used a quantitative metabolic flux analysis approach, together with measurement 
of gene expression and activity of key enzymes, to investigate changes in 
central carbon metabolism that occur in Escherichia coli in response to 
paraquat-induced superoxide stress. The cellular regulatory mechanisms involved 
in the observed global flux changes are discussed.
RESULTS: Flux analysis based on nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and mass 
spectroscopy (MS) measurements and computation provided quantitative results on 
the metabolic fluxes redistribution of the E. coli central carbon network under 
paraquat-induced oxidative stress. The metabolic fluxes of the glycolytic 
pathway were redirected to the pentose phosphate pathway (PP pathway). The 
production of acetate increased significantly, the fluxes associated with the 
TCA cycle decreased, and the fluxes in the glyoxylate shunt increased in 
response to oxidative stress. These global flux changes resulted in an increased 
ratio of NADPH:NADH and in the accumulation of Î±-ketoglutarate.
CONCLUSIONS: Metabolic flux analysis provided a quantitative and global picture 
of responses of the E. coli central carbon metabolic network to oxidative 
stress. Systematic adjustments of cellular physiological state clearly occurred 
in response to changes in metabolic fluxes induced by oxidative stress. 
Quantitative flux analysis therefore could reveal the physiological state of the 
cell at the systems level and is a useful complement to molecular systems 
approaches, such as proteomics and transcription analyses.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-122
PMCID: PMC2944137
PMID: 20809933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]