1. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2010 Oct;36(10):1691-703. doi: 
10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2010.06.020.

Initial investigation of acoustic droplet vaporization for occlusion in canine 
kidney.

Zhang M(1), Fabiilli ML, Haworth KJ, Fowlkes JB, Kripfgans OD, Roberts WW, Ives 
KA, Carson PL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109-5667, USA. maggiez@umich.edu

Acoustic droplet vaporization (ADV) shows promise for spatially and temporally 
targeted tissue occlusion. In this study, substantial tissue occlusion was 
achieved in operatively exposed and transcutaneous canine kidneys by generating 
ADV gas bubbles in the renal arteries or segmental arteries. Fifteen canines 
were anesthetized, among which 10 underwent laparotomy to externalize the left 
kidney and five were undisturbed for transcutaneous ADV. The microbubbles were 
generated by phase conversion of perfluoropentane droplets encapsulated in 
albumin or lipid shells in the blood. A 3.5-MHz single-element therapy 
transducer was aligned with an imaging array in a water tank with direct access 
to the renal artery or a segmental artery. In vivo color flow and spectral 
Doppler imaging were used to identify the target arteries. Tone bursts of 1 kHz 
pulse repetition frequency with 0.25% duty cycle vaporized the droplets during 
bolus passage. Both intracardiac (IC) and intravenous (IV) injections repeatedly 
produced ADV in chosen arteries in externalized kidneys, as seen by B-mode 
imaging. Concurrent with this in two cases was the detection by pulse-wave 
Doppler of blood flow reversal, along with a narrowing of the waveform. 
Localized cortex occlusion was achieved with 87% regional flow reduction in one 
case using IC injections. Vaporization from IV injections resulted in a 
substantial echogenicity increase with an average half-life of 8 min per droplet 
dose. Gas bubbles sufficient to produce some shadowing were generated by 
transcutaneous vaporization of intrarenal artery or IV-administered droplets, 
with a tissue path up to 5.5 cm.

Copyright Â© 2010 World Federation for Ultrasound in Medicine & Biology. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2010.06.020
PMCID: PMC2951622
PMID: 20800939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]