1. J Neurochem. 2010 Nov;115(3):614-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06972.x.
Epub  2010 Sep 28.

Expression and regulation of a low-density lipoprotein receptor exon 12 splice 
variant.

Ling IF(1), Gopalraj RK, Simpson JF, Estus S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0230, USA.

As low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) contributes to cholesterol and 
amyloid beta homeostasis, insights into LDLR regulation may facilitate our 
understanding of cardiovascular disease and Alzheimer's disease. Previously, we 
identified LDLR isoforms that lacked exon 12 or exons 11-12 and that are 
predicted to encode soluble, dominant negative, LDLR. Moreover, these isoforms 
were associated with rs688, an exon 12 polymorphism that was associated with 
LDL-cholesterol and Alzheimer's disease risk. In this study, we present evidence 
that although the truncated LDLR isoforms are translated in vitro, they 
represent < 0.1% of CSF proteins. As these LDLR isoforms likely represent a loss 
of mRNA-encoding functional LDLR, we then focused upon identifying intron-exon 
boundary and exonic splicing enhancer elements critical to splicing. Exon 12 
inclusion is enhanced by altering the 5' splice site in intron 12 towards a 
consensus splice donor sequence, consistent with its being a weak 5' splice 
site. Additionally, of the nine evolutionarily conserved putative splicing 
enhancer regions within exon 12, two regions that flank rs688 were critical to 
exon 12 inclusion. Overall, these results suggest that LDLR splice variants 
represent a loss of mRNA encoding functional LDLR and provide insights into the 
regulatory elements critical for LDLR exon 12 splicing.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2010 International Society for 
Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06972.x
PMCID: PMC2998065
PMID: 20807319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]