1. Mol Microbiol. 2010 Nov;78(4):916-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07378.x. 
Epub 2010 Sep 24.

High-order oligomerization is required for the function of the H-NS family 
member MvaT in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Castang S(1), Dove SL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

H-NS is an abundant DNA-binding protein that has been implicated in the 
silencing of foreign DNA in several different bacteria. The ability of H-NS 
dimers to form higher-order oligomers is thought to aid the polymerization of 
the protein across AT-rich stretches of DNA and facilitate gene silencing. 
Although the oligomerization of H-NS from enteric bacteria has been the subject 
of intense investigation, little is known regarding the oligomerization of H-NS 
family members from bacteria outside of the enterobacteriaceae, many of which 
share little sequence similarity with their enteric counterparts. Here we show 
that MvaT, a member of the H-NS family of proteins from Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 
can form both dimers and higher-order oligomers, and we identify a region within 
MvaT that mediates higher-order oligomer formation. Using genetic assays we 
identify mutants of MvaT that are defective for higher-order oligomer formation. 
We present evidence that these mutants are functionally impaired and exhibit 
DNA-binding defects because of their inability to form higher-order oligomers. 
Our findings support a model in which the ability of MvaT to bind efficiently to 
the DNA depends upon protein-protein interactions between MvaT dimers and 
suggest that the ability to form higher-order oligomers is a conserved and 
essential feature of H-NS family members.

Â© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07378.x
PMCID: PMC2978250
PMID: 20815825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]