1. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 25;5(8):e12375. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012375.

Bilateral renal agenesis/hypoplasia/dysplasia (BRAHD): postmortem analysis of 45 
cases with breakpoint mapping of two de novo translocations.

Harewood L(1), Liu M, Keeling J, Howatson A, Whiteford M, Branney P, Evans M, 
Fantes J, Fitzpatrick DR.

Author information:
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetic and Molecular Medicine, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Bilateral renal agenesis/hypoplasia/dysplasia (BRAHD) is a 
relatively common, lethal malformation in humans. Established clinical risk 
factors include maternal insulin dependent diabetes mellitus and male sex of the 
fetus. In the majority of cases, no specific etiology can be established, 
although teratogenic, syndromal and single gene causes can be assigned to some 
cases.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: 45 unrelated fetuses, stillbirths or infants 
with lethal BRAHD were ascertained through a single regional paediatric 
pathology service (male:female 34:11 or 3.1:1). The previously reported 
phenotypic overlaps with VACTERL, caudal dysgenesis, hemifacial microsomia and 
MÃ¼llerian defects were confirmed. A new finding is that 16/45 (35.6%; m:f 13:3 
or 4.3:1) BRAHD cases had one or more extrarenal malformations indicative of a 
disoder of laterality determination including; incomplete lobulation of right 
lung (seven cases), malrotation of the gut (seven cases) and persistence of the 
left superior vena cava (five cases). One such case with multiple laterality 
defects and sirelomelia was found to have a de novo apparently balanced 
reciprocal translocation 46,XY,t(2;6)(p22.3;q12). Translocation breakpoint 
mapping was performed by interphase fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH) 
using nuclei extracted from archival tissue sections in both this case and an 
isolated bilateral renal agenesis case associated with a de novo 
46,XY,t(1;2)(q41;p25.3). Both t(2;6) breakpoints mapped to gene-free regions 
with no strong evidence of cis-regulatory potential. Ten genes localized within 
500 kb of the t(1;2) breakpoints. Wholemount in-situ expression analyses of the 
mouse orthologs of these genes in embryonic mouse kidneys showed strong 
expression of Esrrg, encoding a nuclear steroid hormone receptor. 
Immunohistochemical analysis showed that Esrrg was restricted to proximal ductal 
tissue within the embryonic kidney.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The previously unreported association of BRAHD with 
laterality defects suggests that renal agenesis may share a common etiology with 
heterotaxy in some cases. Translocation breakpoint mapping identified ESRRG as a 
plausible candidate gene for BRAHD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012375
PMCID: PMC2928268
PMID: 20811621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.