1. Analyst. 2010 Nov;135(11):2945-51. doi: 10.1039/c0an00445f. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Capillary electrophoretic development of aptamers for a glycosylated VEGF 
peptide fragment.

Rose CM(1), Hayes MJ, Stettler GR, Hickey SF, Axelrod TM, Giustini NP, Suljak 
SW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Santa Clara University, Santa 
Clara, CA, USA.

The emergence of functional genomics and proteomics has added to the growing 
need for improved analysis methods that can detect and distinguish between 
protein variants resulting from allelic variation, mutation, or 
post-translational modification. Aptamers, single-stranded DNA or RNA molecules 
that fold into three-dimensional structures conducive to binding targets, have 
become an attractive alternative to antibodies for this type of analysis. 
Although aptamers have been developed for a wide range of target species, very 
few sequences have been identified that bind selectively to proteins with 
specific post-translational modifications. Using capillary electrophoresis-based 
selection, we have developed DNA aptamer sequences that selectively bind an 
N-glycosylated peptide fragment of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). 
The selection method incorporates alternating positive- and counter-selection 
steps in free solution in order to obtain aptamers with both high affinity 
toward the glycosylated target and high selectivity versus a non-glycosylated 
variant. Affinity capillary electrophoresis and surface plasmon resonance 
binding assays indicate these sequences have low-ÂµM dissociation constants and 
preferentially bind the glycosylated peptide with as much as 50-fold 
specificity. Such aptamers could serve as tools for rapid and simple monitoring 
of disease-linked functional changes in proteins, with potential applications in 
drug screening and disease diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1039/c0an00445f
PMCID: PMC2957546
PMID: 20820497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]