1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Sep 28;107(39):16852-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1007896107. Epub 2010 Sep 14.

CD22 EXON 12 deletion as a pathogenic mechanism of human B-precursor leukemia.

Uckun FM(1), Goodman P, Ma H, Dibirdik I, Qazi S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Center 
for Cancer and Blood Diseases, University of Southern California Keck School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90027-0367, USA. fmuckun@chla.usc.edu

Here, we report that primary leukemic cells from infants with newly diagnosed 
B-precursor leukemia express a truncated and functionally defective CD22 
coreceptor protein that is unable to transmit apoptotic signals because it lacks 
most of the intracellular domain, including the key regulatory signal 
transduction elements and all of the cytoplasmic tyrosine residues. Expression 
of this structurally and functionally abnormal CD22 protein is associated with a 
very aggressive in vivo growth of patients' primary leukemia cells causing 
disseminated overt leukemia in SCID mice. The abnormal CD22 coreceptor is 
encoded by a profoundly aberrant mRNA arising from a splicing defect that causes 
the deletion of exon 12 (c.2208-c.2327) (CD22ΔE12) and results in a truncating 
frameshift mutation. The splicing defect is associated with multiple homozygous 
mutations within a 132-bp segment of the intronic sequence between exons 12 and 
13. These mutations cause marked changes in the predicted secondary structures 
of the mutant CD22 pre-mRNA sequences that affect the target motifs for the 
splicing factors hnRNP-L, PTB, and PCBP that are up-regulated in infant leukemia 
cells. Forced expression of the mutant CD22ΔE12 protein in transgenic mice 
perturbs B-cell development, as evidenced by B-precursor/B-cell hyperplasia, and 
corrupts the regulation of gene expression, causing reduced expression levels of 
several genes with a tumor suppressor function. We further show that 
CD22ΔE12-associated unique gene expression signature is a discriminating feature 
of newly diagnosed infant leukemia patients. These striking findings implicate 
CD22ΔE12 as a previously undescribed pathogenic mechanism in human B-precursor 
leukemia.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1007896107
PMCID: PMC2947921
PMID: 20841423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.