1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2010 Dec;23(6):781-94. doi: 
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2010.00773.x.

p53 prevents progression of nevi to melanoma predominantly through cell cycle 
regulation.

Terzian T(1), Torchia EC, Dai D, Robinson SE, Murao K, Stiegmann RA, Gonzalez V, 
Boyle GM, Powell MB, Pollock PM, Lozano G, Robinson WA, Roop DR, Box NF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Charles C Gates Center for Regenerative 
Medicine and Stem Cell Biology, UC Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

p53 is the central member of a critical tumor suppressor pathway in virtually 
all tumor types, where it is silenced mainly by missense mutations. In melanoma, 
p53 predominantly remains wild type, thus its role has been neglected. To study 
the effect of p53 on melanocyte function and melanomagenesis, we crossed the 
‘high-p53’Mdm4+/− mouse to the well-established TP-ras0/+ murine melanoma 
progression model. After treatment with the carcinogen dimethylbenzanthracene 
(DMBA), TP-ras0/+ mice on the Mdm4+/− background developed fewer tumors with a 
delay in the age of onset of melanomas compared to TP-ras0/+ mice. Furthermore, 
we observed a dramatic decrease in tumor growth, lack of metastasis with 
increased survival of TP-ras0/+: Mdm4+/− mice. Thus, p53 effectively prevented 
the conversion of small benign tumors to malignant and metastatic melanoma. p53 
activation in cultured primary melanocyte and melanoma cell lines using 
Nutlin-3, a specific Mdm2 antagonist, supported these findings. Moreover, global 
gene expression and network analysis of Nutlin-3-treated primary human 
melanocytes indicated that cell cycle regulation through the p21WAF1/CIP1 
signaling network may be the key anti-melanomagenic activity of p53.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1755-148X.2010.00773.x
PMCID: PMC3137930
PMID: 20849464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]