1. Haematologica. 2011 Jan;96(1):102-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.026401. Epub 
2010 Sep 17.

Impact of constitutional polymorphisms in VCAM1 and CD44 on CD34+ cell 
collection yield after administration of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 
to healthy donors.

Martín-Antonio B(1), Carmona M, Falantes J, Gil E, Baez A, Suarez M, Marín P, 
Espigado I, Urbano-Ispizua A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Hospital Clinic University of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain. bmartina@clinic.ub.es

Background The number of CD34(+) cells mobilized from bone marrow to peripheral 
blood after administration of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor varies 
greatly among healthy donors. This fact might be explained, at least in part, by 
constitutional differences in genes involved in the interactions tethering 
CD34(+) cells to the bone marrow.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed genetic characteristics associated with CD34(+) 
cell mobilization in 112 healthy individuals receiving granulocyte 
colony-stimulating factor (filgrastim; 10 μg/kg; 5 days).
RESULTS: Genetic variants in VCAM1 and in CD44 were associated with the number 
of CD34(+) cells in peripheral blood after granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 
administration (P = 0.02 and P = 0.04, respectively), with the quantity of 
CD34(+) cells ×10⁶/kg of donor (4.6 versus 6.3; P < 0.001 and 7 versus 5.6; P = 
0.025, respectively), and with total CD34(+) cells ×10⁶ (355 versus 495; P = 
0.002 and 522 versus 422; P = 0.012, respectively) in the first apheresis. Of 
note, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor administration was associated with 
complete disappearance of VCAM1 mRNA expression in peripheral blood. Moreover, 
genetic variants in granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor (CSF3R) and 
in CXCL12 were associated with a lower and higher number of granulocyte 
colony-stimulating factor-mobilized CD34(+) cells/μL in peripheral blood (81 
versus 106; P = 0.002 and 165 versus 98; P=0.02, respectively) and a genetic 
variant in CXCR4 was associated with a lower quantity of CD34(+) cells ×10⁶/kg 
of donor and total CD34(+) cells ×10⁶ (5.3 versus 6.7; P = 0.02 and 399 versus 
533; P = 0.01, respectively). Conclusions In conclusion, genetic variability in 
molecules involved in migration and homing of CD34(+) cells influences the 
degree of mobilization of these cells.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2010.026401
PMCID: PMC3012773
PMID: 20851866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]