1. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jan;33(1):203.e25-33. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.08.002. Epub 2010 Sep 23.

Association and heterogeneity at the GAPDH locus in Alzheimer's disease.

Allen M(1), Cox C, Belbin O, Ma L, Bisceglio GD, Wilcox SL, Howell CC, Hunter 
TA, Culley O, Walker LP, Carrasquillo MM, Dickson DW, Petersen RC, Graff-Radford 
NR, Younkin SG, Ertekin-Taner N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Jacksonville, FL 
32224, USA.

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene (GAPDH) and its paralogs were 
implicated in late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD), although the strength and 
direction of association have not been consistent. We genotyped 3 previously 
reported single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; rs3741916-GAPDH 5' UTR, 
rs2029721-pGAPD, and rs4806173-GAPDHS) in 3 case-control series (2112 cases and 
3808 controls). Rs3741916 showed the strongest LOAD association (p = 0.003). The 
minor allele of rs3741916 showed a protective effect in our combined series 
(odds ratio [OR] = 0.87%, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.79-0.96). This is 
consistent with results from the 2 published follow-up studies and in opposite 
direction of the original report. Meta-analysis of the published series with 
ours suggests presence of heterogeneity (Breslow-Day p < 0.0001). Meta-analysis 
of only the follow-up series including ours revealed a significant protective 
effect for the minor allele of rs3741916 (OR = 0.85%, 95% CI = 0.76-0.96, p = 
0.009). Our results support the presence of LOAD variants and heterogeneity at 
the GAPDH locus. The most promising rs3741916 variant is unlikely to be 
functional given opposing effects in different series. Identification of 
functional variant(s) in this region likely awaits deep sequencing.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.08.002
PMCID: PMC3017231
PMID: 20864222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]