1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 3;285(49):38069-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.147207. Epub 
2010 Oct 5.

Classical NF-kappaB activation negatively regulates noncanonical 
NF-kappaB-dependent CXCL12 expression.

Madge LA(1), May MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Ligation of the lymphotoxin-β receptor (LTβR) by LIGHT (lymphotoxin-related 
inducible ligand that competes for glycoprotein D binding to herpes virus entry 
mediator on T cells (TNFSF14)) activates the noncanonical (NC) NF-κB (nuclear 
factor-κB) pathway and up-regulates CXCL12 gene expression by human umbilical 
vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). In contrast, TNF only activates classical NF-κB 
signaling and does not up-regulate CXCL12. To determine whether cross-talk 
between the classical and NC pathways affects CXCL12 expression, we investigated 
the effects of TNF on LIGHT signaling in HUVEC. We show here that TNF inhibits 
both basal and LIGHT-induced CXCL12 expression. Negative regulation by TNF 
requires the classical NF-κB pathway as inhibition of basal and induced CXCL12 
was reversed in HUVEC-expressing dominant negative IκB (inhibitor of NF-κB) 
kinase (IKK)β (IKKβ(K44M)). TNF did not inhibit the NC NF-κB pathway activation 
as LIGHT-induced p100 processing to p52 was intact; however, TNF either alone or 
together with LIGHT up-regulated p100 and RelB expression and induced the 
nuclear localization of p100-RelB complexes. Enhanced p100 and RelB expression 
was inhibited by IKKβ(K44M), which led us to question whether the IκB function 
of elevated p100 mediates the inhibition of CXCL12 expression by TNF. We 
retrovirally transduced HUVEC to express p100 at a level similar to that 
up-regulated by TNF; however, basal and LIGHT-induced CXCL12 expression was 
normal in the transduced cells. In contrast, ectopic RelB expression 
recapitulated the effects of TNF on NC signaling and inhibited basal and 
LIGHT-induced CXCL12 expression by HUVEC. Our findings therefore demonstrate 
that TNF-induced classical NF-κB signaling up-regulates RelB expression that 
inhibits both basal and NC NF-κB-dependent CXCL12 expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.147207
PMCID: PMC2992241
PMID: 20923761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]