1. Cancer Res. 2010 Dec 1;70(23):9846-54. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3001.
Epub  2010 Oct 8.

Preclinical evaluation of AMG 900, a novel potent and highly selective 
pan-aurora kinase inhibitor with activity in taxane-resistant tumor cell lines.

Payton M(1), Bush TL, Chung G, Ziegler B, Eden P, McElroy P, Ross S, Cee VJ, 
Deak HL, Hodous BL, Nguyen HN, Olivieri PR, Romero K, Schenkel LB, Bak A, 
Stanton M, Dussault I, Patel VF, Geuns-Meyer S, Radinsky R, Kendall RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology Research, Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, California 91320, 
USA. mpayton@amgen.com

In mammalian cells, the aurora kinases (aurora-A, -B, and -C) play essential 
roles in regulating cell division. The expression of aurora-A and -B is elevated 
in a variety of human cancers and is associated with high proliferation rates 
and poor prognosis, making them attractive targets for anticancer therapy. AMG 
900 is an orally bioavailable, potent, and highly selective pan-aurora kinase 
inhibitor that is active in taxane-resistant tumor cell lines. In tumor cells, 
AMG 900 inhibited autophosphorylation of aurora-A and -B as well as 
phosphorylation of histone H3 on Ser(10), a proximal substrate of aurora-B. The 
predominant cellular response of tumor cells to AMG 900 treatment was aborted 
cell division without a prolonged mitotic arrest, which ultimately resulted in 
cell death. AMG 900 inhibited the proliferation of 26 tumor cell lines, 
including cell lines resistant to the antimitotic drug paclitaxel and to other 
aurora kinase inhibitors (AZD1152, MK-0457, and PHA-739358), at low nanomolar 
concentrations. Furthermore, AMG 900 was active in an AZD1152-resistant HCT116 
variant cell line that harbors an aurora-B mutation (W221L). Oral administration 
of AMG 900 blocked the phosphorylation of histone H3 in a dose-dependent manner 
and significantly inhibited the growth of HCT116 tumor xenografts. Importantly, 
AMG 900 was broadly active in multiple xenograft models, including 3 
multidrug-resistant xenograft models, representing 5 tumor types. AMG 900 has 
entered clinical evaluation in adult patients with advanced cancers and has the 
potential to treat tumors refractory to anticancer drugs such as the taxanes.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3001
PMID: 20935223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]