1. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2010 Dec;17(6):561-7. doi: 
10.1097/MED.0b013e32834041d4.

Disorders of phosphorus homeostasis.

Lee R(1), Weber TJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The study of phosphorus physiology and investigations into 
clinical disorders of phosphorus metabolism has blossomed over the past decade. 
Recent work has confirmed and further extended our knowledge of basic mechanisms 
of phosphorus metabolism.
RECENT FINDINGS: This review will focus on FGF-23 and Klotho, and on the recent 
further dissection of their roles in phosphorus and skeletal metabolism. 
Additionally, this review will detail recent studies that implicate a role for 
these phosphaturic and vitamin D regulating factors in extraskeletal 
calcification, including that occurring in soft tissue and vascular beds.
SUMMARY: These findings in total provide fertile ground for investigations into 
the cause and treatment of abnormal skeletal and extraskeletal calcification in 
patients with inherited hypophosphatemic disorders. More importantly, and 
certainly with wider potential clinical application, these studies likewise 
imply a role for these factors in the pathogenesis of accelerated cardiovascular 
disease that occurs in patients with the most common hyperphosphatemic disorder, 
chronic kidney disease. Future studies are needed to confirm a harmful or 
possibly even beneficial role for FGF-23 and other factors in these disease 
states, and to determine whether therapeutic manipulation of these factors does 
truly affect clinical outcomes in patients with hypophosphatemia and 
hyperphosphatemia.

DOI: 10.1097/MED.0b013e32834041d4
PMCID: PMC3740176
PMID: 20962635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]