1. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 18;5(10):e13488. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013488.

Silencing mediated by the Schizosaccharomyces pombe HIRA complex is dependent 
upon the Hpc2-like protein, Hip4.

Anderson HE(1), Kagansky A, Wardle J, Rappsilber J, Allshire RC, Whitehall SK.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: HIRA (or Hir) proteins are conserved histone chaperones that 
function in multi-subunit complexes to mediate replication-independent 
nucleosome assembly. We have previously demonstrated that the 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe HIRA proteins, Hip1 and Slm9, form a complex with a 
TPR repeat protein called Hip3. Here we have identified a new subunit of this 
complex.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To identify proteins that interact with the HIRA 
complex, rapid affinity purifications of Slm9 were performed. Multiple 
components of the chaperonin containing TCP-1 complex (CCT) and the 19S subunit 
of the proteasome reproducibly co-purified with Slm9, suggesting that HIRA 
interacts with these complexes. Slm9 was also found to interact with a 
previously uncharacterised protein (SPBC947.08c), that we called Hip4. Hip4 
contains a HRD domain which is a characteristic of the budding yeast and human 
HIRA/Hir-binding proteins, Hpc2 and UBN1. Co-precipitation experiments revealed 
that Hip4 is stably associated with all of the other components of the HIRA 
complex and deletion of hip4(+) resulted in the characteristic phenotypes of 
cells lacking HIRA function, such as temperature sensitivity, an elongated cell 
morphology and hypersensitivity to the spindle poison, thiabendazole. Moreover, 
loss of Hip4 function alleviated the heterochromatic silencing of reporter genes 
located in the mating type locus and centromeres and was associated with 
increased levels of non-coding transcripts derived from centromeric repeat 
sequences. Hip4 was also found to be required for the distinct form of silencing 
that controls the expression of Tf2 LTR retrotransposons.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Overall, these results indicate that Hip4 is an 
integral component of the HIRA complex that is required for transcriptional 
silencing at multiple loci.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013488
PMCID: PMC2956695
PMID: 20976105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.