1. Endocrine. 2010 Dec;38(3):377-85. doi: 10.1007/s12020-010-9391-8. Epub 2010
Oct  23.

Clinical, biochemical, and molecular findings in Argentinean patients with 
goitrous congenital hypothyroidism.

Chiesa A(1), Rivolta CM, Targovnik HM, Gruñeiro-Papendieck L.

Author information:
(1)División Endocrinología, Hospital de Niños "Ricardo Gutiérrez", Centro de 
Investigaciones Endocrinológicas, CEDIE-CONICET, Gallo 1330, 1425 Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. achiesa@cedie.org.ar

We describe the clinical, biochemical, and molecular findings of a cohort of 
Argentinean patients with congenital hypothyroidism (CH) and goiter studied to 
characterize iodide organification and thyroglobulin (TG) defects. 20 CH 
patients (16 unrelated) were grouped according to serum TG levels and a 
perchlorate discharge test (PDT) in: group 1 (G1): nine patients with high TG 
and PDT > 10% who were studied for tiroperoxidase (TPO), dual oxidase 2 (DUOX2), 
and dual oxidase A2 (DUOXA2) defects and group 2 (G2): 11 patients with low TG 
and PDT < 10% studied for TG defects. Goiter characteristics, outcome, and TT₄ 
and TT₃ levels without treatment were compared between groups. 6/9 G1 patients 
harbored mutations in TPO gene and 3/9 in DUOX2 gene. In G2, mutations of TG 
gene were found in 3/11 homozygous, 5/11 compound heterozygous, and 3/11 
heterozygous patients. Goiter was only evidenced by thyroid scan in the neonatal 
period in both groups; was moderately enlarged in patients diagnosed during 
infancy. In the late detected patients, goiter was big and nodular in G1 while 
diffuse and moderate in G2. Early detected patients grew and developed normally 
while those diagnosed late were severely mentally retarded in G1 and only mildly 
retarded in G2. Thyroid hormone levels of G1 were significantly lower than those 
of G2 P < 0.01. Molecular approach to characterize defects in organification and 
TG defects was optimized by TG measurements and PDT. Clinical and biochemical 
differences based on molecular findings will allow further investigations on 
genotype-phenotype relationships.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-010-9391-8
PMID: 20972728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]