1. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 26;5(10):e13638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013638.

Caspase-10-dependent cell death in Fas/CD95 signalling is not abrogated by 
caspase inhibitor zVAD-fmk.

Lafont E(1), Milhas D, Teissié J, Therville N, Andrieu-Abadie N, Levade T, 
Benoist H, Ségui B.

Author information:
(1)U858 INSERM (Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale), 
Département Cancer, Equipe 14, Toulouse, France.

BACKGROUND: Upon CD95/Fas ligation, the initiator caspase-8 is known to activate 
effector caspases leading to apoptosis. In the presence of zVAD-fmk, a 
broad-spectrum caspase inhibitor, Fas engagement can also trigger an 
alternative, non-apoptotic caspase-independent form of cell death, which is 
initiated by RIP1. Controversy exists as to the ability of caspase-10 to mediate 
cell death in response to FasL (CD95L or CD178). Herein, the role of caspase-10 
in FasL-induced cell death has been re-evaluated.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The present study shows that FasL-induced 
cell death was completely impaired in caspase-8- and caspase-10-doubly deficient 
(I9-2e) Jurkat leukaemia T-cell lines. Over-expressing of either caspase-8 or 
caspase-10 in I9-2e cells triggered cell death and restored sensitivity to FasL, 
further arguing for a role of both initiator caspases in Fas apoptotic 
signalling. In the presence of zVAD-fmk, FasL triggered an alternative form of 
cell death similarly in wild-type (A3) and in caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells 
expressing endogenous caspase-10 (clone I9-2d). Cell death initiated by Fas 
stimulation in the presence of zVAD-fmk was abrogated in I9-2e cells as well as 
in HeLa cells, which did not express endogenous caspase-10, indicating that 
caspase-10 somewhat participates in this alternative form of cell death. 
Noteworthy, ectopic expression of caspase-10 in I9-2e and HeLa cells restored 
the ability of FasL to trigger cell death in the presence of zVAD-fmk. As a 
matter of fact, FasL-triggered caspase-10 processing still occurred in the 
presence of zVAD-fmk.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Altogether, these data provide genetic evidence 
for the involvement of initiator caspase-10 in FasL-induced cell death and 
indicate that zVAD-fmk does not abrogate caspase-10 processing and cytotoxicity 
in Fas signalling. Our study also questions the existence of an alternative 
caspase-independent cell death pathway in Fas signalling.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013638
PMCID: PMC2964310
PMID: 21049020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.