1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 21;286(3):1987-98. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.169862. Epub
2010  Nov 16.

Structure and catalysis of acylaminoacyl peptidase: closed and open subunits of 
a dimer oligopeptidase.

Harmat V(1), Domokos K, Menyhárd DK, Palló A, Szeltner Z, Szamosi I, Beke-Somfai 
T, Náray-Szabó G, Polgár L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Structural Chemistry and Biology and HAS-ELTE Protein Modeling 
Group, Institute of Chemistry, Eötvös Loránd University, Pázmány P. sétány 1/A, 
H-1117 Budapest, Hungary.

Acylaminoacyl peptidase from Aeropyrum pernix is a homodimer that belongs to the 
prolyl oligopeptidase family. The monomer subunit is composed of one hydrolase 
and one propeller domain. Previous crystal structure determinations revealed 
that the propeller domain obstructed the access of substrate to the active site 
of both subunits. Here we investigated the structure and the kinetics of two 
mutant enzymes in which the aspartic acid of the catalytic triad was changed to 
alanine or asparagine. Using different substrates, we have determined the pH 
dependence of specificity rate constants, the rate-limiting step of catalysis, 
and the binding of substrates and inhibitors. The catalysis considerably 
depended both on the kind of mutation and on the nature of the substrate. The 
results were interpreted in terms of alterations in the position of the 
catalytic histidine side chain as demonstrated with crystal structure 
determination of the native and two mutant structures (D524N and D524A). 
Unexpectedly, in the homodimeric structures, only one subunit displayed the 
closed form of the enzyme. The other subunit exhibited an open gate to the 
catalytic site, thus revealing the structural basis that controls the 
oligopeptidase activity. The open form of the native enzyme displayed the 
catalytic triad in a distorted, inactive state. The mutations affected the 
closed, active form of the enzyme, disrupting its catalytic triad. We concluded 
that the two forms are at equilibrium and the substrates bind by the 
conformational selection mechanism.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.169862
PMCID: PMC3023495
PMID: 21084296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]