1. S Afr Med J. 2010 Nov 9;100(11):741-5. doi: 10.7196/samj.4104.

Genetic variations in androgen metabolism genes and associations with prostate 
cancer in South African men.

Fernandez P(1), De Beer PM, Van der Merwe L, Heyns CF.

Author information:
(1)Stellenbosch University. pf3@sun.ac.za.

Background. In South Africa white men have the highest incidence of prostate 
cancer (PCa), coloured (mixed ancestry) men have an intermediate incidence, and 
low incidences are reported for black and Asian men. It has been suggested that 
ethnic differences in incidence and mortality of PCa are related to genetic 
variations in genes that regulate androgen metabolism. We investigated the role 
of genetic variants in the androgen metabolism genes and the probability of 
developing PCa in South African coloured and white men. Methods. Genotype and 
allele counts and frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
CYP3A5, CYP3A4 and CYP3A43 were assessed in coloured men (160 case individuals, 
146 control individuals) and white men (121 case individuals, 141 control 
individuals). Results. A genetic association indicating an increased probability 
of developing PCa was observed with the G allele of the SNP rs2740574 in CYP3A4 
in coloured men, the A allele of rs776746 (CYP3A5) and the G allele of rs2740574 
(CYP3A4) in white men, and the G allele of rs2740574 and the C allele of 
rs501275 (CYP3A43) in the combined ethnic groups analysis. In addition, we 
identified allele combinations (termed haplotypes) with significantly higher 
frequencies in the PCa case individuals than in the control individuals. 
Conclusions. The findings support the role of variants in genes that regulate 
androgen metabolism and the probability of developing PCa. The study paves the 
way to identify other genetic associations in South African men, and to 
establish genetic profiles that could be used to determine disease progression 
and prognosis.

DOI: 10.7196/samj.4104
PMID: 21081028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]