1. Genet Med. 2011 Jan;13(1):1-16. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181faa0f2.

Factor V Leiden thrombophilia.

Kujovich JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Northwest Cancer Specialists, Portland, OR 97227, USA. kujovich@hotmail.com

Factor V Leiden is a genetic disorder characterized by a poor anticoagulant 
response to activated Protein C and an increased risk for venous 
thromboembolism. Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are the most 
common manifestations, but thrombosis in unusual locations also occurs. The 
current evidence suggests that the mutation has at most a modest effect on 
recurrence risk after initial treatment of a first venous thromboembolism. 
Factor V Leiden is also associated with a 2- to 3-fold increased relative risk 
for pregnancy loss and possibly other obstetric complications, although the 
probability of a successful pregnancy outcome is high. The clinical expression 
of Factor V Leiden is influenced by the number of Factor V Leiden alleles, 
coexisting genetic and acquired thrombophilic disorders, and circumstantial risk 
factors. Diagnosis requires the activated Protein C resistance assay (a 
coagulation screening test) or DNA analysis of the F5 gene, which encodes the 
Factor V protein. The first acute thrombosis is treated according to standard 
guidelines. Decisions regarding the optimal duration of anticoagulation are 
based on an individualized assessment of the risks for venous thromboembolism 
recurrence and anticoagulant-related bleeding. In the absence of a history of 
thrombosis, long-term anticoagulation is not routinely recommended for 
asymptomatic Factor V Leiden heterozygotes, although prophylactic 
anticoagulation may be considered in high-risk clinical settings. In the absence 
of evidence that early diagnosis reduces morbidity or mortality, decisions 
regarding testing at-risk family members should be made on an individual basis.

DOI: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181faa0f2
PMID: 21116184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]