1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2011 Jan-Feb;15(1-2):5-10. doi: 
10.1089/gtmb.2010.0083. Epub 2010 Nov 30.

The role of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 677 and 1298 polymorphisms 
in Cretan children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Karathanasis NV(1), Stiakaki E, Goulielmos GN, Kalmanti M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University Hospital of 
Heraklion, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common form of malignancy in 
children. Recently, many studies have examined factors influencing both the 
susceptibility to ALL and the metabolism of widely used chemotherapeutic agents. 
These factors include, among others, single-nucleotide polymorphisms in various 
genes, such as the gene encoding for methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 
(MTHFR), which has been proven polymorphic at the nucleotide positions 677 and 
1298. Thirty-five children with ALL and 48 healthy adults of Cretan origin were 
genotyped for the presence of the MTHFR 677 and 1298 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms. The possible correlation of the polymorphisms with the risk for 
ALL and the presence of methotrexate-induced toxicities were examined. No 
significant association between the MTHFR genotypes and the susceptibility to 
ALL was observed. A borderline statistically significant relationship was 
detected after methotrexate administration, between the C677T genotype 
(polymorphisms) and leukopenia (p = 0.050) and between the A1298C polymorphism 
and normal aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase values (p = 0.065 and 
p = 0.053, respectively), which was strengthened for aspartate transaminase, 
after grouping the A1298A and A1298C genotypes together (p = 0.039). In our 
population the MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms are related with hematologic 
toxicity and hepatotoxicity, respectively, and could be suggested as prognostic 
factors for these adverse events.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0083
PMID: 21117954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]