1. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Jan 25;488(3):283-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.11.048.
Epub  2010 Nov 24.

Correlation of complement factor H gene polymorphisms with exudative age-related 
macular degeneration in a Chinese cohort.

Dong L(1), Qu Y, Jiang H, Dai H, Zhou F, Xu X, Bi H, Pan X, Dang G.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Medical Department of Medical School, Shandong University, Jinan, 
China.

To evaluate the association between complement factor H (CFH) gene polymorphism 
and the risk of exudative age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in a 
case-control study in a Chinese cohort. One hundred and thirty-six exudative AMD 
patients and 140 age- and sex-matched control subjects were recruited. We 
genotyped 3 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), namely, -257C>T 
(rs3753394), Y402H (rs1061170) and IVS15 (rs1329428), genetic analyses were 
performed on all available genotype data. All the possible haplotypes of these 3 
SNPs were detected. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and allele-specific 
restriction endonuclease digestion were performed, some PCR products of these 3 
SNPs were sequenced. The risk alleles (T, C or G) of the 3 SNPs conferred 
1.72-fold, 3.14-fold, and 1.79-fold of increased likelihood of the disease, 
respectively (P<0.05). The heterozygous genotype in rs1061170 (TC) revealed 
significant association, meanwhile rs3753394 and rs1329428 had a slight 
association with the disease, respectively. Significant differences were shown 
in the risk alleles in the 3 SNPs among different Chinese cohort. Low linkage 
disequilibrium was found among the 3 SNPs. The haplotypes TCG and CTG revealed 
as risk factors, whereas the protective haplotype CTA was over-represented in 
controls. We found significant association between risk alleles (T, C or G) of 
the 3 SNPs and the disease. The genetic divergence across multiple populations 
within Chinese existed. Risk haplotypes and protective haplotype were found in 
this study.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.11.048
PMID: 21111031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]