1. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Jan 12;133(1):73-80. doi: 10.1021/ja107810r. Epub 2010 Dec
 10.

Structural signature of the MYPT1-PP1 interaction.

Pinheiro AS(1), Marsh JA, Forman-Kay JD, Peti W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Physiology and Biotechnology, Brown 
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA.

Muscle relaxation is triggered by the dephosphorylation of Ser19 in the myosin 
regulatory light chain. This reaction is catalyzed by the holoenzyme myosin 
phosphatase (MP), which includes the catalytic subunit protein phosphatase 1 
(PP1) and the regulatory targeting subunit (MYPT). MYPT1 (myosin phosphatase 
targeting subunit 1) is responsible for both targeting the holoenzyme to 
subcellular compartments in the muscle and directing PP1 specificity toward 
myosin. To understand the molecular events leading to the MYPT1-PP1 holoenzyme 
formation, we used NMR spectroscopy to determine the structural and dynamic 
characteristics of unbound MYPT1. This allowed the conformations of MYPT1 in the 
free, unbound state to be directly compared to the PP1-bound state. Our results 
show that MYPT1(1-98) behaves like a two-domain protein in solution. The first 
40 residues of MYPT1(1-98), the disordered region, are intrinsically disordered 
and highly dynamic, whereas residues 41-98, the folded ankyrin-repeat region, 
are well-structured and rigid. Furthermore, the integrated use of NMR and 
biophysical data enabled us to calculate an ensemble model for MYPT1(1-98). The 
most prominent structural feature of the MYPT1(1-98) ensemble is a 25% populated 
transient α-helix in the disordered region of MYPT1(1-98). This α-helix becomes 
fully populated when bound to PP1 and, as we show, likely plays a central role 
in the formation of the MYPT1-PP1 holoenzyme complex. Finally, this combined 
analysis shows that the structural and dynamic behaviors exhibited by MYPT1 for 
PP1 are distinct from those of any other previously analyzed PP1 regulatory 
protein. Collectively, these data enable us to present a new model of the 
molecular events that drive MYPT1-PP1 holoenzyme formation and demonstrate that 
there are structural differences in unbound PP1 regulators that have not been 
previously observed. Thus, this work adds significant insights to the currently 
limited data for molecular structures and dynamics of PP1 regulators.

DOI: 10.1021/ja107810r
PMCID: PMC3016445
PMID: 21142030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]