1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Dec 28;107(52):22671-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1009437108. Epub 2010 Dec 8.

Negative regulation of ciliary length by ciliary male germ cell-associated 
kinase (Mak) is required for retinal photoreceptor survival.

Omori Y(1), Chaya T, Katoh K, Kajimura N, Sato S, Muraoka K, Ueno S, Koyasu T, 
Kondo M, Furukawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 
Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.

Cilia function as cell sensors in many organs, and their disorders are referred 
to as "ciliopathies." Although ciliary components and transport machinery have 
been well studied, regulatory mechanisms of ciliary formation and maintenance 
are poorly understood. Here we show that male germ cell-associated kinase (Mak) 
regulates retinal photoreceptor ciliary length and subcompartmentalization. Mak 
was localized both in the connecting cilia and outer-segment axonemes of 
photoreceptor cells. In the Mak-null retina, photoreceptors exhibit elongated 
cilia and progressive degeneration. We observed accumulation of intraflagellar 
transport 88 (IFT88) and IFT57, expansion of kinesin family member 3A (Kif3a), 
and acetylated α-tubulin signals in the Mak-null photoreceptor cilia. We found 
abnormal rhodopsin accumulation in the Mak-null photoreceptor cell bodies at 
postnatal day 14. In addition, overexpression of retinitis pigmentosa 1 (RP1), a 
microtubule-associated protein localized in outer-segment axonemes, induced 
ciliary elongation, and Mak coexpression rescued excessive ciliary elongation by 
RP1. The RP1 N-terminal portion induces ciliary elongation and increased 
intensity of acetylated α-tubulin labeling in the cells and is phosphorylated by 
Mak. These results suggest that Mak is essential for the regulation of ciliary 
length and is required for the long-term survival of photoreceptors.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1009437108
PMCID: PMC3012466
PMID: 21148103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.