1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 18;286(7):5100-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.172254. Epub
2010  Dec 9.

Proteasome-independent degradation of canonical NFkappaB complex components by 
the NleC protein of pathogenic Escherichia coli.

Mühlen S(1), Ruchaud-Sparagano MH, Kenny B.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University Medical 
School, Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.

The NFκB transcription factor is a key component of immune and inflammatory 
signaling as its activation induces the expression of antimicrobial reagents, 
chemokines, cytokines, and anti-apoptotic factors. Many pathogens encode 
effector proteins that target factors regulating NFκB activity and can provide 
novel insights on regulatory mechanisms. Given the link of NFκB dysfunction with 
inflammatory diseases and some cancers, these effectors have therapeutic 
potential. Here, screening enteropathogenic Escherichia coli proteins for those 
implicated in suppressing NFκB function revealed that eGFP-NleC, unlike eGFP, 
strongly inhibited basal and TNFα-induced NFκB reporter activity to prevent 
secretion of the chemokine, IL-8. Work involving NleC variants, chemical 
inhibitors, and immunoprecipitation studies support NleC being a zinc 
metalloprotease that degrades NFκB-IκBα complexes. The findings are consistent 
with features between residues 33-65 recruiting NFκB for proteasomal-independent 
degradation by a mechanism inhibited by metalloprotease inhibitors or disruption 
of a consensus zinc metalloprotease motif spanning NleC residues 183-187. This 
raises the prospect that mammalian cells, or other pathogens, employ a similar 
mechanism to modulate NFκB activity. Moreover, NleC represents a novel tool for 
validating NFκB as a therapeutic target and, indeed, as a possible therapeutic 
reagent.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.172254
PMCID: PMC3037621
PMID: 21148319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]