1. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2010 Dec;64(6):652-8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1819.2010.02151.x.

Probable variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease in Asia: a case report from Taiwan 
and review of two prior cases.

Yang CW(1), Fuh JL, Wang SJ, Lirng JF, Yang CC, Cheng SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Neurological Institute, National Yang-Ming 
University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

New variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (vCJD) was first identified in the UK in 
1996, and was causally linked to bovine spongiform encephalopathy. Herein we 
report the first case of vCJD in Taiwan: a 34-year-old man who had lived in the 
UK between 1989 and 1997. The patient presented with depression, irritability, 
personality change, painful feet and allodynia, followed by gait ataxia and 
cognitive impairment. Electroencephalograms did not show the typical appearance 
of sporadic CJD. The cerebrospinal fluid 14-3-3 protein immunoassay was 
negative. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed high signal lesions 
involving bilateral caudate nuclei, left lentiform nucleus, bilateral 
dorsomedial thalami and pulvinar on fluid-attenuation inversion recovery, T2- 
and diffusion-weighted imaging. Prion protein gene analysis showed homozygous 
for methionine at codon 129. The patient developed akinetic mutism at 16 months 
and died at 28 months after onset. The clinical presentation and neuroimaging 
findings were compatible with the vCJD cases reported since 1996, and met the 
World Health Organization Case Definition for probable vCJD. In this 
communication, we also review two other cases of vCJD in Asia. All three cases 
were assumed as imported cases from the UK because of the residential or travel 
history of the patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1819.2010.02151.x
PMID: 21155168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]