1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 9;5(12):e15553. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015553.

Deletion of CDKAL1 affects mitochondrial ATP generation and first-phase insulin 
exocytosis.

Ohara-Imaizumi M(1), Yoshida M, Aoyagi K, Saito T, Okamura T, Takenaka H, 
Akimoto Y, Nakamichi Y, Takanashi-Yanobu R, Nishiwaki C, Kawakami H, Kato N, 
Hisanaga S, Kakei M, Nagamatsu S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: A variant of the CDKAL1 gene was reported to be associated with type 
2 diabetes and reduced insulin release in humans; however, the role of CDKAL1 in 
β cells is largely unknown. Therefore, to determine the role of CDKAL1 in 
insulin release from β cells, we studied insulin release profiles in CDKAL1 gene 
knockout (CDKAL1 KO) mice.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Total internal reflection fluorescence imaging of CDKAL1 KO 
β cells showed that the number of fusion events during first-phase insulin 
release was reduced. However, there was no significant difference in the number 
of fusion events during second-phase release or high K(+)-induced release 
between WT and KO cells. CDKAL1 deletion resulted in a delayed and slow increase 
in cytosolic free Ca(2+) concentration during high glucose stimulation. 
Patch-clamp experiments revealed that the responsiveness of ATP-sensitive K(+) 
(K(ATP)) channels to glucose was blunted in KO cells. In addition, 
glucose-induced ATP generation was impaired. Although CDKAL1 is homologous to 
cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) regulatory subunit-associated protein 1, there 
was no difference in the kinase activity of CDK5 between WT and CDKAL1 KO 
islets.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We provide the first report describing the function of 
CDKAL1 in β cells. Our results indicate that CDKAL1 controls first-phase insulin 
exocytosis in β cells by facilitating ATP generation, K(ATP) channel 
responsiveness and the subsequent activity of Ca(2+) channels through pathways 
other than CDK5-mediated regulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015553
PMCID: PMC3000340
PMID: 21151568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.