1. J Biomol NMR. 2011 Jan;49(1):27-38. doi: 10.1007/s10858-010-9458-0. Epub 2010 
Dec 14.

A novel strategy for NMR resonance assignment and protein structure 
determination.

Lemak A(1), Gutmanas A, Chitayat S, Karra M, Farès C, Sunnerhagen M, Arrowsmith 
CH.

Author information:
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute and The Campbell Family Cancer Research Institute, 
Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, 101 College Street, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada.

The quality of protein structures determined by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
spectroscopy is contingent on the number and quality of experimentally-derived 
resonance assignments, distance and angular restraints. Two key features of 
protein NMR data have posed challenges for the routine and automated structure 
determination of small to medium sized proteins; (1) spectral resolution - 
especially of crowded nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy (NOESY) spectra, 
and (2) the reliance on a continuous network of weak scalar couplings as part of 
most common assignment protocols. In order to facilitate NMR structure 
determination, we developed a semi-automated strategy that utilizes non-uniform 
sampling (NUS) and multidimensional decomposition (MDD) for optimal data 
collection and processing of selected, high resolution multidimensional NMR 
experiments, combined it with an ABACUS protocol for sequential and side chain 
resonance assignments, and streamlined this procedure to execute structure and 
refinement calculations in CYANA and CNS, respectively. Two graphical user 
interfaces (GUIs) were developed to facilitate efficient analysis and 
compilation of the data and to guide automated structure determination. This 
integrated method was implemented and refined on over 30 high quality structures 
of proteins ranging from 5.5 to 16.5 kDa in size.

DOI: 10.1007/s10858-010-9458-0
PMCID: PMC3715383
PMID: 21161328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]