1. Genome Res. 2011 Mar;21(3):477-86. doi: 10.1101/gr.109033.110. Epub 2010 Dec
20.

Selective ploidy ablation, a high-throughput plasmid transfer protocol, 
identifies new genes affecting topoisomerase I-induced DNA damage.

Reid RJ(1), Gonz√°lez-Barrera S, Sunjevaric I, Alvaro D, Ciccone S, Wagner M, 
Rothstein R.

Author information:
(1)Columbia University Medical Center, Department of Genetics & Development, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.

We have streamlined the process of transferring plasmids into any yeast strain 
library by developing a novel mating-based, high-throughput method called 
selective ploidy ablation (SPA). SPA uses a universal plasmid donor strain that 
contains conditional centromeres on every chromosome. The plasmid-bearing donor 
is mated to a recipient, followed by removal of all donor-strain chromosomes, 
producing a haploid strain containing the transferred plasmid. As proof of 
principle, we used SPA to transfer plasmids containing wild-type and mutant 
alleles of DNA topoisomerase I (TOP1) into the haploid yeast gene-disruption 
library. Overexpression of Top1 identified only one sensitive mutation, rpa34, 
while overexpression of top1-T(722)A allele, a camptothecin mimetic, identified 
190 sensitive gene-disruption strains along with rpa34. In addition to known 
camptothecin-sensitive strains, this set contained mutations in genes involved 
in the Rpd3 histone deacetylase complex, the kinetochore, and vesicle 
trafficking. We further show that mutations in several ESCRT vesicle trafficking 
components increase Top1 levels, which is dependent on SUMO modification. These 
findings demonstrate the utility of the SPA technique to introduce plasmids into 
the haploid gene-disruption library to discover new interacting pathways.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.109033.110
PMCID: PMC3044861
PMID: 21173034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]