1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Dec 9;6(12):e1001242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001242.

Continuous and periodic expansion of CAG repeats in Huntington's disease R6/1 
mice.

MÃ¸llersen L(1), Rowe AD, Larsen E, Rognes T, Klungland A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Neuroscience, Institute of Medical 
Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

Huntington's disease (HD) is one of several neurodegenerative disorders caused 
by expansion of CAG repeats in a coding gene. Somatic CAG expansion rates in HD 
vary between organs, and the greatest instability is observed in the brain, 
correlating with neuropathology. The fundamental mechanisms of somatic CAG 
repeat instability are poorly understood, but locally formed secondary DNA 
structures generated during replication and/or repair are believed to underlie 
triplet repeat expansion. Recent studies in HD mice have demonstrated that 
mismatch repair (MMR) and base excision repair (BER) proteins are expansion 
inducing components in brain tissues. This study was designed to simultaneously 
investigate the rates and modes of expansion in different tissues of HD R6/1 
mice in order to further understand the expansion mechanisms in vivo. We 
demonstrate continuous small expansions in most somatic tissues (exemplified by 
tail), which bear the signature of many short, probably single-repeat expansions 
and contractions occurring over time. In contrast, striatum and cortex display a 
dramatic--and apparently irreversible--periodic expansion. Expansion profiles 
displaying this kind of periodicity in the expansion process have not previously 
been reported. These in vivo findings imply that mechanistically distinct 
expansion processes occur in different tissues.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001242
PMCID: PMC3000365
PMID: 21170307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.