1. Biol Res Nurs. 2012 Jan;14(1):5-15. doi: 10.1177/1099800410393273. Epub 2010
Dec  30.

Evaluating the role of serotonin on neuropsychological function after breast 
cancer using acute tryptophan depletion.

Von Ah D(1), Skaar T, Unverzagt F, Yu M, Wu J, Schneider B, Storniolo AM, Moser 
L, Ryker K, Milata J, Carpenter JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Adult Health, School of Nursing, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. dvonah@iupui.edu

Although cognitive dysfunction is a prevalent and disruptive problem for many 
breast cancer survivors (BCSs), little research has examined its etiology. One 
potential mechanism that remains to be explored is serotonin. Serotonin has been 
implicated in normal and dysfunctional cognitive processes, and serotonin levels 
are significantly affected by estrogen withdrawal, a common side effect of 
breast cancer treatment. However, no study has evaluated serotonin's role on 
cognitive dysfunction in BCSs. The purpose of this study was to examine the role 
of serotonin in cognitive dysfunction in survivors by lowering central serotonin 
concentrations via acute tryptophan depletion (ATD). Based on previous research 
in noncancer populations, we hypothesized that alterations in central serotonin 
levels would induce cognitive dysfunction in these women controlling for 
confounding characteristics such as fluctuating mood and glucose levels. 
Secondarily, we explored whether genetic variations in serotonin genes would 
partly explain ATD. Participants included 20 female BCSs, posttreatment for 
nonmetastatic breast cancer, who received ATD or control in a double-blind, 
crossover design. Cognitive performance was measured at the 5-hr 
tryptophan/serotonin nadir on each test day using standardized 
neuropsychological tests. Specific impairment was noted in episodic memory 
(delayed recall) and motor speed during ATD versus control. ATD did not alter 
new learning (immediate recall), working memory, verbal fluency, or information 
processing speed. Findings suggest that serotonin may play a critical role in 
memory consolidation and motor functioning in BCSs.

DOI: 10.1177/1099800410393273
PMCID: PMC3673716
PMID: 21196424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests The 
author(s) declared no conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship 
and/or publication of this article.