1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 1;286(13):11314-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.193714. Epub 
2011 Jan 3.

Simvastatin prevents skeletal metastasis of breast cancer by an antagonistic 
interplay between p53 and CD44.

Mandal CC(1), Ghosh-Choudhury N, Yoneda T, Choudhury GG, Ghosh-Choudhury N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78229, USA.

Substantial data from clinical trials and epidemiological studies show promising 
results for use of statins in many cancers, including mammary carcinoma. Breast 
tumor primarily metastasizes to bone to form osteolytic lesions, causing severe 
pain and pathological fracture. Here, we report that simvastatin acts as an 
inhibitor of osteolysis in a mouse model of breast cancer skeletal metastasis of 
human mammary cancer cell MDA-MB-231, which expresses the mutant p53R280K. 
Simvastatin and lovastatin attenuated migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 and 
BT-20 breast tumor cells in culture. Acquisition of phenotype to express the 
cancer stem cell marker, CD44, leads to invasive potential of the tumor cells. 
Interestingly, statins significantly decreased the expression of CD44 protein 
via a transcriptional mechanism. shRNA-mediated down-regulation of CD44 markedly 
reduced the migration and invasion of breast cancer cells in culture. We 
identified that in the MDA-MB-231 cells, simvastatin elevated the levels of 
mutated p53R280K, which was remarkably active as a transcription factor. 
shRNA-derived inhibition of mutant p53R280K augmented the expression of CD44, 
leading to increased migration and invasion. Finally, we demonstrate an inverse 
correlation between expression of p53 and CD44 in the tumors of mice that 
received simvastatin. Our results reveal a unique function of statins, which 
foster enhanced expression of mutant p53R280K to prevent breast cancer cell 
metastasis to bone.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.193714
PMCID: PMC3064188
PMID: 21199873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]