1. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jan;155A(1):14-21. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33755. Epub 2010
 Dec 10.

Evaluation of 64 candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms as risk factors for 
neural tube defects in a large Irish study population.

Carter TC(1), Pangilinan F, Troendle JF, Molloy AM, VanderMeer J, Mitchell A, 
Kirke PN, Conley MR, Shane B, Scott JM, Brody LC, Mills JL.

Author information:
(1)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human 
Services, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-7510, USA. carterto@mail.nih.gov

Individual studies of the genetics of neural tube defects (NTDs) contain results 
on a small number of genes in each report. To identify genetic risk factors for 
NTDs, we evaluated potentially functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
that are biologically plausible risk factors for NTDs but that have never been 
investigated for an association with NTDs, examined SNPs that previously showed 
no association with NTDs in published studies, and tried to confirm previously 
reported associations in folate-related and non-folate-related genes. We 
investigated 64 SNPs in 34 genes for association with spina bifida in up to 558 
case families (520 cases, 507 mothers, 457 fathers) and 994 controls in Ireland. 
Case-control and mother-control comparisons of genotype frequencies, tests of 
transmission disequilibrium, and log-linear regression models were used to 
calculate effect estimates. Spina bifida was associated with over-transmission 
of the LEPR (leptin receptor) rs1805134 minor C allele [genotype relative risk 
(GRR): 1.5; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.0-2.1; P = 0.0264] and the COMT 
(catechol-O-methyltransferase) rs737865 major T allele (GRR: 1.4; 95% CI: 
1.1-2.0; P = 0.0206). After correcting for multiple comparisons, these 
individual test P-values exceeded 0.05. Consistent with previous reports, spina 
bifida was associated with MTHFR 677C>T, T (Brachyury) rs3127334, LEPR K109R, 
and PDGFRA promoter haplotype combinations. The associations between LEPR SNPs 
and spina bifida suggest a possible mechanism for the finding that obesity is a 
NTD risk factor. The association between a variant in COMT and spina bifida 
implicates methylation and epigenetics in NTDs.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33755
PMCID: PMC3503244
PMID: 21204206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]