1. Rejuvenation Res. 2011 Feb;14(1):67-73. doi: 10.1089/rej.2010.1091. Epub 2011 
Jan 5.

Age of onset of myocardial infarction: is promoter polymorphism of the RAGE gene 
implicated?

Boiocchi C(1), Bozzini S, Buzzi MP, Schirinzi S, Zorzetto M, Pelissero G, Cuccia 
M, Falcone C.

Author information:
(1)Interdipartimental Center for Research in Molecular Medicine (CIRMC), 
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. chiara.boiocchi@unipv.it

Receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE) is a cell-surface molecule 
member of the immunoglobulin superfamily and engages differing ligands relevant 
to distinct processes. A growing body of evidence has suggested that RAGE may 
promote vascular inflammation through several mechanisms. The objective of this 
study was to identify the possible relationship between the -374 T/A 
polymorphism of the RAGE gene, myocardial infarction (MI), and its age of onset. 
A total of 691 MI patients and 234 matched controls were investigated. In this 
study, the frequency of the A allele and AA genotype of the -374 T/A promoter 
polymorphism is significantly lower in patients with MI respect to the control 
group (p < 0.01). Our results showed a significant role of the AA genotype on 
age of onset of MI. In particular, the mean age of the first MI was higher in 
patients with the AA genotype as compared to those that were AT or TT genotype 
carriers (p = 0.002). The relationship between -374 T/A RAGE polymorphism and 
age for the appearance of MI was independently related to common risk factors of 
disease (p < 0.01). Kaplan-Meier curves confirmed that subjects with the AA 
genotype have a later development of MI (p = 0.0022). This study is the first to 
investigate the role of RAGE polymorphisms on the susceptibility to develop the 
acute coronary events in the Italian population and identified this polymorphism 
as an age-related factor for MI development. The homozygous AA genotype may 
exert a protective role against the early development of MI.

DOI: 10.1089/rej.2010.1091
PMID: 21208063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]