1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2011;34(1):114-9. doi: 10.1248/bpb.34.114.

Association of SLCO1B3 polymorphism with intracellular accumulation of imatinib 
in leukocytes in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia.

Nambu T(1), Hamada A, Nakashima R, Yuki M, Kawaguchi T, Mitsuya H, Saito H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Japan.

Intracellular concentration of imatinib in leukemic cells is thought to affect 
the clinical efficacy of this drug in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia 
(CML); however, there is no report that directly indicates the relationship 
between intracellular concentration and clinical outcome and/or, plasma 
concentration. In addition, the impacts of genetic variations of drug 
transporters, which mediate leukocyte concentration of imatinib, are unknown. In 
the present study, we investigated the correlation between intracellular 
imatinib concentrations in leukocytes, plasma imatinib levels, and genotypes of 
drug transporters, including ATP binding cassette B1 (ABCB), ABCG2, solute 
carrier 22A1 (SLC22A1), solute carrier organic anion transporter family members 
1B1 (SLCO1B1) and SLCO1B3. The imatinib levels in leukocytes were determined 
using HPLC in 15 patients with chronic phase CML. No significant correlation 
between intracellular and plasma concentrations of imatinib was observed. The 
intracellular concentration was comparable in both patients with or without 
complete cytogenetic response. The intracellular imatinib concentration was 
significantly higher in patients with SLCO1B3 334TT than in those with 334TG/GG 
(p=0.0188). Plasma concentrations were similar in both SLCO1B3 genotypes 
(p=0.860), thereby resulting in the intracellular to plasma concentration ratio 
being higher in patients with SLCO1B3 334TT than those with 334 TG/GG 
(p=0.0502). These results suggested that the SLCO1B3 334T>G polymorphism could 
have a significant impact on the intracellular concentration of imatinib in 
leukocytes as a promising biomarker for personalized treatment of CML patients.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.34.114
PMCID: PMC7384356
PMID: 21212528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]