1. Biochem J. 1990 Sep 15;270(3):621-5. doi: 10.1042/bj2700621.

Endogenous phosphorylation of the lipoprotein-associated coagulation inhibitor 
at serine-2.

Girard TJ(1), McCourt D, Novotny WF, MacPhail LA, Likert KM, Broze GJ Jr.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, 
Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110.

Lipoprotein-associated coagulation inhibitor (LACI) inhibits activated Factor X 
(Xa) directly and, in an Xa-dependent fashion, inhibits Factor VIIa-tissue 
factor (TF), presumably by forming a quaternary Xa-LACI-VIIa-TF complex. LACI 
isolated from the conditioned media of HepG2 cells grown in the presence of 
[32P]orthophosphate was observed to be covalently phosphorylated. 
Dephosphorylation of 32P-LACI with phosphatase resulted in an almost complete 
removal of the radiolabel. Phosphoamino acid analysis of the purified 32P-LACI 
established that the phosphorylation occurred on (a) serine residue(s). At its 
N-terminus, LACI contains a cluster of acidic residues C-terminal to the 
serine-2 residue. Such a site is characteristic of the sites phosphorylated by 
casein kinase II (CKII) in protein substrates. Edman degradation of endogenously 
labelled 32P-LACI revealed that the serine-2 residue was a major site of 
phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of purified LACI by bovine CKII was observed to 
occur in vitro; amino acid sequence analysis demonstrated that CKII 
phosphorylated LACI at the serine-2 residue. Recombinant LACI expressed from 
mouse C127 fibroblasts transfected using a bovine-papilloma-virus expression 
vector was found to be endogenously phosphorylated. By using site-directed 
mutagenesis, an altered form of LACI was produced in which the serine-2 residue 
had been changed to alanine. This altered LACI, although expressed in similar 
quantity to the wild-type LACI, was not detectably phosphorylated. Using the 
altered LACI in functional studies demonstrated that a serine residue at 
position 2, and thus the phosphorylation of this site, was not essential for 
LACI's inhibition of Xa and VIIa-TF activities.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2700621
PMCID: PMC1131777
PMID: 2122883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]