1. Behav Brain Res. 2011 May 16;219(1):165-74. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.01.016.
Epub  2011 Jan 14.

The effects of two forms of physical activity on eyeblink classical 
conditioning.

Green JT(1), Chess AC, Burns M, Schachinger KM, Thanellou A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, United 
States. John.Green@uvm.edu

Voluntary exercise, in the form of free access to a running wheel in the home 
cage, has been shown to improve several forms of learning and memory. Acrobatic 
training, in the form of learning to traverse an elevated obstacle course, has 
been shown to induce markers of neural plasticity in the cerebellar cortex in 
rodents. In three experiments, we examined the effects of these two forms of 
physical activity on delay eyeblink conditioning in rats. In Experiment 1, 
exercising rats were given 17 days of free access to a running wheel in their 
home cage prior to 10 days of delay eyeblink conditioning. Rats that exercised 
conditioned significantly better and showed a larger reflexive eyeblink 
unconditioned response to the periocular stimulation unconditioned stimulus than 
rats that did not exercise. In Experiment 2, exercising rats were given 17 days 
of free access to a running wheel in their home cage prior to 10 days of 
explicitly unpaired stimulus presentations. Rats that exercised responded the 
same to tone, light, and periocular stimulation as rats that did not exercise. 
In Experiment 3, acrobatic training rats were given 15 days of daily training on 
an elevated obstacle course prior to 10 days of eyeblink conditioning. Activity 
control rats underwent 15 days of yoked daily running in an open field. Rats 
that underwent acrobatic training did not differ in eyeblink conditioning from 
activity control rats. The ability to measure the learned response precisely, 
and the well-mapped neural circuitry of eyeblink conditioning offer some 
advantages for the study of exercise effects on learning and memory.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.01.016
PMCID: PMC3062702
PMID: 21238502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]