1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 7;6(1):e15972. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015972.

Unusual regulation of a leaderless operon involved in the catabolism of 
dimethylsulfoniopropionate in Rhodobacter sphaeroides.

Sullivan MJ(1), Curson AR, Shearer N, Todd JD, Green RT, Johnston AW.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research 
Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.

Rhodobacter sphaeroides strain 2.4.1 is a widely studied bacterium that has 
recently been shown to cleave the abundant marine anti-stress molecule 
dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) into acrylate plus gaseous dimethyl sulfide. 
It does so by using a lyase encoded by dddL, the promoter-distal gene of a 
three-gene operon, acuR-acuI-dddL. Transcription of the operon was enhanced when 
cells were pre-grown with the substrate DMSP, but this induction is indirect, 
and requires the conversion of DMSP to the product acrylate, the bona fide 
co-inducer. This regulation is mediated by the product of the promoter-proximal 
gene acuR, a transcriptional regulator in the TetR family. AcuR represses the 
operon in the absence of acrylate, but this is relieved by the presence of the 
co-inducer. Another unusual regulatory feature is that the acuR-acuI-dddL mRNA 
transcript is leaderless, such that acuR lacks a Shine-Dalgarno ribosomal 
binding site and 5'-UTR, and is translated at a lower level compared to the 
downstream genes. This regulatory unit may be quite widespread in bacteria, 
since several other taxonomically diverse lineages have adjacent acuR-like and 
acuI-like genes; these operons also have no 5' leader sequences or ribosomal 
binding sites and their predicted cis-acting regulatory sequences resemble those 
of R. sphaeroides acuR-acuI-dddL.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015972
PMCID: PMC3017554
PMID: 21249136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.