1. Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 1;71(5):1730-41. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1432. Epub
 2011 Jan 21.

An EGFR-Src-Arg-cortactin pathway mediates functional maturation of invadopodia 
and breast cancer cell invasion.

Mader CC(1), Oser M, Magalhaes MA, Bravo-Cordero JJ, Condeelis J, Koleske AJ, 
Gil-Henn H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Invasive carcinoma cells use specialized actin polymerization-driven protrusions 
called invadopodia to degrade and possibly invade through the extracellular 
matrix (ECM) during metastasis. Phosphorylation of the invadopodium protein 
cortactin is a master switch that activates invadopodium maturation and 
function. Cortactin was originally identified as a hyperphosphorylated protein 
in v-Src-transformed cells, but the kinase or kinases that are directly 
responsible for cortactin phosphorylation in invadopodia remain unknown. In this 
study, we provide evidence that the Abl-related nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Arg 
mediates epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced cortactin phosphorylation, 
triggering actin polymerization in invadopodia, ECM degradation, and matrix 
proteolysis-dependent tumor cell invasion. Both Src and Arg localize to 
invadopodia and are required for EGF-induced actin polymerization. Notably, Arg 
overexpression in Src knockdown cells can partially rescue actin polymerization 
in invadopodia while Src overexpression cannot compensate for loss of Arg, 
arguing that Src indirectly regulates invadopodium maturation through Arg 
activation. Our findings suggest a novel mechanism by which an 
EGFR-Src-Arg-cortactin pathway mediates functional maturation of invadopodia and 
breast cancer cell invasion. Furthermore, they identify Arg as a novel mediator 
of invadopodia function and a candidate therapeutic target to inhibit tumor 
invasion in vivo.

Â©2011 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1432
PMCID: PMC3057139
PMID: 21257711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]