1. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 1;352(1):58-69. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.012. Epub 2011
 Jan 21.

Wnt4 induces nephronic tubules in metanephric mesenchyme by a non-canonical 
mechanism.

Tanigawa S(1), Wang H, Yang Y, Sharma N, Tarasova N, Ajima R, Yamaguchi TP, 
Rodriguez LG, Perantoni AO.

Author information:
(1)Cancer and Developmental Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

Wnt4 and β-catenin are both required for nephrogenesis, but studies using 
TCF-reporter mice suggest that canonical Wnt signaling is not activated in 
metanephric mesenchyme (MM) during its conversion to the epithelia of the 
nephron. To better define the role of Wnt signaling, we treated rat metanephric 
mesenchymal progenitors directly with recombinant Wnt proteins. These studies 
revealed that Wnt4 protein, which is required for nephron formation, induces 
tubule formation and differentiation markers Lim1 and E-cadherin in MM cells, 
but does not activate a TCF reporter or up regulate expression of canonical Wnt 
target gene Axin-2 and has little effect on the stabilization of β-catenin or 
phosphorylation of disheveled-2. Furthermore, Wnt4 causes membrane localization 
of ZO-1 and occludin in tight junctions. To directly examine the role of 
β-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription, we developed synthetic cell-permeable 
analogs of β-catenin's helix C, which is required for transcriptional 
activation, in efforts to specifically inhibit canonical Wnt signaling. One 
inhibitor blocked TCF-dependent transcription and induced degradation of 
β-catenin but did not affect tubule formation and stimulated the expression of 
Lim1 and E-cadherin. Since a canonical mechanism appears not to be operative in 
tubule formation, we assessed the involvement of the non-canonical 
Ca(2+)-dependent pathway. Treatment of MM cells with Wnt4 induced an influx of 
Ca(2+) and caused phosphorylation of CaMKII. Moreover, Ionomycin, a 
Ca(2+)-dependent pathway activator, stimulated tubule formation. These results 
demonstrate that the canonical Wnt pathway is not responsible for 
mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) in nephron formation and suggest that 
the non-canonical calcium/Wnt pathway mediates Wnt4-induced tubulogenesis in the 
kidney.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.012
PMCID: PMC3049843
PMID: 21256838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]