1. Genes Brain Behav. 2011 Jun;10(4):392-403. doi: 
10.1111/j.1601-183X.2011.00678.x. Epub 2011 Feb 10.

Imprinted Rasgrf1 expression in neonatal mice affects olfactory learning and 
memory.

Drake NM(1), DeVito LM, Cleland TA, Soloway PD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Rasgrf1 is genomically imprinted; only the paternally inherited allele is 
expressed in the neonatal mouse brain until weaning, at which time expression 
becomes biallelic. Whereas Rasgrf1 has been implicated in learning and memory 
via knockout studies in adult mice, the effect of its normal imprinted 
expression on these phenotypes has not yet been examined. Neonatal mice with 
experimentally manipulated patterns of imprinted Rasgrf1 expression were 
assessed on an associative olfactory task. Neonates lacking the normally 
expressed wild-type paternal allele exhibited significant impairment in 
olfactory associative memory. Adult animals in which neonatal imprinting had 
been manipulated were also behaviorally assessed; while neonatal imprinting 
significantly affects body weight even into adulthood, no learning and memory 
phenotype attributable to imprinting was observed in adults. Additional analyses 
of neonates showed imprinted Rasgrf1 transcript selective to olfactory bulb even 
in mice that were null for Rasgrf1 in the rest of the brain and showed that 
Rasgrf1 affects Ras and Rac activation in the brain. Taken together, these 
results indicate that Rasgrf1 expression from the wild-type paternal allele 
contributes to learning and memory in neonatal mice.

© 2011 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 
and International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2011.00678.x
PMCID: PMC3091993
PMID: 21251221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]