1. Microb Biotechnol. 2008 Mar;1(2):126-36. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-7915.2007.00013.x.

Microcalorimetry: a response to challenges in modern biotechnology.

Krell T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Protection, Estación Experimental del Zaidín, 
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, C/Prof. Albareda 1, 18008 
Granada, Spain. tino.krell@eez.csic.es

Almost any process in life is accompanied by heat changes which can be monitored 
by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and differential scanning calorimetry 
(DSC). Both techniques are now established tools in fundamental research but 
over the last decade a clear tendency towards more problem-driven applications 
is noted. This review aims at summarizing these problem-oriented applications of 
microcalorimetry and the solutions both techniques can provide to problems in 
biotechnology. The biotechnological issues to which microcalorimetry has been 
successfully applied are as diverse as rational drug design, overcoming drug 
resistance, optimization of long-term stability of proteins, estimation of the 
bioavailability of drugs, control of complex pharmaceutical products or the 
optimization of gene delivery efficiency. The main limitation of 
microcalorimetry, which is the relatively large amounts of sample necessary for 
analysis, is less important in the biotechnology sector which frequently uses 
large-scale produced bulk products for analysis. The recently developed 
high-throughput DSC and ITC microcalorimeters will additionally reduce the 
labour intensity of these techniques. Due to the precision of microcalorimetric 
analyses and the versatility of processes which can be studied, it is expected 
that ITC and DSC will soon be key technologies in biotechnological research.

© 2007 The Author.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2007.00013.x
PMCID: PMC3864446
PMID: 21261830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]