1. Med Hypotheses. 2011 May;76(5):638-42. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.01.019. Epub 
2011 Feb 1.

What is a functional locus? Understanding the genetic basis of complex 
phenotypic traits.

Ruiz-Narváez EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Slone Epidemiology Center at Boston University, 1010 Commonwealth Avenue, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA. eruiznar@bu.edu

Comment in
    Med Hypotheses. 2014 Oct;83(4):513-4. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2014.08.015.

A multitude of results from genome-wide association studies have been published 
in recent years in relation to different human diseases and phenotypic traits. 
However, the identified polymorphisms explain just a small fraction of the 
variability of the traits and they are poor predictors of occurrence of disease. 
Although part of the missing variability may be found in still to be identified 
rare genetic variants, the present work proposes that a major part of the 
problem is due to our conceptual limitations regarding functional loci and its 
variants. Functional variants are currently defined in absolute positional 
terms; they are just sequence variations in fixed positions along the DNA 
molecule. In the present study is postulated that functional loci may include 
different positions in the DNA sequence. As consequence, variants of the same 
functional locus may be located in different physical positions along the genome 
and, the observed effect of any particular genetic variant will be then reduced 
compared to its true effect. The differential use of regulatory regions such as 
gene promoters and enhancers would be a particular case of the proposed 
hypothesis. The hypothesis makes predictions that can be tested, offering 
potential paths of research to elucidate the genetic basis of complex human 
traits.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.01.019
PMCID: PMC3076543
PMID: 21277686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]