1. Cell Biochem Funct. 2011 Mar;29(2):156-63. doi: 10.1002/cbf.1721. Epub 2011
Feb  2.

First survey of the three gene polymorphisms (PON1 Q192R, eNOS E298D and eNOS 
C-786T) potentially associated with coronary artery spasm in African populations 
and comparison with worldwide data.

Fujihara J(1), Yasuda T, Kawai Y, Morikawa N, Arakawa K, Koda Y, Soejima M, 
Kimura-Kataoka K, Takeshita H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, 
Shimane, Japan.

Three polymorphisms, Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) Q192R (C/G), endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase (eNOS) E298D (G/T) and eNOS T-786C have been suggested to be 
potentially associated with coronary artery spasm in Japanese patients. Data on 
worldwide populations are needed to clarify whether these associations could 
hold true for other populations. However, few data are available especially in 
Africans, spasm of which has been suggested to be an aetiology of myocardial 
infarction. Therefore, these polymorphisms were investigated in three Africans, 
Ovambos (n = 123), Ghanians (n = 118) and Xhosas (n = 96), together with 
Japanese (n = 96), by using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment 
length polymorphism analysis. Genotype-distributions of all these SNPs in 
African populations were significantly different from those in Caucasians, 
whereas were similar to those in Japanese population. African populations 
exhibit relatively higher frequency of spasm-associated G192 allele in PON1 
Q192R being similar to Japanese population, however frequencies of 
spasm-associated T298 allele and -C786 allele in SNP eNOS E298D and T-786C, 
respectively, were conversely lower in Africans than Caucasians. Although 
healthy subjects have been recruited in this study, these findings may provide 
genetic background for elucidation of aetiology of spasm.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cbf.1721
PMID: 21287574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]