1. Mol Immunol. 2011 Mar;48(6-7):835-45. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.12.008. Epub 
2011 Feb 2.

Inhibition of mouse TAP by immune evasion molecules encoded by non-murine 
herpesviruses.

Verweij MC(1), Ressing ME, Knetsch W, Quinten E, Halenius A, van Bel N, Hengel 
H, Drijfhout JW, van Hall T, Wiertz EJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Center of Infectious Diseases, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Herpesviruses escape elimination by cytotoxic T lymphocytes through specific 
interference with the antigen-presenting function of MHC class I (MHC I) 
molecules. The transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) forms a 
bottleneck in the MHC I antigen presentation pathway. The fact that multiple 
viruses, especially herpesviruses, encode molecules blocking TAP function is a 
case in point. The action of these viral immuno evasins is usually potent and 
very specific, making these proteins valuable tools for studying the cell 
biology of antigen presentation, including alternative antigen processing 
pathways. Yet, no dedicated TAP inhibitor has been described for any of the 
mouse herpesviruses. To permit the use of immuno evasins derived from non-mouse 
herpesviruses in mouse models, we assessed the cross-species activity of four 
TAP inhibitors and one tapasin inhibitor in the context of three different mouse 
haplotypes, H-2(b), H-2(d), and H-2(k). Two of the four TAP inhibitors, the 
bovine herpesvirus 1-encoded UL49.5 and the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)-encoded 
US6 protein, potently inhibited mouse TAP. ICP47 and BNLF2a, encoded by herpes 
simplexvirus 1 and Epstein-Barr virus, respectively, failed to inhibit TAP in 
all mouse cells tested. Previous work, however, demonstrated that US6 did not 
cross the mouse species barrier. We now show that substitution of the cysteine 
residue at position 108 was responsible for this lack of activity. The 
HCMV-encoded tapasin inhibitor US3 efficiently downregulated H-2(d) molecules on 
3T3 cells, but not in other cell lines tested. Finally, we show that synthetic 
peptides comprising the functional domain of US6 can be exploited as a versatile 
TAP inhibitor. In conclusion, a complete overview is presented of the 
applicability of herpesvirus-encoded TAP and tapasin inhibitors in mouse cells 
of different genetic background.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.12.008
PMID: 21292324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]