1. Biochemistry. 2011 Mar 29;50(12):2264-73. doi: 10.1021/bi1013694. Epub 2011
Mar  3.

Atomic view of calcium-induced clustering of phosphatidylserine in mixed lipid 
bilayers.

Boettcher JM(1), Davis-Harrison RL, Clay MC, Nieuwkoop AJ, Ohkubo YZ, 
Tajkhorshid E, Morrissey JH, Rienstra CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, 
Illinois 61801, United States.

Membranes play key regulatory roles in biological processes, with bilayer 
composition exerting marked effects on binding affinities and catalytic 
activities of a number of membrane-associated proteins. In particular, proteins 
involved in diverse processes such as vesicle fusion, intracellular signaling 
cascades, and blood coagulation interact specifically with anionic lipids such 
as phosphatidylserine (PS) in the presence of Ca(2+) ions. While Ca(2+) is 
suspected to induce PS clustering in mixed phospholipid bilayers, the detailed 
structural effects of this ion on anionic lipids are not established. In this 
study, combining magic angle spinning (MAS) solid-state NMR (SSNMR) measurements 
of isotopically labeled serine headgroups in mixed lipid bilayers with molecular 
dynamics (MD) simulations of PS lipid bilayers in the presence of different 
counterions, we provide site-resolved insights into the effects of Ca(2+) on the 
structure and dynamics of lipid bilayers. Ca(2+)-induced conformational changes 
of PS in mixed bilayers are observed in both liposomes and Nanodiscs, a 
nanoscale membrane mimetic of bilayer patches. Site-resolved multidimensional 
correlation SSNMR spectra of bilayers containing (13)C,(15)N-labeled PS 
demonstrate that Ca(2+) ions promote two major PS headgroup conformations, which 
are well resolved in two-dimensional (13)C-(13)C, (15)N-(13)C, and (31)P-(13)C 
spectra. The results of MD simulations performed on PS lipid bilayers in the 
presence or absence of Ca(2+) provide an atomic view of the conformational 
effects underlying the observed spectra.

DOI: 10.1021/bi1013694
PMCID: PMC3069658
PMID: 21294564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]