1. Hum Genet. 2011 Jun;129(6):641-54. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-0959-z. Epub 2011
Feb  5.

Polymorphic variants in tenascin-C (TNC) are associated with atherosclerosis and 
coronary artery disease.

Minear MA(1), Crosslin DR, Sutton BS, Connelly JJ, Nelson SC, Gadson-Watson S, 
Wang T, Seo D, Vance JM, Sketch MH Jr, Haynes C, Goldschmidt-Clermont PJ, Shah 
SH, Kraus WE, Hauser ER, Gregory SG.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

Tenascin-C (TNC) is an extracellular matrix protein implicated in biological 
processes important for atherosclerotic plaque development and progression, 
including smooth muscle cell migration and proliferation. Previously, we 
observed differential expression of TNC in atherosclerotic aortas compared with 
healthy aortas. The goal of this study was to investigate whether common genetic 
variation within TNC is associated with risk of atherosclerosis and coronary 
artery disease (CAD) in three independent datasets. We genotyped 35 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), including 21 haplotype tagging SNPs, in two of 
these datasets: human aorta tissue samples (n = 205) and the CATHGEN 
cardiovascular study (n = 1,325). Eleven of these 35 SNPs were then genotyped in 
a third dataset, the GENECARD family study of early-onset CAD (n = 879 
families). Three SNPs representing a block of linkage disequilibrium, rs3789875, 
rs12347433, and rs4552883, were significantly associated with atherosclerosis in 
multiple datasets and demonstrated consistent, but suggestive, genetic effects 
in all analyses. In combined analysis rs3789875 and rs12347433 were 
statistically significant after Bonferroni correction for 35 comparisons, 
p = 2 × 10(-6) and 5 × 10(-6), respectively. The SNP rs12347433 is a synonymous 
coding SNP and may be biologically relevant to the mechanism by which tenascin-C 
influences the pathophysiology of CAD and atherosclerosis. This is the first 
report of genetic association between polymorphisms in TNC and atherosclerosis 
or CAD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-011-0959-z
PMCID: PMC3576662
PMID: 21298289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.