1. Mol Ther. 2011 Jul;19(7):1342-52. doi: 10.1038/mt.2010.315. Epub 2011 Feb 8.

Imaging stem cell-derived persistent foci after in vivo selection of lentiviral 
MGMT-P140K transduced murine bone marrow cells.

Lin Y(1), Cheung P, Roth JC, Wilson DL, Gerson SL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

The engraftment of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) after drug resistance gene 
transfer and drug selection may recapitulate stress response hematopoiesis, but 
the processes remain elusive. Homing, trafficking, and localization of 
transduced cells and the impact of insertion site on focal expansion have not 
been well characterized. With the goal of optimizing and understanding these 
processes under conditions of low multiplicity of infection (MOI) lentiviral 
gene transfer, we used drug resistance gene O(6)-methylguanine-DNA 
methyltransferase (MGMT)-P140K and in vivo selection to enrich for transduced 
and transgene-expressing HSCs. To systemically monitor homing, trafficking, and 
expansion after transplantation and drug selection over time, we linked 
MGMT-P140K to the firefly luciferase gene in lentiviral self-inactivating 
vectors. Periodic bioluminescence imaging (BLI) of transplanted recipients was 
followed for up to 9 months after both primary and secondary transplantation. 
Initial dispersion and widespread early homing and engraftment were transient, 
followed by detection of persistent and discrete foci at stable tissue sites 
after in vivo drug selection. From these studies, we concluded that drug 
resistance gene transfer followed by early or late drug selection can result in 
stable gene expression and cell expansion in persistent foci of transduced bone 
marrow cells that often remain in fixed sites for extended periods of time.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2010.315
PMCID: PMC3129550
PMID: 21304493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]