1. Gut. 2011 Sep;60(9):1204-12. doi: 10.1136/gut.2010.233460. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

β-catenin tyrosine 654 phosphorylation increases Wnt signalling and intestinal 
tumorigenesis.

van Veelen W(1), Le NH, Helvensteijn W, Blonden L, Theeuwes M, Bakker ER, 
Franken PF, van Gurp L, Meijlink F, van der Valk MA, Kuipers EJ, Fodde R, Smits 
R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC-University Medical 
Centre, room L-63, 's Gravendijkwal 230, 3015 CE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
w.vanveelen@erasmusmc.nl

Objective Deregulation of the Wnt signalling pathway by mutations in the Apc or 
β-catenin genes underlies colorectal carcinogenesis. As a result, β-catenin 
stabilises, translocates to the nucleus, and activates gene transcription. 
Intestinal tumours show a heterogeneous pattern of nuclear β-catenin, with the 
highest levels observed at the invasion front. Activation of receptor tyrosine 
kinases in these tumour areas by growth factors expressed by surrounding stromal 
cells phosphorylate β-catenin at tyrosine residues, which is thought to increase 
β-catenin nuclear translocation and tumour invasiveness. This study investigates 
the relevance of β-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation for Wnt signalling and 
intestinal tumorigenesis in vivo. Design A conditional knock-in mouse model was 
generated into which the phospho-mimicking Y654E modification in the endogenous 
β-catenin gene was introduced. Results This study provided in vivo evidence that 
β-catenin(E654) is characterised by reduced affinity for cadherins, increased 
signalling and strongly increased phosphorylation at serine 675 by protein 
kinase A (PKA). In addition, homozygosity for the β-catenin(E654) targeted 
allele caused embryonic lethality, whereas heterozygosity predisposed to 
intestinal tumour development, and strongly enhanced Apc-driven intestinal 
tumour initiation associated with increased nuclear accumulation of βcatenin. 
Surprisingly, the expression of β-catenin(E654) did not affect histological 
grade or induce tumour invasiveness. Conclusions A thus far unknown mechanism 
was uncovered in which Y654 phosphorylation of β-catenin facilitates additional 
phosphorylation at serine 675 by PKA. In addition, in contrast to the current 
belief that β-catenin Y654 phosphorylation increases tumour progression to a 
more invasive phenotype, these results show that it rather increases tumour 
initiation by enhancing Wnt signalling.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2010.233460
PMCID: PMC3152867
PMID: 21307168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.