1. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Mar;9(3):341-9. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0248. Epub 
2011 Feb 11.

Cells lacking IKKα show nuclear cyclin D1 overexpression and a neoplastic 
phenotype: role of IKKα as a tumor suppressor.

Kwak YT(1), Radaideh SM, Ding L, Li R, Frenkel E, Story MD, Girard L, Minna J, 
Verma UN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The catalytic subunits of IκB kinase (IKK) complex, IKKα and IKKβ, are involved 
in activation of NF-κB and in mediating a variety of other biological functions. 
Though these proteins have a high-sequence homology, IKKα exhibits different 
functional characteristics as compared with IKKβ. Earlier, we have shown that 
cyclin D1 is overexpressed and predominantly localized in the nucleus of 
IKKα(-/-) cells, indicating that IKKα regulates turnover and subcellular 
distribution of cyclin D1, which is mediated by IKKα-induced phosphorylation of 
cyclin D1. Because cyclin D nuclear localization is implicated in tumor 
development, we examined whether the absence of IKKα leads to tumor development 
as well. In the current study, we show that IKKα plays a critical role in 
tumorigenesis. Though IKKα(-/-) MEF cells show a slower anchorage-dependent 
growth, they are clonogenic in soft agar. These cells are tumorigenic in nude 
mice. Microarray analysis of IKKα(-/-) cells indicates a differential expression 
of genes involved in proliferation and apoptosis. Furthermore, analysis of 
microarray data of human lung cancer cell lines revealed decreased IKKα RNA 
expression level as compared with cell lines derived from normal bronchial 
epithelium. These results suggest that IKKα may function as a tumor suppressor 
gene. Absence of IKKα may induce tumorigenicity by nuclear localization of 
cyclin D1 and modulating the expression of genes involved in neoplastic 
transformation.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0248
PMCID: PMC3072035
PMID: 21317297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]