1. BMC Genomics. 2011 Feb 16;12:109. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-109.

Multi-genome identification and characterization of chlamydiae-specific type III 
secretion substrates: the Inc proteins.

Dehoux P(1), Flores R, Dauga C, Zhong G, Subtil A.

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unit√© de Biologie des Interactions Cellulaires, Paris, 
France.

BACKGROUND: Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular bacteria that multiply in a 
vacuolar compartment, the inclusion. Several chlamydial proteins containing a 
bilobal hydrophobic domain are translocated by a type III secretion (TTS) 
mechanism into the inclusion membrane. They form the family of Inc proteins, 
which is specific to this phylum. Based on their localization, Inc proteins 
likely play important roles in the interactions between the microbe and the 
host. In this paper we sought to identify and analyze, using bioinformatics 
tools, all putative Inc proteins in published chlamydial genomes, including an 
environmental species.
RESULTS: Inc proteins contain at least one bilobal hydrophobic domain made of 
two transmembrane helices separated by a loop of less than 30 amino acids. Using 
bioinformatics tools we identified 537 putative Inc proteins across seven 
chlamydial proteomes. The amino-terminal segment of the putative Inc proteins 
was recognized as a functional TTS signal in 90% of the C. trachomatis and C. 
pneumoniae sequences tested, validating the data obtained in silico. We 
identified a macro domain in several putative Inc proteins, and observed that 
Inc proteins are enriched in segments predicted to form coiled coils. A 
surprisingly large proportion of the putative Inc proteins are not 
constitutively translocated to the inclusion membrane in culture conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: The Inc proteins represent 7 to 10% of each proteome and show a 
great degree of sequence diversity between species. The abundance of segments 
with a high probability for coiled coil conformation in Inc proteins support the 
hypothesis that they interact with host proteins. While the large majority of 
Inc proteins possess a functional TTS signal, less than half may be 
constitutively translocated to the inclusion surface in some species. This 
suggests the novel finding that translocation of Inc proteins may be regulated 
by as-yet undetermined mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-109
PMCID: PMC3048545
PMID: 21324157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]