1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2011 Feb;236(2):156-68. doi: 10.1258/ebm.2010.010202.

Decreased expression level of apoptosis-related genes and/or proteins in 
skeletal muscles, but not in hearts, of growth hormone receptor knockout mice.

Gesing A(1), Masternak MM, Wang F, Lewinski A, Karbownik-Lewinska M, Bartke A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Geriatrics Research, Southern Illinois 
University School of Medicine, 801 N Rutledge St., Room 4389, 62702-4910 
Springfield, IL, USA. adges7@wp.pl

The long-lived growth hormone (GH) receptor knockout (GHRKO; KO) mice are 
GH-resistant due to targeted disruption of the GH receptor (Ghr) gene. Apoptosis 
is a physiological process in which cells play an active role in their own death 
and is a normal component of the development and health of multicellular 
organisms. Aging is associated with the progressive loss of strength of skeletal 
and heart muscles. Calorie restriction (CR) is a well-known experimental model 
to delay aging and increase lifespan. The aim of the study was to examine the 
expression of the following apoptosis-related genes: caspase-3, caspase-9, 
caspase-8, bax, bcl-2, Smac/DIABLO, p53 and cytochrome c1 (cyc1) in the skeletal 
muscles and hearts of female normal and GHRKO mice, fed ad libitum or subjected 
to 40% CR for six months, starting at two months of age. Moreover, skeletal 
muscle caspase-3, caspase-9, caspase-8, bax, bcl-2, Smac/DIABLO, Apaf-1, bad, 
phospho-bad (pbad), phospho-p53 and cytochrome c (cyc) protein expression levels 
were assessed. Expression of caspase-3, caspase-9, bax and Smac/DIABLO genes and 
proteins was decreased in GHRKO's skeletal muscles. The Apaf-1 protein 
expression also was diminished in this tissue. In contrast, bcl-2 and pbad 
protein levels were increased in skeletal muscles in knockouts. No changes were 
demonstrated for the examined genes' expression in GHRKO's hearts except for the 
increased level of cyc1 mRNA. CR did not alter the expression of the examined 
genes and proteins in skeletal muscles of knockouts versus normal (N) mice. In 
heart homogenates, CR increased caspase-3 mRNA level as compared with ad libitum 
mice. Decreased expression of certain proapoptotic genes and/or proteins may 
constitute the potential mechanism of prolonged longevity in GHRKO mice, 
protecting these animals from aging; this potential beneficial mechanism is not 
affected by CR.

DOI: 10.1258/ebm.2010.010202
PMCID: PMC3703836
PMID: 21321312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]