1. J Gen Physiol. 2011 Mar;137(3):271-88. doi: 10.1085/jgp.200910388. Epub 2011
Feb  14.

Voltage- and temperature-dependent activation of TRPV3 channels is potentiated 
by receptor-mediated PI(4,5)P2 hydrolysis.

Doerner JF(1), Hatt H, Ramsey IS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Physiology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany.

TRPV3 is a thermosensitive channel that is robustly expressed in skin 
keratinocytes and activated by innocuous thermal heating, membrane 
depolarization, and chemical agonists such as 2-aminoethyoxy diphenylborinate, 
carvacrol, and camphor. TRPV3 modulates sensory thermotransduction, hair growth, 
and susceptibility to dermatitis in rodents, but the molecular mechanisms 
responsible for controlling TRPV3 channel activity in keratinocytes remain 
elusive. We show here that receptor-mediated breakdown of the membrane lipid 
phosphatidylinositol (4,5) bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P(2)) regulates the activity of 
both native TRPV3 channels in primary human skin keratinocytes and expressed 
TRPV3 in a HEK-293-derived cell line stably expressing muscarinic M(1)-type 
acetylcholine receptors. Stimulation of PI(4,5)P(2) hydrolysis or 
pharmacological inhibition of PI 4 kinase to block PI(4,5)P(2) synthesis 
potentiates TRPV3 currents by causing a negative shift in the voltage dependence 
of channel opening, increasing the proportion of voltage-independent current and 
causing thermal activation to occur at cooler temperatures. The activity of 
single TRPV3 channels in excised patches is potentiated by PI(4,5)P(2) depletion 
and selectively decreased by PI(4,5)P(2) compared with related 
phosphatidylinositol phosphates. Neutralizing mutations of basic residues in the 
TRP domain abrogate the effect of PI(4,5)P(2) on channel function, suggesting 
that PI(4,5)P(2) directly interacts with a specific protein motif to reduce 
TRPV3 channel open probability. PI(4,5)P(2)-dependent modulation of TRPV3 
activity represents an attractive mechanism for acute regulation of keratinocyte 
signaling cascades that control cell proliferation and the release of autocrine 
and paracrine factors.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.200910388
PMCID: PMC3047606
PMID: 21321070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]