1. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 1;17(7):1684-91. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2346.
 Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Large-scale analysis of KIT aberrations in Chinese patients with melanoma.

Kong Y(1), Si L, Zhu Y, Xu X, Corless CL, Flaherty KT, Li L, Li H, Sheng X, Cui 
C, Chi Z, Li S, Han M, Mao L, Lu A, Guo J.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of 
Education), Department of Renal Cancer and Melanoma, Peking University Cancer 
Hospital & Institute, Beijing, China.

PURPOSE: KIT aberrations were described in acral and mucosal melanomas in 
largely Caucasian populations. Asian populations are more prone to develop acral 
and mucosal than cutaneous melanomas, and may harbor a high frequency of KIT 
aberrations.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Melanoma subtypes (n = 502) were analyzed histologically to 
determine melanoma subtype. Tissue samples were analyzed for mutations in exons 
9, 11, 13, 17, and 18 of KIT gene in genomic DNA by PCR amplification and Sanger 
sequencing. The copy numbers of the KIT gene were analyzed by quantitative PCR, 
and protein expression levels of KIT (CD117) were determined by 
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The most common melanoma subtypes were acral (38.4%) and mucosal 
(33.3%) melanomas in this population. The overall incidence of somatic mutations 
within the KIT gene was 10.8% (54/502), and all subtypes of melanoma contained 
KIT mutations. Increases in KIT gene copy numbers were correlated to CD117 
overexpression. The genetic mutations of KIT were unrelated to the age, gender, 
stage, thickness, and ulceration of primary melanomas. Importantly, the overall 
survival of melanoma patients with KIT mutations (P = 0.001) or with KIT 
aberrations (mutation plus amplification, P = 0.0002) was significantly shorter 
than that of patients without such alterations.
CONCLUSION: In China, the prevalent melanomas are acral and mucosal melanomas. 
KIT mutations are detected in all melanoma subtypes. Our study suggests that 
increases in KIT gene copy numbers, but not KIT mutations, may be correlated to 
CD117 overexpression. For the first time, our study suggests that genetic KIT 
aberration is an adverse prognostic factor for melanoma.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2346
PMID: 21325067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]