1. Neuropharmacology. 2011 Jul-Aug;61(1-2):12-24. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.02.010. Epub 2011 Feb 19.

Multiple protein kinases determine the phosphorylated state of the small heat 
shock protein, HSP27, in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells.

Dokas LA(1), Malone AM, Williams FE, Nauli SM, Messer WS Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, 3000 Arlington Avenue, The 
University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43614, USA. ldokas@umich.edu

In SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells, the cholinergic agonist, carbachol, 
stimulates phosphorylation of the small heat shock protein 27 (HSP27). Carbachol 
increases phosphorylation of both Ser-82 and Ser-78 while the phorbol ester, 
phorbol-12, 13-dibutyrate (PDB) affects only Ser-82. Muscarinic receptor 
activation by carbachol was confirmed by sensitivity of Ser-82 phosphorylation 
to hyoscyamine with no effect of nicotine or bradykinin. This response to 
carbachol is partially reduced by inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) with GF 
109203X and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) with SB 203580. In 
contrast, phosphorylation produced by PDB is completely reversed by GF 109203X 
or CID 755673, an inhibitor of PKD. Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
or Akt with LY 294002 or Akti-1/2 stimulates HSP27 phosphorylation while 
rapamycin, which inhibits mTORC1, does not. The stimulatory effect of Akti-1/2 
is reversed by SB 203580 and correlates with increased p38 MAPK phosphorylation. 
SH-SY5Y cells differentiated with a low concentration of PDB and basic 
fibroblast growth factor to a more neuronal phenotype retain carbachol-, PDB- 
and Akti-1/2-responsive HSP27 phosphorylation. Immunofluorescence microscopy 
confirms increased HSP27 phosphorylation in response to carbachol or PDB. At 
cell margins, PDB causes f-actin to reorganize forming lamellipodial structures 
from which phospho-HSP27 is segregated. The resultant phenotypic change in cell 
morphology is dependent upon PKC, but not PKD, activity. The major conclusion 
from this study is that the phosphorylated state of HSP27 in SH-SY5Y cells 
results from integrated signaling involving PKC, p38 MAPK and Akt.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.02.010
PMCID: PMC3105189
PMID: 21338617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]