1. Mol Genet Metab. 2011 May;103(1):51-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2011.02.002. Epub 
2011 Feb 25.

Blind sterile 2 (bs2), a hypomorphic mutation in Agps, results in cataracts and 
male sterility in mice.

Liegel R(1), Chang B, Dubielzig R, Sidjanin DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Blind sterile 2 (bs2) is a spontaneous autosomal recessive mouse mutation 
exhibiting cataracts and male sterility. Detailed clinical and histological 
evaluation revealed that bs2 mice have cataracts resulting from severely 
disrupted lens fiber cells. Analysis of bs2 testes revealed the absence of 
mature sperm and the presence of large multinucleate cells within the lumens of 
seminiferous tubules. Linkage analysis mapped the bs2 locus to mouse chromosome 
2, approximately 45cM distal from the centromere. Fine mapping established a 
3.1Mb bs2 critical region containing 19 candidate genes. Sequence analysis of 
alkylglycerone-phosphate synthase (Agps), a gene within the bs2 critical region, 
revealed a G to A substitution at the +5 position of intron 14. This mutation 
results in two abundantly expressed aberrantly spliced Agps transcripts: 
Agps(∆exon14) lacking exon 14 or Agps(exon∆13-14) lacking both exons 13 and 14 
as well as full-length Agps transcript. Agps is a peroxisomal enzyme which 
catalyzes the formation of the ether bond during the synthesis of ether lipids. 
Both aberrantly spliced Agps(∆exon14) and Agps(exon∆13-14) transcripts led to a 
frame shift, premature stop and putative proteins lacking the enzymatic FAD 
domain. We present evidence that bs2 mice have significantly decreased levels of 
ether lipids. Human mutations in Agps result in rhizomelic chondrodysplasia 
punctata type 3 (RCDP3), a disease for which bs2 is the only genetic model. 
Thus, bs2 is a hypomorphic mutation in Agps, and represents a useful model for 
investigation of the tissue specificity of ether lipid requirements which will 
be particularly valuable for elucidating the mechanism of disease phenotypes 
resulting from ether lipid depletion.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2011.02.002
PMCID: PMC3081956
PMID: 21353609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.