1. Mutat Res. 2011 Jan-Apr;727(1-2):1-15. doi: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2011.02.001. Epub 
2011 Feb 23.

Polymorphism in the DNA repair enzyme XRCC1: utility of current database and 
implications for human health risk assessment.

Ginsberg G(1), Angle K, Guyton K, Sonawane B.

Author information:
(1)Connecticut Dept of Public Health, Hartford, CT, United States. 
gary.ginsberg@ct.gov

Genetic polymorphisms are increasingly recognized as sources of variability not 
only in toxicokinetic but also in toxicodynamic response to environmental 
agents. XRCC1 is involved in base excision repair (BER) of DNA; it has variant 
genotypes that are associated with modified repair function. This analysis 
focuses on four polymorphisms: three in the coding region that affect protein 
structure and one in an upstream regulatory sequence that affects gene 
expression. The Arg399Gln variant is the most widely studied with evidence 
supporting a quantitative effect of genotype on phenotype. The homozygous 
variant (Gln/Gln) can have 3-4-fold diminished capacity to remove DNA adducts 
and oxidized DNA damage. This variant is relatively common in Caucasians and 
Asians where approximately 10% are homozygous variant. In contrast, the 
Arg194Trp variant appears to protect against genotoxic effects although the 
degree to which DNA repair is enhanced by this polymorphism is uncertain. The 
homozygous variant is rare in Caucasians and African Americans but it is present 
at 7% in Asians. A third coding region polymorphism at codon 280 appears to 
decrease repair function but additional quantitative information is needed and 
the homozygous variant is rare across populations studied. A polymorphism in an 
upstream promoter binding sequence (-77T>C) appears to lower XRCC1 levels by 
decreasing gene expression. Based upon genotype effect on phenotype and allele 
frequency, the current analysis finds that the codon 399 and upstream (-77) 
polymorphisms have the greatest potential to affect the toxicodynamic response 
to DNA damaging agents. However, the implications for risk assessment are 
limited by the likelihood that polymorphisms in multiple BER genes interact to 
modulate DNA repair.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2011.02.001
PMID: 21352951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]