1. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 18;6(2):e14710. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014710.

Neurotensin receptor 1 is expressed in gastrointestinal stromal tumors but not 
in interstitial cells of Cajal.

Gromova P(1), Rubin BP, Thys A, Erneux C, Vanderwinden JM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, Universit√© Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are thought to derive from the 
interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) or an ICC precursor. Oncogenic mutations of 
the KIT or PDGFRA receptor tyrosine kinases are present in the majority of GIST, 
leading to ligand-independent activation of the intracellular signal 
transduction pathways. We previously investigated the gene expression profile in 
the murine Kit(K641E) GIST model and identified Ntsr1 mRNA, encoding the 
Neurotensin receptor 1, amongst the upregulated genes. Here we characterized 
Ntsr1 mRNA and protein expression in the murine Kit(K641E) GIST model and in 
tissue microarrays of human GIST. Ntsr1 mRNA upregulation in Kit(K641E) animals 
was confirmed by quantitative PCR. Ntsr1 immunoreactivity was not detected in 
the Kit positive ICC of WT mice, but was present in the Kit positive hyperplasia 
of Kit(K641E) mice. In the normal human gut, NTSR1 immunoreactivity was detected 
in myenteric neurons but not in KIT positive ICC. Two independent tissue 
microarrays, including a total of 97 GIST, revealed NTSR1 immunoreactivity in 
all specimens, including the KIT negative GIST with PDGFRA mutation. NTSR1 
immunoreactivity exhibited nuclear, cytoplasmic or mixed patterns, which might 
relate to variable levels of NTSR1 activation. As studies using radio-labeled 
NTSR1 ligand analogues for whole body tumor imaging and for targeted therapeutic 
interventions have already been reported, this study opens new perspectives for 
similar approaches in GIST.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014710
PMCID: PMC3041753
PMID: 21364741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.