1. Mol Microbiol. 2011 May;80(3):798-810. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07609.x. 
Epub 2011 Mar 16.

In vivo phosphorylation patterns of key stressosome proteins define a second 
feedback loop that limits activation of Bacillus subtilis σB.

Eymann C(1), Schulz S, Gronau K, Becher D, Hecker M, Price CW.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Microbiology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald, 
F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany. eymann@uni-greifswald.de

The Bacillus subtilis stressosome is a 1.8 MDa complex that orchestrates 
activation of the σ(B) transcription factor by environmental stress. The complex 
comprises members of the RsbR co-antagonist family and the RsbS antagonist, 
which together form an icosahedral core that sequesters the RsbT 
serine-threonine kinase. Phosphorylation of this core by RsbT is associated with 
RsbT release, which activates downstream signalling. RsbRA, the prototype 
co-antagonist, is phosphorylated on T171 and T205 in vitro. In unstressed cells 
T171 is already phosphorylated; this is a prerequisite but not the trigger for 
activation, which correlates with stress-induced phosphorylation of RsbS on S59. 
In contrast, phosphorylation of RsbRA T205 has not been detected in vivo. Here 
we find (i) RsbRA is additionally phosphorylated on T205 following strong 
stresses, (ii) this modification requires RsbT, and (iii) the 
phosphorylation-deficient T205A substitution greatly increases post-stress 
activation of σ(B) . We infer that T205 phosphorylation constitutes a second 
feedback mechanism to limit σ(B) activation, operating in addition to the RsbX 
feedback phosphatase. Loss of RsbX function increases the fraction of 
phosphorylated RsbS and doubly phosphorylated RsbRA in unstressed cells. We 
propose that RsbX both maintains the ready state of the stressosome prior to 
stress and restores it post-stress.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07609.x
PMCID: PMC3206960
PMID: 21362065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]