1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2011 Oct;384(4-5):341-9. doi: 
10.1007/s00210-011-0615-0. Epub 2011 Mar 4.

A genetic interaction between NDPK and AMPK in Dictyostelium discoideum that 
affects motility, growth and development.

Annesley SJ(1), Bago R, Mehta A, Fisher PR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbology, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, 3086, 
Australia. S.Annesley@latrobe.edu.au

Many of the expanding roles of nucleoside diphosphate kinase have been 
attributed to its ability to interact with other proteins. One proposal is an 
interaction with the cellular energy sensor AMP-activated protein kinase, and 
here, we apply the simple eukaryotic organism, Dictyostelium discoideum as a 
test model. Stable cotransformants were created in which NDPK expression was 
knocked down by antisense inhibition, and AMPK activity was chronically elevated 
either by constitutive overexpression of its active, catalytic domain (AMPKαT) 
or as a result of mitochondrial dysfunction (created by antisense inhibition of 
expression of a mitochondrial chaperone protein, chaperonin 60). To investigate 
a biochemical interaction, transformants were created which contained constructs 
expressing FLAG-NDPK and hexahistidine-tagged full-length AMPK or AMPKαT. The 
protein extract from these transformants was used in coimmunoprecipitations. 
Knock down of NDPK expression suppressed the phenotypic defects that are caused 
by AMPK hyperactivity resulting either from overexpression of AMPKαT or from 
mitochondrial dysfunction. These included rescue of defects in slug phototaxis, 
fruiting body morphology and growth in a liquid medium. Coimmunoprecipitation 
experiments failed to demonstrate a biochemical interaction between the two 
proteins. The results demonstrate a genetic interaction between NDPK and AMPK in 
Dictyostelium in that NDPK is required for the phenotypic effects of activated 
AMPK. Coimmunoprecipitations suggest that this interaction is not mediated by a 
direct interaction between the two proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/s00210-011-0615-0
PMCID: PMC3390704
PMID: 21374069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]