1. Biometrics. 2011 Dec;67(4):1422-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1541-0420.2011.01572.x.
Epub  2011 Mar 8.

Reinforcement learning strategies for clinical trials in nonsmall cell lung 
cancer.

Zhao Y(1), Zeng D, Socinski MA, Kosorok MR.

Author information:
(1)Global Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Amgen Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, 
Thousand Oaks, California 91320, USA.

Typical regimens for advanced metastatic stage IIIB/IV nonsmall cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) consist of multiple lines of treatment. We present an adaptive 
reinforcement learning approach to discover optimal individualized treatment 
regimens from a specially designed clinical trial (a "clinical reinforcement 
trial") of an experimental treatment for patients with advanced NSCLC who have 
not been treated previously with systemic therapy. In addition to the complexity 
of the problem of selecting optimal compounds for first- and second-line 
treatments based on prognostic factors, another primary goal is to determine the 
optimal time to initiate second-line therapy, either immediately or delayed 
after induction therapy, yielding the longest overall survival time. A 
reinforcement learning method called Q-learning is utilized, which involves 
learning an optimal regimen from patient data generated from the clinical 
reinforcement trial. Approximating the Q-function with time-indexed parameters 
can be achieved by using a modification of support vector regression that can 
utilize censored data. Within this framework, a simulation study shows that the 
procedure can extract optimal regimens for two lines of treatment directly from 
clinical data without prior knowledge of the treatment effect mechanism. In 
addition, we demonstrate that the design reliably selects the best initial time 
for second-line therapy while taking into account the heterogeneity of NSCLC 
across patients.

Â© 2011, The International Biometric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1541-0420.2011.01572.x
PMCID: PMC3138840
PMID: 21385164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]