1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 May 15;50(10):1252-62. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.02.031. Epub 2011 Mar 5.

Caveolin-1 mediates Fas-BID signaling in hyperoxia-induced apoptosis.

Zhang M(1), Lee SJ, An C, Xu JF, Joshi B, Nabi IR, Choi AM, Jin Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Fas-mediated apoptosis is a crucial cellular event. Fas, the Fas-associated 
death domain, and caspase 8 form the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC). 
Activated caspase 8 mediates the extrinsic pathways and cleaves cytosolic BID. 
Truncated BID (tBID) translocates to the mitochondria, facilitates the release 
of cytochrome c, and activates the intrinsic pathways. However, the mechanism 
causing these DISC components to aggregate and form the complex remains unclear. 
We found that Cav-1 regulated Fas signaling and mediated the communication 
between extrinsic and intrinsic pathways. Shortly after hyperoxia (4 h), the 
colocalization and interaction of Cav-1 and Fas increased, followed by Fas 
multimer and DISC formation. Deletion of Cav-1 (Cav-1-/-) disrupted DISC 
formation. Further, Cav-1 interacted with BID. Mutation of Cav-1 Y14 tyrosine to 
phenylalanine (Y14F) disrupted the hyperoxia-induced interaction between BID and 
Cav-1 and subsequently yielded a decreased level of tBID and resistance to 
hyperoxia-induced apoptosis. The reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger 
N-acetylcysteine decreased the Cav-1-Fas interaction. Deletion of glutathione 
peroxidase-2 using siRNA aggravated the BID-Cav-1 interaction and tBID 
formation. Taken together, these results indicate that Cav-1 regulates 
hyperoxia/ROS-induced apoptosis through interactions with Fas and BID, probably 
via Fas palmitoylation and Cav-1 Y14 phosphorylation, respectively.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.02.031
PMCID: PMC4134776
PMID: 21382479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]