1. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2011 Jun;29(4):423-40. doi:
10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2011.02.012.  Epub 2011 Mar 5.

The developing oligodendrocyte: key cellular target in brain injury in the 
premature infant.

Volpe JJ(1), Kinney HC, Jensen FE, Rosenberg PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. joseph.volpe@childrens.harvard.edu

Republished in
    Int J Dev Neurosci. 2011 Oct;29(6):565-82. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2011.07.008.

Brain injury in the premature infant, a problem of enormous importance, is 
associated with a high risk of neurodevelopmental disability. The major type of 
injury involves cerebral white matter and the principal cellular target is the 
developing oligodendrocyte. The specific phase of the oligodendroglial lineage 
affected has been defined from study of both human brain and experimental 
models. This premyelinating cell (pre-OL) is vulnerable because of a series of 
maturation-dependent events. The pathogenesis of pre-OL injury relates to 
operation of two upstream mechanisms, hypoxia-ischemia and systemic 
infection/inflammation, both of which are common occurrences in premature 
infants. The focus of this review and of our research over the past 15-20 years 
has been the cellular and molecular bases for the maturation-dependent 
vulnerability of the pre-OL to the action of the two upstream mechanisms. Three 
downstream mechanisms have been identified, i.e., microglial activation, 
excitotoxicity and free radical attack. The work in both experimental models and 
human brain has identified a remarkable confluence of maturation-dependent 
factors that render the pre-OL so exquisitely vulnerable to these downstream 
mechanisms. Most importantly, elucidation of these factors has led to 
delineation of a series of potential therapeutic interventions, which in 
experimental models show marked protective properties. The critical next step, 
i.e., clinical trials in the living infant, is now on the horizon.

Copyright Â© 2011 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2011.02.012
PMCID: PMC3099053
PMID: 21382469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]