1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1001097. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001097. 
Epub 2011 Mar 3.

Dynamic conformational changes in munc18 prevent syntaxin binding.

Bar-On D(1), Nachliel E, Gutman M, Ashery U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

The Sec1/munc18 protein family is essential for vesicle fusion in eukaryotic 
cells via binding to SNARE proteins. Protein kinase C modulates these 
interactions by phosphorylating munc18a thereby reducing its affinity to one of 
the central SNARE members, syntaxin-1a. The established hypothesis is that the 
reduced affinity of the phosphorylated munc18a to syntaxin-1a is a result of 
local electrostatic repulsion between the two proteins, which interferes with 
their compatibility. The current study challenges this paradigm and offers a 
novel mechanistic explanation by revealing a syntaxin-non-binding conformation 
of munc18a that is induced by the phosphomimetic mutations. In the present 
study, using molecular dynamics simulations, we explored the dynamics of the 
wild-type munc18a versus phosphomimetic mutant munc18a. We focused on the 
structural changes that occur in the cavity between domains 3a and 1, which 
serves as the main syntaxin-binding site. The results of the simulations suggest 
that the free wild-type munc18a exhibits a dynamic equilibrium between several 
conformations differing in the size of its cavity (the main syntaxin-binding 
site). The flexibility of the cavity's size might facilitate the binding or 
unbinding of syntaxin. In silico insertion of phosphomimetic mutations into the 
munc18a structure induces the formation of a conformation where the 
syntaxin-binding area is rigid and blocked as a result of interactions between 
residues located on both sides of the cavity. Therefore, we suggest that the 
reduced affinity of the phosphomimetic mutant/phosphorylated munc18a is a result 
of the closed-cavity conformation, which makes syntaxin binding energetically 
and sterically unfavorable. The current study demonstrates the potential of 
phosphorylation, an essential biological process, to serve as a driving force 
for dramatic conformational changes of proteins modulating their affinity to 
target proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001097
PMCID: PMC3048386
PMID: 21390273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.