1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2012 Feb;47(2):217-26. doi: 10.1038/bmt.2011.56. Epub 
2011 Mar 28.

Identification by random forest method of HLA class I amino acid substitutions 
associated with lower survival at day 100 in unrelated donor hematopoietic cell 
transplantation.

Marino SR(1), Lin S, Maiers M, Haagenson M, Spellman S, Klein JP, Binkowski TA, 
Lee SJ, van Besien K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL 
60637-1470, USA. smarino@bsd.uchicago.edu

The identification of important amino acid substitutions associated with low 
survival in hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) is hampered by the large 
number of observed substitutions compared with the small number of patients 
available for analysis. Random forest analysis is designed to address these 
limitations. We studied 2107 HCT recipients with good or intermediate risk 
hematological malignancies to identify HLA class I amino acid substitutions 
associated with reduced survival at day 100 post transplant. Random forest 
analysis and traditional univariate and multivariate analyses were used. Random 
forest analysis identified amino acid substitutions in 33 positions that were 
associated with reduced 100 day survival, including HLA-A 9, 43, 62, 63, 76, 77, 
95, 97, 114, 116, 152, 156, 166 and 167; HLA-B 97, 109, 116 and 156; and HLA-C 
6, 9, 11, 14, 21, 66, 77, 80, 95, 97, 99, 116, 156, 163 and 173. In all 13 had 
been previously reported by other investigators using classical biostatistical 
approaches. Using the same data set, traditional multivariate logistic 
regression identified only five amino acid substitutions associated with lower 
day 100 survival. Random forest analysis is a novel statistical methodology for 
analysis of HLA mismatching and outcome studies, capable of identifying 
important amino acid substitutions missed by other methods.

DOI: 10.1038/bmt.2011.56
PMCID: PMC3128239
PMID: 21441965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of conflict of interest: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.