1. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Mar 31;12:46. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-46.

PTPRF is disrupted in a patient with syndromic amastia.

Ausavarat S(1), Tongkobpetch S, Praphanphoj V, Mahatumarat C, Rojvachiranonda N, 
Snabboon T, Markello TC, Gahl WA, Suphapeetiporn K, Shotelersuk V.

Author information:
(1)Interdepartment of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Graduate School, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: The presence of mammary glands distinguishes mammals from other 
organisms. Despite significant advances in defining the signaling pathways 
responsible for mammary gland development in mice, our understanding of human 
mammary gland development remains rudimentary. Here, we identified a woman with 
bilateral amastia, ectodermal dysplasia and unilateral renal agenesis. She was 
found to have a chromosomal balanced translocation, 46,XX,t(1;20)(p34.1;q13.13). 
In addition to characterization of her clinical and cytogenetic features, we 
successfully identified the interrupted gene and studied its consequences.
METHODS: Characterization of the breakpoints was performed by molecular 
cytogenetic techniques. The interrupted gene was further analyzed using 
quantitative real-time PCR and western blotting. Mutation analysis and 
high-density SNP array were carried out in order to find a pathogenic mutation. 
Allele segregations were obtained by haplotype analysis.
RESULTS: We enabled to identify its breakpoint on chromosome 1 interrupting the 
protein tyrosine receptor type F gene (PTPRF). While the patient's mother and 
sisters also harbored the translocated chromosome, their non-translocated 
chromosomes 1 were different from that of the patient. Although a definite 
pathogenic mutation on the paternal allele could not be identified, PTPRF's RNA 
and protein of the patient were significantly less than those of her unaffected 
family members.
CONCLUSIONS: Although ptprf has been shown to involve in murine mammary gland 
development, no evidence has incorporated PTPRF in human organ development. We, 
for the first time, demonstrated the possible association of PTPRF with 
syndromic amastia, making it a prime candidate to investigate for its spatial 
and temporal roles in human breast development.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-46
PMCID: PMC3083333
PMID: 21453473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]