1. Am J Transplant. 2011 May;11(5):1051-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-6143.2011.03491.x.
 Epub 2011 Apr 5.

Donor and recipient IL28B polymorphisms in HCV-infected patients undergoing 
antiviral therapy before and after liver transplantation.

Coto-Llerena M(1), Pérez-Del-Pulgar S, Crespo G, Carrión JA, Martínez SM, 
Sánchez-Tapias JM, Martorell J, Navasa M, Forns X.

Author information:
(1)Liver Unit, CIBERehd, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.

IL28B gene polymorphisms are associated with the response to antiviral therapy 
in hepatitis C patients. We investigated the influence of IL28B polymorphisms on 
the response to therapy before and after liver transplantation (LT). Genotyping 
of SNPs rs8099917 and rs12979860 was performed in 128 HCV-infected liver 
transplant recipients and in their donors; all patients underwent antiviral 
treatment after LT. The prevalence of genotypes rs12979860CC and rs8099917TT was 
higher in donors than in recipients (50% vs.19%, p < 0.001 and 67% vs. 38%, p < 
0.001, respectively). Response to antiviral therapy was significantly higher for 
recipient genotype rs12979860CC as compared to rs12979860CT/TT both before (100% 
vs. 48% p = 0.013) and after LT (59% vs. 25% p = 0.002). The figures were almost 
identical for SNP rs8099917. Sustained virological response after LT was 
particularly high in patients with favorable recipient and donor genotypes (p < 
0.01 for both SNPs). In a subgroup of 34 patients treated while awaiting LT, a 
favorable donor IL28B genotype was associated with an improved virological 
response after LT. Our results support a major role of recipient IL28B genotype 
in the response to antiviral treatment for hepatitis C recurrence. 
Interestingly, donor genotype also seems to influence the response pattern, 
especially in recipients who have a favorable IL28B genotype.

©2011 The Authors Journal compilation©2011 The American Society of 
Transplantation and the American Society of Transplant Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-6143.2011.03491.x
PMID: 21466653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]