1. AIDS. 2011 Apr 24;25(7):941-9. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e3283463c07.

Efficacy of NNRTI-based antiretroviral therapy initiated during acute HIV 
infection.

Gay CL(1), Mayo AJ, Mfalila CK, Chu H, Barry AC, Kuruc JD, McGee KS, Kerkau M, 
Sebastian J, Fiscus SA, Margolis DM, Hicks CB, Ferrari G, Eron JJ; Duke-UNC 
Acute HIV Infection Consortium.

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 
cynthia_gay@med.unc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Characterize responses to non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitor (NNRTI)-based antiretroviral treatment (ART) initiated during acute 
HIV infection (AHI).
DESIGN: This was a prospective, single-arm evaluation of once-daily, 
co-formulated emtricitabine/tenofovir/efavirenz initiated during AHI.
METHODS: The primary endpoint is the proportion of responders with HIV RNA less 
than 200 copies/ml by week 24. We examined time to viral suppression and CD8 
cell activation in relation to baseline participant characteristics. We compared 
time to viral suppression and viral dynamics using linear mixed-effects models 
between acutely infected participants and chronically infected controls.
RESULTS: Between January 2005 and May 2009, 61 AHI participants were enrolled. 
Of participants whose enrollment date allowed 24 and 48 weeks of follow-up, 47 
of 51 (92%) achieved viral suppression to less than 200 copies/ml by week 24, 
and 35 of 41 (85.4%) to less than 50 copies/ml by week 48. The median time from 
ART initiation to suppression below 50 copies/ml was 93 days (range 14-337). 
Higher HIV RNA levels at ART initiation (P = 0.02), but not time from estimated 
date of infection to ART initiation (P = 0.86), were associated with longer time 
to viral suppression. The median baseline frequency of activated 
CD8+CD38+HLA-DR+ T cells was 67% (range 40-95), and was not significantly 
associated with longer time to viral load suppression (P = 0.15). Viremia 
declined to less than 50 copies/ml more rapidly in AHI than chronically infected 
participants. Mixed-model analysis demonstrated similar phase I HIV RNA decay 
rates between acute and chronically infected participants, and more rapid viral 
decline in acutely infected participants in phase II.
CONCLUSION: Once-daily emtricitabine/tenofovir/efavirenz initiated during AHI 
achieves rapid and sustained HIV suppression during this highly infectious 
period.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e3283463c07
PMCID: PMC3569481
PMID: 21487250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Financial Conflicts of Interest: C.G. 
has received research support from Bristol Myers Squibb, Gilead Sciences, Abbott 
and Tibotec Therapeutics. C.H. has received grant support and/or 
consulting/honoraria from BMS, GSK, Merck, Tibotec, Gilead, Myriad 
Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer. D.M. has received research support from Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Gilead Sciences, Merck, Abbott, and Roche, and is a honoraria for 
professional services to Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck, Chimerix, and Tibotec 
Therapeutics. J.E. receives research support from Merck and GlaxoSmithKline and 
is a consultant to Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck, and Tibotec Therapeutics. A.M., 
A.B., J.K., K.M., M.K., S.F., G.F. - No conflicts.