1. Br J Haematol. 2011 Jun;153(5):589-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08663.x. 
Epub 2011 Apr 15.

Direct activation of STAT5 by ETV6-LYN fusion protein promotes induction of 
myeloproliferative neoplasm with myelofibrosis.

Takeda Y(1), Nakaseko C, Tanaka H, Takeuchi M, Yui M, Saraya A, Miyagi S, Wang 
C, Tanaka S, Ohwada C, Sakaida E, Yamaguchi N, Yokote K, Hennighausen L, Iwama 
A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Haematology, Department of Clinical Cell Biology, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), a group of haematopoietic stem cell (HSC) 
disorders, are often accompanied by myelofibrosis. We previously identified the 
fusion of the ETV6 gene to the LYN gene (ETV6-LYN) in idiopathic myelofibrosis 
with ins(12;8)(p13;q11q21). The introduction of ETV6-LYN into HSCs resulted in 
fatal MPN with massive myelofibrosis in mice, implicating the rearranged LYN 
kinase in the pathogenesis of MPN with myelofibrosis. However, the signalling 
molecules directly downstream from and activated by ETV6-LYN remain unknown. In 
this study, we demonstrated that the direct activation of STAT5 by ETV6-LYN is 
crucial for the development of MPN. ETV6-LYN was constitutively active as a 
kinase through autophosphorylation. ETV6-LYN, but not its kinase-dead mutant, 
supported cytokine-free proliferation of haematopoietic cells. STAT5 was 
activated in a JAK2-independent manner in ETV6-LYN-expressing cells. ETV6-LYN 
interacted with STAT5 and directly activated STAT5 both in vitro and in vivo. Of 
note, ETV6-LYN did not support the formation of colonies by Stat5-deficient HSCs 
under cytokine-free conditions and the capacity of ETV6-LYN to induce MPN with 
myelofibrosis was profoundly attenuated in a Stat5-null background. These 
findings define STAT5 as a direct target of ETV6-LYN and unveil the LYN-STAT5 
axis as a novel pathway to augment proliferative signals in MPN and leukaemia.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08663.x
PMCID: PMC3091948
PMID: 21492125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.