1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 22;286(29):25823-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.198267. Epub 
2011 Apr 25.

Fibroblast growth factor-12 (FGF12) translocation into intestinal epithelial 
cells is dependent on a novel cell-penetrating peptide domain: involvement of 
internalization in the in vivo role of exogenous FGF12.

Nakayama F(1), Yasuda T, Umeda S, Asada M, Imamura T, Meineke V, Akashi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Emergency Medicine, National Institute of 
Radiological Sciences, Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8555, Japan. f_naka@nirs.go.jp

The extracellular effect of fibroblast growth factor-12 (FGF12) remains unknown 
because FGF12 cannot activate any fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs), 
and FGF12 is not currently thought to be released from cells. We reported 
previously that FGF12 plays an intracellular role in the inhibition of 
radiation-induced apoptosis. In this study, we demonstrated that recombinant 
FGF12 was able to be internalized into the cytoplasm of a rat intestinal 
epithelial cell line, IEC6, and this process was dependent on two novel 
cell-penetrating peptide (CPP) domains (CPP-M and CPP-C). In particular, CPP-C, 
composed of âˆ¼10 amino acids, was identified as a specific domain of FGF12 and 
its subfamily in the C-terminal region (residues 140-149), although CPP-M was a 
common domain in the internal region of the FGF family. The absence of CPP-C 
from FGF12 or a mutation (E142L) in the CPP-C domain drastically reduced the 
internalization of FGF12 into cells. Therefore, CPP-C played an essential role 
in the internalization of FGF12. In addition, CPP-C was able to deliver other 
polypeptides into cells as a CPP because an FGF1/CPP-C chimeric protein was 
internalized into IEC6 cells more efficiently than wild-type FGF1. Finally, 
intraperitoneally added FGF12 inhibited radiation-induced apoptosis in the 
intestinal epithelial cells of BALB/c mice, and deletion of the CPP-C domain 
decreased the inhibition of the apoptosis. These findings suggest that exogenous 
FGF12 can play a role in tissues by translocating into cells through the plasma 
membrane, and the availability of this novel CPP provides a new tool for the 
intracellular delivery of bioactive molecules.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.198267
PMCID: PMC3138292
PMID: 21518765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]