1. Acta Neuropathol. 2011 May;121(5):571-87. doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0826-y. Epub
 2011 Apr 24.

Alzheimer's disease is not "brain aging": neuropathological, genetic, and 
epidemiological human studies.

Nelson PT(1), Head E, Schmitt FA, Davis PR, Neltner JH, Jicha GA, Abner EL, 
Smith CD, Van Eldik LJ, Kryscio RJ, Scheff SW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0230, 
USA. pnels2@email.uky.edu

Human studies are reviewed concerning whether "aging"-related mechanisms 
contribute to Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis. AD is defined by specific 
neuropathology: neuritic amyloid plaques and neocortical neurofibrillary 
tangles. AD pathology is driven by genetic factors related not to aging per se, 
but instead to the amyloid precursor protein (APP). In contrast to genes 
involved in APP-related mechanisms, there is no firm connection between genes 
implicated in human "accelerated aging" diseases (progerias) and AD. The 
epidemiology of AD in advanced age is highly relevant but deceptively 
challenging to address given the low autopsy rates in most countries. In extreme 
old age, brain diseases other than AD approximate AD prevalence while the impact 
of AD pathology appears to peak by age 95 and decline thereafter. Many distinct 
brain diseases other than AD afflict older human brains and contribute to 
cognitive impairment. Additional prevalent pathologies include cerebrovascular 
disease and hippocampal sclerosis, both high-morbidity brain diseases that 
appear to peak in incidence later than AD chronologically. Because of these 
common brain diseases of extreme old age, the epidemiology differs between 
clinical "dementia" and the subset of dementia cases with AD pathology. 
Additional aging-associated mechanisms for cognitive decline such as diabetes 
and synapse loss have been linked to AD and these hypotheses are discussed. 
Criteria are proposed to define an "aging-linked" disease, and AD fails all of 
these criteria. In conclusion, it may be most fruitful to focus attention on 
specific pathways involved in AD rather than attributing it to an inevitable 
consequence of aging.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-011-0826-y
PMCID: PMC3179861
PMID: 21516511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest This study was supported by 
NIH grants R01 NS061933, K08 NS050110, P30 AG028383, and U01 AG016976.