1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 22;6(4):e19155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019155.

Cholinergic interneurons mediate fast VGluT3-dependent glutamatergic 
transmission in the striatum.

Higley MJ(1), Gittis AH, Oldenburg IA, Balthasar N, Seal RP, Edwards RH, Lowell 
BB, Kreitzer AC, Sabatini BL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The neurotransmitter glutamate is released by excitatory projection neurons 
throughout the brain. However, non-glutamatergic cells, including cholinergic 
and monoaminergic neurons, express markers that suggest that they are also 
capable of vesicular glutamate release. Striatal cholinergic interneurons (CINs) 
express the Type-3 vesicular glutamate transporter (VGluT3), although whether 
they form functional glutamatergic synapses is unclear. To examine this 
possibility, we utilized mice expressing Cre-recombinase under control of the 
endogenous choline acetyltransferase locus and conditionally expressed 
light-activated Channelrhodopsin2 in CINs. Optical stimulation evoked action 
potentials in CINs and produced postsynaptic responses in medium spiny neurons 
that were blocked by glutamate receptor antagonists. CIN-mediated glutamatergic 
responses exhibited a large contribution of NMDA-type glutamate receptors, 
distinguishing them from corticostriatal inputs. CIN-mediated glutamatergic 
responses were insensitive to antagonists of acetylcholine receptors and were 
not seen in mice lacking VGluT3. Our results indicate that CINs are capable of 
mediating fast glutamatergic transmission, suggesting a new role for these cells 
in regulating striatal activity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019155
PMCID: PMC3081336
PMID: 21544206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.