1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 Dec;17(12):2566-84. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21638. Epub 2011 
May 6.

SAMP1/YitFc mouse strain: a spontaneous model of Crohn's disease-like ileitis.

Pizarro TT(1), Pastorelli L, Bamias G, Garg RR, Reuter BK, Mercado JR, Chieppa 
M, Arseneau KO, Ley K, Cominelli F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA. theresa.pizarro@case.edu

The SAMP1/YitFc mouse strain represents a model of Crohn's disease (CD)-like 
ileitis that is ideal for investigating the pathogenesis of chronic intestinal 
inflammation. Different from the vast majority of animal models of colitis, the 
ileal-specific phenotype characteristic of SAMP1/YitFc mice occurs 
spontaneously, without genetic, chemical, or immunological manipulation. In 
addition, SAMP1/YitFc mice possess remarkable similarities to the human 
condition with regard to disease location, histologic features, incidence of 
extraintestinal manifestations, and response to conventional therapies. 
SAMP1/YitFc mice also display a well-defined time course of a predisease state 
and phases of acute and chronic ileitis. As such, the SAMP1/YitFc model is 
particularly suitable for elucidating pathways that precede the clinical 
phenotype that may lead to preventive, and therefore more efficacious, 
intervention with the natural course of disease, or alternatively, for the 
development of therapeutic strategies directed against chronic, established 
ileitis. In this review we summarize important contributions made by our group 
and others that uncover potential mechanisms in the pathogenesis of CD using 
this unique murine model of chronic intestinal inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2011 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ibd.21638
PMCID: PMC3154989
PMID: 21557393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]