1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jun 3;409(2):187-92. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.115. Epub 2011 May 1.

Phosphorylation of human DNMT1: implication of cyclin-dependent kinases.

Lavoie G(1), St-Pierre Y.

Author information:
(1)INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, Laval, Québec, Canada H7V 1B7.

DNA methylation plays a central role in the epigenetic regulation of gene 
expression during development and progression of cancer diseases. The 
inheritance of specific DNA methylation patterns are acquired in the early 
embryo and are specifically maintained after cellular replication via the DNA 
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1). Recent studies have suggested that the enzymatic 
activity of DNMT1 is possibly modulated by phosphorylation of serine/threonine 
residues located in the N-terminal domain of the enzyme. In the present work, we 
report that cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) 1, 2 and 5 can phosphorylate Ser154 
of human DNMT1 in vitro. Further evidence of phosphorylation of endogenous DNMT1 
at position 154 by CDKs is also found in 293 cells treated with roscovitine, a 
specific inhibitor of CDK1, 2 and 5. To determine the importance of Ser154 
phosphorylation, a mutant of DNMT1 encoding a single-point mutation at position 
154 (S154A) was generated. This mutation induced a severe loss of enzymatic 
activity when compared to wild type DNMT1. Moreover, after treatment with 
5-Aza-2'-Deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC), a faster decline in DNMT1 protein level was 
observed for HEK-293 cells expressing DNMT1(S154A) as compared to cells 
expressing wild type DNMT1. Our data suggest that phosphorylation of DNMT1 at 
Ser154 by CDKs is important for enzymatic activity and protein stability of 
DNMT1. Considering that tumour-associated cell cycle defects are often mediated 
by alterations in CDK activity, our results suggest that dysregulation of cell 
cycle via CDKs could induce abnormal phosphorylation of DNMT1 and lead to DNA 
hypermethylation often observed in cancer cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.115
PMID: 21565170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]