1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2011 Dec;26(12):3998-4002. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfr188. 
Epub 2011 May 12.

Lack of association of Klotho gene variants with valvular and vascular 
calcification in Caucasians: a candidate gene study of the Framingham Offspring 
Cohort.

Tangri N(1), Alam A, Wooten EC, Huggins GS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. 
ntangri@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

BACKGROUND: Valvular and vascular calcification are important early aging 
phenotypes and represent risk factors for cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality. Klotho is a gene primarily expressed in the kidney that has an 
important role in calcium-phosphate homeostasis. The functional KL-VS variant of 
Klotho has been associated with aging and cardiovascular disease in human 
studies, but its role in valvular and vascular calcification remains unknown. We 
performed a candidate gene study in the Framingham Offspring Cohort to evaluate 
the effect of KL-VS variant of the Klotho gene on valvular calcification.
METHODS: We analyzed the Klotho KL-VS genotype (rs9536314) from the Affymetrix 
550K genome-wide dataset, distributed by dbGAP, on 1389 cases and 2139 controls 
from the Framingham Heart Study Offspring Cohort. Allele and genotype 
frequencies were compared between cases and controls. Valvular calcification was 
defined as presence of calcification on the mitral annulus or the aortic valve 
as determined by echocardiography. A sensitivity analysis of coronary artery 
calcification by electron beam computed tomography was performed on 1363 
patients.
RESULTS: The frequency of the TT versus the TG allele was not different between 
the cases and the controls (39 versus 41%). The KL-VS variant of Klotho was not 
associated with valvular or vascular calcification, despite adequate power to 
detect association (86% for odds ratios ≥1.2). In sensitivity analyses, no 
association (P > 0.001) between other common variants of Klotho, β-Klotho or 
fibroblast growth factor-23 and the end points of valvular or vascular 
calcification was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: In our adequately powered candidate gene study, we did not observe 
an association with the functional KL-VS variant of Klotho and presence of 
valvular or vascular calcification. Future studies aimed at combining cohorts 
with echocardiographic phenotypes need to be conducted to identify genetic 
variants associated with valvular calcification.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfr188
PMCID: PMC3224114
PMID: 21565945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]