1. Proteome Sci. 2011 May 14;9:26. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-9-26.

Comparative proteomics analysis of proteins expressed in the I-1 and I-2 
internodes of strawberry stolons.

Fang X(1), Ma H, Lu D, Yu H, Lai W, Ruan S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology and Proteomics, Institute of Biology, 
Hangzhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310024, China. 
hzhsma@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Strawberries (Fragaria ananassa) reproduce asexually through 
stolons, which have strong tendencies to form adventitious roots at their second 
node. Understanding how the development of the proximal (I-1) and distal (I-2) 
internodes of stolons differ should facilitate nursery cultivation of 
strawberries.
RESULTS: Herein, we compared the proteomic profiles of the strawberry stolon I-1 
and I-2 internodes. Proteins extracted from the internodes were separated by 
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and 164 I-1 protein spots and 200 I-2 
protein spots were examined further. Using mass spectrometry and database 
searches, 38 I-1 and 52 I-2 proteins were identified and categorized (8 and 10 
groups, respectively) according to their cellular compartmentalization and 
functionality. Many of the identified proteins are enzymes necessary for 
carbohydrate metabolism and photosynthesis. Furthermore, identification of 
proteins that interact revealed that many of the I-2 proteins form a dynamic 
network during development. Finally, given our results, we present a mechanistic 
scheme for adventitious root formation of new clonal plants at the second node.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparative proteomic analysis of I-1 and I-2 proteins revealed 
that the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and sugar-hormone pathways might be 
important during adventitious root formation at the second node of new clonal 
plants.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-5956-9-26
PMCID: PMC3113925
PMID: 21569547