1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2011 Nov;36(10):1582-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2011.04.011. Epub 2011 May 12.

Estrogen receptor gene variants are associated with anxiety disorders in older 
women.

Ryan J(1), Scali J, Carrière I, Scarabin PY, Ritchie K, Ancelin ML.

Author information:
(1)Inserm, U1061, Nervous System Pathologies: Epidemiological and Clinical 
Research, Hôpital La Colombière, Montpellier, France. joanne.ryan@inserm.fr

BACKGROUND: Estrogen is thought to play a key role in anxiety, but it remains 
unknown whether genetic variants in the estrogen receptors (ERs) can influence 
the risk of anxiety. This study investigated whether ESR1 and ESR2 gene variants 
were associated with specific anxiety disorders in postmenopausal women and 
evaluated the potential modifying effect of hormone treatment (HT) on these 
associations.
METHODS: One thousand and ninety-two community-dwelling women aged 65 years and 
older were recruited as part of the ESPRIT Study in Montpellier, France. Anxiety 
was assessed using the Mini-International Neuropsychiatry Interview (MINI), 
according to DSM-IV criteria. Two ESR1 and three ESR2 polymorphisms were 
genotyped.
RESULTS: The most common anxiety disorders were phobia (14.2%) and generalised 
anxiety disorder (GAD, 8%). The A allele of ESR2 rs1256049 was associated with 
an increased risk of GAD [OR: 2.06, 95% CI: 1.09-3.87], while both ESR1 
polymorphisms were specifically associated with phobia. The C allele of ESR1 
rs2234693 decreased the risk of phobia by 42% [95% CI: 0.41-0.83], and this 
remained significant even after Bonferroni correction. The G allele of ESR1 
rs9340799 was associated with a 31% decreased phobia risk [95% CI: 0.49-0.96]. 
There was also evidence of a significant gene-environment interaction, where 
only women who were currently using HT had a reduced risk of phobia with these 
ESR1 gene variants.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms earlier findings of an association between ESR1 
and global anxiety in older women, however these associations varied depending 
on the anxiety syndrome and the use of HT. The results also suggest that the 
ESR2 may contribute to the genetic vulnerability to GAD, but these findings 
require further confirmation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2011.04.011
PMID: 21570196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]