1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Jul;41(7):451-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ibmb.2011.04.010.  Epub 2011 May 7.

Molecular characterization and functional expression of the DSC1 channel.

Zhang T(1), Liu Z, Song W, Du Y, Dong K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Drosophila Sodium Channel 1 (DSC1) was predicted to encode a sodium channel 
based on a high sequence similarity with vertebrate and invertebrate sodium 
channel genes. However, BSC1, a DSC1 ortholog in Blattella germanica, was 
recently shown to encode a cation channel with ion selectivity toward Ca(2+). In 
this study, we isolated a total of 20 full-length cDNA clones that cover the 
entire coding region of the DSC1 gene from adults of Drosophila melanogaster by 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Sequence analysis of the 20 
clones revealed nine optional exons, four of which contain in-frame stop codons; 
and 13 potential A-to-I RNA editing sites. The 20 clones can be grouped into 
eight splice types and represent 20 different transcripts because of unique RNA 
editing. Three variants generated DSC1 currents when expressed in Xenopus 
oocytes. Like the BSC1 channel, all three functional DSC1 channels are permeable 
to Ca(2+) and Ba(2+), and also to Na(+) in the absence of external Ca(2+). 
Furthermore, the DSC1 channel is insensitive to tetrodotoxin, a potent and 
specific sodium channel blocker. Our study shows that DSC1 encodes a 
voltage-gated cation channel similar to the BSC1 channel in B. germanica. 
Extensive alternative splicing and RNA editing of the DSC1 transcripts suggest 
the molecular and functional diversity of the DSC1 channel.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2011.04.010
PMCID: PMC3119376
PMID: 21571069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]