1. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Apr;155A(4):717-20. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33906. Epub
2011  Mar 15.

Further evidence for a marfanoid syndrome with neonatal progeroid features and 
severe generalized lipodystrophy due to frameshift mutations near the 3' end of 
the FBN1 gene.

Goldblatt J(1), Hyatt J, Edwards C, Walpole I.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Services of Western Australia, King Edward Memorial Hospital, 
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. 
jack.goldblatt@health.wa.gov.au

We report on a 20-year-old man who presented in infancy with severe generalized 
lipodystrophy with a progeroid appearance and some Marfanoid features. He 
subsequently was diagnosed with bilateral lens subluxations at the age of 16 
years which prompted analysis of the FBN1 gene. This analysis showed him to have 
a novel heterozygous, de novo, c.8156_8175del, p.Lys2719ThrfsX12, frameshift 
mutation in exon 64 of his FBN1 gene. His phenotype is similar to a patient 
described by Graul-Neumann et al. [2010] who was found to have a de novo, 
heterozygous, c.8155_8156del deletion in exon 64 of FBN1. Both mutations result 
in a truncated protein with an extremely charged C-terminus, containing two 
positive and four negative charges in the last eight amino acids. This most 
likely has a profound impact on proteinâ€“protein interactions, which are very 
important in the extracellular matrix. The similarities in the phenotypes, and 
overlapping molecular defects, provides further evidence that the phenotype with 
features of Marfan syndrome with neonatal progeroid syndrome-like lipodystrophy 
is a distinct clinical entity due to frameshift mutations in exon 64 of the FBN1 
gene.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33906
PMID: 21594992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]