1. Inflammation. 2012 Apr;35(2):566-73. doi: 10.1007/s10753-011-9347-z.

Vasodilator phosphostimulated protein (VASP) protects endothelial barrier 
function during hypoxia.

Schmit MA(1), Mirakaj V, Stangassinger M, König K, Köhler D, Rosenberger P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Tübingen University 
Hospital, Eberhard-Karls University Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

The endothelial barrier controls the passage of solutes from the vascular space. 
This is achieved through active reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. A 
central cytoskeletal protein involved into this is vasodilator-stimulated 
phosphoprotein (VASP). However, the functional role of endothelial VASP during 
hypoxia has not been thoroughly elucidated. We determined endothelial VASP 
expression through real-time PCR (Rt-PCR), immunhistochemistry, and Western blot 
analysis during hypoxia. VASP promoter studies were performed using a PGL3 
firefly luciferase containing plasmid. Following approval by the local 
authorities, VASP ( -/- ) mice and littermate controls were subjected to 
normobaric hypoxia (8% O(2), 92% N(2)) after intravenous injection of Evans blue 
dye. In in vitro studies, we found significant VASP repression in human 
microvascular and human umbilical vein endothelial cells through Rt-PCR, 
immunhistochemistry, and Western blot analysis. The VASP promoter construct 
demonstrated significant repression in response to hypoxia, which was abolished 
when the binding of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha was excluded. Exposure of 
wild-type (WT) and VASP ( -/- ) animals to normobaric hypoxia for 4 h resulted 
in an increase in Evans blue tissue extravasation that was significantly 
increased in VASP ( -/- ) animals compared to WT controls. In summary, we 
demonstrate here that endothelial VASP holds significant importance for 
endothelial barrier properties during hypoxia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10753-011-9347-z
PMCID: PMC3314830
PMID: 21607702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]