1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20121. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020121. Epub 2011 May
17.

A novel splice variant in the N-propeptide of COL5A1 causes an EDS phenotype 
with severe kyphoscoliosis and eye involvement.

Symoens S(1), Malfait F, Vlummens P, Hermanns-LÃª T, Syx D, De Paepe A.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. 
Sofie.Symoens@UGent.be

BACKGROUND: The Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) is a heritable connective tissue 
disorder characterized by hyperextensible skin, joint hypermobility and soft 
tissue fragility. The classic subtype of EDS is caused by mutations in one of 
the type V collagen genes (COL5A1 and COL5A2). Most mutations affect the type V 
collagen helical domain and lead to a diminished or structurally abnormal type V 
collagen protein. Remarkably, only two mutations were reported to affect the 
extended, highly conserved N-propeptide domain, which plays an important role in 
the regulation of the heterotypic collagen fibril diameter. We identified a 
novel COL5A1 N-propeptide mutation, resulting in an unusual but severe classic 
EDS phenotype and a remarkable splicing outcome.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified a novel COL5A1 N-propeptide 
acceptor-splice site mutation (IVS6-2A>G, NM_000093.3_c.925-2A>G) in a patient 
with cutaneous features of EDS, severe progressive scoliosis and eye 
involvement. Two mutant transcripts were identified, one with an exon 7 skip and 
one in which exon 7 and the upstream exon 6 are deleted. Both transcripts are 
expressed and secreted into the extracellular matrix, where they can participate 
in and perturb collagen fibrillogenesis, as illustrated by the presence of 
dermal collagen cauliflowers. Determination of the order of intron removal and 
computational analysis showed that simultaneous skipping of exons 6 and 7 is due 
to the combined effect of delayed splicing of intron 7, altered pre-mRNA 
secondary structure, low splice site strength and possibly disturbed binding of 
splicing factors.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We report a novel COL5A1 N-propeptide acceptor-splice 
site mutation in intron 6, which not only affects splicing of the adjacent exon 
7, but also causes a splicing error of the upstream exon 6. Our findings add 
further insights into the COL5A1 splicing order and show for the first time that 
a single COL5A1 acceptor-splice site mutation can perturb splicing of the 
upstream exon.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020121
PMCID: PMC3096658
PMID: 21611149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.