1. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Feb;39(2):1667-75. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-0906-z. Epub
2011  May 27.

Gene variants of XRCC4 and XRCC3 and their association with risk for urothelial 
bladder cancer.

Mittal RD(1), Gangwar R, Mandal RK, Srivastava P, Ahirwar DK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology and Renal Transplantation, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Raebareli Road, Lucknow 226014, Uttar Pradesh, 
India. ramamittal@gmail.com

The DNA double strand break repair gene XRCC4, an important caretaker of genome 
stability and XRCC3 are suggested to play an imperative role in the development 
of carcinogenesis. However, no evidence has been provided showing that these 
genes are associated with risk of urinary bladder cancer (UBC). The study was 
designed to examine the polymorphisms associated with two genes namely XRCC4 
G1394T (rs6869366), intron 3 (rs28360317), intron 7 rs1805377 and rs2836007 and 
XRCC3 (rs861539 and rs1799796), respectively and investigate their role as 
susceptible markers for UBC risk in North Indian cohort. In this hospital-based 
case-control study histologically confirmed 211 UBC patients and 244 age and 
gender matched controls of similar ethnicity were genotyped by means of 
PCR-RFLP. Significant different distributions in the frequency of the XRCC4 
intron 3 genotype, but not the XRCC4 G1394T or intron 7 genotypes, between the 
UBC and control groups were observed. XRCC4 intron 7 Del/Del conferred enhanced 
risk (OR 1.94; P 0.017) in UBC. Interestingly, XRCC -1394 G>T variant genotype 
GG was associated with reduced risk (OR 0.27; P 0.020). However, none of the 
four polymorphisms in XRCC4 were associated with tobacco smoking and risk of 
recurrence in patients treated with BCG immunotherapy. Similarly, none of the 
XRCC3 polymorphisms were associated with UBC susceptibility. Our results 
suggested that the XRCC4 intron 3 rs6869366 genotype and intron 7 rs28360317 may 
be associated with UBC risk and may be a novel useful marker for primary 
prevention and anticancer intervention.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-011-0906-z
PMID: 21617942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]