1. Mol Vis. 2011;17:1164-71. Epub 2011 May 4.

Microphakia and congenital cataract formation in a novel Lim2(C51R) mutant 
mouse.

Puk O(1), Ahmad N, Wagner S, de Angelis MH, Graw J.

Author information:
(1)Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, 
Institutes of Developmental Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany. 
oliver.puk@helmholtz-muenchen.de

PURPOSE: Within a mutagenesis screen, we identified the new mouse mutant Aca47 
with small lenses and reduced axial eye lengths. The aim of the actual study was 
the molecular and morphological characterization of the mouse mutant Aca47.
METHODS: We analyzed the offspring of paternally N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) 
treated C57BL/6J mice for eye-size parameters by non-invasive in vivo laser 
interference biometry. Linkage analysis of the eye size mutant Aca47 was 
performed using single nucleotide polymorphisms and microsatellite markers. The 
Aca47 mutation was identified by sequence analysis of positional candidate 
genes. A general polymorphism at the mutated site was excluded by restriction 
analysis. Eyes of the Aca47 mouse mutant were characterized by histology. Visual 
properties were examined in the virtual drum.
RESULTS: We identified a new mutant characterized by a significantly smaller 
lens and reduced axial eye length without any changes for cornea thickness, 
anterior chamber depth or aqueous humor size. The smaller size of lens was more 
pronounced in the homozygous mutants, which further developed congenital 
cataracts in the lens nucleus. The mutation was mapped to chromosome 7 between 
the markers D7Mit247 and D7Mit81. Using a positional candidate approach, the 
lens intrinsic integral membrane protein MP19 encoding gene Lim2 was sequenced; 
a T â†’ C exchange at cDNA position 151 leads to a cysteine-to-arginine 
substitution at position 51 of the Lim2 protein. Eye histology of adult 
heterozygous mutants did not show alterations on the cellular level. However, 
homozygous lenses revealed irregularly arranged lens fiber layers in the cortex. 
Virtual vision tests indicated that visual properties are not affected by 
reduced eye size of heterozygous individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate a novel missense mutation in the Lim2 
gene that affects lens development in a semidominant manner. Since homozygous 
mutants develop congenital lens opacities, this line can be used as a model for 
inherited cataract formation in humans.

PMCID: PMC3102026
PMID: 21617753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]