1. Nature. 2011 May 29;474(7353):662-5. doi: 10.1038/nature10099.

Single-molecule fluorescence reveals sequence-specific misfolding in multidomain 
proteins.

Borgia MB(1), Borgia A, Best RB, Steward A, Nettels D, Wunderlich B, Schuler B, 
Clarke J.

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge Chemical Laboratory, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 
1EW, UK.

A large range of debilitating medical conditions is linked to protein 
misfolding, which may compete with productive folding particularly in proteins 
containing multiple domains. Seventy-five per cent of the eukaryotic proteome 
consists of multidomain proteins, yet it is not understood how interdomain 
misfolding is avoided. It has been proposed that maintaining low sequence 
identity between covalently linked domains is a mechanism to avoid misfolding. 
Here we use single-molecule FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer to detect and 
quantify rare misfolding events in tandem immunoglobulin domains from the I band 
of titin under native conditions. About 5.5 per cent of molecules with identical 
domains misfold during refolding in vitro and form an unexpectedly stable state 
with an unfolding half-time of several days. Tandem arrays of 
immunoglobulin-like domains in humans show significantly lower sequence identity 
between neighbouring domains than between non-adjacent domains. In particular, 
the sequence identity of neighbouring domains has been found to be 
preferentially below 40 per cent. We observe no misfolding for a tandem of 
naturally neighbouring domains with low sequence identity (24 per cent), whereas 
misfolding occurs between domains that are 42 per cent identical. Coarse-grained 
molecular simulations predict the formation of domain-swapped structures that 
are in excellent agreement with the observed transfer efficiency of the 
misfolded species. We infer that the interactions underlying misfolding are very 
specific and result in a sequence-specific domain-swapping mechanism. 
Diversifying the sequence between neighbouring domains seems to be a successful 
evolutionary strategy to avoid misfolding in multidomain proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10099
PMCID: PMC3160465
PMID: 21623368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]