1. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Aug 1;22(15):2680-9. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-11-0915. Epub
2011  Jun 1.

Overlapping kinetochore targets of CK2 and Aurora B kinases in mitotic 
regulation.

Peng Y(1), Wong CC, Nakajima Y, Tyers RG, Sarkeshik AS, Yates J 3rd, Drubin DG, 
Barnes G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Protein kinase CK2 is one of the most conserved kinases in eukaryotic cells and 
plays essential roles in diverse processes. While we know that CK2 plays a 
role(s) in cell division, our understanding of how CK2 regulates cell cycle 
progression is limited. In this study, we revealed a regulatory role for CK2 in 
kinetochore function. The kinetochore is a multi-protein complex that assembles 
on the centromere of a chromosome and functions to attach chromosomes to spindle 
microtubules. To faithfully segregate chromosomes and maintain genomic 
integrity, the kinetochore is tightly regulated by multiple mechanisms, 
including phosphorylation by Aurora B kinase. We found that a loss of CK2 kinase 
activity inhibits anaphase spindle elongation and results in chromosome 
missegregation. Moreover, a lack of CK2 activates the spindle assembly 
checkpoint. We demonstrate that CK2 associates with Mif2, the Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae homologue of human CENP-C, which serves as an important link between 
the inner and outer kinetochore. Furthermore, we show Mif2 and the inner 
kinetochore protein Ndc10 are phosphorylated by CK2, and this phosphorylation 
plays antagonistic and synergistic roles with Aurora B phosphorylation of these 
targets, respectively.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E10-11-0915
PMCID: PMC3145544
PMID: 21633108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]