1. Hippocampus. 2012 May;22(5):1107-20. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20957. Epub 2011 May
31.

The absence of the calcium-buffering protein calbindin is associated with faster 
age-related decline in hippocampal metabolism.

Moreno H(1), Burghardt NS, Vela-Duarte D, Masciotti J, Hua F, Fenton AA, 
Schwaller B, Small SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, The Robert F. 
Furchgott Center for Neural and Behavioral Science, Brooklyn, New York 11203, 
USA. herman.moreno@downstate.edu

Although reductions in the expression of the calcium-buffering proteins 
calbindin D-28K (CB) and parvalbumin (PV) have been observed in the aging brain, 
it is unknown whether these changes contribute to age-related hippocampal 
dysfunction. To address this issue, we measured basal hippocampal metabolism and 
hippocampal structure across the lifespan of C57BL/6J, calbindin D-28k knockout 
(CBKO) and parvalbumin knockout (PVKO) mice. Basal metabolism was estimated 
using steady state relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV), which is a variant of 
fMRI that provides the highest spatial resolution, optimal for the analysis of 
individual subregions of the hippocampal formation. We found that like primates, 
normal aging in C57BL/6J mice is characterized by an age-dependent decline in 
rCBV-estimated dentate gyrus (DG) metabolism. Although abnormal hippocampal fMRI 
signals were observed in CBKO and PVKO mice, only CBKO mice showed accelerated 
age-dependent decline of rCBV-estimated metabolism in the DG. We also found 
age-independent structural changes in CBKO mice, which included an enlarged 
hippocampus and neocortex as well as global brain hypertrophy. These metabolic 
and structural changes in CBKO mice correlated with a deficit in 
hippocampus-dependent learning in the active place avoidance task. Our results 
suggest that the decrease in CB that occurs during normal aging is involved in 
age-related hippocampal metabolic decline. Our findings also illustrate the 
value of using multiple MRI techniques in transgenic mice to investigate 
mechanisms involved in the functional and structural changes that occur during 
aging.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hipo.20957
PMCID: PMC3166382
PMID: 21630373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]