1. J Viral Hepat. 2011 Jul;18(7):e325-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2010.01425.x. 
Epub 2011 Jan 13.

IL28B polymorphisms determine early viral kinetics and treatment outcome in 
patients receiving peginterferon/ribavirin for chronic hepatitis C genotype 1.

Lindh M(1), Lagging M, Arnholm B, Eilard A, Nilsson S, Norkrans G, Söderholm J, 
Wahlberg T, Wejstål R, Westin J, Hellstrand K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden. magnus.lindh@microbio.gu.se

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) upstream of IL28B predict the outcome of 
treatment in chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, but their impact on 
viral kinetics and relation to other predictors are not well known. Here, two 
SNPs, rs12979860 and rs8099917, were analysed and related to early viral 
kinetics during treatment in 110 patients with HCV genotype 1 infection. The 
reduction of HCV RNA after 7 days of therapy was more pronounced (P < 0.0001) in 
patients with CC(rs12979860) or TT(rs8099917) than in patients carrying 
TT(rs12979860) or GG(rs8099917), respectively. The two SNPs were in linkage 
disequilibrium (d' = 1, r2 = 0.44), but CC(rs12979860) was less common (43% vs. 
71%) than TT(rs8099917). Patients carrying both CC(rs12979860) and TT(rs8099917) 
genotypes achieved lower levels of HCV RNA at week 4 than those with CT or TT at 
rs12979860 and TT(rs8099917) (P = 0.0004). The viral elimination was 
significantly influenced by rs12979860 independently of baseline viral load, age 
or fibrosis. This translated into high rates of sustained viral response (SVR) 
among patients carrying CC(rs12979860) despite the presence of high viral load 
at baseline (SVR 74%), high age (SVR 79%) or severe liver fibrosis (SVR 83%). We 
conclude that the IL28B variability influences the antiviral efficiency of 
interferon/ribavirin therapy and has a strong impact on SVR, independently of 
traditional response predictors. A combined assessment of these SNPs in 
conjunction with other response predictors may better predict outcome in 
difficult-to-treat patients.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2010.01425.x
PMID: 21692944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]