1. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2011 Oct;24(5):610-6. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2011.06.001.
Epub  2011 Jun 15.

Influence of genetic variation of the β2-adrenergic receptor on lung diffusion 
in patients with cystic fibrosis.

Traylor BR(1), Wheatley CM, Skrentny TT Jr, Foxx-Lupo WT, Phan H, Patanwala AE, 
Morgan WJ, Daines CL, Sprissler R, Snyder EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice and Science, University of Arizona, 1703 E. 
Mabel, Tucson, AZ 85721, United States.

RATIONALE: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a disease that adversely affects the lung 
resulting in a reduction in lung diffusion. Stimulation of the β(2)-adrenergic 
receptors mediates mucociliary clearance and bronchodilation. We sought to 
determine the influence of an inhaled β-agonist on the diffusing capacity of the 
lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO), alveolar-capillary membrane conductance 
(D(M)), pulmonary capillary blood volume (Vc), and peripheral oxygen saturation 
(SaO(2)) in subjects with CF, when compared to matched healthy subjects, 
according to genetic variation of the β(2)-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2).
METHODS: To determine this we recruited 18 subjects with CF and 20 healthy 
subjects (age = 23 ± 7 vs. 24±4years; ht = 168 ± 8 vs. 174 ± 12 cm; wt = 64 ± 16 
vs. 70 ± 13 kg; BMI = 23 ± 4 vs. 23±3 kg/m(2); FEV(1) = 72 ± 27 vs. 
92 ± 12%pred; VO(2peak) = 45 ± 25 vs. 99 ± 24%pred, p < 0.05 for FEV(1) and 
VO(2peak), mean ± SD, for CF and healthy, respectively). The study involved 
measurement of DLCO, D(M), V(C) and SaO(2) before and 30, 60, and 90 min 
following the administration of inhaled albuterol. Subjects were stratified 
according to genetic variation of ADRB2, Gln(27)Gln vs. Glu(27)Glu/Gln(27)Glu.
RESULTS: Within the healthy group, there were no differences in DLCO, D(M), 
V(C), D(M)/V(C) at baseline or in response to albuterol according to genetic 
variation of the ADRB2 at amino acid 27. Within the CF group, the 
Glu(27)Glu/Gln(27)Glu group had higher D(M)/V(C) and SaO(2) when compared to the 
Gln(27)Gln group at baseline (p < 0.05). Both genotype groups demonstrated a 
significant decline in V(C) and an improvement in D(M)/V(C) and SaO(2) in 
response to albuterol. Subjects with the Glu(27) genotype experienced a greater 
improvement in D(M)/V(C) with albuterol when compared to subjects homozygous for 
Gln at amino acid 27.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that there are differences in lung diffusion 
and peripheral SaO(2) according to genetic variation of the ADRB2 at position 27 
which could play a potential role in dosing options or adjustments that may be 
required according to genotype.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2011.06.001
PMID: 21703359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]