1. Physiol Behav. 2012 Jan 18;105(2):568-75. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.06.011. 
Epub 2011 Jun 25.

Evidence for a lack of phasic inhibitory properties of habituated stressors on 
HPA axis responses in rats.

Masini CV(1), Day HE, Gray T, Crema LM, Nyhuis TJ, Babb JA, Campeau S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience and Center for Neuroscience, 
University of Colorado, Boulder, United States. masinic@colorado.edu

This experiment tested the hypothesis that habituation to repeated stressor 
exposures is produced by phasic inhibitory influence on the neural circuitry 
that normally drives the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and 
subsequently the adrenocortical hormone response to psychological stress. Such a 
process would be expected to lower the acute response to a novel stressor when 
experienced concurrently with a habituated stressor. Rats were exposed to 
restraint or no stress conditions for 14 consecutive days. On the 15th day, the 
rats were exposed to the control condition (no stress), acute restraint, loud 
noise, or restraint and loud noise concurrently. Blood was taken and assayed for 
ACTH and corticosterone and brains were collected to examine c-fos messenger RNA 
expression in several brain areas. As predicted, the rats that received the same 
(homotypic) stressor repeatedly and again on the test day displayed low levels 
of ACTH and corticosterone, similar to the control conditions (i.e., showed 
habituation). All rats that received a single novel stressor on the test day, 
regardless of prior stress history, exhibited high levels of ACTH and 
corticosterone. The rats that received two novel stressors also displayed high 
levels of ACTH and corticosterone, but little evidence of additivity was 
observed. Importantly, when a novel stressor was concurrently given with a 
habituated stressor on the test day, no reduction of HPA axis response was 
observed when compared to previously habituated rats given only the novel 
stressor on the test day. In general, c-fos mRNA induction in several stress 
responsive brain areas followed the same patterns as the ACTH and corticosterone 
data. These data suggest that habituation of the adrenocortical hormone response 
to psychological stressors is not mediated by phasic inhibition of the effector 
system.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.06.011
PMCID: PMC3199368
PMID: 21708179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]