1. Plant J. 2011 Oct;68(2):314-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04688.x. Epub
2011  Jul 27.

Arabidopsis thaliana alpha1,2-glucosyltransferase (ALG10) is required for 
efficient N-glycosylation and leaf growth.

Farid A(1), Pabst M, Schoberer J, Altmann F, Glössl J, Strasser R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Genetics and Cell Biology, BOKU-University of Natural 
Resources and Life Sciences, Muthgasse 18, A-1190 Vienna, Austria.

Assembly of the dolichol-linked oligosaccharide precursor (Glc(3) Man(9) 
GlcNAc(2) ) is highly conserved among eukaryotes. In contrast to yeast and 
mammals, little is known about the biosynthesis of dolichol-linked 
oligosaccharides and the transfer to asparagine residues of nascent polypeptides 
in plants. To understand the biological function of these processes in plants we 
characterized the Arabidopsis thaliana homolog of yeast ALG10, the 
α1,2-glucosyltransferase that transfers the terminal glucose residue to the 
lipid-linked precursor. Expression of an Arabidopsis ALG10-GFP fusion protein in 
Nicotiana benthamiana leaf epidermal cells revealed a reticular distribution 
pattern resembling endoplasmic reticulum (ER) localization. Analysis of 
lipid-linked oligosaccharides showed that Arabidopsis ALG10 can complement the 
yeast Δalg10 mutant strain. A homozygous Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion mutant 
(alg10-1) accumulated mainly lipid-linked Glc(2) Man(9) GlcNAc(2) and displayed 
a severe protein underglycosylation defect. Phenotypic analysis of alg10-1 
showed that mutant plants have altered leaf size when grown in soil. Moreover, 
the inactivation of ALG10 in Arabidopsis resulted in the activation of the 
unfolded protein response, increased salt sensitivity and suppression of the 
phenotype of α-glucosidase I-deficient plants. In summary, these data show that 
Arabidopsis ALG10 is an ER-resident α1,2-glucosyltransferase that is required 
for lipid-linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis and subsequently for normal leaf 
development and abiotic stress response.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04688.x
PMCID: PMC3204403
PMID: 21707802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]