1. Br J Nutr. 2011 Aug;106(4):468-71. doi: 10.1017/S0007114511002212. Epub 2011
Jun  7.

A variant near the melanocortin-4 receptor gene regulates postprandial lipid 
metabolism in a healthy Caucasian population.

Perez-Martinez P(1), Garcia-Rios A, Delgado-Lista J, Delgado-Casado N, Malagon 
MM, Marin C, Gomez-Luna P, Caballero J, Perez-Jimenez F, Lopez-Miranda J.

Author information:
(1)Lipids and Atherosclerosis Unit, IMIBIC, Reina Sofia University Hospital, 
University of Cordoba, CIBER Fisiopatologia Obesidad y Nutricion, Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III, Córdoba, Spain.

The melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) is an essential regulator of food intake and 
energy homeostasis. Previous data suggest an influence of MC4R activity on TAG 
levels. Thus, the aim of the present study was to determine whether the presence 
of the rs12970134 polymorphism near the MC4R gene could influence postprandial 
lipoprotein metabolism in healthy subjects. A total of eighty-eight volunteers 
were selected, fifty-three homozygous for the common genotype (G/G) and 
thirty-five carriers for the minor A-allele (G/A and A/A). They were given a 
fat-rich meal containing 1 g fat and 7 mg cholesterol/kg body weight and vitamin 
A (60,000 IU/m(2) body surface). Fat accounted for 60 % of energy, and protein 
and carbohydrates accounted for 15 and 25 % of energy, respectively. Blood 
samples were taken at time 0, every 1 h until 6 h and every 2·5 h until 11 h. 
Total cholesterol and TAG in plasma, and cholesterol, TAG and retinyl palmitate 
in TAG-rich lipoproteins (TRL, large and small TRL) were separated by 
ultracentrifugation. Individuals carrying the G/G genotype displayed a higher 
postprandial response of plasma TAG (P = 0·033), total cholesterol (P = 0·019) 
and large TRL-TAG (P = 0·023) than did carriers of the minor A-allele. 
Furthermore, G/G subjects showed a greater postprandial response of small 
TRL-apoB48 than did carriers of the A-allele (P = 0·032). These results suggest 
that the rs12970134 polymorphism near the MC4R gene region may partly explain 
the inter-individual differences in postprandial lipoprotein response in healthy 
subjects.

DOI: 10.1017/S0007114511002212
PMID: 21736789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]