1. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Mar;39(3):3109-15. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1075-9. Epub
2011  Jul 13.

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor gene -173G>C polymorphism and risk of 
bladder cancer in southeast China: a case-control analysis.

Yuan Q(1), Wang M, Wang M, Zhang Z, Zhang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Huaiyin Hospital of Huaian City, Huaian, China.

Inflammatory factors may promote carcinogenesis. Macrophage migration inhibitory 
factor (MIF), which is derived from T-cell, known as a member of the 
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) superfamily, plays an important role in the 
pro- and anti-inflammatory response to infection and in the etiology of bladder 
cancer. We hypothesized that MIF-173 locus polymorphism might contribute to 
genetic susceptibility to bladder cancer. In a hospital-based case-control study 
of 325 patients with bladder cancer and 345 cancer-free controls 
frequency-matched by age, sex, smoking status, and alcohol use, we genotyped the 
MIF polymorphism and analyzed immunohistochemical stained operational bladder 
cancer tissue sections for MIF. We found that individuals with GC/CC genotype 
had a significantly decreased risk of bladder cancer (adjusted OR = 0.57, 95% 
CI, 0.41-0.79) than those with GG genotype. In the stratification analysis, we 
found that the decreased risk was more pronounced among older subjects (adjusted 
OR = 0.56, 95% CI, 0.39-0.81), men (0.47, 0.33-0.68), smokers (0.54, 0.35-0.85), 
and ever-drinkers (0.44, 0.27-0.71). The percentage of positive staining in the 
cytoplasm and nucleus in the normal and bladder cancer with CC/GC genotype 
tissues was higher than that of GG genotype bladder cancer tissue(39.1% vs. 
75.0% in strong staining for GG and GC/CC genotypes, respectively, P = 0.028). 
In conclusion, MIF -173G>C polymorphism may play a role in the etiology of 
bladder cancer in southern Chinese population. Large studies are warranted to 
validate our findings.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-011-1075-9
PMID: 21750916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]