1. Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;131(2):251-63. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-1072-z. Epub 2011
Jul  26.

The impact of Converso Jews on the genomes of modern Latin Americans.

Velez C(1), Palamara PF, Guevara-Aguirre J, Hao L, Karafet T, Guevara-Aguirre M, 
Pearlman A, Oddoux C, Hammer M, Burns E, Pe'er I, Atzmon G, Ostrer H.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Program, Department of Pediatrics, New York University School 
of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Modern day Latin America resulted from the encounter of Europeans with the 
indigenous peoples of the Americas in 1492, followed by waves of migration from 
Europe and Africa. As a result, the genomic structure of present day Latin 
Americans was determined both by the genetic structure of the founding 
populations and the numbers of migrants from these different populations. Here, 
we analyzed DNA collected from two well-established communities in Colorado (33 
unrelated individuals) and Ecuador (20 unrelated individuals) with a measurable 
prevalence of the BRCA1 c.185delAG and the GHR c.E180 mutations, respectively, 
using Affymetrix Genome-wide Human SNP 6.0 arrays to identify their ancestry. 
These mutations are thought to have been brought to these communities by 
Sephardic Jewish progenitors. Principal component analysis and clustering 
methods were employed to determine the genome-wide patterns of continental 
ancestry within both populations using single nucleotide polymorphisms, 
complemented by determination of Y-chromosomal and mitochondrial DNA haplotypes. 
When examining the presumed European component of these two communities, we 
demonstrate enrichment for Sephardic Jewish ancestry not only for these 
mutations, but also for other segments as well. Although comparison of both 
groups to a reference Hispanic/Latino population of Mexicans demonstrated 
proximity and similarity to other modern day communities derived from a European 
and Native American two-way admixture, identity-by-descent and Y-chromosome 
mapping demonstrated signatures of Sephardim in both communities. These findings 
are consistent with historical accounts of Jewish migration from the realms that 
comprise modern Spain and Portugal during the Age of Discovery. More 
importantly, they provide a rationale for the occurrence of mutations typically 
associated with the Jewish Diaspora in Latin American communities.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-011-1072-z
PMID: 21789512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]