1. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2011 Apr-Jun;24(2 Suppl):15-9. doi: 
10.1177/03946320110240S204.

Evidence of LEF1 fetal-maternal interaction in cleft lip with or without cleft 
palate in a consistent Italian sample study.

Martinelli M(1), Carinci F, Morselli PG, Caramelli E, Palmieri A, Girardi A, 
Riberti C, Scapoli L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Histology, Embryology and Applied Biology, Centre of Molecular 
Genetics, CARISBO Foundation, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Epithelial mesenchymal transformation is considered a cardinal process in 
orofacial development. Several molecular players appear to be involved in this 
delicate mechanism; the activation of LEF1 transcription factor by transforming 
growth factor beta 3 seems to be a key step for the correct flow of events. The 
failure of orofacial processes during embryonic development may provoke cleft 
lip and/or cleft palate malformations. The scope of the present investigation 
was to verify whether genetic variants at LEF1 could influence the risk of 
orofacial clefting. The approach was a family based association study involving 
a total of 512 Italian patients and their parents, 401 having cleft lip with or 
without cleft palate (CL/P) and 111 with cleft palate only (CPO). Haplotype 
association analysis provided moderate evidence of an association with clefting 
(p 0.01). A log-linear likelihood-based method was used to verify maternal and 
foetal-maternal association. An association between the maternal genotype and 
the occurrence of CL/P was observed at two polymorphic loci, at rs10022956 (P = 
0.0049) and rs10025431 (P = 0.0065) respectively, while a foetal-maternal effect 
modulating the risk of clefting was found at locus rs10025431 (P = 0.0071). 
These data further corroborate the importance of the mother's genotype with 
regard to susceptibility to malformations and early-onset diseases.

DOI: 10.1177/03946320110240S204
PMID: 21781440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]