1. J Mol Recognit. 2011 Sep-Oct;24(5):804-14. doi: 10.1002/jmr.1115.

Human dipeptidyl peptidase III: insights into ligand binding from a combined 
experimental and computational approach.

Tomić A(1), Abramić M, Spoljarić J, Agić D, Smith DM, Tomić S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Physical Chemistry, Rudjer Bošković Institute Bijenička 54,10002 
Zagreb, Croatia.

Human dipeptidyl peptidase III (DPP III) is a zinc-exopeptidase with implied 
roles in protein catabolism, pain modulation, and defense against oxidative 
stress. To understand the mode of ligand binding into its active site, we 
performed molecular modeling, site-directed mutagenesis, and biochemical 
analyses. Using the recently determined crystal structure of the human DPP III 
we built complexes between both, the wild-type (WT) protein and its mutant H568N 
with the preferred substrate Arg-Arg-2-naphthylamide (RRNA) and a competitive 
inhibitor Tyr-Phe-hydroxamate (Tyr-Phe-NHOH). The mutation of the conserved 
His568, structurally equivalent to catalytically important His231 in 
thermolysin, to Asn, resulted in a 1300-fold decrease of k(cat) for RRNA 
hydrolysis and in significantly lowered affinity for the inhibitor. Molecular 
dynamics simulations revealed the key protein-ligand interactions as well as the 
ligand-induced reorganization of the binding site and its partial closure. 
Simultaneously, the non-catalytic domain was observed to stretch and the opening 
at the wide side of the inter-domain cleft became enhanced. The driving force 
for these changes was the formation of the hydrogen bond between Asp372 and the 
bound ligand. The structural and dynamical differences, found for the ligand 
binding to the WT enzyme and the H568N mutant, and the calculated binding free 
energies, agree well with the measured affinities. On the basis of the obtained 
results we suggest a possible reaction mechanism. In addition, this work 
provides a foundation for further site-directed mutagenesis experiments, as well 
as for modeling the reaction itself.

Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jmr.1115
PMID: 21812054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]