1. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 Oct;111(4):1134-41. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.00081.2011. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

The α₇β₁-integrin increases muscle hypertrophy following multiple bouts of 
eccentric exercise.

Zou K(1), Meador BM, Johnson B, Huntsman HD, Mahmassani Z, Valero MC, Huey KA, 
Boppart MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology and Community Health, University of Illinois, 
Urbana, Illinois, USA.

Mechanical stimuli increase skeletal muscle growth in a mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR)- and p70(S6K)-dependent manner. It has been proposed that 
costameric proteins at Z bands may sense and transfer tension to these 
initiators of protein translation, but few candidates have been identified. The 
purpose of this study was to determine whether a role exists for the 
α(7)-integrin in the activation of hypertrophic signaling and growth following 
eccentric exercise training. Five-week-old, wild-type (WT) and α(7)BX2-integrin 
transgenic (α(7)Tg) mice were randomly assigned to one of two groups: 1) 
sedentary (SED), or 2) exercise training (EX). Exercise training consisted of 
downhill running 3 sessions/wk for 4 wk (-20°, 17 m/min, 30 min). Downhill 
running was used to induce physiological mechanical strain. Twenty-four hours 
following the final training session, maximal isometric hindlimb plantar flexor 
force was measured. Gastrocnemius-soleus complexes were collected for further 
analysis of signaling changes, which included AKT, mTOR and p70(S6K), and muscle 
growth. Despite increased p70(S6K) activity in WT/EX, no significant changes in 
cross-sectional area or force were observed in WT/EX compared with WT/SED. AKT, 
mTOR, and p70(S6K) activation was higher, and whole muscle hypertrophy, relative 
muscle weight, myofibrillar protein, and force were significantly elevated in 
α(7)Tg/EX compared with α(7)Tg/SED. A marked increase in average myofiber 
cross-sectional area was observed in α(7)Tg/EX compared with all groups. Our 
findings demonstrate that the α(7)β(1)-integrin sensitizes skeletal muscle to 
mechanical strain and subsequent growth. Thus the α(7)β(1)-integrin may 
represent a novel molecular therapy for the treatment of disuse muscle atrophy.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00081.2011
PMID: 21817112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]