1. Gut Liver. 2011 Jun;5(2):248-52. doi: 10.5009/gnl.2011.5.2.248. Epub 2011 Jun 
23.

De Novo Superinfection of Hepatitis B Virus in an Anti-HBs Positive Patient with 
Recurrent Hepatitis C Following Liver Transplantation.

Ha SH(1), Park YM, Hong SP, Back SY, Shin SK, Ji SI, Kim SO, Yoo WD, Kim BH, 
Park SJ, Hong Z.

Author information:
(1)Hepatology Center, Bundang Jesaeng General Hospital, Seongnam, Korea.

A 60-year-old woman with end stage liver cirrhosis caused by genotype 2 
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection received an orthotopic liver transplantation 
(OLT). The patient was negative for the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and 
positive for the anti-hepatitis B surface antibody (anti-HBs) prior to and one 
and a half months following the OLT. Due to reactivation of hepatitis C, 
treatment with interferon-alpha and Ribavirin started two months following the 
OLT and resulted in a sustained virological response. We performed a liver 
biopsy because a biochemical response was not achieved. Surprisingly, liver 
pathology showed HBsAg-positive hepatocytes with a lobular hepatitis feature, 
which had been negative in the liver biopsy specimen obtained one and a half 
months post-OLT. High titers of both HBsAg and HBeAg were detected, while 
anti-HBs antibodies were not found. Tests for IgM anti-hepatitis B core antibody 
and anti-delta virus antibodies were negative. The serum HBV DNA titer was over 
1Ã—10(7) copies/mL. A sequencing analysis showed no mutation in the "a" 
determinant region, but revealed a mixture of wild and mutant strains at an 
overlapping region of the S and P genes (S codon 213 (Leu/Ile); P codons 221 
(Phe/Tyr) and 222 (Ala/Thr)). These findings suggest that de novo hepatitis B 
can develop in patients with HCV infection during the post-OLT period despite 
the presence of protective anti-HBs.

DOI: 10.5009/gnl.2011.5.2.248
PMCID: PMC3140676
PMID: 21814611