1. Mol Immunol. 2011 Sep;48(15-16):2130-4. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.07.004.
Epub  2011 Aug 5.

Asp159 is a critical core amino acid of an IgE-binding and cross-reactive 
epitope of a dust mite allergen Der f 7.

Chou H(1), Tam MF, Lee SS, Tang RB, Lin TH, Tai HY, Chen YS, Shen HD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Research and Education, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Shih-Pai, Taipei 11217, Taiwan.

Der f 7 and Der p 7 are important house dust mite allergens with known structure 
and suggested biological function recently. However, their IgE-binding 
determinants remain unknown. The purpose of this study is to identify the 
IgE-reactive epitopes of Der f 7 and the determinants of IgE-mediated 
cross-reactivity between Der f 7 and Der p 7. IgE-reactive determinants were 
identified by immunodot blot inhibition using synthetic overlapping peptides, 
allergen mutants, and a Der f 7 structural model. Our results showed that 
synthetic peptides with sequence (156)SILDP(160) on Der f 7 bind IgE in two of 
the 30 asthmatic serum samples tested. Recombinant Der f 7 I157A, L158A, or 
D159A mutants have reduced IgE-binding activity. Inhibition experiments 
confirmed Asp159 as a critical core residue for IgE-binding. Among Der p 7, Der 
f 7 and Der f 7 mutants with single substitution between residues 156 and 160, 
only the D159A mutant cannot inhibit significantly IgE-binding against Der p 7. 
Therefore, Asp159 contributes to IgE-mediated cross-reactivity between Der f 7 
and Der p 7. The structural model constructed for Der f 7 suggests that the 
IgE-binding epitope forms a loop-like structure on the surface of the molecule. 
In conclusion, Asp 159 is a critical core residue of an IgE-binding and 
IgE-mediated cross-reactive epitope (156)SILDP(160) of Der f 7. Results obtained 
from this study provide more information on molecular and structural features 
related to allergenicity, underlying basis of IgE cross-reactivity between 
allergens, and in designing safer immunotherapy.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.07.004
PMID: 21820178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]