1. Mol Cancer. 2011 Aug 22;10:101. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-101.

Messing up disorder: how do missense mutations in the tumor suppressor protein 
APC lead to cancer?

Minde DP(1), Anvarian Z, Rüdiger SG, Maurice MM.

Author information:
(1)Cellular Protein Chemistry, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht 
University, Padualaan 8, 3584CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene strongly 
predispose to development of gastro-intestinal tumors. Central to the 
tumorigenic events in APC mutant cells is the uncontrolled stabilization and 
transcriptional activation of the protein β-catenin. Many questions remain as to 
how APC controls β-catenin degradation. Remarkably, the large C-terminal region 
of APC, which spans over 2000 amino acids and includes critical regions in 
downregulating β-catenin, is predicted to be natively unfolded. Here we discuss 
how this uncommonly large disordered region may help to coordinate the multiple 
cellular functions of APC. Recently, a significant number of germline and 
somatic missense mutations in the central region of APC were linked to 
tumorigenesis in the colon as well as extra-intestinal tissues. We classify and 
localize all currently known missense mutations in the APC structure. The 
molecular basis by which these mutations interfere with the function of APC 
remains unresolved. We propose several mechanisms by which cancer-related 
missense mutations in the large disordered domain of APC may interfere with 
tumor suppressor activity. Insight in the underlying molecular events will be 
invaluable in the development of novel strategies to counter dysregulated Wnt 
signaling by APC mutations in cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-101
PMCID: PMC3170638
PMID: 21859464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]