1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23303. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023303. Epub 2011 Aug
9.

Including total EGFR staining in scoring improves EGFR mutations detection by 
mutation-specific antibodies and EGFR TKIs response prediction.

Wu SG(1), Chang YL, Lin JW, Wu CT, Chen HY, Tsai MF, Lee YC, Yu CJ, Shih JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University Hospital Yun-Lin Branch, Yun-Lin, Taiwan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a novel target for therapy in subsets 
of non-small cell lung cancer, especially adenocarcinoma. Tumors with EGFR 
mutations showed good response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). We 
aimed to identify the discriminating capacity of immunohistochemical (IHC) 
scoring to detect L858R and E746-A750 deletion mutation in lung adenocarcinoma 
patients and predict EGFR TKIs response. Patients with surgically resected lung 
adenocarcinoma were enrolled. EGFR mutation status was genotyped by PCR and 
direct sequencing. Mutation-specific antibodies for L858R and E746-A750 deletion 
were used for IHC staining. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were 
used to determine the capacity of IHC, including intensity and/or quickscore (Q 
score), in differentiating L858R and E746-A750 deletion. We enrolled 143 
patients during September 2000 to May 2009. Logistic-regression-model-based 
scoring containing both L858R Q score and total EGFR expression Q score was able 
to obtain a maximal area under the curve (AUC: 0.891) to differentiate the 
patients with L858R. Predictive model based on IHC Q score of E746-A750 deletion 
and IHC intensity of total EGFR expression reached an AUC of 0.969. The 
predictive model of L858R had a significantly higher AUC than L858R intensity 
only (p = 0.036). Of the six patients harboring complex EGFR mutations with 
classical mutation patterns, five had positive IHC staining. For EGFR TKI 
treated cancer recurrence patients, those with positive mutation-specific 
antibody IHC staining had better EGFR TKI response (p = 0.008) and longer 
progression-free survival (p = 0.012) than those without. In conclusion, total 
EGFR expression should be included in the IHC interpretation of L858R. After 
adjusting for total EGFR expression, the scoring method decreased the false 
positive rate and increased diagnostic power. According to the scoring method, 
the IHC method is useful to predict the clinical outcome and refine personalized 
therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023303
PMCID: PMC3153495
PMID: 21858063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.