1. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 Dec;111(6):1554-60. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.00921.2011. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Low-volume high-intensity interval training reduces hyperglycemia and increases 
muscle mitochondrial capacity in patients with type 2 diabetes.

Little JP(1), Gillen JB, Percival ME, Safdar A, Tarnopolsky MA, Punthakee Z, 
Jung ME, Gibala MJ.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Kinesiology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada.

Comment in
    J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 Dec;111(6):1540-1. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.01237.2011.

Low-volume high-intensity interval training (HIT) is emerging as a 
time-efficient exercise strategy for improving health and fitness. This form of 
exercise has not been tested in type 2 diabetes and thus we examined the effects 
of low-volume HIT on glucose regulation and skeletal muscle metabolic capacity 
in patients with type 2 diabetes. Eight patients with type 2 diabetes (63 ± 8 
yr, body mass index 32 ± 6 kg/m(2), Hb(A1C) 6.9 ± 0.7%) volunteered to 
participate in this study. Participants performed six sessions of HIT (10 × 60-s 
cycling bouts eliciting ∼90% maximal heart rate, interspersed with 60 s rest) 
over 2 wk. Before training and from ∼48 to 72 h after the last training bout, 
glucose regulation was assessed using 24-h continuous glucose monitoring under 
standardized dietary conditions. Markers of skeletal muscle metabolic capacity 
were measured in biopsy samples (vastus lateralis) before and after (72 h) 
training. Average 24-h blood glucose concentration was reduced after training 
(7.6 ± 1.0 vs. 6.6 ± 0.7 mmol/l) as was the sum of the 3-h postprandial areas 
under the glucose curve for breakfast, lunch, and dinner (both P < 0.05). 
Training increased muscle mitochondrial capacity as evidenced by higher citrate 
synthase maximal activity (∼20%) and protein content of Complex II 70 kDa 
subunit (∼37%), Complex III Core 2 protein (∼51%), and Complex IV subunit IV 
(∼68%, all P < 0.05). Mitofusin 2 (∼71%) and GLUT4 (∼369%) protein content were 
also higher after training (both P < 0.05). Our findings indicate that 
low-volume HIT can rapidly improve glucose control and induce adaptations in 
skeletal muscle that are linked to improved metabolic health in patients with 
type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00921.2011
PMID: 21868679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]