1. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Mar;19(3):470-7. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.116. Epub 2011 
Sep 2.

Drosophila BRUCE inhibits apoptosis through non-lysine ubiquitination of the 
IAP-antagonist REAPER.

Domingues C(1), Ryoo HD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First 
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Active caspases execute apoptosis to eliminate superfluous or harmful cells in 
animals. In Drosophila, living cells prevent uncontrolled caspase activation 
through an inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) family member, dIAP1, and 
apoptosis is preceded by the expression of IAP-antagonists, such as Reaper, Hid 
and Grim. Strong genetic modifiers of this pathway include another IAP family 
gene encoding an E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme domain, dBruce. Although the 
genetic effects of dBruce mutants are well documented, molecular targets of its 
encoded protein have remained elusive. Here, we report that dBruce targets 
Reaper for ubiquitination through an unconventional mechanism. Specifically, we 
show that dBruce physically interacts with Reaper, dependent upon Reaper's 
IAP-binding (IBM) and GH3 motifs. Consistently, Reaper levels were elevated in a 
dBruce -/- background. Unexpectedly, we found that dBruce also affects the 
levels of a mutant form of Reaper without any internal lysine residues, which 
normally serve as conventional ubiquitin acceptor sites. Furthermore, we were 
able to biochemically detect ubiquitin conjugation on lysine-deficient Reaper 
proteins, and knockdown of dBruce significantly reduced the extent of this 
ubiquitination. Our results indicate that dBruce inhibits apoptosis by promoting 
IAP-antagonist ubiquitination on unconventional acceptor sites.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2011.116
PMCID: PMC3235231
PMID: 21886178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]