1. Thromb Haemost. 2011 Oct;106(4):665-74. doi: 10.1160/TH11-04-0264. Epub 2011
Sep  8.

Factor VIII activation by factor VIIa analog (V158D/E296V/M298Q) in tissue 
factor-independent mechanisms.

Ogiwara K(1), Nogami K, Shima M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nara Medical University, Kashihara, Nara 634-8522, 
Japan.

Factor (F)VIIa with tissue factor (TF) is a primary trigger of blood 
coagulation. The recombinant (r)FVIIa analog, NN1731 (V158D/E296V/ M298Q) 
containing a thrombin/FIXa-mimicking catalytic domain, is ~30-fold more 
effective on activated platelets without TF, but ~1.2-fold with TF, than rFVIIa 
for FX activation. We have recently demonstrated the FVIIa/TF-dependent FVIII 
activation in the early coagulation phase. We assessed the action of NN1731 on 
FVIII activation. NN1731/TF increased FVIII activity ~2.9-fold within 30 
seconds, followed by rapid inactivation, and was slightly more active than 
rFVIIa/TF. NN1731-catalysed activation, however, was enhanced ~6-fold at 5 
minutes (min), and its peak level persisted for ~30 min. NN1731/TF proteolysed 
FVIII at Arg⁷⁴⁰, Arg³⁷², and Arg³³⁶, similar to rFVIIa/TF, but cleavage by 
NN1731 alone was much slower at Arg³³⁶ than at Arg⁷⁴⁰ and Arg³⁷². The Km and 
Vmax for NN1731/TF-catalysed activation were ~1.8-fold lower and ~2.3-fold 
greater than rFVIIa/TF. The Km for NN1731 alone was ~1.3-fold lower than rFVIIa, 
whilst the Vmax was ~7.9-fold greater, indicating that the efficiency of FVIII 
activation by NN1731 and NN1731/TF was ~11- and ~4-fold greater, respectively, 
than equivalent reactions with rFVIIa. In SPR-based assays, NN1731 bound to 
FVIII and the heavy chain (Kd; 0.62 and 1.9 nM) with ~1.4- and ~3.1-fold higher 
affinity than rFVIIa, and the A2 domain contributed to this increase. Von 
Willebrand factor moderated NN1731-catalysed activation more significantly than 
NN1731/TF. In conclusion, NN1731 was a greater potential than rFVIIa in 
up-regulating FVIII activity, and the TF-independent FVIII activation might 
represent a potential extra mode of its enhanced haemostatic effect.

DOI: 10.1160/TH11-04-0264
PMID: 21901232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]