1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Feb;18(2):140-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.09.002. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) genetic polymorphism greatly increases 
risk of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) for Parkinson's disease.

Liu J(1), Zhou Y, Wang C, Wang T, Zheng Z, Chan P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology, Key Laboratory of Ministry of 
Education on Neurodegenerative Disorders, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical 
University, PR China.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a complex neurodegenerative disorder. Although the 
p.G2385R allele of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been recently 
reported as a common genetic variant that increases the risk for typical PD 
exclusively among Asian population, its genetic modifiers is yet to be studied. 
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has been shown to play an important 
role in the survival of dopaminergic neurons and its genetic polymorphism was 
associated with an increased risk for PD at an older age onset. The current 
case-control study was performed to investigate the interaction between LRRK2 
p.G2385R and BDNF p.V66M in a Chinese PD cohort. A total of 464 PD patients and 
549 controls were involved in this study. LRRK2 p.G2385R variant (odds ratio 
[OR] = 3.2; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.96-5.15, p < 0.0001), not BDNF 
p.V66M alone significantly increased the risk of PD. However, the simultaneous 
presence of both LRRK2 and BDNF variants significantly enhanced the risk for PD 
(OR = 4.033; 95% CI = 2.188-7.435, p < 0.0001), particularly in patients with an 
onset age of older than 60 (OR = 6.439; 95% CI = 3.096-13.389, p < 0.0001). Our 
results further support that LRRK2 variants are an independent genetic risk 
factor for typical PD, but BDNF variants can greatly increase LRRK2-induced risk 
for patients with an onset age of older than 60 indicating an additive effect 
between the 2 genes, which might aid in studying the mechanism underlying LRRK2 
parkinsonism and developing potential therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.09.002
PMID: 21924942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]