1. J Membr Biol. 2011 Oct;243(1-3):47-58. doi: 10.1007/s00232-011-9392-4. Epub
2011  Sep 16.

Effects of lipid-analog detergent solubilization on the functionality and 
lipidic cubic phase mobility of the Torpedo californica nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor.

Padilla-Morales LF(1), Morales-Pérez CL, De La Cruz-Rivera PC, Asmar-Rovira G, 
Báez-Pagán CA, Quesada O, Lasalde-Dominicci JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus, San 
Juan, PR 00931.

Over the past three decades, the Torpedo californica nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor (nAChR) has been one of the most extensively studied membrane protein 
systems. However, the effects of detergent solubilization on nAChR stability and 
function are poorly understood. The use of lipid-analog detergents for nAChR 
solubilization has been shown to preserve receptor stability and functionality. 
The present study used lipid-analog detergents from phospholipid-analog and 
cholesterol-analog detergent families for solubilization and affinity 
purification of the receptor and probed nAChR ion channel function using planar 
lipid bilayers (PLBs) and stability using analytical size exclusion 
chromatography (A-SEC) in the detergent-solubilized state. We also examined 
receptor mobility on the lipidic cubic phase (LCP) by measuring the nAChR mobile 
fraction and diffusion coefficient through fluorescence recovery after 
photobleaching (FRAP) experiments using lipid-analog and non-lipid-analog 
detergents. Our results show that it is possible to isolate stable and 
functional nAChRs using lipid-analog detergents, with characteristic ion channel 
currents in PLBs and minimal aggregation as observed in A-SEC. Furthermore, 
fractional mobility and diffusion coefficient values observed in FRAP 
experiments were similar to the values observed for these parameters in the 
recently LCP-crystallized β(2)-adrenergic receptor. The overall results show 
that phospholipid-analog detergents with 16 carbon acyl-chains support nAChR 
stability, functionality and LCP mobility.

DOI: 10.1007/s00232-011-9392-4
PMCID: PMC3437550
PMID: 21922299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]