1. PLoS Genet. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002219. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002219. Epub
2011  Sep 8.

Comparative and functional genomics of Rhodococcus opacus PD630 for biofuels 
development.

Holder JW(1), Ulrich JC, DeBono AC, Godfrey PA, Desjardins CA, Zucker J, Zeng Q, 
Leach AL, Ghiviriga I, Dancel C, Abeel T, Gevers D, Kodira CD, Desany B, 
Affourtit JP, Birren BW, Sinskey AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

The Actinomycetales bacteria Rhodococcus opacus PD630 and Rhodococcus jostii 
RHA1 bioconvert a diverse range of organic substrates through lipid biosynthesis 
into large quantities of energy-rich triacylglycerols (TAGs). To describe the 
genetic basis of the Rhodococcus oleaginous metabolism, we sequenced and 
performed comparative analysis of the 9.27 Mb R. opacus PD630 genome. 
Metabolic-reconstruction assigned 2017 enzymatic reactions to the 8632 R. opacus 
PD630 genes we identified. Of these, 261 genes were implicated in the R. opacus 
PD630 TAGs cycle by metabolic reconstruction and gene family analysis. 
Rhodococcus synthesizes uncommon straight-chain odd-carbon fatty acids in high 
abundance and stores them as TAGs. We have identified these to be pentadecanoic, 
heptadecanoic, and cis-heptadecenoic acids. To identify bioconversion pathways, 
we screened R. opacus PD630, R. jostii RHA1, Ralstonia eutropha H16, and C. 
glutamicum 13032 for growth on 190 compounds. The results of the catabolic 
screen, phylogenetic analysis of the TAGs cycle enzymes, and metabolic product 
characterizations were integrated into a working model of prokaryotic oleaginy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002219
PMCID: PMC3169528
PMID: 21931557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.