1. BMC Microbiol. 2011 Sep 22;11:208. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-208.

Expression of the Flp proteins by Haemophilus ducreyi is necessary for virulence 
in human volunteers.

Janowicz DM(1), Cooney SA, Walsh J, Baker B, Katz BP, Fortney KR, Zwickl BW, 
Ellinger S, Munson RS Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University, School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN 46202, USA. dmjanowi@iupui.edu

BACKGROUND: Haemophilus ducreyi, the causative agent of the sexually transmitted 
disease chancroid, contains a flp (fimbria like protein) operon that encodes 
proteins predicted to contribute to adherence and pathogenesis. H. ducreyi 
mutants that lack expression of Flp1 and Flp2 or TadA, which has homology to 
NTPases of type IV secretion systems, have decreased abilities to attach to and 
form microcolonies on human foreskin fibroblasts (HFF). A tadA mutant is 
attenuated in its ability to cause disease in human volunteers and in the 
temperature dependent rabbit model, but a flp1flp2 mutant is virulent in 
rabbits. Whether a flp deletion mutant would cause disease in humans is not 
clear.
RESULTS: We constructed 35000HPΔflp1-3, a deletion mutant that lacks expression 
of all three Flp proteins but has an intact tad secretion system. 35000HPΔflp1-3 
was impaired in its ability to form microcolonies and to attach to HFF in vitro 
when compared to its parent (35000HP). Complementation of the mutant with flp1-3 
in trans restored the parental phenotype. To test whether expression of Flp1-3 
was necessary for virulence in humans, ten healthy adult volunteers were 
experimentally infected with a fixed dose of 35000HP (ranging from 54 to 67 CFU) 
on one arm and three doses of 35000HPΔflp1-3 (ranging from 63 to 961 CFU) on the 
other arm. The overall papule formation rate for the parent was 80% (95% 
confidence interval, CI, 55.2%-99.9%) and for the mutant was 70.0% (95% CI, 
50.5%-89.5%) (P = 0.52). Mutant papules were significantly smaller (mean, 11.2 
mm2) than were parent papules (21.8 mm2) 24 h after inoculation (P = 0.018). The 
overall pustule formation rates were 46.7% (95% CI 23.7-69.7%) at 30 parent 
sites and 6.7% (95% CI, 0.1-19.1%) at 30 mutant sites (P = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that production and secretion of the Flp proteins 
contributes to microcolony formation and attachment to HFF cells in vitro. 
Expression of flp1-3 is also necessary for H. ducreyi to initiate disease and 
progress to pustule formation in humans. Future studies will focus on how Flp 
proteins contribute to microcolony formation and attachment in vivo.

© 2011 Janowicz et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-208
PMCID: PMC3201912
PMID: 21939541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]