1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Dec;4(12):2072-82. doi: 
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0300. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

Variants downstream of the ornithine decarboxylase gene influence risk of 
colorectal adenoma and aspirin chemoprevention.

Barry EL(1), Mott LA, Sandler RS, Ahnen DJ, Baron JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community and Family Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School, 46 
Centerra Parkway, Suite 300, Lebanon, NH 03766, USA. 
Elizabeth.L.Barry@dartmouth.edu

Increased mucosal polyamine levels and ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) activity 
are associated with an increased risk of colorectal neoplasia and aspirin 
treatment reduces risk. Previous studies suggest that a single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) in the promoter of the ODC gene (rs2302615) may be associated 
with adenoma risk and/or response to aspirin chemoprevention. However, a 
comprehensive investigation of common genetic variation in the region of ODC 
gene is lacking. Using a tag SNP approach, we investigated associations between 
genotype or haplotype and adenoma risk among a cohort of 792 non-Hispanic white 
participants in a randomized trial of aspirin. Generalized linear regression was 
used to compute relative risks (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) 
adjusted for age and sex. The false discovery rate was used to account for 
multiple testing. Interactions terms were used to assess whether genotype 
modified the effect of aspirin treatment. Of 15 SNPs analyzed, seven were 
statistically significantly associated with adenoma risk. However, in multiple 
SNP regression models, only two of these, located downstream of the gene, were 
independently associated with risk: rs11694911 (RR = 1.29; 95% CI, 1.08-1.53; P 
= 0.005) and rs2430420 (RR = 1.20; 95% CI, 1.03-1.40; P = 0.022). In addition, 
there was evidence that rs2430420 and rs28362380 modified the effect of aspirin 
treatment, whereas the previously investigated SNP, rs2302615, had no 
statistically significant main effect or interaction with aspirin treatment. Our 
findings suggest that common genetic variants located downstream (3') of the ODC 
gene influence risk of colorectal adenoma and may also impact the efficacy of 
aspirin chemoprevention.

2011 AACR

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0300
PMCID: PMC3232321
PMID: 21930798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]