1. Shock. 2011 Nov;36(5):451-7. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31822d8de1.

Protective effects of nonionic triblock copolymers on bile acid-mediated 
epithelial barrier disruption.

Edelstein A(1), Fink D, Musch M, Valuckaite V, Zaborina O, Grubjesic S, 
Firestone MA, Matthews JB, Alverdy JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Pritzker School of Medicine, University of Chicago, 
5841 S Maryland Ave., Chicago, IL 60637, USA..

Translocation of bacteria and other luminal factors from the intestine following 
surgical injury can be a major driver of critical illness. Bile acids have been 
shown to play a key role in the loss of intestinal epithelial barrier function 
during states of host stress. Experiments to study the ability of nonionic block 
copolymers to abrogate barrier failure in response to bile acid exposure are 
described. In vitro experiments were performed with the bile salt sodium 
deoxycholate on Caco-2 enterocyte monolayers using transepithelial electrical 
resistance to assay barrier function. A bisphenol A coupled triblock 
polyethylene glycol (PEG), PEG 15-20, was shown to prevent sodium 
deoxycholate-induced barrier failure. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, lactate 
dehydrogenase, and caspase 3-based cell death detection assays demonstrated that 
bile acid-induced apoptosis and necrosis were prevented with PEG 15-20. 
Immunofluorescence microscopic visualization of the tight junctional protein 
zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1) demonstrated that PEG 15-20 prevented significant 
changes in tight junction organization induced by bile acid exposure. 
Preliminary transepithelial electrical resistance-based studies examining 
structure-function correlates of polymer protection against bile acid damage 
were performed with a small library of PEG-based copolymers. Polymer properties 
associated with optimal protection against bile acid-induced barrier disruption 
were PEG-based compounds with a molecular weight greater than 10 kd and 
amphiphilicity. The data demonstrate that PEG-based copolymer architecture is an 
important determinant that confers protection against bile acid injury of 
intestinal epithelia.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31822d8de1
PMCID: PMC3196772
PMID: 21937955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]