1. J Psychiatr Res. 2012 Jan;46(1):44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2011.09.001. 
Epub 2011 Sep 17.

The CC genotype in HTR2A T102C polymorphism is associated with behavioral 
impulsivity in alcohol-dependent patients.

Jakubczyk A(1), Wrzosek M, Lukaszkiewicz J, Sadowska-Mazuryk J, Matsumoto H, 
Sliwerska E, Glass J, Burmeister M, Brower KJ, Wojnar M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

High levels of impulsivity can increase the vulnerability for development of 
alcohol dependence. Moreover, impulsivity is considered to be a predictor of 
poor treatment outcomes. Few studies, however, have directly examined the 
genetics of impulsivity in alcohol-dependent patients. We analyzed the 
relationships between a well-recognized genetic marker of serotonin activity and 
levels of impulsivity as measured by both the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale 
(BIS-11) and the stop-signal task among 304 alcohol-dependent patients. The 
stop-signal task was used as an independent, objective method of estimating the 
level of behavioral impulsivity, and the BIS-11 as a self-report measure of 
global impulsivity. Blood was collected and analyzed for the T102C (rs6313) 
polymorphism in the serotonin type 2A receptor gene (HTR2A). Our results 
indicate a significant association between high levels of behavioral impulsivity 
and the C/C genotype of rs6313 in alcohol-dependent patients. The CC genotype 
has been previously found to be associated with a reduction in 5HT2A receptors 
in the central nervous system. These results support the hypothesis that genetic 
factors are important determinants of behavioral impulsivity in 
alcohol-dependent patients, and that the serotonin system plays an important 
role in establishing its level.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2011.09.001
PMCID: PMC3224206
PMID: 21930285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest All authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.