1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25090. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025090. Epub 2011 Sep
20.

Characterization and regulation of the osmolyte betaine synthesizing enzymes 
GSMT and SDMT from halophilic methanogen Methanohalophilus portucalensis.

Lai SJ(1), Lai MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 
Taiwan, Republic of China.

The halophilic methanoarchaeon Methanohalophilus portucalensis can synthesize 
the osmolyte betaine de novo in response to extracellular salt stress. Betaine 
is generated by the stepwise methylation of glycine to form sarcosine, N, 
N-dimethylglycine and betaine by using S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) as the 
methyl donor. The complete gene cluster of Mpgsmt-sdmt was cloned from Southern 
hybridization and heterologous expressed in E. coli respectively. The 
recombinant MpGSMT and MpSDMT both retained their in vivo functional activities 
in E. coli BL21(DE3)RIL to synthesize and accumulate betaine and conferred 
elevated survival ability in betaine transport deficient mutant E. coli MKH13 
under high salt stress. The dramatic activating effects of sodium and potassium 
ions on the in vitro methyltransferase activities of MpGSMT, but not MpSDMT or 
bacterial GSMT and SDMT, revealed that GSMT from halophilic methanoarchaeon 
possesses novel regulate mechanism in betaine biosynthesis pathway. The circular 
dichroism spectra showed the fluctuated peaks at 206 nm were detected in the 
MpGSMT under various concentrations of potassium or sodium ions. This fluctuated 
difference may cause by a change in the Î²-turn structure located at the 
conserved glycine- and sarcosine-binding residue Arg167 of MpGSMT. The 
analytical ultracentrifugation analysis indicated that the monomer MpGSMT 
switched to dimeric form increased from 7.6% to 70% with KCl concentration 
increased from 0 to 2.0 M. The level of potassium and sodium ions may modulate 
the substrate binding activity of MpGSMT through the conformational change. 
Additionally, MpGSMT showed a strong end product, betaine, inhibitory effect and 
was more sensitive to the inhibitor AdoHcy. The above results indicated that the 
first enzymatic step involved in synthesizing the osmolyte betaine in halophilic 
archaea, namely, GSMT, may also play a major role in coupling the salt-in and 
compatible solute (osmolyte) osmoadaptative strategies in halophilic methanogens 
for adapting to high salt environments.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025090
PMCID: PMC3176816
PMID: 21949863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.