1. Am J Cardiol. 2011 Dec 1;108(11):1606-13. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.07.019. 
Epub 2011 Sep 21.

Electrocardiographic features of sarcomere mutation carriers with and without 
clinically overt hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Lakdawala NK(1), Thune JJ, Maron BJ, Cirino AL, Havndrup O, Bundgaard H, 
Christiansen M, Carlsen CM, Dorval JF, Kwong RY, Colan SD, Køber LV, Ho CY.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.

In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HC), electrocardiographic (ECG) changes have 
been postulated to be an early marker of disease, detectable in sarcomere 
mutation carriers when left ventricular (LV) wall thickness is still normal. 
However, the ECG features of mutation carriers have not been fully 
characterized. Therefore, we systematically analyzed ECGs in a genotyped HC 
population to characterize ECG findings in mutation carriers (G+) with and 
without echocardiographic LV hypertrophy (LVH), and to evaluate the accuracy of 
ECG findings to differentiate at-risk mutation carriers from genetically 
unaffected relatives during family screening. The ECG and echocardiographic 
findings were analyzed from 213 genotyped subjects (76 G+/LVH-, 57 G+/LVH+ overt 
HC, 80 genetically unaffected controls). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was 
available on a subset. Q waves and repolarization abnormalities (QST) were 
highly specific (98% specificity) markers for LVH- mutation carriers, present in 
25% of G+/LVH- subjects, and 3% of controls (p <0.001). QST ECG abnormalities 
remained independently predictive of carrying a sarcomere mutation after 
adjusting for age and impaired relaxation, another distinguishing feature of 
G+/LVH- subjects (odds ratio 8.4, p = 0.007). Myocardial scar or perfusion 
abnormalities were not detected on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in G+/LVH- 
subjects, irrespective of the ECG features. In overt HC, 75% had Q waves and/or 
repolarization changes, but <25% demonstrated common isolated voltage criteria 
for LVH. In conclusion, Q waves and repolarization abnormalities are the most 
discriminating ECG features of sarcomere mutation carriers with and without LVH. 
However, owing to the limited sensitivity of ECG and echocardiographic 
screening, genetic testing is required to definitively identify at-risk family 
members.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.07.019
PMCID: PMC3215918
PMID: 21943931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to report.