1. Curr Chem Biol. 2011 May;5(2):108-117. doi: 10.2174/2212796811105020108.

RNA Granules Living a Post-transcriptional Life: the Trypanosomes' Case.

Cassola A(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biotecnológicas-Instituto Tecnológico Chascomús, 
UNSAM-CONICET, 1650 San Martín, Provincia de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Trypanosomes are protozoan parasites responsible for recalcitrant infectious 
diseases such as Sleeping sickness and Chagas disease in Africa and America, 
respectively. Their complex life-cycles are accompanied by alternation of forms 
specific of the insect vectors and vertebrate hosts, each with different 
metabolic and structural requirements. Unlike most other eukaryotes, these 
single-cell microorganisms seem to control the expression of protein-coding 
genes mostly by mRNA degradation, silencing and translation efficiency. Recent 
evidence showed that genuine cytoplasmic Stress Granules are formed as a 
response to heat stress in Trypanosoma brucei, basically formed by stalled 
translation initiation complexes on mRNA. On the other hand, Processing bodies 
(P bodies) are constitutive components of cytoplasmic mRNA metabolism in 
trypanosomes, which could have an important role in translational repression. 
During physiological starvation conditions in trypanosomes, components from P 
bodies fuse with other ribonucleoprotein complexes to form mRNA granules, where 
transcripts are stored and protected from degradation in a quiescent state. 
Other novel types of foci with unknown function that are related to RNA 
metabolism can be found in these parasites, namely heat-induced granules 
containing the 5' to 3' exoribonuclease XRNA, and starvation-induced granules 
containing transfer RNA halves. Thus, trypanosomes make use of non-membranous 
structures as a strategy to compartmentalize ribonucleoprotein complexes in the 
cytoplasm, aiding to cope with stressful situations avoiding mRNA translation or 
degradation. The relevance of stress-induced foci in trypanosomes has yet to be 
scored, although recent evidence suggests that these cytoplasmic organelles are 
required for survival under adverse growing conditions.

DOI: 10.2174/2212796811105020108
PMCID: PMC3179377
PMID: 21949551

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.