1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Nov 11;413(5):1016-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.09.029. Epub 
2011 Sep 21.

Molecular mechanism of transcription inhibition by phage T7 gp2 protein.

Mekler V(1), Minakhin L, Sheppard C, Wigneshweraraj S, Severinov K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Waksman Institute for 
Microbiology, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, 
USA. mekler@waksman.rutgers.edu

Escherichia coli T7 bacteriophage gp2 protein is a potent inhibitor of host RNA 
polymerase (RNAP). gp2 inhibits formation of open promoter complex by binding to 
the β' jaw, an RNAP domain that interacts with downstream promoter DNA. Here, we 
used an engineered promoter with an optimized sequence to obtain and 
characterize a specific promoter complex containing RNAP and gp2. In this 
complex, localized melting of promoter DNA is initiated but does not propagate 
to include the point of the transcription start. As a result, the complex is 
transcriptionally inactive. Using a highly sensitive RNAP beacon assay, we 
performed quantitative real-time measurements of specific binding of the 
RNAP-gp2 complex to promoter DNA and various promoter fragments. In this way, 
the effect of gp2 on RNAP interaction with promoters was dissected. As expected, 
gp2 greatly decreased RNAP affinity to downstream promoter duplex. However, gp2 
also inhibited RNAP binding to promoter fragments that lacked downstream 
promoter DNA that interacts with the β' jaw. The inhibition was caused by 
gp2-mediated decrease of the RNAP binding affinity to template and non-template 
strand segments of the transcription bubble downstream of the -10 promoter 
element. The inhibition of RNAP interactions with single-stranded segments of 
the transcription bubble by gp2 is a novel effect, which may occur via 
allosteric mechanism that is set in motion by the gp2 binding to the β' jaw.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.09.029
PMCID: PMC3217721
PMID: 21963987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]