1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2012 Feb;59(2):284-92. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2011.07.024. Epub 
2011 Oct 5.

New insights into human minimal change disease: lessons from animal models.

Chugh SS(1), Clement LC, Macé C.

Author information:
(1)Glomerular Disease Therapeutics Laboratory, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, USA. chugh@uab.edu

The pathogenesis of minimal change disease (MCD), considered to be the simplest 
form of nephrotic syndrome, has been one of the major unsolved mysteries in 
kidney disease. In this review, recent landmark studies that have led to the 
unraveling of MCD are discussed. A recent study now explains the molecular basis 
of major clinical and morphologic changes in MCD. Overproduction of 
angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4) in podocytes in MCD causes binding of ANGPTL4 to 
the glomerular basement membrane, development of nephrotic-range selective 
proteinuria, diffuse effacement of foot processes, and loss of glomerular 
basement membrane charge, but is not associated with changes shown by light 
microscopy in the glomerular and tubulointerstitial compartments. At least some 
of this ability of ANGPTL4 to induce proteinuria is linked to a deficiency of 
sialic acid residues because oral supplementation with sialic acid precursor 
N-acetyl-d-mannosamine improves sialylation of podocyte-secreted ANGPTL4 and 
significantly decreases proteinuria. Animal models of MCD, recent advances in 
potential biomarkers, and studies of upstream factors that may initiate 
glomerular changes also are discussed. In summary, recent progress in 
understanding MCD is likely to influence the diagnosis and treatment of MCD in 
the near future.

Copyright © 2012 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2011.07.024
PMCID: PMC3253318
PMID: 21974967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]