1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Oct;28(5):562-7. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2011.05.021.

[Association of leptin level and leptin receptor gene polymorphisms with 
susceptibility to severe pre-eclampsia].

[Article in Chinese]

Guan LX(1), Gao L, Gao Y, Li HB, Yu FF, Du XY, Jiang H.

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Laboratory, Weifang People's Hospital, Weifang, Shandong, People's 
Republic of China. guan373@tom.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association of serum leptin concentrations and 
polymorphisms of G1019A and A223G of leptin receptor gene (LEPR) with severe 
pre-eclampsia. MEHTODS: A case-control study was carried out in 207 patients 
with severe pre-eclampsia (SPE group) and 252 healthy pregnant women (control 
group) during the third trimester of pregnancy. The serum leptin was determined 
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The polymorphisms of LEPR gene G1019A and 
A223G were detected by polymerase chain reaction restriction-fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis. Miettinen's test was used to estimate the odds 
ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI).
RESULTS: (1) In severe pre-eclampsia group, serum leptin levels and rate of 
premature infant birth were significantly higher than that in normal pregnant 
women, and birth weight was lower than that in controls (P<0.01). (2) The 
frequencies of GA genotype and G allele for LEPR gene G1019A in SPE group (33.8% 
and 20.3%) were markedly higher than that in controls (19.8% and 15.1%) 
(P<0.01), and the carriers of GA genotype and G allele were more frequent in SPE 
group than in control group, resulting in an OR 2.04 (95%CI: 0.77-5.42) and 1.43 
(95%CI: 1.02-2.01) to develop severe pre-eclampsia, compared with carriers of AA 
genotype and A allele. (3) AG genotype and A allele frequencies of LEPR gene 
A223G in SPE group (19.3% and 12.6%) were significantly lower than that in 
controls (34.5% and 19.2%) (P<0.01), resulting in an OR of 0.46 (95%CI: 
0.30-0.71) and 0.60 (95%CI: 0.42-0.87) to develop severe pre-eclampsia, compared 
with subjects with GG genotype and G allele. (4) The "1019AA+223AG" genotype 
frequency was significantly lower in SPE group (6.8%) than in controls (24.6%) 
(P<0.01), resulting in an OR of 0.22 (95%CI: 0.12-0.39) to develop severe 
pr-eclampsia, while the "1019AA+223AG" was significantly higher in SPE group 
(22.2%) than in controls (11.9%) (P<0.05), resulting in an OR of 2.10 (95%CI: 
0.78-3.45) to develop severe pre-eclampsia. (5) No significant differences were 
found in SBP, DBP, BMI and serum leptin levels in subjects with different 
genotypes in the two groups (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Elevated serum leptin level and LEPR gene G1019A and A223G 
polymorphisms might play a role in severe pre-eclampsia, while the level of 
serum leptin was not associated with genotypes of LEPR gene G1019A and A223G 
polymorphisms. The genotypes GA and "1019AA+223AG"of G1019A may be genetic 
susceptibility factors to severe pre-eclampsia.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2011.05.021
PMID: 21983736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]