1. Oncogene. 2012 Jun 7;31(23):2849-61. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.462. Epub 2011 Oct 
10.

Ink4a and Arf are crucial factors in the determination of the cell of origin and 
the therapeutic sensitivity of Myc-induced mouse lymphoid tumor.

Sugihara E(1), Shimizu T, Kojima K, Onishi N, Kai K, Ishizawa J, Nagata K, 
Hashimoto N, Honda H, Kanno M, Miwa M, Okada S, Andreeff M, Saya H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gene Regulation, Institute for Advanced Medical Research, School 
of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

The cell of origin of tumors and the factors determining the cell of origin 
remain unclear. In this study, a mouse model of precursor B acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia/lymphoma (pre-B ALL/LBL) was established by retroviral transduction of 
Myc genes (N-Myc or c-Myc) into mouse bone marrow cells. Hematopoietic stem 
cells (HSCs) exhibited the highest susceptibility to N-Myc-induced pre-B ALL/LBL 
versus lymphoid progenitors, myeloid progenitors and committed progenitor B 
cells. N-Myc was able to induce pre-B ALL/LBL directly from progenitor B cells 
in the absence of Ink4a and Arf. Arf was expressed higher in progenitor B cells 
than Ink4a. In addition, N-Myc induced pre-B ALL/LBL from Arf(-/-) progenitor B 
cells suggesting that Arf has a predominant role in determining the cell of 
origin of pre-B ALL/LBL. Tumor cells derived from Ink4a/Arf(-/-) progenitor B 
cells exhibited a higher rate of proliferation and were more chemoresistant than 
those derived from wild-type HSCs. Furthermore, the Mdm2 inhibitor Nutlin-3 
restored p53 and induced massive apoptosis in mouse pre-B ALL/LBL cells derived 
from Ink4a/Arf(-/-) cells and human B-ALL cell lines lacking Ink4a and Arf 
expression, suggesting that Mdm2 inhibition may be a novel therapeutic approach 
to the treatment of Ink4a/Arf(-/-) B-ALL/LBL, such as is frequently found in 
Ph(+) ALL and relapsed ALL. Collectively, these findings indicate that Ink4a and 
Arf are critical determining factors of the cell of origin and the therapeutic 
sensitivity of Myc-induced lymphoid tumors.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2011.462
PMCID: PMC3271180
PMID: 21986948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Dr. Andreeffâ€™s work is 
supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health and by Hoffmann-La 
Roche, Nutley, NJ