1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Mar;20(3):263-70. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.189. Epub 2011 
Oct 19.

Novel NCC mutants and functional analysis in a new cohort of patients with 
Gitelman syndrome.

Glaudemans B(1), Yntema HG, San-Cristobal P, Schoots J, Pfundt R, Kamsteeg EJ, 
Bindels RJ, Knoers NV, Hoenderop JG, Hoefsloot LH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Gitelman syndrome (GS) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by 
hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis in conjunction with significant hypomagnesemia 
and hypocalciuria. The GS phenotype is caused by mutations in the solute carrier 
family 12, member 3 (SLC12A3) gene that encodes the thiazide-sensitive NaCl 
cotransporter (NCC). We analyzed DNA samples of 163 patients with a clinical 
suspicion of GS by direct sequencing of all 26 exons of the SLC12A3 gene. In 
total, 114 different mutations were identified, 31 of which have not been 
reported before. These novel variants include 3 deletions, 18 missense, 6 splice 
site and 4 nonsense mutations. We selected seven missense mutations to 
investigate their effect on NCC activity and plasma membrane localization by 
using the Xenopus laevis oocyte expression system. The Thr392Ile mutant did not 
display transport activity (probably class 2 mutation), while the Asn442Ser and 
Gln1030Arg NCC mutants showed decreased plasma membrane localization and 
consequently function, likely due to impaired trafficking (class 3 mutation). 
Even though the NaCl uptake was hampered for NCC mutants Glu121Asp, Pro751Leu, 
Ser475Cys and Tyr489His, the transporters reached the plasma membrane (class 4 
mutation), suggesting an effect on NCC regulation or ion affinity. The present 
study shows the identification of 38 novel mutations in the SLC12A3 gene and 
provides insight into the mechanisms that regulate NCC.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.189
PMCID: PMC3283182
PMID: 22009145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]