1. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Sep;10(9):4638-49. doi: 10.1128/mcb.10.9.4638-4649.1990.

Characterization of yeast Vps33p, a protein required for vacuolar protein 
sorting and vacuole biogenesis.

Banta LM(1), Vida TA, Herman PK, Emr SD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

vps33 mutants missort and secrete multiple vacuolar hydrolases and exhibit 
extreme defects in vacuolar morphology. Toward a molecular understanding of the 
role of the VPS33 gene in vacuole biogenesis, we have cloned this gene from a 
yeast genomic library by complementation of a temperature-sensitive vps33 
mutation. Gene disruption demonstrated that VPS33 was not essential but was 
required for growth at high temperatures. At the permissive temperature, vps33 
null mutants exhibited defects in vacuolar protein localization and vacuole 
morphology similar to those seen in most of the original mutant alleles. 
Sequence analysis revealed a putative open reading frame sufficient to encode a 
protein of 691 amino acids. Hydropathy analysis indicated that the deduced 
product of the VPS33 gene is generally hydrophilic, contains no obvious signal 
sequence or transmembrane domains, and is therefore unlikely to enter the 
secretory pathway. Polyclonal antisera raised against TrpE-Vps33 fusion proteins 
recognized a protein in yeast cells of the expected molecular weight, 
approximately 75,000. In cell fractionation studies, Vps33p behaved as a 
cytosolic protein. The predicted VPS33 gene product possessed sequence 
similarity with a number of ATPases and ATP-binding proteins specifically in 
their ATP-binding domains. One vps33 temperature-sensitive mutant contained a 
missense mutation near this region of sequence similarity; the mutation resulted 
in a Leu-646----Pro substitution in Vps33p. This temperature-sensitive mutant 
strain contained normal vacuoles at the permissive temperature but lacked 
vacuoles specifically in the bud at the nonpermissive temperature. Our data 
suggest that Vps33p acts in the cytoplasm to facilitate Golgi-to-vacuole protein 
delivery. We propose that as a consequence of the vps33 protein-sorting defects, 
abnormalities in vacuolar morphology and vacuole assembly result.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.10.9.4638-4649.1990
PMCID: PMC361053
PMID: 2201898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]