1. Oral Dis. 2012 Mar;18(2):184-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2011.01862.x. Epub 
2011 Oct 24.

Cleidocranial dysplasia: oral features and genetic analysis of 11 patients.

Bufalino A(1), Paranaíba LM, Gouvêa AF, Gueiros LA, Martelli-Júnior H, Junior 
JJ, Lopes MA, Graner E, De Almeida OP, Vargas PA, Coletta RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of 
Campinas, Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is a dominantly inherited autosomal 
disease characterized by typical bone defects including short stature, 
persistently open or delayed closure of the cranial sutures, and hypoplastic or 
aplastic clavicles. Oral features are frequent and include supernumerary teeth, 
delayed eruption or impaction of the permanent teeth, and malocclusion. 
Heterozygous mutations in RUNX2 gene, which encodes a transcription factor 
essential for osteoblast differentiation, were identified as the etiological 
cause of CCD.
OBJECTIVE AND METHODS: Herein, we performed physical and radiographic 
examination and screening for RUNX2 mutations in 11 patients from five families 
with CCD.
RESULTS: All patients demonstrated the classical phenotypes related to CCD. 
Families whose affected members had several dental alterations such as multiple 
impacted and supernumerary teeth demonstrated heterozygous missense mutations 
(R190Q and R225Q) that impair the runt domain of RUNX2. On the other hand, CCD 
patients from families with low frequency of dental abnormalities showed no 
mutation in RUNX2 or mutation outside of the runt domain (Q292fs→X299).
CONCLUSION: The current findings suggest a correlation between dental 
alterations and mutations in the runt domain of RUNX2 in CCD patients. Further 
clinical and genetic studies are needed to clarify the relationship between 
phenotypes and genotypes in CCD and to identify other factors that might 
influence the clinical features of this uncommon disease.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2011.01862.x
PMID: 22023169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]