1. J Gen Virol. 2012 Feb;93(Pt 2):374-382. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.035865-0. Epub 2011
 Oct 26.

Functional studies of per os infectivity factor 3 of Helicoverpa armigera 
nucleopolyhedrovirus.

Song J(1)(2), Wang M(1), Huang H(1), Luo X(1), Deng F(1), Wang H(1), Hu Z(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Joint Laboratory of Invertebrate 
Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 
430071, PR China.
(2)Division of Clinical Immunology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, PR China.

PIF3 is one of the six conserved per os infectivity factors (PIFs) of 
baculoviruses. In this study, PIF3 of Helicoverpa armigera nucleopolyhedrovirus 
(HearNPV) was analysed by infectivity bioassays using a series of recombinant 
viruses harbouring various PIF3 truncation/substitution mutants. The results 
demonstrated that the N-terminal region (L26-Y45) and C-terminal region 
(T160-Q199) are essential for HearNPV oral infectivity. In the C-terminal 
T160-Q199 region, there are three conserved cysteines (C162, C164 and C185). Our 
results showed that substitutions of C162 or C164, predicted to be involved in 
disulfide-bond formation, led to a severe decrease in HearNPV per os 
infectivity. Mutation of C185, predicted not to be involved in disulfide-bond 
formation, did not affect the per os infectivity. The data suggest that 
disulfide bonds are important for PIF3 conformation and function. 
Immunofluorescence assays showed that none of the mutations affected the 
subcellular localization of PIF3 to the nuclear ring zone region of infected 
cells. Western blot results showed that all mutants except C162G and C185G 
failed to incorporate PIF3 into occlusion-derived viruses, which resulted in 
impaired oral infectivity of the latter. The data provide insights for future 
study of PIF3 function.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.035865-0
PMID: 22031529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]