1. Dis Markers. 2011;31(4):223-9. doi: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0820.

Polymorphism in the KCNA3 gene is associated with susceptibility to autoimmune 
pancreatitis in the Japanese population.

Ota M(1), Ito T, Umemura T, Katsuyama Y, Yoshizawa K, Hamano H, Kawa S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Matsumoto, Japan. otamasao@shinshu-u.ac.jp

Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP), characterized by irregular narrowing of the main 
pancreatic duct, swelling of the pancreas, and histological evidence of 
lymphoplasmacytic inflammation by high serum immunoglobulin G4, is distinct from 
ordinary pancreatitis. However, genetic factors involved in the etiology and 
pathophysiology of AIP remain unclear. Sixty-four patients with autoimmune 
pancreatitis (53 men, 11 women; mean age, 62.4 years) and 104 healthy Japanese 
controls were enrolled in this study. We performed an association analysis using 
400 microsatellite markers with an average spacing of 10.8 cM in the genome. We 
also evaluated the association of AIP with seven single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) within the 20-kb region around the potassium voltage-gated channel, 
shaker-related subfamily, member 3 gene (KCNA3). We identified six statistically 
significant markers (D1S2726, D5S410, D6S460, D10S548, D15S128, and D20S186; P< 
0.05) related to susceptibility. The surrounding region showing the strong 
association (P=7.4 Ã— 10<formula>^{-7}</formula>, Pc=0.0015) contained the KCNA3 
gene. Further analysis by SNP genotyping in KCNA3 gene revealed that four SNPs 
(rs2840381, rs1058184, rs2640480, rs1319782) were significantly associated with 
the AIP susceptibility (P< 0.007). KCNA3 is known to be involved in 
immunomodulation of autoreactive effector and memory T cell--mediated autoimmune 
diseases. Our findings provide the first evidence that KCNA3 is associated with 
AIP and suggest that KCNA3 may influence the risk for AIP.

DOI: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0820
PMCID: PMC3826803
PMID: 22045429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]