1. Acta Neuropathol. 2012 Jan;123(1):119-32. doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0898-8. Epub
 2011 Nov 6.

Selective tau tyrosine nitration in non-AD tauopathies.

Reyes JF(1), Geula C, Vana L, Binder LI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. juan-reyes@northwestern.edu

Previously, we reported the characterization of two novel antibodies that react 
with tau nitrated at tyrosine 197 (Tau-nY197) and tyrosine 394 (Tau-nY394) in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). In this report, we examined whether tau nitration at 
these sites also occurs in corticobasal degeneration (CBD), progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) and Pick's disease (PiD), three neurodegenerative 
tauopathies that contain abundant tau deposits within glial and neuronal cell 
types but lack amyloid deposition. The reactivity of these antibodies was also 
compared to two previously characterized antibodies Tau-nY18 and Tau-nY29, 
specific for tau nitrated at tyrosine 18 and tyrosine 29, respectively. In the 
present experiments, Tau-nY18 did not label the classical pathological lesions 
of CBD or PSP but did label the neuronal lesions associated with PiD to a 
limited extent. In contrast, Tau-nY29 revealed some, but not all classes of tau 
inclusions associated with both CBD and PSP but did label numerous Pick body 
inclusions in PiD. Tau-nY197 was restricted to the neuropil threads in both CBD 
and PSP; however, similar to Tau-nY29, extensive Pick body pathology was clearly 
labeled. Tau-nY394 did not detect any of the lesions associated with these 
disorders. In contrast, extensive neuronal and glial tau pathology within these 
diseases was labeled by Tau-Y197, a monoclonal antibody that reacts within the 
Y-197-containing proline-rich region of the molecule. Based on our Western and 
IHC experiments, it appears that nitration of tau at tyrosine 29 is a 
pathological modification that might be associated with neurodegeneration. 
Collectively, our data suggest that site-specific tau tyrosine nitration events 
occur in a disease and lesion-specific manner, indicating that nitration appears 
to be a highly controlled modification in AD and non-AD tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-011-0898-8
PMCID: PMC3314430
PMID: 22057784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]