1. Meat Sci. 2006 May;73(1):42-7. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2005.10.016. Epub 2005
Dec  15.

Association of MC4R gene variants with growth, fatness, carcass composition and 
meat and fat quality traits in heavy pigs.

Ovilo C(1), Fernández A, Rodríguez MC, Nieto M, Silió L.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Mejora Genética Animal, INIA, Ctra Coruña Km 7.5, 28040 
Madrid, Spain.

The melanocortin receptor 4 (MC4R) gene is implicated in the regulation of 
feeding behaviour and body weight in humans and mice. A missense mutation 
(Asp298Asn) located in a highly conserved region of this gene has clearly been 
associated with backfat depth, feed intake and growth rate in different porcine 
lines. In this work the complete coding region of the gene was sequenced in 
samples from six pigs of a commercial hybrid line and two polymorphisms were 
detected at positions 709 (C/T) and 1426 (G/A). The last one corresponds to the 
missense mutation, and has been genotyped in 333 animals with phenotypic records 
and 68 out of their 81 parents. An association study of these genotypes with 
several performance and quality traits was performed within the statistical 
animal model framework. The results confirmed the effect of the missense 
mutation on growth and fat deposition traits (live weight at 140d and backfat 
depth), and supported new effects on carcass composition (loin and shoulder 
weights) and traits related to fat and meat quality (profile of fatty acids; 
muscle Minolta L(*), a(*) and H(o) colour parameters). A 
transmission-disequilibrium test provided no evidence of spurious association 
due to population stratification.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2005.10.016
PMID: 22062052