1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2012 May;35(3):469-77. doi: 10.1007/s10545-011-9407-4.
Epub  2011 Nov 9.

Cystathionine beta-synthase mutants exhibit changes in protein unfolding: 
conformational analysis of misfolded variants in crude cell extracts.

Hnízda A(1), Jurga V, Raková K, Kožich V.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Ke 
Karlovu 2, 128 08, Prague 2, Czech Republic.

Protein misfolding has been proposed to be a common pathogenic mechanism in many 
inborn errors of metabolism including cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) deficiency. 
In this work, we describe the structural properties of nine CBS mutants that 
represent a common molecular pathology in the CBS gene. Using thermolysin in two 
proteolytic techniques, we examined conformation of these mutants directly in 
crude cell extracts after expression in E. coli. Proteolysis with thermolysin 
under native conditions appeared to be a useful technique even for very unstable 
mutant proteins, whereas pulse proteolysis in a urea gradient had limited values 
for the study of the majority of CBS mutants due to their instability. Mutants 
in the active core had either slightly increased unfolding (p.A114V, p.E302K and 
p.G307S) or extensive unfolding with decreased stability (p.H65R, p.T191M, 
p.I278T and p.R369C). The extent of the unfolding inversely correlated with the 
previously determined degree of tetrameric assembly and with the catalytic 
activity. In contrast, mutants bearing aminoacid substitutions in the C-terminal 
regulatory domain (p.R439Q and p.D444N) had increased global stability with 
decreased flexibility. This study shows that proteolytic techniques can reveal 
conformational abnormalities even for CBS mutants that have activity and/or a 
degree of assembly similar to the wild-type enzyme. We present here a 
methodological strategy that may be used in cell lysates to evaluate properties 
of proteins that tend to misfold and aggregate and that may be important for 
conformational studies of disease-causing mutations in the field of inborn 
errors of metabolism.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-011-9407-4
PMCID: PMC3319881
PMID: 22069143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]