1. Genome Biol. 2011 Nov 25;12(11):R118. doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-11-r118.

Hundreds of putatively functional small open reading frames in Drosophila.

Ladoukakis E(1), Pereira V, Magny EG, Eyre-Walker A, Couso JP.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, UK.

BACKGROUND: The relationship between DNA sequence and encoded information is 
still an unsolved puzzle. The number of protein-coding genes in higher 
eukaryotes identified by genome projects is lower than was expected, while a 
considerable amount of putatively non-coding transcription has been detected. 
Functional small open reading frames (smORFs) are known to exist in several 
organisms. However, coding sequence detection methods are biased against 
detecting such very short open reading frames. Thus, a substantial number of 
non-canonical coding regions encoding short peptides might await 
characterization.
RESULTS: Using bio-informatics methods, we have searched for smORFs of less than 
100 amino acids in the putatively non-coding euchromatic DNA of Drosophila 
melanogaster, and initially identified nearly 600,000 of them. We have studied 
the pattern of conservation of these smORFs as coding entities between D. 
melanogaster and Drosophila pseudoobscura, their presence in syntenic and in 
transcribed regions of the genome, and their ratio of conservative versus 
non-conservative nucleotide changes. For negative controls, we compared the 
results with those obtained using random short sequences, while a positive 
control was provided by smORFs validated by proteomics data.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of these analyses led us to postulate the existence 
of at least 401 functional smORFs in Drosophila, with the possibility that as 
many as 4,561 such functional smORFs may exist.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-11-r118
PMCID: PMC3334604
PMID: 22118156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]