1. J Thromb Haemost. 2012 Feb;10(2):289-97. doi:
10.1111/j.1538-7836.2011.04577.x.

A mutation in the β3 cytoplasmic tail causes variant Glanzmann thrombasthenia by 
abrogating transition of αIIb β3 to an active state.

Hauschner H(1), Mor-Cohen R, Seligsohn U, Rosenberg N.

Author information:
(1)Amalia Biron Research Institute of Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Chaim Sheba 
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer and Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv 
University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: The cytoplasmic tails of α(IIb) and β(3) regulate essential α(IIb) 
β(3) functions. We previously described a variant Glanzmann thrombasthenia 
mutation in the β(3) cytoplasmic tail, IVS14: -3C>G, which causes a frameshift 
with an extension of β(3) by 40 residues.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to characterize the mechanism by which the 
mutation abrogates transition of α(IIb) β(3) from a resting state to an active 
state.
METHODS:  We expressed the natural mutation, termed 742ins, and three artificial 
mutations in baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells along with wild-type (WT) α(IIb) as 
follows: β(3) -742stop, a truncated mutant to evaluate the effect of deleted 
residues; β(3) -749stop, a truncated mutant that preserves the NPLY conserved 
sequence; and β(3) -749ins, in which the aberrant tail begins after the 
conserved sequence. Flow cytometry was used to determine ligand binding to BHK 
cells.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Surface expression of α(IIb) β(3) of all four mutants 
was at least 60% of WT expression, but there was almost no binding of soluble 
fibrinogen following activation with activating antibodies 
(anti-ligand-induced-binding-site 6 [antiLIBS6] or PT25-2). Activation of the 
α(IIb) β(3) mutants was only achieved when both PT25-2 and antiLIBS6 were used 
together or following treatment with dithiothreitol. These data suggest that the 
ectodomain of the four mutants is tightly locked in a resting conformation but 
can be forced to become active by strong stimuli. These data and those of others 
indicate that the middle part of the β(3) tail is important for maintaining 
α(IIb) β(3) in a resting conformation.

© 2011 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2011.04577.x
PMID: 22136613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]