1. J Mol Biol. 2012 Jan 27;415(4):666-79. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.11.035. Epub
2011  Nov 25.

A conserved Glu-Arg salt bridge connects coevolved motifs that define the 
eukaryotic protein kinase fold.

Yang J(1), Wu J, Steichen JM, Kornev AP, Deal MS, Li S, Sankaran B, Woods VL Jr, 
Taylor SS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California San Diego, 
San Diego, CA 92093, USA.

Eukaryotic protein kinases (EPKs) feature two coevolved structural segments, the 
Activation segment, which starts with the Asp-Phe-Gly (DFG) and ends with the 
Ala-Pro-Glu (APE) motifs, and the helical GHI subdomain that comprises αG-αH-αI 
helices. Eukaryotic-like kinases have a much shorter Activation segment and lack 
the GHI subdomain. They thus lack the conserved salt bridge interaction between 
the APE Glu and an Arg from the GHI subdomain, a hallmark signature of EPKs. 
Although the conservation of this salt bridge in EPKs is well known and its 
implication in diseases has been illustrated by polymorphism analysis, its 
function has not been carefully studied. In this work, we use murine 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A) as the model enzyme (Glu208 and 
Arg280) to examine the role of these two residues. We showed that Ala 
replacement of either residue caused a 40- to 120-fold decrease in catalytic 
efficiency of the enzyme due to an increase in K(m)(ATP) and a decrease in 
k(cat). Crystal structures, as well as solution studies, also demonstrate that 
this ion pair contributes to the hydrophobic network and stability of the 
enzyme. We show that mutation of either Glu or Arg to Ala renders both mutant 
proteins less effective substrates for upstream kinase 
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1. We propose that the Glu208-Arg280 pair 
serves as a center hub of connectivity between these two structurally conserved 
elements in EPKs. Mutations of either residue disrupt communication not only 
between the two segments but also within the rest of the molecule, leading to 
altered catalytic activity and enzyme regulation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.11.035
PMCID: PMC3445030
PMID: 22138346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing financial interests.