1. PLoS Genet. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002398. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002398. Epub 
2011 Dec 1.

Widespread cotranslational formation of protein complexes.

Duncan CD(1), Mata J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

Most cellular processes are conducted by multi-protein complexes. However, 
little is known about how these complexes are assembled. In particular, it is 
not known if they are formed while one or more members of the complexes are 
being translated (cotranslational assembly). We took a genomic approach to 
address this question, by systematically identifying mRNAs associated with 
specific proteins. In a sample of 31 proteins from Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
that did not contain RNA-binding domains, we found that âˆ¼38% copurify with mRNAs 
that encode interacting proteins. For example, the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc2p 
associates with the rum1 and cdc18 mRNAs, which encode, respectively, an 
inhibitor of Cdc2p kinase activity and an essential regulator of DNA 
replication. Both proteins interact with Cdc2p and are key cell cycle 
regulators. We obtained analogous results with proteins with different 
structures and cellular functions (kinesins, protein kinases, transcription 
factors, proteasome components, etc.). We showed that copurification of a bait 
protein and of specific mRNAs was dependent on the presence of the proteins 
encoded by the interacting mRNAs and on polysomal integrity. These results 
indicate that these observed associations reflect the cotranslational 
interaction between the bait and the nascent proteins encoded by the interacting 
mRNAs. Therefore, we show that the cotranslational formation of protein-protein 
interactions is a widespread phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002398
PMCID: PMC3228823
PMID: 22144913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.