1. Urol Int. 2012;88(1):88-94. doi: 10.1159/000331931. Epub 2011 Dec 9.

Lack of association between hOGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism and the risk of bladder 
cancer: a meta-analysis.

Li D(1), Liu H, Yan L, Tang Y, Ren J, Xu Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan City, PR 
China.

OBJECTIVE: In some but not all studies, hOGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism has been 
reported to contribute to the risk of bladder cancer. To determine whether there 
is a significant association of hOGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism with the 
susceptibility for bladder cancer, we performed a comprehensive meta-analysis.
METHODS: The electronic PubMed, Medline and Springer databases were searched for 
publications on the association between hOGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism and bladder 
cancer through to May 20, 2011. Seven case-control studies were identified, 
including 2,474 cases and 2,408 controls. From these identified publications, 
crude odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated to 
estimate the strength of association using fixed- or random-effects models. Two 
investigators each extracted data and conducted the analysis independently.
RESULTS: Overall, no significant associations were found between hOGG1 Ser326Cys 
polymorphism and bladder cancer in codominant models (GG vs. CC: OR 1.11, 95% CI 
0.74-1.66, p = 0.63; GC vs. CC: OR 1.07, 95% CI 0.80-1.41, p = 0.65). Similarly, 
no significant associations with bladder cancer were observed in the recessive 
model (GG vs. GC+CC: OR 1.05, 95% CI 0.65-1.70, p = 0.85), dominant model (GG+GC 
vs. CC: OR 1.07, 95% CI 0.87-1.32, p = 0.53) and allele model (G vs. C: OR 1.06, 
95% CI 0.90-1.26, p = 0.49). In the stratified analyses by ethnicity, control 
sources, pathology, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, significant associations were 
still not observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The overall current literature on hOGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism and 
the risk of bladder cancer suggests no statistically significant association 
between the two. Additional primary studies may be necessary to provide evidence 
of any significant association between this specific polymorphism and bladder 
cancer.

Copyright Â© 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000331931
PMID: 22156293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]