1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Mar;1818(3):512-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.11.024.  Epub 2011 Dec 3.

Interaction of α-synuclein with vesicles that mimic mitochondrial membranes.

Zigoneanu IG(1), Yang YJ, Krois AS, Haque E, Pielak GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA.

α-Synuclein, an intrinsically-disordered protein associated with Parkinson's 
disease, interacts with mitochondria, but the details of this interaction are 
unknown. We probed the interaction of α-synuclein and its A30P variant with 
lipid vesicles by using fluorescence anisotropy and (19)F nuclear magnetic 
resonance. Both proteins interact strongly with large unilamellar vesicles whose 
composition is similar to that of the inner mitochondrial membrane, which 
contains cardiolipin. However, the proteins have no affinity for vesicles 
mimicking the outer mitochondrial membrane, which lacks cardiolipin. The (19)F 
data show that the interaction involves α-synuclein's N-terminal region. These 
data indicate that the middle of the N-terminal region, which contains the 
KAKEGVVAAAE repeats, is involved in binding, probably via electrostatic 
interactions between the lysines and cardiolipin. We also found that the 
strength of α-synuclein binding depends on the nature of the cardiolipin acyl 
side chains. Eliminating one double bond increases affinity, while complete 
saturation dramatically decreases affinity. Increasing the temperature increases 
the binding of wild-type, but not the A30P variant. The data are interpreted in 
terms of the properties of the protein, cardiolipin demixing within the vesicles 
upon binding of α-synuclein, and packing density. The results advance our 
understanding of α-synuclein's interaction with mitochondrial membranes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.11.024
PMCID: PMC3273638
PMID: 22155643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]