1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2012 Feb;24(1):1-8. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e32834ea739.

New advances in the diagnosis and treatment of autoimmune lymphoproliferative 
syndrome.

Teachey DT(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
University of Pennsylvania, School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. 
teacheyd@E-Mail.chop.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is a disorder 
of disrupted lymphocyte homeostasis, resulting from mutations in the Fas 
apoptotic pathway. Clinical manifestations include lymphadenopathy, 
splenomegaly, and autoimmune cytopenias. A number of new insights have improved 
the understanding of the genetics and biology of ALPS. These will be discussed 
in this review.
RECENT FINDINGS: A number of key observations have been made recently that 
better define the pathophysiology of ALPS, including the characterization of 
somatic FAS variant ALPS, the identification of haploinsufficiency as a 
mechanism of decreased Fas expression, and the description of multiple genetic 
hits in FAS in some families that may explain the variable penetrance of the 
disease. In addition, ALPS has been shown to be a more common condition, as 
patients diagnosed with other disorders, including Evans syndrome and common 
variable immune deficiency, have been found to have ALPS. Finally, the treatment 
of the disease has changed as splenectomy and rituximab have been shown to have 
unexpected ALPS-specific toxicities, and mycophenolate mofetil and sirolimus 
have been demonstrated to have marked activity against the disease.
SUMMARY: On the basis of novel advances, the diagnostic algorithm and 
recommended treatment for ALPS have changed significantly, improving quality of 
life for many patients.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e32834ea739
PMCID: PMC3673763
PMID: 22157362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]