1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Mar;1817(3):419-29. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbabio.2011.11.021. Epub 2011 Dec 8.

Damage to mitochondrial complex I during cardiac ischemia reperfusion injury is 
reduced indirectly by anti-anginal drug ranolazine.

Gadicherla AK(1), Stowe DF, Antholine WE, Yang M, Camara AK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 
53226, USA.

Ranolazine, an anti-anginal drug, is a late Na(+) channel current blocker that 
is also believed to attenuate fatty acid oxidation and mitochondrial respiratory 
complex I activity, especially during ischemia. In this study, we investigated 
if ranolazine's protective effect against cardiac ischemia/reperfusion (IR) 
injury is mediated at the mitochondrial level and specifically if respiratory 
complex I (NADH Ubiquinone oxidoreductase) function is protected. We treated 
isolated and perfused guinea pig hearts with ranolazine just before 30 min 
ischemia and then isolated cardiac mitochondria at the end of 30 min ischemia 
and/or 30 min ischemia followed by 10 min reperfusion. We utilized 
spectrophotometric and histochemical techniques to assay complex I activity, 
Western blot analysis for complex I subunit NDUFA9, electron paramagnetic 
resonance for activity of complex I Fe-S clusters, enzyme linked immuno sorbent 
assay (ELISA) for determination of protein acetylation, native gel histochemical 
staining for respiratory supercomplex assemblies, and high pressure liquid 
chromatography for cardiolipin integrity; cardiac function was measured during 
IR. Ranolazine treated hearts showed higher complex I activity and greater 
detectable complex I protein levels compared to untreated IR hearts. Ranolazine 
treatment also led to more normalized electron transfer via Fe-S centers, 
supercomplex assembly and cardiolipin integrity. These improvements in complex I 
structure and function with ranolazine were associated with improved cardiac 
function after IR. However, these protective effects of ranolazine are not 
mediated by a direct action on mitochondria, but rather indirectly via cytosolic 
mechanisms that lead to less oxidation and better structural integrity of 
complex I.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2011.11.021
PMCID: PMC3269517
PMID: 22178605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]