1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Jan 3;59(1):49-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.08.061.

A common β1-adrenergic receptor polymorphism predicts favorable response to 
rate-control therapy in atrial fibrillation.

Parvez B(1), Chopra N, Rowan S, Vaglio JC, Muhammad R, Roden DM, Darbar D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37323, USA.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Jan 3;59(1):57-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.09.041.

OBJECTIVES: In this study, we evaluated the impact of 2 common β1-adrenergic 
receptor (β1-AR) polymorphisms (G389R and S49G) in response to ventricular rate 
control therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF).
BACKGROUND: Randomized studies have shown that ventricular rate control is an 
acceptable treatment strategy in patients with AF. However, identification of 
patients who will adequately respond to rate-control therapy remains a 
challenge.
METHODS: We studied 543 subjects (63% men; age 61.8 ± 14 years) prospectively 
enrolled in the Vanderbilt AF registry and managed with rate-control strategy. A 
"responder" displayed adequate ventricular rate control based on the AFFIRM 
(Atrial Fibrillation Follow-Up Investigation of Rhythm Management) criteria: 
average heart rate (HR) at rest ≤80 beats/min; and maximum HR during a 6-min 
walk test ≤110 beats/min or average HR during 24-h Holter ≤100 beats/min.
RESULTS: A total of 295 (54.3%) patients met the AFFIRM criteria. Baseline 
clinical characteristics were similar in responders and nonresponders except for 
mean resting HR (76 ± 20 beats/min vs. 70 ± 15 beats/min; p < 0.01) and smoking 
(6% vs. 1%; p < 0.01). Multiple clinical variables (age, gender, hypertension) 
failed to predict response to rate-control therapy. By contrast, carriers of Gly 
variant at 389 were more likely to respond favorably to rate-control therapy; 
60% versus 51% in the Arg389Arg genotype, p = 0.04. This association persisted 
after correction for multiple clinical factors (odds ratio: 1.42, 95% confidence 
interval: 1.00 to 2.03, p < 0.05). Among responders, subjects carrying the 
Gly389 variant required the lowest doses of rate-control medications; atenolol: 
92 mg versus 68 mg; carvedilol: 44 mg versus 20 mg; metoprolol: 80 mg versus 72 
mg; diltiazem: 212 mg versus 180 mg, and verapamil: 276 mg versus 200 mg, 
respectively (p < 0.01 for all comparisons).
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a common β1-AR polymorphism, G389R, that is 
associated with adequate response to rate-control therapy in AF patients. Gly389 
is a loss-of-function variant; consequently, for the same adrenergic 
stimulation, it produces reduced levels of adenyl cyclase, and hence, attenuates 
the β-adrenergic cascade. Mechanistically, the effect of rate-control drugs will 
be synergistic with that of the Gly389 variant, which could possibly explain our 
findings. These findings represent a step forward in the development of a 
long-term strategy of selecting treatment options in AF based on genotype.

Copyright © 2012 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.08.061
PMCID: PMC3245828
PMID: 22192668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]