1. J Mol Biol. 2012 Feb 10;416(1):108-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.12.023. Epub
2011  Dec 17.

NMR characterization of monomeric and oligomeric conformations of human 
calcitonin and its interaction with EGCG.

Huang R(1), Vivekanandan S, Brender JR, Abe Y, Naito A, Ramamoorthy A.

Author information:
(1)Biophysics and Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109-1055, USA.

Calcitonin is a 32-residue peptide hormone known for its hypocalcemic effect and 
its inhibition of bone resorption. While calcitonin has been used in therapy for 
osteoporosis and Paget's disease for decades, human calcitonin (hCT) forms 
fibrils in aqueous solution that limit its therapeutic application. The 
molecular mechanism of fiber formation by calcitonin is not well understood. 
Here, high-resolution structures of hCT at concentrations of 0.3 mM and 1 mM 
have been investigated using NMR spectroscopy. Comparing the structures of hCT 
at different concentrations, we discovered that the peptide undergoes a 
conformational transition from an extended to a β-hairpin structure in the 
process of molecular association. This conformational transition locates the 
aromatic side chains of Tyr12 and Phe16 in a favorable way for intermolecular 
π-π stacking, which is proposed to be a crucial interaction for peptide 
association and fibrillation. One-dimensional (1)H NMR experiments confirm that 
oligomerization of hCT accompanies the conformational transition at 1 mM 
concentration. The effect of the polyphenol epigallocatechin 3-gallate (EGCG) on 
hCT fibrillation was also investigated by NMR and electron microscopy, which 
show that EGCG efficiently inhibits fibril formation of hCT by preventing the 
initial association of hCT before fiber formation. The NMR experiments also 
indicate that the interaction between aromatic rings of EGCG and the aromatic 
side chains of the peptide may play an important role in inhibiting fibril 
formation of hCT.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.12.023
PMCID: PMC3405540
PMID: 22200484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]