1. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2012;27(2):263-7. doi: 10.2133/dmpk.dmpk-11-nt-092. 
Epub 2011 Dec 27.

An artifact derived from a pseudogene led to the discovery of microRNA binding 
site polymorphism in the 3'-untranslated region of the human dihydrofolate 
reductase gene.

Hayashi H(1), Tazoe Y, Horino M, Fujimaki-Katoh C, Tsuboi S, Matsuyama T, Kosuge 
K, Yamada H, Tsuji D, Inoue K, Itoh K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology & Genetics, School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka.

A novel single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the 3'-untranslated region of 
the human dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene with enhanced expression was 
identified in 2001. In 2007, it was reported that this SNP, DHFR C829T, was 
located close to a microRNA binding site and contributed to the stability of 
mRNA. Many researchers have analyzed this SNP in several races including Asians 
and Caucasians. However, the mutation allele is not yet confirmed in most 
populations. In this study, we reinvestigated the frequency of this SNP using 
three methods. First, this SNP in genomic DNA was analyzed by a PCR-restriction 
fragment length polymorphism method. Second, this SNP in mRNA was analyzed by a 
single nucleotide extension method following a reverse transcription reaction. 
Third, the mRNA expression level was analyzed by a real-time PCR method. The 
findings in our study, regarding the discovery of this SNP, suggest that the SNP 
is an artifact caused by contamination by the genomic DNA of the pseudogene 
DHFRP1. This study is a reinvestigation of a newly discovered genetic 
polymorphism.

DOI: 10.2133/dmpk.dmpk-11-nt-092
PMID: 22201119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]