1. Biochemistry. 2012 Feb 14;51(6):1148-59. doi: 10.1021/bi201820p. Epub 2012 Feb
 3.

A processive carbohydrate polymerase that mediates bifunctional catalysis using 
a single active site.

May JF(1), Levengood MR, Splain RA, Brown CD, Kiessling LL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53706-1544, United States.

Even in the absence of a template, glycosyltransferases can catalyze the 
synthesis of carbohydrate polymers of specific sequence. The paradigm has been 
that one enzyme catalyzes the formation of one type of glycosidic linkage, yet 
certain glycosyltransferases generate polysaccharide sequences composed of two 
distinct linkage types. In principle, bifunctional glycosyltransferases can 
possess separate active sites for each catalytic activity or one active site 
with dual activities. We encountered the fundamental question of one or two 
distinct active sites in our investigation of the galactosyltransferase GlfT2. 
GlfT2 catalyzes the formation of mycobacterial galactan, a critical cell-wall 
polymer composed of galactofuranose residues connected with alternating, 
regioisomeric linkages. We found that GlfT2 mediates galactan polymerization 
using only one active site that manifests dual regioselectivity. Structural 
modeling of the bifunctional glycosyltransferases hyaluronan synthase and 
cellulose synthase suggests that these enzymes also generate multiple glycosidic 
linkages using a single active site. These results highlight the versatility of 
glycosyltransferases for generating polysaccharides of specific sequence. We 
postulate that a hallmark of processive elongation of a carbohydrate polymer by 
a bifunctional enzyme is that one active site can give rise to two separate 
types of glycosidic bonds.

DOI: 10.1021/bi201820p
PMCID: PMC3326345
PMID: 22217153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]