1. J Mol Biol. 2012 Mar 2;416(4):543-57. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.12.044. Epub
2011  Dec 28.

Alternative relay and converter domains tune native muscle myosin isoform 
function in Drosophila.

Kronert WA(1), Melkani GC, Melkani A, Bernstein SI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Molecular Biology Institute and Heart Institute, San 
Diego State University, San Diego, CA 92182-4614, USA.

Myosin isoforms help define muscle-specific contractile and structural 
properties. Alternative splicing of myosin heavy chain gene transcripts in 
Drosophila melanogaster yields muscle-specific isoforms and highlights 
alternative domains that fine-tune myosin function. To gain insight into how 
native myosin is tuned, we expressed three embryonic myosin isoforms in indirect 
flight muscles lacking endogenous myosin. These isoforms differ in their relay 
and/or converter domains. We analyzed isoform-specific ATPase activities, in 
vitro actin motility and myofibril structure/stability. We find that dorsal 
acute body wall muscle myosin (EMB-9c11d) shows a significant increase in 
MgATPase V(max) and actin sliding velocity, as well as abnormal myofibril 
assembly compared to cardioblast myosin (EMB-11d). These properties differ as a 
result of alternative exon-9-encoded relay domains that are hypothesized to 
communicate signals among the ATP-binding pocket, actin-binding site and the 
converter domain. Further, EMB-11d shows significantly reduced levels of basal 
Ca- and MgATPase as well as MgATPase V(max) compared to embryonic body wall 
muscle isoform (EMB) (expressed in a multitude of body wall muscles). EMB-11d 
also induces increased actin sliding velocity and stabilizes myofibril structure 
compared to EMB. These differences arise from exon-11-encoded alternative 
converter domains that are proposed to reposition the lever arm during the power 
and recovery strokes. We conclude that relay and converter domains of native 
myosin isoforms fine-tune ATPase activity, actin motility and muscle 
ultrastructure. This verifies and extends previous studies with chimeric 
molecules and indicates that interactions of the relay and converter during the 
contractile cycle are key to myosin-isoform-specific kinetic and mechanical 
functions.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.12.044
PMCID: PMC3288177
PMID: 22226837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]