1. Clin Immunol. 2012 Mar;142(3):320-31. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2011.11.010. Epub
2011  Dec 8.

Effect of HLA DR epitope de-immunization of Factor VIII in vitro and in vivo.

Moise L(1), Song C, Martin WD, Tassone R, De Groot AS, Scott DW.

Author information:
(1)EpiVax, Inc., Providence, RI 02903, USA. lmoise@epivax.com

T cell-dependent development of anti-Factor VIII (FVIII) antibodies that 
neutralize FVIII activity is a major obstacle to replacement therapy in 
hemophilia A. To create a less immunogenic therapeutic protein, recombinant 
FVIII can be modified to reduce HLA binding of epitopes based on predicted 
anchoring residues. Here, we used immunoinformatic tools to identify C2 domain 
HLA DR epitopes and predict site-specific mutations that reduce immunogenicity. 
Epitope peptides corresponding to original and modified sequences were validated 
in HLA binding assays and in immunizations of hemophilic E16 mice, DR3 and DR4 
mice and DR3×E16 mice. Consistent with immunoinformatic predictions, original 
epitopes are immunogenic. Immunization with selected modified sequences lowered 
immunogenicity for particular peptides and revealed residual immunogenicity of 
incompletely de-immunized modified peptides. The stepwise approach to reduce 
protein immunogenicity by epitope modification illustrated here is being used to 
design and produce a functional full-length modified FVIII for clinical use.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2011.11.010
PMCID: PMC3288193
PMID: 22222093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest Two of the contributing 
authors, Anne S. De Groot and William D. Martin, are senior officers and 
majority shareholders at EpiVax, Inc., a privately owned biotechnology company 
located in Providence, RI. Leonard Moise and David Scott hold stock options in 
EpiVax. These authors acknowledge that there is a potential conflict of interest 
related to their relationship with EpiVax and attest that the work contained in 
this research report is free of any bias that might be associated with the 
commercial goals of the company.