1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012 Feb 22;104(4):273-9. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djr514. Epub 
2012 Jan 9.

Interdisciplinary critique of sipuleucel-T as immunotherapy in 
castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Huber ML, Haynes L, Parker C, Iversen P.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012 Jul 18;104(14):1106; author reply 1109-12. doi: 
10.1093/jnci/djs280.
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012 Jul 18;104(14):1107-9; author reply 1109-12. doi: 
10.1093/jnci/djs279.
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012 Sep 19;104(18):1422; author reply 1422-3. doi: 
10.1093/jnci/djs340.

Sipuleucel-T was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration on April 29, 
2010, as an immunotherapy for late-stage prostate cancer. To manufacture 
sipuleucel-T, mononuclear cells harvested from the patient are incubated with a 
recombinant prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) antigen and reinfused. The 
manufacturer proposes that antigen-presenting cells exogenously activated by PAP 
induce endogenous T-cells to attack PAP-bearing prostate cancer cells. However, 
the lack of demonstrable tumor responses has prompted calls for scrutiny of the 
design of the trials in which sipuleucel-T demonstrated a 4-month survival 
benefit. Previously unpublished data from the sipuleucel-T trials show worse 
overall survival in older vs younger patients in the placebo groups, which have 
not been shown previously to be prognostic for survival in castration-resistant 
prostate cancer patients receiving chemotherapy. Because two-thirds of the cells 
harvested from placebo patients, but not from the sipuleucel-T arm, were frozen 
and not reinfused, a detrimental effect of this large repeated cell loss 
provides a potential alternative explanation for the survival "benefit." Patient 
safety depends on adequately addressing this alternative explanation for the 
trial results.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djr514
PMCID: PMC3283534
PMID: 22232132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]