1. Genes Immun. 2012 Jun;13(4):321-7. doi: 10.1038/gene.2011.88. Epub 2012 Jan
12.

Macrophage-stimulating protein polymorphism rs3197999 is associated with a gain 
of function: implications for inflammatory bowel disease.

HÃ¤user F(1), Deyle C, Berard D, Neukirch C, Glowacki C, Bickmann JK, Wenzel JJ, 
Lackner KJ, Rossmann H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical 
Centre Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, the two main types of inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD), were reported to be associated with a variety of genetic 
polymorphisms. A subset of these polymorphisms was identified in both diseases 
and only three of them were found in primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). 
rs3197999 (Arg689Cys) located in the MST1 gene is one of the most convincingly 
replicated IBD/PSC-associated polymorphisms but its functional consequences have 
not been investigated, yet. We expressed both MST1 gene variants (Arg(689) 
(MSP(wt)) and Cys(689) (MSP(mut)) in a eukaryotic cell system and compared their 
stimulatory effects on macrophage-like THP-1 cells. Except for the rate of 
apoptosis that remained unchanged, MSP(mut) significantly increased the 
stimulatory effect of MSP (macrophage-stimulating protein) on chemotaxis and 
proliferation by THP-1 cells, indicating a gain of function associated with the 
Arg689Cys exchange. A broad set of evidence reported previously suggests that 
pro-inflammatory changes in macrophage function have a major role in the 
initiation of the inflammatory process in IBD and PSC. Therefore, the gain of 
function observed with rs3197999 in MST1 might provide a cellular mechanism for 
the consistent association of this polymorphism with an increased risk for IBD 
and PSC.

DOI: 10.1038/gene.2011.88
PMID: 22237417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]