1. J Mol Biol. 2012 Mar 2;416(4):495-502. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.12.050. Epub
2012  Jan 8.

Engineering domain-swapped binding interfaces by mutually exclusive folding.

Ha JH(1), Karchin JM, Walker-Kopp N, Huang LS, Berry EA, Loh SN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, State University of New 
York Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

Domain swapping is a mechanism for forming protein dimers and oligomers with 
high specificity. It is distinct from other forms of oligomerization in that the 
binding interface is formed by reciprocal exchange of polypeptide segments. 
Swapping plays a physiological role in protein-protein recognition, and it can 
also potentially be exploited as a mechanism for controlled self-assembly. Here, 
we demonstrate that domain-swapped interfaces can be engineered by inserting one 
protein into a surface loop of another protein. The key to facilitating a domain 
swap is to destabilize the protein when it is monomeric but not when it is 
oligomeric. We achieve this condition by employing the "mutually exclusive 
folding" design to apply conformational stress to the monomeric state. Ubiquitin 
(Ub) is inserted into one of six surface loops of barnase (Bn). The 38-Å 
amino-to-carboxy-terminal distance of Ub stresses the Bn monomer, causing it to 
split at the point of insertion. The 2.2-Å X-ray structure of one insertion 
variant reveals that strain is relieved by intermolecular folding with an 
identically unfolded Bn domain, resulting in a domain-swapped polymer. All six 
constructs oligomerize, suggesting that inserting Ub into each surface loop of 
Bn results in a similar domain-swapping event. Binding affinity can be tuned by 
varying the length of the peptide linkers used to join the two proteins, which 
modulates the extent of stress. Engineered, swapped proteins have the potential 
to be used to fabricate "smart" biomaterials, or as binding modules from which 
to assemble heterologous, multi-subunit protein complexes.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.12.050
PMCID: PMC3288482
PMID: 22245575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]