1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29898. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029898. Epub 2012 Jan
5.

Type II heat-labile enterotoxins from 50 diverse Escherichia coli isolates 
belong almost exclusively to the LT-IIc family and may be prophage encoded.

Jobling MG(1), Holmes RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, Colorado, United States of America. michael.jobling@ucdenver.edu

Some enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) produce a type II heat-labile 
enterotoxin (LT-II) that activates adenylate cyclase in susceptible cells but is 
not neutralized by antisera against cholera toxin or type I heat-labile 
enterotoxin (LT-I). LT-I variants encoded by plasmids in ETEC from humans and 
pigs have amino acid sequences that are â‰¥ 95% identical. In contrast, LT-II 
toxins are chromosomally encoded and are much more diverse. Early studies 
characterized LT-IIa and LT-IIb variants, but a novel LT-IIc was reported 
recently. Here we characterized the LT-II encoding loci from 48 additional ETEC 
isolates. Two encoded LT-IIa, none encoded LT-IIb, and 46 encoded highly related 
variants of LT-IIc. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that the predicted LT-IIc 
toxins encoded by these loci could be assigned to 6 subgroups. The loci 
corresponding to individual toxins within each subgroup had DNA sequences that 
were more than 99% identical. The LT-IIc subgroups appear to have arisen by 
multiple recombinational events between progenitor loci encoding LT-IIc1- and 
LT-IIc3-like variants. All loci from representative isolates encoding the 
LT-IIa, LT-IIb, and each subgroup of LT-IIc enterotoxins are preceded by 
highly-related genes that are between 80 and 93% identical to predicted phage 
lysozyme genes. DNA sequences immediately following the B genes differ 
considerably between toxin subgroups, but all are most closely related to 
genomic sequences found in predicted prophages. Together these data suggest that 
the LT-II loci are inserted into lambdoid type prophages that may or may not be 
infectious. These findings raise the possibility that production of LT-II 
enterotoxins by ETEC may be determined by phage conversion and may be activated 
by induction of prophage, in a manner similar to control of production of 
Shiga-like toxins by converting phages in isolates of enterohemmorhagic E. coli.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029898
PMCID: PMC3252337
PMID: 22242186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.