1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029645. Epub 2012 Jan
12.

Spatial modeling of vesicle transport and the cytoskeleton: the challenge of 
hitting the right road.

Klann M(1), Koeppl H, Reuss M.

Author information:
(1)Automatic Control Laboratory, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland. mklann@control.ee.ethz.ch

The membrane trafficking machinery provides a transport and sorting system for 
many cellular proteins. We propose a mechanistic agent-based computer simulation 
to integrate and test the hypothesis of vesicle transport embedded into a 
detailed model cell. The method tracks both the number and location of the 
vesicles. Thus both the stochastic properties due to the low numbers and the 
spatial aspects are preserved. The underlying molecular interactions that 
control the vesicle actions are included in a multi-scale manner based on the 
model of Heinrich and Rapoport (2005). By adding motor proteins we can improve 
the recycling process of SNAREs and model cell polarization. Our model also 
predicts that coat molecules should have a high turnover at the compartment 
membranes, while the turnover of motor proteins has to be slow. The modular 
structure of the underlying model keeps it tractable despite the overall 
complexity of the vesicle system. We apply our model to receptor-mediated 
endocytosis and show how a polarized cytoskeleton structure leads to polarized 
distributions in the plasma membrane both of SNAREs and the Ste2p receptor in 
yeast. In addition, we can couple signal transduction and membrane trafficking 
steps in one simulation, which enables analyzing the effect of receptor-mediated 
endocytosis on signaling.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029645
PMCID: PMC3257240
PMID: 22253752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.