1. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Jan;8(1):e1002485. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002485. Epub 
2012 Jan 12.

The bZIP transcription factor Rca1p is a central regulator of a novel CO₂ 
sensing pathway in yeast.

Cottier F(1), Raymond M, Kurzai O, Bolstad M, Leewattanapasuk W, Jiménez-López 
C, Lorenz MC, Sanglard D, Váchová L, Pavelka N, Palková Z, Mühlschlegel FA.

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, United Kingdom.

Like many organisms the fungal pathogen Candida albicans senses changes in the 
environmental CO(2) concentration. This response involves two major proteins: 
adenylyl cyclase and carbonic anhydrase (CA). Here, we demonstrate that CA 
expression is tightly controlled by the availability of CO(2) and identify the 
bZIP transcription factor Rca1p as the first CO(2) regulator of CA expression in 
yeast. We show that Rca1p upregulates CA expression during contact with 
mammalian phagocytes and demonstrate that serine 124 is critical for Rca1p 
signaling, which occurs independently of adenylyl cyclase. ChIP-chip analysis 
and the identification of Rca1p orthologs in the model yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae (Cst6p) point to the broad significance of this novel pathway in 
fungi. By using advanced microscopy we visualize for the first time the impact 
of CO(2) build-up on gene expression in entire fungal populations with an 
exceptional level of detail. Our results present the bZIP protein Rca1p as the 
first fungal regulator of carbonic anhydrase, and reveal the existence of an 
adenylyl cyclase independent CO(2) sensing pathway in yeast. Rca1p appears to 
regulate cellular metabolism in response to CO(2) availability in environments 
as diverse as the phagosome, yeast communities or liquid culture.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002485
PMCID: PMC3257301
PMID: 22253597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.