1. Nature. 2012 Jan 25;482(7384):241-5. doi: 10.1038/nature10752.

Gated regulation of CRAC channel ion selectivity by STIM1.

McNally BA(1), Somasundaram A, Yamashita M, Prakriya M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern 
University School of Medicine, 303 E Chicago Avenue, Ward 8-296, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611, USA.

Two defining functional features of ion channels are ion selectivity and channel 
gating. Ion selectivity is generally considered an immutable property of the 
open channel structure, whereas gating involves transitions between open and 
closed channel states, typically without changes in ion selectivity. In 
store-operated Ca(2+) release-activated Ca(2+) (CRAC) channels, the molecular 
mechanism of channel gating by the CRAC channel activator, stromal interaction 
molecule 1 (STIM1), remains unknown. CRAC channels are distinguished by a very 
high Ca(2+) selectivity and are instrumental in generating sustained 
intracellular calcium concentration elevations that are necessary for gene 
expression and effector function in many eukaryotic cells. Here we probe the 
central features of the STIM1 gating mechanism in the human CRAC channel 
protein, ORAI1, and identify V102, a residue located in the extracellular region 
of the pore, as a candidate for the channel gate. Mutations at V102 produce 
constitutively active CRAC channels that are open even in the absence of STIM1. 
Unexpectedly, although STIM1-free V102 mutant channels are not Ca(2+)-selective, 
their Ca(2+) selectivity is dose-dependently boosted by interactions with STIM1. 
Similar enhancement of Ca(2+) selectivity is also seen in wild-type ORAI1 
channels by increasing the number of STIM1 activation domains that are directly 
tethered to ORAI1 channels, or by increasing the relative expression of 
full-length STIM1. Thus, exquisite Ca(2+) selectivity is not an intrinsic 
property of CRAC channels but rather a tuneable feature that is bestowed on 
otherwise non-selective ORAI1 channels by STIM1. Our results demonstrate that 
STIM1-mediated gating of CRAC channels occurs through an unusual mechanism in 
which permeation and gating are closely coupled.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10752
PMCID: PMC3276717
PMID: 22278058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]