1. Oncogene. 2012 Dec 13;31(50):5144-52. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.1. Epub 2012 Feb
13.

A proprotein convertase/MMP-14 proteolytic cascade releases a novel 40â€‰kDa 
vasculostatin from tumor suppressor BAI1.

Cork SM(1), Kaur B, Devi NS, Cooper L, Saltz JH, Sandberg EM, Kaluz S, Van Meir 
EG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Laboratory of Molecular Neuro-Oncology, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor 1 (BAI1), an orphan G protein-coupled 
receptor-type seven transmembrane protein, was recently found mutated or 
silenced in multiple human cancers and can interfere with tumor growth when 
overexpressed. Yet, little is known about its regulation and the molecular 
mechanisms through which this novel tumor suppressor exerts its anti-cancer 
effects. Here, we demonstrate that the N terminus of BAI1 is cleaved 
extracellularly to generate a truncated receptor and a 40-kDa fragment 
(Vasculostatin-40) that inhibits angiogenesis. We demonstrate that this novel 
proteolytic processing event depends on a two-step cascade of protease 
activation: proprotein convertases, primarily furin, activate latent matrix 
metalloproteinase-14, which then directly cleaves BAI1 to release the bioactive 
fragment. These findings significantly augment our knowledge of BAI1 by showing 
a novel post-translational mechanism regulating BAI1 activity through 
cancer-associated proteases, have important implications for BAI1 function and 
regulation, and present novel opportunities for therapy of cancer and other 
vascular diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.1
PMCID: PMC3355202
PMID: 22330140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest. The authors declare they 
have no competing interests.