1. Mol Immunol. 2012 Apr;50(4):185-92. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.12.010. Epub
2012  Feb 13.

Putative sequences on Ro60 three-dimensional structure accessible for 
4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE) modification compared to in vitro HNE modification of 
Ro60 sequences.

Kurien BT(1), D'Souza A, Terzyan S, Scofield RH.

Author information:
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma, OK 73104, USA.

We have previously reported accelerated acquisition of new autoreactivity upon 
immunization with 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE)-modified Ro60, as well as 
differential induction of lupus or Sjögren's syndrome by immunization with Ro60 
containing varying amounts of HNE. Since the number of HNE molecules on Ro60 
appears to be important, we hypothesized that specific sequences on Ro60 are 
targets for HNE-modification. Using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) we have also 
shown intramolecular protein-protein interaction between Ro60 and Ro multiple 
antigenic peptides (MAPs). We also hypothesized that intramolecular 
protein-protein interaction would be abolished by HNE-modification. To test this 
hypotheses we investigated (a) the epitopes of Ro60, using 19 Ro MAPs in an in 
vitro assay (involving HNE-modification of MAPs following immobilization on 
ELISA plates) to identify targets of HNE modification on Ro60 and (b) the 
protein-protein interaction between unmodified Ro60 MAPs, immobilized on the 
sensor surface of BIAcore, and unmodified Ro60 or HNE-modified Ro60 using SPR. 
New data obtained with SPR strengthens our earlier observation that immunization 
with HNE-Ro60 induces a stronger response. Unmodified Ro60 bound to several Ro60 
MAPs through protein-protein interaction analyzed using SPR. This interaction 
was totally abrogated using HNE-modified Ro60 suggesting that sequences on Ro 
had become modified with HNE. When 19 Ro60 MAPs were modified in vitro with HNE, 
it was found that 10/19 MAPs significantly bound HNE covalently (p<0.001 
compared to MAPs binding HNE poorly). The amino acid sequences 126-137, 166-272 
and 401-495 on Ro60 were strongly HNE modified. Using computational model system 
based on the recently published crystal structure for Ro60 enabled us to 
identify regions on the Ro60 molecule represented by the HNE-modified Ro MAPs, 
which are part of the exposed tertiary structure of the Ro60 protein.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.12.010
PMCID: PMC8459514
PMID: 22336572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]