1. Nature. 2012 Feb 15;482(7386):519-23. doi: 10.1038/nature10810.

The microRNA miR-34 modulates ageing and neurodegeneration in Drosophila.

Liu N(1), Landreh M, Cao K, Abe M, Hendriks GJ, Kennerdell JR, Zhu Y, Wang LS, 
Bonini NM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19104, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 Feb 28;13(4):222. doi: 10.1038/nrg3205.
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012 Mar 07;13(4):222. doi: 10.1038/nrn3215.

Human neurodegenerative diseases have the temporal hallmark of afflicting the 
elderly population. Ageing is one of the most prominent factors to influence 
disease onset and progression, yet little is known about the molecular pathways 
that connect these processes. To understand this connection it is necessary to 
identify the pathways that functionally integrate ageing, chronic maintenance of 
the brain and modulation of neurodegenerative disease. MicroRNAs (miRNA) are 
emerging as critical factors in gene regulation during development; however, 
their role in adult-onset, age-associated processes is only beginning to be 
revealed. Here we report that the conserved miRNA miR-34 regulates 
age-associated events and long-term brain integrity in Drosophila, providing a 
molecular link between ageing and neurodegeneration. Fly mir-34 expression 
exhibits adult-onset, brain-enriched and age-modulated characteristics. Whereas 
mir-34 loss triggers a gene profile of accelerated brain ageing, late-onset 
brain degeneration and a catastrophic decline in survival, mir-34 upregulation 
extends median lifespan and mitigates neurodegeneration induced by human 
pathogenic polyglutamine disease protein. Some of the age-associated effects of 
miR-34 require adult-onset translational repression of Eip74EF, an essential ETS 
domain transcription factor involved in steroid hormone pathways. Our studies 
indicate that miRNA-dependent pathways may have an impact on adult-onset, 
age-associated events by silencing developmental genes that later have a 
deleterious influence on adult life cycle and disease, and highlight fly miR-34 
as a key miRNA with a role in this process.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10810
PMCID: PMC3326599
PMID: 22343898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]