1. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Mar 15;175(6):479-87. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwr430. Epub 2012 
Feb 20.

Association between total number of deaths, diabetes mellitus, incident cancers, 
and haplotypes in chromosomal region 8q24 in a prospective study.

Guarrera S(1), Ricceri F, Polidoro S, Sacerdote C, Allione A, Rosa F, Voglino F, 
Critelli R, Russo A, Vineis P, Matullo G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, Universityof Torino, 
Torino, Italy. guiseppe.matullo@unito.it

Comment in
    Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Mar 15;175(6):488-91. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwr429.

The 8q24 region is a gene desert, although chromosomal aberrations and somatic 
amplification involving this region, including translocations involving the 
protooncogene c-MYC, have been frequently reported in people with cancer. To 
investigate the role of variants in 8q24 region, the authors analyzed data from 
a prospective study (n = 10,372 participants who were followed for 11 years) in 
which a large number of health events (>1,500) occurred (1993-1998). They 
genotyped all subjects for 5 candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(rs672888, rs1447295, rs9642880, rs16901979, and rs6983267) that were identified 
in previous genome-wide scans. Although significant associations with individual 
single nucleotide polymorphisms were small in magnitude, the authors observed 
higher increases in the risks of different types of cancer with specific 
haplotypes, particularly when subjects were homozygous for the haplotype: for 
breast cancer and homozygotes for haplotype CAGCT, hazard ratio = 3.40, 95% 
confidence interval: 1.24, 9.21; for prostate cancer and grouped rare 
haplotypes, hazard ratio = 7.43, 95% confidence interval: 3.00, 18.37; and for 
brain cancer and homozygotes for haplotype CGGCT, hazard ratio = 13.48, 95% 
confidence interval: 3.00, 59.53. Significant associations were also observed 
between haplotypes and deaths from cardiovascular diseases and cerebrovascular 
diseases; the most stable association was between homozygotes for haplotypes 
CGTCG and CAGCT and total deaths in men (hazard ratio = 3.5, 95% confidence 
interval: 1.8, 6.9, and hazard ratio = 2.8, 95% confidence interval: 1.3, 6.4, 
respectively). In conclusion, the authors have observed a strong pleiotropic 
effect of the 8q24 region in a large prospective study. This observation can 
shed light on the mechanisms underlying reported associations between 8q24 
variants and disparate chronic diseases.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwr430
PMID: 22350583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]