1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32000. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032000. Epub 2012 Feb
21.

Challenges in whole exome sequencing: an example from hereditary deafness.

Sirmaci A(1), Edwards YJ, Akay H, Tekin M.

Author information:
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.

Whole exome sequencing provides unprecedented opportunities to identify 
causative DNA variants in rare Mendelian disorders. Finding the responsible 
mutation via traditional methods in families with hearing loss is difficult due 
to a high degree of genetic heterogeneity. In this study we combined 
autozygosity mapping and whole exome sequencing in a family with 3 affected 
children having nonsyndromic hearing loss born to consanguineous parents. Two 
novel missense homozygous variants, c.508C>A (p.H170N) in GIPC3 and c.1328C>T 
(p.T443M) in ZNF57, were identified in the same âˆ¼6 Mb autozygous region on 
chromosome 19 in affected members of the family. Both variants co-segregated 
with the phenotype and were absent in 335 ethnicity-matched controls. Biallelic 
GIPC3 mutations have recently been reported to cause autosomal recessive 
nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss. Thus we conclude that the hearing loss 
in the family described in this report is caused by a novel missense mutation in 
GIPC3. Identified variant in GIPC3 had a low read depth, which was initially 
filtered out during the analysis leaving ZNF57 as the only potential causative 
gene. This study highlights some of the challenges in the analyses of whole 
exome data in the bid to establish the true causative variant in Mendelian 
disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032000
PMCID: PMC3283682
PMID: 22363784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.