1. BMC Genomics. 2011 Nov 30;12 Suppl 3(Suppl 3):S25. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2164-12-S3-S25. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Prioritizing disease candidate genes by a gene interconnectedness-based 
approach.

Hsu CL(1), Huang YH, Hsu CT, Yang UC.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 
City, Taiwan 11221, Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide disease-gene finding approaches may sometimes provide us 
with a long list of candidate genes. Since using pure experimental approaches to 
verify all candidates could be expensive, a number of network-based methods have 
been developed to prioritize candidates. Such tools usually have a set of 
parameters pre-trained using available network data. This means that re-training 
network-based tools may be required when existing biological networks are 
updated or when networks from different sources are to be tried.
RESULTS: We developed a parameter-free method, interconnectedness (ICN), to rank 
candidate genes by assessing the closeness of them to known disease genes in a 
network. ICN was tested using 1,993 known disease-gene associations and achieved 
a success rate of ~44% using a protein-protein interaction network under a test 
scenario of simulated linkage analysis. This performance is comparable with 
those of other well-known methods and ICN outperforms other methods when a 
candidate disease gene is not directly linked to known disease genes in a 
network. Interestingly, we show that a combined scoring strategy could enable 
ICN to achieve an even better performance (~50%) than other methods used alone.
CONCLUSIONS: ICN, a user-friendly method, can well complement other 
network-based methods in the context of prioritizing candidate disease genes.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-S3-S25
PMCID: PMC3333184
PMID: 22369140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]