1. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2012 Jan-Feb;26(1):12-7. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2012.26.3692.

HLA-DRA polymorphisms associated with risk of nasal polyposis in asthmatic 
patients.

Kim JH(1), Park BL, Cheong HS, Pasaje CF, Bae JS, Park JS, Uh ST, Kim YH, Kim 
MK, Choi IS, Choi BW, Park CS, Shin HD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Nasal polyps, part of the aspirin triad symptoms, are edematous 
protrusions arising from the mucosa of the nasal sinuses. Although the causative 
factors and pathogenesis of the polyps are unknown, the significant effect of 
human leukocyte antigen-DR (HLA-DR) expression in nasal polyps and genetic 
associations of the major histocompatibility complex class II, DR alpha 
(HLA-DRA) with immune-mediated diseases have been revealed.
METHODS: To investigate the associations of HLA-DRA polymorphisms with nasal 
polyposis in asthmatic patients and in aspirin-hypersensitive subgroups, 22 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in a total of 467 
asthmatic patients including 158 nasal polyp-positive and 309 polyp-negative 
subjects.
RESULTS: Statistical analysis showed that four SNPs (p = 0.0005-0.02; Pcorr = 
0.009-0.033) and one haplotype (p = 0.002; Pcorr = 0.029) were significantly 
associated with the presence of nasal polyposis in asthmatic patients. In 
further analysis, although significant signals disappeared after corrections for 
multiple testing, two HLA-DRA polymorphisms (rs9268644C>A, rs3129878A>C) were 
found to be potential markers for nasal polyp development in aspirin-tolerant 
asthma (p = 0.005 and 0.007, respectively) compared with the aspirin-exacerbated 
respiratory disease (p > 0.05) subgroup. In silico analysis predicted major "C" 
allele of rs14004C>A in 5'-untranslated region as a potential binding site for 
regulatory glucocorticoid receptor. In addition, sequence nearby rs1051336G>A is 
suspected to be a pyrimidine-rich element that affects mRNA stability.
CONCLUSION: Despite the need for replication in larger cohorts and/or functional 
evaluations, our findings suggest that HLA-DRA polymorphisms might contribute to 
nasal polyposis susceptibility in patients with asthma.

DOI: 10.2500/ajra.2012.26.3692
PMID: 22391069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]