1. Extremophiles. 2012 May;16(3):363-76. doi: 10.1007/s00792-012-0435-2. Epub
2012  Mar 4.

Plasmid pP62BP1 isolated from an Arctic Psychrobacter sp. strain carries two 
highly homologous type II restriction-modification systems and a putative 
organic sulfate metabolism operon.

Lasek R(1), Dziewit L, Bartosik D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacterial Genetics, Faculty of Biology, Institute of 
Microbiology, University of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, 02-096, Warsaw, Poland.

The complete nucleotide sequence of plasmid pP62BP1 (34,467Â bp), isolated from 
Arctic Psychrobacter sp. DAB_AL62B, was determined and annotated. The conserved 
plasmid backbone is composed of several genetic modules, including a replication 
system (REP) with similarities to the REP region of the iteron-containing 
plasmid pPS10 of Pseudomonas syringae. The additional genetic load of pP62BP1 
includes two highly related type II restriction-modification systems and a set 
of genes (slfRCHSL) encoding enzymes engaged in the metabolism of organic 
sulfates, plus a putative transcriptional regulator (SlfR) of the AraC family. 
The pP62BP1 slf locus has a compact and unique structure. It is predicted that 
the enzymes SlfC, SlfH, SlfS and SlfL carry out a chain of reactions leading to 
the transformation of alkyl sulfates into acyl-CoA, with dodecyl sulfate (SDS) 
as a possible starting substrate. Comparative analysis of the nucleotide 
sequences of pP62BP1 and other Psychrobacter spp. plasmids revealed their 
structural diversity. However, the presence of a few highly conserved DNA 
segments in pP62BP1, plasmid 1 of P. cryohalolentis K5 and pRWF-101 of 
Psychrobacter sp. PRwf-1 is indicative of recombinational shuffling of genetic 
information, and is evidence of lateral gene transfer in the Arctic environment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00792-012-0435-2
PMCID: PMC3346939
PMID: 22392282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]