1. Vet Microbiol. 2012 Jul 6;158(1-2):60-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.02.014.
Epub  2012 Feb 17.

Identification of swine H1N2/pandemic H1N1 reassortant influenza virus in pigs, 
United States.

Ali A(1), Khatri M, Wang L, Saif YM, Lee CW.

Author information:
(1)Ohio State University, Food Animal Health Research Program, Ohio Agricultural 
Research and Development Center, 1680 Madison Avenue, Wooster, OH 44691, USA.

In October and November 2010, novel H1N2 reassortant influenza viruses were 
identified from pigs showing mild respiratory signs that included cough and 
depression. Sequence and phylogenetic analysis showed that the novel H1N2 
reassortants possesses HA and NA genes derived from recent H1N2 swine isolates 
similar to those isolated from Midwest. Compared to the majority of reported 
reassortants, both viruses preserved human-like host restrictive and putative 
antigenic sites in their HA and NA genes. The four internal genes, PB2, PB1, PA, 
and NS were similar to the contemporary swine triple reassortant viruses' 
internal genes (TRIG). Interestingly, NP and M genes of the novel reassortants 
were derived from the 2009 pandemic H1N1. The NP and M proteins of the two 
isolates demonstrated one (E16G) and four (G34A, D53E, I109T, and V313I) amino 
acid changes in the M2 and NP proteins, respectively. Similar amino acid changes 
were also noticed upon incorporation of the 2009 pandemic H1N1 NP in other 
reassortant viruses reported in the U.S. Thus the role of those amino acids in 
relation to host adaptation need to be further investigated. The reassortments 
of pandemic H1N1 with swine influenza viruses and the potential of interspecies 
transmission of these reassortants from swine to other species including human 
indicate the importance of systematic surveillance of swine population to 
determine the origin, the prevalence of similar reassortants in the U.S. and 
their impact on both swine production and public health.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.02.014
PMID: 22397932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]