1. Biochemistry. 2012 Apr 3;51(13):2950-7. doi: 10.1021/bi300230h. Epub 2012 Mar 
21.

Role of Gly117 in the cation/melibiose symport of MelB of Salmonella 
typhimurium.

Guan L(1), Jakkula SV, Hodkoff AA, Su Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Physiology & Molecular Biophysics, Center for Membrane 
Protein Research, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas 
79430, USA. Lan.Guan@ttuhsc.edu

The melibiose permease of Salmonella typhimurium (MelB(St)) catalyzes symport of 
melibiose with Na(+), Li(+), or H(+), and bioinformatics analysis indicates that 
a conserved Gly117 (helix IV) is part of the Na(+)-binding site. We mutated 
Gly117 to Ala, Pro, Trp, or Arg; the effects on melibiose transport and binding 
of cosubstrates depended on the physical-chemical properties of the side chain. 
Compared with WT MelB(St), the Gly117 → Ala mutant exhibited little difference 
in either cosubstrate binding or stimulation of melibiose transport by Na(+) or 
Li(+), but all other mutations reduced melibiose active transport and efflux, 
and decreased the apparent affinity for Na(+). The bulky Trp at position 117 
caused the greatest inhibition of melibiose binding, and Gly117 → Arg yielded 
less than a 4-fold decrease in the apparent affinity for melibiose at saturating 
Na(+) or Li(+) concentration. Remarkably, the mutant Gly117 → Arg catalyzed 
melibiose exchange in the presence of Na(+) or Li(+), but did not catalyze 
melibiose translocation involving net flux of the coupling cation, indicating 
that sugar is released prior to release of the coupling cation. Taken together, 
the findings are consistent with the notion that Gly117 plays an important role 
in cation binding and translocation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi300230h
PMCID: PMC3334291
PMID: 22413840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]