1. Neurology. 2012 May 29;78(22):1714-20. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182556c05. Epub
 2012 Mar 28.

Mutations in the tail domain of DYNC1H1 cause dominant spinal muscular atrophy.

Harms MB(1), Ori-McKenney KM, Scoto M, Tuck EP, Bell S, Ma D, Masi S, Allred P, 
Al-Lozi M, Reilly MM, Miller LJ, Jani-Acsadi A, Pestronk A, Shy ME, Muntoni F, 
Vallee RB, Baloh RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hope Center for Neurological Disease,Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. robert.baloh@csmc.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2012 May 29;78(22):1706-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182556c1f.
    J Neurol. 2012 Jul;259(7):1509-11. doi: 10.1007/s00415-012-6587-2.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the gene responsible for 14q32-linked dominant spinal 
muscular atrophy with lower extremity predominance (SMA-LED, OMIM 158600).
METHODS: Target exon capture and next generation sequencing was used to analyze 
the 73 genes in the 14q32 linkage interval in 3 SMA-LED family members. 
Candidate gene sequencing in additional dominant SMA families used PCR and 
pooled target capture methods. Patient fibroblasts were biochemically analyzed.
RESULTS: Regional exome sequencing of all candidate genes in the 14q32 interval 
in the original SMA-LED family identified only one missense mutation that 
segregated with disease state-a mutation in the tail domain of DYNC1H1 (I584L). 
Sequencing of DYNC1H1 in 32 additional probands with lower extremity predominant 
SMA found 2 additional heterozygous tail domain mutations (K671E and Y970C), 
confirming that multiple different mutations in the same domain can cause a 
similar phenotype. Biochemical analysis of dynein purified from patient-derived 
fibroblasts demonstrated that the I584L mutation dominantly disrupted dynein 
complex stability and function.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that mutations in the tail domain of the heavy chain 
of cytoplasmic dynein (DYNC1H1) cause spinal muscular atrophy and provide 
experimental evidence that a human DYNC1H1 mutation disrupts dynein complex 
assembly and function. DYNC1H1 mutations were recently found in a family with 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (type 2O) and in a child with mental retardation. 
Both of these phenotypes show partial overlap with the spinal muscular atrophy 
patients described here, indicating that dynein dysfunction is associated with a 
range of phenotypes in humans involving neuronal development and maintenance.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182556c05
PMCID: PMC3359582
PMID: 22459677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]