1. BMC Cancer. 2012 Apr 2;12:132. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-132.

Androgen receptor expression predicts breast cancer survival: the role of 
genetic and epigenetic events.

Peters KM(1), Edwards SL, Nair SS, French JD, Bailey PJ, Salkield K, Stein S, 
Wagner S, Francis GD, Clark SJ, Brown MA.

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, 
St, Lucia 4072 Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer outcome, including response to therapy, risk of 
metastasis and survival, is difficult to predict using currently available 
methods, highlighting the urgent need for more informative biomarkers. Androgen 
receptor (AR) has been implicated in breast carcinogenesis however its potential 
to be an informative biomarker has yet to be fully explored. In this study, AR 
protein levels were determined in a cohort of 73 Grade III invasive breast 
ductal adenocarcinomas.
METHODS: The levels of Androgen receptor protein in a cohort of breast tumour 
samples was determined by immunohistochemistry and the results were compared 
with clinical characteristics, including survival. The role of defects in the 
regulation of Androgen receptor gene expression were examined by mutation and 
methylation screening of the 5' end of the gene, reporter assays of the 5' and 
3' end of the AR gene, and searching for miRNAs that may regulate AR gene 
expression.
RESULTS: AR was expressed in 56% of tumours and expression was significantly 
inversely associated with 10-year survival (P = 0.004). An investigation into 
the mechanisms responsible for the loss of AR expression revealed that 
hypermethylation of the AR promoter is associated with loss of AR expression in 
breast cancer cells but not in primary breast tumours. In AR negative breast 
tumours, mutation screening identified the same mutation (T105A) in the 5'UTR of 
two AR negative breast cancer patients but not reported in the normal human 
population. Reporter assay analysis of this mutation however found no evidence 
for a negative impact on AR 5'UTR activity. The role of miR-124 in regulating AR 
expression was also investigated, however no evidence for this was found.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the potential for AR expression to be an 
informative biomarker for breast cancer survival and sets the scene for a more 
comprehensive investigation of the molecular basis of this phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-132
PMCID: PMC3349557
PMID: 22471922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]