1. Biochemistry. 2012 May 8;51(18):3911-8. doi: 10.1021/bi3001853. Epub 2012 Apr 
25.

Probing the caveolin-1 P132L mutant: critical insights into its oligomeric 
behavior and structure.

Rieth MD(1), Lee J, Glover KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Lehigh University, 6 E. Packer Ave, Bethlehem, 
Pennsylvania 18015, USA.

Caveolin-1 is the most important protein found in caveolae, which are cell 
surface invaginations of the plasma membrane that act as signaling platforms. A 
single point mutation in the transmembrane domain of caveolin-1 (proline 132 to 
leucine) has deleterious effects on caveolae formation in vivo and has been 
implicated in various disease states, particularly aggressive breast cancers. 
Using a combination of gel filtration chromatography and analytical 
ultracentrifugation, we found that a fully functional construct of caveolin-1 
(Cav1(62-178)) was a monomer in dodecylphosphocholine micelles. In contrast, the 
P132L mutant of Cav1(62-178) was dimeric. To explore the dimerization of the 
P132L mutant further, various truncated constructs (Cav1(82-178), Cav1(96-178), 
Cav1(62-136), Cav1(82-136), Cav1(96-136)) were prepared which revealed that 
oligomerization occurs in the transmembrane domain (residues 96-136) of 
caveolin-1. To characterize the mutant structurally, solution-state NMR 
experiments in lyso-myristoylphosphatidylglycerol were undertaken of the 
Cav1(96-136) P132L mutant. Chemical shift analysis revealed that, compared to 
the wild-type, helix 2 in the transmembrane domain was lengthened by four 
residues (wild-type, residues 111-129; mutant, residues 111-133), which 
corresponds to an extra turn in helix 2 of the mutant. Lastly, point mutations 
at position 132 of Cav1(62-178) (P132A, P132I, P132V, P132G, P132W, P132F) 
revealed that no other hydrophobic amino acid can preserve the monomeric state 
of Cav1(62-178), which indicates that proline 132 is critical in supporting 
proper caveolin-1 behavior.

DOI: 10.1021/bi3001853
PMCID: PMC3396432
PMID: 22506673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]