1. Eur Heart J. 2012 Sep;33(18):2331-41. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs058. Epub 2012
 Apr 14.

Orthostatic hypotension and novel blood pressure-associated gene variants: 
Genetics of Postural Hemodynamics (GPH) Consortium.

Fedorowski A(1), Franceschini N, Brody J, Liu C, Verwoert GC, Boerwinkle E, 
Couper D, Rice KM, Rotter JI, Mattace-Raso F, Uitterlinden A, Hofman A, Almgren 
P, Sjögren M, Hedblad B, Larson MG, Newton-Cheh C, Wang TJ, Rose KM, Psaty BM, 
Levy D, Witteman J, Melander O.

Author information:
(1)Center for Emergency Medicine, Skåne University Hospital, 205 02 Malmö, 
Sweden. artur.fedorowski@med.lu.se

AIMS: Orthostatic hypotension (OH), an independent predictor of mortality and 
cardiovascular events, strongly correlates with hypertension. Recent genome-wide 
studies have identified new loci influencing blood pressure (BP) in populations, 
but their impact on OH remains unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 38 970 men and women of European ancestry from 
five population-based cohorts were included, of whom 2656 (6.8%) met the 
diagnostic criteria for OH (systolic/diastolic BP drop ≥ 20/10 mmHg within 3 min 
of standing). Thirty-one recently discovered BP-associated single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) were examined using an additive genetic model and the major 
allele as referent. Relations between OH, orthostatic systolic BP response, and 
genetic variants were assessed by inverse variance-weighted meta-analysis. We 
found Bonferroni adjusted (P < 0.0016) significant evidence for association 
between OH and the EBF1 locus (rs11953630, per-minor-allele odds ratio, 95% 
confidence interval: 0.90, 0.85-0.96; P = 0.001), and nominal evidence (P < 
0.05) for CYP17A1 (rs11191548: 0.85, 0.75-0.95; P = 0.005), and NPR3-C5orf23 
(rs1173771: 0.92, 0.87-0.98; P= 0.009) loci. Among subjects not taking 
BP-lowering drugs, three SNPs within the NPPA/NPPB locus were nominally 
associated with increased risk of OH (rs17367504: 1.13, 1.02-1.24; P = 0.02, 
rs198358: 1.10, 1.01-1.20; P = 0.04, and rs5068: 1.22, 1.04-1.43; P = 0.01). 
Moreover, an ADM variant was nominally associated with continuous orthostatic 
systolic BP response in the adjusted model (P= 0.04).
CONCLUSION: The overall association between common gene variants in BP loci and 
OH was generally weak and the direction of effect inconsistent with resting BP 
findings. These results suggest that OH and resting BP share few genetic 
components.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs058
PMCID: PMC3442958
PMID: 22504314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]