1. Caries Res. 2012;46(3):177-84. doi: 10.1159/000337282. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Genetic and environmental factors associated with dental caries in children: the 
Iowa Fluoride Study.

Wang X(1), Willing MC, Marazita ML, Wendell S, Warren JJ, Broffitt B, Smith B, 
Busch T, Lidral AC, Levy SM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Craniofacial and Dental Genetics, University of Pittsburgh Suite 
500 Bridgeside Point, 100 Technology Drive Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA. xiw23 @ 
pitt.edu

Dental caries remains the most common chronic childhood disease. Despite strong 
evidence of genetic components, there have been few studies of candidate genes 
and caries. In this analysis we tried to assess genetic and environmental 
factors contributing to childhood caries in the Iowa Fluoride Study. 
Environmental factors (age, sex, race, tooth-brushing frequencies and water 
fluoride level) and three dental caries scores (d(2)fs-total, 
d(2)fs-pit/fissure, and d(2)fs-smooth surface) were assessed in 575 unrelated 
children (mean age 5.2 years). Regression analyses were applied to assess 
environmental correlates. The Family-Based Association Test was used to test 
genetic associations for 23 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers in 7 
caries candidate genes on 333 Caucasian parent-child trios. We evaluated the 
associations between caries status and the level of both single and multiple 
SNPs (haplotype) respectively. Permutation procedure was performed for 
correction of inflated type I errors due to multiple testing. Age, 
tooth-brushing frequency and water fluoride level were significantly correlated 
to at least one carious score. Caries on pit and fissure surfaces was 
substantially higher than on smooth surfaces (61 vs. 39%). SNPs in three genes 
(DSPP, KLK4 and AQP5) showed consistent associations with protection against 
caries. Of note, KLK4 and AQP5 were also highlighted by subsequent haplotype 
analysis. Our results support the concept that genes can modify the 
susceptibility of caries in children. Replication analysis in independent 
cohorts is highly needed in order to verify the validity of our findings.

Copyright Â© 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000337282
PMCID: PMC3580152
PMID: 22508493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests All co-authors have no 
conflicts of interest.