1. Biochemistry. 2012 May 8;51(18):3819-26. doi: 10.1021/bi300078p. Epub 2012 Apr
 30.

A single tyrosine hydroxyl group almost entirely controls the NADPH specificity 
of Plasmodium falciparum ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase.

Baroni S(1), Pandini V, Vanoni MA, Aliverti A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology, Universit√† degli Studi 
di Milano, via Celoria 26, 20133 Milano, Italy.

Plasmodium falciparum ferredoxin-NADP(+) reductase (FNR) is a FAD-containing 
enzyme that, in addition to be a promising target of novel antimalarial drugs, 
represents an excellent model of plant-type FNRs. The cofactor specificity of 
FNRs depends on differences in both k(cat) and K(m) values for NADPH and NADH. 
Here, we report that deletion of the hydroxyl group of the conserved Y258 of P. 
falciparum FNR, which interacts with the 2'-phosphate group of NADPH, 
selectively decreased the k(cat) of the NADPH-dependent reaction by a factor of 
2 to match that of the NADH-dependent one. Rapid-reaction kinetics, active-site 
titrations with NADP(+), and anaerobic photoreduction experiments indicated that 
this effect may be the consequence of destabilization of the catalytically 
competent conformation of bound NADPH. Moreover, because the Y258F replacement 
increased the K(m) for NADPH 4-fold and decreased that for NADH 3-fold, it led 
to a drop in the ability of the enzyme to discriminate between the coenzymes 
from 70- to just 1.5-fold. The impact of the Y258F change was not affected by 
the presence of the H286Q mutation, which is known to enhance the catalytic 
activity of the enzyme. Our data highlight the major role played by the Y258 
hydroxyl group in determining the coenzyme specificity of P. falciparum FNR. 
From the general standpoint of engineering the kinetic properties of plant-type 
FNRs, although P. falciparum FNR is less strictly NADPH-dependent than its 
homologues, the almost complete abolishment of coenzyme selectivity reported 
here has never been accomplished before through a single mutation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi300078p
PMID: 22519987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]