1. Placenta. 2012 Jul;33(7):554-60. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2012.04.002. Epub
2012  Apr 23.

Tissue-wide overexpression of alpha-T-catenin results in aberrant trophoblast 
invasion but does not cause embryonic mortality in mice.

Tyberghein K(1), Goossens S, Haigh JJ, van Roy F, van Hengel J.

Author information:
(1)Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB, Technologiepark 927, 
B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.

Transcriptional activation of CTNNA3, encoding αT-catenin, by the Y153H mutated 
form of the human STOX1 transcription factor was proposed to be responsible for 
altered fetal trophoblast invasion into the maternal endometrium during 
placentation in pre-eclampsia. Here we have generated a mouse model to 
investigate the in vivo effects of ectopic αT-catenin expression on trophoblast 
invasion. Histological analysis was used to determine the invasive capacities of 
trophoblasts from transgenic embryos, as well as proliferation rates of 
spongiotrophoblasts in the junctional zone. Augmented expression of αT-catenin 
reduced the number of invading trophoblasts but did not cause embryonic 
mortality. The, αT-catenin positive cells could still invade into the decidual 
layer and migrated as deeply as wild-type trophoblasts. Furthermore, the 
junctional zone is enlarged in placentas of mice overexpressing αT-catenin due 
to hyperproliferation of the residing spongiotrophoblasts, suggesting a pivotal 
role of αT-catenin levels in the control of the proliferative versus invasive 
state of trophoblasts during placentation. Our study provides, for the first 
time, in vivo data on the effects of increased levels of αT-catenin in the 
placenta.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.placenta.2012.04.002
PMID: 22534068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]