1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e36124. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036124. Epub 2012 Apr
27.

BCAR1 protein plays important roles in carcinogenesis and predicts poor 
prognosis in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Huang W(1), Deng B, Wang RW, Tan QY, He Y, Jiang YG, Zhou JH.

Author information:
(1)Thoracic Surgery Department, Institute of Surgery Research, Daping Hospital, 
Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(8). 
doi:10.1371/annotation/384d93a8-eef6-406b-8903-c7009061b496.

OBJECTIVE: Our previous study suggested the potential clinical implications of 
BCAR1 in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (Mol Diagn Ther. 2011. 15(1): 
31-40). Herein, we aim to evaluate the predictive power of BCAR1 as a marker for 
poor prognosis in NSCLC cases, verify the carcinogenic roles of BCAR1 in the 
A549 lung adenocarcinoma cell line, and testify to the BCAR1/phospho-p38 axis.
METHODS: Between January 2006 and June 2010, there were a total of 182 patients 
with NSCLC (151 cases with available follow up data, and 31 cases lost to 
follow-up due to the invalid contact information). We inspected BCAR1, 
phospho-BCAR1(Tyr410), phospho-p38(Thr180/Tyr182) and p38 expression in NSCLC 
tissues and matched adjacent normal tissues by immunoblotting and IHC. After 
BCAR1 -RNA interference in A549 cells, we inspected the protein expression 
(BCAR1, phospho-BCAR1, phospho-p38 and p38) and performed cell biology 
experiments (cell growth, migration and cycle).
RESULTS: BCAR1 was overexpressed in NSCLC tissues (177/182) and cell lines (A549 
and Calu-3). However, it was not detected in the normal adjacent tissue in 161 
of the 182 cases. Higher BCAR1 levels were strongly associated with more poorly 
differentiated NSCLC and predicted poorer prognosis. BCAR1 knockdown caused cell 
growth arrest, cell migration inhibition and cell cycle arrest of A549 cells. 
Overexpression of BCAR1 was associated with activation of p38 in NSCLC cases, 
and BCAR1 knockdown caused reduction of phospho-p38 levels in A549 cells.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of BCAR1 is a predictor of poor prognosis in NSCLC 
and plays important carcinogenic roles in carcinogenesis, probably via 
activation of p38 MAPK. However, further investigations are required 
immediately.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036124
PMCID: PMC3338601
PMID: 22558353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.