1. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Apr;23(4):317-28. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.04.011. Epub 2012 May 4.

Caffeine regulates frontocorticostriatal dopamine transporter density and 
improves attention and cognitive deficits in an animal model of attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Pandolfo P(1), Machado NJ, Köfalvi A, Takahashi RN, Cunha RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Biological Science Center, Federal University of 
Santa Catarina, Florianopolis, Brazil. pablopandolfo@gmail.com

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) likely involves dopaminergic 
dysfunction in the frontal cortex and striatum, resulting in cognitive and motor 
abnormalities. Since both adenosine and dopamine modulation systems are tightly 
intertwined, we tested if caffeine (a non-selective adenosine receptor 
antagonist) attenuated the behavioral and neurochemical changes in adolescent 
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR, a validated ADHD animal model) compared to 
their control strain (Wistar Kyoto rats, WKY). SHR were hyperactive and had 
poorer performance in the attentional set-shifting and Y-maze paradigms and also 
displayed increased dopamine transporter (DAT) density and increased dopamine 
uptake in frontocortical and striatal terminals compared with WKY rats. Chronic 
caffeine treatment was devoid of effects in WKY rats while it improved memory 
and attention deficits and also normalized dopaminergic function in SHR. 
Additionally, we provide the first direct demonstration for the presence of 
adenosine A2A receptors (A2AR) in frontocortical nerve terminals, whose density 
was increased in SHR. These findings underscore the potential for caffeine 
treatment to normalize frontocortical dopaminergic function and to abrogate 
attention and cognitive changes characteristic of ADHD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.04.011
PMID: 22561003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]