1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36166. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036166. Epub 2012 May
2.

CNR1 genotype influences HDL-cholesterol response to change in dietary fat 
intake.

Silver HJ(1), Niswender KD, Keil CD, Jiang L, Feng Q, Chiu S, Krauss RM, Wilke 
RA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of 
Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United 
States of America. heidi.j.silver@vanderbilt.edu

BACKGROUND: Success in further reducing the burden of cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) is threatened by the increasing prevalence of obesity-related atherogenic 
dyslipidemia. HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) level is inversely correlated with CVD 
risk; each 1 mg/dl decrease in HDL-C is associated with a 6% reduction in risk. 
We previously showed that a common CNR1 haplotype, H3 (frequency 20%), is 
protective against the reduction in HDL-C that typically accompanies weight 
gain. In the present study, we extend that observation by reporting the effect 
of CNR1 haplotype on HDL-C response to modification of dietary fat intake in 
weight maintenance and weight loss.
METHODS: Six haplotype tagging SNPs that cover the CNR1 gene locus were 
genotyped in 590 adults of varying body mass index (cohort 1 is 411 males with 
BMI 18.5-30.0 kg/m(2); cohort 2 is 71 females with BMI18.5-30.0 kg/m(2); and 
cohort 3 is 108 females with BMI 30-39.9 kg/m(2)). Dietary intakes were modified 
so that fat intake in the "high fat" condition was 15-20% greater than in the 
"low fat" condition, and lipid profiles were compared between carriers versus 
noncarriers for each of the five commonly observed CNR1 haplotypes (H1-H5).
RESULTS: In normal to overweight subjects on eucaloric diets, the H3 haplotype 
was significantly associated with short-term high fat diet induced changes in 
HDL-C level in females (carriers 5.9 mg/dl>noncarriers, p = 0.007). The H3 
haplotype was also significantly associated with HDL-C level after 16 weeks on 
high fat calorie restricted diet in obese females (carriers 6.8 
mg/dl>noncarriers, p = 0.009).
CONCLUSION: Variability within the CNR1 gene locus contributes to gender-related 
differences in the HDL-cholesterol response to change in dietary fat intake. 
Functional characterization of this relationship in vitro may offer insights 
that potentially yield therapeutic guidance targeting dietary macronutrient 
composition, a direction much needed in the current epidemic of obesity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036166
PMCID: PMC3342253
PMID: 22567136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.