1. Age (Dordr). 2013 Jun;35(3):993-1005. doi: 10.1007/s11357-012-9408-8. Epub
2012  May 9.

Variations of the angiotensin II type 1 receptor gene are associated with 
extreme human longevity.

Benigni A(1), Orisio S, Noris M, Iatropoulos P, Castaldi D, Kamide K, Rakugi H, 
Arai Y, Todeschini M, Ogliari G, Imai E, Gondo Y, Hirose N, Mari D, Remuzzi G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological 
Research, Centro Anna Maria Astori, Science and Technology Park Kilometro Rosso, 
Via Stezzano 87, 24126, Bergamo, Italy.

Longevity phenotype in humans results from the influence of environmental and 
genetic factors. Few gene polymorphisms have been identified so far with a 
modest effect on lifespan leaving room for the search of other players in the 
longevity game. It has been recently demonstrated that targeted disruption of 
the mouse homolog of the human angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) gene 
(AGTR1) translates into marked prolongation of animal lifespan (Benigni et al., 
J Clin Invest 119(3):524-530, 2009). Based on the above study in mice, here we 
sought to search for AGTR1 variations associated to reduced AT1 receptor protein 
levels and to prolonged lifespan in humans. AGTR1 was sequenced in 173 Italian 
centenarians and 376 younger controls. A novel non-synonymous mutation was 
detected in a centenarian. Two polymorphisms in AGTR1 promoter, rs422858 and 
rs275653, in complete linkage disequilibrium, were significantly associated with 
the ability to attain extreme old age. We then replicated the study of rs275653 
in a large independent cohort of Japanese origin (598 centenarians and 
semi-supercentenarians, 422 younger controls) and indeed confirmed its 
association with exceptional old age. In combined analyses, rs275653 was 
associated to extreme longevity either at recessive model (P = 0.007, odds ratio 
(OR) 3.57) or at genotype level (P = 0.015). Significance was maintained after 
correcting for confounding factors. Fluorescence activated cell sorting analysis 
revealed that subjects homozygous for the minor allele of rs275653 had less 
AT1R-positive peripheral blood polymorphonuclear cells. Moreover, rs275653 was 
associated to lower blood pressure in centenarians. These findings highlight the 
role of AGTR1 as a possible candidate among longevity-enabling genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s11357-012-9408-8
PMCID: PMC3636412
PMID: 22569962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]