1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 22;287(26):21765-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.342022. Epub 
2012 May 8.

N-glycosylation determines ionic permeability and desensitization of the TRPV1 
capsaicin receptor.

Veldhuis NA(1), Lew MJ, Abogadie FC, Poole DP, Jennings EA, Ivanusic JJ, Eilers 
H, Bunnett NW, McIntyre P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
3010, Australia.

The balance of glycosylation and deglycosylation of ion channels can markedly 
influence their function and regulation. However, the functional importance of 
glycosylation of the TRPV1 receptor, a key sensor of pain-sensing nerves, is not 
well understood, and whether TRPV1 is glycosylated in neurons is unclear. We 
report that TRPV1 is N-glycosylated and that N-glycosylation is a major 
determinant of capsaicin-evoked desensitization and ionic permeability. Both 
N-glycosylated and unglycosylated TRPV1 was detected in extracts of peripheral 
sensory nerves by Western blotting. TRPV1 expressed in HEK-293 cells exhibited 
various degrees of glycosylation. A mutant of asparagine 604 (N604T) was not 
glycosylated but did not alter plasma membrane expression of TRPV1. 
Capsaicin-evoked increases in intracellular calcium ([Ca(2+)](i)) were sustained 
in wild-type TRPV1 HEK-293 cells but were rapidly desensitized in N604T TRPV1 
cells. There was marked cell-to-cell variability in capsaicin responses and 
desensitization between individual cells expressing wild-type TRPV1 but highly 
uniform responses in cells expressing N604T TRPV1, consistent with variable 
levels of glycosylation of the wild-type channel. These differences were also 
apparent when wild-type or N604T TRPV1-GFP fusion proteins were expressed in 
neurons from trpv1(-/-) mice. Capsaicin evoked a marked, concentration-dependent 
increase in uptake of the large cationic dye YO-PRO-1 in cells expressing 
wild-type TRPV1, indicative of loss of ion selectivity, that was completely 
absent in cells expressing N604T TRPV1. Thus, TRPV1 is variably N-glycosylated 
and glycosylation is a key determinant of capsaicin regulation of TRPV1 
desensitization and permeability. Our findings suggest that physiological or 
pathological alterations in TRPV1 glycosylation would affect TRPV1 function and 
pain transmission.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.342022
PMCID: PMC3381139
PMID: 22570472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]