1. Blood. 2012 Jul 5;120(1):181-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-395608. Epub 2012
May  17.

WHIM syndrome caused by a single amino acid substitution in the carboxy-tail of 
chemokine receptor CXCR4.

Liu Q(1), Chen H, Ojode T, Gao X, Anaya-O'Brien S, Turner NA, Ulrick J, DeCastro 
R, Kelly C, Cardones AR, Gold SH, Hwang EI, Wechsler DS, Malech HL, Murphy PM, 
McDermott DH.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

WHIM syndrome is a rare, autosomal dominant, immunodeficiency disorder so-named 
because it is characterized by warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, and 
myelokathexis (defective neutrophil egress from the BM). Gain-of-function 
mutations that truncate the C-terminus of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 by 10-19 
amino acids cause WHIM syndrome. We have identified a family with autosomal 
dominant inheritance of WHIM syndrome that is caused by a missense mutation in 
CXCR4, E343K (1027G â†’ A). This mutation is also located in the C-terminal 
domain, a region responsible for negative regulation of the receptor. 
Accordingly, like CXCR4(R334X), the most common truncation mutation in WHIM 
syndrome, CXCR4(E343K) mediated approximately 2-fold increased signaling in 
calcium flux and chemotaxis assays relative to wild-type CXCR4; however, 
CXCR4(E343K) had a reduced effect on blocking normal receptor down-regulation 
from the cell surface. Therefore, in addition to truncating mutations in the 
C-terminal domain of CXCR4, WHIM syndrome may be caused by a single 
charge-changing amino acid substitution in this domain, E343K, that results in 
increased receptor signaling.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-395608
PMCID: PMC3390956
PMID: 22596258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]