1. Evodevo. 2012 May 17;3(1):10. doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-3-10.

Development and myogenesis of the vermiform Buddenbrockia (Myxozoa) and 
implications for cnidarian body plan evolution.

Gruhl A(1), Okamura B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London, SW7 
5BD, UK. a.gruhl@nhm.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The enigmatic wormlike parasite Buddenbrockia plumatellae has 
recently been shown to belong to the Myxozoa, which are now supported as a clade 
within Cnidaria. Most myxozoans are morphologically extremely simplified, 
lacking major metazoan features such as epithelial tissue layers, gut, nervous 
system, body axes and gonads. This hinders comparisons to free-living cnidarians 
and thus an understanding of myxozoan evolution and identification of their 
cnidarian sister group. However, B. plumatellae is less simplified than other 
myxozoans and therefore is of specific significance for such evolutionary 
considerations.
METHODS: We analyse and describe the development of major body plan features in 
Buddenbrockia worms using a combination of histology, electron microscopy and 
confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: Early developmental stages develop a primary body axis that shows a 
polarity, which is manifested as a gradient of tissue development, enabling 
distinction between the two worm tips. This polarity is maintained in adult 
worms, which, in addition, often develop a pore at the distal tip. The 
musculature comprises tetraradially arranged longitudinal muscle blocks 
consisting of independent myocytes embedded in the extracellular matrix between 
inner and outer epithelial tissue layers. The muscle fibres are obliquely 
oriented and in fully grown worms consistently form an angle of 12Â° with respect 
to the longitudinal axis of the worm in each muscle block and hence confer 
chirality. Connecting cells form a link between each muscle block and constitute 
four rows of cells that run in single file along the length of the worm. These 
connecting cells are remnants of the inner epithelial tissue layer and are 
anchored to the extracellular matrix. They are likely to have a biomechanical 
function.
CONCLUSIONS: The polarised primary body axis represents an ancient feature 
present in the last common ancestor of Cnidaria and Bilateria. The tetraradial 
arrangement of musculature is consistent with a medusozoan affinity for Myxozoa. 
However, the chiral pattern of muscle fibre orientation is apparently novel 
within Cnidaria and could thus be a specific adaptation. The presence of 
independent myocytes instead of Cnidaria-like epitheliomuscular cells can be 
interpreted as further support for the presence of mesoderm in cnidarians, or it 
may represent convergent evolution to a bilaterian condition.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-9139-3-10
PMCID: PMC3419630
PMID: 22594622