1. J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jan;48(1):73-80. doi: 10.1007/s00535-012-0602-3. Epub
2012  May 23.

Genetic polymorphisms of SCN10A are associated with functional dyspepsia in 
Japanese subjects.

Arisawa T(1), Tahara T, Shiroeda H, Minato T, Matsue Y, Saito T, Fukuyama T, 
Otsuka T, Fukumura A, Nakamura M, Shibata T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Kanazawa Medical University, 1-1 Daigaku, 
Uchinada-machi, Ishikawa, 920-0293, Japan. tarisawa@kanazawa-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Visceral sensory impulses are transmitted via C-fibers from the 
gastrointestinal tract to the central nervous system. The tetrodotoxinresistant 
(TTX-r) sodium channel, Na(V) 1.8/SNS (sensory-neuron specific), encoded by 
SCN10A, has been identified on C-fibers. We attempted to clarify the association 
between functional dyspepsia (FD) and SCN10A non-synonymous polymorphisms (2884 
A>G, 3218 C>T and 3275 T>C).
METHODS: The study was performed in 642 subjects (345 with no symptoms and 297 
with FD). We employed a multiplex polymerase chain reaction single-strand 
confirmation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) method to detect the gene polymorphisms.
RESULTS: The 3218 CC homozygotes had a reduced risk for the development of FD 
[odds ratio (OR) 0.589; 95 % confidence interval (CI) 0.402-0.864; p = 0.0067]. 
In addition, both 2884 A>G and 3275 T>C, which were in linkage disequilibrium, 
were also associated with the development of FD (p = 0.039 and 0.028, 
respectively). Each 2884 G carrier, 3218 CC homozygote, and 3275 C carrier had a 
reduced risk for the development of both epigastric pain syndrome (EPS) and 
postprandial distress syndrome (PDS). The subjects with the 2884 G allele, 3275 
C allele, and no 3218 T allele had a reduced risk for FD (OR 0.618; 95 % CI 
0.448-0.853; p = 0.0034). This haplotype was associated with a reduced risk for 
both EPS and PDS (p = 0.0011 and 0.0056, respectively). In addition, there was a 
significant association between FD and this haplotype in Helicobacter 
pylori-negative subjects (OR 0.463; 95 % CI 0279-0.9768; p = 0.0029).
CONCLUSION: We conclude that genetic polymorphisms of SCN10A are closely 
associated with FD (both EPS and PDS), especially in H. pylori-negative 
subjects, in Japanese.

DOI: 10.1007/s00535-012-0602-3
PMID: 22618805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]