1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37618. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037618. Epub 2012 May
18.

Genetic variation in the β2-adrenocepter gene is associated with susceptibility 
to bacterial meningitis in adults.

Adriani KS(1), Brouwer MC, Baas F, Zwinderman AH, van der Ende A, van de Beek D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Recently, the biased β2-adrenoceptor/β-arrestin pathway was shown to play a 
pivotal role in crossing of the blood brain barrier by Neisseria meningitidis. 
We hypothesized that genetic variation in the β2-adrenoceptor gene (ADRB2) may 
influence susceptibility to bacterial meningitis. In a prospective genetic 
association study we genotyped 542 patients with CSF culture proven community 
acquired bacterial meningitis and 376 matched controls for 2 functional single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in the β2-adrenoceptor gene (ADRB2). Furthermore, we 
analyzed if the use of non-selective beta-blockers, which bind to the 
β2-adrenoceptor, influenced the risk of bacterial meningitis. We identified a 
functional polymorphism in ADRB2 (rs1042714) to be associated with an increased 
risk for bacterial meningitis (Odds ratio [OR] 1.35, 95% confidence interval 
[CI] 1.04-1.76; p = 0.026). The association remained significant after 
correction for age and was more prominent in patients with pneumococcal 
meningitis (OR 1.52, 95% CI 1.12-2.07; p = 0.007). For meningococcal meningitis 
the difference in genotype frequencies between patients and controls was similar 
to that in pneumococcal meningitis, but this was not statistically significant 
(OR 1.43, 95% CI 0.60-3.38; p = 0.72). Patients with bacterial meningitis had a 
lower frequency of non-selective beta-blockers use compared to the age matched 
population (0.9% vs. 1.8%), although this did not reach statistical significance 
(OR 1.96 [95% CI 0.88-4.39]; p = 0.09). In conclusion, we identified an 
association between a genetic variant in the β2-adrenoceptor and increased 
susceptibility to bacterial meningitis. The potential benefit of pharmacological 
treatment targeting the β2-adrenoceptor to prevent bacterial meningitis in the 
general population or patients with bacteraemia should be further studied in 
both experimental studies and observational cohorts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037618
PMCID: PMC3356289
PMID: 22624056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.