1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37787. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037787. Epub 2012 May
25.

Inhibition of intestinal bile acid transporter Slc10a2 improves triglyceride 
metabolism and normalizes elevated plasma glucose levels in mice.

Lundåsen T(1), Andersson EM, Snaith M, Lindmark H, Lundberg J, Östlund-Lindqvist 
AM, Angelin B, Rudling M.

Author information:
(1)Karolinska Institute, Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, 
and Molecular Nutrition Unit, Center for Biosciences, NOVUM, Karolinska 
University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

Interruption of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids increases 
cholesterol catabolism, thereby stimulating hepatic cholesterol synthesis from 
acetate. We hypothesized that such treatment should lower the hepatic acetate 
pool which may alter triglyceride and glucose metabolism. We explored this using 
mice deficient of the ileal sodium-dependent BA transporter (Slc10a2) and ob/ob 
mice treated with a specific inhibitor of Slc10a2. Plasma TG levels were reduced 
in Slc10a2-deficient mice, and when challenged with a sucrose-rich diet, they 
displayed a reduced response in hepatic TG production as observed from the mRNA 
levels of several key enzymes in fatty acid synthesis. This effect was 
paralleled by a diminished induction of mature sterol regulatory element-binding 
protein 1c (Srebp1c). Unexpectedly, the SR-diet induced intestinal fibroblast 
growth factor (FGF) 15 mRNA and normalized bile acid synthesis in Slc10a2-/- 
mice. Pharmacologic inhibition of Slc10a2 in diabetic ob/ob mice reduced serum 
glucose, insulin and TGs, as well as hepatic mRNA levels of Srebp1c and its 
target genes. These responses are contrary to those reported following treatment 
of mice with a bile acid binding resin. Moreover, when key metabolic signal 
transduction pathways in the liver were investigated, those of Mek1/2-Erk1/2 and 
Akt were blunted after treatment of ob/ob mice with the Slc10a2 inhibitor. It is 
concluded that abrogation of Slc10a2 reduces hepatic Srebp1c activity and serum 
TGs, and in the diabetic ob/ob model it also reduces glucose and insulin levels. 
Hence, targeting of Slc10a2 may be a promising strategy to treat 
hypertriglyceridemia and diabetes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037787
PMCID: PMC3360597
PMID: 22662222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: BA and MR have for other 
studies received research grants from AstraZeneca and Albireo AB; BA has served 
as a board member of and is a shareholder in AstraZeneca PLC; EMA, HL, SS and 
A-MÖ-L are employees at AstraZeneca. MS and SS were previously employed by 
AstraZeneca; TL and JL have nothing to declare. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.