1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37100. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037100. Epub 2012 May
29.

Autoimmunity in CD73/Ecto-5'-nucleotidase deficient mice induces renal injury.

Blume C(1), Felix A, Shushakova N, Gueler F, Falk CS, Haller H, Schrader J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany. Blume.cornelia@mh-hannover.de

Extracellular adenosine formed by 5'-ectonucleotidase (CD73) is involved in 
tubulo-glomerular feedback in the kidney but is also known to be an important 
immune modulator. Since CD73(-/-)mutant mice exhibit a vascular proinflammatory 
phenotype, we asked whether long term lack of CD73 causes inflammation related 
kidney pathologies. CD73(-/-)mice (13 weeks old) showed significantly increased 
low molecule proteinuria compared to C57BL6 wild type controls (4.8 ≥ 0.52 vs. 
2.9 ± 0.54 mg/24 h, p<0.03). Total proteinuria increased to 5.97 ± 0.78 vs. 2.55 
± 0.35 mg/24 h at 30 weeks (p<0.01) whereas creatinine clearance decreased 
(0.161 ± 0.02 vs. 0.224 ± 0.02 ml/min). We observed autoimmune inflammation in 
CD73(-/-)mice with glomerulitis and peritubular capillaritis, showing glomerular 
deposition of IgG and C3 and enhanced presence of CD11b, CD8, CD25 as well as 
GR-1-positive cells in the interstitium. Vascular inflammation was associated 
with enhanced serum levels of the cytokines IL-18 and TNF-α as well as VEGF and 
the chemokine MIP-2 (CXCL-2) in CD73(-/-)mice, whereas chemokines and cytokines 
in the kidney tissue were unaltered or reduced. In CD73(-/-)mice glomeruli, we 
found a reduced number of podocytes and endothelial fenestrations, increased 
capillaries per glomeruli, endotheliosis and enhanced tubular fibrosis. Our 
results show that adult CD73(-/-)mice exhibit spontaneous proteinuria and renal 
functional deterioration even without exogenous stress factors. We have 
identified an autoimmune inflammatory phenotype comprising the glomerular 
endothelium, leading to glomeruli inflammation and injury and to a cellular 
infiltrate of the renal interstitium. Thus, long term lack of CD73 reduced renal 
function and is associated with autoimmune inflammation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037100
PMCID: PMC3362584
PMID: 22666342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.