1. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Aug;23(15):2993-3007. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-03-0232. Epub 
2012 Jun 13.

Perturbation-based analysis and modeling of combinatorial regulation in the 
yeast sulfur assimilation pathway.

McIsaac RS(1), Petti AA, Bussemaker HJ, Botstein D.

Author information:
(1)The Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. rmcisaac@princeton.edu

In yeast, the pathways of sulfur assimilation are combinatorially controlled by 
five transcriptional regulators (three DNA-binding proteins [Met31p, Met32p, and 
Cbf1p], an activator [Met4p], and a cofactor [Met28p]) and a ubiquitin ligase 
subunit (Met30p). This regulatory system exerts combinatorial control not only 
over sulfur assimilation and methionine biosynthesis, but also on many other 
physiological functions in the cell. Recently we characterized a gene induction 
system that, upon the addition of an inducer, results in near-immediate 
transcription of a gene of interest under physiological conditions. We used this 
to perturb levels of single transcription factors during steady-state growth in 
chemostats, which facilitated distinction of direct from indirect effects of 
individual factors dynamically through quantification of the subsequent changes 
in genome-wide patterns of gene expression. We were able to show directly that 
Cbf1p acts sometimes as a repressor and sometimes as an activator. We also found 
circumstances in which Met31p/Met32p function as repressors, as well as those in 
which they function as activators. We elucidated and numerically modeled 
feedback relationships among the regulators, notably feedforward regulation of 
Met32p (but not Met31p) by Met4p that generates dynamic differences in abundance 
that can account for the differences in function of these two proteins despite 
their identical binding sites.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E12-03-0232
PMCID: PMC3408425
PMID: 22696683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]