1. Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;2012:493670. doi: 10.1155/2012/493670. Epub 2012
May  30.

Tau and caspase 3 as targets for neuroprotection.

Idan-Feldman A(1), Ostritsky R, Gozes I.

Author information:
(1)The Adams Super Center for Brain Studies, The Lily and Avraham Gildor Chair 
for The Investigation of Growth Factors, The Elton Laboratory for Molecular 
Neuroendocrinology, and Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, 
Sagol School of Neuroscience, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
69978 Tel Aviv, Israel.

The peptide drug candidate NAP (davunetide) has demonstrated protective effects 
in various in vivo and in vitro models of neurodegeneration. NAP was shown to 
reduce tau hyperphosphorylation as well as to prevent caspase-3 activation and 
cytochrome-3 release from mitochondria, both characteristic of apoptotic cell 
death. Recent studies suggest that caspases may play a role in tau pathology. 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of NAP on tau 
hyperphosphorylation and caspase activity in the same biological system. Our 
experimental setup used primary neuronal cultures subjected to oxygen-glucose 
deprivation (OGD), with and without NAP or caspase inhibitor. Cell viability was 
assessed by measuring mitochondrial activity (MTS assay), and immunoblots were 
used for analyzing protein level. It was shown that apoptosis was responsible 
for all cell death occurring following ischemia, and NAP treatment showed a 
concentration-dependent protection from cell death. Ischemia caused an increase 
in the levels of active caspase-3 and hyperphosphorylated tau, both of which 
were prevented by either NAP or caspase-inhibitor treatment. Our data suggest 
that, in this model system, caspase activation may be an upstream event to tau 
hyperphosphorylation, although additional studies will be required to fully 
elucidate the cascade of events.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/493670
PMCID: PMC3369463
PMID: 22693678