1. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Feb;69(2):167-77. doi: 10.1007/s00228-012-1326-2. 
Epub 2012 Jun 17.

eNOS and BDKRB2 genotypes affect the antihypertensive responses to enalapril.

Silva PS(1), Fontana V, Luizon MR, Lacchini R, Silva WA Jr, Biagi C, 
Tanus-Santos JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, State University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, 
Brazil.

PURPOSE: The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors 
(ACEi) is attributed partially to increased nitric oxide bioavailability. It is 
possible that functional polymorphisms in endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
(eNOS) and bradykinin receptor B2 (BDKRB2) genes may affect the antihypertensive 
response to enalapril.
METHODS: We evaluated 106 hypertensive patients treated only with enalapril for 
60 days. The difference between the mean arterial pressure (MAP) before and 
after the antihypertensive treatment was defined as ΔMAP. If ΔMAP were below or 
above the median value, the patients were classified as poor responders (PR) or 
good responders (GR), respectively. eNOS genotypes for the T(-786)C, G894T and 
4b/4a polymorphisms were determined and haplotype frequencies were estimated by 
PHASE and Haplo.stats programs. The C(-58)T and BE1 +9/-9 polymorphisms of 
BDKRB2 genes and their haplotypes were determined by DNA sequencing. Robust 
multifactor dimensionality reduction analysis was used to characterize gene-gene 
interactions.
RESULTS: The TC/CC genotypes and the C allele for the eNOS T(-786)C polymorphism 
were more frequent in GR than in PR. Furthermore, the TT genotype for the BDKRB2 
C(-58)T polymorphism was more frequent in PR than GR. No other significant 
differences in genotypes or haplotypes were found. However, we found significant 
gene-gene interactions: the CC genotype for the BDKRB2 C(-58)T polymorphism was 
associated with response to enalapril depending on eNOS T(-786)C genotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that eNOS T(-786)C and BDKRB2 C(-58)T 
polymorphisms may synergically affect the antihypertensive response to 
enalapril.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-012-1326-2
PMID: 22706620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]