1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep;40(16):8085-98. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks530. Epub 2012
 Jun 20.

Analysis of rRNA processing and translation in mammalian cells using a synthetic 
18S rRNA expression system.

Burman LG(1), Mauro VP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Analysis of processing, assembly, and function of higher eukaryotic ribosomal 
RNA (rRNA) has been hindered by the lack of an expression system that enables 
rRNA to be modified and then examined functionally. Given the potential 
usefulness of such a system, we have developed one for mammalian 18S rRNA. We 
inserted a sequence tag into expansion segment 3 of mouse 18S rRNA to monitor 
expression and cleavage by hybridization. Mutations were identified that confer 
resistance to pactamycin, allowing functional analysis of 40S ribosomal subunits 
containing synthetic 18S rRNAs by selectively blocking translation from 
endogenous (pactamycin-sensitive) subunits. rRNA constructs were suitably 
expressed in transfected cells, shown to process correctly, incorporate into â‰ˆ 
15% of 40S subunits, and function normally based on various criteria. After 
rigorous analysis, the system was used to investigate the importance of 
sequences that flank 18S rRNA in precursor transcripts. Although deletion 
analysis supported the requirement of binding sites for the U3 snoRNA, it showed 
that a large segment of the 5' external transcribed spacer and the entire first 
internal transcribed spacer, both of which flank 18S rRNA, are not required. The 
success of this approach opens the possibility of functional analyses of 
ribosomes, with applications in basic research and synthetic biology.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks530
PMCID: PMC3439915
PMID: 22718970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]