1. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2012 Aug 1;5(4):841-9. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.111.969733. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

In situ confocal imaging in intact heart reveals stress-induced Ca(2+) release 
variability in a murine catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia 
model of type 2 ryanodine receptor(R4496C+/-) mutation.

Chen B(1), Guo A, Gao Z, Wei S, Xie YP, Chen SR, Anderson ME, Song LS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

BACKGROUND: Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia is directly 
linked to mutations in proteins (eg, type 2 ryanodine receptor [RyR2](R4496C)) 
responsible for intracellular Ca(2+) homeostasis in the heart. However, the 
mechanism of Ca(2+) release dysfunction underlying catecholaminergic polymorphic 
ventricular tachycardia has only been investigated in isolated cells but not in 
the in situ undisrupted myocardium.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated in situ myocyte Ca(2+) dynamics in intact 
Langendorff-perfused hearts (ex vivo) from wild-type and RyR2(R4496C+/-) mice 
using laser scanning confocal microscopy. We found that myocytes from both 
wild-type and RyR2(R4496C+/-) hearts displayed uniform, synchronized Ca(2+) 
transients. Ca(2+) transients from beat to beat were comparable in amplitude 
with identical activation and decay kinetics in wild-type and RyR2(R4496C+/-) 
hearts, suggesting that excitation-contraction coupling between the sarcolemmal 
Ca(2+) channels and mutated RyR2(R4496C+/-) channels remains intact under 
baseline resting conditions. On adrenergic stimulation, RyR2(R4496C+/-) hearts 
exhibited a high degree of Ca(2+) release variability. The varied pattern of 
Ca(2+) release was absent in single isolated myocytes, independent of cell cycle 
length, synchronized among neighboring myocytes, and correlated with 
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. A similar pattern of 
action potential variability, which was synchronized among neighboring myocytes, 
was also revealed under adrenergic stress in intact hearts but not in isolated 
myocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies using an in situ confocal imaging approach suggest that 
mutated RyR2s are functionally normal at rest but display a high degree of 
Ca(2+) release variability on intense adrenergic stimulation. Ca(2+) release 
variability is a Ca(2+) release abnormality, resulting from electric defects 
rather than the failure of the Ca(2+) release response to action potentials in 
mutated ventricular myocytes. Our data provide important insights into Ca(2+) 
release and electric dysfunction in an established model of catecholaminergic 
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCEP.111.969733
PMCID: PMC3421047
PMID: 22722659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None.