1. Front Microbiol. 2012 Jun 19;3:213. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00213. eCollection
 2012.

Diversity and Distribution of Marine Synechococcus: Multiple Gene Phylogenies 
for Consensus Classification and Development of qPCR Assays for Sensitive 
Measurement of Clades in the Ocean.

Ahlgren NA(1), Rocap G.

Author information:
(1)School of Oceanography, Center for Environmental Genomics, University of 
Washington Seattle, WA, USA.

Marine Synechococcus is a globally significant genus of cyanobacteria that is 
comprised of multiple genetic lineages or clades. These clades are thought to 
represent ecologically distinct units, or ecotypes. Because multiple clades 
often co-occur together in the oceans, Synechococcus are ideal microbes to 
explore how closely related bacterial taxa within the same functional guild of 
organisms co-exist and partition marine habitats. Here we sequenced multiple 
gene loci from cultured strains to confirm the congruency of clade 
classifications between the 16S-23S rDNA internally transcribed spacer (ITS), 
16S rDNA, narB, ntcA, and rpoC1 loci commonly used in Synechococcus diversity 
studies. We designed quantitative PCR (qPCR) assays that target the ITS for 10 
Synechococcus clades, including four clades, XV, XVI, CRD1, and CRD2, not 
covered by previous assays employing other loci. Our new qPCR assays are very 
sensitive and specific, detecting down to tens of cells per ml. Application of 
these qPCR assays to field samples from the northwest Atlantic showed clear 
shifts in Synechococcus community composition across a coastal to open-ocean 
transect. Consistent with previous studies, clades I and IV dominated cold, 
coastal Synechococcus communities. Clades II and X were abundant at the two 
warmer, off-shore stations, and at all stations multiple Synechococcus clades 
co-occurred. qPCR assays developed here provide valuable tools to further 
explore the dynamics of microbial community structure and the mechanisms of 
co-existence.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00213
PMCID: PMC3377940
PMID: 22723796