1. J Transl Med. 2012 Jul 2;10:136. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-136.

A systematic review and meta-analysis of 235delC mutation of GJB2 gene.

Yao J(1), Lu Y, Wei Q, Cao X, Xing G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Basic Medical Science, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing 210029, Peopleâ€™s Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The 235delC mutation of GJB2 gene is considered as a risk factor for 
the non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL), and a significant difference in the 
frequency and distribution of the 235delC mutation has been described world 
widely.
METHODS: A systematic review was performed by means of a meta-analysis to 
evaluate the influence of the 235delC mutation on the risk of NSHL. A literature 
search in electronic databases using keywords "235delC", "GJB2" associated with 
"carrier frequency" was conducted to include all papers from January 1999 to 
June 2011. A total of 36 papers were included and there contained 13217 cases 
and 6521 controls derived from Oceania, American, Europe and Asian.
RESULTS: A remarkable heterogeneity between these studies was observed. The 
combined results of meta-analysis showed that the 235delC mutant increased the 
risk of NSHL (OR = 7.9, 95%CI 4.77 ~ 13.11, P <0.00001). Meanwhile, 
heterogeneity of genetic effect was also observed due to the ethnic specificity 
and regional disparity. Therefore, the stratified meta-analysis was subsequently 
conducted and the results indicated that the 235delC mutation was significantly 
correlated with the risk of NHSL in the East Asian and South-east Asian 
populations (OR = 12.05, 95%CI 8.33~17.44, P <0.00001), but not significantly in 
the Oceania and European populations (OR = 10.36, 95%CI: 4.68~22.96, Z = 1.68, P 
>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The 235delC mutation of GJB2 gene increased the risk of NHSL in the 
East Asian and South-east Asian populations, but non-significantly associated 
with the NSHL susceptibility in Oceania and European populations, suggesting a 
significant ethnic specificity of this NSHL-associated mutation.

DOI: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-136
PMCID: PMC3443034
PMID: 22747691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]