1. Hum Mutat. 2012 Dec;33(12):1665-75. doi: 10.1002/humu.22159. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Identification of fifteen novel germline variants in the BRCA1 3'UTR reveals a 
variant in a breast cancer case that introduces a functional miR-103 target 
site.

Brewster BL(1), Rossiello F, French JD, Edwards SL, Wong M, Wronski A, Whiley P, 
Waddell N, Chen X, Bove B; kConFab; Hopper JL, John EM, Andrulis I, Daly M, 
Volorio S, Bernard L, Peissel B, Manoukian S, Barile M, Pizzamiglio S, Verderio 
P, Spurdle AB, Radice P, Godwin AK, Southey MC, Brown MA, Peterlongo P.

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Australia. b.brewster@uq.edu.au

Mutations in the BRCA1 gene confer a substantial increase in breast cancer risk, 
yet routine clinical genetic screening is limited to the coding regions and 
intron-exon boundaries, precluding the identification of mutations in noncoding 
and untranslated regions (UTR). As 3'UTR mutations can influence cancer 
susceptibility by altering protein and microRNA (miRNA) binding regions, we 
screened the BRCA1 3'UTR for mutations in a large series of BRCA-mutation 
negative, population and clinic-based breast cancer cases, and controls. Fifteen 
novel BRCA1 3'UTR variants were identified, the majority of which were unique to 
either cases or controls. Using luciferase reporter assays, three variants found 
in cases, c.* 528G>C, c.* 718A>G, and c.* 1271T>C and four found in controls, 
c.* 309T>C, c.* 379G>A, c.* 823C>T, and c.* 264C>T, reduced 3'UTR activity (P < 
0.02), whereas two variants found in cases, c.* 291C>T and c.* 1139G>T, 
increased 3'UTR activity (P < 0.01). Three case variants, c.* 718A>G, c.* 
800T>C, and c.* 1340_1342delTGT, were predicted to create new miRNA binding 
sites and c.* 1340_1342delTGT caused a reduction (25%, P = 0.0007) in 3'UTR 
reporter activity when coexpressed with the predicted targeting miRNA, miR-103. 
This is the most comprehensive identification and analysis of BRCA1 3'UTR 
variants published to date.

Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22159
PMID: 22753153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]