1. J Neurosci. 2012 Jul 11;32(28):9613-25. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0602-12.2012.

Intracellular amyloid precursor protein sorting and amyloid-β secretion are 
regulated by Src-mediated phosphorylation of Mint2.

Chaufty J(1), Sullivan SE, Ho A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Mint adaptor proteins bind to the membrane-bound amyloid precursor protein (APP) 
and affect the production of pathogenic amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides related to 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Previous studies have shown that loss of each of the 
three Mint proteins delays the age-dependent production of amyloid plaques in 
transgenic mouse models of AD. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms 
underlying Mints effect on amyloid production are unclear. Because Aβ generation 
involves the internalization of membrane-bound APP via endosomes and Mints bind 
directly to the endocytic motif of APP, we proposed that Mints are involved in 
APP intracellular trafficking, which in turn, affects Aβ generation. Here, we 
show that APP endocytosis was attenuated in Mint knock-out neurons, revealing a 
role for Mints in APP trafficking. We also show that the endocytic APP sorting 
processes are regulated by Src-mediated phosphorylation of Mint2 and that 
internalized APP is differentially sorted between autophagic and recycling 
trafficking pathways. A Mint2 phosphomimetic mutant favored endocytosis of APP 
along the autophagic sorting pathway leading to increased intracellular Aβ 
accumulation. Conversely, the Mint2 phospho-resistant mutant increased APP 
localization to the recycling pathway and back to the cell surface thereby 
enhancing Aβ42 secretion. These results demonstrate that Src-mediated 
phosphorylation of Mint2 regulates the APP endocytic sorting pathway, providing 
a mechanism for regulating Aβ secretion.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0602-12.2012
PMCID: PMC3404619
PMID: 22787047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]