1. Dev Psychopathol. 2012 Aug;24(3):907-28. doi: 10.1017/S0954579412000442.

The effects of child maltreatment on early signs of antisocial behavior: genetic 
moderation by tryptophan hydroxylase, serotonin transporter, and monoamine 
oxidase A genes.

Cicchetti D(1), Rogosch FA, Thibodeau EL.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, 51 East River Road, 
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. cicchett@umn.edu

Gene-environment interaction effects in predicting antisocial behavior in late 
childhood were investigated among maltreated and nonmaltreated low-income 
children (N = 627, M age = 11.27). Variants in three genes were examined: 
tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (TPH1), serotonin transporter linked polymorphic region 
(5-HTTLPR), and monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) upstream variable number tandem 
repeat. In addition to child maltreatment status, we considered the impact of 
maltreatment subtypes, developmental timing of maltreatment, and chronicity. 
Indicators of antisocial behavior were obtained from self-, peer, and adult 
counselor reports. In a series of analyses of covariance, child maltreatment and 
its parameters demonstrated strong main effects on early antisocial behavior as 
assessed by all report forms. Genetic effects operated primarily in the context 
of gene-environment interactions, moderating the impact of child maltreatment on 
outcomes. Across the three genes, among nonmaltreated children no differences in 
antisocial behavior were found based on genetic variation. In contrast, among 
maltreated children specific polymorphisms of TPH1, 5-HTTLPR, and MAOA were each 
related to heightened self-report of antisocial behavior; the interaction of 
5-HTTLPR and developmental timing of maltreatment also indicated more severe 
antisocial outcomes for children with early onset and recurrent maltreatment 
based on genotype. TPH1 and 5-HTTLPR interacted with maltreatment subtype to 
predict peer reports of antisocial behavior; genetic variation contributed to 
larger differences in antisocial behavior among abused children. The TPH1 and 
5-HTTLPR polymorphisms also moderated the effects of maltreatment subtype on 
adult reports of antisocial behavior; again, the genetic effects were strongest 
for children who were abused. In addition, TPH1 moderated the effect of 
developmental timing of maltreatment and chronicity on adult reports of 
antisocial behavior. The findings elucidate how genetic variation contributes to 
identifying which maltreated children are most vulnerable to antisocial 
development.

DOI: 10.1017/S0954579412000442
PMCID: PMC3684360
PMID: 22781862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]