1. N Engl J Med. 2012 Aug 30;367(9):795-804. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1202753. Epub
2012  Jul 11.

Clinical and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited Alzheimer's disease.

Bateman RJ(1), Xiong C, Benzinger TL, Fagan AM, Goate A, Fox NC, Marcus DS, 
Cairns NJ, Xie X, Blazey TM, Holtzman DM, Santacruz A, Buckles V, Oliver A, 
Moulder K, Aisen PS, Ghetti B, Klunk WE, McDade E, Martins RN, Masters CL, 
Mayeux R, Ringman JM, Rossor MN, Schofield PR, Sperling RA, Salloway S, Morris 
JC; Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network.

Author information:
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Department of Neurology, 660 S. 
Euclid Ave., Box 8111, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. batemanr@wustl.edu

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Aug 23;367(8):780.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Aug 30;367(9):864-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1207995.
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Nov 22;367(21):2050; author reply 2051-2. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1211767.
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Nov 22;367(21):2050-1; author reply 2051-2. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1211767.
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Nov 22;367(21):2051; author reply 2051-2. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1211767.

BACKGROUND: The order and magnitude of pathologic processes in Alzheimer's 
disease are not well understood, partly because the disease develops over many 
years. Autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease has a predictable age at onset and 
provides an opportunity to determine the sequence and magnitude of pathologic 
changes that culminate in symptomatic disease.
METHODS: In this prospective, longitudinal study, we analyzed data from 128 
participants who underwent baseline clinical and cognitive assessments, brain 
imaging, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood tests. We used the 
participant's age at baseline assessment and the parent's age at the onset of 
symptoms of Alzheimer's disease to calculate the estimated years from expected 
symptom onset (age of the participant minus parent's age at symptom onset). We 
conducted cross-sectional analyses of baseline data in relation to estimated 
years from expected symptom onset in order to determine the relative order and 
magnitude of pathophysiological changes.
RESULTS: Concentrations of amyloid-beta (Aβ)(42) in the CSF appeared to decline 
25 years before expected symptom onset. Aβ deposition, as measured by 
positron-emission tomography with the use of Pittsburgh compound B, was detected 
15 years before expected symptom onset. Increased concentrations of tau protein 
in the CSF and an increase in brain atrophy were detected 15 years before 
expected symptom onset. Cerebral hypometabolism and impaired episodic memory 
were observed 10 years before expected symptom onset. Global cognitive 
impairment, as measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination and the Clinical 
Dementia Rating scale, was detected 5 years before expected symptom onset, and 
patients met diagnostic criteria for dementia at an average of 3 years after 
expected symptom onset.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease was associated 
with a series of pathophysiological changes over decades in CSF biochemical 
markers of Alzheimer's disease, brain amyloid deposition, and brain metabolism 
as well as progressive cognitive impairment. Our results require confirmation 
with the use of longitudinal data and may not apply to patients with sporadic 
Alzheimer's disease. (Funded by the National Institute on Aging and others; DIAN 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00869817.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1202753
PMCID: PMC3474597
PMID: 22784036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]