1. N Engl J Med. 2012 Jul 19;367(3):214-23. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1108735.

Genetically distinct subsets within ANCA-associated vasculitis.

Lyons PA(1), Rayner TF, Trivedi S, Holle JU, Watts RA, Jayne DR, Baslund B, 
Brenchley P, Bruchfeld A, Chaudhry AN, Cohen Tervaert JW, Deloukas P, Feighery 
C, Gross WL, Guillevin L, Gunnarsson I, Harper L, Hrušková Z, Little MA, 
Martorana D, Neumann T, Ohlsson S, Padmanabhan S, Pusey CD, Salama AD, Sanders 
JS, Savage CO, Segelmark M, Stegeman CA, Tesař V, Vaglio A, Wieczorek S, Wilde 
B, Zwerina J, Rees AJ, Clayton DG, Smith KG.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, and Department of Medicine, 
University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Addenbrooke's Hospital, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom. kgcs2@cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Jul 19;367(3):271-3. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1203592.
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2012 Oct;8(10):555. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2012.183.
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2012 Sep;8(9):502. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2012.136.
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Oct 11;367(15):1470; author reply 1471. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1209906.
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Oct 11;367(15):1470; author reply 1471. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1209906.
    Z Rheumatol. 2013 Mar;72(2):187-8. doi: 10.1007/s00393-012-1087-4.

BACKGROUND: Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis is 
a severe condition encompassing two major syndromes: granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis (formerly known as Wegener's granulomatosis) and microscopic 
polyangiitis. Its cause is unknown, and there is debate about whether it is a 
single disease entity and what role ANCA plays in its pathogenesis. We 
investigated its genetic basis.
METHODS: A genomewide association study was performed in a discovery cohort of 
1233 U.K. patients with ANCA-associated vasculitis and 5884 controls and was 
replicated in 1454 Northern European case patients and 1666 controls. Quality 
control, population stratification, and statistical analyses were performed 
according to standard criteria.
RESULTS: We found both major-histocompatibility-complex (MHC) and non-MHC 
associations with ANCA-associated vasculitis and also that granulomatosis with 
polyangiitis and microscopic polyangiitis were genetically distinct. The 
strongest genetic associations were with the antigenic specificity of ANCA, not 
with the clinical syndrome. Anti-proteinase 3 ANCA was associated with HLA-DP 
and the genes encoding α(1)-antitrypsin (SERPINA1) and proteinase 3 (PRTN3) 
(P=6.2×10(-89), P=5.6×10(-12,) and P=2.6×10(-7), respectively). 
Anti-myeloperoxidase ANCA was associated with HLA-DQ (P=2.1×10(-8)).
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that the pathogenesis of ANCA-associated 
vasculitis has a genetic component, shows genetic distinctions between 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis and microscopic polyangiitis that are 
associated with ANCA specificity, and suggests that the response against the 
autoantigen proteinase 3 is a central pathogenic feature of proteinase 3 
ANCA-associated vasculitis. These data provide preliminary support for the 
concept that proteinase 3 ANCA-associated vasculitis and myeloperoxidase 
ANCA-associated vasculitis are distinct autoimmune syndromes. (Funded by the 
British Heart Foundation and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1108735
PMCID: PMC3773907
PMID: 22808956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]