1. J Physiol. 2012 Oct 15;590(20):5025-36. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.236075.
Epub  2012 Jul 16.

A universally conserved residue in the SUR1 subunit of the KATP channel is 
essential for translating nucleotide binding at SUR1 into channel opening.

de Wet H(1), Shimomura K, Aittoniemi J, Ahmad N, Lafond M, Sansom MS, Ashcroft 
FM.

Author information:
(1)Henry Wellcome Centre for Gene Function, Department of Physiology, Anatomy 
and Genetics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PT, UK.

The sulphonylurea receptor (SUR1) subunit of the ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) 
channel is a member of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) protein family. Binding of 
MgADP to nucleotide-binding domain 2 (NBD2) is critical for channel 
activation.We identified a residue in NBD2 (G1401) that is fully conserved among 
ABC proteins and whose functional importance is unknown. Homology modelling 
places G1401 on the outer surface of the protein, distant from the 
nucleotide-binding site. The ATPase activity of purified SUR1-NBD2-G1410R (bound 
to maltose-binding protein) was slightly inhibited when compared to the 
wild-type protein, but its inhibition by MgADP was unchanged, indicating that 
MgADP binding is not altered. However, MgADP activation of channel activity was 
abolished. This implies that the G1401R mutation impairs the mechanism by which 
MgADP binding to NBD2 is translated into opening of the KATP channel pore. The 
location of G1401 would be consistent with interaction of this residue with the 
pore-forming Kir6.2 subunit. Channel activity in the presence of MgATP reflects 
the balance between the stimulatory (at SUR1) and inhibitory (at Kir6.2) effects 
of nucleotides. Mutant channels were 2.5-fold less sensitive to MgATP inhibition 
and not activated by MgATP. This suggests that ATP block of the channel is 
reduced by the SUR1 mutation. Interestingly, this effect was dependent on the 
functional integrity of the NBDs. These results therefore suggest that SUR1 
modulates both nucleotide inhibition and activation of the KATP channel.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.236075
PMCID: PMC3495298
PMID: 22802590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]