1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040684. Epub 2012 Jul
12.

Identification of a novel function for the chromatin remodeling protein ING2 in 
muscle differentiation.

Eapen SA(1), Netherton SJ, Sarker KP, Deng L, Chan A, Riabowol K, Bonni S.

Author information:
(1)Southern Alberta Cancer Research Institute, Departments of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

The inhibitor of growth (ING) family of zinc-finger plant homeodomain 
(PHD)-containing chromatin remodeling protein controls gene expression and has 
been implicated in the regulation of cell proliferation and death. However, the 
role of ING proteins in cell differentiation remains largely unexplored. Here, 
we identify an essential function for ING2 in muscle differentiation. We find 
that knockdown of ING2 by RNA interference (RNAi) blocks the differentiation of 
C2C12 cells into myotubes, suggesting that ING2 regulates the myogenic 
differentiation program. We also characterize a mechanism by which ING2 drives 
muscle differentiation. In structure-function analyses, we find that the leucine 
zipper motif of ING2 contributes to ING2-dependent muscle differentiation. By 
contrast, the PHD domain, which recognizes the histone H3K4me3 epigenetic mark, 
inhibits the ability of ING2 to induce muscle differentiation. We also find that 
the Sin3A-HDAC1 chromatin remodeling complex, which interacts with ING2, plays a 
critical role in ING2-dependent muscle differentiation. These findings define a 
novel function for ING2 in muscle differentiation and bear significant 
implications for our understanding of the role of the ING protein family in cell 
differentiation and tumor suppression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040684
PMCID: PMC3395697
PMID: 22808232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.