1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40606. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040606. Epub 2012 Jul
11.

The SNP (rs2230500) in PRKCH decreases the risk of carotid intima-media 
thickness in a Chinese young adult population.

Wu L(1), Xi B, Hou D, Zhao X, Liu J, Cheng H, Zhou X, Shen Y, Wang X, Mi J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The SNP (rs2230500) in PRKCH (the gene encoding protein kinase C Î·) 
is associated with ischemic stroke and cerebral hemorrhage in the Chinese 
population, but the molecular mechanisms are not clear. The aim of the present 
study is to investigate the association between the SNP and atherosclerosis that 
is common pathological basis of ischemic stroke and cerebral hemorrhage.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We examined the associations of the SNP with 
carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT), atherosclerosis diagnosed by CIMT, and 
factors related with inflammation in the Beijing Child Blood Pressure Study. A 
total of 1190 subjects participated in the follow-up study. The SNP was 
genotyped by allele-specific real-time PCR assay. The SNP (rs2230500) in PRKCH 
was significantly associated with CIMT (in far wall of left common carotid 
arteries, P = 0.016; in far wall of right common carotid arteries, P = 0.012) 
under a recessive model after adjustment for age, gender, smoking, and 
hypertension. The SNP was also significantly associated with complement C3 (P = 
0.012) under a dominant model after adjustment for age, gender, and high 
sensitivity C-reactive protein.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data provide evidence that the SNP (rs2230500) in 
PRKCH decreases the risk of CIMT that is a worthwhile predictor of stroke and 
complement system possibly mediates this process.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040606
PMCID: PMC3394745
PMID: 22808203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.