1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40683. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040683. Epub 2012 Jul
17.

Novel bacteriophages containing a genome of another bacteriophage within their 
genomes.

Swanson MM(1), Reavy B, Makarova KS, Cock PJ, Hopkins DW, Torrance L, Koonin EV, 
Taliansky M.

Author information:
(1)The James Hutton Institute, Invergowrie, Dundee, United Kingdom.

A novel bacteriophage infecting Staphylococus pasteuri was isolated during a 
screen for phages in Antarctic soils. The phage named SpaA1 is morphologically 
similar to phages of the family Siphoviridae. The 42,784 bp genome of SpaA1 is a 
linear, double-stranded DNA molecule with 3' protruding cohesive ends. The SpaA1 
genome encompasses 63 predicted protein-coding genes which cluster within three 
regions of the genome, each of apparently different origin, in a mosaic pattern. 
In two of these regions, the gene sets resemble those in prophages of Bacillus 
thuringiensis kurstaki str. T03a001 (genes involved in DNA 
replication/transcription, cell entry and exit) and B. cereus AH676 (additional 
regulatory and recombination genes), respectively. The third region represents 
an almost complete genome (except for the short terminal segments) of a distinct 
bacteriophage, MZTP02. Nearly the same gene module was identified in prophages 
of B. thuringiensis serovar monterrey BGSC 4AJ1 and B. cereus Rock4-2. These 
findings suggest that MZTP02 can be shuttled between genomes of other 
bacteriophages and prophages, leading to the formation of chimeric genomes. The 
presence of a complete phage genome in the genome of other phages apparently has 
not been described previously and might represent a 'fast track' route of virus 
evolution and horizontal gene transfer. Another phage (BceA1) nearly identical 
in sequence to SpaA1, and also including the almost complete MZTP02 genome 
within its own genome, was isolated from a bacterium of the B. cereus/B. 
thuringiensis group. Remarkably, both SpaA1 and BceA1 phages can infect B. 
cereus and B. thuringiensis, but only one of them, SpaA1, can infect S. 
pasteuri. This finding is best compatible with a scenario in which MZTP02 was 
originally contained in BceA1 infecting Bacillus spp, the common hosts for these 
two phages, followed by emergence of SpaA1 infecting S. pasteuri.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040683
PMCID: PMC3398947
PMID: 22815791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.