1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 7;287(37):31073-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.346767. Epub 
2012 Jul 24.

DEF6, a novel substrate for the Tec kinase ITK, contains a glutamine-rich 
aggregation-prone region and forms cytoplasmic granules that co-localize with 
P-bodies.

Hey F(1), Czyzewicz N, Jones P, Sablitzky F.

Author information:
(1)School of Biology, Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, The University 
of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, United Kingdom.

Localization of DEF6 (SLAT/IBP), a Rho-family guanine nucleotide exchange 
factor, to the center of the immune synapse is dependent upon ITK, a Tec-family 
kinase that regulates the spatiotemporal organization of components of T cell 
signaling pathways and Cdc42-dependent actin polymerization. Here we demonstrate 
that ITK both interacts with DEF6 and phosphorylates DEF6 at tyrosine residues 
Tyr(210) and Tyr(222). Expression of a GFP-tagged Y210E-Y222E phosphomimic 
resulted in the formation of DEF6 cytoplasmic granules that co-localized with 
decapping enzyme 1 (DCP1), a marker of P-bodies; sites of mRNA degradation. 
Similarly treatment of cells with puromycin or sodium arsenite, reagents that 
arrest translation, also resulted in the accumulation of DEF6 in cytoplasmic 
granules. Bioinformatics analysis identified a glutamine-rich, heptad-repeat 
region; a feature of aggregating proteins, within the C-terminal region of DEF6 
with the potential to promote granule formation through a 
phosphorylation-dependent unmasking of this region. These data suggest that in 
addition to its role as a GEF, DEF6 may also function in regulating mRNA 
translation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.346767
PMCID: PMC3438939
PMID: 22829599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]