1. J Neurosci. 2012 Jul 25;32(30):10201-10. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1496-12.2012.

Early stage drug treatment that normalizes proinflammatory cytokine production 
attenuates synaptic dysfunction in a mouse model that exhibits age-dependent 
progression of Alzheimer's disease-related pathology.

Bachstetter AD(1), Norris CM, Sompol P, Wilcock DM, Goulding D, Neltner JH, St 
Clair D, Watterson DM, Van Eldik LJ.

Author information:
(1)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 
40536, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 Sep;8(9):475. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.172.

Overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines in the CNS has been implicated as a 
key contributor to pathophysiology progression in Alzheimer's disease (AD), and 
extensive studies with animal models have shown that selective suppression of 
excessive glial proinflammatory cytokines can improve neurologic outcomes. The 
prior art, therefore, raises the logical postulation that intervention with 
drugs targeting dysregulated glial proinflammatory cytokine production might be 
effective disease-modifying therapeutics if used in the appropriate biological 
time window. To test the hypothesis that early stage intervention with such 
drugs might be therapeutically beneficial, we examined the impact of 
intervention with MW01-2-151SRM (MW-151), an experimental therapeutic that 
selectively attenuates proinflammatory cytokine production at low doses. MW-151 
was tested in an APP/PS1 knock-in mouse model that exhibits increases in 
AD-relevant pathology progression with age, including increases in 
proinflammatory cytokine levels. Drug was administered during two distinct but 
overlapping therapeutic time windows of early stage pathology development. 
MW-151 treatment attenuated the increase in microglial and astrocyte activation 
and proinflammatory cytokine production in the cortex and yielded improvement in 
neurologic outcomes, such as protection against synaptic protein loss and 
synaptic plasticity impairment. The results also demonstrate that the 
therapeutic time window is an important consideration in efficacy studies of 
drugs that modulate glia biological responses involved in pathology progression 
and suggest that such paradigms should be considered in the development of new 
therapeutic regimens that seek to delay the onset or slow the progression of AD.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1496-12.2012
PMCID: PMC3419360
PMID: 22836255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]