1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 5;287(41):34246-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.367540. Epub 
2012 Aug 13.

Activation of transcription factor MEF2D by bis(3)-cognitin protects 
dopaminergic neurons and ameliorates Parkinsonian motor defects.

Yao L(1), Li W, She H, Dou J, Jia L, He Y, Yang Q, Zhu J, Cápiro NL, Walker DI, 
Pennell KD, Pang Y, Liu Y, Han Y, Mao Z.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, Environment and Genes Related to Diseases, Key 
Laboratory of Education Ministry, Xi'an Jiaotong University College of Medicine, 
Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China.

Parkinson disease (PD) is characterized by the selective demise of dopaminergic 
(DA) neurons in the substantial nigra pars compacta. Dysregulation of 
transcriptional factor myocyte enhancer factor 2D (MEF2D) has been implicated in 
the pathogenic process in in vivo and in vitro models of PD. Here, we identified 
a small molecule bis(3)-cognitin (B3C) as a potent activator of MEF2D. We showed 
that B3C attenuated the toxic effects of neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium 
(MPP(+)) by activating MEF2D via multiple mechanisms. B3C significantly reduced 
MPP(+)-induced oxidative stress and potentiated Akt to down-regulate the 
activity of MEF2 inhibitor glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) in a DA neuronal 
cell line SN4741. Furthermore, B3C effectively rescued MEF2D from MPP(+)-induced 
decline in both nucleic and mitochondrial compartments. B3C offered SN4741 cells 
potent protection against MPP(+)-induced apoptosis via MEF2D. Interestingly, B3C 
also protected SN4741 cells from wild type or mutant A53T α-synuclein-induced 
cytotoxicity. Using the in vivo PD model of C57BL/6 mice treated with 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine hydrochloride (MPTP), we showed 
that B3C maintained redox homeostasis, promoted Akt function activity, and 
restored MEF2D level in midbrain neurons. Moreover, B3C greatly prevented the 
loss of tyrosine hydroxylase signal in substantial nigra pars compacta DA 
neurons and ameliorated behavioral impairments in mice treated with MPTP. 
Collectedly, our studies identified B3C as a potent neuroprotective agent whose 
effectiveness relies on its ability to effectively up-regulate MEF2D in DA 
neurons against toxic stress in models of PD in vitro and in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.367540
PMCID: PMC3464532
PMID: 22891246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]