1. Mol Genet Metab. 2012 Sep;107(1-2):37-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.07.010.
Epub  2012 Jul 20.

Assessment of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4))-responsiveness and spontaneous 
phenylalanine reduction in a phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency population.

Tansek MZ(1), Groselj U, Murko S, Kobe H, Lampret BR, Battelino T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, 
University Children's Hospital, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

A BH(4) loading test was performed in 36 patients from 34 unrelated families. 
The patients had 29 different genotypes, and previous data on only eight of them 
were found in the BIOPKU database. Thirteen patients were classified as classic 
PKU (35.1%), 14 as mild PKU (37.8%) and 9 as MHP (27.0%). Blood Phe levels were 
shown to reach a plateau after three full days of increased natural protein 
ingestion. Measuring the 24-hour blood Phe levels (T(-24), T(-16), T(0)) on the 
fourth day of increased protein ingestion before BH(4) administration showed 
that within 24h Phe on average increased by 2.4% in MHP patients, decreased by 
2.7% in mild PKU patients and increased by 9.7% in classic PKU patients (NS for 
all comparisons); Phe only slightly decreased in responders by 0.2% but 
increased in non-responders by 7.8% (P>0.05). Altogether, 16 of 36 (44.4%) 
patients represented by 12 of 29 (41.4%) different genotypes were proven to be 
BH(4) responders, and four (10.8%) were slow-responders. Responders were 6/9 
(66.7%) MHP patients, 10/14 (71.4%) mild PKU patients and 0/13 classic PKU 
patients. Twenty of the 29 (68.9%) genotypes harbored at least one mutation with 
a known PRA of 10% or more but only 11 (55%) of them were BH(4)-responsive. 
Spontaneous reduction of blood Phe levels within 24h on the fourth day of 
natural protein loading was observed only in mild PKU patients and was shown not 
to be an important part of the BH(4)-response. 73.3% of genotypes containing at 
least one allele with a PRA of at least 30% were found to be BH(4) responsive; a 
PRA of at least 15.5% was needed for the responder genotype in our population.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.07.010
PMID: 22917871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]