1. Front Genet. 2012 Aug 25;3:159. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00159. eCollection
2012.

Posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression-adding another layer of 
complexity to the DNA damage response.

Boucas J(1), Riabinska A, Jokic M, Herter-Sprie GS, Chen S, HÃ¶pker K, Reinhardt 
HC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Center for Internal Medicine, University 
Hospital of Cologne Cologne, Germany.

In response to DNA damage, cells activate a complex, kinase-based signaling 
network to arrest the cell cycle and allow time for DNA repair, or, if the 
extend of damage is beyond repair capacity, induce apoptosis. This signaling 
network, which is collectively referred to as the DNA damage response (DDR), is 
primarily thought to consist of two components-a rapid phosphorylation-driven 
signaling cascade that results in immediate inhibition of Cdk/cyclin complexes 
and a delayed transcriptional response that promotes a prolonged cell cycle 
arrest through the induction of Cdk inhibitors, such as p21. In recent years a 
third layer of complexity has emerged that involves potent posttranscriptional 
regulatory mechanisms that control the cellular response to DNA damage. Although 
much has been written on the relevance of the DDR in cancer and on the 
post-transcriptional role of microRNAs (miRs) in cancer, the 
post-transcriptional regulation of the DDR by non-coding RNAs and RNA-binding 
proteins (RBPs) still remains elusive in large parts. Here, we review the recent 
developments in this exciting new area of research in the cellular response to 
genotoxic stress. We put specific emphasis on the role of RBPs and the control 
of their function through DNA damage-activated protein kinases.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00159
PMCID: PMC3427493
PMID: 22936947