1. Microb Cell Fact. 2012 Sep 12;11:125. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-11-125.

Role of Rhizobium endoglucanase CelC2 in cellulose biosynthesis and biofilm 
formation on plant roots and abiotic surfaces.

Robledo M(1), Rivera L, Jiménez-Zurdo JI, Rivas R, Dazzo F, Velázquez E, 
Martínez-Molina E, Hirsch AM, Mateos PF.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Microbiología y Genética and CIALE, Universidad de Salamanca, 
Salamanca, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The synthesis of cellulose is among the most important but poorly 
understood biochemical processes, especially in bacteria, due to its complexity 
and high degree of regulation. In this study, we analyzed both the production of 
cellulose by all known members of the Rhizobiaceae and the diversity of 
Rhizobium celABC operon predicted to be involved in cellulose biosynthesis. We 
also investigated the involvement in cellulose production and biofilm formation 
of celC gene encoding an endoglucanase (CelC2) that is required for canonical 
symbiotic root hair infection by Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. trifolii.
RESULTS: ANU843 celC mutants lacking (ANU843ΔC2) or overproducing cellulase 
(ANU843C2+) produced greatly increased or reduced amounts of external cellulose 
micro fibrils, respectively. Calcofluor-stained cellulose micro fibrils were 
considerably longer when formed by ANU843ΔC2 bacteria rather than by the 
wild-type strain, in correlation with a significant increase in their 
flocculation in batch culture. In contrast, neither calcofluor-stained 
extracellular micro fibrils nor flocculation was detectable in ANU843C2+ cells. 
To clarify the role of cellulose synthesis in Rhizobium cell aggregation and 
attachment, we analyzed the ability of these mutants to produce biofilms on 
different surfaces. Alteration of wild-type CelC2 levels resulted in a reduced 
ability of bacteria to form biofilms both in abiotic surfaces and in planta.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support a key role of the CelC2 cellulase in cellulose 
biosynthesis by modulating the length of the cellulose fibrils that mediate firm 
adhesion among Rhizobium bacteria leading to biofilm formation. Rhizobium 
cellulose is an essential component of the biofilm polysaccharidic matrix 
architecture and either an excess or a defect of this "building material" seem 
to collapse the biofilm structure. These results position cellulose hydrolytic 
enzymes as excellent anti-biofilm candidates.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-11-125
PMCID: PMC3520766
PMID: 22970813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]