1. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(23):12552-60. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01657-12. Epub 2012 Sep
12.

The Vpx lentiviral accessory protein targets SAMHD1 for degradation in the 
nucleus.

Hofmann H(1), Logue EC, Bloch N, Daddacha W, Polsky SB, Schultz ML, Kim B, 
Landau NR.

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Department, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York, USA.

Sterile alpha motif domain- and HD domain-containing protein 1 (SAMHD1) is a 
deoxynucleoside triphosphohydrolase that restricts the replication of 
lentiviruses in myeloid cells by hydrolyzing the cellular deoxynucleotide 
triphosphates to a level below that which is required for reverse transcription. 
Human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) and some simian immunodeficiency 
viruses (SIVs) encode the accessory protein viral protein X (Vpx) that 
counteracts SAMHD1. Vpx recruits SAMHD1 to a cullin4A-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase 
(CRL4), which targets the enzyme for proteasomal degradation. Vpx and SAMHD1 
both localize to the nucleus of the cell. We identified the nuclear localization 
sequence (NLS) of SAMHD1 as a conserved KRPR sequence at amino acid residues 11 
to 14. SAMHD1 lacking a functional NLS localized to the cytoplasm but retained 
its triphosphohydrolase and antiviral activities. However, cytoplasmic SAMHD1 
was resistant to Vpx-induced degradation, and its antiviral activity was not 
counteracted by Vpx. Cytoplasmic SAMHD1 interacted with Vpx and retained it in 
the cytoplasm. The inhibition of nuclear export with leptomycin B did not impair 
the ability of Vpx to degrade SAMHD1. These findings suggest that SAMHD1 is 
targeted by Vpx for ubiquitination and degradation in the nucleus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01657-12
PMCID: PMC3497686
PMID: 22973040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]