1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2012 Oct;71(10):894-906. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31826c6f7b.

Muscle fiber atrophy and regeneration coexist in collagen VI-deficient human 
muscle: role of calpain-3 and nuclear factor-κB signaling.

Paco S(1), Ferrer I, Jou C, Cusí V, Corbera J, Torner F, Gualandi F, Sabatelli 
P, Orozco A, Gómez-Foix AM, Colomer J, Nascimento A, Jimenez-Mallebrera C.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Unit, Neurology Department, Fundación Sant Joan de Déu, 
Hospital Materno-Infantil Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.

Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (UCMD) is a common form of muscular 
dystrophy associated with defects in collagen VI. It is characterized by loss of 
individual muscle fibers and muscle mass and proliferation of connective and 
adipose tissues. We sought to investigate the mechanisms by which collagen VI 
regulates muscle cell survival, size, and regeneration and, in particular, the 
potential role of the ubiquitin-proteasome and calpain-proteolytic systems. We 
studied muscle biopsies of UCMD (n = 6), other myopathy (n = 12), and control 
patients (n = 10) and found reduced expression of atrogin-1, MURF1, and 
calpain-3 mRNAs in UCMD cases. Downregulation of calpain-3 was associated with 
changes in the nuclear immunolocalization of nuclear factor-κB. We also observed 
increased expression versus controls of regeneration markers at the protein and 
RNA levels. Satellite cell numbers did not differ in collagen VI-deficient 
muscle versus normal nonregenerating muscle, indicating that collagen VI does 
not play a key role in the maintenance of the satellite cell pool. Our results 
indicate that alterations in calpain-3 and nuclear factor-κB signaling pathways 
may contribute to muscle mass loss in UCMD muscle, whereas atrogin-1 and MURF1 
are not likely to play a major role.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31826c6f7b
PMID: 22975586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]