1. Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 15;72(22):5767-77. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3654.
Epub  2012 Sep 12.

Differential effects of polymorphic alleles of FGF receptor 4 on colon cancer 
growth and metastasis.

Heinzle C(1), Gsur A, Hunjadi M, Erdem Z, Gauglhofer C, Stättner S, Karner J, 
Klimpfinger M, Wrba F, Reti A, Hegedus B, Baierl A, Grasl-Kraupp B, Holzmann K, 
Grusch M, Berger W, Marian B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine 1, Institute of Cancer Research, Clinical Institute of 
Pathology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

A gly(388)arg polymorphism (rs351855) in the transmembrane domain of the 
fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR4) is associated with increased risk, 
staging, and metastasis in several different types of cancer. To specifically 
assess the impact of the polymorphic FGFR4 in colorectal cancer (CRC), we 
engineered CRC cell lines with distinct endogenous expression patterns to 
overexpress either the FGFR4(gly) or FGFR4(arg) alleles. The biologic analyses 
revealed an oncogenic importance for both polymorphic alleles, but FGFR4(gly) 
was the stronger inducer of tumor growth, whereas FGFR4(arg) was the stronger 
inducer of migration. An evaluation of clinical specimens revealed that FGFR4 
was upregulated in 20/71 patients independent of gly(388)arg status. There was 
no correlation between the presence of an FGFR4(arg) allele and CRC or polyp 
risk in 3,471 participants of the CORSA study. However, among 182 patients with 
CRC, FGFR4(arg)-carriers had a fivefold higher risk of tumors that were stage II 
or greater. Together, our results established that both allelic forms of FGFR4 
exert an oncogenic impact and may serve equally well as therapeutic targets in 
CRC. One important implication of our findings is that FGFR4(arg)-carriers are 
at a higher risk for more aggressive tumors and therefore may profit from early 
detection measures.

©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3654
PMCID: PMC5455878
PMID: 22971346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest No 
potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.