1. Sci Signal. 2012 Sep 18;5(242):rs6. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002255.

Charting the landscape of tandem BRCT domain-mediated protein interactions.

Woods NT(1), Mesquita RD, Sweet M, Carvalho MA, Li X, Liu Y, Nguyen H, Thomas 
CE, Iversen ES Jr, Marsillac S, Karchin R, Koomen J, Monteiro AN.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Epidemiology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Eukaryotic cells have evolved an intricate system to resolve DNA damage to 
prevent its transmission to daughter cells. This system, collectively known as 
the DNA damage response (DDR) network, includes many proteins that detect DNA 
damage, promote repair, and coordinate progression through the cell cycle. 
Because defects in this network can lead to cancer, this network constitutes a 
barrier against tumorigenesis. The modular BRCA1 carboxyl-terminal (BRCT) domain 
is frequently present in proteins involved in the DDR, can exist either as an 
individual domain or as tandem domains (tBRCT), and can bind phosphorylated 
peptides. We performed a systematic analysis of protein-protein interactions 
involving tBRCT in the DDR by combining literature curation, yeast two-hybrid 
screens, and tandem affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry. We 
identified 23 proteins containing conserved BRCT domains and generated a human 
protein-protein interaction network for seven proteins with tBRCT. This study 
also revealed previously unknown components in DNA damage signaling, such as 
COMMD1 and the target of rapamycin complex mTORC2. Additionally, integration of 
tBRCT domain interactions with DDR phosphoprotein studies and analysis of 
kinase-substrate interactions revealed signaling subnetworks that may aid in 
understanding the involvement of tBRCT in disease and DNA repair.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2002255
PMCID: PMC4064718
PMID: 22990118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: none.