1. Evol Appl. 2012 Sep;5(6):583-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-4571.2012.00248.x. Epub 
2012 Feb 23.

Evolutionary dynamics of separate and combined exposure of Pseudomonas 
fluorescens SBW25 to antibiotics and bacteriophage.

Escobar-Páramo P(1), Gougat-Barbera C, Hochberg ME.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution, UMR5554, Université Montpellier II 
Montpellier, France.

The use of bacteriophages against pathogenic bacteria in health care and in the 
food industry is now being advocated as an alternative to the use of 
antibiotics. But what is the evolutionary response for a bacterial population if 
both antibiotics and phages are used in combination? We employ an experimental 
evolution approach to address these questions and exposed Pseudomonas 
fluorescens SBW25 and a related hypermutator strain (mutS-) to the action of the 
antibiotic rifampicin and the lytic bacteriophage SBW25ϕ2. We then compared the 
densities, growth rates, and the mutations at the rpoB locus leading to 
rifampicin resistance of the evolved bacterial populations. We observed that the 
evolutionary response of populations under different treatments varied depending 
on the order in which the antimicrobials were added and whether the bacterium 
was a hypermutator. We found that wild-type rifampicin-resistant populations 
involved in biofilm formation often reverted to rifampicin sensitivity when 
stresses were added sequentially. In contrast, when the mortality agents were 
added simultaneously, phage populations frequently went extinct and the bacteria 
evolved antibiotic resistance. However, populations of the hypermutator mutS- 
converged to a single genotype at the rpoB locus. Future investigation on other 
bacteria and using different antibiotics and bacteriophage are needed to 
evaluate the generality of our findings.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1752-4571.2012.00248.x
PMCID: PMC3461141
PMID: 23028399