1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045518. Epub 2012 Sep
18.

A substitution in the ligand binding domain of the porcine glucocorticoid 
receptor affects activity of the adrenal gland.

Murani E(1), Reyer H, Ponsuksili S, Fritschka S, Wimmers K.

Author information:
(1)Research Unit Molecular Biology, Leibniz Institute for Farm Animal Biology 
(FBN), Dummerstorf, Germany.

Glucocorticoids produced in the adrenal cortex under the control of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary axis play a vital role in the maintenance of basal and 
stress-related homeostasis and influence health and well-being. To identify loci 
affecting regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis in the pig 
we performed a genome-wide association study for two parameters of acute and 
long-term adrenal activity: plasma cortisol level and adrenal weight. We 
detected a major quantitative trait locus at the position of the glucocorticoid 
receptor gene (NR3C1) - a key regulator of HPA axis activity. To determine the 
causal variant(s), we resequenced the coding region of NR3C1 and found three 
missense single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). SNP c.1829C>T, leading to a 
p.Ala610Val substitution in the ligand binding domain, showed large (about 0.6× 
and 1.2× phenotypic standard deviations for cortisol level and adrenal weight, 
respectively), and highly significant (2.1E-39≤log10(1/p)≤1.7E+0) negative 
effects on both traits. We were able to replicate the association in three 
commercial pig populations with different breed origins. We analyzed effects of 
the p.Ala610Val substitution on glucocorticoid-induced transcriptional activity 
of porcine glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in vitro and determined that the 
substitution introduced by SNP c.1829C>T increased sensitivity of GR by about 
two-fold. Finally, we found that non-coding polymorphisms in linkage 
disequilibrium with SNP c.1829C>T have only a minor effect on the expression of 
NR3C1 in tissues related to the HPA axis. Our findings provide compelling 
evidence that SNP c.1829C>T in porcine NR3C1 is a gain-of-function mutation with 
a major effect on the activity of the adrenal gland. Pigs carrying this SNP 
could provide a new animal model to study neurobiological and physiological 
consequences of genetically based GR hypersensitivity and adrenal hypofunction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045518
PMCID: PMC3445511
PMID: 23029068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.