1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 16;109(42):16951-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1201408109. Epub 2012 Oct 1.

Analysis of human samples reveals impaired SHH-dependent cerebellar development 
in Joubert syndrome/Meckel syndrome.

Aguilar A(1), Meunier A, Strehl L, Martinovic J, Bonniere M, Attie-Bitach T, 
Encha-Razavi F, Spassky N.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Sup√©rieure, F-75005 Paris, France. 
aguilara@stanford.edu

Joubert syndrome (JS) and Meckel syndrome (MKS) are pleiotropic ciliopathies 
characterized by severe defects of the cerebellar vermis, ranging from 
hypoplasia to aplasia. Interestingly, ciliary conditional mutant mice have a 
hypoplastic cerebellum in which the proliferation of cerebellar granule cell 
progenitors (GCPs) in response to Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is severely reduced. This 
suggests that Shh signaling defects could contribute to the vermis hypoplasia 
observed in the human syndromes. As existing JS/MKS mutant mouse models suggest 
apparently contradictory hypotheses on JS/MKS etiology, we investigated Shh 
signaling directly on human fetal samples. First, in an examination of human 
cerebellar development, we linked the rates of GCP proliferation to the 
different levels and localizations of active Shh signaling and showed that the 
GCP possessed a primary cilium with CEP290 at its base. Second, we found that 
the proliferation of GCPs and their response to SHH were severely impaired in 
the cerebellum of subjects with JS/MKS and Jeune syndrome. Finally, we showed 
that the defect in GCP proliferation was similar in the cerebellar vermis and 
hemispheres in all patients with ciliopathy analyzed, suggesting that the 
specific cause of vermal hypo-/aplasia precedes this defect. Our results, 
obtained from the analysis of human samples, show that the hemispheres and the 
vermis are affected in JS/MKS and provide evidence of a defective cellular 
mechanism in these pathologic processes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1201408109
PMCID: PMC3479472
PMID: 23027964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.