1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Feb;1828(2):294-301. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.09.016. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Uptake, efflux, and mass transfer coefficient of fluorescent PAMAM dendrimers 
into pancreatic cancer cells.

Opitz AW(1), Czymmek KJ, Wickstrom E, Wagner NJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular and Engineering Thermodynamics, Department of Chemical 
Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716, USA.

Targeted delivery of imaging agents to cells can be optimized with the 
understanding of uptake and efflux rates. Cellular uptake of macromolecules is 
studied frequently with fluorescent probes. We hypothesized that the 
internalization and efflux of fluorescently labeled macromolecules into and out 
of mammalian cells could be quantified by confocal microscopy to determine the 
rate of uptake and efflux, from which the mass transfer coefficient is 
calculated. The cellular influx and efflux of a third generation poly(amido 
amine) (PAMAM) dendrimer labeled with an Alexa Fluor 555 dye was measured in 
Capan-1 pancreatic cancer cells using confocal fluorescence microscopy. The 
Capan-1 cells were also labeled with 5-chloromethylfluorescein diacetate (CMFDA) 
green cell tracker dye to delineate cellular boundaries. A dilution curve of the 
fluorescently labeled PAMAM dendrimer enabled quantification of the 
concentration of dendrimer in the cell. A simple mass transfer model described 
the uptake and efflux behavior of the PAMAM dendrimer. The effective mass 
transfer coefficient was found to be 0.054±0.043μm/min, which corresponds to a 
rate constant of 0.035±0.023min(-1) for uptake of the PAMAM dendrimer into the 
Capan-1 cells. The effective mass transfer coefficient was shown to predict the 
efflux behavior of the PAMAM dendrimer from the cell if the fraction of labeled 
dendrimer undergoing non-specific binding is accounted for. This work introduces 
a novel method to quantify the mass transfer behavior of fluorescently labeled 
macromolecules into mammalian cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.09.016
PMCID: PMC3534946
PMID: 23022133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]