1. Semin Reprod Med. 2012 Oct;30(5):374-81. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1324720. Epub
2012  Oct 8.

Steroidogenic factor-1 and human disease.

El-Khairi R(1), Achermann JC.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, Clinical and Molecular Genetics 
Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

Steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) (Ad4BP, NR5A1) is a nuclear receptor that plays a 
key role in adrenal and reproductive development and function. Deletion of the 
gene encoding Sf-1 (Nr5a1) in mice results in severe developmental defects of 
the adrenal gland and gonad. Consequently, initial work on the potential effects 
of SF-1 disruption in humans focused on individuals with primary adrenal 
failure, a 46,XY karyotype, complete gonadal dysgenesis, and MÃ¼llerian 
structures. This is a rare phenotype, but has been reported on two occasions, 
because of alterations that affect key DNA-binding domains of SF-1. Attention 
then turned to a potential wider role of SF-1 in human adrenal and reproductive 
disorders. Although changes in SF-1 only very rarely cause isolated adrenal 
failure, it is emerging that variations in SF-1 are a surprisingly frequent 
cause of reproductive dysfunction in humans. In 46,XY disorders of sex 
development, a spectrum of phenotypes has been reported including severe and 
partial forms of gonadal (testicular) dysgenesis, hypospadias, anorchia with 
microphallus, and even male factor infertility. In 46,XX females, alterations in 
SF-1 are associated with primary ovarian insufficiency. Thus, SF-1 seems be a 
more significant factor in human reproductive health than was first envisioned, 
with implications for adults as well as children.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1324720
PMCID: PMC5159746
PMID: 23044873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.