1. Arch Ophthalmol. 2012 Oct;130(10):1301-8. doi:
10.1001/archophthalmol.2012.1906.

Identification of a novel mutation in the CDHR1 gene in a family with recessive 
retinal degeneration.

Duncan JL(1), Roorda A, Navani M, Vishweswaraiah S, Syed R, Soudry S, Ratnam K, 
Gudiseva HV, Lee P, Gaasterland T, Ayyagari R.

Author information:
(1)Shiley Eye Center, University of California San Diego, Jacobs Retina Center, 
9415 Campus Point Dr, Room 206, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the clinical phenotype and identify the molecular basis 
of disease in a consanguineous family of Palestinian origin with autosomal 
recessive retinal degeneration.
METHODS: Eight family members were evaluated with visual acuity and perimetry 
tests, color fundus photographs, full-field electroretinography, and optical 
coherence tomography. Cone photoreceptors surrounding the fovea were imaged in 2 
members, using adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy. Exome was captured 
using probes and sequenced. Readings were mapped to reference hg19. Variant 
calls and annotations were performed, using published protocols. Confirmation of 
variants and segregation analysis was performed using dideoxy sequencing.
RESULTS: Analysis detected 24 037 single-nucleotide variants in one affected 
family member, of which 3622 were rare and potentially damaging to encoded 
proteins. Further analysis revealed a novel homozygous nonsense change, c.1381 
C>T, p.Gln461X in exon 13 of the CDHR1 gene, which segregated with retinal 
degeneration in this family. Affected members had night blindness beginning 
during adolescence with progressive visual acuity and field loss and 
unmeasurable electroretinographic responses, as well as macular outer retinal 
loss, although residual cones with increased cone spacing were observed in the 
youngest individual.
CONCLUSIONS: Exome analysis revealed a novel CDHR1 nonsense mutation segregating 
with progressive retinal degeneration causing severe central vision loss by the 
fourth decade of life. High-resolution retinal imaging revealed outer retinal 
changes suggesting that CDHR1 is important for normal photoreceptor structure 
and survival.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Exome sequencing is a powerful technique that may identify 
causative genetic variants in families with autosomal recessive retinal 
degeneration.

DOI: 10.1001/archophthalmol.2012.1906
PMCID: PMC3799916
PMID: 23044944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]