1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046674. Epub 2012 Oct
3.

α-bisabolol is an effective proapoptotic agent against BCR-ABL(+) cells in 
synergism with Imatinib and Nilotinib.

Bonifacio M(1), Rigo A, Guardalben E, Bergamini C, Cavalieri E, Fato R, Pizzolo 
G, Suzuki H, Vinante F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology, University of Verona, Verona, 
Italy.

We showed that α-bisabolol is active against primary acute leukemia cells, 
including BCR-ABL(+) acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL). Here we studied the 
activity of α-bisabolol against BCR-ABL(+) cells using 3 cell lines (K562, 
LAMA-84, CML-T1) and 10 primary BCR-ABL(+) ALL samples. We found that: (a) 
α-bisabolol was effective in reducing BCR-ABL(+) cell viabilty at concentrations 
ranging from 53 to 73 µM; (b) α-bisabolol concentrations in BCR-ABL(+) cellular 
compartments were 4- to 12-fold higher than in normal cells, thus indicating a 
preferential intake in neoplastic cells; (c) α-bisabolol displayed a slight to 
strong synergism with the Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors (TKI) imatinib and 
nilotinib: the combination of α-bisabolol+imatinib allowed a dose reduction of 
each compound up to 7.2 and 9.4-fold respectively, while the combination of 
α-bisabolol+nilotinib up to 6.7 and 5-fold respectively; (d) α-bisabolol-induced 
apoptosis was associated with loss of plasma membrane integrity, irreversible 
opening of mitochondrial transition pore, disruption of mitochondrial potential, 
inhibition of oxygen consumption and increase of intracellular reactive oxygen 
species. These data indicate α-bisabolol as a candidate for treatment of 
BCR-ABL(+) leukemias to overcome resistance to TKI alone and to target leukemic 
cells through BCR-ABL-independent pathways.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046674
PMCID: PMC3463553
PMID: 23056396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.