1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2012 Dec 1;11(12):942-50. doi:
10.1016/j.dnarep.2012.09.003.  Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Lack of CAK complex accumulation at DNA damage sites in XP-B and XP-B/CS 
fibroblasts reveals differential regulation of CAK anchoring to core TFIIH by 
XPB and XPD helicases during nucleotide excision repair.

Zhu Q(1), Wani G, Sharma N, Wani A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
zhu.49@osu.edu

Transcription factor II H (TFIIH) is composed of core TFIIH and Cdk-activating 
kinase (CAK) complexes. Besides transcription, TFIIH also participates in 
nucleotide excision repair (NER), verifying DNA lesions through its helicase 
components XPB and XPD. The assembly state of TFIIH is known to be affected by 
truncation mutations in xeroderma pigmentosum group G/Cockayne syndrome 
(XP-G/CS). Here, we showed that CAK component MAT1 was rapidly recruited to 
UV-induced DNA damage sites, co-localizing with core TFIIH component p62, and 
dispersed from the damage sites upon completion of DNA repair. While the core 
TFIIH-CAK association remained intact, MAT1 failed to accumulate at DNA damage 
sites in fibroblasts harboring XP-B or XP-B/CS mutations. Nevertheless, MAT1, 
XPD and XPC as well as XPG were able to accumulate at damage sites in XP-D 
fibroblasts, in which the core TFIIH-CAK association also remained intact. 
Interestingly, XPG recruitment was impaired in XP-B/CS fibroblasts derived from 
patients with mild phenotype, but persisted in XP-B/CS fibroblasts from severely 
affected patients resulting in a nonfunctional preincision complex. An 
examination of steady-state levels of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) indicated that 
UV-induced RNAPII phosphorylation was dramatically reduced in XP-B/CS 
fibroblasts. These results demonstrated that the CAK rapidly disassociates from 
the core TFIIH upon assembly of nonfunctional preincision complex in XP-B and 
XP-B/CS cells. The persistency of nonfunctional preincision complex correlates 
with the severity exhibited by XP-B patients. The results suggest that XPB and 
XPD helicases differentially regulate the anchoring of CAK to core TFIIH during 
damage verification step of NER.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2012.09.003
PMCID: PMC3501591
PMID: 23083890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]