1. BMC Evol Biol. 2012 Nov 8;12:214. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-12-214.

Adaptive evolution of the chrysanthemyl diphosphate synthase gene involved in 
irregular monoterpene metabolism.

Liu PL(1), Wan JN, Guo YP, Ge S, Rao GY.

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

BACKGROUND: Chrysanthemyl diphosphate synthase (CDS) is a key enzyme in 
biosynthetic pathways producing pyrethrins and irregular monoterpenes. These 
compounds are confined to plants of the tribe Anthemideae of the Asteraceae, and 
play an important role in defending the plants against herbivorous insects. It 
has been proposed that the CDS genes arose from duplication of the farnesyl 
diphosphate synthase (FDS) gene and have different function from FDSs. However, 
the duplication time toward the origin of CDS and the evolutionary force behind 
the functional divergence of the CDS gene are still unknown.
RESULTS: Two duplication events were detected in the evolutionary history of the 
FDS gene family in the Asteraceae, and the second duplication led to the origin 
of CDS. CDS occurred after the divergence of the tribe Mutisieae from other 
tribes of Asteraceae but before the birth of the Anthemideae tribe. After its 
origin, CDS accumulated four mutations in sites homologous to the 
substrate-binding and catalysis sites of FDS. Of these, two sites were involved 
in the binding of the nucleophilic substrate isopentenyl diphosphate in FDS. 
Maximum likelihood analyses showed that some sites in CDS were under positive 
selection and were scattered throughout primary sequences, whereas in the 
three-dimensional structure model they clustered in the large central cavity.
CONCLUSION: Positive selection associated with gene duplication played a major 
role in the evolution of CDS.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-12-214
PMCID: PMC3518182
PMID: 23137178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]