1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49150. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049150. Epub 2012 Nov
7.

Induced tauopathy in a novel 3D-culture model mediates neurodegenerative 
processes: a real-time study on biochips.

Seidel D(1), Krinke D, Jahnke HG, Hirche A, Klo√ü D, Mack TG, Striggow F, 
Robitzki A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Biotechnology and Biomedicine (BBZ), University of Leipzig, 
Division of Molecular Biological-Biochemical Processing Technology, Leipzig, 
Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2013 Jan;9(1):2. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.245.

Tauopathies including Alzheimer's disease represent one of the major health 
problems of aging population worldwide. Therefore, a better understanding of 
tau-dependent pathologies and consequently, tau-related intervention strategies 
is highly demanded. In recent years, several tau-focused therapies have been 
proposed with the aim to stop disease progression. However, to develop efficient 
active pharmaceutical ingredients for the broad treatment of Alzheimer's disease 
patients, further improvements are necessary for understanding the detailed 
neurodegenerative processes as well as the mechanism and side effects of 
potential active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) in the neuronal system. In 
this context, there is a lack of suitable complex in vitro cell culture models 
recapitulating major aspects of taupathological degenerative processes in 
sufficient time and reproducible manner.Herewith, we describe a novel 3D SH-SY5Y 
cell-based, tauopathy model that shows advanced characteristics of matured 
neurons in comparison to monolayer cultures without the need of artificial 
differentiation promoting agents. Moreover, the recombinant expression of a 
novel highly pathologic fourfold mutated human tau variant lead to a fast and 
emphasized degeneration of neuritic processes. The neurodegenerative effects 
could be analyzed in real time and with high sensitivity using our unique 
microcavity array-based impedance spectroscopy measurement system. We were able 
to quantify a time- and concentration-dependent relative impedance decrease when 
Alzheimer's disease-like tau pathology was induced in the neuronal 3D cell 
culture model. In combination with the collected optical information, the 
degenerative processes within each 3D-culture could be monitored and analyzed. 
More strikingly, tau-specific regenerative effects caused by tau-focused active 
pharmaceutical ingredients could be quantitatively monitored by impedance 
spectroscopy.Bringing together our novel complex 3D cell culture taupathology 
model and our microcavity array-based impedimetric measurement system, we 
provide a powerful tool for the label-free investigation of tau-related 
pathology processes as well as the high content analysis of potential active 
pharmaceutical ingredient candidates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049150
PMCID: PMC3492324
PMID: 23145103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Till G.A. Mack and Frank 
Striggow were formerly employed by the the KeyNeurotek Pharmaceuticals AG. This 
does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing 
data and materials.