1. Food Funct. 2013 Feb;4(2):200-12. doi: 10.1039/c2fo30199g.

Anti-diabetic functions of soy isoflavone genistein: mechanisms underlying its 
effects on pancreatic β-cell function.

Gilbert ER(1), Liu D.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, 
Virginia 24061, USA.

Type 2 diabetes is a result of chronic insulin resistance and loss of functional 
pancreatic β-cell mass. Strategies to preserve β-cell mass and a greater 
understanding of the mechanisms underlying β-cell turnover are needed to prevent 
and treat this devastating disease. Genistein, a naturally occurring soy 
isoflavone, is reported to have numerous health benefits attributed to multiple 
biological functions. Over the past 10 years, numerous studies have demonstrated 
that genistein has anti-diabetic effects, in particular, direct effects on 
β-cell proliferation, glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and protection 
against apoptosis, independent of its functions as an estrogen receptor agonist, 
antioxidant, or tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Effects are structure-specific and 
not common to all flavonoids. While there are limited data on the effects of 
genistein consumption in humans with diabetes, there are a plethora of animal 
and cell-culture studies that demonstrate a direct effect of genistein on 
β-cells at physiologically relevant concentrations (<10 μM). The effects appear 
to involve cAMP/PKA signaling and there are some studies that suggest an effect 
on epigenetic regulation of gene expression. This review focuses on the 
anti-diabetic effects of genistein in both in vitro and in vivo models and 
potential mechanisms underlying its direct effects on β-cells.

DOI: 10.1039/c2fo30199g
PMCID: PMC3678366
PMID: 23160185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]