1. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2012 Oct;12(10):1289-97. doi: 10.1586/era.12.116.

Potential of whole-genome sequencing for determining risk and personalizing 
therapy: focus on AML.

Borate U(1), Absher D, Erba HP, Pasche B.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham and UAB Comprehensive Cancer Center, Birmingham, AL, USA.

In spite of recent advances in molecular diagnostic techniques and expanded 
indications for allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, treatment of 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains a major challenge. In the last decade, 
several recurrent genetic abnormalities and gene mutations with prognostic 
implications have been identified. This has led to improved informed treatment 
decisions. However, there has been limited change in the use of nonspecific 
cytotoxic chemotherapy and mortality rates continue to be unacceptably high, 
with 5 year overall survival rates of older AML patients at 30% or less. 
Whole-genome sequencing offers hope for greater diagnostic accuracy and is 
likely to lead to further characterization of disease subsets with differential 
outcome and response to treatment. The holy grail of personalized targeted 
therapy for the individual AML patient, while minimizing toxicity and prolonging 
survival, appears closer than ever.

DOI: 10.1586/era.12.116
PMCID: PMC3636990
PMID: 23176617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial & competing interests disclosure The 
authors have no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any 
organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with 
the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes 
employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert 
testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties. No writing 
assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.