1. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Mar;34(3):689-93. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs373. Epub 2012
Nov  27.

Genetic variation in a hsa-let-7 binding site in RAD52 is associated with breast 
cancer susceptibility.

Jiang Y(1), Qin Z, Hu Z, Guan X, Wang Y, He Y, Xue J, Liu X, Chen J, Dai J, Jin 
G, Ma H, Wang S, Shen H.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

Genetic variants may influence miRNA-mRNA interaction through modulate binding 
affinity, creating or destroying miRNA-binding sites. Twenty-four single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that were predicted to affect the binding 
affinity of breast cancer-related miRNAs to 3'-untranslated regions (UTR) of 
known genes were genotyped in 878 breast cancer cases and 900 controls in 
Chinese women. Three promising SNPs (rs10494836, rs10857748 and rs7963551) were 
further validated in additional 914 breast cancer cases and 967 controls. The 
variant allele (C) of rs7963551 at 3'-UTR of RAD52 showed a consistently reduced 
breast cancer risk in two stages with a combined odds ratio (OR) of 0.84 [95% 
confidence interval (CI) = 0.75-0.95], which was more prominent among women with 
early age at first live birth (OR = 0.71, 95% CI = 0.58-0.87). A significant 
interaction was observed between rs7963551 and age at first live birth on breast 
cancer risk (P for interaction = 0.04). Luciferase activity assay showed a 
higher expression level for rs7963551 C allele as compared with A allele (P = 
5.19 Ã— 10(-3) for MCF-7 cell lines), which might be due to a reduced inhibition 
from a weakened binding capacity of miRNA to 3'-UTR of RAD52 harboring C allele. 
These findings indicate that rs7963551 located at hsa-let-7 binding site may 
alter expression of RAD52 through modulating miRNA-mRNA interaction and 
contribute to the development of breast cancer in Chinese women.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgs373
PMID: 23188672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]