1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Nov 29;14(6):R260. doi: 10.1186/ar4105.

Raised circulating tenascin-C in rheumatoid arthritis.

Page TH, Charles PJ, Piccinini AM, Nicolaidou V, Taylor PC, Midwood KS.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to examine whether circulating levels of 
the pro-inflammatory glycoprotein tenascin-C (TNC) are elevated in 
musculoskeletal disorders including rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and to assess in 
RA whether levels are related to clinical disease status and/or patient response 
to treatment.
METHODS: TNC in serum or plasma was quantified by ELISA. Samples from 4 cohorts 
of RA patients were examined and compared to normal human subjects and to 
patients with other inflammatory diseases.
RESULTS: Circulating TNC levels were significantly raised in patients with RA, 
as well as patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, idiopathic inflammatory 
myositis, psoriatic arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis, whilst patients with 
Sjogren's syndrome displayed levels similar to healthy controls. The highest 
levels of TNC were observed in RA patients with late stage disease. In early 
disease TNC levels correlated positively with ultrasound determined erosion 
scores. Treatment of early RA patients with infliximab plus methotrexate (MTX) 
resulted in a transient decrease in circulating TNC over the first year of 
therapy. In contrast, TNC levels increased over time in RA patients receiving 
MTX alone. In patients treated with infliximab plus MTX, baseline TNC levels 
significantly correlated with tender joint counts (TJC) at 18 and 54 weeks after 
initiation of infliximab therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Raised circulating TNC levels are detected in specific inflammatory 
diseases. Levels are especially high in RA where they may act as a biomarker of 
bone erosion and a predictor of the effect of infliximab on RA patient joint 
pain.

DOI: 10.1186/ar4105
PMCID: PMC3674624
PMID: 23193984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]