1. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2013 Jun;61(3):88-92. doi: 10.1016/j.patbio.2012.10.002. 
Epub 2012 Nov 30.

Effect of different genetics variants: CYP2C9*2, CYP2C9*3 of cytochrome P-450 
CYP2C9 and 1639G>A of the VKORC1 gene; On acenocoumarol requirement in Moroccan 
patients.

Smires FZ(1), Habbal R, Moreau C, Assaidi A, Loriot MA, Nadifi S.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetic Laboratory and Molecular Pathology, Medical School, 19 rue 
Tarik-Bnou-ziad, BP 9154 Casablanca, Morocco. smires_fz@yahoo.fr

Coumarin derivatives such as acenocoumarol represent the therapy of choice for 
the long-term treatment and prevention of thromboembolic diseases. Many genetics 
determinants involved in the metabolism of acenocoumarol have been shown to 
influence the anticoagulant dosage. The aim of this work was to evaluate, for 
the first time in Maghreb, the allelic frequencies of CYP2C9*2, CYP2C9*3 and 
VKORC1 -1639G>A mutations, and to establish the role of this polymorphisms in 
modulating the acenocoumarol requirement in Moroccan patients receiving 
anticoagulation treatment. Three groups of patients, with low, medium, or high 
acenocoumarol dose requirements were studied. Genetic analyses of VKORC1 
-1639G>A, CYP2C9*2, and CYP2C9*3, were performed in 114 Moroccan patients with 
stable acenocoumarol dose. The results showed that the allelic frequencies of 
the three mutations studied was varies, most of patients having CYP2C9*2 and 
CYP2C9*3 mutations belong to a group with low dose of acenocoumarol, with 
P-value of 0.0082 and the single patient with CYP2C9*3 on homozygous form 
belongs to the same group and carried the A allele for VKORC1 gene. In 
conclusion, the present study confirmed the large interindividual variability in 
acenocoumarol maintenance dose due to CYP2C9*2, CYP2C9*3 and VKORC1 -1639G>A 
polymorphisms, and demonstrated that these alleles modulates sensitivity to 
acenocoumarol, a finding indicating that a reduced initial loading dose of 
acenocoumarol should be used in carriers of this allele, also, she indicates the 
usefulness of predictive testing concerning these mutations when an 
hypocoagulability is installed and not explained by the dose of VKA.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.patbio.2012.10.002
PMID: 23201087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]