1. Int J Mol Sci. 2012 Sep 28;13(10):12428-60. doi: 10.3390/ijms131012428.

Computational protein engineering: bridging the gap between rational design and 
laboratory evolution.

Barrozo A(1), Borstnar R, Marloie G, Kamerlin SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala Biomedical Center (BMC), 
Uppsala University, Box 596, S-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden. kamerlin@icm.uu.se.

Enzymes are tremendously proficient catalysts, which can be used as 
extracellular catalysts for a whole host of processes, from chemical synthesis 
to the generation of novel biofuels. For them to be more amenable to the needs 
of biotechnology, however, it is often necessary to be able to manipulate their 
physico-chemical properties in an efficient and streamlined manner, and, 
ideally, to be able to train them to catalyze completely new reactions. Recent 
years have seen an explosion of interest in different approaches to achieve 
this, both in the laboratory, and in silico. There remains, however, a gap 
between current approaches to computational enzyme design, which have primarily 
focused on the early stages of the design process, and laboratory evolution, 
which is an extremely powerful tool for enzyme redesign, but will always be 
limited by the vastness of sequence space combined with the low frequency for 
desirable mutations. This review discusses different approaches towards 
computational enzyme design and demonstrates how combining newly developed 
screening approaches that can rapidly predict potential mutation "hotspots" with 
approaches that can quantitatively and reliably dissect the catalytic step can 
bridge the gap that currently exists between computational enzyme design and 
laboratory evolution studies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms131012428
PMCID: PMC3497281
PMID: 23202907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]