1. Int J Mol Sci. 2012 Oct 24;13(11):13804-15. doi: 10.3390/ijms131113804.

Asymmetric dimethylarginine plasma levels and endothelial function in newly 
diagnosed type 2 diabetic patients.

Sciacqua A(1), Grillo N, Quero M, Sesti G, Perticone F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University Magna Græcia of 
Catanzaro, Campus Germaneto, viale Europa, 88100, Italy. perticone@unicz.it

It is now well established that major risk factors for cardiovascular diseases 
(CVD) impact upon endothelial function by decreasing nitric oxide (NO) 
bioavailability. Asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), an endogenous analog of 
l-arginine, is able to inhibit the activity of endothelial-NO synthase, 
promoting endothelial dysfunction. Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is characterized by a 
reduced endothelium-dependent vasodilation and increased ADMA levels and ADMA is 
strongly associated with micro- and macrovascular diabetic complications. 
However, there are not a lot of data about the role of ADMA on endothelial 
function in newly diagnosed T2D patients without cardiovascular (CV) 
complications. For this aim, we have enrolled forty-five newly diagnosed T2D 
patients, evaluated by a oral glucose tolerance test, and thirty normal 
subjects. Endothelium-dependent and -independent vasodilatation was investigated 
by intra-arterial infusion of increasing doses of acetylcholine (ACh) and sodium 
nitroprusside. ADMA was measured by high-performance liquid chromatography and 
insulin resistance (IR) by HOMA. Newly diagnosed T2D patients showed higher ADMA 
and l-arginine mean values in comparison with normal subjects and a 
significantly reduced ACh-stimulated forearm blood flow (FBF). In T2D patients 
FBF was significantly and inversely correlated with ADMA (r = −0.524, p < 
0.0001) and in a multivariate regression analysis, ADMA resulted the stronger 
predictor of FBF, explaining the 27.5% of variability (p < 0.0001). In 
conclusion, ADMA was strongly related to endothelial dysfunction also in 
patients with newly diagnosed T2D, without clinically manifest vascular 
complications. This field is of great interest for understanding the mechanisms 
underlying the pathogenesis of diabetic disease and its CV complications.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms131113804
PMCID: PMC3509551
PMID: 23203035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]