1. Biochemistry. 2013 Jan 8;52(1):115-24. doi: 10.1021/bi3009483. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Proper protein glycosylation promotes mitogen-activated protein kinase signal 
fidelity.

Lien EC(1), Nagiec MJ, Dohlman HG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

The ability of cells to sense and respond appropriately to changing 
environmental conditions is often mediated by signal transduction pathways that 
employ mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs). In the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, the high-osmolarity glycerol (HOG) and filamentous growth (FG) 
pathways are activated following hyperosmotic stress and nutrient deprivation, 
respectively. Whereas the HOG pathway requires the MAPK Hog1, the FG pathway 
employs the MAPK Kss1. We conducted a comprehensive screen of nearly 5000 gene 
deletion strains for mutants that exhibit inappropriate cross-talk between the 
HOG and FG pathways. We identified two novel mutants, mnn10Δ and mnn11Δ, that 
allow activation of Kss1 under conditions that normally stimulate Hog1. MNN10 
and MNN11 encode mannosyltransferases that are part of the N-glycosylation 
machinery within the Golgi apparatus; deletion of either gene results in 
N-glycosylated proteins that have shorter mannan chains. Deletion of the cell 
surface mucin Msb2 suppressed the mnn11Δ phenotype, while mutation of a single 
glycosylation site within Msb2 was sufficient to confer inappropriate activation 
of Kss1 by salt stress. These findings reveal new components of the 
N-glycosylation machinery needed to ensure MAPK signaling fidelity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi3009483
PMCID: PMC3540157
PMID: 23210626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]