1. BMC Immunol. 2012 Dec 10;13:67. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-13-67.

Sequence-based in silico analysis of well studied hepatitis C virus epitopes and 
their variants in other genotypes (particularly genotype 5a) against South 
African human leukocyte antigen backgrounds.

Prabdial-Sing N(1), Puren AJ, Bowyer SM.

Author information:
(1)Specialized Molecular Diagnostics, Hepatitis Unit, National Institute for 
Communicable Diseases, National Health Laboratory Services, Johannesburg, South 
Africa. niship@nicd.ac.za

BACKGROUND: Host genetics influence the outcome of HCV disease. HCV is also 
highly mutable and escapes host immunity. HCV genotypes are geographically 
distributed and HCV subtypes have been shown to have distinct repertoires of 
HLA-restricted viral epitopes which explains the lack of cross protection across 
genotypes observed in some studies. Despite this, immune databases and putative 
epitope vaccines concentrate almost exclusively on HCV genotype 1 class 
I-epitopes restricted by the HLA-A*02 allele. While both genotype and allele 
predominate in developed countries, we hypothesise that HCV variation and 
population genetics will affect the efficacy of proposed epitope vaccines in 
South Africa. This in silico study investigates HCV viral variability within 
well-studied epitopes identified in genotype 1 and uses algorithms to predict 
the immunogenicity of their variants from other less studied genotypes and thus 
rate the most promising vaccine candidates for the South African population. Six 
class I- and seven class II- restricted epitope sequences within the core, NS3, 
NS4B and NS5B regions were compared across the six HCV genotypes using local 
genotype 5a sequence data together with global data. Common HLA alleles in the 
South African population are A30:01, A02:01, B58:02, B07:02; DRB1*13:01 and 
DRB1*03:01. Epitope binding to 13 class I- and 8 class -II alleles were 
described using web-based prediction servers, Immune Epitope Database, (IEDB) 
and Propred. Online population coverage tools were used to assess vaccine 
efficacy.
RESULTS: Despite the homogeneity of genotype 1 and genotype 5 over the epitopes, 
there was limited promiscuity to local HLA-alleles.Host differences will make a 
putative vaccine less effective in South Africa. Of the 6 well-characterized 
class I- epitopes, only 2 class I- epitopes were promiscuous and 3 of the 7 
class-II epitopes were better conserved and promiscuous. By fine tuning the 
putative vaccine using an optimal cocktail of genotype 1 and 5a epitopes and 
local HLA data, the coverage was raised from 65.85% to 91.87% in South African 
Blacks.
CONCLUSION: While in vivo and in vitro studies are needed to confirm immunogenic 
epitopes, in silico HCV epitope vaccine design which takes into account HCV 
variation and host allele frequency will maximize population coverage in 
different ethnic groups.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2172-13-67
PMCID: PMC3552980
PMID: 23227878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]