1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50773. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050773. Epub 2012 Nov 
30.

eIF4E is an important determinant of adhesion and pseudohyphal growth of the 
yeast S. cerevisiae.

Ross D(1), Saxena M, Altmann M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.

eIF4E, the cytoplasmatic cap-binding protein, is required for efficient 
cap-dependent translation. We have studied the influence of mutations that alter 
the activity and/or expression level of eIF4E on haploid and diploid cells in 
the yeast S. cerevisiae. Temperature-sensitive eIF4E mutants with reduced levels 
of expression and reduced cap-binding affinity clearly show a loss in haploid 
adhesion and diploid pseudohyphenation upon starvation for nitrogen. Some of 
these mutations affect the interaction of the cap-structure of mRNAs with the 
cap-binding groove of eIF4E. The observed reduction in adhesive and 
pseudohyphenating properties is less evident for an eIF4E mutant that shows 
reduced interaction with p20 (an eIF4E-binding protein) or for a p20-knockout 
mutant. Loss of adhesive and pseudohyphenating properties was not only observed 
for eIF4E mutants but also for knockout mutants of components of eIF4F such as 
eIF4B and eIF4G1. We conclude from these experiments that mutations that affect 
components of the eIF4F-complex loose properties such as adhesion and 
pseudohyphal differentiation, most likely due to less effective translation of 
required mRNAs for such processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050773
PMCID: PMC3511313
PMID: 23226381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.