1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Apr;52(4):385-401. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22036. Epub
 2012 Dec 10.

New recurrent balanced translocations in acute myeloid leukemia and 
myelodysplastic syndromes: cancer and leukemia group B 8461.

Walker A(1), Mrózek K, Kohlschmidt J, Rao KW, Pettenati MJ, Sterling LJ, 
Marcucci G, Carroll AJ, Bloomfield CD; Alliance for Clinical Trials in Oncology.

Collaborators: Crawford J, Bigner SH, Budman DR, Koduru PR, Bloomfield CD, 
Heerema NA, Levine EG, Block AW, Burstein HJ, Tantravahi R, Dal Cin P, Bartlett 
NL, Watson MS, Crawford EC, Garcia-Heras J, Hurd DD, Pettenati MJ, Vaena DA, 
Patil SR, Kindler HL, Le Beau MM, Peterson BA, Arthur DC, Nattam S, Bader PI, 
Graziano SL, Stein CK, Parker BA, Bernstein R, Edelman MJ, Testa JR, Lister J, 
Diggans GR, Diasio R, Carroll AJ, Dragnev K, Wurster-Hill DH, Grunberg SM, Tang 
M, Roberts JD, Jackson-Cook C, Rafla S, Verma RS, Freter CE, Miles JH, Shea TC, 
Rao KW, Sikov W, Padre-Mendoza T, Niell HB, Tharapel SA, Ganti A, Sanger WG, 
Ryan C, Richkind KE, Grubbs SS, Borgaonkar DS, Van Echo D, Richkind KE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Ohio 
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Acquired chromosome abnormalities in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) 
and myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are among the most valuable determinants of 
diagnosis and prognosis. In search of new recurrent balanced translocations, we 
reviewed the Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) cytogenetics database 
containing pretreatment and relapse karyotypes of 4,701 adults with AML and 565 
with MDS who were treated on CALGB trials. We identified all cases with balanced 
structural rearrangements occurring as a sole abnormality or in addition to one 
other abnormality, excluded abnormalities known to be recurrent, and then 
reviewed the literature to determine whether any of what we considered unique, 
previously unknown abnormalities had been reported. As a result, we identified 
seven new recurrent balanced translocations in AML or MDS: t(7;11)(q22;p15.5), 
t(10;11)(q23;p15), t(2;12)(p13;p13), t(12;17)(p13;q12), t(2;3)(p21;p21), 
t(5;21)(q31;q22), and t(8;14)(q24.1;q32.2), and additionally, t(10;12)(p11;q15), 
a new translocation in AML previously reported in a case of acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia. Herein, we report hematologic and clinical characteristics and 
treatment outcomes of patients with these newly recognized recurrent 
translocations. We also report 52 unique balanced translocations, together with 
the clinical data of patients harboring them, which to our knowledge have not 
been previously published. We hope that once the awareness of their existence is 
increased, some of these translocations may become recognized as novel recurring 
abnormalities. Identification of additional cases with both the new recurrent 
and the unique balanced translocations will enable determination of their 
prognostic significance and help to provide insights into the mechanisms of 
disease pathogenesis in patients with these rare abnormalities.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.22036
PMCID: PMC3874732
PMID: 23225546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]