1. J Cell Sci. 2013 Jan 15;126(Pt 2):464-72. doi: 10.1242/jcs.111773. Epub 2012
Dec  10.

Positional editing of transmembrane domains during ion channel assembly.

Ã–jemalm K(1), Watson HR, Roboti P, Cross BC, Warwicker J, von Heijne G, High S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Center for Biomembrane Research, 
Stockholm University, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden.

The integration of transmembrane (TM)-spanning regions of many channels and ion 
transporters is potentially compromised by the presence of polar and charged 
residues required for biological function. Although the two TMs of the ATP-gated 
ion channel subunit P2X2 each contain charged/polar amino acids, we found that 
each TM is efficiently membrane inserted when it is analysed in isolation, and 
uncovered no evidence for cooperativity between these two TMs during P2X2 
integration. However, using minimal N-glycosylation distance mapping, we find 
that the positioning of TM2 in newly synthesized P2X2 monomers is distinct from 
that seen in subunits of the high-resolution structures of assembled homologous 
trimers. We conclude that P2X2 monomers are initially synthesised at the 
endoplasmic reticulum in a distinct conformation, where the extent of the 
TM-spanning regions is primarily defined by the thermodynamic cost of their 
membrane integration at the Sec61 translocon. In this model, TM2 of P2X2 
subsequently undergoes a process of positional editing within the membrane that 
correlates with trimerisation of the monomer, a process requiring specific 
polar/charged residues in both TM1 and TM2. We postulate that the assembly 
process offsets any energetic cost of relocating TM2, and find evidence that 
positional editing of TM2 in the acid-sensing ion channel (ASIC1a) is even more 
pronounced than that observed for P2X2. Taken together, these data further 
underline the potential complexities involved in accurately predicting TM 
domains. We propose that the orchestrated repositioning of TM segments during 
subunit oligomerisation plays an important role in generating the functional 
architecture of active ion channels, and suggest that the regulation of this 
underappreciated biosynthetic step may provide an elegant mechanism for 
maintaining ER homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.111773
PMCID: PMC3613178
PMID: 23230148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]