1. Neuromolecular Med. 2013 Mar;15(1):180-91. doi: 10.1007/s12017-012-8209-7.
Epub  2012 Dec 13.

Variable phenotypes of knockin mice carrying the M712T Gne mutation.

Sela I(1), Yakovlev L, Becker Cohen M, Elbaz M, Yanay N, Ben Shlomo U, Yotvat H, 
Fellig Y, Argov Z, Mitrani-Rosenbaum S.

Author information:
(1)Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy, Hadassah Hospital, Hadassah Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Mount Scopus, 91240, Jerusalem, Israel.

GNE myopathy is a recessive adult onset, slowly progressive distal and proximal 
myopathy, caused by mutations in the GNE gene. The most frequent mutation in GNE 
myopathy patients is the Middle Eastern founder mutation M712T. We have 
generated Gne (M712T/M712T) knockin mice. A high mortality rate in the first 
generation due to renal failure was recorded (as previously described). However, 
the following Gne (M712T/M712T) offspring generations could be classified into 3 
phenotypic categories: severe, mild and without apparent phenotype. By further 
crossing between mice with no apparent phenotype, we were able to establish a 
colony of Gne (M712T/M712T) knockin mice with a high- and long-term survival 
rate, lacking any renal phenotype. These mice did not present any muscle 
phenotype (clinical or pathological) for up to 18Â months. No correlation was 
found between the expression of any of the two mRNA Gne isoforms in muscle and 
the mouse genotype or phenotype. However, the expression of isoform 2 mRNA was 
significantly higher in the kidney of Gne (M712T/M712T) kidney affected mice 
compared with control. In contrast, the expression of UPR markers Bip, Chop and 
of the spliced form of XBP1, was upregulated in muscle of Gne (M712T/M712T) mice 
compared with controls, but was unchanged in the affected kidney. Thus, Gne 
defects can affect both muscle and kidney in mouse, but probably through 
different mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s12017-012-8209-7
PMID: 23238814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]