1. Front Immunol. 2012 Dec 17;3:383. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00383. eCollection 
2012.

CD4 binding determinant mimicry for HIV vaccine design.

Nishiyama Y(1), Planque S, Hanson CV, Massey RJ, Paul S.

Author information:
(1)Chemical Immunology Research Center, Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, University of Texas-Houston Medical School Houston, TX, USA.

The immunodominant epitopes expressed by the HIV-1 envelope protein gp120 are 
hypermutable, defeating attempts to develop an effective HIV vaccine. Targeting 
the structurally conserved gp120 determinant that binds host CD4 receptors 
(CD4BD) and initiates infection is a more promising route to vaccination, but 
this has proved difficult because of the conformational flexibility of gp120 and 
immune evasion mechanisms used by the virus. Mimicking the outer CD4BD 
conformational epitopes is difficult because of their discontinuous nature. The 
CD4BD region composed of residues 421-433 (CD4BD(core)) is a linear epitope, but 
this region possesses B cell superantigenic character. While superantigen 
epitopes are vulnerable to a small subset of spontaneously produced neutralizing 
antibodies present in humans without infection (innate antibodies), their 
non-covalent binding to B cell receptors (BCRs) does not stimulate an effective 
adaptive response from B cells. Covalent binding at naturally occurring 
nucleophilic sites of the BCRs by an electrophilic gp120 (E-gp120) analog is a 
promising solution. E-gp120 induces the synthesis of neutralizing antibodies the 
CD4BD(core). The highly energetic covalent reaction is hypothesized to convert 
the abortive superantigens-BCR interaction into a stimulatory signal, and the 
binding of a spatially distinct epitope at the traditional combining site of the 
BCRs may furnish a second stimulatory signal. Flexible synthetic peptides can 
detect pre-existing CD4BD(core)-specific neutralizing antibodies. However, 
induced-fit conformational transitions of the peptides dictated by the antibody 
combining site structure may induce the synthesis of non-neutralizing 
antibodies. Successful vaccine targeting of the CD4BD will require a 
sufficiently rigid immunogen that mimics the native epitope conformation and 
bypasses B cell checkpoints restricting synthesis of the neutralizing 
antibodies.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00383
PMCID: PMC3523313
PMID: 23251137