1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 May;58:170-86. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.12.012. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

S100A8 and S100A9-oxidant scavengers in inflammation.

Gomes LH(1), Raftery MJ, Yan WX, Goyette JD, Thomas PS, Geczy CL.

Author information:
(1)Inflammation and Infection Research Centre, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.

S100A8 and S100A9 are generally considered proinflammatory. Hypohalous acids 
generated by activated phagocytes promote novel modifications in murine S100A8 
but modifications to human S100A8 are undefined and there is no evidence that 
these proteins scavenge oxidants in human disease. Recombinant S100A8 was 
exquisitely sensitive to equimolar ratios of HOCl, which generated sulfinic and 
sulfonic acid intermediates and novel oxathiazolidine oxide/dioxide forms (mass 
additions, m/z +30 and +46) on the single Cys42 residue. Met78(O) and Trp54(+16) 
were also present. HOBr generated sulfonic acid intermediates and oxidized 
Trp54(+16). Evidence for oxidation of the single Cys3 residue in recS100A9 HOCl 
was weak; Met63, Met81, Met83, and Met94 were converted to Met(O) in vitro. 
Oxidized S100A8 was prominent in lungs from patients with asthma and 
significantly elevated in sputum compared to controls, whereas S100A8 and S100A9 
were not significantly increased. Oxidized monomeric S100A8 was the major 
component in asthmatic sputum, and modifications, including the oxathiazolidine 
adducts, were similar to those generated by HOCl in vitro. Oxidized Met63, 
Met81, and Met94 were variously present in S100A9 from asthmatic sputum. Results 
have broad implications for conditions under which hypohalous acid oxidants are 
generated by activated phagocytes. Identification in human disease of the novel 
S100A8 Cys derivatives typical of those generated in vitro strongly supports the 
notion that S100A8 contributes to antioxidant defense during oxidative stress.

Crown Copyright Â© 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.12.012
PMID: 23277148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]