1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Dec 28;7:103. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-103.

Four new loci associations discovered by pathway-based and network analyses of 
the genome-wide variability profile of Hirschsprung's disease.

Fernández RM(1), Bleda M, Núñez-Torres R, Medina I, Luzón-Toro B, García-Alonso 
L, Torroglosa A, Marbà M, Enguix-Riego MV, Montaner D, Antiñolo G, Dopazo J, 
Borrego S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Reproduction and Fetal Medicine, Institute of 
Biomedicine of Seville (IBIS, University Hospital Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/University of Seville, Seville, Spain.

Finding gene associations in rare diseases is frequently hampered by the reduced 
numbers of patients accessible. Conventional gene-based association tests rely 
on the availability of large cohorts, which constitutes a serious limitation for 
its application in this scenario. To overcome this problem we have used here a 
combined strategy in which a pathway-based analysis (PBA) has been initially 
conducted to prioritize candidate genes in a Spanish cohort of 53 trios of 
short-segment Hirschsprung's disease. Candidate genes have been further 
validated in an independent population of 106 trios. The study revealed a strong 
association of 11 gene ontology (GO) modules related to signal transduction and 
its regulation, enteric nervous system (ENS) formation and other HSCR-related 
processes. Among the preselected candidates, a total of 4 loci, RASGEF1A, 
IQGAP2, DLC1 and CHRNA7, related to signal transduction and migration processes, 
were found to be significantly associated to HSCR. Network analysis also 
confirms their involvement in the network of already known disease genes. This 
approach, based on the study of functionally-related gene sets, requires of 
lower sample sizes and opens new opportunities for the study of rare diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-103
PMCID: PMC3575329
PMID: 23270508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]