1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2013 Jan;61(1):70-6. doi:
10.1097/FJC.0b013e318278575e.

Functional and RNA expression profile of adenosine receptor subtypes in mouse 
mesenteric arteries.

Teng B(1), Fil D, Tilley SL, Ledent C, Krahn T, Mustafa SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Center for Cardiovascular and 
Respiratory Sciences, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA. 
bteng@hsc.wvu.edu

Concentration-response curves (CRCs) of adenosine receptor (AR) agonists, NECA 
(nonspecific), CCPA (A1 specific), CGS-216870 (A2A specific), BAY 60-6583 (A2B 
specific), and Cl-IB-MECA (A3 specific) for mesenteric arteries (MAs) from 4 AR 
knockout (KO) mice (A1, A2A, A2B, and A3) and their wild type (WT) were 
constructed. The messenger RNA expression of MAs from KO mice and WT were also 
studied. Adenosine (10 to 10 M) and NECA (10 to 10 M) induced relaxation in all 
mice except A2B KO mice, which only showed constriction by adenosine at 10 to 10 
and NECA at 10 to 10 M. The CCPA induced a significant constriction at 10 and 10 
M in all mice, except A1KO. BAY 60-6583 induced relaxation (10 to 10 M) in WT 
and no response in A2BKO except at 10 M. The CRCs for BAY 60-6583 in A1, A2A, 
and A3 KO mice shifted to the left when compared with WT mice, suggesting an 
upregulation of A2B AR. No responses were noted to CGS-21680 in all mice. 
Cl-IB-MECA only induced relaxation at concentration greater than 10 M, and no 
differences were found between different KO mice. The CRC for Bay 60-6583 was 
not significantly changed in the presence of 10 M of L-NAME, 10 M of 
indomethacin, or both. Our data suggest that A2B AR is the predominant AR 
subtype and the effect may be endothelial independent, whereas A1 AR plays a 
significant modulatory role in mouse MAs.

DOI: 10.1097/FJC.0b013e318278575e
PMCID: PMC3539216
PMID: 23288107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.