1. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Mar;24(5):643-58. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-09-0659. Epub 2013 
Jan 2.

Rab11-family interacting proteins define spatially and temporally distinct 
regions within the dynamic Rab11a-dependent recycling system.

Baetz NW(1), Goldenring JR.

Author information:
(1)Section of Surgical Sciences and Epithelial Biology Center, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

The Rab11-family interacting proteins (Rab11-FIPs) facilitate Rab11-dependent 
vesicle recycling. We hypothesized that Rab11-FIPs define discrete subdomains 
and carry out temporally distinct roles within the recycling system. We used 
live-cell deconvolution microscopy of HeLa cells expressing chimeric fluorescent 
Rab11-FIPs to examine Rab11-FIP localization, transferrin passage through 
Rab11-FIP-containing compartments, and overlap among Rab11-FIPs within the 
recycling system. FIP1A, FIP2, and FIP5 occupy widely distributed mobile tubules 
and vesicles, whereas FIP1B, FIP1C, and FIP3 localize to perinuclear tubules. 
Internalized transferrin entered Rab11-FIP-containing compartments within 5 min, 
reaching maximum colocalization with FIP1B and FIP2 early in the time course, 
whereas localization with FIP1A, FIP1C, FIP3, and FIP5 was delayed until 10 min 
or later. Whereas direct interactions with FIP1A were only observed for FIP1B 
and FIP1C, FIP1A also associated with membranes containing FIP3. Live-cell 
dual-expression studies of Rab11-FIPs revealed the tubular dynamics of 
Rab11-FIP-containing compartments and demonstrated a series of selective 
associations among Rab11-FIPs in real time. These findings suggest that 
Rab11-FIP1 proteins participate in spatially and temporally distinct steps of 
the recycling process along a complex and dynamic tubular network in which 
Rab11-FIPs occupy discrete domains.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E12-09-0659
PMCID: PMC3583667
PMID: 23283983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]