1. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2013 Mar;14(1):77-86. doi: 10.1007/s11154-012-9234-4.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus and exercise impairment.

Reusch JE(1), Bridenstine M, Regensteiner JG.

Author information:
(1)Denver VA Medical Center, Clermont Street, Denver, CO 80220, USA. 
Jane.Reusch@ucdenver.edu

Limitations in physical fitness, a consistent finding in individuals with both 
type I and type 2 diabetes mellitus, correlate strongly with cardiovascular and 
all-cause mortality. These limitations may significantly contribute to the 
persistent excess cardiovascular mortality affecting this group. Exercise 
impairments in VO2 peak and VO2 kinetics manifest early on in diabetes, even 
with good glycemic control and in the absence of clinically apparent 
complications. Subclinical cardiac dysfunction is often present but does not 
fully explain the observed defect in exercise capacity in persons with diabetes. 
In part, the cardiac limitations are secondary to decreased perfusion with 
exercise challenge. This is a reversible defect. Similarly, in the skeletal 
muscle, impairments in nutritive blood flow correlate with slowed (or 
inefficient) exercise kinetics and decreased exercise capacity. Several 
correlations highlight the likelihood of endothelial-specific impairments as 
mediators of exercise dysfunction in diabetes, including insulin resistance, 
endothelial dysfunction, decreased myocardial perfusion, slowed tissue 
hemoglobin oxygen saturation, and impairment in mitochondrial function. Both 
exercise training and therapies targeted at improving insulin sensitivity and 
endothelial function improve physical fitness in subjects with type 2 diabetes. 
Optimization of exercise functions in people with diabetes has implications for 
diabetes prevention and reductions in mortality risk. Understanding the 
molecular details of endothelial dysfunction in diabetes may provide specific 
therapeutic targets for the remediation of this defect. Rat models to test this 
hypothesis are under study.

DOI: 10.1007/s11154-012-9234-4
PMCID: PMC3593997
PMID: 23299658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]