1. Br J Cancer. 2013 Jan 15;108(1):183-7. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.534. Epub 2013
Jan  8.

One-carbon metabolism factors and endometrial cancer risk.

Liu JJ(1), Hazra A, Giovannucci E, Hankinson SE, Rosner B, De Vivo I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 
02115, USA. jasonjliu.jjl@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: This is the largest prospective cohort analysis to assess how 
dietary factors involved in one-carbon metabolism are associated with 
endometrial cancer incidence, using 26 years of follow-up data from the Nurses' 
Health Study.
METHODS: The prospective cohort analysis of one-carbon metabolism dietary 
factors used the Cox proportional hazards model, and incorporated 788 incident 
endometrial cancer events from 1980 to 2006. Genotyping and unconditional 
logistic regression were performed on 572 endometrial cancer cases and their 
matched controls to examine 29 mostly non-synonymous single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms involved in one-carbon metabolism.
RESULTS: There were no significant dose-response relationships between intake of 
any of the one-carbon metabolism dietary factors and endometrial cancer 
incidence, but alcohol consumption of <1 drink a day was significantly 
protective (hazard ratio: 0.80; 95% CI: 0.68, 0.94). Those with the MTHFR 677 TT 
or MTHFR 1298 CC genotype had more protective associations for many of the 
dietary factors and endometrial cancer, but statistical power was limited in 
this analysis.
CONCLUSION: Dietary levels of folate, choline, methionine, vitamin B2, vitamin 
B6 or vitamin B12 do not appear to influence endometrial cancer incidence. 
Moderate alcohol intake may protect against developing endometrial cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2012.534
PMCID: PMC3553527
PMID: 23299529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]