1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51485. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051485. Epub 2012 Dec 
27.

Combination therapy using monoclonal antibodies against respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV) G glycoprotein protects from RSV disease in BALB/c mice.

Caidi H(1), Harcourt JL, Tripp RA, Anderson LJ, Haynes LM.

Author information:
(1)National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, Division of Viral 
Diseases, Gastroenteritis and Respiratory Viruses Laboratory Branch, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, GA, USA.

Therapeutic options to control respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) are limited, 
thus development of new therapeutics is high priority. Previous studies with a 
monoclonal antibody (mAb) reactive to an epitope proximal to the central 
conserved region (CCR) of RSV G protein (mAb 131-2G) showed therapeutic efficacy 
for reducing pulmonary inflammation RSV infection in BALB/c mice. Here, we show 
a protective effect in RSV-infected mice therapeutically treated with a mAb 
(130-6D) reactive to an epitope within the CCR of G protein, while treatment 
with a mAb specific for a carboxyl G protein epitope had no effect. Combined 
treatment with mAbs 130-6D and 131-2G significantly decreased RSV-associated 
pulmonary inflammation compared to either antibody alone. The results suggest 
that anti-RSV G protein mAbs that react at or near the CCR and can block RSV G 
protein-mediated activities are effective at preventing RSV disease and may be 
an effective strategy for RSV therapeutic treatment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051485
PMCID: PMC3531420
PMID: 23300550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have the 
following interests: R. Tripp, L. Haynes and L. Anderson have a licensing 
agreement related to the monoclonal antibody, 131-2G, with Trellis Biosciences. 
R. Tripp is a PLOS ONE Editorial Board Member. This does not alter the authorsâ€™ 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.