1. J Clin Lipidol. 2012 Nov-Dec;6(6):596-600. doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2012.08.005.
Epub  2012 Aug 30.

Glycogen storage disease type Ia: linkage of glucose, glycogen, lactic acid, 
triglyceride, and uric acid metabolism.

Sever S(1), Weinstein DA, Wolfsdorf JI, Gedik R, Schaefer EJ.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Research Clinic and Lipid Metabolism Laboratory, Human 
Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University and Tufts University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

A female presented in infancy with hypotonia, undetectable serum glucose, lactic 
acidosis, and triglycerides >5000 mg/dL. The diagnosis of type 1A glycogen 
storage disease was made via the result of a liver biopsy, which showed 
increased glycogen and absent glucose-6-phosphatase enzyme activity. The patient 
was treated with dextrose administered orally, which was replaced by frequent 
feedings of cornstarch, which resulted in an improvement of her metabolic 
parameters. At age 18 years of age, she had marked hypertriglyceridemia (3860 
mg/dL) and eruptive xanthomas and was treated with fenofibrate, atorvastatin, 
and fish oil. At age 29 years she was noted to have multiple liver adenomas, 
severe anemia, and hyperuricemia. Aggressive cornstarch therapy was commenced 
with a goal of maintaining her blood glucose levels >75 mg/dL and lactate levels 
<2 mmol/L. After 15 months on this regimen, her lipids levels (measured in 
mg/dL) off all medications were as follows: total cholesterol 222, triglycerides 
179, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 32, and calculated low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol 154. Her weight was stable with a body mass index of 
24.8 kg/m(2). Her liver adenomas had decreased in size, and her anemia and 
hyperuricemia had improved. She was homozygous for the R83C missense mutation in 
G6PC. Our data indicate that optimized metabolic control to maintain blood 
glucose levels >75 mg/dL is critical in the management of this disease.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacl.2012.08.005
PMCID: PMC3812663
PMID: 23312056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]