1. Pituitary. 2014 Feb;17(1):30-7. doi: 10.1007/s11102-013-0462-8.

Frequency of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 in a group of patients with 
pituitary adenoma: genetic study and familial screening.

Nunes VS(1), Souza GL, Perone D, Conde SJ, Nogueira CR.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Internal Medicine, Botucatu 
Medical School, UNESP, Univ Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, Brazil, 
vsnunes@fmb.unesp.br.

The purpose of this study it was to evaluate the frequency of Multiple Endocrine 
Neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) in patients with pituitary adenoma and to perform 
genetic analysis and familial screening of those individuals afflicted with 
MEN1. 144 patients with pituitary adenoma at Botucatu Medical School, UNESP-Univ 
Estadual Paulista, were assessed retrospectively for MEN1 during the years of 
2005-2011. The patients were evaluated for the presence of primary 
hyperparathyroidism (PHP) and enteropancreatic tumors. Genetic analysis was 
performed for the individuals with clinically diagnosed MEN1. Thirteen patients 
met the diagnostic criteria for MEN1, but three individuals belong to the same 
family and they were considered as a single MEN1 event, revealing 7.7Â % 
frequency of MEN1 in this patient group. Genetic analysis showed MEN1 mutations 
in four index cases: IVS4+1 G>A, IVS3-6 C>T, c.1547insC and a new D180A 
mutation. One patient did not agree to participate in the genetic study and 
another one was referred for follow up in other hospital. Only polymorphisms 
were found in the other individuals, one of which was novel. We identified a 
high frequency of MEN1 in pituitary adenoma patients. Since PHP is one of the 
most common MEN1 tumor and patients are mostly asymptomatic, we suggest that all 
pituitary adenoma patients have their calcium profile analyzed.

DOI: 10.1007/s11102-013-0462-8
PMID: 23334809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]