1. Virol J. 2013 Jan 23;10:30. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-30.

Association of human papillomavirus type 16 long control region mutation and 
cervical cancer.

Pientong C(1), Wongwarissara P, Ekalaksananan T, Swangphon P, Kleebkaow P, 
Kongyingyoes B, Siriaunkgul S, Tungsinmunkong K, Suthipintawong C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon 
Kaen, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: The variation of human papillomavirus (HPV) genes or HPV variants 
demonstrates different risks of cervical cancer. Mutation in the long control 
region (LCR) at YY1-motifs is one of the mechanisms for enhancing viral oncogene 
expression during the course of cancer cell progression. In Thai women, cervical 
cancers are almost always associated with HPV16 variant sub-lineage Asian 
(HPV16As); however, the mechanism involved remains elusive. The aim of this 
study was to understand further the oncogenic potential of HPV16As.
METHODS: A total of 82 HPV16-positive specimens from Thai women were selected 
from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded cervical tissues, and the full length E6 
gene of each specimen was amplified and sequenced. LCRs of the HPV16As-positive 
cases were amplified and sequenced to analyze their polymorphisms. 
Transcriptional activities of the HPV16As LCRs were then compared with 
sub-lineage European (EUR), sub-lineage Asian-American 1 (AA1) and HPV16 
prototype by insertion of the LCRs into the pGL3-Basic vector.
RESULTS: The HPV16 DNA sequences were classified as HPV16 prototype (18.3%), 
Asian (As, 61%), Asian American-1 (AA1, 8.5%), European (EUR, 7.3%), Asian 
African-2 (AFR2, 3.7%) and Java-135C (J135C, 1.2%). The prevalence of HPV16As 
was 30% in low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL), while that in 
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) and squamous cell cervical 
carcinoma (SCC) were 63.9% and 66.7%, respectively, which demonstrates a 
significant association of HPV16As with the disease severity. LCR polymorphisms 
from 43 HPV16As positive cases were analyzed by PCR-sequencing. Thirty-eight 
nucleotide variation positions spanned nucleotide positions 7157-82. Ten new 
mutations found in the HPV16As LCRs were located predominantly at the enhancer 
and proximal to the 3'-end of the early promoter. The LCRs of the common 
HPV16As, EUR and AA1 showed 5, 13 and 23-fold higher activity than the HPV16 
prototype LCR, while those of the new nucleotide variations of As showed 19 
(As-sv1) and 30 (As-sv14) -fold higher activity than the HPV16 prototype.
CONCLUSIONS: HPV16As DNA sequence variation, especially at the proximal to early 
promoter in the LCR, enhances transcriptional activity. This could be one of the 
possible mechanisms for HPV16As-associated cervical cancer development.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-30
PMCID: PMC3599568
PMID: 23343096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]