1. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(1):e1003237. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003237. Epub 2013
Jan  24.

Histone H3K56 acetylation, Rad52, and non-DNA repair factors control 
double-strand break repair choice with the sister chromatid.

Muñoz-Galván S(1), Jimeno S, Rothstein R, Aguilera A.

Author information:
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa (CABIMER), 
Universidad de Sevilla-CSIC, Sevilla, Spain.

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are harmful lesions that arise mainly during 
replication. The choice of the sister chromatid as the preferential repair 
template is critical for genome integrity, but the mechanisms that guarantee 
this choice are unknown. Here we identify new genes with a specific role in 
assuring the sister chromatid as the preferred repair template. Physical 
analyses of sister chromatid recombination (SCR) in 28 selected mutants that 
increase Rad52 foci and inter-homolog recombination uncovered 8 new genes 
required for SCR. These include the SUMO/Ub-SUMO protease Wss1, the 
stress-response proteins Bud27 and Pdr10, the ADA histone acetyl-transferase 
complex proteins Ahc1 and Ada2, as well as the Hst3 and Hst4 histone deacetylase 
and the Rtt109 histone acetyl-transferase genes, whose target is histone H3 
Lysine 56 (H3K56). Importantly, we use mutations in H3K56 residue to A, R, and Q 
to reveal that H3K56 acetylation/deacetylation is critical to promote SCR as the 
major repair mechanism for replication-born DSBs. The same phenotype is observed 
for a particular class of rad52 alleles, represented by rad52-C180A, with a DSB 
repair defect but a spontaneous hyper-recombination phenotype. We propose that 
specific Rad52 residues, as well as the histone H3 acetylation/deacetylation 
state of chromatin and other specific factors, play an important role in 
identifying the sister as the choice template for the repair of replication-born 
DSBs. Our work demonstrates the existence of specific functions to guarantee SCR 
as the main repair event for replication-born DSBs that can occur by two 
pathways, one Rad51-dependent and the other Pol32-dependent. A dysfunction can 
lead to genome instability as manifested by high levels of homolog recombination 
and DSB accumulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003237
PMCID: PMC3554610
PMID: 23357952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.