1. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(1):e1003236. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003236. Epub 2013
Jan  24.

Heterologous gln/asn-rich proteins impede the propagation of yeast prions by 
altering chaperone availability.

Yang Z(1), Hong JY, Derkatch IL, Liebman SW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Comment in
    Prion. 2013 Jul-Aug;7(4):294-300. doi: 10.4161/pri.26021.

Prions are self-propagating conformations of proteins that can cause heritable 
phenotypic traits. Most yeast prions contain glutamine (Q)/asparagine (N)-rich 
domains that facilitate the accumulation of the protein into amyloid-like 
aggregates. Efficient transmission of these infectious aggregates to daughter 
cells requires that chaperones, including Hsp104 and Sis1, continually sever the 
aggregates into smaller "seeds." We previously identified 11 proteins with 
Q/N-rich domains that, when overproduced, facilitate the de novo aggregation of 
the Sup35 protein into the [PSI(+)] prion state. Here, we show that 
overexpression of many of the same 11 Q/N-rich proteins can also destabilize 
pre-existing [PSI(+)] or [URE3] prions. We explore in detail the events leading 
to the loss (curing) of [PSI(+)] by the overexpression of one of these proteins, 
the Q/N-rich domain of Pin4, which causes Sup35 aggregates to increase in size 
and decrease in transmissibility to daughter cells. We show that the Pin4 
Q/N-rich domain sequesters Hsp104 and Sis1 chaperones away from the diffuse 
cytoplasmic pool. Thus, a mechanism by which heterologous Q/N-rich proteins 
impair prion propagation appears to be the loss of cytoplasmic Hsp104 and Sis1 
available to sever [PSI(+)].

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003236
PMCID: PMC3554615
PMID: 23358669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.