1. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 15;19(8):1926-32. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0930.  Epub 2013 Jan 25.

Molecular pathways: adiponectin and leptin signaling in cancer.

Vansaun MN(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hepatobiliary Surgery and Liver Transplantation, Department of 
Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA. 
michael.n.vansaun@vanderbilt.edu

The increasing percentage of obese individuals in the population and its 
independent association of increased risk for the development of cancer have 
heightened the necessity to understand the molecular mechanisms that underlie 
this connection. The deregulation of adipokines in the setting of obesity and 
their impact on cancer progression and metastasis is one such area of research. 
Adipokines are bioactive proteins that mediate metabolism, inflammation, 
angiogenesis, and proliferation. Altered levels of adipokines or their cognate 
receptors in cancers can ultimately lead to an imbalance in downstream molecular 
pathways. Discovery of adipokine receptors in various cancers has highlighted 
the potential for novel therapeutic targets. Leptin and adiponectin represent 
two adipokines that elicit generally opposing molecular effects. Epidemiologic 
studies have highlighted associations between increased serum leptin levels and 
increased tumor growth, whereas adiponectin exhibits an inverse correlation with 
cancer development. This review addresses the current level of understanding of 
molecular pathways activated by adiponectin and leptin to identify the areas of 
intervention and facilitate advancement in the field.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0930
PMCID: PMC3630242
PMID: 23355630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest 
The author: Michael Nathan VanSaun has disclosed no potential conflicts of 
interest.