1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55027. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055027. Epub 2013 Jan
24.

Glomerular endothelial cell injury and damage precedes that of podocytes in 
adriamycin-induced nephropathy.

Sun YB(1), Qu X, Zhang X, Caruana G, Bertram JF, Li J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, 
Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

The role of podocytes in the development and progression of glomerular disease 
has been extensively investigated in the past decade. However, the importance of 
glomerular endothelial cells in the pathogenesis of proteinuria and 
glomerulosclerosis has been largely ignored. Recent studies have demonstrated 
that endothelial nitric oxide synthatase (eNOS) deficiency exacerbates renal 
injury in anti-GBM and remnant kidney models and accelerates diabetic kidney 
damage. Increasing evidence also demonstrates the importance of the glomerular 
endothelium in preventing proteinuria. We hypothesize that endothelial 
dysfunction can initiate and promote the development and progression of 
glomerulopathy. Administration of adriamycin (ADR) to C57BL/6 mice, normally an 
ADR resistant strain, with an eNOS deficiency induced overt proteinuria, severe 
glomerulosclerosis, interstitial fibrosis and inflammation. We also examined 
glomerular endothelial cell and podocyte injury in ADR-induced nephropathy in 
Balb/c mice, an ADR susceptible strain, by immunostaining, TUNEL and Western 
blotting. Interestingly, down-regulation of eNOS and the appearance of apoptotic 
glomerular endothelial cells occurred as early as 24 hours after ADR injection, 
whilst synaptopodin, a functional podocyte marker, was reduced 7 days after ADR 
injection and coincided with a significant increase in the number of apoptotic 
podocytes. Furthermore, conditioned media from mouse microvascular endothelial 
cells over-expressing GFP-eNOS protected podocytes from TNF-Î±-induced loss of 
synaptopodin. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that endothelial dysfunction 
and damage precedes podocyte injury in ADR-induced nephropathy. Glomerular 
endothelial cells may protect podocytes from inflammatory insult. Understanding 
the role of glomerular endothelial dysfunction in the development of kidney 
disease will facilitate in the design of novel strategies to treat kidney 
disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055027
PMCID: PMC3554670
PMID: 23359116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.