1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54623. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054623. Epub 2013 Jan
29.

IL-18 induces airway hyperresponsiveness and pulmonary inflammation via CD4+ T 
cell and IL-13.

Sawada M(1), Kawayama T, Imaoka H, Sakazaki Y, Oda H, Takenaka S, Kaku Y, Azuma 
K, Tajiri M, Edakuni N, Okamoto M, Kato S, Hoshino T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine 
1, Kurume University School of Medicine, Fukuoka, Japan.

IL-18 plays a key role in the pathogenesis of pulmonary inflammatory diseases 
including pulmonary infection, pulmonary fibrosis, lung injury and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, it is unknown whether IL-18 plays 
any role in the pathogenesis of asthma. We hypothesized that overexpression of 
mature IL-18 protein in the lungs may exacerbate disease activities of asthma. 
We established lung-specific IL-18 transgenic mice on a Balb/c genetic 
background. Female mice sensitized- and challenged- with antigen (ovalbumin) 
were used as a mouse asthma model. Pulmonary inflammation and emphysema were not 
observed in the lungs of naïve transgenic mice. However, airway 
hyperresponsiveness and airway inflammatory cells accompanied with CD4(+) T 
cells, CD8(+) T cells, eosinophils, neutrophils, and macrophages were 
significantly increased in ovalbumin-sensitized and challenged transgenic mice, 
as compared to wild type Balb/c mice. We also demonstrate that IL-18 induces 
IFN-γ, IL-13, and eotaxin in the lungs of ovalbumin-sensitized and challenged 
transgenic mice along with an increase in IL-13 producing CD4(+) T cells. 
Treatment with anti-CD4 monoclonal antibody or deletion of the IL-13 gene 
improves ovalbumin-induced airway hyperresponsiveness and reduces airway 
inflammatory cells in transgenic mice. Overexpressing the IL-18 protein in the 
lungs induces type 1 and type 2 cytokines and airway inflammation, and results 
in increasing airway hyperresponsiveness via CD4(+) T cells and IL-13 in asthma.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054623
PMCID: PMC3558507
PMID: 23382928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.