1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):9373-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.374744. Epub 
2013 Feb 10.

Identification of the E3 deubiquitinase ubiquitin-specific peptidase 21 (USP21) 
as a positive regulator of the transcription factor GATA3.

Zhang J(1), Chen C, Hou X, Gao Y, Lin F, Yang J, Gao Z, Pan L, Tao L, Wen C, Yao 
Z, Tsun A, Shi G, Li B.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Unit of Molecular 
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 411 Hefei Road, Shanghai 200025, China.

The expression of the transcription factor GATA3 in FOXP3(+) regulatory T (Treg) 
cells is crucial for their physiological function in limiting inflammatory 
responses. Although other studies have shown how T cell receptor (TcR) signals 
induce the up-regulation of GATA3 expression in Treg cells, the underlying 
mechanism that maintains GATA3 expression in Treg cells remains unclear. Here, 
we show how USP21 interacts with and stabilizes GATA3 by mediating its 
deubiquitination. In a T cell line model, we found that TcR stimulation promoted 
USP21 expression, which was further up-regulated in the presence of FOXP3. The 
USP21 mutant C221A reduced its capacity to stabilize GATA3 expression, and its 
knockdown led to the down-regulation of GATA3 protein expression in Treg cells. 
Furthermore, we found that FOXP3 could directly bind to the USP21 gene promoter 
and activated its transcription upon TcR stimulation. Finally, USP21, GATA3, and 
FOXP3 were found up-regulated in Treg cells that were isolated from asthmatic 
subjects. In summary, we have identified a USP21-mediated pathway that promotes 
GATA3 stabilization and expression at the post-translational level. We propose 
that this pathway forms an important signaling loop that stabilizes the 
expression of GATA3 in Treg cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.374744
PMCID: PMC3611007
PMID: 23395819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]