1. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 May;30(5):1172-87. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst022. Epub 2013
Feb  7.

The repertoires of ubiquitinating and deubiquitinating enzymes in eukaryotic 
genomes.

Hutchins AP(1), Liu S, Diez D, Miranda-Saavedra D.

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics and Genomics Laboratory, World Premier International 
Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Reversible protein ubiquitination regulates virtually all known cellular 
activities. Here, we present a quantitatively evaluated and broadly applicable 
method to predict eukaryotic ubiquitinating enzymes (UBE) and deubiquitinating 
enzymes (DUB) and its application to 50 distinct genomes belonging to four of 
the five major phylogenetic supergroups of eukaryotes: unikonts (including 
metazoans, fungi, choanozoa, and amoebozoa), excavates, chromalveolates, and 
plants. Our method relies on a collection of profile hidden Markov models, and 
we demonstrate its superior performance (coverage and classification accuracy 
>99%) by identifying approximately 25% and approximately 35% additional UBE and 
DUB genes in yeast and human, which had not been reported before. In yeast, we 
predict 85 UBE and 24 DUB genes, for 814 UBE and 107 DUB genes in the human 
genome. Most UBE and DUB families are present in all eukaryotic lineages, with 
plants and animals harboring massively enlarged repertoires of ubiquitin 
ligases. Unicellular organisms, on the other hand, typically harbor less than 
300 UBEs and less than 40 DUBs per genome. Ninety-one UBE/DUB genes are 
orthologous across all four eukaryotic supergroups, and these likely represent a 
primordial core of enzymes of the ubiquitination system probably dating back to 
the first eukaryotes approximately 2 billion years ago. Our genome-wide 
predictions are available through the Database of Ubiquitinating and 
Deubiquitinating Enzymes (www.DUDE-db.org), where users can also perform 
advanced sequence and phylogenetic analyses and submit their own predictions.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst022
PMCID: PMC3670738
PMID: 23393154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]