1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56042. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056042. Epub 2013 Feb
6.

Cross-reactive anti-viral T cells increase prior to an episode of viral 
reactivation post human lung transplantation.

Nguyen TH(1), Westall GP, Bull TE, Meehan AC, Mifsud NA, Kotsimbos TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Monash University, Central Clinical School, The 
Alfred Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Human Cytomegalovirus (CMV) reactivation continues to influence lung transplant 
outcomes. Cross-reactivity of anti-viral memory T cells against donor human 
leukocyte antigens (HLA) may be a contributing factor. We identified 
cross-reactive HLA-A*02:01-restricted CMV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) 
co-recognizing the NLVPMVATV (NLV) epitope and HLA-B27. NLV-specific CD8+ T 
cells were expanded for 13 days from 14 HLA-A*02:01/CMV seropositive healthy 
donors and 11 lung transplant recipients (LTR) then assessed for the production 
of IFN-Î³ and CD107a expression in response to 19 cell lines expressing either 
single HLA-A or -B class I molecules. In one healthy individual, we observed 
functional and proliferative cross-reactivity in response to B*27:05 
alloantigen, representing approximately 5% of the NLV-specific CTL population. 
Similar patterns were also observed in one LTR receiving a B27 allograft, 
revealing that the cross-reactive NLV-specific CTL gradually increased (days 
13-193 post-transplant) before a CMV reactivation event (day 270) and reduced to 
basal levels following viral clearance (day 909). Lung function remained stable 
with no acute rejection episodes being reported up to 3 years post-transplant. 
Individualized immunological monitoring of cross-reactive anti-viral T cells 
will provide further insights into their effects on the allograft and an 
opportunity to predict sub-clinical CMV reactivation events and 
immunopathological complications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056042
PMCID: PMC3566045
PMID: 23405250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.