1. J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol. 2013;24(2):131-5. doi:
10.1515/jbcpp-2012-0055.

BRAF gene polymorphism (rs10487888) assessment in chronic periodontitis and 
peri-implantitis in an Iranian population.

Kadkhodazadeh M(1), Jafari AR, Khalighi HR, Ebadian AR, Vaziri S, Amid R.

Author information:
(1)Dental Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Peri-implantitis (PI) and chronic periodontitis (CP) are 
multifactorial diseases of implant/tooth supporting tissue that are caused by 
bacterial infection and increased host immune response. T-cell proliferation 
plays a pivotal role in the orchestration of host response to bacterial 
infection. BRAF is a positive regulator of T-cell proliferation. The aim of this 
study was to evaluate for the first time the role of a functional single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the BRAF gene in association to PI and CP.
METHODS: A total of 194 individuals referred to the Periodontology Department of 
Shahid Beheshti Dental School, Tehran, Iran, were divided into three groups: 74 
patients in the CP group (39 men and 35 women, with mean age of 48.3 years), 38 
patients in the PI group (20 men and 18 women, with mean age of 50.2 years), and 
82 patients in the healthy periodontium group (39 men and 43 women, with mean 
age of 45.4 years). DNA was extracted from fresh blood samples collected from 
the arm vein of participants and was transferred to KBiosience institute (United 
Kingdom) for genotyping. Ï‡2 and Kruskal-Wallis tests were conducted using SPSS 
software v. 19 for statistical analysis (p<0.05).
RESULTS: The allele (C/T) and genotype (CC, CT, TT) frequencies had 
insignificant differences among the three groups; however, the CC genotype was 
more prevalent in the healthy condition than in the disease conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: The BRAF gene polymorphism (rs10487888) may not be a genetic 
determinant for increasing the risk of CP and PI among the Iranian population. 
More studies with more sample size in different populations are necessary for 
determining the effect of this SNP.

DOI: 10.1515/jbcpp-2012-0055
PMID: 23412871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]