1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56927. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056927. Epub 2013 Feb
20.

Age-dependent decrease and alternative splicing of methionine synthase mRNA in 
human cerebral cortex and an accelerated decrease in autism.

Muratore CR(1), Hodgson NW, Trivedi MS, Abdolmaleky HM, Persico AM, Lintas C, De 
la Monte S, Deth RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Northeastern 
University, Boston, MA, USA.

The folate and vitamin B12-dependent enzyme methionine synthase (MS) is highly 
sensitive to cellular oxidative status, and lower MS activity increases 
production of the antioxidant glutathione, while simultaneously decreasing more 
than 200 methylation reactions, broadly affecting metabolic activity. MS mRNA 
levels in postmortem human cortex from subjects across the lifespan were 
measured and a dramatic progressive biphasic decrease of more than 400-fold from 
28 weeks of gestation to 84 years was observed. Further analysis revealed 
alternative splicing of MS mRNA, including deletion of folate-binding domain 
exons and age-dependent deletion of exons from the cap domain, which protects 
vitamin B12 (cobalamin) from oxidation. Although three species of MS were 
evident at the protein level, corresponding to full-length and alternatively 
spliced mRNA transcripts, decreasing mRNA levels across the lifespan were not 
associated with significant changes in MS protein or methionine levels. MS mRNA 
levels were significantly lower in autistic subjects, especially at younger 
ages, and this decrease was replicated in cultured human neuronal cells by 
treatment with TNF-Î±, whose CSF levels are elevated in autism. These novel 
findings suggest that rather than serving as a housekeeping enzyme, MS has a 
broad and dynamic role in coordinating metabolism in the brain during 
development and aging. Factors adversely affecting MS activity, such as 
oxidative stress, can be a source of risk for neurological disorders across the 
lifespan via their impact on methylation reactions, including epigenetic 
regulation of gene expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056927
PMCID: PMC3577685
PMID: 23437274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.