1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 19;288(16):11013-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.392878. Epub 
2013 Feb 22.

Structural and functional characterization of K339T substitution identified in 
the PB2 subunit cap-binding pocket of influenza A virus.

Liu Y(1), Qin K, Meng G, Zhang J, Zhou J, Zhao G, Luo M, Zheng X.

Author information:
(1)State Key Lab of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life Sciences, 
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Influenza virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase is a heterotrimer composed of PA, 
PB1, and PB2 subunits. RNA-dependent RNA polymerase is required for both 
transcription and replication of influenza viral RNA taking place in the nucleus 
of infected cells. A "cap-snatching" mechanism is used to generate a 5'-capped 
primer for transcription in which the cap-binding domain of PB2 (PB2cap) 
captures the 5' cap of the host pre-mRNA. Our statistical analysis of PB2 
sequences showed that residue Lys(339) located in the cap-binding pocket of H5N1 
PB2cap was gradually replaced by Thr(339) over the past decade. To understand 
the role of this amino acid polymorphism, we solved the crystal structures of 
PB2cap with or without a pre-mRNA cap analog, m(7)GTP, in the presence of 
Lys(339) or Thr(339). The structures showed that Lys(339) contributes to binding 
the Î³-phosphate group of m(7)GTP, and the replacement of Lys(339) by Thr 
eliminates this interaction. Isothermal titration calorimetry analysis showed 
that Thr(339) attenuated the PB2cap cap binding activity in vitro compared with 
Lys(339). Further functional studies confirmed that Thr(339)-PB2-containing 
ribonucleoprotein complex has a reduced influenza polymerase activity and RNA 
synthesis activity, and a reconstituted H5N1 virus containing the Thr(339) 
substitution exhibited a lower virulence to mice but more active replication in 
Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. The K339T substitution in the cap-binding 
pocket of PB2 modulates the polymerase activity and virulence by regulating the 
cap binding activity. It is informative to track variations in the cap-binding 
pocket of PB2 in surveillance of the evolution and spread of influenza virus.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.392878
PMCID: PMC3630847
PMID: 23436652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]