1. Diabetes. 2013 Jul;62(7):2613-7. doi: 10.2337/db12-1093. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

TCF7L2 variation and proliferative diabetic retinopathy.

Luo J(1), Zhao L, Chen AY, Zhang X, Zhu J, Zhao J, Ouyang H, Luo H, Song Y, Lee 
J, Patel SH, Shaw PX, Sadda S, Zhuo Y, Rosenfeld MG, Zhang K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.

Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) is the most severe vision-threatening 
complication of diabetes. For investigation of genetic association between 
TCF7L2 and PDR in Caucasian type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and its functional 
consequences, 383 T2DM patients with PDR (T2DM-PDR) and 756 T2DM patients 
without diabetic retinopathy (T2DM-no DR) were genotyped with rs7903146 in 
TCF7L2. We found that risk allele (T) frequency of rs7903146 was significantly 
higher in T2DM-PDR patients (allelic P = 2.52E-04). In lymphoblastoid cells 
induced to undergo endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by treatment of 
tunicamycin, higher fold change of TCF7L2 and VEGFA mRNA levels were observed in 
rs7903146-TT cells than in rs7903146-CC cells (P = 0.02 for TCF7L2; P = 0.004 
for VEGFA), suggesting that ER stress plays a role in PDR pathogenesis. 
Silencing TCF7L2 resulted in decreased mRNA levels of both TCF7L2 and VEGFA (P < 
0.001). Retinas of oxygen-induced retinopathy mice (a model for PDR) had higher 
TCF7L2 and VEGFA mRNA levels than those of controls (P = 2.9E-04 for TCF7L2; P = 
1.9E-07 for VEGFA). Together, data from our study show that TCF7L2-rs7903146 is 
associated with PDR in Caucasian T2DM and suggest that TCF7L2 promotes 
pathological retinal neovascularization via ER stress-dependent upregulation of 
VEGFA.

DOI: 10.2337/db12-1093
PMCID: PMC3712060
PMID: 23434931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]