1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Apr;41(8):4601-12. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt109. Epub 2013 
Feb 26.

Altered error specificity of RNase H-deficient HIV-1 reverse transcriptases 
during DNA-dependent DNA synthesis.

Álvarez M(1), Barrioluengo V, Afonso-Lehmann RN, Menéndez-Arias L.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Asp(443) and Glu(478) are essential active site residues in the RNase H domain 
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT). We 
have investigated the effects of substituting Asn for Asp(443) or Gln for 
Glu(478) on the fidelity of DNA-dependent DNA synthesis of phylogenetically 
diverse HIV-1 RTs. In M13mp2 lacZα-based forward mutation assays, HIV-1 group M 
(BH10) and group O RTs bearing substitutions D443N, E478Q, V75I/D443N or 
V75I/E478Q showed 2.0- to 6.6-fold increased accuracy in comparison with the 
corresponding wild-type enzymes. This was a consequence of their lower base 
substitution error rates. One-nucleotide deletions and insertions represented 
between 30 and 68% of all errors identified in the mutational spectra of RNase 
H-deficient HIV-1 group O RTs. In comparison with the wild-type RT, these 
enzymes showed higher frameshift error rates and higher dissociation rate 
constants (koff) for DNA/DNA template-primers. The effects on frameshift 
fidelity were similar to those reported for mutation E89G and suggest that in 
HIV-1 group O RT, RNase H inactivation could affect template/primer slippage. 
Our results support a role for the RNase H domain during plus-strand DNA 
polymerization and suggest that mutations affecting RNase H function could also 
contribute to retrovirus variability during the later steps of reverse 
transcription.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt109
PMCID: PMC3632107
PMID: 23444139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]