1. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(2):e1003337. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003337. Epub 2013
Feb  28.

CELF family RNA-binding protein UNC-75 regulates two sets of mutually exclusive 
exons of the unc-32 gene in neuron-specific manners in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Kuroyanagi H(1), Watanabe Y, Hagiwara M.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan. kuroyana.end@tmd.ac.jp

An enormous number of alternative pre-mRNA splicing patterns in multicellular 
organisms are coordinately defined by a limited number of regulatory proteins 
and cis elements. Mutually exclusive alternative splicing should be strictly 
regulated and is a challenging model for elucidating regulation mechanisms. Here 
we provide models of the regulation of two sets of mutually exclusive exons, 
4a-4c and 7a-7b, of the Caenorhabditis elegans uncoordinated (unc)-32 gene, 
encoding the a subunit of V0 complex of vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPases. We visualize 
selection patterns of exon 4 and exon 7 in vivo by utilizing a trio and a pair 
of symmetric fluorescence splicing reporter minigenes, respectively, to 
demonstrate that they are regulated in tissue-specific manners. Genetic analyses 
reveal that RBFOX family RNA-binding proteins ASD-1 and FOX-1 and a UGCAUG 
stretch in intron 7b are involved in the neuron-specific selection of exon 7a. 
Through further forward genetic screening, we identify UNC-75, a neuron-specific 
CELF family RNA-binding protein of unknown function, as an essential regulator 
for the exon 7a selection. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays specify a short 
fragment in intron 7a as the recognition site for UNC-75 and demonstrate that 
UNC-75 specifically binds via its three RNA recognition motifs to the element 
including a UUGUUGUGUUGU stretch. The UUGUUGUGUUGU stretch in the reporter 
minigenes is actually required for the selection of exon 7a in the nervous 
system. We compare the amounts of partially spliced RNAs in the wild-type and 
unc-75 mutant backgrounds and raise a model for the mutually exclusive selection 
of unc-32 exon 7 by the RBFOX family and UNC-75. The neuron-specific selection 
of unc-32 exon 4b is also regulated by UNC-75 and the unc-75 mutation suppresses 
the Unc phenotype of the exon-4b-specific allele of unc-32 mutants. Taken 
together, UNC-75 is the neuron-specific splicing factor and regulates both sets 
of the mutually exclusive exons of the unc-32 gene.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003337
PMCID: PMC3585155
PMID: 23468662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.