1. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2013 May;52(5):373-84. doi: 10.1007/s40262-013-0046-9.

Population pharmacokinetics of metformin in healthy subjects and patients with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus: simulation of doses according to renal function.

Duong JK(1), Kumar SS, Kirkpatrick CM, Greenup LC, Arora M, Lee TC, Timmins P, 
Graham GG, Furlong TJ, Greenfield JR, Williams KM, Day RO.

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales, Kensington, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Metformin is contraindicated in patients with renal 
impairment; however, there is poor adherence to current dosing guidelines. In 
addition, the pharmacokinetics of metformin in patients with significant renal 
impairment are not well described. The aims of this study were to investigate 
factors influencing the pharmacokinetic variability, including variant 
transporters, between healthy subjects and patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) and to simulate doses of metformin at varying stages of renal 
function.
METHODS: Plasma concentrations of metformin were pooled from three studies: 
patients with T2DM (study A; n = 120), healthy Caucasian subjects (study B; n = 
16) and healthy Malaysian subjects (study C; n = 169). A population 
pharmacokinetic model of metformin was developed using NONMEM(Â®) version VI for 
both the immediate-release (IR) formulation and the extended-release (XR) 
formulation of metformin. Total body weight (TBW), lean body weight (LBW), 
creatinine clearance (CLCR; estimated using TBW and LBW) and 57 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of metformin transporters (OCT1, OCT2, 
OCT3, MATE1 and PMAT) were investigated as potential covariates. A nonparametric 
bootstrap (n = 1,000) was used to evaluate the final model. This model was used 
to simulate 1,000 concentration-time profiles for doses of metformin at each 
stage of renal impairment to ensure metformin concentrations do not exceed 5 
mg/l, the proposed upper limit.
RESULTS: Creatinine clearance and TBW were clinically and statistically 
significant covariates with the apparent clearance and volume of distribution of 
metformin, respectively. None of the 57 SNPs in transporters of metformin were 
significant covariates. In contrast to previous studies, there was no effect on 
the pharmacokinetics of metformin in patients carrying the reduced function OCT1 
allele (R61C, G401S, 420del or G465R). Dosing simulations revealed that the 
maximum daily doses in relation to creatinine clearance to prescribe to patients 
are 500 mg (15 ml/min), 1,000 mg (30 ml/min), 2,000 mg (60 ml/min) and 3,000 mg 
(120 ml/min), for both the IR and XR formulations.
CONCLUSION: The population model enabled doses of metformin to be simulated for 
each stage of renal function, to ensure the concentrations of metformin do not 
exceed 5 mg/l. However, the plasma concentrations of metformin at these dosage 
levels are still quite variable and monitoring metformin concentrations may be 
of value in individualising dosage. This study provides confirmatory data that 
metformin can be used, with appropriate dosage adjustment, in patients with 
renal impairment.

DOI: 10.1007/s40262-013-0046-9
PMID: 23475568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]