1. J Bacteriol. 2013 May;195(10):2244-54. doi: 10.1128/JB.02011-12. Epub 2013 Mar
 8.

A mutant with aberrant extracellular LcrV-YscF interactions fails to form pores 
and translocate Yop effector proteins but retains the ability to trigger Yop 
secretion in response to host cell contact.

Harmon DE(1), Murphy JL, Davis AJ, Mecsas J.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Microbiology Graduate Program, Sackler School of Biomedical 
Sciences School of Medicine, Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The plasmid-encoded type three secretion system (TTSS) of Yersinia spp. is 
responsible for the delivery of effector proteins into cells of the innate 
immune system, where these effectors disrupt the target cells' activity. 
Successful translocation of effectors into mammalian cells requires Yersinia to 
both insert a translocon into the host cell membrane and sense contact with host 
cells. To probe the events necessary for translocation, we investigated 
protein-protein interactions among TTSS components of the needle-translocon 
complex using a chemical cross-linking-based approach. We detected extracellular 
protein complexes containing YscF, LcrV, and YopD that were dependent upon 
needle formation. The formation of these complexes was evaluated in a 
secretion-competent but translocation-defective mutant, the YscFD28AD46A strain 
(expressing YscF with the mutations D28A and D46A). We found that one of the 
YscF and most of the LcrV and YopD cross-linked complexes were nearly absent in 
this mutant. Furthermore, the YscFD28AD46A strain did not support YopB insertion 
into mammalian membranes, supporting the idea that the LcrV tip complex is 
required for YopB insertion and translocon formation. However, the YscFD28AD46A 
strain did secrete Yops in the presence of host cells, indicating that a 
translocation-competent tip complex is not required to sense contact with host 
cells to trigger Yop secretion. In conclusion, in the absence of cross-linkable 
LcrV-YscF interactions, translocon insertion is abolished, but Yersinia still 
retains the ability to sense cell contact.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.02011-12
PMCID: PMC3650545
PMID: 23475976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]