1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:739010. doi: 10.1155/2013/739010. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

The Italian National External quality assessment program in molecular genetic 
testing: results of the VII round (2010-2011).

Censi F(1), Tosto F, Floridia G, Marra M, Salvatore M, Baffico AM, Grasso M, 
Melis MA, Pelo E, Radice P, Ravani A, Rosatelli C, Resta N, Russo S, Seia M, 
Varesco L, Falbo V, Taruscio D.

Author information:
(1)National Centre of Rare Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome, 
Italy.

Since 2001 the Istituto Superiore di Sanità established a quality assurance 
programme for molecular genetic testing that covers four pathologies: Cystic 
Fibrosis (CF), Beta Thalassemia (BT), Fragile X Syndrome (FX), and Familial 
Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC). Since 2009 this activity is an institutional 
activity and participation is open to both public and private laboratories. 
Seven rounds have been performed until now and the eighth is in progress. 
Laboratories receive 4 DNA samples with mock clinical indications. They analyze 
the samples using their routine procedures. A panel of assessors review the raw 
data and the reports; all data are managed through a web utility. In 2010 the 
number of participants was 43, 17, 15, 5 for CF, BT, FX, APC schemes 
respectively. Genotyping results were correct in 96%, 98.5%, 100%, and 100% of 
CF, BT, FX, and APC samples, respectively. Interpretation was correct in 74%, 
91%, 88%, and 60% of CF, BT, FX, and APC reports, respectively; however in most 
of them it was not complete but a referral to genetic counseling was given. 
Reports were satisfactory in more than 60% of samples in all schemes. This work 
presents the 2010 results in detail comparing our data with those from other 
European schemes.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/739010
PMCID: PMC3581119
PMID: 23484150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]