1. Retrovirology. 2013 Mar 20;10:32. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-32.

The transmembrane domain of HIV-1 Vpu is sufficient to confer anti-tetherin 
activity to SIVcpz and SIVgor Vpu proteins: cytoplasmic determinants of Vpu 
function.

Kluge SF(1), Sauter D, Vogl M, Peeters M, Li Y, Bibollet-Ruche F, Hahn BH, 
Kirchhoff F.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, Germany. 
frank.kirchhoff@uni-ulm.de

BACKGROUND: The acquisition of effective Vpu-mediated anti-tetherin activity to 
promote virion release following transmission of SIVcpzPtt from central 
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes troglodytes) to humans distinguishes pandemic HIV-1 
group M strains from non-pandemic group N, O and P viruses and may have been a 
prerequisite for their global spread. Some functional motifs in the cytoplasmic 
region of HIV-1 M Vpus proposed to be important for anti-tetherin activity are 
more frequently found in the Vpu proteins of SIVcpzPtt than in those of 
SIVcpzPts infecting eastern chimpanzees (P. t. schweinfurthii), that have not 
been detected in humans, and SIVgor from gorillas, which is closely related to 
HIV-1 O and P. Thus, SIVcpzPtt strains may require fewer adaptive changes in Vpu 
than SIVcpzPts or SIVgor strains to counteract human tetherin.
RESULTS: To examine whether SIVcpzPtt may only need changes in the transmembrane 
domain (TMD) of Vpu to acquire anti-tetherin activity, whereas SIVcpzPts and 
SIVgor may also require changes in the cytoplasmic region, we analyzed chimeras 
between the TMD of an HIV-1 M Vpu and the cytoplasmic domains of SIVcpzPtt 
(n = 2), SIVcpzPts (n = 2) and SIVgor (n = 2) Vpu proteins. Unexpectedly, all of 
these chimeras were capable of counteracting human tetherin to enhance virion 
release, irrespective of the presence or absence of the putative adaptor protein 
binding sites and the DSGxxS β-TrCP binding motif reported to be critical for 
effective anti-tetherin activity of M Vpus. It was also surprising that in three 
of the six chimeras the gain of anti-tetherin function was associated with a 
loss of the CD4 degradation activity since this function was conserved among all 
parental HIV-1, SIVcpz and SIVgor Vpu proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that changes in the TMD of SIVcpzPtt, SIVcpzPts 
and SIVgor Vpus are sufficient to render them active against human tetherin. 
Thus, several previously described domains in the extracellular region of Vpu 
are not absolutely essential for tetherin antagonism but may be required for 
other Vpu functions.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-32
PMCID: PMC3621411
PMID: 23514615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]