1. Gene. 2013 May 25;521(1):116-21. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.010. Epub 2013
Mar  17.

Flavin containing monooxygenase 3 genetic polymorphisms Glu158Lys and Glu308Gly 
and their relation to ischemic stroke.

Türkanoğlu Özçelik A(1), Can Demirdöğen B, Demirkaya S, Adalı O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Natural and Applied Sciences, Middle 
East Technical University, 06800 Ankara, Turkey. aysunturkanoglu@gmail.com

Ischemic stroke is a multifactorial disease leading to severe long-term 
disability and it is the third leading cause of death in developed countries. 
Although many studies have been reported to elucidate etiological and 
pathological mechanisms of stroke, the genetic and molecular basis of disease 
remains poorly understood. Recent studies have shown that reactive oxygen 
species causing oxidative stress play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of 
atherosclerosis that is the main cause of a group of cardiovascular diseases 
including ischemic stroke. In this study, we aimed to investigate the 
relationship between FMO3 Glu158Lys and Glu308Gly variants, and the risk of 
incidence of ischemic stroke in Turkish population. Two single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) within the FMO3 gene were genotyped by using PCR-RFLP 
technique in a sample set of 245 cases and 145 controls. In the case-control 
analysis, no significant difference was observed between stroke patients and 
controls with respect to FMO3 Glu158Lys and Glu308Gly polymorphisms' genotype 
and allele frequency distribution. However, heterozygote 158Glu/Lys (OR=6.110, 
P<0.001) and 308Glu/Gly (OR=6.000, P=0.006) genotypes increase the risk of 
stroke 6 times in hypertensive subjects. On the other hand, the wild type 
genotypes 158Glu/Glu and 308Glu/Glu had 6.2-fold and 4.8-fold higher risk of 
ischemic stroke in obese subgroup, respectively. Our results clearly showed that 
the risk of hypertension-related ischemic stroke was higher in the heterozygote 
genotype carriers. This is the first study conducted regarding the association 
of FMO3 Glu158Lys and Glu308Gly genetic polymorphisms and ischemic stroke risk 
in Turkish population.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.010
PMID: 23510775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]