1. Kidney Int. 2013 Jul;84(1):206-13. doi: 10.1038/ki.2013.93. Epub 2013 Mar 20.

Genetic screening in adolescents with steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome.

Lipska BS(1), Iatropoulos P, Maranta R, Caridi G, Ozaltin F, Anarat A, Balat A, 
Gellermann J, Trautmann A, Erdogan O, Saeed B, Emre S, Bogdanovic R, Azocar M, 
Balasz-Chmielewska I, Benetti E, Caliskan S, Mir S, Melk A, Ertan P, Baskin E, 
Jardim H, Davitaia T, Wasilewska A, Drozdz D, Szczepanska M, Jankauskiene A, 
Higuita LM, Ardissino G, Ozkaya O, Kuzma-Mroczkowska E, Soylemezoglu O, Ranchin 
B, Medynska A, Tkaczyk M, Peco-Antic A, Akil I, Jarmolinski T, Firszt-Adamczyk 
A, Dusek J, Simonetti GD, Gok F, Gheissari A, Emma F, Krmar RT, Fischbach M, 
Printza N, Simkova E, Mele C, Ghiggeri GM, Schaefer F; PodoNet Consortium.

Collaborators: Azocar M, Quiroz L, Higuita LM, Dušek J, Ranchin B, Fischbach M, 
Davitaia T, Gellermann J, Oh J, Melk A, Schaefer F, Wigger M, Printza N, Sallay 
P, Gheissari A, Noris M, Pasini A, Ghiggeri GM, Ardissino G, Benetti E, Emma F, 
Aoun B, Abou-Jaoudé P, Jankauskiene A, Wasilewska A, Gacka E, Żurowska A, Drożdz 
D, Tkaczyk M, Borzęcka H, Silska M, Jarmoliński T, Firszt-Adamczyk A, Książek J, 
Kuźma-Mroczkowska E, Medyńska A, Szczepańska M, Afonso AC, Jardim H, Peco-Antic 
A, Bogdanovic R, Krmar RT, Simonetti GD, Saeed B, Anarat A, Balat A, Baskin Z, 
Cakar N, Erdogan O, Özcakar B, Ozaltin F, Sakallioglu O, Soylemezoglu O, Akman 
S, Gok F, Caliskan S, Candan C, Emre S, Mir S, Akil I, Ertan P, Özkaya O, 
Kalyoncu M, Simkova E, Alhammadi E, Sobko R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Center for Pediatric and Adolescent 
Medicine, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. b.lipska@gumed.edu.pl

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2013 Jul;9(7):379-81. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2013.101.

Genetic screening paradigms for congenital and infantile nephrotic syndrome are 
well established; however, screening in adolescents has received only minor 
attention. To help rectify this, we analyzed an unselected adolescent cohort of 
the international PodoNet registry to develop a rational screening approach 
based on 227 patients with nonsyndromic steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome 
aged 10-20 years. Of these, 21% had a positive family history. Autosomal 
dominant cases were screened for WT1, TRPC6, ACTN4, and INF2 mutations. All 
other patients had the NPHS2 gene screened, and WT1 was tested in sporadic 
cases. In addition, 40 sporadic cases had the entire coding region of INF2 
tested. Of the autosomal recessive and the sporadic cases, 13 and 6%, 
respectively, were found to have podocin-associated nephrotic syndrome, and 56% 
of them were compound heterozygous for the nonneutral p.R229Q polymorphism. Four 
percent of the sporadic and 10% of the autosomal dominant cases had a mutation 
in WT1. Pathogenic INF2 mutations were found in 20% of the dominant but none of 
the sporadic cases. In a large cohort of adolescents including both familial and 
sporadic disease, NPHS2 mutations explained about 7% and WT1 4% of cases, 
whereas INF2 proved relevant only in autosomal dominant familial disease. Thus, 
screening of the entire coding sequence of NPHS2 and exons 8-9 of WT1 appears to 
be the most rational and cost-effective screening approach in sporadic juvenile 
steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2013.93
PMID: 23515051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]