1. Biol Open. 2013 Mar 15;2(3):314-23. doi: 10.1242/bio.20133327. Epub 2013 Jan
17.

Establishment and mitotic characterization of new Drosophila acentriolar cell 
lines from DSas-4 mutant.

Lecland N(1), Debec A, Delmas A, Moutinho-Pereira S, Malmanche N, Bouissou A, 
Dupré C, Jourdan A, Raynaud-Messina B, Maiato H, Guichet A.

Author information:
(1)Polarity and Morphogenesis Group, Jacques Monod Institute, UMR 7592 CNRS, 
University Paris Diderot , 15 rue Hélène Brion, 75 205 Paris Cedex 13 , France ; 
Present address: Microtubule Organization Lab, Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de 
Barcelona, Baldiri Reixac 10-12, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

In animal cells the centrosome is commonly viewed as the main cellular structure 
driving microtubule (MT) assembly into the mitotic spindle apparatus. However, 
additional pathways, such as those mediated by chromatin and augmin, are 
involved in the establishment of functional spindles. The molecular mechanisms 
involved in these pathways remain poorly understood, mostly due to limitations 
inherent to current experimental systems available. To overcome these 
limitations we have developed six new Drosophila cell lines derived from 
Drosophila homozygous mutants for DSas-4, a protein essential for centriole 
biogenesis. These cells lack detectable centrosomal structures, astral MT, with 
dispersed pericentriolar proteins D-PLP, Centrosomin and γ-tubulin. They show 
poorly focused spindle poles that reach the plasma membrane. Despite being 
compromised for functional centrosome, these cells could successfully undergo 
mitosis. Live-cell imaging analysis of acentriolar spindle assembly revealed 
that nascent MTs are nucleated from multiple points in the vicinity of 
chromosomes. These nascent MTs then grow away from kinetochores allowing the 
expansion of fibers that will be part of the future acentriolar spindle. MT 
repolymerization assays illustrate that acentriolar spindle assembly occurs 
"inside-out" from the chromosomes. Colchicine-mediated depolymerization of MTs 
further revealed the presence of a functional Spindle Assembly Checkpoint (SAC) 
in the acentriolar cells. Finally, pilot RNAi experiments open the potential use 
of these cell lines for the molecular dissection of anastral pathways in spindle 
and centrosome assembly.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.20133327
PMCID: PMC3603413
PMID: 23519377

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors have no 
competing interests to declare.