1. Int J Cell Biol. 2013;2013:604867. doi: 10.1155/2013/604867. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Aggregates, crystals, gels, and amyloids: intracellular and extracellular 
phenotypes at the crossroads of immunoglobulin physicochemical property and cell 
physiology.

Hasegawa H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutic Discovery, Amgen Inc., 1201 Amgen Court West, 
Seattle, WA 98119, USA.

Recombinant immunoglobulins comprise an important class of human therapeutics. 
Although specific immunoglobulins can be purposefully raised against desired 
antigen targets by various methods, identifying an immunoglobulin clone that 
simultaneously possesses potent therapeutic activities and desirable 
manufacturing-related attributes often turns out to be challenging. The variable 
domains of individual immunoglobulins primarily define the unique antigen 
specificities and binding affinities inherent to each clone. The primary 
sequence of the variable domains also specifies the unique physicochemical 
properties that modulate various aspects of individual immunoglobulin life 
cycle, starting from the biosynthetic steps in the endoplasmic reticulum, 
secretory pathway trafficking, secretion, and the fate in the extracellular 
space and in the endosome-lysosome system. Because of the diverse repertoire of 
immunoglobulin physicochemical properties, some immunoglobulin clones' intrinsic 
properties may manifest as intriguing cellular phenotypes, unusual solution 
behaviors, and serious pathologic outcomes that are of scientific and clinical 
importance. To gain renewed insights into identifying manufacturable therapeutic 
antibodies, this paper catalogs important intracellular and extracellular 
phenotypes induced by various subsets of immunoglobulin clones occupying 
different niches of diverse physicochemical repertoire space. Both intrinsic and 
extrinsic factors that make certain immunoglobulin clones desirable or 
undesirable for large-scale manufacturing and therapeutic use are summarized.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/604867
PMCID: PMC3603282
PMID: 23533417