1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59843. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059843. Epub 2013 Mar
28.

Neuroprotection by curcumin in ischemic brain injury involves the Akt/Nrf2 
pathway.

Wu J(1), Li Q, Wang X, Yu S, Li L, Wu X, Chen Y, Zhao J, Zhao Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, People's 
Republic of China.

Oxidative damage plays a critical role in many diseases of the central nervous 
system. This study was conducted to determine the molecular mechanisms involved 
in the putative anti-oxidative effects of curcumin against experimental stroke. 
Oxygen and glucose deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/R) was used to mimic ischemic 
insult in primary cultured cortical neurons. A rapid increase in the 
intracellular expression of NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase1 (NQO1) induced by 
OGD was counteracted by curcumin post-treatment, which paralleled attenuated 
cell injury. The reduction of phosphorylation Akt induced by OGD was restored by 
curcumin. Consequently, NQO1 expression and the binding activity of nuclear 
factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) to antioxidant response element (ARE) 
were increased. LY294002 blocked the increase in phospho-Akt evoked by curcumin 
and abolished the associated protective effect. Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats 
were subjected to transient middle cerebral artery occlusion for 60 minutes. 
Curcumin administration significantly reduced infarct size. Curcumin also 
markedly reduced oxidative stress levels in middle cerebral artery occlusion 
(MCAO) rats; hence, these effects were all suppressed by LY294002. Taken 
together, these findings provide evidence that curcumin protects neurons against 
ischemic injury, and this neuroprotective effect involves the Akt/Nrf2 pathway. 
In addition, Nrf2 is involved in the neuroprotective effects of curcumin against 
oxidative damage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059843
PMCID: PMC3610879
PMID: 23555802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.