1. Neuroscientist. 2013 Oct;19(5):465-78. doi: 10.1177/1073858413482983. Epub
2013  Apr 4.

Presynaptic gating of postsynaptic synaptic plasticity: a plasticity filter in 
the adult auditory cortex.

Blundon JA(1), Zakharenko SS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Development Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105-2794, USA.

Sensory cortices can not only detect and analyze incoming sensory information 
but can also undergo plastic changes while learning behaviorally important 
sensory cues. This experience-dependent cortical plasticity is essential for 
shaping and modifying neuronal circuits to perform computations of multiple, 
previously unknown sensations, the adaptive process that is believed to underlie 
perceptual learning. Intensive efforts to identify the mechanisms of cortical 
plasticity have provided several important clues; however, the exact cellular 
sites and mechanisms within the intricate neuronal networks that underlie 
cortical plasticity have yet to be elucidated. In this review, we present 
several parallels between cortical plasticity in the auditory cortex and 
recently discovered mechanisms of synaptic plasticity gating at thalamocortical 
projections that provide the main input to sensory cortices. Striking 
similarities between the features and mechanisms of thalamocortical synaptic 
plasticity and those of experience-dependent cortical plasticity in the auditory 
cortex, especially in terms of regulation of an early critical period, point to 
thalamocortical projections as an important locus of plasticity in sensory 
cortices.

DOI: 10.1177/1073858413482983
PMCID: PMC4057285
PMID: 23558179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]