1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 16;8(4):e62121. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062121. Print 
2013.

Diversity of mating-type chromosome structures in the yeast Zygosaccharomyces 
rouxii caused by ectopic exchanges between MAT-like loci.

Watanabe J(1), Uehara K, Mogi Y.

Author information:
(1)Manufacturing Division, Yamasa Corporation, Araoicho, Choshi, Chiba, Japan. 
j_watanabe@yamasa.com

We investigated sex chromosome diversity in Zygosaccharomyces rouxii (Z. 
rouxii). In the current study, we show that the organization of the mating-type 
(MAT) locus is highly variable in the Z. rouxii population, indicating the MAT, 
HML, and HMR loci are translocation hotspots. Although NBRC1130 and CBS732 were 
originally two stocks of the type strain of the species, only NBRC1130 retains 
the original karyotype. A reciprocal translocation between the MAT and HMR loci 
appears to have occurred during the early passage culture of CBS732, which was 
used for genome sequencing. In NBRC1733, NBRC0686, NBRC0740 and NBRC1053, the 
terminal region of the chromosome containing the HMR locus was replaced with the 
chromosomal region to the left of the MAT or HML loci. The translocation events 
found in NBRC1733, NBRC0686, NBRC0740, and NBRC1053 were reconstructed under our 
experimental conditions using the DA2 background, and the reconstruction 
suggests that the frequency of this type of translocation is approximately 
10(-7). These results suggest that the MAT and MAT-like loci were the 
susceptible regions in the genome, and the diversity of mating-type chromosome 
structures in Z. rouxii was caused by ectopic exchanges between MAT-like loci.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062121
PMCID: PMC3628578
PMID: 23614024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have the 
following competing interest. The study was Supported by Yamasa Corporation and 
all of the authors are employed by Yamasa Corporation. There are no patents, 
products in development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter the 
authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, 
as detailed online in the guide for authors.