1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 19;8(4):e61716. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061716. Print 
2013.

Propagation of human prostate cancer stem-like cells occurs through 
EGFR-mediated ERK activation.

Rybak AP(1), Ingram AJ, Tang D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Prostate cancer stem-like cells (PCSCs) are being intensely investigated largely 
owing to their contributions towards prostate tumorigenesis, however, our 
understanding of PCSC biology, including their critical pathways, remains 
incompletely understood. While epidermal growth factor (EGF) is widely used in 
maintaining PCSC cells in vitro, the importance of EGF-dependent signaling and 
its downstream pathways in PCSC self-renewal are not well characterized. By 
investigating DU145 sphere cells, a population of prostate cancer cells with 
stem-like properties, we report here that epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) signaling plays a critical role in the propagation of DU145 PCSCs. 
Activation of EGFR signaling via addition of EGF and ectopic expression of a 
constitutively-active EGFR mutant (EGFRvIII) increased sphere formation. 
Conversely, inhibition of EGFR signaling by using EGFR inhibitors (AG1478 and 
PD168393) and knockdown of EGFR significantly inhibited PCSC self-renewal. 
Consistent with the MEK-ERK pathway being a major target of EGFR signaling, 
activation of the MEK-ERK pathway contributed to EGFR-facilitated PCSC 
propagation. Modulation of EGFR signaling affected extracellular signal-related 
kinase (ERK) activation. Inhibition of ERK activation through multiple 
approaches, including treatment with the MEK inhibitor U0126, ectopic expression 
of dominant-negative MEK1(K97M), and knockdown of either ERK1 or ERK2 resulted 
in a robust reduction in PCSC propagation. Collectively, the present study 
provides evidence that EGFR signaling promotes PCSC self-renewal, in part, by 
activating the MEK-ERK pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061716
PMCID: PMC3631151
PMID: 23620784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.