1. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Aug;169(7):1600-11. doi: 10.1111/bph.12234.

Functional interaction between pre-synaptic α6β2-containing nicotinic and 
adenosine A2A receptors in the control of dopamine release in the rat striatum.

Garção P(1), Szabó EC, Wopereis S, Castro AA, Tomé ÂR, Prediger RD, Cunha RA, 
Agostinho P, Köfalvi A.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 
Portugal; Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Pre-synaptic nicotinic ACh receptors (nAChRs) and 
adenosine A2A receptors (A2A Rs) are involved in the control of dopamine release 
and are putative therapeutic targets in Parkinson's disease and addiction. Since 
A2A Rs have been reported to interact with nAChRs, here we aimed at mapping the 
possible functional interaction between A2A Rs and nAChRs in rat striatal 
dopaminergic terminals.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We pharmacologically characterized the release of 
dopamine and defined the localization of nAChR subunits in rat striatal nerve 
terminals in vitro and carried out locomotor behavioural sensitization in rats 
in vivo.
KEY RESULTS: In striatal nerve terminals, the selective A2A R agonist CGS21680 
inhibited, while the A2A R antagonist ZM241385 potentiated the 
nicotine-stimulated [(3) H]dopamine ([(3) H]DA) release. Upon blockade of the α6 
subunit-containing nAChRs, the remaining nicotine-stimulated [(3) H]DA release 
was no longer modulated by A2A R ligands. In the locomotor sensitization 
experiments, nicotine enhanced the locomotor activity on day 7 of repeated 
nicotine injection, an effect that no longer persisted after 1 week of drug 
withdrawal. Notably, ZM241385-injected rats developed locomotor sensitization to 
nicotine already on day 2, which remained persistent upon nicotine withdrawal.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These results provide the first evidence for a 
functional interaction between nicotinic and adenosine A2A R in striatal 
dopaminergic terminals, with likely therapeutic consequences for smoking, 
Parkinson's disease and other dopaminergic disorders.

© 2013 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.12234
PMCID: PMC3724115
PMID: 23638679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]