1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 18;8(4):e62119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062119. Print 
2013.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors, somatic mutations and candidate genetic risk 
variants.

O'Brien KM(1), Orlow I, Antonescu CR, Ballman K, McCall L, DeMatteo R, Engel LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are rare but treatable soft tissue 
sarcomas. Nearly all GISTs have somatic mutations in either the KIT or PDGFRA 
gene, but there are no known inherited genetic risk factors. We assessed the 
relationship between KIT/PDGFRA mutations and select deletions or single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 279 participants from a clinical trial of 
adjuvant imatinib mesylate. Given previous evidence that certain susceptibility 
loci and carcinogens are associated with characteristic mutations, or 
"signatures" in other cancers, we hypothesized that the characteristic somatic 
mutations in the KIT and PDGFRA genes in GIST tumors may similarly be mutational 
signatures that are causally linked to specific mutagens or susceptibility loci. 
As previous epidemiologic studies suggest environmental risk factors such as 
dioxin and radiation exposure may be linked to sarcomas, we chose 208 variants 
in 39 candidate genes related to DNA repair and dioxin metabolism or response. 
We calculated adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for 
the association between each variant and 7 categories of tumor mutation using 
logistic regression. We also evaluated gene-level effects using the sequence 
kernel association test (SKAT). Although none of the association p-values were 
statistically significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons, SNPs in 
CYP1B1 were strongly associated with KIT exon 11 codon 557-8 deletions 
(OR = 1.9, 95% CI: 1.3-2.9 for rs2855658 and OR = 1.8, 95% CI: 1.2-2.7 for 
rs1056836) and wild type GISTs (OR = 2.7, 95% CI: 1.5-4.8 for rs1800440 and 
OR = 0.5, 95% CI: 0.3-0.9 for rs1056836). CYP1B1 was also associated with these 
mutations categories in the SKAT analysis (p = 0.002 and p = 0.003, 
respectively). Other potential risk variants included GSTM1, RAD23B and ERCC2. 
This preliminary analysis of inherited genetic risk factors for GIST offers some 
clues about the disease's genetic origins and provides a starting point for 
future candidate gene or gene-environment research.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062119
PMCID: PMC3630216
PMID: 23637977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Novartis Pharmaceuticals 
Corporation provided funding for this research project. RD previously served as 
a paid consultant to Novartis. All other authors declare that they have no 
conflict of interest. There are no patents or products related to this research. 
Novartis Pharmaceuticals' role does not alter the authors' adherence to all the 
PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.