1. Sci Signal. 2013 Apr 30;6(273):ra28.1-13, S0-15. doi:
10.1126/scisignal.2003884.

Epigenetic activation of AP1 promotes squamous cell carcinoma metastasis.

Ding X(1), Pan H, Li J, Zhong Q, Chen X, Dry SM, Wang CY.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling, Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, 
School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 
90095, USA.

The transcription factor AP1 (activating protein 1), a heterodimer of the JUN 
and FOS proteins, promotes the invasive growth and metastasis of various tumors 
such as squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), breast cancer, and melanoma. AP1 activity 
is transcriptionally induced through a positive feedback loop. We identified the 
histone demethylase KDM4A (lysine-specific demethylase 4A) as a key epigenetic 
priming factor in this positive feedback loop. KDM4A contributed to the 
induction of genes encoding the AP1 transcription factors and the invasive 
growth and metastasis of SCC. KDM4A knockdown decreased the growth 
factor-induced messenger RNA expression and protein abundance of AP1 family 
members, including JUN and FOSL1. Mechanistically, histone demethylation by 
KDM4A facilitated the binding of the AP1 complex to the promoters of JUN and 
FOSL1, thereby promoting the positive feedback loop that maintains activation of 
AP1. In a mouse model of SCC, KDM4A knockdown inhibited lymph node metastasis. 
Moreover, the abundance of KDM4A correlated with the abundance of JUN and FOSL1 
in human SCC tissues, and KDM4A expression was increased in human lymph node 
metastases. Our studies provide insights into the epigenetic control of AP1 and 
tumor invasion and suggest that KDM4A could be an important therapeutic target 
for inhibiting invasive SCC growth and metastasis.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2003884
PMCID: PMC3951265
PMID: 23633675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]