1. Cancer Med. 2013 Apr;2(2):208-15. doi: 10.1002/cam4.61. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

Ultradeep sequencing detects GNAQ and GNA11 mutations in cell-free DNA from 
plasma of patients with uveal melanoma.

Metz CH(1), Scheulen M, Bornfeld N, Lohmann D, Zeschnigk M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, University Duisburg-Essen 
Essen, Germany.

Elevated levels of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) are frequently observed in tumor 
patients. Activating mutations in exon 4 (R183) and exon 5 (Q209) of GNAQ and 
GNA 11 are almost exclusively found in uveal melanoma, thus providing a highly 
specific marker for the presence of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA). To establish 
a reliable, noninvasive assay that might allow early detection and monitoring of 
metastatic disease, we determined the proportion of GNAQ or GNA 11 mutant reads 
in cfDNA of uveal melanoma patients by ultradeep sequencing. Cell-free DNA from 
28 uveal melanoma patients with metastases or extraocular growth was isolated 
and quantified by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (7-1550 ng DNA/mL 
plasma). GNAQ and GNA 11 regions of interest were amplified in 22 of 28 patients 
and ultradeep sequencing of amplicons was performed to detect even low 
proportions of mutant reads. We detected Q209 mutations (2-38% mutant reads) in 
either GNAQ or GNA 11 in the plasma of 9 of 22 metastasized patients. No 
correlation between the proportion of mutant reads and the concentration of 
cfDNA could be detected. Among the nine ctDNA-positive patients, four had 
metastases in bone, whereas no metastases were detected in the 13 ctDNA-negative 
patients at this location (P = 0.025). Furthermore, ctDNA-positive patients 
tended to be younger at initial diagnosis and show larger metastases. The 
results show that ultradeep amplicon sequencing can be used to detect tumor DNA 
in plasma of metastasized uveal melanoma patients. It remains to be shown if 
this approach can be used for early detection of disseminated tumor disease.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.61
PMCID: PMC3639659
PMID: 23634288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]