1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 18;8(4):e61456. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061456. Print 
2013.

Roles of ApoB-100 gene polymorphisms and the risks of gallstones and gallbladder 
cancer: a meta-analysis.

Gong Y(1), Zhang L, Bie P, Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third 
Military Medical University, Chongqing City, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Gallstones (GS) is the major manifestation of gallbladder disease, 
and is the most common risk factor for gallbladder cancer (GBC). Previous 
studies investigating the association between ApoB-100 gene polymorphisms and 
the risks of GS and GBC have yielded conflicting results. Therefore, we 
performed a meta-analysis to clarify the effects of ApoB-100 gene polymorphisms 
on the risks of GS and GBC.
METHODS: A computerized literature search was conducted to identify the relevant 
studies from PubMed and Embase. Fixed or random effects model was selected based 
on heterogeneity test. Publication bias was estimated using Begg's funnel plots 
and Egger's regression test.
RESULTS: A total of 10, 3, and 3 studies were included in the analyses of the 
association between ApoB-100 XbaI, EcoRI, or insertion/deletion (ID) 
polymorphisms and the GS risks, respectively, while 3 studies were included in 
the analysis for the association between XbaI polymorphism and GBC risk. The 
combined results showed a significant association in Chinese (X+ vs. X-, 
OR = 2.37, 95%CI 1.52-3.70; X+X+/X+X- vs. X+X+, OR = 2.47, 95%CI 1.55-3.92), but 
not in Indians or Caucasians. Null association was observed between EcoRI or ID 
polymorphisms and GS risks. With regard to the association between XbaI 
polymorphism and GBC risk, a significant association was detected when GBC 
patients were compared with healthy persons and when GBC patients were compared 
with GS patients. A significant association was still detected when GBC patients 
(with GS) were compared with the GS patients (X+X+ vs. X-X-, OR = 0.33, 95%CI 
0.12-0.90).
CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis suggest that the ApoB-100 X+ 
allele might be associated with increased risk of GS in Chinese but not in other 
populations, while the ApoB-100 X+X+ genotype might be associated with reduced 
risk of GBC. Further studies with larger sample sizes are needed to confirm 
these results.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061456
PMCID: PMC3630192
PMID: 23637837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.