1. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jun;161A(6):1291-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35905. Epub
2013  Apr 30.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI: a predominantly cardiac phenotype associated with 
homozygosity for p.R152W mutation in the ARSB gene.

Jurecka A(1), Zakharova E, Cimbalistiene L, Gusina N, Kulpanovich A, Golda A, 
Opoka-Winiarska V, Piotrowska E, Voskoboeva E, Tylki-Szymańska A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland. 
ajurecka@gmail.com

Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI (MPS VI) is a rare lysosomal, autosomal recessive 
storage disorder caused by deficient activity of 
N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase (ARSB). Approximately, 140 ARSB gene mutations 
have been identified; however, most are private mutations making 
genotype-phenotype correlation for most MPS VI patients difficult. The aim of 
this study was to describe the natural clinical course in patients homozygous 
for the p.R152W mutation from eight unrelated families. From our database of 70 
patients with MPS VI, we selected 10 patients homozygous for the p.R152W mutant 
allele (median age 27.5 years, range 18-38 years). We performed a 
cross-sectional observational study characterizing the onset and prevalence of 
clinical manifestations. First signs of the disease, such as cardiac valve 
disease, slightly decreased joint range of motion and mild growth retardation, 
were observed in mid-adolescent years (median 15 years). Within the disease 
course, the most common clinical feature in all the patients was progressive 
heart disease of predominantly valve origin leading to symptoms of heart 
failure. Other typical MPS VI features were subtle and not present in all the 
patients. Delays up to 23 years (median 8.5 years) intervened between symptom 
onset and disease diagnosis. Patients homozygous for the p.R152W mutation 
present a cardiac variant of MPS VI characterized by progressive cardiac valve 
disease leading to serious cardiac complications including abrupt death due to 
cardiac failure.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35905
PMID: 23633437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]