1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 21;288(25):18300-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.441089. Epub 
2013 May 8.

The yeast ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter Ycf1p enhances the recruitment 
of the soluble SNARE Vam7p to vacuoles for efficient membrane fusion.

Sasser TL(1), Lawrence G, Karunakaran S, Brown C, Fratti RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae vacuole contains five ATP-binding cassette class C 
(ABCC) transporters, including Ycf1p, a family member that was originally 
characterized as a Cd(2+) transporter. Ycf1p has also been found to physically 
interact with a wide array of proteins, including factors that regulate vacuole 
homeostasis. In this study, we examined the role of Ycf1p and other ABCC 
transporters in the regulation of vacuole homotypic fusion. We found that 
deletion of YCF1 attenuated in vitro vacuole fusion by up to 40% relative to 
wild-type vacuoles. Plasmid-expressed wild-type Ycf1p rescued the deletion 
phenotype; however, Ycf1p containing a mutation of the conserved Lys-669 to Met 
in the Walker A box of the first nucleotide-binding domain (Ycf1p(K669M)) was 
unable to complement the fusion defect of ycf1Δ vacuoles. This indicates that 
the ATPase activity of Ycf1p is required for its function in regulating fusion. 
In addition, we found that deleting YCF1 caused a striking decrease in vacuolar 
levels of the soluble SNARE Vam7p, whereas total cellular levels were not 
altered. The attenuated fusion of ycf1Δ vacuoles was rescued by the addition of 
recombinant Vam7p to in vitro experiments. Thus, Ycf1p contributes in the 
recruitment of Vam7p to the vacuole for efficient membrane fusion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.441089
PMCID: PMC3689972
PMID: 23658021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]