1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2013 Jun;162B(4):404-12. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.32157. Epub 2013 May 3.

Association of aggression with a novel microRNA binding site polymorphism in the 
wolframin gene.

Kovacs-Nagy R(1), Elek Z, Szekely A, Nanasi T, Sasvari-Szekely M, Ronai Z.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, 
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

Rare mutations in the WFS1 gene lead to Wolfram syndrome, a severe multisystem 
disorder with progressive neurodegeneration and diabetes mellitus causing 
life-threatening complications and premature death. Only a few association 
studies using small clinical samples tested the possible effects of common WFS1 
gene variants on mood disorders and suicide, the non-clinical spectrum has not 
been studied yet. Self-report data on Aggression, Impulsiveness, Anxiety, and 
Depression were collected from a large (N = 801) non-psychiatric sample. Single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were selected to provide an adequate coverage of 
the entire WFS1 gene, as well as to include putative microRNA binding site 
polymorphisms. Molecular analysis of the assumed microRNA binding site variant 
was performed by an in vitro reporter-gene assay of the cloned 3' untranslated 
region with coexpression of miR-668. Among the 17 WFS1 SNPs, only the rs1046322, 
a putative microRNA (miR-668) binding site polymorphism showed significant 
association with psychological dimensions after correction for multiple testing: 
those with the homozygous form of the minor allele reported higher aggression on 
the Buss-Perry Aggression Questionnaire (P = 0.0005). Functional effect of the 
same SNP was also demonstrated in a luciferase reporter system: the minor A 
allele showed lower repression compared to the major G allele, if co-expressed 
with miR-668. To our knowledge, this is the first report describing a microRNA 
binding site polymorphism of the WFS1 gene and its association with human 
aggression based on a large, non-clinical sample.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32157
PMID: 23650218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]