1. Sci Transl Med. 2013 May 8;5(184):184ra60. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3005497.

Genomic diversity and fitness of E. coli strains recovered from the intestinal 
and urinary tracts of women with recurrent urinary tract infection.

Chen SL(1), Wu M, Henderson JP, Hooton TM, Hibbing ME, Hultgren SJ, Gordon JI.

Author information:
(1)Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University, St. 
Louis, MO 63108, USA.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2013 Oct;190(4):1252-3. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.06.075.

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are common in women, and recurrence is a major 
clinical problem. Most UTIs are caused by uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC). 
UPEC are generally thought to migrate from the gut to the bladder to cause UTI. 
UPEC form specialized intracellular bacterial communities in the bladder 
urothelium as part of a pathogenic mechanism to establish a foothold during 
acute stages of infection. Evolutionarily, such a specific adaptation to the 
bladder environment would be predicted to result in decreased fitness in other 
habitats, such as the gut. To examine this prediction, we characterized 45 E. 
coli strains isolated from the feces and urine of four otherwise healthy women 
with recurrent UTI. Multilocus sequence typing and whole genome sequencing 
revealed that two patients maintained a clonal population in both these body 
habitats throughout their recurrent UTIs, whereas the other two exhibited a 
wholesale shift in the dominant UPEC strain colonizing both sites. In vivo 
competition studies in mouse models, using isolates taken from one of the 
patients with a wholesale population shift, revealed that the strain that 
dominated her last UTI episode had increased fitness in both the gut and the 
bladder relative to the strain that dominated in preceding episodes. Increased 
fitness correlated with differences in the strains' gene repertoires and 
carbohydrate and amino acid utilization profiles. Thus, UPEC appear capable of 
persisting in both the gut and urinary tract without a fitness trade-off, 
emphasizing the need to widen our consideration of potential reservoirs for 
strains causing recurrent UTI.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3005497
PMCID: PMC3695744
PMID: 23658245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.