1. J Neurol. 2013 Aug;260(8):2084-93. doi: 10.1007/s00415-013-6934-y. Epub 2013
May  14.

Anoctamin 5 muscular dystrophy in Denmark: prevalence, genotypes, phenotypes, 
cardiac findings, and muscle protein expression.

Witting N(1), Duno M, Petri H, Krag T, Bundgaard H, Kober L, Vissing J.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Research Unit and Department of Neurology, Rigshospitalet, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. nanna.witting@regionh.dk

Since the initial description in 2010 of anoctamin 5 deficiency as a cause of 
muscular dystrophy, a handful of papers have described this disease in cases of 
mixed populations. We report the first large regional study and present data on 
new aspects of prevalence, muscular and cardiac phenotypic characteristics, and 
muscle protein expression. All patients in our neuromuscular unit with 
genetically unclassified, recessive limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD2), 
Miyoshi-type distal myopathy (MMD) or persistent asymptomatic hyperCK-emia 
(PACK) were assessed for mutations in the ANO5 gene. Genetically confirmed 
patients were evaluated with muscular and cardiopulmonary examination. Among 40 
unclassified patients (28 LGMD2, 5 MMD, 7 PACK), 20 were homozygous or compound 
heterozygous for ANO5 mutations, (13 LGMD2, 5 MMD, 2 PACK). Prevalence of ANO5 
deficiency in Denmark was estimated at 1:100.000 and ANO5 mutations caused 11 % 
of our total cohort of LGMD2 cases making it the second most common LGMD2 
etiology in Denmark. Eight patients complained of dysphagia and 3 dated symptoms 
of onset in childhood. Cardiac examinations revealed increased frequency of 
premature ventricular contractions. Four novel putative pathogenic mutations 
were discovered. Total prevalence and distribution of phenotypes of ANO5 disease 
in a representative regional cohort are described for the first time. A high 
prevalence of ANO5 deficiency was found among patients with unclassified LGMD2 
(46 %) and MMD (100 %). The high incidence of reported dysphagia is a new 
phenotypic feature not previously reported, and cardiac investigations revealed 
that ANO5-patients may have an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-013-6934-y
PMID: 23670307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]