1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2013 Oct;229(3):453-76. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-013-3120-y. Epub 2013 May 18.

The reinstatement model of drug relapse: recent neurobiological findings, 
emerging research topics, and translational research.

Bossert JM(1), Marchant NJ, Calu DJ, Shaham Y.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Neuroscience Branch, Intramural Research Program, National 
Institute on Drug Abuse, Baltimore, MD, USA, jennifer.bossert@nih.gov.

BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE: Results from many clinical studies suggest that drug 
relapse and craving are often provoked by acute exposure to the 
self-administered drug or related drugs, drug-associated cues or contexts, or 
certain stressors. During the last two decades, this clinical scenario has been 
studied in laboratory animals by using the reinstatement model. In this model, 
reinstatement of drug seeking by drug priming, drug cues or contexts, or certain 
stressors is assessed following drug self-administration training and subsequent 
extinction of the drug-reinforced responding.
OBJECTIVE: In this review, we first summarize recent (2009-present) 
neurobiological findings from studies using the reinstatement model. We then 
discuss emerging research topics, including the impact of interfering with 
putative reconsolidation processes on cue- and context-induced reinstatement of 
drug seeking, and similarities and differences in mechanisms of reinstatement 
across drug classes. We conclude by discussing results from recent human studies 
that were inspired by results from rat studies using the reinstatement model.
CONCLUSIONS: Main conclusions from the studies reviewed highlight: (1) the 
ventral subiculum and lateral hypothalamus as emerging brain areas important for 
reinstatement of drug seeking, (2) the existence of differences in brain 
mechanisms controlling reinstatement of drug seeking across drug classes, (3) 
the utility of the reinstatement model for assessing the effect of 
reconsolidation-related manipulations on cue-induced drug seeking, and (4) the 
encouraging pharmacological concordance between results from rat studies using 
the reinstatement model and human laboratory studies on cue- and stress-induced 
drug craving.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-013-3120-y
PMCID: PMC3770775
PMID: 23685858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]