1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2013 Nov;110(11):2803-14. doi: 10.1002/bit.24956. Epub 2013
 Jul 1.

Crystallographic analysis and structure-guided engineering of NADPH-dependent 
Ralstonia sp. alcohol dehydrogenase toward NADH cosubstrate specificity.

Lerchner A(1), Jarasch A, Meining W, Schiefner A, Skerra A.

Author information:
(1)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science, CIPS-M, and Lehrstuhl für 
Biologische Chemie, Technische Universität München, 85350, 
Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.

The NADP⁺-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase from Ralstonia sp. (RasADH) belongs to 
the protein superfamily of short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDRs). As an 
enzyme that accepts different types of substrates--including bulky-bulky as well 
as small-bulky secondary alcohols or ketones--with high stereoselectivity, it 
offers potential as a biocatalyst for industrial biotechnology. To understand 
substrate and cosubstrate specificities of RasADH we determined the crystal 
structure of the apo-enzyme as well as its NADP⁺-bound state with resolutions 
down to 2.8 Å. RasADH displays a homotetrameric quaternary structure that can be 
described as a dimer of homodimers while in each subunit a seven-stranded 
parallel β-sheet, flanked by three α-helices on each side, forms a Rossmann 
fold-type dinucleotide binding domain. Docking of the well-known substrate 
(S)-1-phenylethanol clearly revealed the structural determinants of 
stereospecificity. To favor practical RasADH application in the context of 
established cofactor recycling systems, for example, those involving an 
NADH-dependent amino acid dehydrogenase, we attempted to rationally change its 
cosubstrate specificity from NADP⁺ to NAD⁺ utilizing the structural information 
that NADP⁺ specificity is largely governed by the residues Asn15, Gly37, Arg38, 
and Arg39. Furthermore, an extensive sequence alignment with homologous 
dehydrogenases that have different cosubstrate specificities revealed a modified 
general SDR motif ASNG (instead of NNAG) at positions 86-89 of RasADH. 
Consequently, we constructed mutant enzymes with one (G37D), four 
(N15G/G37D/R38V/R39S), and six (N15G/G37D/R38V/R39S/A86N/S88A) amino acid 
exchanges. RasADH (N15G/G37D/R38V/R39S) was better able to accept NAD⁺ while 
showing much reduced catalytic efficiency with NADP⁺, leading to a change in 
NADH/NADPH specificity by a factor of ∼3.6 million.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.24956
PMID: 23686719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]