1. Int J Endocrinol. 2013;2013:216107. doi: 10.1155/2013/216107. Epub 2013 Apr
17.

Effects of growth hormone replacement therapy on bone mineral density in growth 
hormone deficient adults: a meta-analysis.

Xue P(1), Wang Y, Yang J, Li Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Third Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
139 Ziqiang Road, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050000, China.

Objectives. Growth hormone deficiency patients exhibited reduced bone mineral 
density compared with healthy controls, but previous researches demonstrated 
uncertainty about the effect of growth hormone replacement therapy on bone in 
growth hormone deficient adults. The aim of this study was to determine whether 
the growth hormone replacement therapy could elevate bone mineral density in 
growth hormone deficient adults. Methods. In this meta-analysis, searches of 
Medline, Embase, and The Cochrane Library were undertaken to identify studies in 
humans of the association between growth hormone treatment and bone mineral 
density in growth hormone deficient adults. Random effects model was used for 
this meta-analysis. Results. A total of 20 studies (including one outlier study) 
with 936 subjects were included in our research. We detected significant overall 
association of growth hormone treatment with increased bone mineral density of 
spine, femoral neck, and total body, but some results of subgroup analyses were 
not consistent with the overall analyses. Conclusions. Our meta-analysis 
suggested that growth hormone replacement therapy could have beneficial 
influence on bone mineral density in growth hormone deficient adults, but, in 
some subject populations, the influence was not evident.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/216107
PMCID: PMC3652209
PMID: 23690770