1. PLoS One. 2013 May 16;8(5):e64344. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064344. Print 
2013.

Dual regulation of cadmium-induced apoptosis by mTORC1 through selective 
induction of IRE1 branches in unfolded protein response.

Kato H(1), Katoh R, Kitamura M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of 
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan.

Cadmium (Cd) causes generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that trigger 
renal tubular injury. We found that rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTORC1, 
attenuated Cd-induced apoptosis in renal tubular cells. Knockdown of Raptor, a 
positive regulator of mTORC1, also had the similar effect. However, rapamycin 
did not alter generation of ROS, suggesting that mTORC1 is a target downstream 
of ROS. Indeed, ROS caused activation of mTORC1, which contributed to induction 
of a selective branch of the unfolded protein response (UPR); i.e., the IRE1 
pathway. Although Cd triggered three major UPR pathways, activation of mTORC1 by 
Cd did not contribute to induction of the PERK-eIF2α and ATF6 pathways. 
Consistently, knockdown of Raptor caused suppression of JNK without affecting 
the PERK-eIF2α pathway in Cd-exposed cells. Knockdown of TSC2, a negative 
regulator of mTORC1, caused activation of mTORC1 and enhanced Cd induction of 
the IRE1-JNK pathway and apoptosis without affecting other UPR branches. 
Inhibition of IRE1α kinase led to suppression of JNK activity and apoptosis in 
Cd-treated cells. Dominant-negative inhibition of JNK also suppressed Cd-induced 
apoptosis. In contrast, inhibition of IRE1α endoribonuclease activity or 
downstream XBP1 modestly enhanced Cd-induced apoptosis. In vivo, administration 
with rapamycin suppressed activation of mTORC1 and JNK, but not eIF2α, in the 
kidney of Cd-treated mice. It was correlated with attenuation of tubular injury 
and apoptotic cell death in the tubules. These results elucidate dual regulation 
of Cd-induced renal injury by mTORC1 through selective induction of IRE1 
signaling.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064344
PMCID: PMC3655991
PMID: 23696882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.