1. Retrovirology. 2013 May 30;10:57. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-57.

LEDGINs inhibit late stage HIV-1 replication by modulating integrase 
multimerization in the virions.

Desimmie BA(1), Schrijvers R, Demeulemeester J, Borrenberghs D, Weydert C, Thys 
W, Vets S, Van Remoortel B, Hofkens J, De Rijck J, Hendrix J, Bannert N, 
Gijsbers R, Christ F, Debyser Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, Laboratory for 
Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, KU Leuven, Leuven, Flanders, Belgium.

Erratum in
    Retrovirology. 2020 Jul 29;17(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s12977-020-00530-4.

BACKGROUND: LEDGINs are novel allosteric HIV integrase (IN) inhibitors that 
target the lens epithelium-derived growth factor (LEDGF)/p75 binding pocket of 
IN. They block HIV-1 integration by abrogating the interaction between LEDGF/p75 
and IN as well as by allosterically inhibiting the catalytic activity of IN.
RESULTS: Here we demonstrate that LEDGINs reduce the replication capacity of HIV 
particles produced in their presence. We systematically studied the molecular 
basis of this late effect of LEDGINs and demonstrate that HIV virions produced 
in their presence display a severe replication defect. Both the late effect and 
the previously described, early effect on integration contribute to LEDGIN 
antiviral activity as shown by time-of-addition, qPCR and infectivity assays. 
The late effect phenotype requires binding of LEDGINs to integrase without 
influencing proteolytic cleavage or production of viral particles. LEDGINs 
augment IN multimerization during virion assembly or in the released viral 
particles and severely hamper the infectivity of progeny virions. About 70% of 
the particles produced in LEDGIN-treated cells do not form a core or display 
aberrant empty cores with a mislocalized electron-dense ribonucleoprotein. The 
LEDGIN-treated virus displays defective reverse transcription and nuclear import 
steps in the target cells. The LEDGIN effect is possibly exerted at the level of 
the Pol precursor polyprotein.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that LEDGINs modulate IN multimerization in 
progeny virions and impair the formation of regular cores during the maturation 
step, resulting in a decreased infectivity of the viral particles in the target 
cells. LEDGINs thus profile as unique antivirals with combined early 
(integration) and late (IN assembly) effects on the HIV replication cycle.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-57
PMCID: PMC3671127
PMID: 23721378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]