1. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Jun 26;135(25):9299-302. doi: 10.1021/ja4042115. Epub 2013
 Jun 17.

The structure of the mercury transporter MerF in phospholipid bilayers: a large 
conformational rearrangement results from N-terminal truncation.

Lu GJ(1), Tian Y, Vora N, Marassi FM, Opella SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0307, United States.

The three-dimensional structure of the 81-residue mercury transporter MerF 
determined in liquid crystalline phospholipid bilayers under physiological 
conditions by Rotationally Aligned (RA) solid-state NMR has two long helices, 
which extend well beyond the bilayer, with a well-defined interhelical loop. 
Truncation of the N-terminal 12 residues, which are mobile and unstructured when 
the protein is solubilized in micelles, results in a large structural 
rearrangement of the protein in bilayers. In the full-length protein, the 
N-terminal helix is aligned nearly parallel to the membrane normal and forms an 
extension of the first transmembrane helix. By contrast, this helix adopts a 
perpendicular orientation in the truncated protein. The close spatial proximity 
of the two Cys-containing metal binding sites in the three-dimensional structure 
of full-length MerF provides insights into possible transport mechanisms. These 
results demonstrate that major changes in protein structure can result from 
differences in amino acid sequence (e.g., full-length vs truncated proteins) as 
well as the use of a non-native membrane mimetic environment (e.g., micelles) vs 
liquid crystalline phospholipid bilayers. They provide further evidence of the 
importance of studying unmodified membrane proteins in near-native bilayer 
environments in order to obtain accurate structures that can be related to their 
functions.

DOI: 10.1021/ja4042115
PMCID: PMC3763827
PMID: 23763519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]