1. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2013 Aug;23(8):395-402. doi: 
10.1097/FPC.0b013e328362f9f2.

Rare SERINC2 variants are specific for alcohol dependence in individuals of 
European descent.

Zuo L(1), Wang KS, Zhang XY, Li CS, Zhang F, Wang X, Chen W, Gao G, Zhang H, 
Krystal JH, Luo X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06516, USA.

OBJECTIVES: We have previously reported a top-ranked risk gene [i.e., serine 
incorporator 2 gene (SERINC2)] for alcohol dependence in individuals of European 
descent by analyzing the common variants in a genome-wide association study. In 
the present study, we comprehensively examined the rare variants [minor allele 
frequency (MAF)<0.05] in the NKAIN1-SERINC2 region to confirm our previous 
finding.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A discovery sample (1409 European-American patients with 
alcohol dependence and 1518 European-American controls) and a replication sample 
(6438 European-Australian family participants with 1645 alcohol-dependent 
probands) were subjected to an association analysis. A total of 39,903 
individuals from 19 other cohorts with 11 different neuropsychiatric and 
neurological disorders served as contrast groups. The entire NKAIN1-SERINC2 
region was imputed in all cohorts using the same reference panels of genotypes 
that included rare variants from the whole-genome sequencing data. We 
stringently cleaned the phenotype and genotype data, and obtained a total of 
about 220 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in individuals of European descent and 
about 450 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the individuals of African descent 
with 0<MAF<0.05 for an association analysis.
RESULTS: Using a weighted regression analysis implemented in the program 
SCORE-Seq, we found a rare variant constellation across the entire 
NKAIN1-SERINC2 region that was associated with alcohol dependence in 
European-Americans (Fp: overall, P=1.8×10(-4); VT: overall, P=1.4×10(-4); 
Collapsing, P=6.5×10(-5)) and European-Australians (Fp: overall, P=0.028; 
Collapsing, P=0.025), but not in African-Americans, and not associated with any 
other disorder examined. Association signals in this region came mainly from 
SERINC2, a gene that codes for an activity-regulated protein expressed in the 
brain that incorporates serine into lipids. In addition, 26 individual rare 
variants were nominally associated with alcohol dependence in European-Americans 
(P<0.05). The associations of five of these rare variants that lay within 
SERINC2 showed region-wide significance (P<α=0.0006) and 25 associations 
survived correction for a false discovery rate (q<0.05). The associations of two 
rare variants at SERINC2 were replicated in European-Australians (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: We concluded that SERINC2 was a replicable and significant risk gene 
specific for alcohol dependence in individuals of European descent.

DOI: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e328362f9f2
PMCID: PMC4287355
PMID: 23778322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None.