1. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;1036:81-8. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-511-8_7.

Generation of human iPSCs from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells using 
non-integrative Sendai virus in chemically defined conditions.

Churko JM(1), Burridge PW, Wu JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Institute of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative 
Medicine, Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

Human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) have received enormous attention 
because of their ability to differentiate into multiple cell types that 
demonstrate the patient's original phenotype. The use of hiPSCs is particularly 
valuable to the study of cardiac biology, as human cardiomyocytes are difficult 
to isolate and culture and have a limited proliferative potential. By deriving 
iPSCs from patients with heart disease and subsequently differentiating these 
hiPSCs to cardiomyocytes, it is feasible to study cardiac biology in vitro and 
model cardiac diseases. While there are many different methods for deriving 
hiPSCs, clinical use of these hiPSCs will require derivation by methods that do 
not involve modification of the original genome (non-integrative) or incorporate 
xeno-derived products (such as bovine serum albumin) which may contain 
xeno-agents. Ideally, this derivation would be carried out under chemically 
defined conditions to prevent lot-to-lot variability and enhance 
reproducibility. Additionally, derivation from cell types such as fibroblasts 
requires extended culture (4-6 weeks), greatly increasing the time required to 
progress from biopsy to hiPSC. Herein, we outline a method of culturing 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and reprogramming PBMCs into hiPSCs 
using a non-integrative Sendai virus.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-62703-511-8_7
PMCID: PMC6430631
PMID: 23807788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]