1. J Autoimmun. 2013 Aug;44:21-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2013.06.003. Epub 2013 Jun
 28.

Breakdown of immune privilege and spontaneous autoimmunity in mice expressing a 
transgenic T cell receptor specific for a retinal autoantigen.

Horai R(1), Silver PB, Chen J, Agarwal RK, Chong WP, Jittayasothorn Y, 
Mattapallil MJ, Nguyen S, Natarajan K, Villasmil R, Wang P, Karabekian Z, Lytton 
SD, Chan CC, Caspi RR.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1857, USA. hreiko@mail.nih.gov

Despite presence of circulating retina-specific T cells in healthy individuals, 
ocular immune privilege usually averts development of autoimmune uveitis. To 
study the breakdown of immune privilege and development of disease, we generated 
transgenic (Tg) mice that express a T cell receptor (TCR) specific for 
interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein (IRBP), which serves as an 
autoimmune target in uveitis induced by immunization. Three lines of TCR Tg 
mice, with different levels of expression of the transgenic R161 TCR and 
different proportions of IRBP-specific CD4⁺ T cells in their peripheral 
repertoire, were successfully established. Importantly, two of the lines rapidly 
developed spontaneous uveitis, reaching 100% incidence by 2 and 3 months of age, 
respectively, whereas the third appeared "poised" and only developed appreciable 
disease upon immune perturbation. Susceptibility roughly paralleled expression 
of the R161 TCR. In all three lines, peripheral CD4⁺ T cells displayed a naïve 
phenotype, but proliferated in vitro in response to IRBP and elicited uveitis 
upon adoptive transfer. In contrast, CD4⁺ T cells infiltrating uveitic eyes 
mostly showed an effector/memory phenotype, and included Th1, Th17 as well as T 
regulatory cells that appeared to have been peripherally converted from 
conventional CD4⁺ T cells rather than thymically derived. Thus, R161 mice 
provide a new and valuable model of spontaneous autoimmune disease that 
circumvents the limitations of active immunization and adjuvants, and allows to 
study basic mechanisms involved in maintenance and breakdown of immune 
homeostasis affecting immunologically privileged sites such as the eye.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2013.06.003
PMCID: PMC3743101
PMID: 23810578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]