1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 27;8(6):e67186. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067186. Print 
2013.

Systematic Analysis of the Functions of Lysine Acetylation in the Regulation of 
Tat Activity.

He M(1), Zhang L, Wang X, Huo L, Sun L, Feng C, Jing X, Du D, Liang H, Liu M, 
Hong Z, Zhou J.

Author information:
(1)Center for AIDS Research, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, 
Tianjin, China.

The Tat protein of HIV-1 has several well-known properties, such as 
nucleocytoplasmic trafficking, transactivation of transcription, interaction 
with tubulin, regulation of mitotic progression, and induction of apoptosis. 
Previous studies have identified a couple of lysine residues in Tat that are 
essential for its functions. In order to analyze the functions of all the lysine 
residues in Tat, we mutated them individually to alanine, glutamine, and 
arginine. Through systematic analysis of the lysine mutants, we discovered 
several previously unidentified characteristics of Tat. We found that lysine 
acetylation could modulate the subcellular localization of Tat, in addition to 
the regulation of its transactivation activity. Our data also revealed that 
lysine mutations had distinct effects on microtubule assembly and Tat binding to 
bromodomain proteins. By correlation analysis, we further found that the effects 
of Tat on apoptosis and mitotic progression were not entirely attributed to its 
effect on microtubule assembly. Our findings suggest that Tat may regulate 
diverse cellular activities through binding to different proteins and that the 
acetylation of distinct lysine residues in Tat may modulate its interaction with 
various partners.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067186
PMCID: PMC3695041
PMID: 23826228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.