1. J Vet Sci. 2013;14(4):441-7. doi: 10.4142/jvs.2013.14.4.441. Epub 2013 Jun 30.

Codon optimization of the rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) capsid gene 
leads to increased gene expression in Spodoptera frugiperda 9 (Sf9) cells.

Gao J(1), Meng C, Chen Z, Li C, Liu G.

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China.

Rabbit hemorrhagic disease (RHD) is contagious and highly lethal. Commercial 
vaccines against RHD are produced from the livers of experimentally infected 
rabbits. Although several groups have reported that recombinant subunit vaccines 
against rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) are promising, application of 
the vaccines has been restricted due to high production costs or low yield. In 
the present study, we performed codon optimization of the capsid gene to 
increase the number of preference codons and eliminate rare codons in Spodoptera 
frugiperda 9 (Sf9) cells. The capsid gene was then subcloned into the pFastBac 
plasmid, and the recombinant baculoviruses were identified with a plaque assay. 
As expected, expression of the optimized capsid protein was markedly increased 
in the Sf9 cells, and the recombinant capsid proteins self-assembled into 
virus-like particles (VLPs) that were released into the cell supernatant. 
Rabbits inoculated with the supernatant and the purified VLPs were protected 
against RHDV challenge. A rapid, specific antibody response against RHDV was 
detected by an ELISA in all of the experimental groups. In conclusion, this 
strategy of producing a recombinant subunit vaccine antigen can be used to 
develop a low-cost, insect cell-derived recombinant subunit vaccine against 
RHDV.

DOI: 10.4142/jvs.2013.14.4.441
PMCID: PMC3885738
PMID: 23820215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]