1. Phytochemistry. 2013 Oct;94:60-7. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2013.04.017. Epub 
2013 Jul 6.

The identification of a vacuolar iron transporter involved in the blue 
coloration of cornflower petals.

Yoshida K(1), Negishi T.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Japan. 
yoshidak@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp

The blue petal color of the cornflower (Centaurea cyanus) is caused by 
protocyanin, a kind of metalloanthocyanin, which is a self-assembled 
supramolecular metal complex pigment. Protocyanin is composed of six molecules 
of anthocyanin, six molecules of flavone, one ferric ion, and one magnesium ion. 
The ferric ion is essential for blue color development. Here, we identify the 
vacuolar iron transporter gene (CcVIT) from the blue petals of C. cyanus and its 
function is identified and characterized. The CcVIT transcript was observed only 
in the petals. Its amino acid sequence is highly homologous to the Arabidopsis 
thaliana (AtVIT1) and Tulipa gesneriana (TgVit1) vacuolar iron transporters. 
Heterologous expression of the CcVIT gene in yeast indicated that the 
corresponding gene product transports ferrous ion into vacuoles. Analysis of 
purple mutant-line petals clarified that the anthocyanin and flavone components 
were the same as those found in plants with blue petals, but the amount of iron 
ions in the colored cells decreased, and consequently the amount of blue 
protocyanin was reduced. The CcVIT gene was expressed even in purple mutant 
petals, however, an amino acid substitution (A236E) occurred in that case. This 
change in the CcVIT gene sequence also resulted in loss of iron transport 
activity. The CcVIT protein thus plays a critical role in the blue coloration of 
cornflower petals.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2013.04.017
PMID: 23838627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]