1. Blood. 2013 Aug 15;122(7):1222-32. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-475111. Epub
2013  Jul 8.

A mutation in MYD88 (L265P) supports the survival of lymphoplasmacytic cells by 
activation of Bruton tyrosine kinase in Waldenström macroglobulinemia.

Yang G(1), Zhou Y, Liu X, Xu L, Cao Y, Manning RJ, Patterson CJ, Buhrlage SJ, 
Gray N, Tai YT, Anderson KC, Hunter ZR, Treon SP.

Author information:
(1)Bing Center for Waldenstrom's Macroglobulinemia, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MYD88) L265P somatic mutation is highly 
prevalent in Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM) and supports malignant growth 
through nuclear factor κB (NF-κB). The signaling cascade(s) by which MYD88 L265P 
promotes NF-κB activation in WM remain unclear. By lentiviral knockdown or use 
of a MYD88 inhibitor, decreased phosphorylation of the NF-κB gatekeeper IκBα and 
survival occurred in MYD88 L265P-expressing WM cells. Conversely, WM cells 
engineered to overexpress MYD88 L265P showed enhanced survival. 
Coimmunoprecipitation studies identified Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) complexed 
to MYD88 in L265P-expressing WM cells, with preferential binding of MYD88 to 
phosphorylated BTK (pBTK). Increased pBTK was also observed in WM cells 
transduced to overexpress L265P vs wild-type MYD88. Importantly, MYD88 binding 
to BTK was abrogated following treatment of MYD88 L265P-expressing cells with a 
BTK kinase inhibitor. Inhibition of BTK or interleukin-1 receptor-associated 
kinase 1 and 4 (IRAK-1 and -4) kinase activity induced apoptosis of WM cells, 
and their combination resulted in more robust inhibition of NF-κB signaling and 
synergistic WM cell killing. The results establish BTK as a downstream target of 
MYD88 L265P signaling, and provide a framework for the study of BTK inhibitors 
alone, and in combination with IRAK inhibitors for the treatment of WM.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-475111
PMID: 23836557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]