1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2014 Jan;121(1):105-11. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-013-1065-2. Epub 2013 Jul 12.

Association between DPYSL2 gene polymorphisms and alcohol dependence in 
Caucasian samples.

Taylor A(1), Wang KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, College of Public Health, East 
Tennessee State University, PO Box 70259, Lamb Hall, Johnson City, TN, 
37614-1700, USA.

The DPYSL2 gene at 8p22-p21 is expressed widely in neuronal tissues and has been 
implicated in multiple psychiatric disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and 
schizophrenia. We therefore hypothesized that DPYSL2 gene polymorphisms may play 
a role in alcohol dependence (AD). We investigated the genetic associations of 
57 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the DPYSL2 gene with AD using 
two Caucasian samples-the Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Alcoholism 
(COGA) sample (660 AD cases and 400 controls), and the Study of Addiction: 
Genetics and Environment (SAGE) sample (623 cases and 1,016 controls). The SNP 
rs11995227 was most significantly associated with AD (p = 0.000122) in the COGA 
sample while one flanking SNP rs7832576 revealed the second most significant 
association with AD (p = 0.00163) in the COGA sample and association with AD (p 
= 0.0195) in the SAGE sample. Meta-analysis of two samples showed both 
rs119952227 and rs7832576 were associated with AD (p = 0.000363 and 0.000184, 
respectively). Furthermore, the C-A haplotype from rs11995227 and rs7832576 
revealed significant association with AD (p = 0.0000899) in the COGA sample 
while the T-G haplotype revealed association with AD both in the COGA and SAGE 
samples (p = 0.00098 and 0.021, respectively). These findings suggest that 
genetic variants in DPYSL2 may play a role in susceptibility to AD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-013-1065-2
PMID: 23846846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]