1. Cancer Epidemiol. 2013 Oct;37(5):619-24. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2013.06.005.
Epub  2013 Jul 11.

No association between genetic variants in angiogenesis and inflammation pathway 
genes and breast cancer survival among Chinese women.

Dorjgochoo T(1), Zheng Y, Gao YT, Ma X, Long J, Bao P, Zhang B, Wen W, Lu W, 
Zheng W, Shu XO, Beeghly-Fadiel A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology 
Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis and inflammation are implicated in breast cancer 
prognosis; however, the role of individual germline variation in related genes 
is unknown.
METHODS: A two-stage candidate pathway association study was conducted among 
6983 Chinese women. Stage 1 included 2884 women followed for a median of 5.7 
years; Stage 2 included 4099 women followed for a median of 4.0 years. Cox 
proportional hazards regression was used to estimate the effects of genetic 
variants on disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: Stage 1 included genotyping of 506 variants in 22 genes; analysis was 
conducted for 370 common variants. Nominally significant associations with DFS 
and/or OS were found for 20 loci in ten genes in Stage 1; variants in 19 loci 
were successfully genotyped and evaluated in Stage 2. In analyses of both study 
stages combined, nominally significant associations were found for nine variants 
in seven genes; none of these associations surpassed a significance threshold 
level corrected for the total number of variants evaluated in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: No association with survival was found for 370 common variants in 
22 angiogenesis and inflammation pathway genes among Chinese women with breast 
cancer.
IMPACT: Our data do not support a large role for common genetic variation in 22 
genes in breast cancer prognosis; research on angiogenesis and inflammation 
genes should focus on common variation in other genes, rare host variants, or 
tumor alterations.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canep.2013.06.005
PMCID: PMC4064366
PMID: 23850146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosure: The authors 
declare that they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.