1. J Comput Phys. 2013 Jul 1;244:223-235. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2012.08.014.

Multiscale model of platelet translocation and collision.

Wang W(1), Mody NA, King MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, NY 14853, USA.

The tethering of platelets on the injured vessel surface mediated by 
glycoprotein Ibα (GPIbα) - Von Willebrand factor (vWF) bonds, as well as the 
interaction between flowing platelets and adherent platelets, are two key events 
that take place immediately following blood vessel injury. This early-stage 
platelet deposition and accumulation triggers the initiation of hemostasis, a 
self-defensive mechanism to prevent the body from excessive blood loss. To 
understand and predict this complex process, one must integrate experimentally 
determined information on the mechanics and biochemical kinetics of 
participating receptors over very small time frames (1-1000 µs) and length 
scales (10-100 nm), to collective phenomena occurring over seconds and tens of 
microns. In the present study, a unique three dimensional multiscale 
computational model, platelet adhesive dynamics (PAD), was applied to elucidate 
the unique physics of (i) a non-spherical, disk-shaped platelet interacting and 
tethering onto the damaged vessel wall followed by (ii) collisional interactions 
between a flowing platelet with a downstream adherent platelet. By analyzing 
numerous simulations under different physiological conditions, we conclude that 
the platelet's unique spheroid-shape provides heterogeneous, 
orientation-dependent translocation (rolling) behavior which enhances cell-wall 
interactions. We also conclude that platelet-platelet near field interactions 
are critical for cell-cell communication during the initiation of microthrombi. 
The PAD model described here helps to identify the physical factors that control 
the initial stages of platelet capture during this process.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcp.2012.08.014
PMCID: PMC3706308
PMID: 23853387