1. Protein Pept Lett. 2014;21(8):752-65. doi: 10.2174/09298665113209990051.

Thermodynamic stability and flexibility characteristics of antibody fragment 
complexes.

Li T, Verma D, Tracka MB, Casas-Finet J, Livesay DR, Jacobs DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)UNC Charlotte, Charlotte, NC 28223, USA. drlivesa@uncc.edu.

Free energy landscapes, backbone flexibility and residue-residue couplings for 
being co-rigid or co-flexible are calculated from the minimal Distance 
Constraint Model (mDCM) on an exploratory dataset consisting of VL, scFv and Fab 
antibody fragments. Experimental heat capacity curves are reproduced markedly 
well, and an analysis of quantitative stability/flexibility relationships (QSFR) 
is applied to a representative VL domain and several complexes in the scFv and 
Fab forms. Global flexibility in the denatured ensemble typically decreases in 
the larger complexes due to domain-domain interfaces. Slight decreases in global 
flexibility also occur in the native state of the larger fragments, but with a 
concurrent large increase in correlated flexibility. Typically, a VL fragment 
has more co-rigid residue pairs when isolated compared to the scFv and Fab 
forms, where correlated flexibility appears upon complex formation. This context 
dependence on residue- residue couplings in the VL domain across length scales 
of a complex is consistent with the evolutionary hypothesis of antibody 
maturation. In comparing two scFv mutants with similar thermodynamic stability, 
local and long-ranged changes in backbone flexibility are observed. In the case 
of anti-p24 HIV-1 Fab, a variety of QSFR metrics were found to be atypical, 
which includes comparatively greater co-flexibility in the VH domain and less 
co-flexibility in the VL domain. Interestingly, this fragment is the only 
example of a polyspecific antibody in our dataset. Finally, the mDCM method is 
extended to cases where thermodynamic data is incomplete, enabling high 
throughput QSFR studies on large numbers of antibody fragments and their 
complexes.

DOI: 10.2174/09298665113209990051
PMCID: PMC4667953
PMID: 23855672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]