1. Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 1;73(17):5426-37. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0443.
Epub  2013 Jul 15.

PTK6 activation at the membrane regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition in 
prostate cancer.

Zheng Y(1), Wang Z, Bie W, Brauer PM, Perez White BE, Li J, Nogueira V, 
Raychaudhuri P, Hay N, Tonetti DA, Macias V, Kajdacsy-Balla A, Tyner AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biopharmaceutical Sciences, and Pathology, 
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2013 Oct 1;73(19):6096.

The intracellular tyrosine kinase protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) lacks a 
membrane-targeting SH4 domain and localizes to the nuclei of normal prostate 
epithelial cells. However, PTK6 translocates from the nucleus to the cytoplasm 
in human prostate tumor cells. Here, we show that while PTK6 is located 
primarily within the cytoplasm, the pool of active PTK6 in prostate cancer cells 
localizes to membranes. Ectopic expression of membrane-targeted active PTK6 
promoted epithelial-mesenchymal transition in part by enhancing activation of 
AKT, thereby stimulating cancer cell migration and metastases in xenograft 
models of prostate cancer. Conversely, siRNA-mediated silencing of endogenous 
PTK6 promoted an epithelial phenotype and impaired tumor xenograft growth. In 
mice, PTEN deficiency caused endogenous active PTK6 to localize at membranes in 
association with decreased E-cadherin expression. Active PTK6 was detected at 
membranes in some high-grade human prostate tumors, and PTK6 and E-cadherin 
expression levels were inversely correlated in human prostate cancers. In 
addition, high levels of PTK6 expression predicted poor prognosis in patients 
with prostate cancer. Our findings reveal novel functions for PTK6 in the 
pathophysiology of prostate cancer, and they define this kinase as a candidate 
therapeutic target. Cancer Res; 73(17); 5426-37. Â©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0443
PMCID: PMC3766391
PMID: 23856248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]