1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 4;8(7):e67840. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067840. Print
2013.

High levels of DegU-P activate an Esat-6-like secretion system in Bacillus 
subtilis.

Baptista C(1), Barreto HC, São-José C.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Patogénese Molecular-Unidade de Retrovírus e Infecções Associadas 
(CPM-URIA), Faculdade de Farmácia da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.

The recently discovered Type VII/Esat-6 secretion systems seem to be widespread 
among bacteria of the phyla Actinobacteria and Firmicutes. In some species they 
play an important role in pathogenic interactions with eukaryotic hosts. Several 
studies have predicted that the locus yukEDCByueBC of the non-pathogenic, 
Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis would encode an Esat-6-like secretion 
system (Ess). We provide here for the first time evidences for the functioning 
of this secretion pathway in an undomesticated B. subtilis strain. We show that 
YukE, a small protein with the typical features of the secretion substrates from 
the WXG100 superfamily is actively secreted to culture media. YukE secretion 
depends on intact yukDCByueBC genes, whose products share sequence or structural 
homology with known components of the S. aureus Ess. Biochemical 
characterization of YukE indicates that it exists as a dimer both in vitro and 
in vivo. We also show that the B. subtilis Ess essentially operates in late 
stationary growth phase in absolute dependence of phosphorylated DegU, the 
response regulator of the two-component system DegS-DegU. We present possible 
reasons that eventually have precluded the study of this secretion system in the 
B. subtilis laboratory strain 168.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067840
PMCID: PMC3701619
PMID: 23861817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.