1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Aug 8;93(2):368-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.06.013. Epub
 2013 Jul 18.

XLID-causing mutations and associated genes challenged in light of data from 
large-scale human exome sequencing.

Piton A(1), Redin C, Mandel JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine and Neurogenetics, Institut de Génétique 
et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7104, Institut National de la Santé et de 
la Recherche Médicale Unité 964, University of Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, 
France; Chaire de Génétique Humaine, Collège de France, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, 
France. Electronic address: piton@igbmc.fr.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Aug 8;93(2):406.

Because of the unbalanced sex ratio (1.3-1.4 to 1) observed in intellectual 
disability (ID) and the identification of large ID-affected families showing 
X-linked segregation, much attention has been focused on the genetics of 
X-linked ID (XLID). Mutations causing monogenic XLID have now been reported in 
over 100 genes, most of which are commonly included in XLID diagnostic gene 
panels. Nonetheless, the boundary between true mutations and rare 
non-disease-causing variants often remains elusive. The sequencing of a large 
number of control X chromosomes, required for avoiding false-positive results, 
was not systematically possible in the past. Such information is now available 
thanks to large-scale sequencing projects such as the National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood (NHLBI) Exome Sequencing Project, which provides variation information on 
10,563 X chromosomes from the general population. We used this NHLBI cohort to 
systematically reassess the implication of 106 genes proposed to be involved in 
monogenic forms of XLID. We particularly question the implication in XLID of ten 
of them (AGTR2, MAGT1, ZNF674, SRPX2, ATP6AP2, ARHGEF6, NXF5, ZCCHC12, ZNF41, 
and ZNF81), in which truncating variants or previously published mutations are 
observed at a relatively high frequency within this cohort. We also highlight 15 
other genes (CCDC22, CLIC2, CNKSR2, FRMPD4, HCFC1, IGBP1, KIAA2022, KLF8, MAOA, 
NAA10, NLGN3, RPL10, SHROOM4, ZDHHC15, and ZNF261) for which replication studies 
are warranted. We propose that similar reassessment of reported mutations (and 
genes) with the use of data from large-scale human exome sequencing would be 
relevant for a wide range of other genetic diseases.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.06.013
PMCID: PMC3738825
PMID: 23871722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]