1. BMC Res Notes. 2013 Jul 25;6:290. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-6-290.

Extracranial glioblastoma with synchronous metastases in the lung, pulmonary 
lymph nodes, vertebrae, cervical muscles and epidural space in a young patient - 
case report and review of literature.

Blume C(1), von Lehe M, van Landeghem F, Greschus S, Bostr√∂m J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Bonn Medical Center, 
Sigmund-Freud-Str, 25, Bonn 53105, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Extraneural and extracranial metastases of glioblastoma (GB) are 
very rarely reported in the literature. They occur in only 0.2% of all GB 
patients.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a 40 year old caucasian male with secondary GB and 
first diagnosis of an astrocytoma world health organisation (WHO) grade II 
through stereotactic biopsy in 2006. He presented a new hemiparesis and a 
progress of the known mass lesion in 2008. Subtotal tumor resection was 
performed and the histological examination verified a GB. After combined radio- 
and chemotherapy the adjuvant temozolomide therapy was not started because of 
non-compliance. In 2011 a second local relapse was resected and 4 month later 
the patient presented a fast progressing tetraparesis. Cervical CT and MRI scan 
showed a mass lesion infiltrating the fifth and sixth vertebra with infiltration 
of the spinal canal and large paravertebral tumor masses. Emergency surgery was 
performed. By additional screening further metastases were detected in the 
thoracal and lumbal spine and surprisingly also in the lung and pulmonary 
lymphnodes. Palliative radio- and chemotherapy of the pulmonal lesions was 
completed, further antitumor therapy was rejected. The patient died 10 months 
after diagnosis of the extraneural metastases.
CONCLUSION: Especially young "long-term-survivors" seem to have a higher risk of 
extraneural metastasis from a GB and appropriate staging should be performed in 
these cases.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-6-290
PMCID: PMC3726502
PMID: 23883669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]