1. J Med Virol. 2013 Nov;85(11):1940-6. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23685. Epub 2013 Jul 25.

Persistent human herpesvirus-6 infection in patients with an inherited form of 
the virus.

Pantry SN(1), Medveczky MM, Arbuckle JH, Luka J, Montoya JG, Hu J, Renne R, 
Peterson D, Pritchett JC, Ablashi DV, Medveczky PG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, Morsani 
College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6)A and 6B are ubiquitous betaherpesviruses viruses 
with lymphotropic and neurotropic potential. As reported earlier, these viruses 
establish latency by integration into the telomeres of host chromosomes. 
Chromosomally integrated HHV-6 (CIHHV-6) can be transmitted vertically from 
parent to child. Some CIHHV-6 patients are suffering from neurological symptoms, 
while others remain asymptomatic. Four patients with CIHHV-6 and CNS dysfunction 
were treated with valganciclovir or foscarnet. HHV-6 replication was detected by 
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction amplification of a late envelope 
glycoprotein. In this study we also compared the inherited and persistent HHV-6 
viruses by DNA sequencing. The prevalence of CIHHV-6 in this cohort of adult 
patients from the USA suffering from a wide range of neurological symptoms 
including long-term fatigue were found significantly greater than the reported 
0.8% in the general population. Long-term antiviral therapy inhibited HHV-6 
replication as documented by loss of viral mRNA production. Sequence comparison 
of the mRNA and the inherited viral genome revealed that the transcript is 
produced by an exogenous virus. In conclusion, the data presented here document 
that some individuals with CIHHV-6 are infected persistently with exogenous 
HHV-6 strains that lead to a wide range of neurological symptoms; the proposed 
name for this condition is inherited herpesvirus 6 syndrome or IHS.

Copyright Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23685
PMCID: PMC3779660
PMID: 23893753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]