1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Dec 20;22(25):5136-45. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt367. Epub 2013 
Aug 4.

Non-exomic and synonymous variants in ABCA4 are an important cause of Stargardt 
disease.

Braun TA(1), Mullins RF, Wagner AH, Andorf JL, Johnston RM, Bakall BB, Deluca 
AP, Fishman GA, Lam BL, Weleber RG, Cideciyan AV, Jacobson SG, Sheffield VC, 
Tucker BA, Stone EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences.

Mutations in ABCA4 cause Stargardt disease and other blinding autosomal 
recessive retinal disorders. However, sequencing of the complete coding sequence 
in patients with clinical features of Stargardt disease sometimes fails to 
detect one or both mutations. For example, among 208 individuals with clear 
clinical evidence of ABCA4 disease ascertained at a single institution, 28 had 
only one disease-causing allele identified in the exons and splice junctions of 
the primary retinal transcript of the gene. Haplotype analysis of these 28 
probands revealed 3 haplotypes shared among ten families, suggesting that 18 of 
the 28 missing alleles were rare enough to be present only once in the cohort. 
We hypothesized that mutations near rare alternate splice junctions in ABCA4 
might cause disease by increasing the probability of mis-splicing at these 
sites. Next-generation sequencing of RNA extracted from human donor eyes 
revealed more than a dozen alternate exons that are occasionally incorporated 
into the ABCA4 transcript in normal human retina. We sequenced the genomic DNA 
containing 15 of these minor exons in the 28 one-allele subjects and observed 
five instances of two different variations in the splice signals of exon 36.1 
that were not present in normal individuals (P < 10(-6)). Analysis of RNA 
obtained from the keratinocytes of patients with these mutations revealed the 
predicted alternate transcript. This study illustrates the utility of RNA 
sequence analysis of human donor tissue and patient-derived cell lines to 
identify mutations that would be undetectable by exome sequencing.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt367
PMCID: PMC3842174
PMID: 23918662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]