1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 26;8(7):e69721. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069721. Print 
2013.

Transcription coactivators p300 and CBP are necessary for photoreceptor-specific 
chromatin organization and gene expression.

Hennig AK(1), Peng GH, Chen S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Rod and cone photoreceptor neurons in the mammalian retina possess specialized 
cellular architecture and functional features for converting light to a neuronal 
signal. Establishing and maintaining these characteristics requires appropriate 
expression of a specific set of genes, which is tightly regulated by a network 
of photoreceptor transcription factors centered on the cone-rod homeobox protein 
CRX. CRX recruits transcription coactivators p300 and CBP to acetylate 
promoter-bound histones and activate transcription of target genes. To further 
elucidate the role of these two coactivators, we conditionally knocked out Ep300 
and/or CrebBP in differentiating rods or cones, using opsin-driven Cre 
recombinase. Knockout of either factor alone exerted minimal effects, but loss 
of both factors severely disrupted target cell morphology and function: the 
unique nuclear chromatin organization seen in mouse rods was reversed, 
accompanied by redistribution of nuclear territories associated with repressive 
and active histone marks. Transcription of many genes including CRX targets was 
severely impaired, correlating with reduced histone H3/H4 acetylation (the 
products of p300/CBP) on target gene promoters. Interestingly, the presence of a 
single wild-type allele of either coactivator prevented many of these defects, 
with Ep300 more effective than Cbp. These results suggest that p300 and CBP play 
essential roles in maintaining photoreceptor-specific structure, function and 
gene expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069721
PMCID: PMC3724885
PMID: 23922782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.