1. Infect Agent Cancer. 2013 Aug 12;8(1):30. doi: 10.1186/1750-9378-8-30.

Oncogenic human papillomavirus-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma: an 
observational study of correlation with ethnicity, histological subtype and 
outcome in a UK population.

Robinson M(1), Suh YE, Paleri V, Devlin D, Ayaz B, Pertl L, Thavaraj S.

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Diagnostic Sciences, King's College London Dental Institute, 
London, UK. selvam.thavaraj@kcl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) accounts for 0.6% of all cancers 
worldwide with the highest prevalence in South East Asia, Southern China and 
Northern Africa but the disease is uncommon in Europe with an annual incidence 
in this region of less than 1 per 100 000. Although the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) 
is a well known causative agent in NPC, recent reports have implicated oncogenic 
Human Papillomavirus (HPV) in a subgroup of these tumours. The recent striking 
rise of oropharyngeal carcinoma has been attributed to HPV, but little is known 
about the prevalence and clinical significance of the virus in NPC. The aim of 
this study was to determine the prevalence of oncogenic HPV in NPC from tissue 
archives of two head and neck cancer centres in the UK.
METHODS: Samples were available for 67 patients with clinically validated NPC. 
The detection of high-risk HPV was carried out by screening all cases for p16 
using immunohistochemistry and HPV DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using 
GP5+/6+ primers. All cases with p16 over-expression or positive for HPV by PCR 
were then examined by high-risk HPV DNA in-situ hybridisation and genotype 
analysis by PCR.
RESULTS: Eleven cases (11/67, 16.4%) showed concurrent over-expression of p16 
and evidence of high-risk HPV DNA by in-situ hybridisation; the majority were 
HPV16 positive. Of these 11 cases, nine occurred in Whites and two in Blacks. 
Histologically, there were two keratinising squamous cell carcinoma and nine 
non-keratinising carcinomas (eight differentiated and one undifferentiated). 
None of the HPV-positive cases showed any co-infection with EBV. There was no 
statistically significant difference in overall survival outcome between 
patients with HPV-positive and HPV-negative NPC.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study show that oncogenic HPV is associated with 
a subgroup of NPCs and is more likely to occur in Whites. However, unlike 
oropharyngeal carcinoma there was no significant difference in overall survival 
between patients with HPV-positive and HPV-negative NPC.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-9378-8-30
PMCID: PMC3751535
PMID: 23938045