1. PLoS Biol. 2013 Jul;11(7):e1001615. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001615. Epub
2013  Jul 23.

The Rho exchange factors Vav2 and Vav3 favor skin tumor initiation and promotion 
by engaging extracellular signaling loops.

Menacho-Márquez M(1), García-Escudero R, Ojeda V, Abad A, Delgado P, Costa C, 
Ruiz S, Alarcón B, Paramio JM, Bustelo XR.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas-CSIC-University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2013 Jul;11(7):e1001617. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001617.

The catalytic activity of GDP/GTP exchange factors (GEFs) is considered critical 
to maintain the typically high activity of Rho GTPases found in cancer cells. 
However, the large number of them has made it difficult to pinpoint those 
playing proactive, nonredundant roles in tumors. In this work, we have 
investigated whether GEFs of the Vav subfamily exert such specific roles in skin 
cancer. Using genetically engineered mice, we show here that Vav2 and Vav3 favor 
cooperatively the initiation and promotion phases of skin tumors. Transcriptomal 
profiling and signaling experiments indicate such function is linked to the 
engagement of, and subsequent participation in, keratinocyte-based 
autocrine/paracrine programs that promote epidermal proliferation and 
recruitment of pro-inflammatory cells. This is a pathology-restricted mechanism 
because the loss of Vav proteins does not cause alterations in epidermal 
homeostasis. These results reveal a previously unknown Rho GEF-dependent 
pro-tumorigenic mechanism that influences the biology of cancer cells and their 
microenvironment. They also suggest that anti-Vav therapies may be of potential 
interest in skin tumor prevention and/or treatment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001615
PMCID: PMC3720258
PMID: 23935450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.