1. Ann Hum Genet. 2013 Nov;77(6):472-81. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12035. Epub 2013 Aug
14.

Secondary analysis of publicly available data reveals superoxide and oxygen 
radical pathways are enriched for associations between type 2 diabetes and 
low-frequency variants.

Yazdanpanah M(1), Chen C, Graham J.

Author information:
(1)British Columbia Clinical Genomics Network, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Centre for Molecular Medicine and 
Therapeutics, Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Child and Family Research Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Genome-wide association studies explain at most 5%-10% of the heritable 
components of type 2 diabetes. Some of the "missing type 2 diabetes 
heritability" could be explained by low-frequency variants. We examined the 
associations between low-frequency variants and type 2 diabetes, using data from 
2538 diabetic and 2977 nondiabetic subjects in the publicly available database 
of Genotypes and Phenotypes. We applied two approaches. First, we combined 
information from all low-frequency (1%-5%) variants at a locus in a gene-centric 
analysis of associations with diabetes. Next, we searched for gene ontology (GO) 
biological processes that were enriched for gene-centric associations, after 
correcting for multiple testing to control the false discovery rate (FDR). We 
found three GO biological processes that were significantly enriched for 
associations to diabetes: "response to superoxide" (FDR-adjusted p=2.7×10(-3)), 
"response to oxygen radical" (FDR-adjusted p=2.7×10(-3)), and "heart 
contraction" (FDR-adjusted p=2.6×10(-2)). There were three genes that 
contributed to "response to superoxide" and "oxygen radical" pathways, including 
the SOD1 gene. Gene-centric tests of association with low-frequency variants, 
followed by analysis to evaluate which biological pathways are enriched for 
these associations has the potential to recover, at least some proportion of, 
the "missing heritability" of type 2 diabetes.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd/University College London.

DOI: 10.1111/ahg.12035
PMCID: PMC4254771
PMID: 23941231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to 
this article were reported.