1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 8;8(8):e70640. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070640.
eCollection  2013.

Contribution of common genetic variants to obesity and obesity-related traits in 
mexican children and adults.

León-Mimila P(1), Villamil-Ramírez H, Villalobos-Comparán M, Villarreal-Molina 
T, Romero-Hidalgo S, López-Contreras B, Gutiérrez-Vidal R, Vega-Badillo J, 
Jacobo-Albavera L, Posadas-Romeros C, Canizalez-Román A, Río-Navarro BD, 
Campos-Pérez F, Acuña-Alonzo V, Aguilar-Salinas C, Canizales-Quinteros S.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Genómica de Poblaciones Aplicada a la Salud, Facultad de Química, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México-UNAM-Instituto Nacional de Medicina 
Genómica-INMEGEN, Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have identified multiple obesity-associated loci 
mainly in European populations. However, their contribution to obesity in other 
ethnicities such as Mexicans is largely unknown. The aim of this study was to 
examine 26 obesity-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in a sample 
of Mexican mestizos.
METHODS: 9 SNPs in biological candidate genes showing replications (PPARG, 
ADRB3, ADRB2, LEPR, GNB3, UCP3, ADIPOQ, UCP2, and NR3C1), and 17 SNPs in or near 
genes associated with obesity in first, second and third wave GWAS (INSIG2, FTO, 
MC4R, TMEM18, FAIM2/BCDIN3, BDNF, SH2B1, GNPDA2, NEGR1, KCTD15, SEC16B/RASAL2, 
NPC1, SFRF10/ETV5, MAF, PRL, MTCH2, and PTER) were genotyped in 1,156 unrelated 
Mexican-Mestizos including 683 cases (441 obese class I/II and 242 obese class 
III) and 473 normal-weight controls. In a second stage we selected 12 of the 
SNPs showing nominal associations with obesity, to seek associations with 
quantitative obesity-related traits in 3 cohorts including 1,218 Mexican Mestizo 
children, 945 Mexican Mestizo adults, and 543 Indigenous Mexican adults.
RESULTS: After adjusting for age, sex and admixture, significant associations 
with obesity were found for 6 genes in the case-control study (ADIPOQ, FTO, 
TMEM18, INSIG2, FAIM2/BCDIN3 and BDNF). In addition, SH2B1 was associated only 
with class I/II obesity and MC4R only with class III obesity. SNPs located at or 
near FAIM2/BCDIN3, TMEM18, INSIG2, GNPDA2 and SEC16B/RASAL2 were significantly 
associated with BMI and/or WC in the combined analysis of Mexican-mestizo 
children and adults, and FTO locus was significantly associated with increased 
BMI in Indigenous Mexican populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings replicate the association of 8 obesity-related SNPs 
with obesity risk in Mexican adults, and confirm the role of some of these SNPs 
in BMI in Mexican adults and children.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070640
PMCID: PMC3738539
PMID: 23950976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.