1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jan 1;23(1):259-67. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt404. Epub 2013 Aug
 20.

GWAS of human bitter taste perception identifies new loci and reveals additional 
complexity of bitter taste genetics.

Ledda M(1), Kutalik Z, Souza Destito MC, Souza MM, Cirillo CA, Zamboni A, Martin 
N, Morya E, Sameshima K, Beckmann JS, le Coutre J, Bergmann S, Genick UK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Food-Consumer Interaction, Nestlé Research Center, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

Human perception of bitterness displays pronounced interindividual variation. 
This phenotypic variation is mirrored by equally pronounced genetic variation in 
the family of bitter taste receptor genes. To better understand the effects of 
common genetic variations on human bitter taste perception, we conducted a 
genome-wide association study on a discovery panel of 504 subjects and a 
validation panel of 104 subjects from the general population of São Paulo in 
Brazil. Correction for general taste-sensitivity allowed us to identify a SNP in 
the cluster of bitter taste receptors on chr12 (10.88- 11.24 Mb, build 36.1) 
significantly associated (best SNP: rs2708377, P = 5.31 × 10(-13), r(2) = 8.9%, 
β = -0.12, s.e. = 0.016) with the perceived bitterness of caffeine. This 
association overlaps with-but is statistically distinct from-the previously 
identified SNP rs10772420 influencing the perception of quinine bitterness that 
falls in the same bitter taste cluster. We replicated this association to 
quinine perception (P = 4.97 × 10(-37), r(2) = 23.2%, β = 0.25, s.e. = 0.020) 
and additionally found the effect of this genetic locus to be concentration 
specific with a strong impact on the perception of low, but no impact on the 
perception of high concentrations of quinine. Our study, thus, furthers our 
understanding of the complex genetic architecture of bitter taste perception.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt404
PMCID: PMC3857948
PMID: 23966204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]