1. Springerplus. 2012 Oct 23;1:38. doi: 10.1186/2193-1801-1-38. eCollection 2012.

A BCL2 promoter polymorphism rs2279115 is not associated with BCL2 protein 
expression or patient survival in breast cancer patients.

Searle CJ(1), Brock IW, Cross SS, Balasubramanian SP, Reed MW, Cox A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, CR-UK/YCR Sheffield Cancer Research Centre, 
University of Sheffield Medical School, Beech Hill Road, Sheffield, UK ; 
Department of Clinical Genetics, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Chapeltown Road, 
Leeds, UK.

The B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (BCL2) gene family encodes pro- and anti-apoptotic 
proteins that are critical regulators of programmed cell death. Higher levels of 
BCL2 expression in breast tumours have been shown to be an independent 
prognostic factor for improved survival from breast cancer. The promoter single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs2279115 has been associated with both BCL2 
expression and patient survival. The aim of this study was to attempt to 
replicate these observations in a cohort of 1015 UK women with breast cancer, 
and to compare genotype frequencies in cases and controls. In this study, 1015 
breast cancer cases and 1034 control subjects were genotyped for the rs2279115 
SNP by 5' nuclease PCR. Paraffin embedded tumour tissue for 342 case subjects 
was assembled into tissue microarrays, and the level of expression of BCL2 was 
established by immunohistochemistry. Kaplan Meier survival curves and Cox 
Proportional Hazards models were used to examine the effect of genotype on 
patient survival. The effect of SNP genotype on tumour BCL2 protein levels and 
breast cancer susceptibility was assessed by logistic regression. In this study 
higher BCL2 expression was significantly associated with improved survival from 
breast cancer (p = 0.015), in keeping with previous reports. The SNP rs2279115 
was not found to be associated with tumour expression of BCL2, (p = 0.77), and 
neither was it associated with case/control status (p = 0.25). There was no 
significant association between the SNP and overall survival (p = 0.75). In 
conclusion, we found that higher tumour BCL2 expression is associated with 
improved survival from breast cancer, in keeping with previous studies. However, 
in contrast to a previous report, the promoter SNP rs2279115 was not associated 
with BCL2 expression or overall survival from breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/2193-1801-1-38
PMCID: PMC3725909
PMID: 23961365