1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Nov 1;86(9):1347-56. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.08.010. 
Epub 2013 Aug 17.

Regulation of intraocular pressure in mice: structural analysis of dopaminergic 
and serotonergic systems in response to cabergoline.

Platania CB(1), Leggio GM, Drago F, Salomone S, Bucolo C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Biomedicine, Section of Pharmacology and 
Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Catania, 95125, Catania, Italy.

Elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) is the main recognized risk factor of 
glaucoma. To investigate the contribution of dopaminergic and serotonergic 
systems in IOP regulation, we used cabergoline, a mixed dopamine and serotonin 
agonist, in C57BL/6J WT and dopamine D₃ receptor knock-out (D₃R⁻/⁻) mice with 
normal eye pressure or steroid-induced ocular hypertension. Furthermore, we 
studied the structural basis of the cabergoline-mediated activation of the 
dopaminergic and serotonergic systems by molecular modeling. Topical application 
of cabergoline, significantly decreased, in a dose-dependent manner, the 
intraocular pressure in WT mice, both in an ocular normotensive group (-9, -5 
and -2 mmHg with 5%, 1%, and 0.1%, respectively) and an ocular hypertensive 
group, with a prolonged effect in this latter group. No change of intraocular 
pressure was observed after topical application of cabergoline in D₃R⁻/⁻ mice. 
We modeled and optimized, with molecular dynamics, structures of hD₃, h5HT(1A) 
and h5HT(2A-C) receptors; thereafter we carried out molecular docking of 
cabergoline. Docking revealed that binding of cabergoline into D₃ and 5HT(1A) 
receptors is associated with a better desolvation energy in comparison to 
5HT(2A-C) binding. In conclusion, the present study support the hypothesis that 
dopaminergic system is pivotal to regulate IOP and that D₃R represents an 
intriguing target in the treatment of glaucoma. Furthermore, the structure-based 
computational approach adopted in this study is able to build and refine 
structure models of homologous dopaminergic and serotonergic receptors that may 
be of interest for structure-based drug discovery of ligands, with dopaminergic 
selectivity or with multi-pharmacological profile, potentially useful to treat 
optic neuropathies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.08.010
PMID: 23962442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]