1. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003585. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003585. Epub 2013
Aug  22.

Causal and synthetic associations of variants in the SERPINA gene cluster with 
alpha1-antitrypsin serum levels.

Thun GA(1), Imboden M, Ferrarotti I, Kumar A, Obeidat M, Zorzetto M, Haun M, 
Curjuric I, Couto Alves A, Jackson VE, Albrecht E, Ried JS, Teumer A, Lopez LM, 
Huffman JE, Enroth S, Bossé Y, Hao K, Timens W, Gyllensten U, Polasek O, Wilson 
JF, Rudan I, Hayward C, Sandford AJ, Deary IJ, Koch B, Reischl E, Schulz H, Hui 
J, James AL, Rochat T, Russi EW, Jarvelin MR, Strachan DP, Hall IP, Tobin MD, 
Dahl M, Fallgaard Nielsen S, Nordestgaard BG, Kronenberg F, Luisetti M, 
Probst-Hensch NM.

Author information:
(1)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003768. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003768.

Several infrequent genetic polymorphisms in the SERPINA1 gene are known to 
substantially reduce concentration of alpha1-antitrypsin (AAT) in the blood. 
Since low AAT serum levels fail to protect pulmonary tissue from enzymatic 
degradation, these polymorphisms also increase the risk for early onset chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The role of more common SERPINA1 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in respiratory health remains poorly understood. 
We present here an agnostic investigation of genetic determinants of circulating 
AAT levels in a general population sample by performing a genome-wide 
association study (GWAS) in 1392 individuals of the SAPALDIA cohort. Five common 
SNPs, defined by showing minor allele frequencies (MAFs) >5%, reached 
genome-wide significance, all located in the SERPINA gene cluster at 14q32.13. 
The top-ranking genotyped SNP rs4905179 was associated with an estimated effect 
of β = -0.068 g/L per minor allele (P = 1.20*10(-12)). But denser SERPINA1 locus 
genotyping in 5569 participants with subsequent stepwise conditional analysis, 
as well as exon-sequencing in a subsample (N = 410), suggested that AAT serum 
level is causally determined at this locus by rare (MAF<1%) and low-frequent 
(MAF 1-5%) variants only, in particular by the well-documented protein inhibitor 
S and Z (PI S, PI Z) variants. Replication of the association of rs4905179 with 
AAT serum levels in the Copenhagen City Heart Study (N = 8273) was successful 
(P<0.0001), as was the replication of its synthetic nature (the effect 
disappeared after adjusting for PI S and Z, P = 0.57). Extending the analysis to 
lung function revealed a more complex situation. Only in individuals with 
severely compromised pulmonary health (N = 397), associations of common SNPs at 
this locus with lung function were driven by rarer PI S or Z variants. Overall, 
our meta-analysis of lung function in ever-smokers does not support a functional 
role of common SNPs in the SERPINA gene cluster in the general population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003585
PMCID: PMC3749935
PMID: 23990791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and have the 
following conflicts: NMPH has received an unrestricted research grant from 
Talecris GmbH. The grant money was applied to covering part of the salary costs 
for GAT. IF has received educational and consultancy fees, research grant (eALTA 
Award), and travel support from Talecris Biotherapeutics GmbH and Kedrion S.p.A. 
TR has received fees for consulting once in 2011 by Talecris Biotherapeutics 
GmbH. ML travels to European Respiratory Society and American Thoracic Society 
congresses have been funded by Talecris Biotherapeutics GmbH, has performed paid 
lectures for Kedrion S.p.A., has obtained research funds by Talecris 
Biotherapeutics GmbH, as well as funds for staff members. All other authors 
declare no conflict of interest.