1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 23;8(8):e72687. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072687. 
eCollection 2013.

Food vacuole associated enolase in plasmodium undergoes multiple 
post-translational modifications: evidence for atypical ubiquitination.

Shevade S(1), Jindal N, Dutta S, Jarori GK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 
Colaba, Mumbai, India.

Plasmodium enolase localizes to several sub-cellular compartments viz. cytosol, 
nucleus, cell membrane, food vacuole (FV) and cytoskeleton, without having any 
organelle targeting signal sequences. This enzyme has been shown to undergo 
multiple post-translational modifications (PTMs) giving rise to several variants 
that show organelle specific localization. It is likely that these PTMs may be 
responsible for its diverse distribution and moonlighting functions. While most 
variants have a MW of ~50 kDa and are likely to arise due to changes in pI, food 
vacuole (FV) associated enolase showed three forms with MW~50, 65 and 75 kDa. 
Evidence from immuno-precipitation and western analysis indicates that the 65 
and 75 kDa forms of FV associated enolase are ubiquitinated. Using mass 
spectrometry (MS), definitive evidence is obtained for the nature of PTMs in FV 
associated variants of enolase. Results showed several modifications, viz. 
ubiquitination at K147, phosphorylation at Y148 and acetylation at K142 and 
K384. MS data also revealed the conjugation of three ubiquitin (Ub) molecules to 
enolase through K147. Trimeric ubiquitin has a linear peptide linkage between 
the NH2-terminal methionine of the first ubiquitin (Ub1) and the C-terminal G76 
of the second (Ub2). Ub2 and third ubiquitin (Ub3) were linked through an 
atypical isopeptide linkage between K6 of Ub2 and G76 of Ub3, respectively. 
Further, the tri-ubiquitinated form was found to be largely associated with 
hemozoin while the 50 and 65 kDa forms were present in the NP-40 soluble 
fraction of FV. Mass spectrometry results also showed phosphorylation of S42 in 
the cytosolic enolase from P. falciparum and T337 in the cytoskeleton associated 
enolase from P. yoelii. The composition of food vacuolar proteome and likely 
interactors of enolase are also being reported.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072687
PMCID: PMC3751847
PMID: 24009698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.