1. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med. 2013 Nov-Dec;5(6):717-31. doi: 
10.1002/wsbm.1240. Epub 2013 Sep 9.

Molecular mechanisms underlying neuronal synaptic plasticity: systems biology 
meets computational neuroscience in the wilds of synaptic plasticity.

Blackwell KT(1), Jedrzejewska-Szmek J.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuroscience Department, The Krasnow Institute for Advanced 
Studies, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA.

Interactions among signaling pathways that are activated by transmembrane 
receptors produce complex networks and emergent dynamical behaviors that are 
implicated in synaptic plasticity. Temporal dynamics and spatial aspects are 
critical determinants of cell responses such as synaptic plasticity, although 
the mapping between spatiotemporal activity pattern and direction of synaptic 
plasticity is not completely understood. Computational modeling of neuronal 
signaling pathways has significantly contributed to understanding signaling 
pathways underlying synaptic plasticity. Spatial models of signaling pathways in 
hippocampal neurons have revealed mechanisms underlying the spatial distribution 
of extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) activation in hippocampal neurons. 
Other spatial models have demonstrated that the major role of anchoring proteins 
in striatal and hippocampal synaptic plasticity is to place molecules near their 
activators. Simulations of yet other models have revealed that the spatial 
distribution of synaptic plasticity may differ for potentiation versus 
depression. In general, the most significant advances have been made by 
interactive modeling and experiments; thus, an interdisciplinary approach should 
be applied to investigate critical issues in neuronal signaling pathways. These 
issues include identifying which transmembrane receptors are key for activating 
ERK in neurons, and the crucial targets of kinases that produce long-lasting 
synaptic plasticity. Although the number of computer programs for 
computationally efficient simulation of large reaction-diffusion networks is 
increasing, parameter estimation and sensitivity analysis in these spatial 
models remain more difficult than in single compartment models. Advances in live 
cell imaging coupled with further software development will continue to 
accelerate the development of spatial models of synaptic plasticity.

Copyright Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/wsbm.1240
PMCID: PMC3947422
PMID: 24019266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]