1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Nov;6(11):1212-21. doi: 
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0131. Epub 2013 Sep 10.

Interaction of fatty acid genotype and diet on changes in colonic fatty acids in 
a Mediterranean diet intervention study.

Porenta SR(1), Ko YA, Gruber SB, Mukherjee B, Baylin A, Ren J, Djuric Z.

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan, 1500 E. Medical Center Drive, Room 2150 Cancer 
Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5930. zoralong@umich.edu.

A Mediterranean diet increases intakes of n-3 and n-9 fatty acids and lowers 
intake of n-6 fatty acids. This can impact colon cancer risk as n-6 fatty acids 
are metabolized to proinflammatory eicosanoids. The purpose of this study was to 
evaluate interactions of polymorphisms in the fatty acid desaturase (FADS) 
genes, FADS1 and FADS2, and changes in diet on fatty acid concentrations in 
serum and colon. A total of 108 individuals at increased risk of colon cancer 
were randomized to either a Mediterranean or a Healthy Eating diet. Fatty acids 
were measured in both serum and colonic mucosa at baseline and after six months. 
Each individual was genotyped for four single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the 
FADS gene cluster. Linear regression was used to evaluate the effects of diet, 
genotype, and the diet by genotype interaction on fatty acid concentrations in 
serum and colon. Genetic variation in the FADS genes was strongly associated 
with baseline serum arachidonic acid (n-6) but serum eicosapentaenoic acid (n-3) 
and colonic fatty acid concentrations were not significantly associated with 
genotype. After intervention, there was a significant diet by genotype 
interaction for arachidonic acid concentrations in colon. Subjects who had all 
major alleles for FADS1/2 and were following a Mediterranean diet had 16% lower 
arachidonic acid concentrations in the colon after six months of intervention 
than subjects following the Healthy Eating diet. These results indicate that 
FADS genotype could modify the effects of changes in dietary fat intakes on 
arachidonic acid concentrations in the colon.

Â©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0131
PMCID: PMC3840911
PMID: 24022589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]