1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 10;8(9):e73843. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073843. 
eCollection 2013.

Membrane lipid-modulated mechanism of action and non-cytotoxicity of novel 
fungicide aminoglycoside FG08.

Shrestha S(1), Grilley M, Fosso MY, Chang CW, Takemoto JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, United States of 
America ; Synthetic Bioproducts Center (USTAR), Utah State University, North 
Logan, Utah, United States of America.

A novel aminoglycoside, FG08, that differs from kanamycin B only by a C8 alkyl 
chain at the 4″-O position, was previously reported. Unlike kanamycin B, FG08 
shows broad-spectrum fungicidal but not anti-bacterial activities. To understand 
its specificity for fungi, the mechanism of action of FG08 was studied using 
intact cells of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and small unilamellar 
membrane vesicles. With exposure to FG08 (30 µg mL(-1)), 8-fold more cells were 
stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate, cells had 4 to 6-fold higher K(+) 
efflux rates, and 18-fold more cells were stained with SYTOX Green in comparison 
to exposure to kanamycin B (30 µg mL(-1)). Yeast mutants with aberrant membrane 
sphingolipids (no sphingoid base C4 hydroxyl group, truncated very long fatty 
acid chain, or lacking the terminal phosphorylinositol group of 
mannosyl-diinositolphosphorylphytoceramide were 4 to 8-fold less susceptible to 
growth inhibition with FG08 and showed 2 to 10-fold lower SYTOX Green dye uptake 
rates than did the isogenic wild-type strain. FG08 caused leakage of pre-loaded 
calcein from 50% of small unilamellar vesicles with glycerophospholipid and 
sterol compositions that mimic the compositions of fungal plasma membranes. Less 
than 5 and 10% of vesicles with glycerophospholipid and sterol compositions that 
mimic bacterial and mammalian cell plasma membranes, respectively, showed 
calcein leakage. In tetrazolium dye cytotoxicity tests, mammalian cell lines 
NIH3T3 and C8161.9 showed FG08 toxicity at concentrations that were 10 to 
20-fold higher than fungicidal minimal inhibitory concentrations. It is 
concluded that FG08's growth inhibitory specificity for fungi lie in plasma 
membrane permeability changes involving mechanisms that are modulated by 
membrane lipid composition.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073843
PMCID: PMC3769384
PMID: 24040088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors wish to inform 
you of material added to the Competing Interests section of the submission form 
regarding patent applications 61/060,661 (Novel Antimicrobial Aminoglycosides: 
Synthesis and Use as Antifungals) and PCT/US2009/46827 (New Aminoglycosides: 
Synthesis and Use as Antifungals. Continuation of PCT Utility Patent 
Application) filed and pending with the U.S. Patent and Trademark and related to 
the work described in the manuscript. This declaration pertains to only two of 
the co-authors (Chang and Takemoto). These applications do not alter the 
authors’ adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.