1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 18;8(9):e75105. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075105. 
eCollection 2013.

Characterization of four type IV pilin homologues in Stigmatella aurantiaca 
DSM17044 by heterologous expression in Myxococcus xanthus.

Tan Z(1), Li H, Pan H, Zhou X, Liu X, Luo N, Hu W, Li Y.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, School of Life Science, 
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.

As prokaryotic models for multicellular development, Stigmatella aurantiaca and 
Myxococcus xanthus share many similarities in terms of social behaviors, such as 
gliding motility. Our current understanding of myxobacterial grouped-cell 
motilities comes mainly from the research on M. xanthus, which shows that 
filamentous type IV pili (TFP), composed of type IV pilin (also called PilA 
protein) subunits, are the key apparatus for social motility (S-motility). 
However, little is known about the pilin protein in S. aurantiaca. We cloned and 
sequenced four genes (pilA(Sa1~4)) from S. aurantiaca DSM17044 that are 
homologous to pilA(Mx) (pilA gene in M. xanthus DK1622). The homology and 
similarities among pilA(Sa) proteins and other myxobacterial homologues were 
systematically analyzed. To determine their potential biological functions, the 
four pilA(Sa) genes were expressed in M. xanthus DK10410 (Î”pilA(Mx)), which did 
not restore S-motility on soft agar or EPS production to host cells. After 
further analysis of the motile behaviors in a methylcellulose solution, the M. 
xanthus strains were categorized into three types. YL6101, carrying pilA(Sa1), 
and YL6104, carrying pilA(Sa4), produced stable but unretractable surface pili; 
YL6102, carrying pilA(Sa2), produced stable surface pili and exhibited reduced 
TFP-dependent motility in methylcellulose; YL6103, carrying pilA(Sa3), produced 
unstable surface pili. Based on these findings, we propose that pilA(Sa2) might 
be responsible for the type IV pilin production involved in group motility in S. 
aurantiaca DSM17044. After examining the developmental processes, it was 
suggested that the expression of PilA(Sa4) protein might have positive effects 
on the fruiting body formation of M. xanthus DK10410 cells. Moreover, the 
formation of fruiting body in M. xanthus cells with stable exogenous TFPSa were 
compensated by mixing them with S. aurantiaca DSM17044 cells. Our results shed 
some light on the features and functions of type IV pilin homologues in S. 
aurantiaca.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075105
PMCID: PMC3776727
PMID: 24058653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.