1. Virus Res. 2013 Dec 26;178(2):383-91. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2013.09.015.
Epub  2013 Sep 17.

Enhanced infectivity of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus in 
pig ex vivo respiratory tract organ cultures following adaptation by in vitro 
passage.

Londt BZ(1), Brookes SM, Nash BJ, Núñez A, Kelly MD, Garçon F, Graham SP, Brown 
IH.

Author information:
(1)Animal Health and Veterinary Laboratories Agency (AHVLA), Addlestone, Surrey 
KT15 3NB, United Kingdom. Electronic address: brandon.londt@ahvla.gsi.gov.uk.

Pigs are thought to play a role in the adaptation of avian influenza (AI) 
viruses to mammalian hosts. To better understand this mechanism and to identify 
key mutations two highly pathogenic AI (HPAI) viruses (H5N1 and H7N7) were grown 
in pig cells, To mimic the pressure of an immune response, these viruses were 
grown in the presence of antiserum to the homologous virus or porcine IFN-γ. 
Mutations were identified in both viruses grown in vitro in the presence and 
absence of antisera or IFN-γ and included the PB2 mutations, E627K or 
627E,D701N, described previously as requirements for the adaptation of AI 
viruses to mammalian species. Additional mutations were also identified in PB1, 
HA, NP and M genes for viruses passaged in the presence of immune pressure. The 
infectivity of these viruses was then assessed using ex vivo pig bronchi and 
lung organ cultures. For lung explants, higher levels of virus were detected in 
organ cultures infected with H5N1 HPAI viruses passaged in pig cell lines 
regardless of the presence or absence of homologous antisera or IFN-γ when 
compared with the wild-type parental viruses. No infection was observed for any 
of the H7N7 HPAI viruses. These results suggest that the mutations identified in 
H5N1 HPAI viruses may provide a replication or infection advantage in pigs in 
vivo and that pigs may continue to play an important role in the ecology of 
influenza A viruses including those of avian origin.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2013.09.015
PMID: 24050997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]