1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Sep;9(9):e1003624. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003624. Epub 
2013 Sep 12.

The crystal structure and RNA-binding of an orthomyxovirus nucleoprotein.

Zheng W(1), Olson J, Vakharia V, Tao YJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas, 
United States of America.

Genome packaging for viruses with segmented genomes is often a complex problem. 
This is particularly true for influenza viruses and other orthomyxoviruses, 
whose genome consists of multiple negative-sense RNAs encapsidated as 
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes. To better understand the structural features 
of orthomyxovirus RNPs that allow them to be packaged, we determined the crystal 
structure of the nucleoprotein (NP) of a fish orthomyxovirus, the infectious 
salmon anemia virus (ISAV) (genus Isavirus). As the major protein component of 
the RNPs, ISAV-NP possesses a bi-lobular structure similar to the influenza 
virus NP. Because both RNA-free and RNA-bound ISAV NP forms stable dimers in 
solution, we were able to measure the NP RNA binding affinity as well as the 
stoichiometry using recombinant proteins and synthetic oligos. Our RNA binding 
analysis revealed that each ISAV-NP binds ~12 nts of RNA, shorter than the 24-28 
nts originally estimated for the influenza A virus NP based on population 
average. The 12-nt stoichiometry was further confirmed by results from electron 
microscopy and dynamic light scattering. Considering that RNPs of ISAV and the 
influenza viruses have similar morphologies and dimensions, our findings suggest 
that NP-free RNA may exist on orthomyxovirus RNPs, and selective RNP packaging 
may be accomplished through direct RNA-RNA interactions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003624
PMCID: PMC3771910
PMID: 24068932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.