1. Biochemistry. 2013 Oct 29;52(43):7551-8. doi: 10.1021/bi401034q. Epub 2013 Oct
 18.

Mechanistic basis for the potent anti-angiogenic activity of semaphorin 3F.

Guo HF(1), Li X, Parker MW, Waltenberger J, Becker PM, Vander Kooi CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Center for Structural 
Biology, University of Kentucky , Lexington, Kentucky 40536, United States.

Neuropilin-1 (Nrp1), an essential type I transmembrane receptor, binds two 
secreted ligand families, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and class 
III Semaphorin (Sema3). VEGF-A and Sema3F have opposing roles in regulating Nrp1 
vascular function in angiogenesis. VEGF-A functions as one of the most potent 
pro-angiogenic cytokines, while Sema3F is a uniquely potent endogenous 
angiogenesis inhibitor. Sema3 family members require proteolytic processing by 
furin to allow competitive binding to Nrp1. We demonstrate that the 
furin-processed C-terminal domain of Sema3F (C-furSema) potently inhibits 
VEGF-A-dependent activation of endothelial cells. We find that this potent 
activity is due to unique heterobivalent engagement of Nrp1 by two distinct 
sites in the C-terminal domain of Sema3F. One of the sites is the C-terminal 
arginine, liberated by furin cleavage, and the other is a novel upstream helical 
motif centered on the intermolecular disulfide. Using a novel chimeric 
C-furSema, we demonstrate that combining a single C-terminal arginine with the 
helical motif is necessary and sufficient for potent inhibition of binding of 
VEGF-A to Nrp1. We further demonstrate that the multiple furin-processed 
variants of Sema3A, with the altered proximity of the two binding motifs, have 
dramatically different potencies. This suggests that furin processing not only 
switches Sema3 to an activated form but also, depending on the site processed, 
can also tune potency. These data establish the basis for potent competitive 
binding of Sema3 to Nrp1 and provide a basis for the design of bivalent Nrp 
inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1021/bi401034q
PMCID: PMC3873856
PMID: 24079887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]