1. Biophys Chem. 2014 Feb;186:3-12. doi: 10.1016/j.bpc.2013.08.006. Epub 2013 Aug
 31.

Interplay between conformational selection and induced fit in multidomain 
protein-ligand binding probed by paramagnetic relaxation enhancement.

Clore GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0520, 
USA. Electronic address: mariusc@mail.nih.gov.

The binding of ligands and substrates to proteins has been extensively studied 
for many years and can be described, in its simplest form, by two limiting 
mechanisms: conformational selection and induced fit. Conformational selection 
involves the binding of ligand to a pre-existing sparsely-populated conformation 
of the free protein that is the same as that in the final protein-ligand 
complex. In the case of induced fit, the ligand binds to the major conformation 
of the free protein and only subsequent to binding undergoes a conformational 
change to the final protein-ligand complex. While these two mechanisms can be 
dissected and distinguished by transient kinetic measurements, direct direction, 
characterization and visualization of transient, sparsely-populated states of 
proteins are experimentally challenging. Unless trapped, sparsely-populated 
states are generally invisible to conventional structural and biophysical 
techniques, including crystallography and most NMR measurements. In this review 
we summarize some recent developments in the use of paramagnetic relaxation 
enhancement to directly study sparsely-populated states of proteins and 
illustrate the application of this approach to two proteins, maltose binding 
protein and calmodulin, both of which undergo large rigid body conformational 
rearrangements upon ligand binding from an open apo state to a closed 
ligand-bound holo state. We show that the apo state ensemble comprises a small 
population of partially-closed configurations that are similar but not identical 
to that of the holo state. These results highlight the complementarity and 
interplay of induced fit and conformational selection and suggest that the 
existence of partially-closed states in the absence of ligand facilitates the 
transition to the closed ligand-bound state.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpc.2013.08.006
PMCID: PMC3944927
PMID: 24070540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]