1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 26;8(9):e76598. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076598. 
eCollection 2013.

Ubiquilin 2 is not associated with tau pathology.

NÃ¶lle A(1), van Haastert ES, Zwart R, Hoozemans JJ, Scheper W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Analysis, Academic Medical Center/University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Accumulation of aberrant proteins in inclusion bodies is a hallmark of many 
neurodegenerative diseases. Impairment of proteolytic systems is a common event 
in these protein misfolding diseases. Recently, mutations in the UBQLN 2 gene 
encoding ubiquilin 2 have been identified in X-linked amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS). Furthermore, ubiquilin 2 is associated with inclusions in 
familial and sporadic ALS/dementia, synucleinopathies and polyglutamine 
diseases. Ubiquilin 2 exerts a regulatory role in proteostasis and thus it has 
been suggested that ubiquilin 2 pathology may be a common event in 
neurodegenerative diseases. Tauopathies, a heterogenous group of 
neurodegenerative diseases accompanied with dementia, are characterized by 
inclusions of the microtubule-binding protein tau. In the present study, we 
investigate whether ubiquilin 2 is connected with tau pathology in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), supranuclear palsy (PSP) and Pick's disease (PiD) and familial 
cases with frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
(FTDP-17). We show that ubiquilin 2 positive inclusions are absent in these 
tauopathies. Furthermore, we find decreased ubiquilin 2 protein levels in AD 
patients, but our results do not indicate a correlation with tau pathology. Our 
data show no evidence for involvement of ubiquilin 2 and indicate that other 
mechanisms underly the proteostatic disturbances in tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076598
PMCID: PMC3784422
PMID: 24086754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.