1. Hemoglobin. 2014;38(1):33-8. doi: 10.3109/03630269.2013.837394. Epub 2013 Oct
7.

Distinctive mutation spectrum of the HBB gene in an urban eastern Indian 
population.

Sahoo SS(1), Biswal S, Dixit M.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and 
Research (NISER) , Bhubaneswar, Odisha , India.

ABSTRACT Hemoglobinopathies such as β-thalassemia (β-thal) and sickle cell 
anemia (or Hb S [β6(A3)Glu→Val]) impose a major health burden in the Indian 
population. To determine the frequencies of the HBB gene mutations in eastern 
Indian populations and to compare with the available data, a comprehensive 
molecular analysis of the HBB gene was done in the normal Odisha State 
population. Using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (RFLP), amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) and DNA 
sequencing techniques, β-thal and sickle cell anemia mutations were 
characterized in 267 healthy individuals. Entire HBB gene sequencing showed 63 
different mutations including 11 new ones. The predominant mutation HBB: c.9T > 
C was observed at a high frequency (19.57%) in the normal population. In the 
urban population of Odisha State, India, carrier frequency of hemoglobinopathies 
was found to be 18.48%, and for β-thal, the carrier rate was 14.13%, which is 
very high indeed. In the absence of a complete cure by any expensive treatment 
and drug administration, this information would be helpful for planning a 
population screening program and establishing prenatal diagnosis of β-thal in 
order to reduce the burden of such a genetic disease.

DOI: 10.3109/03630269.2013.837394
PMID: 24099628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]