1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Oct 6;14:687. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-687.

Genome-wide transcriptional analysis of two soybean genotypes under dehydration 
and rehydration conditions.

Chen LM(1), Zhou XA, Li WB, Chang W, Zhou R, Wang C, Sha AH, Shan ZH, Zhang CJ, 
Qiu DZ, Yang ZL, Chen SL.

Author information:
(1)Oil Crops Research Institute of Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences, 
Wuhan 430062, China. zhouocri@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Soybean is an important crop that provides valuable proteins and 
oils for human use. Because soybean growth and development is extremely 
sensitive to water deficit, quality and crop yields are severely impacted by 
drought stress. In the face of limited water resources, drought-responsive genes 
are therefore of interest. Identification and analysis of dehydration- and 
rehydration-inducible differentially expressed genes (DEGs) would not only aid 
elucidation of molecular mechanisms of stress response, but also enable 
improvement of crop stress tolerance via gene transfer. Using Digital Gene 
Expression Tag profiling (DGE), a new technique based on Illumina sequencing, we 
analyzed expression profiles between two soybean genotypes to identify 
drought-responsive genes.
RESULTS: Two soybean genotypes - drought-tolerant Jindou21 and drought-sensitive 
Zhongdou33 - were subjected to dehydration and rehydration conditions. For 
analysis of DEGs under dehydration conditions, 20 cDNA libraries were generated 
from roots and leaves at two different time points under well-watered and 
dehydration conditions. We also generated eight libraries for analysis under 
rehydration conditions. Sequencing of the 28 libraries produced 25,000-33,000 
unambiguous tags, which were mapped to reference sequences for annotation of 
expressed genes. Many genes exhibited significant expression differences among 
the libraries. DEGs in the drought-tolerant genotype were identified by 
comparison of DEGs among treatments and genotypes. In Jindou21, 518 and 614 
genes were differentially expressed under dehydration in leaves and roots, 
respectively, with 24 identified both in leaves and roots. The main functional 
categories enriched in these DEGs were metabolic process, response to stresses, 
plant hormone signal transduction, protein processing, and plant-pathogen 
interaction pathway; the associated genes primarily encoded transcription 
factors, protein kinases, and other regulatory proteins. The seven most 
significantly expressed (|log2 ratio| ≥ 8) genes - Glyma15g03920, Glyma05g02470, 
Glyma15g15010, Glyma05g09070, Glyma06g35630, Glyma08g12590, and Glyma11g16000 - 
are more likely to determine drought stress tolerance. The expression patterns 
of eight randomly-selected genes were confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR; the 
results of QRT-PCR analysis agreed with transcriptional profile data for 96 out 
of 128 (75%) data points.
CONCLUSIONS: Many soybean genes were differentially expressed between 
drought-tolerant and drought-sensitive genotypes. Based on GO functional 
annotation and pathway enrichment analysis, some of these genes encoded 
transcription factors, protein kinases, and other regulatory proteins. The seven 
most significant DEGs are candidates for improving soybean drought tolerance. 
These findings will be helpful for analysis and elucidation of molecular 
mechanisms of drought tolerance; they also provide a basis for cultivating new 
varieties of drought-tolerant soybean.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-687
PMCID: PMC3827939
PMID: 24093224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]