1. Rev Bras Hematol Hemoter. 2013;35(4):290-2. doi: 10.5581/1516-8484.20130058.

Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: first molecular diagnosis in a Brazilian child.

Alves C(1), Fernandes JC, Sampaio S, Paiva Rde M, Calado RT.

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal da Bahia - UFBA, Salvador, BA, Brazil.

Herein the first molecular diagnosis of a Brazilian child with Shwachman-Diamond 
Syndrome is reported. A 6-year-old boy was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis at the 
age of 15 months due to recurrent respiratory infections, diarrhea and 
therapeutic response to pancreatic enzymes. Three sweat tests were negative. At 
the age of 5 years, he began to experience pain in the lower limbs, laxity of 
joints, lameness and frequent falls. A radiological study revealed metaphyseal 
chondrodysplasia. A complete blood cell count showed leukopenia (leukocytes: 
3.1-3.5 x 10(3)/ÂµL), neutropenia (segmented neutrophils: 15-22%), but normal 
hemoglobin, hematocrit and platelet count. A molecular study revealed biallelic 
mutations in the Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond Syndrome gene (183-184TA-CT K62X in 
exon 2 and a 258+2T-C transition) confirming the diagnosis of Shwachman-Diamond 
Syndrome. A non-pathologic, silent nucleotide A to G transition at position 201 
was also found in heterozygosis in the Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond Syndrome gene. 
This is the first report to describe a Brazilian child with molecular diagnosis 
of Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized 
by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, intermittent or persistent neutropenia and 
skeletal changes. Other characteristics include immune system, hepatic and 
cardiac changes and predisposition to leukemia. Recurrent bacterial, viral and 
fungal infections are common. The possibility of Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome 
should be kept in mind when investigating children with a diagnosis of cystic 
fibrosis and normal sweat tests.

DOI: 10.5581/1516-8484.20130058
PMCID: PMC3789437
PMID: 24106450

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interest