1. RNA. 2013 Dec;19(12):1684-92. doi: 10.1261/rna.036806.112. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

HAMR: high-throughput annotation of modified ribonucleotides.

Ryvkin P, Leung YY, Silverman IM, Childress M, Valladares O, Dragomir I, Gregory 
BD, Wang LS.

RNA is often altered post-transcriptionally by the covalent modification of 
particular nucleotides; these modifications are known to modulate the structure 
and activity of their host RNAs. The recent discovery that an RNA methyl-6 
adenosine demethylase (FTO) is a risk gene in obesity has brought to light the 
significance of RNA modifications to human biology. These noncanonical 
nucleotides, when converted to cDNA in the course of RNA sequencing, can produce 
sequence patterns that are distinguishable from simple base-calling errors. To 
determine whether these modifications can be detected in RNA sequencing data, we 
developed a method that can not only locate these modifications 
transcriptome-wide with single nucleotide resolution, but can also differentiate 
between different classes of modifications. Using small RNA-seq data we were 
able to detect 92% of all known human tRNA modification sites that are predicted 
to affect RT activity. We also found that different modifications produce 
distinct patterns of cDNA sequence, allowing us to differentiate between two 
classes of adenosine and two classes of guanine modifications with 98% and 79% 
accuracy, respectively. To show the robustness of this method to sample 
preparation and sequencing methods, as well as to organismal diversity, we 
applied it to a publicly available yeast data set and achieved similar levels of 
accuracy. We also experimentally validated two novel and one known 
3-methylcytosine (3mC) sites predicted by HAMR in human tRNAs. Researchers can 
now use our method to identify and characterize RNA modifications using only 
RNA-seq data, both retrospectively and when asking questions specifically about 
modified RNA.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.036806.112
PMCID: PMC3884653
PMID: 24149843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]