1. BMC Vet Res. 2013 Oct 24;9:219. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-9-219.

Status of selected nutrients in obese dogs undergoing caloric restriction.

Linder DE, Freeman LM, Holden SL, Biourge V, German AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obesity and Endocrinology, University of Liverpool, Leahurst 
Campus, Chester High Road, Neston, Wirral CH64 7TE, UK. ajgerman@liv.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that dog plasma 
concentrations of selected nutrients decrease after undergoing caloric 
restriction for weight loss. Thirty-one overweight dogs that had successfully 
lost at least 15% of initial body weight were included in the study. Nutrients 
that had been previously identified to be at potential risk of deficiency during 
caloric restriction were measured in plasma (choline, amino acids) and urine 
(selenium) at the initiation and completion of a standardized weight loss 
regimen in dogs.
RESULTS: Dogs remained healthy throughout the study, and no signs attributable 
to nutrient deficiency were noted. Percentage weight loss was 28.3% (16.0-40.1%) 
starting body weight, over a period of 250 days (91-674 days). Median energy 
intake during the weight loss period was 62 (44 to 74) Kcal/kg(0.75) target 
weight per day. Choline (P = 0.046) and threonine (P = 0.02) decreased after 
weight loss. Glycine (P = 0.041), and urinary selenium:creatinine ratio 
(P = 0.006) both increased after weight loss. There were no other significant 
differences in plasma nutrient concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: Since concentrations of most measured nutrients did not change 
significantly, the data are not consistent with widespread nutrient deficiency 
in dogs undergoing caloric restriction using a diet formulated for weight loss. 
However, the significance of the decrease in plasma choline concentration 
requires further assessment.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-6148-9-219
PMCID: PMC4016246
PMID: 24156605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]