1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(3):1873-86. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt973. Epub 2013 
Oct 29.

The insect-phase gRNA transcriptome in Trypanosoma brucei.

Koslowsky D(1), Sun Y, Hindenach J, Theisen T, Lucas J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA and Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 
48824, USA.

One of the most striking examples of small RNA regulation of gene expression is 
the process of RNA editing in the mitochondria of trypanosomes. In these 
parasites, RNA editing involves extensive uridylate insertions and deletions 
within most of the mitochondrial messenger RNAs (mRNAs). Over 1200 small guide 
RNAs (gRNAs) are predicted to be responsible for directing the sequence changes 
that create start and stop codons, correct frameshifts and for many of the mRNAs 
generate most of the open reading frame. In addition, alternative editing 
creates the opportunity for unprecedented protein diversity. In Trypanosoma 
brucei, the vast majority of gRNAs are transcribed from minicircles, which are 
approximately one kilobase in size, and encode between three and four gRNAs. The 
large number (5000-10,000) and their concatenated structure make them difficult 
to sequence. To identify the complete set of gRNAs necessary for mRNA editing in 
T. brucei, we used Illumina deep sequencing of purified gRNAs from the procyclic 
stage. We report a near complete set of gRNAs needed to direct the editing of 
the mRNAs.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt973
PMCID: PMC3919587
PMID: 24174546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]