1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013 Oct 29;7:193. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00193.

New tools for investigating astrocyte-to-neuron communication.

Li D(1), Agulhon C, Schmidt E, Oheim M, Ropert N.

Author information:
(1)Biophysics of Gliotransmitter Release Team, Laboratory of Neurophysiology and 
New Microscopies, INSERM U603, CNRS UMR 8154, University Paris Descartes Paris, 
France.

Gray matter protoplasmic astrocytes extend very thin processes and establish 
close contacts with synapses. It has been suggested that the release of 
neuroactive gliotransmitters at the tripartite synapse contributes to 
information processing. However, the concept of calcium (Ca(2+))-dependent 
gliotransmitter release from astrocytes, and the release mechanisms are being 
debated. Studying astrocytes in their natural environment is challenging 
because: (i) astrocytes are electrically silent; (ii) astrocytes and neurons 
express an overlapping repertoire of transmembrane receptors; (iii) the size of 
astrocyte processes in contact with synapses are below the resolution of 
confocal and two-photon microscopes (iv) bulk-loading techniques using 
fluorescent Ca(2+) indicators lack cellular specificity. In this review, we will 
discuss some limitations of conventional methodologies and highlight the 
interest of novel tools and approaches for studying gliotransmission. 
Genetically encoded Ca(2+) indicators (GECIs), light-gated channels, and 
exogenous receptors are being developed to selectively read out and stimulate 
astrocyte activity. Our review discusses emerging perspectives on: (i) the 
complexity of astrocyte Ca(2+) signaling revealed by GECIs; (ii) new 
pharmacogenetic and optogenetic approaches to activate specific Ca(2+) signaling 
pathways in astrocytes; (iii) classical and new techniques to monitor vesicle 
fusion in cultured astrocytes; (iv) possible strategies to express specifically 
reporter genes in astrocytes.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00193
PMCID: PMC3810613
PMID: 24194698