1. PLoS Genet. 2013 Oct;9(10):e1003920. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003920. Epub 
2013 Oct 31.

Different roles of eukaryotic MutS and MutL complexes in repair of small 
insertion and deletion loops in yeast.

Romanova NV(1), Crouse GF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of 
America.

DNA mismatch repair greatly increases genome fidelity by recognizing and 
removing replication errors. In order to understand how this fidelity is 
maintained, it is important to uncover the relative specificities of the 
different components of mismatch repair. There are two major mispair recognition 
complexes in eukaryotes that are homologues of bacterial MutS proteins, MutSα 
and MutSβ, with MutSα recognizing base-base mismatches and small loop mispairs 
and MutSβ recognizing larger loop mispairs. Upon recognition of a mispair, the 
MutS complexes then interact with homologues of the bacterial MutL protein. 
Loops formed on the primer strand during replication lead to insertion 
mutations, whereas loops on the template strand lead to deletions. We show here 
in yeast, using oligonucleotide transformation, that MutSα has a strong bias 
toward repair of insertion loops, while MutSβ has an even stronger bias toward 
repair of deletion loops. Our results suggest that this bias in repair is due to 
the different interactions of the MutS complexes with the MutL complexes. Two 
mutants of MutLα, pms1-G882E and pms1-H888R, repair deletion mispairs but not 
insertion mispairs. Moreover, we find that a different MutL complex, MutLγ, is 
extremely important, but not sufficient, for deletion repair in the presence of 
either MutLα mutation. MutSβ is present in many eukaryotic organisms, but not in 
prokaryotes. We suggest that the biased repair of deletion mispairs may reflect 
a critical eukaryotic function of MutSβ in mismatch repair.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003920
PMCID: PMC3814323
PMID: 24204320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.