1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 28;8(10):e76096. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076096. 
eCollection 2013.

A method for selectively enriching microbial DNA from contaminating vertebrate 
host DNA.

Feehery GR(1), Yigit E, Oyola SO, Langhorst BW, Schmidt VT, Stewart FJ, 
Dimalanta ET, Amaral-Zettler LA, Davis T, Quail MA, Pradhan S.

Author information:
(1)New England Biolabs Inc., Ipswich, Massachusetts, United States of America.

DNA samples derived from vertebrate skin, bodily cavities and body fluids 
contain both host and microbial DNA; the latter often present as a minor 
component. Consequently, DNA sequencing of a microbiome sample frequently yields 
reads originating from the microbe(s) of interest, but with a vast excess of 
host genome-derived reads. In this study, we used a methyl-CpG binding domain 
(MBD) to separate methylated host DNA from microbial DNA based on differences in 
CpG methylation density. MBD fused to the Fc region of a human antibody (MBD-Fc) 
binds strongly to protein A paramagnetic beads, forming an effective one-step 
enrichment complex that was used to remove human or fish host DNA from bacterial 
and protistan DNA for subsequent sequencing and analysis. We report enrichment 
of DNA samples from human saliva, human blood, a mock malaria-infected blood 
sample and a black molly fish. When reads were mapped to reference genomes, 
sequence reads aligning to host genomes decreased 50-fold, while bacterial and 
Plasmodium DNA sequences reads increased 8-11.5-fold. The Shannon-Wiener 
diversity index was calculated for 149 bacterial species in saliva before and 
after enrichment. Unenriched saliva had an index of 4.72, while the enriched 
sample had an index of 4.80. The similarity of these indices demonstrates that 
bacterial species diversity and relative phylotype abundance remain conserved in 
enriched samples. Enrichment using the MBD-Fc method holds promise for targeted 
microbiome sequence analysis across a broad range of sample types.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076096
PMCID: PMC3810253
PMID: 24204593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: GRF, EY, BWL, FJS, ETD, TD, 
and SP are employed by New England Biolabs and as such would benefit from the 
sale of kits containing the reagent described in the manuscript. SOO, VTS, LAZ 
and MAQ have declared that no competing interests exist. This does not alter the 
authorsâ€™ adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.