1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Jan;66:63-71. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.10.021. Epub 
2013 Nov 9.

Cellular mechanisms of ventricular arrhythmias in a mouse model of Timothy 
syndrome (long QT syndrome 8).

Drum BM(1), Dixon RE(1), Yuan C(1), Cheng EP(1), Santana LF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Electronic address: santana@uw.edu.

Ca(2+) flux through l-type CaV1.2 channels shapes the waveform of the 
ventricular action potential (AP) and is essential for excitation-contraction 
(EC) coupling. Timothy syndrome (TS) is a disease caused by a gain-of-function 
mutation in the CaV1.2 channel (CaV1.2-TS) that decreases inactivation of the 
channel, which increases Ca(2+) influx, prolongs APs, and causes lethal 
arrhythmias. Although many details of the CaV1.2-TS channels are known, the 
cellular mechanisms by which they induce arrhythmogenic changes in intracellular 
Ca(2+) remain unclear. We found that expression of CaV1.2-TS channels increased 
sarcolemmal Ca(2+) "leak" in resting TS ventricular myocytes. This resulted in 
higher diastolic [Ca(2+)]i in TS ventricular myocytes compared to WT. 
Accordingly, TS myocytes had higher sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) load and 
Ca(2+) spark activity, larger amplitude [Ca(2+)]i transients, and augmented 
frequency of Ca(2+) waves. The large SR Ca(2+) release in TS myocytes had a 
profound effect on the kinetics of CaV1.2 current in these cells, increasing the 
rate of inactivation to a high, persistent level. This limited the amount of 
influx during EC coupling in TS myocytes. The relationship between the level of 
expression of CaV1.2-TS channels and the probability of Ca(2+) wave occurrence 
was non-linear, suggesting that even low levels of these channels were 
sufficient to induce maximal changes in [Ca(2+)]i. Depolarization of WT 
cardiomyocytes with a TS AP waveform increased, but did not equalize [Ca(2+)]i, 
compared to depolarization of TS myocytes with the same waveform. We propose 
that CaV1.2-TS channels increase [Ca(2+)] in the cytosol and the SR, creating a 
Ca(2+)overloaded state that increases the probability of arrhythmogenic 
spontaneous SR Ca(2+) release.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.10.021
PMCID: PMC3903114
PMID: 24215710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]