1. Cancers (Basel). 2011 Jan 4;3(1):182-97. doi: 10.3390/cancers3010182.

Dependence of Relative Expression of NTR1 and EGFR on Cell Density and 
Extracellular pH in Human Pancreatic Cancer Cell Lines.

Olszewski-Hamilton U(1), Hamilton G.

Author information:
(1)Cluster of Translational Oncology, Ludwig Boltzmann Society, c/o 
Balderichgasse 26A / 7-8, A-1170 Vienna, Austria. 
u.olszewski@gmx.netorulrike.olszewski@toc.lbg.ac.at.

Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is a devastating disease characterized by early 
dissemination and poor prognosis. These solid tumors express receptors for 
neuropeptides like neurotensin (NT) or epidermal growth factor (EGF) and exhibit 
acidic regions when grown beyond a certain size. We previously demonstrated 
increases in intracellular Ca2+ levels, intracellular pH and interleukin-8 
(IL-8) secretion in BxPC-3 and PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells in response to a 
stable NT analog. The present study aimed at investigation of the dependence of 
the relative expression of NT receptor 1 (NTR1) and EGFR in BxPC-3 and MIA 
PaCa-2 cells on cell density and extracellular pH (pHe). MTT assays revealed the 
NTR1 inhibitor SR 142948-sensitive Lys8-ψ-Lys9NT (8-13)-induced proliferation in 
BxPC-3 and PANC-1 cells. Confluent cultures of BxPC3 and HT-29 lines exhibited 
highest expression of NTR1 and lowest of EGFR and expression of NTR1 was maximal 
at slightly acidic pHe. IL-8 production was stimulated by Lys8-ψ-Lys9NT (8-13) 
and even enhanced at both acidic and alkaline pHe in BxPC-3 and PANC-1 cells. In 
conclusion, our in vitro study suggests that one contributing factor to the 
minor responses obtained with EGFR-directed therapy may be downregulation of 
this receptor in tumor cell aggregates, possibly resulting in acquisition of a 
more aggressive phenotype via other growth factor receptors like NTR1.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers3010182
PMCID: PMC3756355
PMID: 24212612