1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(11):e1003749. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003749. Epub 2013
 Nov 14.

A viral genome landscape of RNA polyadenylation from KSHV latent to lytic 
infection.

Majerciak V(1), Ni T, Yang W, Meng B, Zhu J, Zheng ZM.

Author information:
(1)Tumor Virus RNA Biology Section, Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology 
Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

RNA polyadenylation (pA) is one of the major steps in regulation of gene 
expression at the posttranscriptional level. In this report, a genome landscape 
of pA sites of viral transcripts in B lymphocytes with Kaposi sarcoma-associated 
herpesvirus (KSHV) infection was constructed using a modified PA-seq strategy. 
We identified 67 unique pA sites, of which 55 could be assigned for expression 
of annotated ~90 KSHV genes. Among the assigned pA sites, twenty are for 
expression of individual single genes and the rest for multiple genes (average 
2.7 genes per pA site) in cluster-gene loci of the genome. A few novel viral pA 
sites that could not be assigned to any known KSHV genes are often positioned in 
the antisense strand to ORF8, ORF21, ORF34, K8 and ORF50, and their associated 
antisense mRNAs to ORF21, ORF34 and K8 could be verified by 3'RACE. The usage of 
each mapped pA site correlates to its peak size, the larger (broad and wide) 
peak size, the more usage and thus, the higher expression of the pA 
site-associated gene(s). Similar to mammalian transcripts, KSHV RNA 
polyadenylation employs two major poly(A) signals, AAUAAA and AUUAAA, and is 
regulated by conservation of cis-elements flanking the mapped pA sites. 
Moreover, we found two or more alternative pA sites downstream of ORF54, K2 
(vIL6), K9 (vIRF1), K10.5 (vIRF3), K11 (vIRF2), K12 (Kaposin A), T1.5, and PAN 
genes and experimentally validated the alternative polyadenylation for the 
expression of KSHV ORF54, K11, and T1.5 transcripts. Together, our data provide 
not only a comprehensive pA site landscape for understanding KSHV genome 
structure and gene expression, but also the first evidence of alternative 
polyadenylation as another layer of posttranscriptional regulation in viral gene 
expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003749
PMCID: PMC3828183
PMID: 24244170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.