1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014 Jan 1;541:53-60. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2013.11.001.
Epub  2013 Nov 17.

Two surfaces of cytochrome b5 with major and minor contributions to 
CYP3A4-catalyzed steroid and nifedipine oxygenation chemistries.

Peng HM(1), Auchus RJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology, and Diabetes, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States.
(2)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology, and Diabetes, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States. Electronic 
address: rauchus@med.umich.edu.

Conserved human cytochrome b5 (b5) residues D58 and D65 are critical for 
interactions with CYP2E1 and CYP2C19, whereas E48 and E49 are essential for 
stimulating the 17,20-lyase activity of CYP17A1. Here, we show that b5 mutations 
E48G, E49G, D58G, and D65G have reduced capacity to stimulate CYP3A4-catalyzed 
progesterone and testosterone 6β-hydroxylation or nifedipine oxidation. The b5 
double mutation D58G/D65G fails to stimulate these reactions, similar to CYP2E1 
and CYP2C19, whereas mutation E48G/E49G retains 23-42% of wild-type stimulation. 
Neither mutation impairs the activity stimulation of wild-type b5, nor does 
mutation D58G/D65G impair the partial stimulation of mutations E48G or 
E48G/E49G. For assays reconstituted with a single phospholipid, phosphatidyl 
serine afforded the highest testosterone 6β-hydroxylase activity with wild-type 
b5 but the poorest activity with b5 mutation E48G/E49G, and the activity 
stimulation of mutation E48G/E49G was lost at [NaCl]>50mM. Cross-linking of 
CYP3A4 and b5 decreased in the order wild-type>E48G/E49G>D58G/D65G and varied 
with phospholipid. We conclude that two b5 acidic surfaces, primarily the domain 
including residues D58-D65, participate in the stimulation of CYP3A4 activities. 
Our data suggest that a minor population of CYP3A4 molecules remains sensitive 
to b5 mutation E48G/E49G, consistent with phospholipid-dependent conformational 
heterogeneity of CYP3A4.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2013.11.001
PMCID: PMC3933929
PMID: 24256945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]