1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e79546. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079546. 
eCollection 2013.

Production of a dominant-negative fragment due to G3BP1 cleavage contributes to 
the disruption of mitochondria-associated protective stress granules during CVB3 
infection.

Fung G(1), Ng CS, Zhang J, Shi J, Wong J, Piesik P, Han L, Chu F, Jagdeo J, Jan 
E, Fujita T, Luo H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, James Hogg Research Center, Providence Heart+Lung Institute, St. 
Paul's Hospital Vancouver, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Stress granules (SGs) are dynamic cytosolic aggregates containing messenger 
ribonucleoproteins and target poly-adenylated (A)-mRNA. A key component of SGs 
is Ras-GAP SH3 domain binding protein-1 (G3BP1), which in part mediates 
protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions. SGs are modulated during infection 
by several viruses, however, the function and significance of this process 
remains poorly understood. In this study, we investigated the interplay between 
SGs and Coxsackievirus type B3 (CVB3), a member of the Picornaviridae family. 
Our studies demonstrated that SGs were formed early during CVB3 infection; 
however, G3BP1-positive SGs were actively disassembled at 5 hrs post-infection, 
while poly(A)-positive RNA granules persisted. Furthermore, we confirmed G3BP1 
cleavage by 3C(pro) at Q325. We also demonstrated that overexpression of 
G3BP1-SGs negatively impacted viral replication at the RNA, protein, and viral 
progeny levels. Using electron microscopy techniques, we showed that 
G3BP1-positive SGs localized near mitochondrial surfaces. Finally, we provided 
evidence that the C-terminal cleavage product of G3BP1 inhibited SG formation 
and promoted CVB3 replication. Taken together, we conclude that CVB3 infection 
selectively targets G3BP1-SGs by cleaving G3BP1 to produce a dominant-negative 
fragment that further inhibits G3BP1-SG formation and facilitates viral 
replication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079546
PMCID: PMC3832613
PMID: 24260247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.