1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Jan 15;723:131-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.10.064.
Epub  2013 Nov 18.

2-methoxyestradiol binding of GPR30 down-regulates angiotensin AT(1) receptor.

Koganti S(1), Snyder R(1), Gumaste U(1), Karamyan VT(2), Thekkumkara T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Texas Tech University Health Sciences 
Center, 1300 Coulter Drive, Amarillo, TX 79106, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Texas Tech University Health Sciences 
Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, United States.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Texas Tech University Health Sciences 
Center, 1300 Coulter Drive, Amarillo, TX 79106, United States. Electronic 
address: thomas.thekkumkara@ttuhsc.edu.

Controlling angiotensin AT1 receptor function has been shown to be protective 
for many pathophysiological disorders. Although estrogen metabolite, 
2-methoxyestradiol (2ME2) can down-regulate angiotensin AT1 receptor expression 
independently of nuclear receptors, no specific cellular targets have been 
identified. This study was focused on identification and validation of a 
cellular target responsible for 2ME2-mediated angiotensin AT1 receptor 
down-regulation in a continuously passaged rat liver epithelial cell line. Cell 
membranes were isolated and used to determine 2ME2 specific binding. Cell 
membranes exposed to [(3)H]2ME2 showed specific saturable binding, which was 
found to be pertussis toxin (PTx) sensitive. Under similar conditions, G-protein 
coupled receptor 30 (GPR30) agonist (G1) and antagonist (G15) inhibited 2ME2 
specific binding. In these cells GPR30 was found localized to endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) membranes. In intact cells, G1 down-regulated angiotensin AT1 
receptor expression and this effect was reversed by G15. Furthermore, 2ME2 
mediated activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) followed by 
ERK1/2 phosphorylation, an essential signaling step in angiotensin AT1 receptor 
down-regulation, was abrogated by G15, suggesting that this signal is GPR30 
dependent. Additionally, EGF was found to independently down-regulate 
angiotensin AT1 receptor in an ERK1/2-dependent manner. In summary, our results 
demonstrate for the first time that 2ME2 down-regulation of angiotensin AT1 
receptor is dependent on ER membrane-associated GRP30. Moreover, this effect is 
facilitated by GPR30 dependent transactivation of EGFR and ERK1/2 
phosphorylation. This study provides further understanding of the physiological 
significance of 2ME2 and its role in modulating angiotensin AT1 receptor 
expression.

Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.10.064
PMCID: PMC3946276
PMID: 24262995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]