1. Glob Adv Health Med. 2012 Sep;1(4):54-61. doi: 10.7453/gahmj.2012.1.4.009.

Psoriatic arthritis.

Fitzgerald K(1), Hyman M, Swift K.

Author information:
(1)Kara Fitzgerald, ND, is coauthor of Case Studies in Integrative and 
Functional Medicine and is on faculty for the Institute for Functional Medicine, 
Gig Harbor, Washington.

Autoimmune diseases (ADs) are chronic, often debilitating and potentially 
life-threatening conditions that collectively affect up to 23.5 million 
Americans, and their incidence is rising.(1) They are heterogeneous in pathology 
but share common etiopathogenic factors such as intestinal hyperpermeability.(2) 
Although up to 100 ADs have been identified, there are likely more.(1) Genetics 
plays a clear role in the predisposition for the development and phenotype of 
AD, but various combinations of factors, such as toxins, endogenous hormone 
imbalances, microbes (including of GI origin), infections, stress and food 
antigens, are involved in disease expression.(2-5) Standard treatments include 
NSAIDs, steroids, antineoplastic agents and tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
antagonists. These tools have potentially devastating side effects and are often 
applied regardless of the diagnosis. Frequently, they are only modestly 
effective in relieving symptoms and limiting the advancing disease process. 
Direct health-care costs of AD are estimated at around 100 billion dollars per 
year in the United States. By comparison, cancer care costs about 57 billion 
dollars per year.(1) The rising incidence of this debilitating and costly group 
of conditions dictates that safe, alternative approaches to treatment be 
considered now.

Publisher: 自身免疫性疾病 (Autoimmune diseases, AD) 属于慢性疾 病，此类疾病经常会使人变得 虚弱并可能危及生命，患有此 
类疾病的美国人多达 2350 万， 并且患病率正不断上升。1 它们 在病理学上属于异质疾病，但 是却具有相同的疾病发生基因 因素，例如肠内渗透性过高。2 
虽然已确定多达 100 种 AD，但 数量可能更多。1 遗传在 AD 的 发展和显型素质中起重要作 用，但是疾病表达涉及不同的 因素组合，例如毒素、内源性 
激素失衡、微生物（包括 GI 成 因） 、感染、压力和食物抗 原。2–5 标准治疗包括 NSAID、 类固醇、抗肿瘤药以及肿瘤坏 死因子 α 阻滞剂。此类工具可 
能导致严重的副作用，使用时 通常不考虑诊断结果。通常， 它们仅对缓解症状并防止疾病 进一步恶化起一定作用。在美 国，AD 的直接健康护理成本大 约为每年 
1000 亿美元。比较 起来，癌症护理成本约为每年 570 亿美元。1 衰弱病例的不断 增加造成医疗成本剧增， 因 此，现在必须找到安全、可替 代的治疗方法。

Publisher: Las enfermedades autoinmunitarias (EA) son enfermedades crónicas, a 
menudo debilitantes y potencialmente mortales que, en su conjunto, afectan a 
23,5 millones de estadounidenses, y su incidencia continúa en aumento.1 Su 
patología es heterogénea, pero todas comparten factores etiopatogénicos comunes, 
como la hiperpermeabilidad intestinal.2 Aunque se han identificado hasta 100 EA, 
posiblemente existan más.1 La genética desempeña un papel claro en la 
predisposición a la aparición y el fenotipo de una EA; sin embargo, diversas 
combinaciones de factores, como las toxinas, los desequilibrios de las hormonas 
endógenas, los microorganismos (incluidos los de origen GI), las infecciones, el 
estrés y los antígenos alimentarios están implicados en la expresión de la 
enfermedad.2–5 Los tratamientos habituales son los siguientes: AINE, esteroides, 
agentes antineoplásicos y antagonistas del factor de necrosis tumoral alfa. 
Estas herramientas tienen efectos secundarios potencialmente devastadores y, a 
menudo, se aplican con independencia del diagnóstico. Con frecuencia, solo 
tienen una eficacia moderada para aliviar los síntomas y limitar el avance del 
proceso patológico. Se calcula que los costes sanitarios directos de las EA 
ascienden a unos 100 000 millones de dólares al año en los Estados Unidos. En 
comparación, los costes sanitarios relacionados con el cáncer ascienden a 
aproximadamente 57 000 millones de dólares al año.1 El incremento de la 
incidencia de este grupo de enfermedades debilitantes y costosas exige que se 
estudien planteamientos terapéuticos alternativos.

DOI: 10.7453/gahmj.2012.1.4.009
PMCID: PMC3833510
PMID: 24278833