1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2013;2013:145421. doi: 10.1155/2013/145421. Epub 2013
Oct  24.

Dietary anthocyanins as nutritional therapy for nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease.

Valenti L(1), Riso P, Mazzocchi A, Porrini M, Fargion S, Agostoni C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation (DEPT), Universit√† degli 
Studi di Milano, Internal Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Policlinico, 20122 Milano, Italy.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), defined by excessive lipid 
accumulation in the liver, is the hepatic manifestation of insulin resistance 
and the metabolic syndrome. Due to the epidemics of obesity, NAFLD is rapidly 
becoming the leading cause of altered liver enzymes in Western countries. NAFLD 
encompasses a wide spectrum of liver disease ranging from simple uncomplicated 
steatosis, to steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Diet may 
affect the development of NAFLD either by increasing risk or by providing 
protective factors. Therefore, it is important to investigate the role of foods 
and/or food bioactives on the metabolic processes involved in steatohepatitis 
for preventive strategies. It has been reported that anthocyanins (ACNs) 
decrease hepatic lipid accumulation and may counteract oxidative stress and 
hepatic inflammation, but their impact on NAFLD has yet to be fully determined. 
ACNs are water-soluble bioactive compounds of the polyphenol class present in 
many vegetable products. Here, we summarize the evidence evaluating the 
mechanisms of action of ACNs on hepatic lipid metabolism in different 
experimental setting: in vitro, in vivo, and in human trials. Finally, a working 
model depicting the possible mechanisms underpinning the beneficial effects of 
ACNs in NAFLD is proposed, based on the available literature.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/145421
PMCID: PMC3824564
PMID: 24282628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]