1. Cancer Metab. 2013 Feb 4;1(1):8. doi: 10.1186/2049-3002-1-8.

Balancing glycolytic flux: the role of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose 
2,6-bisphosphatases in cancer metabolism.

Ros S(1), Schulze A.

Author information:
(1)Gene Expression Analysis Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research 
Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, WC2A 3LY, UK. 
almut.schulze@cancer.org.uk.

The increased glucose metabolism in cancer cells is required to fulfill their 
high energetic and biosynthetic demands. Changes in the metabolic activity of 
cancer cells are caused by the activation of oncogenes or loss of tumor 
suppressors. They can also be part of the metabolic adaptations to the 
conditions imposed by the tumor microenvironment, such as the hypoxia response. 
Among the metabolic enzymes that are modulated by these factors are the 
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose 2,6-bisphosphatases (PFKFBs), a family of 
bifunctional enzymes that control the levels of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate 
(Fru-2,6-P2). This metabolite is important for the dynamic regulation of 
glycolytic flux by allosterically activating the rate-limiting enzyme of 
glycolysis phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK-1). Therapeutic strategies designed to 
alter the levels of this metabolite are likely to interfere with the metabolic 
balance of cancer cells, and could lead to a reduction in cancer cell 
proliferation, invasiveness and survival. This article will review our current 
understanding of the role of PFKFB proteins in the control of cancer metabolism 
and discuss the emerging interest in these enzymes as potential targets for the 
development of antineoplastic agents.

DOI: 10.1186/2049-3002-1-8
PMCID: PMC4178209
PMID: 24280138