1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(10):5929-34. doi: 
10.7314/apjcp.2013.14.10.5929.

Investigation of ICAM-1 and β3 integrin gene variations in patients with brain 
tumors.

Yilmaz U(1), Zeybek U, Kahraman OT, Kafadar AM, Toptas B, Yamak N, Celik F, 
Yaylim I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey E-mail : umz67@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Primary brain tumors constitute a small percent of all malignant 
cancers, but their etiology remains poorly understood. β3 integrin (ITGB3) has 
been recognized to play influential roles in angiogenesis, tumor growth and 
metastasis. Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) is a surface glycoprotein 
important for tumor invasion and angiogenesis. The aim of this study was to 
investigate whether specific genetic polymorphisms of ICAM-1 and ITGB3 could be 
associated with brain cancer development and progression in a Turkish 
population. Our study is the first to our knowledge to investigate the 
relationship between brain tumor risk and ICAM-1 and β3 integrin gene 
polymorphisms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study covered 92 patients with primary brain tumors 
and 92 age-matched healthy control subjects. Evaluation of β3 integrin (Leu33Pro 
(rs5918)) and ICAM-1 (R241G (rs1799969) and K469E (rs5498)) gene polymorphisms 
was performed by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
RESULTS: According to results of our research, the A allele of the ICAM-1 R241G 
gene polymorphism appeared to be a risk factor for primary brain tumors 
(p<0.001). Similarly, the frequency of the A mutant allele of ICAM-1 R241G was 
statistically significant in patients with brain tumors classified as glioma 
(p<0.001). When allele and genotype distributions of ICAM- 1 K469E, ICAM-1 R241G 
and β3 integrin Leu33Pro gene polymorphisms were evaluated with age, sex, and 
smoking, there were no statistically significant differences. Haplotype analysis 
revealed that the frequencies of GAC (rs1799969-rs5498-rs5918) and GAT 
(rs1799969-rs5498-rs5918) haplotypes were significantly lower in patients as 
compared with controls (p=0.001; p=0.036 respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first evidence that ICAM-1 R241G SNP 
significantly contributes to the risk of primary brain tumors in a Turkish 
population. In addition, our results suggest that ICAM-1 R241G in combination 
ICAM-1 K469E may have protective effects against the development of brain 
cancer.

DOI: 10.7314/apjcp.2013.14.10.5929
PMID: 24289603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]