1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Jan 30;21(2):189-202. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0453.
Print  2014 Apr.

Estradiol enhances CIP2A expression by the activation of p70 S6 kinase.

Choi YA(1), Koo JS, Park JS, Park MY, Jeong AL, Oh KS, Yang Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Research Center for Women's Disease, Sookmyung 
Women's University, Seoul 140-742, Republic of Korea Department of Pathology, 
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

Cancerous inhibitor of PP2A (CIP2A) stimulates the proliferation of various 
cancer cells, and 17β-estradiol (E₂) enhances the proliferation of breast cancer 
cells. E₂ activates epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), stimulating the 
MEK1/2 and PI3K pathways, and CIP2A expression is increased by the 
MEK1/2-induced transcription factor ETS1. It is possible for E₂ to increase 
CIP2A expression. This study examined whether E₂ could increase CIP2A expression 
and whether CIP2A is highly expressed in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast 
cancer tissues. E₂ increased CIP2A expression at the translational level in a 
c-MYC-independent manner in MCF-7 cells. E₂-enhanced proliferation was impaired 
without CIP2A expression. E₂-stimulated EGFR activated the MAPK and PI3K 
pathways, which converged to activate p70 S6 kinase (S6K). Phosphorylation at 
all the three phosphorylation sites (S424/T421, T229, and T389) on S6K was 
required for the phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 4B (eIF4B), 
which was responsible for the increase in CIP2A translation. Furthermore, CIP2A 
expression was higher in ER-positive tissues than in ER-negative tissues. This 
is the first study, to our knowledge, to demonstrate that CIP2A is a key factor 
in E₂-enhanced proliferation and that estrogen regulates CIP2A expression by 
non-genomic action through EGFR.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-13-0453
PMID: 24280132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]