1. Biophys J. 2013 Dec 3;105(11):2461-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.09.058.

Building KCNQ1/KCNE1 channel models and probing their interactions by 
molecular-dynamics simulations.

Xu Y(1), Wang Y, Meng XY, Zhang M, Jiang M, Cui M, Tseng GN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, Virginia.

Comment in
    Biophys J. 2013 Dec 3;105(11):2437-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.10.022.

The slow delayed rectifier (I(KS)) channel is composed of KCNQ1 (pore-forming) 
and KCNE1 (auxiliary) subunits, and functions as a repolarization reserve in the 
human heart. Design of I(KS)-targeting anti-arrhythmic drugs requires detailed 
three-dimensional structures of the KCNQ1/KCNE1 complex, a task made possible by 
Kv channel crystal structures (templates for KCNQ1 homology-modeling) and KCNE1 
NMR structures. Our goal was to build KCNQ1/KCNE1 models and extract mechanistic 
information about their interactions by molecular-dynamics simulations in an 
explicit lipid/solvent environment. We validated our models by confirming two 
sets of model-generated predictions that were independent from the spatial 
restraints used in model-building. Detailed analysis of the molecular-dynamics 
trajectories revealed previously unrecognized KCNQ1/KCNE1 interactions, whose 
relevance in I(KS) channel function was confirmed by voltage-clamp experiments. 
Our models and analyses suggest three mechanisms by which KCNE1 slows KCNQ1 
activation: by promoting S6 bending at the Pro hinge that closes the activation 
gate; by promoting a downward movement of gating charge on S4; and by 
establishing a network of electrostatic interactions with KCNQ1 on the 
extracellular surface that stabilizes the channel in a pre-open activated state. 
Our data also suggest how KCNE1 may affect the KCNQ1 pore conductance.

Copyright Â© 2013 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.09.058
PMCID: PMC3854563
PMID: 24314077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]