1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 24;289(4):1971-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.502211. Epub
2013  Dec 5.

Inherited pain: sodium channel Nav1.7 A1632T mutation causes erythromelalgia due 
to a shift of fast inactivation.

Eberhardt M(1), Nakajima J, Klinger AB, Neacsu C, Hühne K, O'Reilly AO, Kist AM, 
Lampe AK, Fischer K, Gibson J, Nau C, Winterpacht A, Lampert A.

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Universitatsstrasse 17, 91054 
Erlangen, Germany.

Inherited erythromelalgia (IEM) causes debilitating episodic neuropathic pain 
characterized by burning in the extremities. Inherited "paroxysmal extreme pain 
disorder" (PEPD) differs in its clinical picture and affects proximal body areas 
like the rectal, ocular, or jaw regions. Both pain syndromes have been linked to 
mutations in the voltage-gated sodium channel Nav1.7. Electrophysiological 
characterization shows that IEM-causing mutations generally enhance activation, 
whereas mutations leading to PEPD alter fast inactivation. Previously, an A1632E 
mutation of a patient with overlapping symptoms of IEM and PEPD was reported 
(Estacion, M., Dib-Hajj, S. D., Benke, P. J., Te Morsche, R. H., Eastman, E. M., 
Macala, L. J., Drenth, J. P., and Waxman, S. G. (2008) NaV1.7 Gain-of-function 
mutations as a continuum. A1632E displays physiological changes associated with 
erythromelalgia and paroxysmal extreme pain disorder mutations and produces 
symptoms of both disorders. J. Neurosci. 28, 11079-11088), displaying a shift of 
both activation and fast inactivation. Here, we characterize a new mutation of 
Nav1.7, A1632T, found in a patient suffering from IEM. Although transfection of 
A1632T in sensory neurons resulted in hyperexcitability and spontaneous firing 
of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons, whole-cell patch clamp of transfected HEK 
cells revealed that Nav1.7 activation was unaltered by the A1632T mutation but 
that steady-state fast inactivation was shifted to more depolarized potentials. 
This is a characteristic normally attributed to PEPD-causing mutations. In 
contrast to the IEM/PEPD crossover mutation A1632E, A1632T failed to slow 
current decay (i.e. open-state inactivation) and did not increase resurgent 
currents, which have been suggested to contribute to high-frequency firing in 
physiological and pathological conditions. Reduced fast inactivation without 
increased resurgent currents induces symptoms of IEM, not PEPD, in the new 
Nav1.7 mutation, A1632T. Therefore, persistent and resurgent currents are likely 
to determine whether a mutation in Nav1.7 leads to IEM or PEPD.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.502211
PMCID: PMC3900947
PMID: 24311784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]