1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 5;8(12):e82675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082675. 
eCollection 2013.

Tentative identification of the second substrate binding site in Arabidopsis 
phytochelatin synthase.

Chia JC(1), Yang CC, Sui YT, Lin SY, Juang RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Science and Technology, College of Life Science, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Phytochelatin synthase (PCS) uses the substrates glutathione (GSH, γGlu-Cys-Gly) 
and a cadmium (Cd)-bound GSH (Cd∙GS2) to produce the shortest phytochelatin 
product (PC2, (γGlu-Cys)2-Gly) through a ping-pong mechanism. The binding of the 
2 substrates to the active site, particularly the second substrate binding site, 
is not well-understood. In this study, we generated a structural model of the 
catalytic domain of Arabidopsis AtPCS1 (residues 12-218) by using the crystal 
structure of the γGlu-Cys acyl-enzyme complex of the PCS of the cyanobacterium 
Nostoc (NsPCS) as a template. The modeled AtPCS1 revealed a cavity in proximity 
to the first substrate binding site, consisting of 3 loops containing several 
conserved amino acids including Arg152, Lys185, and Tyr55. Substitutions of 
these amino acids (R152K, K185R, or double mutation) resulted in the abrogation 
of enzyme activity, indicating that the arrangement of these 2 positive charges 
is crucial for the binding of the second substrate. Recombinant AtPCS1s with 
mutations at Tyr55 showed lower catalytic activities because of reduced affinity 
(3-fold for Y55W) for the Cd∙GS2, further suggesting the role of the cation-π 
interaction in recognition of the second substrate. Our study results indicate 
the mechanism for second substrate recognition in PCS. The integrated catalytic 
mechanism of PCS is further discussed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082675
PMCID: PMC3855540
PMID: 24340051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.