1. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;20(5):1235-48. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1607.
 Epub 2013 Dec 23.

Inhibition of DNA double-strand break repair by the dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor 
NVP-BEZ235 as a strategy for radiosensitization of glioblastoma.

Gil del Alcazar CR(1), Hardebeck MC, Mukherjee B, Tomimatsu N, Gao X, Yan J, Xie 
XJ, Bachoo R, Li L, Habib AA, Burma S.

Author information:
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Radiation Oncology, Clinical Sciences, 
and Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center; and VA North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas.

PURPOSE: Inhibitors of the DNA damage response (DDR) have great potential for 
radiosensitization of numerous cancers, including glioblastomas, which are 
extremely radio- and chemoresistant brain tumors. Currently, there are no DNA 
double-strand break (DSB) repair inhibitors that have been successful in 
treating glioblastoma. Our laboratory previously demonstrated that the dual 
phosphoinositide 3-kinase/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 can potently inhibit the two 
central DDR kinases, DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) 
and ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), in vitro. Here, we tested whether 
NVP-BEZ235 could also inhibit ATM and DNA-PKcs in tumors in vivo and assessed 
its potential as a radio- and chemosensitizer in preclinical mouse glioblastoma 
models.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The radiosensitizing effect of NVP-BEZ235 was tested by 
following tumor growth in subcutaneous and orthotopic glioblastoma models. 
Tumors were generated using the radioresistant U87-vIII glioma cell line and 
GBM9 neurospheres in nude mice. These tumors were then treated with ionizing 
radiation and/or NVP-BEZ235 and analyzed for DNA-PKcs and ATM activation, DSB 
repair inhibition, and attenuation of growth.
RESULTS: NVP-BEZ235 potently inhibited both DNA-PKcs and ATM kinases and 
attenuated the repair of ionizing radiation-induced DNA damage in tumors. This 
resulted in striking tumor radiosensitization, which extended the survival of 
brain tumor-bearing mice. Notably, tumors displayed a higher DSB-load when 
compared with normal brain tissue. NVP-BEZ235 also sensitized a subset of 
subcutaneous tumors to temozolomide, a drug routinely used concurrently with 
ionizing radiation for the treatment of glioblastoma.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that it may be possible to significantly 
improve glioblastoma therapy by combining ionizing radiation with potent and 
bioavailable DNA repair inhibitors such as NVP-BEZ235.

Â©2013 AACR

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1607
PMCID: PMC3947495
PMID: 24366691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]