1. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Mar;25(5):606-19. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-08-0474. Epub 2013 
Dec 26.

Cell cycle-regulated membrane binding of NuMA contributes to efficient anaphase 
chromosome separation.

Zheng Z(1), Wan Q, Meixiong G, Du Q.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Georgia Regents University, 
Augusta, GA 30912 Department of Neurology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia 
Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912 Lakeside High School, Evans, GA 30809.

Accurate and efficient separation of sister chromatids during anaphase is 
critical for faithful cell division. It has been proposed that cortical 
dynein-generated pulling forces on astral microtubules contribute to anaphase 
spindle elongation and chromosome separation. In mammalian cells, however, 
definitive evidence for the involvement of cortical dynein in chromosome 
separation is missing. It is believed that dynein is recruited and anchored at 
the cell cortex during mitosis by the α subunit of heterotrimeric G protein 
(Gα)/mammalian homologue of Drosophila Partner of Inscuteable/nuclear mitotic 
apparatus (NuMA) ternary complex. Here we uncover a Gα/LGN-independent lipid- 
and membrane-binding domain at the C-terminus of NuMA. We show that the membrane 
binding of NuMA is cell cycle regulated-it is inhibited during prophase and 
metaphase by cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1)-mediated phosphorylation and only 
occurs after anaphase onset when CDK1 activity is down-regulated. Further 
studies indicate that cell cycle-regulated membrane association of NuMA 
underlies anaphase-specific enhancement of cortical NuMA and dynein. By 
replacing endogenous NuMA with membrane-binding-deficient NuMA, we can 
specifically reduce the cortical accumulation of NuMA and dynein during anaphase 
and demonstrate that cortical NuMA and dynein contribute to efficient chromosome 
separation in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E13-08-0474
PMCID: PMC3937087
PMID: 24371089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]