1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:680712. doi: 10.1155/2013/680712. Epub 2013 Dec 5.

Use of magnetic folate-dextran-retinoic acid micelles for dual targeting of 
doxorubicin in breast cancer.

Varshosaz J(1), Sadeghi-aliabadi H(2), Ghasemi S(1), Behdadfar B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy and Novel Drug Delivery 
Systems Research Centre, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan 
81745-359, Iran.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, School of Pharmacy, Isfahan University of 
Medical Sciences, Isfahan 81745-359, Iran.
(3)Department of Materials Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology, 
Isfahan 84156-83111, Iran.

Amphiphilic copolymer of folate-conjugated dextran/retinoic acid (FA/DEX-RA) was 
self-assembled into micelles by direct dissolution method. Magnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles (MNPs) coated with oleic acid (OA) were prepared by hydrothermal 
method and encapsulated within the micelles. Doxorubicin HCl was loaded in the 
magnetic micelles. The characteristics of the magnetic micelles were determined 
by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, thermogravimetric analysis 
(TGA), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and vibrating sample magnetometer 
(VSM). The crystalline state of OA-coated MNPs and their heat capacity were 
analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) 
methods, respectively. The iron content of magnetic micelles was determined 
using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). Bovine 
serum albumin (BSA) was used to test the protein binding of magnetic micelles. 
The cytotoxicity of doxorubicin loaded magnetic micelles was studied on MCF-7 
and MDA-MB-468 cells using MTT assay and their quantitative cellular uptake by 
fluorimetry method. TEM results showed the MNPs in the hydrophobic core of the 
micelles. TGA results confirmed the presence of OA and FA/DEX-RA copolymer on 
the surface of MNPs and micelles, respectively. The magnetic micelles showed no 
significant protein bonding and reduced the IC₅₀ of the drug to about 10 times 
lower than the free drug.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/680712
PMCID: PMC3870081
PMID: 24381941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]