1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2014 May;121(5):479-90. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-013-1142-6. Epub 2014 Jan 1.

Global signaling effects of a schizophrenia-associated missense mutation in 
neuregulin 1: an exploratory study using whole genome and novel kinome 
approaches.

Marballi KK(1), McCullumsmith RE, Yates S, Escamilla MA, Leach RJ, Raventos H, 
Walss-Bass C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Dr., San Antonio, TX, 78229, USA, 
marballi@livemail.uthscsa.edu.

Aberrant neuregulin 1-ErbB4 signaling has been implicated in schizophrenia. We 
previously identified a novel schizophrenia-associated missense mutation (valine 
to leucine) in the NRG1 transmembrane domain. This variant inhibits formation of 
the NRG1 intracellular domain (ICD) and causes decreases in dendrite formation. 
To assess the global effects of this mutation, we used lymphoblastoid cell lines 
from unaffected heterozygous carriers (Val/Leu) and non-carriers (Val/Val). 
Transcriptome data showed 367 genes differentially expressed between the two 
groups (Val/Val N = 6, Val/Leu N = 5, T test, FDR (1 %), α = 0.05, -log10 p 
value >1.5). Ingenuity pathway (IPA) analyses showed inflammation and NRG1 
signaling as the top pathways altered. Within NRG1 signaling, protein kinase C 
(PKC)-eta (PRKCH) and non-receptor tyrosine kinase (SRC) were down-regulated in 
heterozygous carriers. Novel kinome profiling (serine/threonine) was performed 
after stimulating cells (V/V N = 6, V/L N = 6) with ErbB4, to induce release of 
the NRG1 ICD, and revealed significant effects of treatment on the 
phosphorylation of 35 peptides. IPA showed neurite outgrowth (six peptides) as 
the top annotated function. Phosphorylation of these peptides was significantly 
decreased in ErbB4-treated Val/Val but not in Val/Leu cells. These results show 
that perturbing NRG1 ICD formation has major effects on cell signaling, 
including inflammatory and neurite formation pathways, and may contribute 
significantly to schizophrenia pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-013-1142-6
PMCID: PMC3999257
PMID: 24380930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare they 
have no conflict of interest.