1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:853602. doi: 10.1155/2013/853602. Epub 2013 Dec 7.

Correlation of N-acetyltransferase 2 genotype with isoniazid acetylation in 
Polish tuberculosis patients.

Zabost A(1), Brzezińska S(1), Kozińska M(1), Błachnio M(2), Jagodziński J(2), 
Zwolska Z(1), Augustynowicz-Kopeć E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases Research 
Institute, 01-138 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Mazovian Center for Lung Diseases and Tuberculosis, 05-400 Otwock, Poland.

Isoniazid (INH), a key agent in the treatment of tuberculosis (TB), is 
metabolized primarily by the genetically polymorphic N-acetyltransferase 2 
(NAT2) enzyme. Patients treated with INH can be classified as fast, 
intermediate, and slow acetylators. The objective of this study was to explore 
the relationship between NAT2 genotypes and the serum concentrations of INH. 
Blood samples from 130 patients were taken for the analysis, and plasma INH 
concentrations were determined by using the high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) technology. Acetylation genotype was determined on genomic 
DNA by using an allele-specific polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment 
length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay. Once the NAT2 genotypes were established, 
patients were classified into three categories: fast, intermediate, and slow 
acetylators. Of the 130 patients studied, 84 (64.6%) were slow, 39 (30%) were 
intermediate, and 7 (5.4%) were fast acetylators. Analysis of INH concentrations 
in the blood of patients receiving the approximate doses of the drug revealed 
that, at the time intervals examined, the average concentration of INH was 2- to 
7-fold higher among slow acetylators compared to fast and intermediate 
acetylators.
CONCLUSION: Determining mutations in the NAT2 gene enabled the identification of 
the INH acetylation type in patients and the genotyping results were consistent 
with the phenotype determined by methods of measurement of drug bioavailability.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/853602
PMCID: PMC3871508
PMID: 24383060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]