1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 2;9(1):e84532. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084532.
eCollection  2014.

Association of polymorphisms and haplotypes in the insulin-like growth factor 1 
receptor (IGF1R) gene with the risk of breast cancer in Korean women.

Kang HS(1), Ahn SH(2), Mishra SK(3), Hong KM(4), Lee ES(1), Shin KH(1), Ro J(1), 
Lee KS(1), Kim MK(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Breast Cancer, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Surgery, Division of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Asan Medical 
Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si, 
Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Cancer Biology, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do, 
Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(3):e91218.

The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling pathway plays an important role 
in cancer biology. The IGF 1 receptor (IGF1R) overexpression has been associated 
with a number of hematological neoplasias and solid tumors including breast 
cancer. However, molecular mechanism involving IGF1R in carcinogenic 
developments is clearly not known. We investigated the genetic variations across 
the IGF1R polymorphism and the risk of breast cancer risk in Korean women. A 
total of 1418 individuals comprising 1026 breast cancer cases and 392 
age-matched controls of Korean were included for the analysis. Genomic DNA was 
extracted from whole blood and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were 
analyzed on the GoldenGate Assay system by Illumina's Custom Genetic Analysis 
service. SNPs were selected for linkage disequilibrium (LD) analysis by 
Haploview. We genotyped total 51 SNPs in the IGF1R gene and examined for 
association with breast cancer. All the SNPs investigated were in Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium. These SNPs tested were significantly associated with breast cancer 
risk, after correction for multiple comparisons by adjusting for age at 
diagnosis, BMI, age at menarche, and age at first parturition. Among 51 IGF1R 
SNPs, five intron located SNPs (rs8032477, rs7175052, rs12439557, rs11635251 and 
rs12916884) with homozygous genotype (variant genotype) were associated with 
decreased risk of breast cancer. Fisher's combined p-value for the five SNPs was 
0.00032. Three intron located SNPs with heterozygous genotypes also had 
decreased risk of breast cancer. Seven of the 51 IGF1R SNPs were in LD and in 
one haplotype block, and were likely to be associated with breast cancer risk. 
Overall, this case-control study demonstrates statistically significant 
associations between breast cancer risk and polymorphisms in IGF1R gene.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084532
PMCID: PMC3879335
PMID: 24392142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.