1. Indian J Surg Oncol. 2013 Mar;4(1):37-47. doi: 10.1007/s13193-012-0201-z. Epub
 2012 Dec 7.

Recent advances in granulosa cell tumor ovary: a review.

Kottarathil VD(1), Antony MA(2), Nair IR(3), Pavithran K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and 
Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Ponekkara P.O, Kochi, Kerala India 
682041 ; 710, Sunny Palace, Changampuzha Samadhi Road, Edapally, Kochi, Kerala 
682024 India.
(2)Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Surgical Oncology, Amrita Institute of 
Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Ponekkara P.O, 
Kochi, Kerala India 682041.
(3)Department of Pathology, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research 
Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Ponekkara P.O, Kochi, Kerala India 682041.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and 
Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Ponekkara P.O, Kochi, Kerala India 
682041.

Granulosa cell tumors constitute less than 5 % of all ovarian tumors. Unlike 
epithelial ovarian tumors, they occur in a younger age group, are usually 
detected in an early stage and often have features of hyperestrogenism. The 
presenting symptoms are usually nonspecific with abdominal pain or distension. 
They follow an indolent course and are characterized by a long natural history. 
Mutation of FOXL2 (402C->G) seen in 97 % of adult GCT may be pathognomonic for 
adult GCT. Only stage of the disease has been consistently shown in various 
studies to affect survival of patients with GCT. The initial management of 
patients, for whom fertility is not an issue, is total abdominal hysterectomy, 
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and removal of all gross disease. Nodal 
dissection is not a significant factor for survival and is not recommended in 
surgical staging of GCT. Fertility preserving surgery with unilateral 
salpingo-oophorectomy is feasible in young patients with stage Ia GCT. Patients 
with early stage disease (stage I and II) have a very good prognosis with 5 year 
DFS and OS of 89 % and 99 % respectively and these groups of patients usually 
don't require any postoperative treatment. Patients with stage Ic disease 
associated with poor prognostic factors like large tumor size or high mitotic 
index and stage II, have a higher chance of relapse, and may benefit with 
postoperative treatment but role of chemotherapy is still debatable. In advanced 
stage disease (stage III and IV) the 5 year DFS and OS disease was 72 % and 80 % 
respectively hence the option of postoperative treatment with 6 cycles of BEP 
should be considered in this group. Recently paclitaxel is being investigated as 
an effective tool in GCT. The efficacy of radiation in GCT is not well defined 
but in optimally debulked cases postoperative radiation is a viable option. Due 
to high chance of recurrence even years after apparent clinical cure of the 
primary tumor, lifelong follow up with clinical examination and tumor markers 
like inhibin B is recommended. About 25 % GCT develop recurrence and the median 
time to recur is usually 4-5 years. Most recurrences are intraperitoneal and 
usually a complete debulking of the disease is feasible even in the recurrent 
setting. Postoperative chemotherapy (platinum based) is usually given after 
surgery more so in cases with widespread disease or after suboptimal 
cytoreduction. Recurrent chemoresistant, progressive non-responding GCT or 
patients with high surgical risk are ideal candidates for targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s13193-012-0201-z
PMCID: PMC3578540
PMID: 24426698