1. Am J Hematol. 2014 May;89(5):499-504. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23652. Epub 2014 Feb
10.

BRAF kinase domain mutations are present in a subset of chronic myelomonocytic 
leukemia with wild-type RAS.

Zhang L(1), Singh RR, Patel KP, Stingo F, Routbort M, You MJ, Miranda RN, 
Garcia-Manero G, Kantarjian HM, Medeiros LJ, Luthra R, Khoury JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas.

The frequency of RAS mutations in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) 
suggests that activation of the MAPK pathway is important in CMML pathogenesis. 
Accordingly, we hypothesized that mutations in other members of the MAPK pathway 
might be overrepresented in RAS(wt) CMML. We performed targeted next generation 
sequencing analysis on 70 CMML patients with known RAS mutation status. The 
study group included 37 men and 33 women with a median age of 67.8 years (range, 
28-86 years). Forty patients were RAS(wt) and 30 were RAS(mut) ; the latter 
included KRAS = 17; NRAS = 12; KRAS + NRAS = 1. Five patients (7.1% of total 
group; 12.5% of RAS(wt) group) with RAS(wt) had kinase domain BRAF mutations. 
The BRAF mutations were of missense type and involved exon 11 in one patient and 
exon 15 in four patients. All BRAF(mut) patients had CMML-1 with low-risk 
cytogenetic findings. Two (40%) of the five patients with BRAF(mut) patients 
transformed to acute myeloid leukemia during follow-up. In summary, we 
demonstrate that a subset of patients with RAS(wt) CMML harbors BRAF kinase 
domain mutations that are potentially capable of activating the MAPK signaling 
pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.23652
PMCID: PMC4207363
PMID: 24446311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosure: None of the 
authors has declared competing financial interests.