1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 21;289(12):8041-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.545384. Epub 
2014 Jan 23.

Structures of complexes of a metal-independent glycosyltransferase GT6 from 
Bacteroides ovatus with UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine (UDP-GalNAc) and its 
hydrolysis products.

Pham TT(1), Stinson B, Thiyagarajan N, Lizotte-Waniewski M, Brew K, Acharya KR.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, 
Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom and.

Mammalian members of glycosyltransferase family 6 (GT6) of the CAZy database 
have a GT-A fold containing a conserved Asp-X-Asp (DXD) sequence that binds an 
essential metal cofactor. Bacteroides ovatus GT6a represents a GT6 clade found 
in more than 30 Gram-negative bacteria that is similar in sequence to the 
catalytic domains of mammalian GT6, but has an Asn(95)-Ala-Asn(97) (NXN) 
sequence substituted for the DXD motif and metal-independent catalytic activity. 
Co-crystals of a low activity mutant of BoGT6a (E192Q) with UDP-GalNAc contained 
protein complexes with intact UDP-GalNAc and two forms with hydrolysis products 
(UDP plus GalNAc) representing an initial closed complex and later open form 
primed for product release. Two cationic residues near the C terminus of BoGT6a, 
Lys(231) and Arg(243), interact with the diphosphate moiety of UDP-GalNAc, but 
only Lys(231) interacts with the UDP product and may function in leaving group 
stabilization. The amide group of Asn(95), the first Asn of the NXN motif, 
interacts with the ribose moiety of the substrate. This metal-independent GT6 
resembles its metal-dependent homologs in undergoing conformational changes on 
binding UDP-GalNAc that arise from structuring the C terminus to cover this 
substrate. It appears that in the GT6 family, the metal cofactor functions 
specifically in binding the UDP moiety in the donor substrate and transition 
state, actions that can be efficiently performed by components of the 
polypeptide chain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.545384
PMCID: PMC3961637
PMID: 24459149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]