1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1003435. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003435. 
Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Coarse-grained molecular simulation of epidermal growth factor receptor protein 
tyrosine kinase multi-site self-phosphorylation.

Koland JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Carver 
College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of America.

Upon the ligand-dependent dimerization of the epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR), the intrinsic protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) activity of one receptor 
monomer is activated, and the dimeric receptor undergoes self-phosphorylation at 
any of eight candidate phosphorylation sites (P-sites) in either of the two 
C-terminal (CT) domains. While the structures of the extracellular ligand 
binding and intracellular PTK domains are known, that of the âˆ¼225-amino acid CT 
domain is not, presumably because it is disordered. Receptor phosphorylation on 
CT domain P-sites is critical in signaling because of the binding of specific 
signaling effector molecules to individual phosphorylated P-sites. To 
investigate how the combination of conventional substrate recognition and the 
unique topological factors involved in the CT domain self-phosphorylation 
reaction lead to selectivity in P-site phosphorylation, we performed 
coarse-grained molecular simulations of the P-site/catalytic site binding 
reactions that precede EGFR self-phosphorylation events. Our results indicate 
that self-phosphorylation of the dimeric EGFR, although generally believed to 
occur in trans, may well occur with a similar efficiency in cis, with the 
P-sites of both receptor monomers being phosphorylated to a similar extent. An 
exception was the case of the most kinase-proximal P-site-992, the catalytic 
site binding of which occurred exclusively in cis via an intramolecular 
reaction. We discovered that the in cis interaction of P-site-992 with the 
catalytic site was facilitated by a cleft between the N-terminal and C-terminal 
lobes of the PTK domain that allows the short CT domain sequence tethering 
P-site-992 to the PTK core to reach the catalytic site. Our work provides 
several new mechanistic insights into the EGFR self-phosphorylation reaction, 
and demonstrates the potential of coarse-grained molecular simulation approaches 
for investigating the complexities of self-phosphorylation in molecules such as 
EGFR (HER/ErbB) family receptors and growth factor receptor PTKs in general.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003435
PMCID: PMC3894164
PMID: 24453959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author has declared that no competing 
interests exist.