1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 20;9(1):e85360. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085360. 
eCollection 2014.

Binding of HSV-1 glycoprotein K (gK) to signal peptide peptidase (SPP) is 
required for virus infectivity.

Allen SJ(1), Mott KR(1), Matsuura Y(2), Moriishi K(3), Kousoulas KG(4), Ghiasi 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Vaccine Development, Ophthalmology Research, 
Department of Surgery, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Yamanashi University, 
Yamanashi, Japan.
(4)Division of Biotechnology and Molecular Medicine, School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, United States of 
America.

Glycoprotein K (gK) is a virion envelope protein of herpes simplex virus types 1 
(HSV-1) and 2 (HSV-2), which plays important roles in virion entry, 
morphogenesis and egress. Two-hybrid and pull-down assays were utilized to 
demonstrate that gK and no other HSV-1 genes specifically binds to signal 
peptide peptidase (SPP), also known as minor histocompatibility antigen H13. SPP 
dominant negative mutants, shRNA against SPP significantly reduced HSV-1 
replication in vitro. SPP also affected lysosomes and ER responses to HSV-1 
infection. Thus, in this study we have shown for the first time that gK, despite 
its role in fusion and egress, is also involved in binding the cytoplasmic 
protein SPP. These results also suggest that SPP plays an important role in 
viral replication and possibly virus pathogenesis. This makes SPP unique in that 
its function appears to be required by the virus as no other protein can 
compensate its loss in terms of viral replication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085360
PMCID: PMC3896391
PMID: 24465545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.