1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 20;9(1):e82356. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082356. 
eCollection 2014.

Arctic lineage-canine distemper virus as a cause of death in Apennine wolves 
(Canis lupus) in Italy.

Di Sabatino D(1), Lorusso A(1), Di Francesco CE(2), Gentile L(3), Di Pirro V(3), 
Bellacicco AL(1), Giovannini A(1), Di Francesco G(1), Marruchella G(1), Marsilio 
F(2), Savini G(1).

Author information:
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale dell'Abruzzo e del Molise "G. 
Caporale", Teramo, Italy.
(2)Unit of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine of Teramo, 
Teramo, Italy.
(3)Veterinary Services, National Park of Abruzzi, Lazio and Molise, Pescasseroli 
(AQ), Italy.

Canine distemper virus (CDV) infection is a primary threat affecting a wide 
number of carnivore species, including wild animals. In January 2013, two 
carcasses of Apennine wolves (Canis lupus) were collected in Ortona dei Marsi 
(L'Aquila province, Italy) by the local Veterinary Services. CDV was immediately 
identified either by RT-PCR or immunohistochemistry in lung and central nervous 
tissue samples. At the same time, severe clinical signs consistent with CDV 
infection were identified and taped (Videos S1-S3) from three wolves rescued in 
the areas surrounding the National Parks of the Abruzzi region by the Veterinary 
Services. The samples collected from these symptomatic animals also turned out 
CDV positive by RT-PCR. So far, 30 carcasses of wolves were screened and CDV was 
detected in 20 of them. The sequencing of the haemagglutinin gene and subsequent 
phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the identified virus belonged to the CDV 
Arctic lineage. Strains belonging to this lineage are known to circulate in 
Italy and in Eastern Europe amongst domestic dogs. To the best of our knowledge 
this is the first report of CDV Arctic lineage epidemics in the wild population 
in Europe.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082356
PMCID: PMC3896332
PMID: 24465373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.