1. Mutat Res Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 2014 Feb;761:18-26. doi: 
10.1016/j.mrgentox.2014.01.009. Epub 2014 Jan 25.

Activation of aflatoxin B1 by expression of human CYP1A2 polymorphisms in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Fasullo M(1), Smith A(2), Egner P(3), Cera C(2).

Author information:
(1)Ordway Research Institute, Center for Medical Sciences, 150 New Scotland 
Avenue, Albany, NY 12209, USA; Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of 
Public Health, Center for Medical Sciences, 150 New Scotland Avenue, Albany NY, 
USA. Electronic address: mfasullo@albany.edu.
(2)Ordway Research Institute, Center for Medical Sciences, 150 New Scotland 
Avenue, Albany, NY 12209, USA.
(3)Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.

Human susceptibility to environmental carcinogens is highly variable and depends 
on multiple genetic factors, including polymorphisms in cytochrome P450 genes. 
Although epidemiological studies have identified individual polymorphisms in 
cytochrome P450 genes that may alter cancer risk, there is often conflicting 
data about whether such polymorphisms alter the genotoxicity of environmental 
carcinogens. This is particularly true of the CYP1A2 polymorphisms that confer 
differential activation of multiple human carcinogens. To determine whether a 
single cytochrome P450 polymorphism confers higher levels of 
carcinogen-associated genotoxicity, we chose an organism that lack enzymes to 
metabolically activate aflatoxins and expressed individual human P450 genes in 
budding yeast. We measured the frequencies of recombination, Rad51 foci 
formation, 7-methoxyresorufin O-demethylase activities, and the concentrations 
of carcinogen-associated DNA adducts in DNA repair proficient yeast expressing 
P450 polymorphisms after exposure to aflatoxin B1 (AFB1).We measured growth of 
rad4 rad51 cells expressing CYP1A2 polymorphisms while exposed to AFB1. We 
observed that there was significantly less AFB1-associated genotoxicity in yeast 
expressing CYP1A2 I386F, while yeast expressing CYP1A2 C406Y exhibited 
intermediate levels of genotoxicity compared to yeast expressing CYP1A2 D348N or 
wild type. We conclude that differences in carcinogen genotoxicity can be 
observed in yeast expressing different CYP1A2 alleles. This is the first report 
that carcinogen-associated P450 polymorphisms can be studied in yeast.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2014.01.009
PMCID: PMC4707934
PMID: 24472830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]