1. BMC Cancer. 2014 Feb 3;14:58. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-58.

A retrospective comparative exploratory study on two methylentetrahydrofolate 
reductase (MTHFR) polymorphisms in esophagogastric cancer: the A1298C MTHFR 
polymorphism is an independent prognostic factor only in neoadjuvantly treated 
gastric cancer patients.

Blank S, Rachakonda S, Keller G, Weichert W, Lordick F, Langer R, Springfeld C, 
Bruckner T, Becker K, Kumar R, Ott K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 
110, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. katja.ott@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: Methylentetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) plays a major role in 
folate metabolism and consequently could be an important factor for the efficacy 
of a treatment with 5-fluorouracil. Our aim was to evaluate the prognostic and 
predictive value of two well characterized constitutional MTHFR gene 
polymorphisms for primarily resected and neoadjuvantly treated esophagogastric 
adenocarcinomas.
METHODS: 569 patients from two centers were analyzed (gastric cancer: 218, 
carcinoma of the esophagogastric junction (AEG II, III): 208 and esophagus (AEG 
I): 143). 369 patients received neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgery, 
200 patients were resected without preoperative treatment. The MTHFR C677T and 
A1298C polymorphisms were determined in DNA from peripheral blood lymphozytes. 
Associations with prognosis, response and clinicopathological factors were 
analyzed retrospectively within a prospective database (chi-square, log-rank, 
cox regression).
RESULTS: Only the MTHFR A1298C polymorphisms had prognostic relevance in 
neoadjuvantly treated patients but it was not a predictor for response to 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The AC genotype of the MTHFR A1298C polymorphisms was 
significantly associated with worse outcome (p = 0.02, HR 1.47 (1.06-2.04). If 
neoadjuvantly treated patients were analyzed based on their tumor localization, 
the AC genotype of the MTHFR A1298C polymorphisms was a significant negative 
prognostic factor in patients with gastric cancer according to UICC 6th edition 
(gastric cancer including AEG type II, III: HR 2.0, 95% CI 1.3-2.0, p = 0.001) 
and 7th edition (gastric cancer without AEG II, III: HR 2.8, 95% CI 1.5-5.7, p = 
0.003), not for AEG I. For both definitions of gastric cancer the AC genotype 
was confirmed as an independent negative prognostic factor in cox regression 
analysis. In primarily resected patients neither the MTHFR A1298C nor the MTHFR 
C677T polymorphisms had prognostic impact.
CONCLUSIONS: The MTHFR A1298C polymorphisms was an independent prognostic factor 
in patients with neoadjuvantly treated gastric adenocarcinomas (according to 
both UICC 6th or 7th definitions for gastric cancer) but not in AEG I nor in 
primarily resected patients, which confirms the impact of this enzyme on 
chemotherapy associated outcome.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-58
PMCID: PMC3922603
PMID: 24490800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]