1. Biophys J. 2014 Feb 4;106(3):548-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.11.4495.

The open gate of the K(V)1.2 channel: quantum calculations show the key role of 
hydration.

Kariev AM(1), Njau P(1), Green ME(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, City College of CUNY, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Chemistry, City College of CUNY, New York, New York. Electronic 
address: green@sci.ccny.cuny.edu.

The open gate of the Kv1.2 voltage-gated potassium channel can just hold a 
hydrated K(+) ion. Quantum calculations starting from the x-ray coordinates of 
the channel confirm this, showing little change from the x-ray coordinates for 
the protein. Water molecules not in the x-ray coordinates, and the ion itself, 
are placed by the calculation. The water molecules, including their orientation 
and hydrogen bonding, with and without an ion, are critical for the path of the 
ion, from the solution to the gate. A sequence of steps is postulated in which 
the potential experienced by the ion in the pore is influenced by the position 
of the ion. The gate structure, with and without the ion, has been optimized. 
The charges on the atoms and bond lengths have been calculated using natural 
bond orbital calculations, giving K(+) ~0.77 charges, rather than 1.0. The PVPV 
hinge sequence has been mutated in silico to PVVV (P407V in the 2A79 numbering). 
The water structure around the ion becomes discontinuous, separated into two 
sections, above and below the ion. PVPV conservation closely relates to 
maintaining the water structure. Finally, these results have implications 
concerning gating.

Copyright Â© 2014 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.11.4495
PMCID: PMC3945100
PMID: 24507595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]