1. ChemMedChem. 2014 Mar;9(3):566-71. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201300428. Epub 2014 Feb
6.

A cell-permeable ester derivative of the JmjC histone demethylase inhibitor 
IOX1.

Schiller R(1), Scozzafava G, Tumber A, Wickens JR, Bush JT, Rai G, Lejeune C, 
Choi H, Yeh TL, Chan MC, Mott BT, McCullagh JS, Maloney DJ, Schofield CJ, 
Kawamura A.

Author information:
(1)Chemistry Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, 
Mansfield Road, Oxford, OX1 3TA (UK).

The 2-oxoglutarate (2OG)-dependent Jumonji C domain (JmjC) family is the largest 
family of histone lysine demethylases. There is interest in developing 
small-molecule probes that modulate JmjC activity to investigate their 
biological roles. 5-Carboxy-8-hydroxyquinoline (IOX1) is the most potent 
broad-spectrum inhibitor of 2OG oxygenases, including the JmjC demethylases, 
reported to date; however, it suffers from low cell permeability. Here, we 
describe structure-activity relationship studies leading to the discovery of an 
n-octyl ester form of IOX1 with improved cellular potency (EC50 value of 100 to 
4 μM). These findings are supported by in vitro inhibition and selectivity 
studies, docking studies, activity versus toxicity analysis in cell cultures, 
and intracellular uptake measurements. The n-octyl ester was found to have 
improved cell permeability; it was found to inhibit some JmjC demethylases in 
its intact ester form and to be more selective than IOX1. The n-octyl ester of 
IOX1 should find utility as a starting point for the development of JmjC 
inhibitors and as a use as a cell-permeable tool compound for studies 
investigating the roles of 2OG oxygenases in epigenetic regulation.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.201300428
PMCID: PMC4503230
PMID: 24504543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]