1. Pharmgenomics Pers Med. 2014 Feb 4;7:43-51. doi: 10.2147/PGPM.S38698. 
eCollection 2014.

Molecular variants and mutations in medulloblastoma.

Schroeder K(1), Gururangan S(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Clinical Services, Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center at Duke, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Medulloblastoma is the commonest malignant brain tumor in children. Treatment 
with surgery, irradiation, and chemotherapy has improved outcomes in recent 
years, but patients are frequently left with devastating neurocognitive and 
other sequelae following such therapy. While the prognosis has traditionally 
been based on conventional histopathology and clinical staging (based on age, 
extent of resection, and presence or absence of metastasis), it has become 
apparent in recent years that the inherent biology of the tumor plays a 
significant part in predicting survival and sometimes supersedes clinical or 
pathologic risk factors. The advent of deep sequencing gene technology has 
provided invaluable clues to the molecular makeup of this tumor and allowed 
neuro-oncologists to understand that medulloblastoma is an amalgamation of 
several distinct disease entities with unique clinical associations and 
behavior. This review is a concise summary of the pathology, genetic syndromes, 
recent advances in molecular subgrouping, and the associated gene mutations and 
copy number variations in medulloblastoma. The association of molecular 
alterations with patient prognosis is also discussed, but it should be 
remembered that further validation is required in prospective clinical trials 
utilizing uniform treatment approaches.

DOI: 10.2147/PGPM.S38698
PMCID: PMC3921827
PMID: 24523595