1. J Neurosci. 2014 Feb 12;34(7):2645-51. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3501-13.2014.

Dosage effects of BDNF Val66Met polymorphism on cortical surface area and 
functional connectivity.

Wang C(1), Zhang Y, Liu B, Long H, Yu C, Jiang T.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation of Ministry of Education, School of Life 
Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of 
China, Chengdu 610054, China, Brainnetome Center and National Laboratory of 
Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100190, China, Department of Radiology, Tianjin Medical University 
General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China, and Queensland Brain Institute, 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.

The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) that leads to a valine-to-methionine 
substitution at codon 66 (Val66Met) in BDNF is correlated with differences in 
cognitive and memory functions, as well as with several neurological and 
psychiatric disorders. MRI studies have already shown that this genetic variant 
contributes to changes in cortical thickness and volume, but whether the 
Val66Met polymorphism affects the cortical surface area of healthy subjects 
remains unclear. Here, we used multimodal MRI to study whether this polymorphism 
would affect the cortical morphology and resting-state functional connectivity 
of a large sample of healthy Han Chinese human subjects. An SNP-wise general 
linear model analysis revealed a "dosage effect" of the Met allele, specifically 
a stepwise increase in cortical surface area of the right anterior insular 
cortex with increasing numbers of the Met allele. Moreover, we found enhanced 
functional connectivity between the anterior insular and the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortices that was linked with the dosage of the Met allele. In 
conclusion, these data demonstrated a "dosage effect" of BDNF Val66Met on normal 
cortical structure and function, suggesting a new path for exploring the 
mechanisms underlying the effects of genotype on cognition.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3501-13.2014
PMCID: PMC6802754
PMID: 24523553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]