1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2014 Feb;70(Pt 2):501-13. doi: 
10.1107/S1399004713027879. Epub 2014 Jan 30.

The multiple nucleotide-divalent cation binding modes of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae CK2α indicate a possible co-substrate hydrolysis product (ADP/GDP) 
release pathway.

Liu H(1), Wang H(1), Teng M(1), Li X(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, 96 
Jinzhai Road, Hefei, Anhui 230026, People's Republic of China.

CK2 is a ubiquitous and conserved protein kinase in eukaryotic organisms and is 
important in many biological processes. It is unique in maintaining constitutive 
activity and in using both ATP and GTP as phosphor donors. In this study, 
crystal structures of recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae CK2α (scCK2α) 
complexed with GMPPNP, ATP and AMPPN with either Mg2+ or Mn2+ as the coordinated 
divalent cation are presented. The overall structure of scCK2α shows high 
similarity to its homologous proteins by consisting of two domains with the 
co-substrate lying in the cleft between them. However, three characteristic 
features distinguish scCK2α from its homologues. Firstly, the Lys45-Glu53 and 
Arg48-Glu53 interactions in scCK2α lead Lys50 to adopt a unique conformation 
that is able to stabilize the γ-phosphate of the co-substrate, which makes the 
existence of the `essential divalent cation' not so essential. The multiple 
nucleotide-divalent cation binding modes of the active site of scCK2α are 
apparently different from the two-divalent-cation-occupied active site of Zea 
mays CK2α and human CK2α. Secondly, conformational change of Glu53 in 
scCK2α-AMPPN breaks its interaction with Lys45 and Arg48; as a result, the 
co-substrate binding pocket becomes more open. This may suggest a clue to a 
possible ADP/GDP-release pathway, because the NE1 atom of the Trp in the `DWG 
motif' of CK2α forms a hydrogen bond to the O atom of Leu212, which seems to 
make ADP release by means of the `DFG-in flip to DFG-out' model found in most 
eukaryotic protein kinases impossible. Coincidentally, two sulfate ions which 
may mimic two phosphate groups were captured by Arg161 and Lys197 around the 
pocket. Mutagenesis and biochemical experiments on R161A and K197A mutants 
support the above proposal. Finally, scCK2α is unique in containing an insertion 
region whose function had not been identified in previous research. It is found 
that the insertion region contributes to maintaining the constitutively active 
conformation of the scCK2α catalytic site, but does not participate in 
interaction with the regulatory subunits.

DOI: 10.1107/S1399004713027879
PMID: 24531484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]