1. FEBS Lett. 2014 Apr 17;588(8):1480-90. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.02.002.
Epub  2014 Feb 15.

Functional alterations in gut contractility after connexin36 ablation and 
evidence for gap junctions forming electrical synapses between nitrergic enteric 
neurons.

Nagy JI(1), Urena-Ramirez V(2), Ghia JE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, Canada.
(2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, Canada; Department of Immunology and Internal Medicine section of 
Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(3)Department of Immunology and Internal Medicine section of Gastroenterology, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada. Electronic 
address: jeghia@med.umanitoba.ca.

Neurons in the enteric nervous system utilize numerous neurotransmitters to 
orchestrate rhythmic gut smooth muscle contractions. We examined whether 
electrical synapses formed by gap junctions containing connexin36 also 
contribute to communication between enteric neurons in mouse colon. Spontaneous 
contractility properties and responses to electrical field stimulation and 
cholinergic agonist were altered in gut from connexin36 knockout vs. wild-type 
mice. Immunofluorescence revealed punctate labelling of connexin36 that was 
localized at appositions between somata of enteric neurons immunopositive for 
the enzyme nitric oxide synthase. There is indication for a possible functional 
role of gap junctions between inhibitory nitrergic enteric neurons.

Copyright Â© 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.02.002
PMCID: PMC4043341
PMID: 24548563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]