1. Cell Rep. 2014 Mar 13;6(5):868-77. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.02.004. Epub
2014  Feb 27.

Histone demethylase RBP2 is critical for breast cancer progression and 
metastasis.

Cao J(1), Liu Z(1), Cheung WK(1), Zhao M(1), Chen SY(1), Chan SW(2), Booth 
CJ(3), Nguyen DX(1), Yan Q(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(2)Cancer and Developmental Cell Biology Division, Institute of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673, Singapore.
(3)Section of Comparative Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. 
Electronic address: qin.yan@yale.edu.

Metastasis is a major clinical challenge for cancer treatment. Emerging evidence 
suggests that aberrant epigenetic modifications contribute significantly to 
tumor formation and progression. However, the drivers and roles of such 
epigenetic changes in tumor metastasis are still poorly understood. Using 
bioinformatic analysis of human breast cancer gene-expression data sets, we 
identified histone demethylase RBP2 as a putative mediator of metastatic 
progression. By using both human breast cancer cells and genetically engineered 
mice, we demonstrated that RBP2 is critical for breast cancer metastasis to the 
lung in multiple in vivo models. Mechanistically, RBP2 promotes metastasis as a 
pleiotropic positive regulator of many metastasis genes, including TNC. In 
addition, RBP2 loss suppresses tumor formation in MMTV-neu transgenic mice. 
These results suggest that therapeutic targeting of RBP2 is a potential strategy 
for inhibition of tumor progression and metastasis.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.02.004
PMCID: PMC4014129
PMID: 24582965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.