1. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(5):1246-53. doi: 10.2337/dc13-1828. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Empirical validation of the information-motivation-behavioral skills model of 
diabetes medication adherence: a framework for intervention.

Mayberry LS(1), Osborn CY.

Author information:
(1)http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0654-4151.

OBJECTIVE: Suboptimal adherence to diabetes medications is prevalent and 
associated with unfavorable health outcomes, but it remains unclear what 
intervention content is necessary to effectively promote medication adherence in 
diabetes. In other disease contexts, the Information-Motivation-Behavioral 
skills (IMB) model has effectively explained and promoted medication adherence 
and thus may have utility in explaining and promoting adherence to diabetes 
medications. We tested the IMB model's hypotheses in a sample of adults with 
type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Participants (N = 314) completed an 
interviewer-administered survey and A1C test. Structural equation models tested 
the effects of diabetes medication adherence-related information, motivation, 
and behavioral skills on medication adherence and the effect of medication 
adherence on A1C.
RESULTS: The IMB elements explained 41% of the variance in adherence, and 
adherence explained 9% of the variance in A1C. As predicted, behavioral skills 
had a direct effect on adherence (β = 0.59; P < 0.001) and mediated the effects 
of information (indirect effect 0.08 [0.01-0.15]) and motivation (indirect 
effect 0.12 [0.05-0.20]) on adherence. Medication adherence significantly 
predicted glycemic control (β = -0.30; P < 0.001). Neither insulin status nor 
regimen complexity was associated with adherence, and neither moderated 
associations between the IMB constructs and adherence.
CONCLUSIONS: The results support the IMB model's predictions and identify 
modifiable and intervenable determinants of diabetes medication adherence. 
Medication adherence promotion interventions may benefit from content targeting 
patients' medication adherence-related information, motivation, and behavioral 
skills and assessing the degree to which change in these determinants leads to 
changes in medication adherence behavior.

DOI: 10.2337/dc13-1828
PMCID: PMC3994934
PMID: 24598245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]