1. J Exp Bot. 2014 Jun;65(9):2415-26. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru123. Epub 2014 Mar 25.

Ethylene negatively regulates aluminium-induced malate efflux from wheat roots 
and tobacco cells transformed with TaALMT1.

Tian Q(1), Zhang X(1), Ramesh S(2), Gilliham M(2), Tyerman SD(2), Zhang WH(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Vegetation and Environmental Change, Institute of 
Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China.
(2)ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, School of Agriculture, Food 
and Wine, Waite Research Institute, University of Adelaide, Glen Osmond, SA 
5064, Australia.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Vegetation and Environmental Change, Institute of 
Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China Research Network of 
Global Change Biology, Beijing Institutes of Life Science, The Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Beijing, P. R. China whzhang@ibcas.ac.cn.

An important mechanism for Al(3+) tolerance in wheat is exudation of malate 
anions from the root apex through activation of malate-permeable TaALMT1 
channels. Here, the effect of ethylene on Al(3+)-activated efflux of malate was 
investigated using Al(3+)-tolerant wheat genotype ET8, which has high expression 
of TaALMT1. Exposure of ET8 plants to Al(3+) enhanced ethylene evolution in root 
apices. Treatment with the ethylene synthesis precursor 
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) and ethylene gas suppressed 
Al(3+)-induced malate efflux from root apices, whereas the intracellular malate 
concentrations in roots were not affected. Malate efflux from root apices was 
enhanced in the presence of Al(3+) by two antagonists of ethylene biosynthesis, 
aminoethoxyvinylglycine (AVG) and 2-aminoisobutyric acid (AIB). An increase in 
Al accumulation in root apices was observed when treated with ACC, whereas AVG 
and AIB suppressed Al accumulation in root apices. Al(3+)-induced inhibition of 
root elongation was ameliorated by pretreatment with AIB. In addition, ethylene 
donor (Ethrel) also inhibited Al(3+)-induced malate efflux from tobacco cells 
transformed with TaALMT1. ACC and the anion-channel blocker niflumate had a 
similar and non-additive effect on Al-induced malate efflux from root apices. 
Treatment of ET8 plants with ACC enhanced expression of TaALMT1, suggesting that 
the inhibitory effect of ethylene on Al-induced malate efflux is unlikely to 
occur at the transcriptional level. These findings indicate that ethylene may 
behave as a negative regulator of Al(3+)-induced malate efflux by targeting 
TaALMT1-mediated malate efflux by an unknown mechanism.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/eru123
PMCID: PMC4036508
PMID: 24668874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]