1. Ren Fail. 2014 Jul;36(6):904-7. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2014.900407. Epub 2014
Mar  27.

The association between therapeutic outcomes and VEGF G-1154A and C-936T gene 
polymorphisms in patients with glomerulonephritis.

Terzi H(1), Kayatas M, Korkmaz S, Yildiz G, Candan F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet University , Sivas 
, Turkey .

BACKGROUND: In this present study, we aimed to investigate the association 
between therapeutic outcomes and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
G-1154A and C-936T gene polymorphisms in patients with glomerulonephritis.
METHODS: Thirty-eight patients with glomerulonephritis diagnosed by renal biopsy 
were included to the study. All patients had proteinuria at least 1 gram (g)/day 
in urine analysis. At the end of a yearly therapy, patients with proteinuria 
less than 0.5 g/day were accepted as in complete remission and they were termed 
as group 1. The patients with proteinuria over 0.5 g/day were accepted as in no 
remission and they were termed as group 2.
RESULTS: The mean age of patients in group 1 and group 2 was 35.88 ± 13.80 years 
and 37.30 ± 13.89 years, respectively. There were nine (50%) male and nine (50%) 
female patients in group 1. In group 2, seven (35%) male and 13 (65%) female 
patients were present. Although VEGF G-1154A (GG) gene polymorphism was found in 
55% of group 2 patients, and 22.2% of group 1 patients, but the differences did 
not reach statistical significance. There were no statistical differences 
between groups in terms of other gene polymorphisms. Namely, we obtained no 
statistical differences between therapeutic outcomes and gene polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a significant difference between groups in terms of VEGF 
G-1154A (GG) gene polymorphism, but the minority of the patient population has 
led to not to reach statistical significance. So, this gene polymorphism has to 
be investigated in larger studies.

DOI: 10.3109/0886022X.2014.900407
PMID: 24673399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]