1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 2;9(4):e93651. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093651.
eCollection  2014.

EGFR signaling promotes β-cell proliferation and survivin expression during 
pregnancy.

Hakonen E(1), Ustinov J(1), Palgi J(1), Miettinen PJ(2), Otonkoski T(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, Biomedicum Stem Cell Center, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, Biomedicum Stem Cell Center, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Children's Hospital, University of 
Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

Placental lactogen (PL) induced serotonergic signaling is essential for 
gestational β-cell mass expansion. We have previously shown that intact 
Epidermal growth factor -receptor (EGFR) function is a crucial component of this 
pathway. We now explored more specifically the link between EGFR and 
pregnancy-induced β-cell mass compensation. Islets were isolated from wild-type 
and β-cell-specific EGFR-dominant negative mice (E1-DN), stimulated with PL and 
analyzed for β-cell proliferation and expression of genes involved in 
gestational β-cell growth. β-cell mass dynamics were analyzed both with 
traditional morphometrical methods and three-dimensional optical projection 
tomography (OPT) of whole-mount insulin-stained pancreata. Insulin-positive 
volume analyzed with OPT increased 1.4-fold at gestational day 18.5 (GD18.5) 
when compared to non-pregnant mice. Number of islets peaked by GD13.5 (680 vs 
1134 islets per pancreas, non-pregnant vs. GD13.5). PL stimulated beta cell 
proliferation in the wild-type islets, whereas the proliferative response was 
absent in the E1-DN mouse islets. Serotonin synthesizing enzymes were 
upregulated similarly in both the wild-type and E1-DN mice. However, while 
survivin (Birc5) mRNA was upregulated 5.5-fold during pregnancy in the wild-type 
islets, no change was seen in the E1-DN pregnant islets. PL induced survivin 
expression also in isolated islets and this was blocked by EGFR inhibitor 
gefitinib, mTOR inhibitor rapamycin and MEK inhibitor PD0325901. Our 
3D-volumetric analysis of β-cell mass expansion during murine pregnancy revealed 
that islet number increases during pregnancy. In addition, our results suggest 
that EGFR signaling is required for lactogen-induced survivin expression via 
MAPK and mTOR pathways.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093651
PMCID: PMC3973552
PMID: 24695557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.