1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Mar 27;8:82. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00082. 
eCollection 2014.

Modulatory mechanisms and multiple functions of somatodendritic A-type K (+) 
channel auxiliary subunits.

Jerng HH(1), Pfaffinger PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA.

Auxiliary subunits are non-conducting, modulatory components of the 
multi-protein ion channel complexes that underlie normal neuronal signaling. 
They interact with the pore-forming α-subunits to modulate surface distribution, 
ion conductance, and channel gating properties. For the somatodendritic 
subthreshold A-type potassium (ISA) channel based on Kv4 α-subunits, two types 
of auxiliary subunits have been extensively studied: Kv channel-interacting 
proteins (KChIPs) and dipeptidyl peptidase-like proteins (DPLPs). KChIPs are 
cytoplasmic calcium-binding proteins that interact with intracellular portions 
of the Kv4 subunits, whereas DPLPs are type II transmembrane proteins that 
associate with the Kv4 channel core. Both KChIPs and DPLPs genes contain 
multiple start sites that are used by various neuronal populations to drive the 
differential expression of functionally distinct N-terminal variants. In turn, 
these N-terminal variants generate tremendous functional diversity across the 
nervous system. Here, we focus our review on (1) the molecular mechanism 
underlying the unique properties of different N-terminal variants, (2) the 
shaping of native ISA properties by the concerted actions of KChIPs and DPLP 
variants, and (3) the surprising ways that KChIPs and DPLPs coordinate the 
activity of multiple channels to fine-tune neuronal excitability. Unlocking the 
unique contributions of different auxiliary subunit N-terminal variants may 
provide an important opportunity to develop novel targeted therapeutics to treat 
numerous neurological disorders.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00082
PMCID: PMC3973911
PMID: 24723849