1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:757461. doi: 10.1155/2014/757461. Epub 2014 Mar 6.

Estrogen Deficiency and the Origin of Obesity during Menopause.

Lizcano F(1), Guzm√°n G(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Center, Universidad de La Sabana (CIBUS), km 7, Autopista 
Norte de Bogota, Chia, Colombia ; Fundacion Cardio-Infantil Instituto de 
Cardiologia, Bogota, Colombia.
(2)Biomedical Research Center, Universidad de La Sabana (CIBUS), km 7, Autopista 
Norte de Bogota, Chia, Colombia.

Sex hormones strongly influence body fat distribution and adipocyte 
differentiation. Estrogens and testosterone differentially affect adipocyte 
physiology, but the importance of estrogens in the development of metabolic 
diseases during menopause is disputed. Estrogens and estrogen receptors regulate 
various aspects of glucose and lipid metabolism. Disturbances of this metabolic 
signal lead to the development of metabolic syndrome and a higher cardiovascular 
risk in women. The absence of estrogens is a clue factor in the onset of 
cardiovascular disease during the menopausal period, which is characterized by 
lipid profile variations and predominant abdominal fat accumulation. However, 
influence of the absence of these hormones and its relationship to higher 
obesity in women during menopause are not clear. This systematic review 
discusses of the role of estrogens and estrogen receptors in adipocyte 
differentiation, and its control by the central nervous systemn and the possible 
role of estrogen-like compounds and endocrine disruptors chemicals are 
discussed. Finally, the interaction between the decrease in estrogen secretion 
and the prevalence of obesity in menopausal women is examined. We will consider 
if the absence of estrogens have a significant effect of obesity in menopausal 
women.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/757461
PMCID: PMC3964739
PMID: 24734243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]