1. Eur J Pediatr. 2014 Sep;173(9):1233-44. doi: 10.1007/s00431-014-2311-9. Epub 
2014 Apr 17.

Hypermethylation of the enolase gene (ENO2) in autism.

Wang Y(1), Fang Y, Zhang F, Xu M, Zhang J, Yan J, Ju W, Brown WT, Zhong N.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Shanghai Children's Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China, wy_rain@126.com.

It has been hypothesized that dysregulation of brain-expressed genes is the 
major predisposing underlying mechanism for autism. This dysregulation may be 
mediated by differential methylation of CpG sites within gene promoters, which 
could be candidate biomarkers and used for early clinical screening of autism. A 
total of 131 pairs of age- and sex-matched autistic and control subjects were 
recruited in this study. Peripheral blood cells were analyzed. The first five 
pairs were randomly applied to array-based genome-wide methylation studies. A 
neuron-specific gene, ENO2, was found to be hypermethylated in the autistic 
samples. This difference was validated by bisulfite sequencing PCR (BSP). The 
differential expression of ENO2 gene was further analyzed with RT-qPCR and 
ELISA. The hypermethylation of ENO2 within the promoter region was confirmed by 
BSP to be present in 14.5 % (19/131) of the total of the autistic samples. The 
mean ENO2 RNA level in these 19 autistic samples was reduced by about 70 % 
relative to that in controls. The average level of ENO2 protein expression in 
the 19 autistic samples (15.18 ± 3.51 μg/l) was about half of that in the 
controls (33.86 ± 8.16 μg/l).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that reduced ENO2 expression may be a 
biomarker for a subset of autistic children.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-014-2311-9
PMCID: PMC4134484
PMID: 24737292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]