1. J Clin Microbiol. 2014 Jun;52(6):2157-62. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00691-14. Epub 2014
 Apr 16.

Profiling of rpoB mutations and MICs for rifampin and rifabutin in Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis.

Jamieson FB(1), Guthrie JL(2), Neemuchwala A(2), Lastovetska O(2), Melano RG(1), 
Mehaffy C(3).

Author information:
(1)Public Health Ontario, Toronto, ON, Canada University of Toronto, Department 
of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Public Health Ontario, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Public Health Ontario, Toronto, ON, Canada University of Toronto, Department 
of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Toronto, ON, Canada 
Carolina.mehaffy@oahpp.ca.

Resistance to rifampin (RIF) and rifabutin (RFB) in Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
is associated with mutations within an 81-bp region of the rpoB gene (RIF 
resistance-determining region [RRDR]). Previous studies have shown that certain 
mutations in this region are more likely to confer high levels of RIF 
resistance, while others may be found in phenotypically susceptible isolates. In 
this study, we sought to determine the relationship between the MICs of RIF and 
RFB and rpoB RRDR mutations in 32 multidrug-resistant (MDR), 4 
RIF-monoresistant, and 5 susceptible M. tuberculosis clinical isolates. The MICs 
were determined using the MGIT 960 system. Mutations in the rpoB RRDR were 
determined by Sanger sequencing. RpoB proteins with mutations S531L (a change of 
S to L at position 531), S531W, H526Y, and H526D and the double mutation 
D516A-R529Q were associated with high MICs for RIF and RFB. Five isolates 
carrying the mutations L511P, H526L, H526N, and D516G-S522L were found to be 
susceptible to RIF. Several mutations were associated with resistance to RIF and 
susceptibility to RFB (F514FF, D516V, and S522L). Whole-genome sequencing of two 
MDR isolates without rpoB RRDR mutations revealed a mutation outside the RRDR 
(V146F; RIF MIC of 50 μg/ml). The implications of the polymorphisms identified 
in the second of these isolates in RIF resistance need to be further explored. 
Our study further establishes a correlation between the mutations and the MICs 
of RIF and, also, RFB in M. tuberculosis. Several rpoB mutations were identified 
in RIF- and RFB-susceptible isolates. The clinical significance of these 
findings requires further exploration. Until then, a combination of phenotypic 
and molecular testing is advisable for drug susceptibility testing.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00691-14
PMCID: PMC4042728
PMID: 24740074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]