1. Pharmacol Res. 2014 May;83:3-9. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2014.04.002. Epub 2014 Apr
 18.

Using pharmacological chaperones to restore proteostasis.

Wang YJ(1), Di XJ(2), Mu TW(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics and Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 
44106, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. Electronic address: 
tingwei.mu@case.edu.

Normal organismal physiology depends on the maintenance of proteostasis in each 
cellular compartment to achieve a delicate balance between protein synthesis, 
folding, trafficking, and degradation while minimizing misfolding and 
aggregation. Defective proteostasis leads to numerous protein misfolding 
diseases. Pharmacological chaperones are cell-permeant small molecules that 
promote the proper folding and trafficking of a protein via direct binding to 
that protein. They stabilize their target protein in a protein-pharmacological 
chaperone state, increasing the natively folded protein population that can 
effectively engage trafficking machinery for transport to the final destination 
for function. Here, as regards the application of pharmacological chaperones, we 
focus on their capability to promote the folding and trafficking of lysosomal 
enzymes, G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs), and ion channels, each of which is 
presently an important drug target. Pharmacological chaperones hold great 
promise as potential therapeutics to ameliorate a variety of protein misfolding 
diseases.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2014.04.002
PMCID: PMC4070435
PMID: 24747662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]