1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 25;9(4):e96420. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096420. 
eCollection 2014.

Real-time bidirectional pyrophosphorolysis-activated polymerization for 
quantitative detection of somatic mutations.

Song N(1), Zhong X(1), Li Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Engineering Research Centre of Molecular Diagnostics, Ministry of Education, 
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics, School 
of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.

Detection of somatic mutations for targeted therapy is increasingly used in 
clinical settings. However, due to the difficulties of detecting rare mutations 
in excess of wild-type DNA, current methods often lack high sensitivity, require 
multiple procedural steps, or fail to be quantitative. We developed real-time 
bidirectional pyrophosphorolysis-activated polymerization (real-time Bi-PAP) 
that allows quantitative detection of somatic mutations. We applied the method 
to quantify seven mutations at codons 12 and 13 in KRAS, and 2 mutations (L858R, 
and T790M) in EGFR in clinical samples. The real-time Bi-PAP could detect 0.01% 
mutation in the presence of 100 ng template DNA. Of the 34 samples from the 
colon cancer patients, real-time Bi-PAP detected 14 KRAS mutant samples whereas 
the traditional real-time allele-specific PCR missed two samples with mutation 
abundance <1% and DNA sequencing missed nine samples with mutation abundance 
<10%. The detection results of the two EGFR mutations in 45 non-small cell lung 
cancer samples further supported the applicability of the real-time Bi-PAP. The 
real-time Bi-PAP also proved to be more efficient than the real-time 
allele-specific PCR in the detection of templates prepared from formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded samples. Thus, real-time Bi-PAP can be used for rapid and 
accurate quantification of somatic mutations. This flexible approach could be 
widely used for somatic mutation detection in clinical settings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096420
PMCID: PMC4000192
PMID: 24769870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.