1. Adv Biomed Res. 2014 Feb 28;3:82. doi: 10.4103/2277-9175.127995. eCollection 
2014.

Cloning, expression, purification and characterisation of Erwinia carotovora 
L-asparaginase in Escherichia coli.

Pourhossein M(1), Korbekandi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, 
Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: For the past 30 years, bacterial L-asparaginases have been used as 
therapeutic agents in the treatment of acute childhood lymphoblastic leukemia. 
It is found in a variety of organisms such as microbes, plants and mammals. 
Their intrinsic low-rate glutaminase activity, however, causes serious 
side-effects, including neurotoxicity, hepatitis, coagulopathy and other 
dysfunctions. Erwinia carotovora asparaginase shows decreased glutaminase 
activity, so it is believed to have fewer side-effects in leukemia therapy. Our 
aim was to clone, express, purify and characterize E. carotovora asparaginase.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: L-asparaginase from E. carotovora NCYC 1526 (ErA) was 
cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli strain BL21 (DE3). The enzyme was 
purified to homogeneity by affinity chromatography. Various conditions were 
tested to maximize the production of recombinant asparaginase in E. coli.
RESULTS: A new L. asparaginase from E. carotovora NCYC 1526 (ErA) was 
successfully cloned, expressed and purified in E. coli BL21 (DE3). The specific 
activity of the enzyme was 430 IU/mg.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present work form the basis for a new engineered 
form of ErA for future therapeutic use, which could be extended with 
crystallographic studies.

DOI: 10.4103/2277-9175.127995
PMCID: PMC3988593
PMID: 24761390

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.