1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 25;9(4):e96125. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096125. 
eCollection 2014.

Association between vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms and breast cancer 
risk: a meta-analysis of 39 studies.

Zhang K(1), Song L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine Oncology, Shandong Cancer Hospital and 
Institute, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Medicine and Life 
Sciences, University of Jinan -Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, 
China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine Oncology, Shandong Cancer Hospital and 
Institute, Jinan, China.

BACKGROUND: The associations between vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms 
and breast cancer risk were comprehensively investigated to clarify issues that 
remain controversial.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: An electronic search was conducted of several 
databases, including PubMed, the Cochrane library, Web of Science, EMBASE, CBM 
and CNKI, for papers that describe the association between Fok1, poly-A repeat, 
Bsm1, Taq1 or Apa1 polymorphisms of the VDR gene and breast cancer risk. Summary 
odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated based on a 
fixed-effect model (FEM) or random-effect model (REM), depending on the absence 
or presence of significant heterogeneity. A total of 39 studies met the 
inclusion criteria. A meta-analysis of high-quality studies showed that the Fok1 
polymorphism of the VDR gene was associated with an increased risk of breast 
cancer (ff vs. Ff+FF, OR: 1.09, 95%CI: 1.02 to 1.16, p = 0.007). No significant 
associations were observed between the other polymorphisms and breast cancer 
risk. No positive results were detected by pooling the results of all relevant 
studies.
CONCLUSION: A meta-analysis of high-quality studies demonstrated that the Fok1 
polymorphism of the VDR gene was closely associated with breast cancer risk.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096125
PMCID: PMC4000223
PMID: 24769568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.