1. Anesthesiology. 2014 Aug;121(2):290-301. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000000268.

Analogues of etomidate: modifications around etomidate's chiral carbon and the 
impact on in vitro and in vivo pharmacology.

Pejo E(1), Santer P, Jeffrey S, Gallin H, Husain SS, Raines DE.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care, and Pain Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: R-etomidate possesses unique desirable properties but potently 
suppresses adrenocortical function. Consequently, efforts are being made to 
define structure-activity relationships with the goal of designing analogues 
with reduced adrenocortical toxicity. The authors explored the pharmacological 
impact of modifying etomidate's chiral center using R-etomidate, S-etomidate, 
and two achiral etomidate analogues (cyclopropyl etomidate and dihydrogen 
etomidate).
METHODS: The γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor modulatory potencies of drugs 
were assessed in oocyte-expressed α1(L264T)β3γ2L and α1(L264T)β1γ2L 
γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors (for each drug, n = 6 oocytes per subtype). 
In rats, hypnotic potencies and durations of action were measured using a 
righting reflex assay (n = 26 to 30 doses per drug), and adrenocortical 
potencies were quantified by using an adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation 
test (n = 20 experiments per drug).
RESULTS: All four drugs activated both γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor 
subtypes in vitro and produced hypnosis and suppressed adrenocortical function 
in rats. However, drug potencies in each model ranged by 1 to 2 orders of 
magnitude. R-etomidate had the highest γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor 
modulatory, hypnotic, and adrenocortical inhibitory potencies. Respectively, 
R-etomidate, S-etomidate, and cyclopropyl etomidate were 27.4-, 18.9-, and 
23.5-fold more potent activators of receptors containing β3 subunits than β1 
subunits; however, dihydrogen etomidate's subunit selectivity was only 2.48-fold 
and similar to that of propofol (2.08-fold). S-etomidate was 1/23rd as potent an 
adrenocortical inhibitor as R-etomidate.
CONCLUSION: The linkage between the structure of etomidate's chiral center and 
its pharmacology suggests that altering etomidate's chiral center may be used as 
part of a strategy to design analogues with more desirable adrenocortical 
activities and/or subunit selectivities.

DOI: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000000268
PMCID: PMC4121658
PMID: 24777068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no 
competing interests