1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1844(9):1523-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2014.04.016. Epub 2014 Apr 26.

Low resolution X-ray structure of γ-glutamyltranspeptidase from Bacillus 
licheniformis: opened active site cleft and a cluster of acid residues 
potentially involved in the recognition of a metal ion.

Lin LL(1), Chen YY(1), Chi MC(1), Merlino A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, National Chiayi University, 300 Syuefu Road, 
Chiayi City 600, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, Napoli, 
Italy; Istituto di Biostrutture e Bioimmagini, CNR, Napoli, Italy. Electronic 
address: antonello.merlino@unina.it.

γ-Glutamyltranspeptidases (γ-GTs) cleave the γ-glutamyl amide bond of 
glutathione and transfer the released γ-glutamyl group to water (hydrolysis) or 
acceptor amino acids (transpeptidation). These ubiquitous enzymes play a key 
role in the biosynthesis and degradation of glutathione, and in xenobiotic 
detoxification. Here we report the 3Å resolution crystal structure of Bacillus 
licheniformis γ-GT (BlGT) and that of its complex with l-Glu. X-ray structures 
confirm that BlGT belongs to the N-terminal nucleophilic hydrolase superfamily 
and reveal that the protein possesses an opened active site cleft similar to 
that reported for the homologous enzyme from Bacillus subtilis, but different 
from those observed for human γ-GT and for γ-GTs from other microorganisms. Data 
suggest that the binding of l-Glu induces a reordering of the C-terminal tail of 
BlGT large subunit and allow the identification of a cluster of acid residues 
that are potentially involved in the recognition of a metal ion. The role of 
these residues on the conformational stability of BlGT has been studied by 
characterizing the autoprocessing, enzymatic activity, chemical and thermal 
denaturation of four new Ala single mutants. The results show that replacement 
of Asp568 with an Ala affects both the autoprocessing and structural stability 
of the protein.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2014.04.016
PMID: 24780583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]