1. Biochemistry. 2014 May 27;53(20):3308-17. doi: 10.1021/bi5002085. Epub 2014
May  13.

Exploring the catalytic mechanism of alkanesulfonate monooxygenase using 
molecular dynamics.

Armacost K(1), Musila J, Gathiaka S, Ellis HR, Acevedo O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Auburn University , Auburn, Alabama 
36849, United States.

The complex mechanistic properties of alkanesulfonate monooxygenase (SsuD) 
provide a particular challenge for identifying catalytically relevant amino 
acids. In response, a joint computational and experimental study was conducted 
to further elucidate the SsuD mechanism. Extensive unbiased molecular dynamics 
(MD) simulations were performed for six SsuD systems: (1) substrate-free, (2) 
bound with FMNH2, (3) bound with a C4a-peroxyflavin intermediate (FMNOO(-)), (4) 
bound with octanesulfonate (OCS), (5) co-bound with FMNH2 and OCS, and (6) 
co-bound with FMNOO(-) and OCS. A previous theoretical study suggested that salt 
bridges between Arg297 and Glu20 or Asp111 initiated conformational changes 
critical for catalysis. However, our MD simulations and steady-state kinetic 
experiments did not corroborate this result. Similar kcat/Km values for both the 
E20A and D111A SsuD variants to wild-type SsuD suggest that the salt bridges are 
not critical to the desulfonation mechanism. Instead, the predicted role of 
Arg297 is to favorably interact with the phosphate group of the reduced flavin. 
Concomitantly, Arg226 functioned as a "protection" group shielding FMNOO(-) from 
bulk solvent and was more pronounced when both FMNOO(-) and OCS were bound. The 
stabilization of FMNOO(-) through electrostatic interactions with Arg226 would 
properly position the C4a peroxy group for the proposed nucleophilic attack on 
the sulfur of octanesulfonate.

DOI: 10.1021/bi5002085
PMID: 24798142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]