1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Apr 23;8:113. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00113. 
eCollection 2014.

The role of extracellular Tau in the spreading of neurofibrillary pathology.

Medina M(1), Avila J(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas 
(CIBERNED) Madrid, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas 
(CIBERNED) Madrid, Spain ; Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" CSIC-UAM 
Madrid, Spain.

The microtubule-associated protein (MAP) tau plays a critical role in the 
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and several related disorders 
collectively known as tauopathies. Development of tau pathology is associated 
with progressive neuronal loss and cognitive decline. In the brains of AD 
patients, tau pathology spreads following an anatomically defined pattern. 
Mounting evidence strongly suggests that accumulation of abnormal tau is 
mediated through spreading of seeds of the protein from cell to cell and point 
at the involvement of extracellular tau species as the main agent in the 
interneuronal propagation of neurofibrillary lesions and spreading of tau 
toxicity throughout different brain regions in these disorders. That would 
support the concept that pathology initiates in a very small part of the brain 
many years before becoming symptomatic, spreading progressively to the whole 
brain within 10-20 years. Understanding the precise molecular mechanism 
underlying tau propagation is crucial for the development of therapeutics for 
this devastating disorder. In this work, we will discuss recent research on the 
role of extracellular tau in the spreading of tau pathology, through synaptic 
and non-synaptic mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00113
PMCID: PMC4005959
PMID: 24795568