1. Neuron. 2014 May 7;82(3):618-34. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.03.012.

Miniature neurotransmission regulates Drosophila synaptic structural maturation.

Choi BJ(1), Imlach WL(2), Jiao W(2), Wolfram V(3), Wu Y(4), Grbic M(5), Cela 
C(5), Baines RA(3), Nitabach MN(4), McCabe BD(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Center for Motor Neuron Biology 
and Disease, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, 
NY 10032, USA; Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics, College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Center for Motor Neuron Biology 
and Disease, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, 
NY 10032, USA; Department of Neuroscience, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK.
(4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Department of Genetics, 
Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Center for Motor Neuron Biology 
and Disease, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, 
NY 10032, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Center for Motor Neuron Biology 
and Disease, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, 
NY 10032, USA; Department of Neuroscience, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address: 
brian@mccabelab.org.

Miniature neurotransmission is the transsynaptic process where single synaptic 
vesicles spontaneously released from presynaptic neurons induce miniature 
postsynaptic potentials. Since their discovery over 60 years ago, miniature 
events have been found at every chemical synapse studied. However, the in vivo 
necessity for these small-amplitude events has remained enigmatic. Here, we show 
that miniature neurotransmission is required for the normal structural 
maturation of Drosophila glutamatergic synapses in a developmental role that is 
not shared by evoked neurotransmission. Conversely, we find that increasing 
miniature events is sufficient to induce synaptic terminal growth. We show that 
miniature neurotransmission acts locally at terminals to regulate synapse 
maturation via a Trio guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) and Rac1 GTPase 
molecular signaling pathway. Our results establish that miniature 
neurotransmission, a universal but often-overlooked feature of synapses, has 
unique and essential functions in vivo.

Copyright Â© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.03.012
PMCID: PMC4022839
PMID: 24811381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]