1. G3 (Bethesda). 2014 May 15;4(7):1259-74. doi: 10.1534/g3.114.011080.

Abscisic acid regulates root elongation through the activities of auxin and 
ethylene in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Thole JM(1), Beisner ER(2), Liu J(2), Venkova SV(2), Strader LC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63130.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas 
77005.
(3)Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63130 strader@wustl.edu.

Abscisic acid (ABA) regulates many aspects of plant growth and development, 
including inhibition of root elongation and seed germination. We performed an 
ABA resistance screen to identify factors required for ABA response in root 
elongation inhibition. We identified two classes of Arabidopsis thaliana AR 
mutants that displayed ABA-resistant root elongation: those that displayed 
resistance to ABA in both root elongation and seed germination and those that 
displayed resistance to ABA in root elongation but not in seed germination. We 
used PCR-based genotyping to identify a mutation in ABA INSENSITIVE2 (ABI2), 
positional information to identify mutations in AUXIN RESISTANT1 (AUX1) and 
ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE2 (EIN2), and whole genome sequencing to identify mutations 
in AUX1, AUXIN RESISTANT4 (AXR4), and ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE ROOT1/PIN-FORMED2 
(EIR1/PIN2). Identification of auxin and ethylene response mutants among our 
isolates suggested that auxin and ethylene responsiveness were required for ABA 
inhibition of root elongation. To further our understanding of 
auxin/ethylene/ABA crosstalk, we examined ABA responsiveness of double mutants 
of ethylene overproducer1 (eto1) or ein2 combined with auxin-resistant mutants 
and found that auxin and ethylene likely operate in a linear pathway to affect 
ABA-responsive inhibition of root elongation, whereas these two hormones likely 
act independently to affect ABA-responsive inhibition of seed germination.

Copyright Â© 2014 Thole et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.114.011080
PMCID: PMC4455775
PMID: 24836325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]