1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2014 Jul;61:46-55. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2014.05.002. Epub
2014  May 20.

The phosphorylation of Hsp20 enhances its association with amyloid-β to increase 
protection against neuronal cell death.

Cameron RT(1), Quinn SD(2), Cairns LS(1), MacLeod R(1), Samuel ID(2), Smith 
BO(1), Carlos Penedo J(2), Baillie GS(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Science, College of Veterinary, 
Medical and life sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G128QQ, UK.
(2)SUPA School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, 
Fife KY169SS, UK.
(3)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Science, College of Veterinary, 
Medical and life sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G128QQ, UK. Electronic 
address: George.Baillie@glasgow.ac.uk.

Up-regulation of Hsp20 protein levels in response to amyloid fibril formation is 
considered a key protective response against the onset of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Indeed, the physical interaction between Hsp20 and Aβ is known to prevent 
Aβ oligomerisation and protects neuronal cells from Aβ mediated toxicity, 
however, details of the molecular mechanism and regulatory cell signalling 
events behind this process have remained elusive. Using both conventional MTT 
end-point assays and novel real time measurement of cell impedance, we show that 
Hsp20 protects human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells from the neurotoxic effects of 
Aβ. In an attempt to provide a mechanism for the neuroprotection afforded by 
Hsp20, we used peptide array, co-immunoprecipitation analysis and NMR techniques 
to map the interaction between Hsp20 and Aβ and report a binding mode where 
Hsp20 binds adjacent to the oligomerisation domain of Aβ, preventing 
aggregation. The Hsp20/Aβ interaction is enhanced by Hsp20 phosphorylation, 
which serves to increase association with low molecular weight Aβ species and 
decrease the effective concentration of Hsp20 required to disrupt the formation 
of amyloid oligomers. Finally, using a novel fluorescent assay for the real time 
evaluation of morphology-specific Aβ aggregation, we show that 
phospho-dependency of this effect is more pronounced for fibrils than for 
globular Aβ forms and that 25mers corresponding to the Hsp20 N-terminal can be 
used as Aβ aggregate inhibitors. Our report is the first to provide a molecular 
model for the Hsp20/Aβ complex and the first to suggest that modulation of the 
cAMP/cGMP pathways could be a novel route to enhance Hsp20-mediated attenuation 
of Aβ fibril neurotoxicity.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcn.2014.05.002
PMCID: PMC4148482
PMID: 24859569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]