1. Acta Crystallogr Sect E Struct Rep Online. 2014 Apr 18;70(Pt 5):o579-80. doi: 
10.1107/S1600536814007983. eCollection 2014 May 1.

4-(4-Bromo-phen-yl)-7,7-dimethyl-2-methyl-amino-3-nitro-7,8-di-hydro-4H-chromen-5(6H)-one 
including an unknown solvate.

Inglebert SA(1), Kamalraja J(2), Sethusankar K(3), Vasuki G(2).

Author information:
(1)Sri Ram Engineering College, Chennai 602 024, India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Pondichery University, Pondichery 605 014, India.
(3)Department of Physics, RKM Vivekananda College (Autonomous), Chennai 600 004, 
India.

In the title compound, C18H19BrN2O4, the chromene unit is not quite planar 
(r.m.s. deviation = 0.199 Å), with the methyl C atoms lying 0.027 (4) and 
1.929 (4) Å from the mean plane of the chromene unit. The six-membered 
carbocyclic ring of the chromene moiety adopts an envelope conformation, with 
the dimethyl-substituted C atom as the flap. The methyl-amine and nitro groups 
are slightly twisted from the chromene moiety, with C-N-C-O and O-N-C-C torsion 
angles of 2.7 (4) and -0.4 (4)°, respectively. The dihedral angle between the 
mean plane of the chromene unit and the benzene ring is 85.61 (13)°. An 
intra-molecular N-H⋯O hydrogen bond generates an S(6) ring motif, which 
stabilizes the mol-ecular conformation. In the crystal, mol-ecules are linked 
via N-H⋯O hydrogen bonds, forming hexa-gonal rings lying parallel to the ab 
plane. A region of disordered electron density, most probably disordered ethanol 
solvent mol-ecules, occupying voids of ca 432 Å(3) for an electron count of 158, 
was treated using the SQUEEZE routine in PLATON [Spek (2009 ▶). Acta Cryst. D65, 
148-155]. Their formula mass and unit-cell characteristics were not taken into 
account during refinement.

DOI: 10.1107/S1600536814007983
PMCID: PMC4011266
PMID: 24860381