1. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2014 Dec;34(6):500-5. doi: 
10.3109/10799893.2014.921202. Epub 2014 May 29.

Association of vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism with the risk of lung 
cancer: a meta-analysis.

Zhong H(1), Zhou R, Feng Y, Zheng GX, Liang Y, Zhang JY, Qin XQ, Chen W, Wu JQ, 
Zhong YH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, People's Hospital of Beihai , BeiHai , 
China and.

Relationship between vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphism and the risk of 
lung cancer from the published reports are still conflicting. This study was 
conducted to evaluate the relationship between VDR TaqI (rs731236), BsmI 
(rs1544410) and ApaI (rs7975232) gene polymorphism and the risk of lung cancer 
using meta-analysis method. The association studies were identified from PubMed 
and Cochrane Library on 1 December 2013, and eligible investigations were 
included and synthesized using meta-analysis method. Six reports were recruited 
into this meta-analysis for the association of VDR gene polymorphism with lung 
cancer susceptibility. In the meta-analysis for ApaI gene polymorphism, AA 
genotype was associated with the risk of lung cancer in Asians. In the 
meta-analysis for BsmI gene polymorphism, B allele, BB genotype and bb genotype 
were associated with lung cancer in Asians, and B allele bb genotype were 
associated with lung cancer risk in overall populations; furthermore, bb 
genotype was associated with lung cancer risk in Caucasians. In the 
meta-analysis for TaqI gene polymorphism, t allele and TT genotype were 
associated with lung cancer in overall populations and in Caucasians. In 
conclusion, B allele bb genotype t allele and TT genotype were associated with 
lung cancer risk in overall populations. AA genotype, B allele, BB genotype and 
bb genotype were associated with the risk of lung cancer in Asians. Furthermore, 
bb genotype t allele and TT genotype was associated with lung cancer risk in 
Caucasians. However, more studies should be conducted to confirm it.

DOI: 10.3109/10799893.2014.921202
PMID: 24875270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]