1. J Gen Virol. 2014 Sep;95(Pt 9):1958-1968. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.066753-0. Epub
2014  Jun 4.

Newly isolated mAbs broaden the neutralizing epitope in murine norovirus.

Kolawole AO(1), Xia C(2), Li M(2), Gamez M(1), Yu C(1), Rippinger CM(1), Yucha 
RE(1), Smith TJ(2), Wobus CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St Louis, MO, USA.

Here, we report the isolation and functional characterization of mAbs against 
two murine norovirus (MNV) strains, MNV-1 and WU20, which were isolated 
following oral infection of mice. The mAbs were screened for reactivity against 
the respective homologous and heterologous MNV strain by ELISA. Selected mAbs 
were of IgA, IgG1, IgG2a or IgG2b isotype and showed a range of Western blot 
reactivities from non-binding to strong binding, suggesting recognition of 
conformational and linear epitopes. Some of the anti-MNV-1 antibodies 
neutralized both MNV-1 and WU20 infections in culture and in mice, but none of 
the anti-WU20 mAbs neutralized either virus. The non-neutralizing anti-MNV-1 
IgG2b antibody 5C4.10 was mapped to the S domain of the MNV-1 capsid, whilst the 
epitopes of the neutralizing anti-MNV-1 IgA antibodies 2D3.7 and 4F9.4 were 
mapped to the P domain. Generation of neutralization escape viruses showed that 
two mutations (V339I and D348E) in the C'D' loop of the MNV-1 P domain mediated 
escape from mAb 2D3.7 and 4F9.4 neutralization. These findings broaden the known 
neutralizing epitopes of MNV to the main surface-exposed loops of the P domain. 
In addition, the current panel of antibodies provides valuable reagents for 
studying norovirus biology and development of diagnostic tools.

Â© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.066753-0
PMCID: PMC4135088
PMID: 24899153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]