1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2014 Oct 15;22(20):5697-704. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2014.05.015. 
Epub 2014 May 20.

Intramolecular C(sp(3))H amination of arylsulfonyl azides with engineered and 
artificial myoglobin-based catalysts.

Bordeaux M(1), Singh R(1), Fasan R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, United 
States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, United 
States. Electronic address: fasan@chem.rochester.edu.

The direct conversion of aliphatic CH bonds into CN bonds provides an attractive 
approach to the introduction of nitrogen-containing functionalities in organic 
molecules. Following the recent discovery that cytochrome P450 enzymes can 
catalyze the cyclization of arylsulfonyl azide compounds via an intramolecular 
C(sp(3))H amination reaction, we have explored here the CH amination reactivity 
of other hemoproteins. Various heme-containing proteins, and in particular 
myoglobin and horseradish peroxidase, were found to be capable of catalyzing 
this transformation. Based on this finding, a series of engineered and 
artificial myoglobin variants containing active site mutations and non-native 
Mn- and Co-protoporphyrin IX cofactors, respectively, were prepared to 
investigate the effect of these structural changes on the catalytic activity and 
selectivity of these catalysts. Our studies showed that metallo-substituted 
myoglobins constitute viable CH amination catalysts, revealing a distinctive 
reactivity trend as compared to synthetic metalloporphyrin counterparts. On the 
other hand, amino acid substitutions at the level of the heme pocket were found 
to be beneficial toward improving the stereo- and enantioselectivity of these 
Mb-catalyzed reactions. Mechanistic studies involving kinetic isotope effect 
experiments indicate that CH bond cleavage is implicated in the rate-limiting 
step of myoglobin-catalyzed amination of arylsulfonyl azides. Altogether, these 
studies indicate that myoglobin constitutes a promising scaffold for the design 
and development of CH amination catalysts.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2014.05.015
PMCID: PMC4182183
PMID: 24890656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]