1. Hum Brain Mapp. 2014 Nov;35(11):5414-30. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22560. Epub 2014 Jun
 7.

A brain-wide association study of DISC1 genetic variants reveals a relationship 
with the structure and functional connectivity of the precuneus in 
schizophrenia.

Gong X(1), Lu W, Kendrick KM, Pu W, Wang C, Jin L, Lu G, Liu Z, Liu H, Feng J.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Computational Systems Biology, School of Mathematical Sciences, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China; State Key Laboratory of Genetic 
Engineering and MOE Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, School of Life 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China.

The Disrupted in Schizophrenia Gene 1 (DISC1) plays a role in both neural 
signaling and development and is associated with schizophrenia, although its 
links to altered brain structure and function in this disorder are not fully 
established. Here we have used structural and functional MRI to investigate 
links with six DISC1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We employed a 
brain-wide association analysis (BWAS) together with a Jacknife internal 
validation approach in 46 schizophrenia patients and 24 matched healthy control 
subjects. Results from structural MRI showed significant associations between 
all six DISC1 variants and gray matter volume in the precuneus, post-central 
gyrus and middle cingulate gyrus. Associations with specific SNPs were found for 
rs2738880 in the left precuneus and right post-central gyrus, and rs1535530 in 
the right precuneus and middle cingulate gyrus. Using regions showing structural 
associations as seeds a resting-state functional connectivity analysis revealed 
significant associations between all 6 SNPS and connectivity between the right 
precuneus and inferior frontal gyrus. The connection between the right precuneus 
and inferior frontal gyrus was also specifically associated with rs821617. 
Importantly schizophrenia patients showed positive correlations between the six 
DISC-1 SNPs associated gray matter volume in the left precuneus and right 
post-central gyrus and negative symptom severity. No correlations with illness 
duration were found. Our results provide the first evidence suggesting a key 
role for structural and functional connectivity associations between DISC1 
polymorphisms and the precuneus in schizophrenia.

Copyright Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.22560
PMCID: PMC6869119
PMID: 24909300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]