1. Chem Phys Lipids. 2014 Oct;183:110-6. doi: 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2014.06.001. 
Epub 2014 Jun 4.

Peptidophospholipids: synthesis, phospholipase A2 catalyzed hydrolysis, and 
application to development of phospholipid prodrugs.

Rosseto R(1), Hajdu J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Center for Supramolecular Studies, 
California State University, Northridge, CA 91330, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Center for Supramolecular Studies, 
California State University, Northridge, CA 91330, USA. Electronic address: 
joseph.hajdu@csun.edu.

New phospholipid analogues incorporating sn-2-peptide substituents have been 
prepared to probe the fundamental structural requirements for phospholipase A2 
catalyzed hydrolysis of PLA2-directed synthetic substrates. Two structurally 
different antiviral oligopeptides with C-terminal glycine were introduced 
separately at the sn-2-carboxylic ester position of phospholipids to assess the 
role of the α-methylene group adjacent to the ester carbonyl in allowing 
hydrolytic cleavage by the enzyme. The oligopeptide-carrying phospholipid 
derivatives were readily incorporated into mixed micelles consisting of natural 
phospholipid (dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine, DPPC) and Triton X-100 as 
surfactant. Hydrolytic cleavage of the synthetic peptidophospholipids by the 
phospholipase A2 occurred slower, but within the same order of magnitude as the 
natural substrate alone. The results provide useful information toward better 
understanding the mechanism of action of the enzyme, and to improve the design 
and synthesis of phospholipid prodrugs targeted at secretory PLA2 enzymes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2014.06.001
PMCID: PMC4183669
PMID: 24905766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]