1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 9;9(6):e98713. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098713.
eCollection  2014.

β3-Adrenoreceptor stimulation protects against myocardial infarction injury via 
eNOS and nNOS activation.

Niu X(1), Zhao L(1), Li X(1), Xue Y(1), Wang B(1), Lv Z(2), Chen J(1), Sun D(3), 
Zheng Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tangdu Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(2)Cadet Brigade of Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

β3-adrenergic receptor (AR) and the downstream signaling, nitric oxide synthase 
(NOS) isoforms, have been emerged as novel modulators of heart function and even 
potential therapeutic targets for cardiovascular diseases. However, it is not 
known whether β3-AR plays cardioprotective effects against myocardial infarction 
(MI) injury. Therefore, the present study was designed to determine the effects 
of β3-AR on MI injury and to elucidate the underlying mechanism. MI model was 
constructed by left anterior descending (LAD) artery ligation. Animals were 
administrated with β3-AR agonist BRL37344 (BRL) or β3-AR inhibitor SR59230A (SR) 
respectively at 0.1 mg/kg/hour one day after MI operation. The scar area, 
cardiac function and the apoptosis of myocardial were assessed by Masson's 
trichrome stain, echocardiography and TUNEL assay respectively. Western blot 
analysis was performed to elucidate the expressions of target proteins. β3-AR 
activation with BRL administration significantly attenuated fibrosis and 
decreased scar area after MI. Moreover, BRL also preserved heart function, and 
reduced the apoptosis of cardiomyocyte induced by MI. Furthermore, BRL treatment 
altered the phosphorylation status of endothelial NOS (eNOS) and increased the 
expression of neuronal NOS (nNOS). These results suggested that β3-AR 
stimulation has a substantial effect on recovery of heart function. In addition, 
the activations of both eNOS and nNOS may be associated with the cardiac 
protective effects of β3-AR.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098713
PMCID: PMC4049583
PMID: 24911015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.