1. Viruses. 2014 Jun 6;6(6):2287-327. doi: 10.3390/v6062287.

Peste des petits ruminants virus infection of small ruminants: a comprehensive 
review.

Kumar N(1), Maherchandani S(2), Kashyap SK(3), Singh SV(4), Sharma S(5), Chaubey 
KK(6), Ly H(7).

Author information:
(1)Virology Laboratory, Division of Animal Health, Central Institute for 
Research on Goats, Makhdoom, P.O. Farah, Mathura, UP 281122, India. 
naveenkumar.icar@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Biotechnology, Rajasthan University 
of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Bikaner, Rajasthan 334001, India. 
smchandani86@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Biotechnology, Rajasthan University 
of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Bikaner, Rajasthan 334001, India. 
skkashyap3@rediffmail.com.
(4)Virology Laboratory, Division of Animal Health, Central Institute for 
Research on Goats, Makhdoom, P.O. Farah, Mathura, UP 281122, India. 
shoorvir.singh@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Biochemistry, Lala Lajpat Rai 
University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Hisar, Haryana 125004, India. 
shalinisharma12_vet@yahoo.co.in.
(6)Virology Laboratory, Division of Animal Health, Central Institute for 
Research on Goats, Makhdoom, P.O. Farah, Mathura, UP 281122, India. 
kundan2006chaubey@gmail.com.
(7)Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences Department, University of Minnesota, 1988 
Fitch Ave., Ste 295, Saint Paul, MN 55108, USA. hly@umn.edu.

Peste des petits ruminants (PPR) is caused by a Morbillivirus that belongs to 
the family Paramyxoviridae. PPR is an acute, highly contagious and fatal disease 
primarily affecting goats and sheep, whereas cattle undergo sub-clinical 
infection. With morbidity and mortality rates that can be as high as 90%, PPR is 
classified as an OIE (Office International des Epizooties)-listed disease. 
Considering the importance of sheep and goats in the livelihood of the poor and 
marginal farmers in Africa and South Asia, PPR is an important concern for food 
security and poverty alleviation. PPR virus (PPRV) and rinderpest virus (RPV) 
are closely related Morbilliviruses. Rinderpest has been globally eradicated by 
mass vaccination. Though a live attenuated vaccine is available against PPR for 
immunoprophylaxis, due to its instability in subtropical climate 
(thermo-sensitivity), unavailability of required doses and insufficient coverage 
(herd immunity), the disease control program has not been a great success. 
Further, emerging evidence of poor cross neutralization between vaccine strain 
and PPRV strains currently circulating in the field has raised concerns about 
the protective efficacy of the existing PPR vaccines. This review summarizes the 
recent advancement in PPRV replication, its pathogenesis, immune response to 
vaccine and disease control. Attempts have also been made to highlight the 
current trends in understanding the host susceptibility and resistance to PPR.

DOI: 10.3390/v6062287
PMCID: PMC4074929
PMID: 24915458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]