1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 12;9(6):e98350. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098350. 
eCollection 2014.

A replication study for genome-wide gene expression levels in two layer lines 
elucidates differentially expressed genes of pathways involved in bone 
remodeling and immune responsiveness.

Habig C(1), Geffers R(2), Distl O(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine 
Hannover (Foundation), Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany.

The current replication study confirmed significant differences in gene 
expression profiles of the cerebrum among the two commercial layer lines Lohmann 
Selected Leghorn (LSL) and Lohmann Brown (LB). Microarray analyses were 
performed for 30 LSL and another 30 LB laying hens kept in the small group 
housing system Eurovent German. A total of 14,103 microarray probe sets using 
customized Affymetrix ChiGene-1_0-st Arrays with 20,399 probe sets were 
differentially expressed among the two layer lines LSL and LB (FDR adjusted 
P-value <0.05). An at least 2-fold change in expression levels could be observed 
for 388 of these probe sets. In LSL, 214 of the 388 probe sets were down- and 
174 were up-regulated and vice versa for the LB layer line. Among the 174 
up-regulated probe sets in LSL, we identified 51 significantly enriched Gene 
ontology (GO) terms of the biological process category. A total of 63 enriched 
GO-terms could be identified for the 214 down-regulated probe sets of the layer 
line LSL. We identified nine genes significantly differentially expressed 
between the two layer lines in both microarray experiments. These genes play a 
crucial role in protection of neuronal cells from oxidative stress, bone mineral 
density and immune response among the two layer lines LSL and LB. Thus, the 
different regulation of these genes may significantly contribute to phenotypic 
trait differences among these layer lines. In conclusion, these novel findings 
provide a basis for further research to improve animal welfare in laying hens 
and these layer lines may be of general interest as an animal model.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098350
PMCID: PMC4055560
PMID: 24922511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.