1. Endocrinology. 2014 Sep;155(9):3713-24. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-2058. Epub 2014
Jun  16.

A rapid cytoplasmic mechanism for PI3 kinase regulation by the nuclear thyroid 
hormone receptor, TRβ, and genetic evidence for its role in the maturation of 
mouse hippocampal synapses in vivo.

Martin NP(1), Marron Fernandez de Velasco E, Mizuno F, Scappini EL, Gloss B, 
Erxleben C, Williams JG, Stapleton HM, Gentile S, Armstrong DL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurobiology (N.P.M., E.M.F.d.V., F.M., E.L.S., B.G., C.E., 
S.G., D.L.A.) and Laboratory of Structural Biology (J.G.W.), National Institute 
of Environmental Health and Sciences, National Institutes of Health/Department 
of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709; 
Nicholas School of the Environment (H.M.S.), Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27708; and Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Therapeutics 
(S.G.), Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois 60153.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2014 Sep;155(9):3206-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1597.

Several rapid physiological effects of thyroid hormone on mammalian cells in 
vitro have been shown to be mediated by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
(PI3K), but the molecular mechanism of PI3K regulation by nuclear zinc finger 
receptor proteins for thyroid hormone and its relevance to brain development in 
vivo have not been elucidated. Here we show that, in the absence of hormone, the 
thyroid hormone receptor TRβ forms a cytoplasmic complex with the p85 subunit of 
PI3K and the Src family tyrosine kinase, Lyn, which depends on two canonical 
phosphotyrosine motifs in the second zinc finger of TRβ that are not conserved 
in TRα. When hormone is added, TRβ dissociates and moves to the nucleus, and 
phosphatidylinositol (3, 4, 5)-trisphosphate production goes up rapidly. 
Mutating either tyrosine to a phenylalanine prevents rapid signaling through 
PI3K but does not prevent the hormone-dependent transcription of genes with a 
thyroid hormone response element. When the rapid signaling mechanism was blocked 
chronically throughout development in mice by a targeted point mutation in both 
alleles of Thrb, circulating hormone levels, TRβ expression, and direct gene 
regulation by TRβ in the pituitary and liver were all unaffected. However, the 
mutation significantly impaired maturation and plasticity of the Schaffer 
collateral synapses on CA1 pyramidal neurons in the postnatal hippocampus. Thus, 
phosphotyrosine-dependent association of TRβ with PI3K provides a potential 
mechanism for integrating regulation of development and metabolism by thyroid 
hormone and receptor tyrosine kinases.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2013-2058
PMCID: PMC4138568
PMID: 24932806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]