1. Biochemistry. 2014 Jul 15;53(27):4467-75. doi: 10.1021/bi500289h. Epub 2014
Jul  7.

Conserved glycine 232 in the ligand channel of ba3 cytochrome oxidase from 
Thermus thermophilus.

McDonald W(1), Funatogawa C, Li Y, Chen Y, Szundi I, Fee JA, Stout CD, 
Einarsd√≥ttir O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California , Santa 
Cruz, California 95064, United States.

Knowing how the protein environment modulates ligand pathways and redox centers 
in the respiratory heme-copper oxidases is fundamental for understanding the 
relationship between the structure and function of these enzymes. In this study, 
we investigated the reactions of O2 and NO with the fully reduced G232V mutant 
of ba3 cytochrome c oxidase from Thermus thermophilus (Tt ba3) in which a 
conserved glycine residue in the O2 channel of the enzyme was replaced with a 
bulkier valine residue. Previous studies of the homologous mutant of Rhodobacter 
sphaeroides aa3 cytochrome c oxidase suggested that the valine completely 
blocked the access of O2 to the active site [Salomonsson, L., et al. (2004) 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 11617-11621]. Using photolabile O2 and NO 
carriers, we find by using time-resolved optical absorption spectroscopy that 
the rates of O2 and NO binding are not significantly affected in the Tt ba3 
G232V mutant. Classical molecular dynamics simulations of diffusion of O2 to the 
active site in the wild-type enzyme and G232V mutant show that the insertion of 
the larger valine residue in place of the glycine appears to open up other O2 
and NO exit/entrance pathways that allow these ligands unhindered access to the 
active site, thus compensating for the larger valine residue.

DOI: 10.1021/bi500289h
PMCID: PMC4216187
PMID: 24937405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]