1. Cancer. 2014 Nov 15;120(22):3446-56. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28864. Epub 2014 Jun
19.

The MAPK pathway across different malignancies: a new perspective.

Burotto M(1), Chiou VL, Lee JM, Kohn EC.

Author information:
(1)Women's Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated (MAPK/ERK) 
pathway is activated by upstream genomic events and/or activation of multiple 
signaling events in which information coalesces at this important nodal pathway 
point. This pathway is tightly regulated under normal conditions by phosphatases 
and bidirectional communication with other pathways, like the protein kinase 
B/mammalian target of rapamycin (AKT/m-TOR) pathway. Recent evidence indicates 
that the MAPK/ERK signaling node can function as a tumor suppressor as well as 
the more common pro-oncogenic signal. The effect that predominates depends on 
the intensity of the signal and the context or tissue in which the signal is 
aberrantly activated. Genomic profiling of tumors has revealed common mutations 
in MAPK/ERK pathway components, such as v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene 
homolog B1 (BRAF). Currently approved for the treatment of melanoma, inhibitors 
of BRAF kinase are being studied alone and in combination with inhibitors of the 
MAPK and other pathways to optimize the treatment of many tumor types. Therapies 
targeted toward MAPK/ERK components have various response rates when used in 
different solid tumors, such as colorectal cancer and ovarian cancer. 
Understanding the differential nature of activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway in 
each tumor type is critical in developing single and combination regimens, 
because different tumors have unique mechanisms of primary and secondary 
signaling and subsequent sensitivity to drugs.

Â© 2014 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28864
PMCID: PMC4221543
PMID: 24948110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]