1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 15;289(33):22900-22914. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.557900.
Epub  2014 Jun 23.

Engagement of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 1 
(NOD1) by receptor-interacting protein 2 (RIP2) is insufficient for signal 
transduction.

Mayle S(1), Boyle JP(1), Sekine E(1), Zurek B(2), Kufer TA(2), Monie TP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1GA, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of 
Cologne, Goldenfelsstrasse 19-21, 50935 Köln, Germany, and.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1GA, 
United Kingdom,; Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge CB3 0ES, United Kingdom. Electronic address: tpm22@cam.ac.uk.

Following activation, the cytoplasmic pattern recognition receptor 
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 1 (NOD1) interacts 
with its adaptor protein receptor-interacting protein 2 (RIP2) to propagate 
immune signaling and initiate a proinflammatory immune response. This 
interaction is mediated by the caspase recruitment domain (CARD) of both 
proteins. Polymorphisms in immune proteins can affect receptor function and 
predispose individuals to specific autoinflammatory disorders. In this report, 
we show that mutations in helix 2 of the CARD of NOD1 disrupted receptor 
function but did not interfere with RIP2 interaction. In particular, N43S, a 
rare polymorphism, resulted in receptor dysfunction despite retaining normal 
cellular localization, protein folding, and an ability to interact with RIP2. 
Mutation of Asn-43 resulted in an increased tendency to form dimers, which we 
propose is the source of this dysfunction. We also demonstrate that mutation of 
Lys-443 and Tyr-474 in RIP2 disrupted the interaction with NOD1. Mapping the key 
residues involved in the interaction between NOD1 and RIP2 to the known 
structures of CARD complexes revealed the likely involvement of both type I and 
type III interfaces in the NOD1·RIP2 complex. Overall we demonstrate that the 
NOD1-RIP2 signaling axis is more complex than previously assumed, that simple 
engagement of RIP2 is insufficient to mediate signaling, and that the 
interaction between NOD1 and RIP2 constitutes multiple CARD-CARD interfaces.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.557900
PMCID: PMC4132792
PMID: 24958724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]