1. Oncol Lett. 2014 Jul;8(1):327-334. doi: 10.3892/ol.2014.2107. Epub 2014 Apr
30.

Important factors for achieving survival of five years or more in non-small cell 
lung cancer patients with distant metastasis.

Hirashima T(1), Suzuki H(1), Okamoto N(1), Morishita N(1), Yamadori T(1), Tamiya 
M(1), Shiroyama T(1), Kurata K(1), Kawase I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Malignancy, Osaka Prefectural Medical Center for 
Respiratory and Allergic Diseases, Habikino-shi, Osaka 583-8588, Japan.

In order to examine which factors were important for achieving a ≥5 year 
survival time in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with distant 
metastasis, 268 NSCLC patients who received first-line chemotherapy between 
January 2004 and December 2007 were retrospectively examined. The median 
survival time of the patients was 14 months, with 22 surviving for ≥5 years, 48 
for ≥2 years, but <5 years, and 198 surviving <2 years. Multivariate analysis 
determined that never having smoked, a good performance status, relapse 
following thoracic surgery and intra-thoracic metastasis were significantly 
favorable prognostic factors, while abdominal metastasis was a significantly 
poor prognostic factor. The ≥5 years and ≥2-5 years groups had significantly 
more favorable prognostic factors than the <2 years group. The never-smoked 
status was a particularly important factor for ≥5 years of survival. The ≥5 
years and ≥2-5 years groups achieved a significantly more favorable response to 
first-line chemotherapy, and a greater number of regimens, total months of 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) 
treatment and cytotoxic agent treatment cycles compared with the <2 years group. 
In total, ~50% of the patients received palliative radiotherapy. In the ≥5 years 
group, patients with EGFR drug-sensitive mutations achieved ≥5 years of survival 
mainly by EGFR-TKI therapy, while those without EGFR mutations achieved ≥5 years 
of survival by continuing effective cytotoxic agents. Achievement of >5 years of 
survival was found to correlate with the presence of favorable prognostic 
factors, response to first-line chemotherapy, provision of appropriate EGFR-TKI 
therapy according to genetic testing results, continuing effective cytotoxic 
regimens and the use of radiotherapy as local therapy.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2014.2107
PMCID: PMC4063572
PMID: 24959271