1. BMC Syst Biol. 2014 Jul 7;8:82. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-82.

Integrative analysis of differential miRNA and functional study of miR-21 by 
seed-targeting inhibition in multiple myeloma cells in response to berberine.

Luo X, Gu J, Zhu R, Feng M, Zhu X, Li Y, Fei J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Jinan 
University, Guangzhou 510632, China. efeijia@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Berberine is a natural alkaloid derived from a traditional Chinese 
herbal medicine. It is known to modulate microRNA (miRNA) levels, although the 
mechanism for this action is unknown. Here, we previously demonstrate that the 
expression of 87 miRNAs is differentially affected by berberine in multiple 
myeloma cells. Among 49 miRNAs that are down-regulated, nine act as oncomirs, 
including miR-21. Integrative analysis showed that 28 of the down-regulated 
miRNAs participate in tumor protein p53 (TP53) signaling and other cancer 
pathways. miR-21 is involved in all these pathways, and is one of the most 
important oncomirs to be affected by berberine in multiple myeloma cells.
RESULTS: We confirmed that berberine down-regulated miRNA-21 expression and 
significantly up-regulated the expression of programmed cell death 4 (PDCD4), a 
predicted miR-21 target. Luciferase reporter assays confirmed that PDCD4 was 
directly regulated by miR-21. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that the miR-21 
promoter can be targeted by signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 
(STAT3). Down-regulation of interleukin 6 (IL6) by berberine might lead to 
inhibition of miR-21 transcription through STAT3 down-regulation in multiple 
myeloma. Furthermore, both berberine and seed-targeting anti-miR-21 
oligonucleotide induced apoptosis, G2-phase cell cycle arrest and colony 
inhibition in multiple myeloma cell lines. Depletion of PDCD4 by short 
interfering RNA could rescue berberine-induced cytotoxicity in multiple myeloma 
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that berberine suppresses multiple myeloma cell 
growth, at least in part, by down-regulating miR-21 levels possibly through 
IL6/STAT3. This led to increased PDCD4 expression, which is likely to result in 
suppression of the p53 signaling pathway. These findings may also provide new 
mechanistic insight into the anti-cancer effects of certain compounds in 
traditional Chinese herbal medicines.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-82
PMCID: PMC4096730
PMID: 25000828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]