1. Biochem J. 2014 Oct 1;463(1):83-92. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140169.

Influence of association state and DNA binding on the O₂-reactivity of [4Fe-4S] 
fumarate and nitrate reduction (FNR) regulator.

Crack JC(1), Stapleton MR(2), Green J(2), Thomson AJ(1), Le Brun NE(1).

Author information:
(1)*Centre for Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, School of Chemistry, 
University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7TJ, U.K.
(2)†Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield S10 2TN, U.K.

The fumarate and nitrate reduction (FNR) regulator is the master switch for the 
transition between anaerobic and aerobic respiration in Escherichia coli. 
Reaction of dimeric [4Fe-4S] FNR with O2 results in conversion of the cluster 
into a [2Fe-2S] form, via a [3Fe-4S] intermediate, leading to the loss of DNA 
binding through dissociation of the dimer into monomers. In the present paper, 
we report studies of two previously identified variants of FNR, D154A and I151A, 
in which the form of the cluster is decoupled from the association state. In 
vivo studies of permanently dimeric D154A FNR show that DNA binding does not 
affect the rate of cluster incorporation into the apoprotein or the rate of 
O2-mediated cluster loss. In vitro studies show that O2-mediated cluster 
conversion for D154A and the permanent monomer I151A FNR is the same as in 
wild-type FNR, but with altered kinetics. Decoupling leads to an increase in the 
rate of the [3Fe-4S]1+ into [2Fe-2S]2+ conversion step, consistent with the 
suggestion that this step drives association state changes in the wild-type 
protein. We have also shown that DNA-bound FNR reacts more rapidly with O2 than 
FNR free in solution, implying that transcriptionally active FNR is the 
preferred target for reaction with O2.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20140169
PMCID: PMC4214427
PMID: 25019503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]