1. Cell. 2014 Jul 31;158(3):593-606. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.049.

Genome-wide mapping and characterization of Notch-regulated long noncoding RNAs 
in acute leukemia.

Trimarchi T(1), Bilal E(2), Ntziachristos P(1), Fabbri G(3), Dalla-Favera R(3), 
Tsirigos A(4), Aifantis I(5).

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, 
and Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU School of 
Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA; Department of Pathology, 
NYU School of Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(2)Computational Biology Center, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, 1101 
Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA.
(3)Institute for Cancer Genetics and the Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Columbia University, 1130 St. Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, NYU School of Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, 
NY 10016, USA; Center for Health Informatics and Bioinformatics, NYU School of 
Medicine, 227 East 30(th) Street, New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic address: 
aristotelis.tsirigos@nyumc.org.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, 
and Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU School of 
Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA; Department of Pathology, 
NYU School of Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic 
address: iannis.aifantis@nyumc.org.

Notch signaling is a key developmental pathway that is subject to frequent 
genetic and epigenetic perturbations in many different human tumors. Here we 
investigate whether long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) genes, in addition to mRNAs, are 
key downstream targets of oncogenic Notch1 in human T cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (T-ALL). By integrating transcriptome profiles with chromatin state 
maps, we have uncovered many previously unreported T-ALL-specific lncRNA genes, 
a fraction of which are directly controlled by the Notch1/Rpbjκ activator 
complex. Finally we have shown that one specific Notch-regulated lncRNA, LUNAR1, 
is required for efficient T-ALL growth in vitro and in vivo due to its ability 
to enhance IGF1R mRNA expression and sustain IGF1 signaling. These results 
confirm that lncRNAs are important downstream targets of the Notch signaling 
pathway, and additionally they are key regulators of the oncogenic state in 
T-ALL.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.049
PMCID: PMC4131209
PMID: 25083870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]