1. Eur J Med Chem. 2015 Feb 16;91:51-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.07.094. Epub 
2014 Jul 27.

Dynamics differentiate between active and inactive inteins.

Cronin M(1), Coolbaugh MJ(2), Nellis D(3), Zhu J(4), Wood DW(2), Nussinov R(5), 
Ma B(6).

Author information:
(1)Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Cancer and 
Inflammation Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(3)Biopharmaceutical Development Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., 
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 DongChuan Road, 
Shanghai 200240, China.
(5)Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Cancer and 
Inflammation Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA; 
Sackler Inst. of Molecular Medicine, Department of Human Genetics and Molecular 
Medicine, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, 
Israel.
(6)Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Cancer and 
Inflammation Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. 
Electronic address: mabuyong@mail.nih.gov.

The balance between stability and dynamics for active enzymes can be somewhat 
quantified by studies of intein splicing and cleaving reactions. Inteins 
catalyze the ligation of flanking host exteins while excising themselves. The 
potential for applications led to engineering of a mini-intein splicing domain, 
where the homing endonuclease domain of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis RecA (Mtu 
recA) intein was removed. The remaining domains were linked by several short 
peptides, but splicing activity in all was substantially lower than the 
full-length intein. Native splicing activity was restored in some cases by a 
V67L mutation. Using computations and experiments, we examine the impact of this 
mutation on the stability and conformational dynamics of the mini-intein 
splicing domain. Molecular dynamics simulations were used to delineate the 
factors that determine the active state, including the V67L mini-intein mutant, 
and peptide linker. We found that (1) the V67L mutation lowers the global 
fluctuations in all modeled mini-inteins, stabilizing the mini-intein 
constructs; (2) the connecting linker length affects intein dynamics; and (3) 
the flexibilities of the linker and intein core are higher in the active 
structure. We have observed that the interaction of the linker region and a turn 
region around residues 35-41 provides the pathway for the allostery interaction. 
Our experiments reveal that intein catalysis is characterized by non-linear 
Arrhenius plot, confirming the significant contribution of protein 
conformational dynamics to intein function. We conclude that while the V67L 
mutation stabilizes the global structure, cooperative dynamics of all intein 
regions appear more important for intein function than high stability. Our 
studies suggest that effectively quenching the conformational dynamics of an 
intein through engineered allosteric interactions could deactivate intein 
splicing or cleaving.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.07.094
PMCID: PMC4308580
PMID: 25087201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]