1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2014 Nov;23:49-58. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2014.07.009. Epub 
2014 Aug 2.

Regulation of NAD+ metabolism, signaling and compartmentalization in the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Kato M(1), Lin SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of Biological 
Sciences, University of California, One Shields Ave., Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of Biological 
Sciences, University of California, One Shields Ave., Davis, CA 95616, USA. 
Electronic address: slin@ucdavis.edu.

Pyridine nucleotides are essential coenzymes in many cellular redox reactions in 
all living systems. In addition to functioning as a redox carrier, NAD(+) is 
also a required co-substrate for the conserved sirtuin deacetylases. Sirtuins 
regulate transcription, genome maintenance and metabolism and function as 
molecular links between cells and their environment. Maintaining NAD(+) 
homeostasis is essential for proper cellular function and aberrant NAD(+) 
metabolism has been implicated in a number of metabolic- and age-associated 
diseases. Recently, NAD(+) metabolism has been linked to the 
phosphate-responsive signaling pathway (PHO pathway) in the budding yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Activation of the PHO pathway is associated with the 
production and mobilization of the NAD(+) metabolite nicotinamide riboside (NR), 
which is mediated in part by PHO-regulated nucleotidases. Cross-regulation 
between NAD(+) metabolism and the PHO pathway has also been reported; however, 
detailed mechanisms remain to be elucidated. The PHO pathway also appears to 
modulate the activities of common downstream effectors of multiple 
nutrient-sensing pathways (Ras-PKA, TOR, Sch9/AKT). These signaling pathways 
were suggested to play a role in calorie restriction-mediated beneficial 
effects, which have also been linked to Sir2 function and NAD(+) metabolism. 
Here, we discuss the interactions of these pathways and their potential roles in 
regulating NAD(+) metabolism. In eukaryotic cells, intracellular 
compartmentalization facilitates the regulation of enzymatic functions and also 
concentrates or sequesters specific metabolites. Various NAD(+)-mediated 
cellular functions such as mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation are 
compartmentalized. Therefore, we also discuss several key players functioning in 
mitochondrial, cytosolic and vacuolar compartmentalization of NAD(+) 
intermediates, and their potential roles in NAD(+) homeostasis. To date, it 
remains unclear how NAD(+) and NAD(+) intermediates shuttle between different 
cellular compartments. Together, these studies provide a molecular basis for how 
NAD(+) homeostasis factors and the interacting signaling pathways confer 
metabolic flexibility and contribute to maintaining cell fitness and genome 
stability.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2014.07.009
PMCID: PMC4254062
PMID: 25096760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare that no conflicts of interest exist.