1. J Org Chem. 2014 Oct 17;79(20):9444-50. doi: 10.1021/jo501481r. Epub 2014 Aug 
26.

Synthesis of a poly-hydroxypyrolidine-based inhibitor of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis GlgE.

Veleti SK(1), Lindenberger JJ, Thanna S, Ronning DR, Sucheck SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, School of Green Chemistry and 
Engineering, The University of Toledo , 2801 West Bancroft Street, Toledo, Ohio 
43606, United States.

Long treatment times, poor drug compliance, and natural selection during 
treatment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) have given rise to extensively 
drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB). As a result, there is a need to identify 
new antituberculosis drug targets. Mtb GlgE is a maltosyl transferase involved 
in α-glucan biosynthesis. Mutation of GlgE in Mtb increases the concentration of 
maltose-1-phosphate (M1P), one substrate for GlgE, causing rapid cell death. We 
have designed 2,5-dideoxy-3-O-α-d-glucopyranosyl-2,5-imino-d-mannitol (9) to act 
as an inhibitor of GlgE. Compound 9 was synthesized using a convergent synthesis 
by coupling thioglycosyl donor 14 and 
5-azido-3-O-benzyl-5-deoxy-1,2-O-isopropylidene-β-d-fructopyranose (23) to form 
disaccharide 24. A reduction and intramolecular reductive amination transformed 
the intermediate disaccharide 24 to the desired pyrolidine 9. Compound 9 
inhibited both Mtb GlgE and a variant of Streptomyces coelicolor (Sco) GlgEI 
with Ki = 237 ± 27 μM and Ki = 102 ± 7.52 μM, respectively. The results confirm 
that a Sco GlgE-V279S variant can be used as a model for Mtb GlgE. In 
conclusion, we designed a lead transition state inhibitor of GlgE, which will be 
instrumental in further elucidation of the enzymatic mechanism of Mtb GlgE.

DOI: 10.1021/jo501481r
PMCID: PMC4201354
PMID: 25137149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]