1. J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol. 2014 Sep;25(3):289-92. doi: 
10.1515/jbcpp-2014-0053.

Apparent phenotypic anticipation in autosomal dominant connexin 26 deafness.

Sokolov M, Brownstein Z, Frydman M, Avraham KB.

BACKGROUND: Connexin 26 (GJB2) mutations are associated with various types of 
hearing loss, either without associated symptoms or with skin disease, 
constituting a form of syndromic hearing loss. These mutations can lead to 
deafness in either a recessive or a dominant autosomal form of inheritance.
METHODS: Ascertainment of a Jewish Ashkenazi family with nonsyndromic hearing 
loss led to the construction of a pedigree for a four-generation family, with 
hearing loss detected in three successive generations. The entire coding region 
of the GJB2 gene was amplified and sequenced by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: Audiological analysis revealed that the age of onset and severity of 
hearing loss were earlier and more severe, respectively, in each successive 
generation of an Ashkenazi Jewish family. A mutation, c.224G>A, leading to 
missense p.Arg75Gln was detected only in the affected members of the family.
CONCLUSIONS: The entire coding region of GJB2 should be checked in 
hearing-impaired patients by Sanger sequencing, rather than examination only of 
the two most prevalent mutations, regardless of mode of inheritance or 
ethnicity. Furthermore, predictions regarding phenotype based on genotype can be 
difficult to make due to clinical variability in multigenerational families, as 
demonstrated in the family presented in this study.

DOI: 10.1515/jbcpp-2014-0053
PMCID: PMC5916754
PMID: 25153233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement Authorsâ€™ conflict 
of interest disclosure: The authors stated that there are no conflicts of 
interest regarding the publication of this article. Research funding: None 
declared. Employment or leadership: None declared. Honorarium: None declared.