1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2014 Aug 25;11(9):8645-60. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph110908645.

Clinical and metabolic parameters in non-small cell lung carcinoma and 
colorectal cancer patients with and without KRAS mutations.

Yilmaz A(1), Mohamed N(2), Patterson KA(3), Tang Y(4), Shilo K(5), 
Villalona-Calero MA(6), Davis ME(7), Zhou XP(8), Frankel W(9), Otterson GA(10), 
Zhao W(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
Ahmet.Yilmaz2@osumc.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
Nehad.Mohamed@osumc.edu.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
Kara.Patterson@osumc.edu.
(4)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
Yan.Tang@osumc.edu.
(5)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
Konstantin.Shilo@osumc.edu.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA. Miguel.Villalona@osumc.edu.
(7)Department of Animal Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA. Davis.28@osu.edu.
(8)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
Xiao-Ping.Zhou@osumc.edu.
(9)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
Wendy.Frankel@osumc.edu.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA. Greg.Otterson@osumc.edu.
(11)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
Weiqiang.Zhao@osumc.edu.

Lung cancer (LC) and colorectal cancer (CRC) are the first and second deadliest 
types of cancer worldwide. EGFR-based therapy has been used in the treatment of 
these cancers with variable success. Presence of mutations in the KRAS driver 
oncogene, possibly induced by environmental factors such as carcinogens in diet 
and cigarette smoke, may confer worse prognosis and resistance to treatment for 
reasons not fully understood. Data on possible associations between KRAS 
mutational status and clinical and metabolic parameters, which may help in 
clinical management, as well as in identifying risk factors for developing these 
cancers, are limited in the current literature. We sequenced the KRAS gene and 
investigated the associations of variations in 108 patients with non-small cell 
lung carcinoma (NSCLC), the most common form of LC, and in 116 patients with 
CRC. All of the mutations originated from the guanosine nucleotide and over half 
of all transversions in NSCLC and CRC were c.34 G>T and c.35 G>T, respectively. 
c.35 G>A was the most frequent type of transition in both cancers. Excluding 
smoking, the clinical and metabolic parameters in patients carrying mutant and 
wild type KRAS were similar except that the CRC patients with transversion 
mutations were 8.6 years younger than those carrying the transitions (P < 0.01). 
Dyslipidemia, hypertension, family cancer history, and age of diagnosis older 
than 60 years were more frequent in NSCLC than CRC (P â‰¤ 0.04). These results 
suggest that most of the clinical and metabolic parameters investigated in this 
study are probably not associated with the more aggressive phenotype and 
differences in response to EGFR-based treatment previously reported in patients 
with KRAS mutations. However, the increased rates of abnormal metabolic 
parameters in patients with NSCLC in comparison to CRC indicate that these 
parameters may be more important in the management of NSCLC. CRC patients 
carrying transition mutations are older than those carrying transversions, 
suggesting that age may determine the type of KRAS mutation in CRC patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph110908645
PMCID: PMC4198984
PMID: 25158139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]