1. J Trauma Stress. 2014 Aug;27(4):379-87. doi: 10.1002/jts.21937.

The dopamine D3 receptor gene and posttraumatic stress disorder.

Wolf EJ(1), Mitchell KS, Logue MW, Baldwin CT, Reardon AF, Aiello A, Galea S, 
Koenen KC, Uddin M, Wildman D, Miller MW.

Author information:
(1)National Center for PTSD at VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The dopamine D3 receptor (DRD3) gene has been implicated in schizophrenia, 
autism, and substance use-disorders and is related to emotion reactivity, 
executive functioning, and stress-responding, processes impaired in 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The aim of this candidate gene study was 
to evaluate DRD3 polymorphisms for association with PTSD. The discovery sample 
was trauma-exposed White, non-Hispanic U.S. veterans and their trauma-exposed 
intimate partners (N = 491); 60.3% met criteria for lifetime PTSD. The 
replication sample was 601 trauma-exposed African American participants living 
in Detroit, Michigan; 23.6% met criteria for lifetime PTSD. Genotyping was based 
on high-density bead chips. In the discovery sample, 4 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), rs2134655, rs201252087, rs4646996, and rs9868039, showed 
evidence of association with PTSD and withstood correction for multiple testing. 
The minor alleles were associated with reduced risk for PTSD (OR range = 0.59 to 
0.69). In the replication sample, rs2251177, located 149 base pairs away from 
the most significant SNP in the discovery sample, was nominally associated with 
PTSD in men (OR = 0.32). Although the precise role of the D3 receptor in PTSD is 
not yet known, its role in executive functioning and emotional reactivity, and 
the sensitivity of the dopamine system to environmental stressors could 
potentially explain this association.

Published 2014. This article is a US Government work and is in the public domain 
in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/jts.21937
PMCID: PMC4147673
PMID: 25158632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]