1. Virol J. 2014 Aug 31;11:155. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-11-155.

Nuclear localized Influenza nucleoprotein N-terminal deletion mutant is 
deficient in functional vRNP formation.

Sanchez A, Guerrero-Juarez CF, Ramirez J, Newcomb LL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, California State University San Bernardino, 5500 
University Parkway, San Bernardino, CA 92407, USA. lnewcomb@csusb.edu.

BACKGROUND: The influenza RNA dependent RNA polymerase synthesizes viral RNA in 
the nucleus as functional viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complexes with RNA and 
nucleoprotein (NP). The N-terminus of NP contains an unconventional nuclear 
localization signal (NLS) important for initial vRNP nuclear localization but 
which also interacts with various host factors.
METHODS: To study the role of the N-terminus of NP aside from NLS function, we 
generated an N-terminal NP deletion mutant, del20NLS-NP, encoding the 
conventional SV40 T-antigen NLS in place of the first 20 amino acids of NP. We 
characterized expression, location, and activity of del20NLS-NP compared to wild 
type NP using reconstituted vRNP assays, cellular fractionation, Western 
blotting, and reverse transcription-PCR. We assessed NP nucleotide binding with 
gel-shift assays and analyzed NP complexes using 1D blue native gel 
electrophoresis.
RESULTS: del20NLS-NP is expressed, localized in the nucleus and cytoplasm, and 
maintains ability to bind nucleic acids. Despite this, del20NLS-NP exhibits a 
defect in viral RNA expression exacerbated by increasing vRNA template length. 
We find diminished del20NLS-NP high molecular weight complexes in protein 
extracts; evidence the defect is with functional vRNP formation. Interestingly, 
the shortest template, NS vRNA, exhibits a limited defect. However, this is not 
due to short template size, but rather activity of the NS protein(s). Expression 
of NS1 rescues the gene expression defect primarily at the protein level, a 
finding consistent with the known role of NS1 as a viral mRNA translational 
enhancer. NS1 mutant analysis confirms NS1-RNA binding is not required for the 
translational enhancement and reveals the NS1-CPSF30 interaction surface is 
essential.
CONCLUSIONS: del20NLS-NP is a nuclear localized NP mutant able to bind nucleic 
acids but inefficient for assembly of functional vRNPs inside the host cell. Our 
results add to growing evidence the N-terminus of NP plays important roles aside 
from vRNP nuclear localization. We demonstrate the utility of this partially 
functional NP mutant to characterize the influence of additional proteins on 
viral gene expression. Our studies reveal the NS1-CPSF30 interaction surface is 
required for the ability of NS1 to enhance viral protein translation, supporting 
a function for this NS1 domain in the cytoplasm.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-11-155
PMCID: PMC4177073
PMID: 25174360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]