1. Int J Oncol. 2014 Nov;45(5):2013-23. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2618. Epub 2014 Aug
 22.

MicroRNA-29b-1 impairs in vitro cell proliferation, self‑renewal and 
chemoresistance of human osteosarcoma 3AB-OS cancer stem cells.

Di Fiore R(1), Drago-Ferrante R(1), Pentimalli F(2), Di Marzo D(2), Forte IM(2), 
D'Anneo A(1), Carlisi D(3), De Blasio A(1), Giuliano M(1), Tesoriere G(4), 
Giordano A(2), Vento R(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Biological, Chemical and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technologies, University of Palermo, Polyclinic, 
Palermo, Italy.
(2)INT-CROM, 'Pascale Foundation', National Cancer Institute - Cancer Research 
Center, Mercogliano, Avellino, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Experimental Biomedicine and 
Clinical Neurosciences, University of Palermo, Polyclinic, Palermo, Italy.
(4)Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine and Center of 
Biotechnology - College of Science and Biotechnology, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common type of bone cancer, with a peak incidence 
in the early childhood. Emerging evidence suggests that treatments targeting 
cancer stem cells (CSCs) within a tumor can halt cancer and improve patient 
survival. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been implicated in the maintenance of the CSC 
phenotype, thus, identification of CSC-related miRNAs would provide information 
for a better understanding of CSCs. Downregulation of miRNA-29 family members 
(miR-29a/b/c; miR‑29s) was observed in human OS, however, little is known about 
the functions of miR-29s in human OS CSCs. Previously, during the 
characterization of 3AB-OS cells, a CSC line selected from human OS MG63 cells, 
we showed a potent downregulation of miR-29b. In this study, after stable 
transfection of 3AB-OS cells with miR-29b-1, we investigated the role of 
miR-29b-1 in regulating cell proliferation, sarcosphere-forming ability, 
clonogenic growth, chemosensitivity, migration and invasive ability of 3AB-OS 
cells, in vitro. We found that, miR-29b-1 overexpression consistently reduced 
both, 3AB-OS CSCs growth in two- and three-dimensional culture systems and their 
sarcosphere- and colony-forming ability. In addition, while miR-29b-1 
overexpression sensitized 3AB-OS cells to chemotherapeutic drug-induced 
apoptosis, it did not influence their migratory and invasive capacities, thus 
suggesting a context-depending role of miR-29b-1. Using publicly available 
databases, we proceeded to identify potential miR-29b target genes, known to 
play a role in the above reported functions. Among these targets we analyzed 
CD133, N-Myc, CCND2, E2F1 and E2F2, Bcl-2 and IAP-2. We also analyzed the most 
important stemness markers as Oct3/4, Sox2 and Nanog. Real-time RT-PCR and 
western-blot analyses showed that miR-29b-1 negatively regulated the expression 
of these markers. Overall, the results show that miR-29b-1 suppresses stemness 
properties of 3AB-OS CSCs and suggest that developing miR-29b-1 as a novel 
therapeutic agent might offer benefits for OS treatment.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2618
PMCID: PMC4432724
PMID: 25174983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]