1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2014 Oct;22:137-46. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2014.07.015. Epub
 2014 Sep 3.

Multimerization domains are associated with apparent strand exchange activity in 
BLM and WRN DNA helicases.

Chen CF(1), Brill SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers University, 
Piscataway, NJ, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers University, 
Piscataway, NJ, United States. Electronic address: brill@cabm.rutgers.edu.

BLM and WRN are members of the RecQ family of DNA helicases that act to suppress 
genome instability and cancer predisposition. In addition to a RecQ helicase 
domain, each of these proteins contains an N-terminal domain of approximately 
500 amino acids (aa) that is incompletely characterized. Previously, we showed 
that the N-terminus of Sgs1, the yeast ortholog of BLM, contains a 
physiologically important 200 aa domain (Sgs1103-322) that displays 
single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) binding, strand annealing (SA), and apparent 
strand-exchange (SE) activities in vitro. Here we used a genetic assay to search 
for heterologous proteins that could functionally replace this domain of Sgs1 in 
vivo. In contrast to Rad59, the oligomeric Rad52 protein provided in vivo 
complementation, suggesting that multimerization is functionally important. An 
N-terminal domain of WRN was also identified that could replace Sgs1103-322 in 
yeast. This domain, WRN235-526, contains a known coiled coil and displays the 
same SA and SE activities as Sgs1103-322. The coiled coil domain of WRN235-526 
is required for both its in vivo activity and its in vitro SE activity. Based on 
this result, a potential coiled coil was identified within Sgs1103-322. This 25 
amino acid region was similarly essential for wt Sgs1 activity in vivo and was 
replaceable by a heterologous coiled coil. Taken together, the results indicate 
that a coiled coil and a closely linked apparent SE activity are conserved 
features of the BLM and WRN DNA helicases.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2014.07.015
PMCID: PMC4174979
PMID: 25198671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]