1. Front Genet. 2014 Aug 21;5:287. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00287. eCollection
2014.

The dual nature of mismatch repair as antimutator and mutator: for better or for 
worse.

Bak ST(1), Sakellariou D(1), Pena-Diaz J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology and Center for Healthy Aging, 
University of Copenhagen Copenhagen, Denmark.

DNA is constantly under attack by a number of both exogenous and endogenous 
agents that challenge its integrity. Among the mechanisms that have evolved to 
counteract this deleterious action, mismatch repair (MMR) has specialized in 
removing DNA biosynthetic errors that occur when replicating the genome. 
Malfunction or inactivation of this system results in an increase in spontaneous 
mutability and a strong predisposition to tumor development. Besides this key 
corrective role, MMR proteins are involved in other pathways of DNA metabolism 
such as mitotic and meiotic recombination and processing of oxidative damage. 
Surprisingly, MMR is also required for certain mutagenic processes. The 
mutagenic MMR has beneficial consequences contributing to the generation of a 
vast repertoire of antibodies through class switch recombination and somatic 
hypermutation processes. However, this non-canonical mutagenic MMR also has 
detrimental effects; it promotes repeat expansions associated with neuromuscular 
and neurodegenerative diseases and may contribute to cancer/disease-related 
aberrant mutations and translocations. The reaction responsible for replication 
error correction has been the most thoroughly studied and it is the subject to 
numerous reviews. This review describes briefly the biochemistry of MMR and 
focuses primarily on the non-canonical MMR activities described in mammals as 
well as emerging research implicating interplay of MMR and chromatin.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00287
PMCID: PMC4139959
PMID: 25191341