1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 18;10(9):e1004627. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004627. 
eCollection 2014 Sep.

Atkinesin-13A modulates cell-wall synthesis and cell expansion in Arabidopsis 
thaliana via the THESEUS1 pathway.

Fujikura U(1), Elsaesser L(2), Breuninger H(1), Sánchez-Rodríguez C(3), Ivakov 
A(3), Laux T(2), Findlay K(4), Persson S(5), Lenhard M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Universität Potsdam, Potsdam-Golm, 
Germany.
(2)BIOSS Centre for Biological Signaling Studies, Faculty of Biology, 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Potsdam-Golm, 
Germany.
(4)Cell & Developmental Biology Department, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research 
Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(5)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Potsdam-Golm, 
Germany; ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Cell Walls, School of Botany, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Growth of plant organs relies on cell proliferation and expansion. While an 
increasingly detailed picture about the control of cell proliferation is 
emerging, our knowledge about the control of cell expansion remains more 
limited. We demonstrate here that the internal-motor kinesin AtKINESIN-13A 
(AtKIN13A) limits cell expansion and cell size in Arabidopsis thaliana, with 
loss-of-function atkin13a mutants forming larger petals with larger cells. The 
homolog, AtKINESIN-13B, also affects cell expansion and double mutants display 
growth, gametophytic and early embryonic defects, indicating a redundant role of 
the two genes. AtKIN13A is known to depolymerize microtubules and influence 
Golgi motility and distribution. Consistent with this function, AtKIN13A 
interacts genetically with ANGUSTIFOLIA, encoding a regulator of Golgi dynamics. 
Reduced AtKIN13A activity alters cell wall structure as assessed by 
Fourier-transformed infrared-spectroscopy and triggers signalling via the 
THESEUS1-dependent cell-wall integrity pathway, which in turn promotes the 
excess cell expansion in the atkin13a mutant. Thus, our results indicate that 
the intracellular activity of AtKIN13A regulates cell expansion and wall 
architecture via THESEUS1, providing a compelling case of interplay between cell 
wall integrity sensing and expansion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004627
PMCID: PMC4169273
PMID: 25232944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.