1. J Neurosci. 2014 Sep 17;34(38):12893-903. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1201-14.2014.

Intracellular accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) protein plays a major role in 
Aβ-induced alterations of glutamatergic synaptic transmission and plasticity.

Ripoli C(1), Cocco S(1), Li Puma DD(1), Piacentini R(1), Mastrodonato A(1), 
Scala F(1), Puzzo D(2), D'Ascenzo M(1), Grassi C(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Physiology, Università Cattolica, 00168 Rome, Italy and.
(2)Department of Bio-Medical Sciences-Section of Physiology, University of 
Catania, 95125 Catania, Italy.
(3)Institute of Human Physiology, Università Cattolica, 00168 Rome, Italy and 
grassi@rm.unicatt.it.

Intracellular accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) protein has been proposed as an 
early event in AD pathogenesis. In patients with mild cognitive impairment, 
intraneuronal Aβ immunoreactivity was found especially in brain regions 
critically involved in the cognitive deficits of AD. Although a large body of 
evidence demonstrates that Aβ42 accumulates intraneuronally ((in)Aβ), the action 
and the role of Aβ42 buildup on synaptic function have been poorly investigated. 
Here, we demonstrate that basal synaptic transmission and LTP were markedly 
depressed following Aβ42 injection into the neuron through the patch pipette. 
Control experiments performed with the reverse peptide (Aβ42-1) allowed us to 
exclude that the effects of (in)Aβ depended on changes in oncotic pressure. To 
further investigate (in)Aβ synaptotoxicity we used an Aβ variant harboring 
oxidized methionine in position 35 that does not cross the neuronal plasma 
membrane and is not uploaded from the extracellular space. This Aβ42 variant had 
no effects on synaptic transmission and plasticity when applied extracellularly, 
but induced synaptic depression and LTP inhibition after patch-pipette dialysis. 
Finally, the injection of an antibody raised against human Aβ42 (6E10) in CA1 
pyramidal neurons of mouse hippocampal brain slices and autaptic microcultures 
did not, per se, significantly affect LTP and basal synaptic transmission, but 
it protected against the toxic effects of extracellular Aβ42. Collectively, 
these findings suggest that Aβ42-induced impairment of glutamatergic synaptic 
function depends on its internalization and intracellular accumulation thus 
paving the way to a systemic proteomic analysis of intracellular 
targets/partners of Aβ42.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3412893-11$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1201-14.2014
PMCID: PMC6705320
PMID: 25232124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]