1. J Nanobiotechnology. 2014 Sep 24;12:39. doi: 10.1186/s12951-014-0039-3.

The role of lipid-based nano delivery systems on oral bioavailability 
enhancement of fenofibrate, a BCS II drug: comparison with fast-release 
formulations.

Weng T, Qi J, Lu Y, Wang K, Tian Z, Hu K, Yin Z, Wu W.

The aim of this study was to compare various formulations solid dispersion 
pellets (SDP), nanostructured lipid carriers (NLCs) and a self-microemulsifying 
drug delivery system (SMEDDS) generally accepted to be the most efficient drug 
delivery systems for BCS II drugs using fenofibrate (FNB) as a model drug. The 
size and morphology of NLCs and SMEDDS was characterized by dynamic light 
scattering (DLS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Their release 
behaviors were investigated in medium with or without pancreatic lipase. The 
oral bioavailability of the various formulations was compared in beagle dogs 
using commercial Lipanthyl® capsules (micronized formulation) as a reference. 
The release of FNB from SDP was much faster than that from NLCs and SMEDDS in 
medium without lipase, whereas the release rate from NLCs and SMEDDS was 
increased after adding pancreatic lipase into the release medium. However, NLCs 
and SMEDDS increased the bioavailability of FNB to 705.11% and 809.10%, 
respectively, in comparison with Lipanthyl® capsules, although the relative 
bioavailability of FNB was only 366.05% after administration of SDPs. Thus, 
lipid-based drug delivery systems (such as NLCs and SMEDDS) may have more 
advantages than immediate release systems (such as SDPs and Lipanthyl® 
capsules).

DOI: 10.1186/s12951-014-0039-3
PMCID: PMC4180958
PMID: 25248304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]