1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Dec;1844(12):2145-54. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2014.09.013. Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Catalytically active alkaline molten globular enzyme: Effect of pH and 
temperature on the structural integrity of 5-aminolevulinate synthase.

Stojanovski BM(1), Breydo L(1), Hunter GA(1), Uversky VN(2), Ferreira GC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA; USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Research 
Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA; Biology 
Department, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi 
Arabia; Institute for Biological Instrumentation, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
142290 Pushchino, Moscow Region, Russia.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA; Department of Chemistry, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. Electronic address: 
gferreir@health.usf.edu.

5-Aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS), a pyridoxal-5'phosphate (PLP)-dependent 
enzyme, catalyzes the first step of heme biosynthesis in mammals. Circular 
dichroism (CD) and fluorescence spectroscopies were used to examine the effects 
of pH (1.0-3.0 and 7.5-10.5) and temperature (20 and 37°C) on the structural 
integrity of ALAS. The secondary structure, as deduced from far-UV CD, is mostly 
resilient to pH and temperature changes. Partial unfolding was observed at 
pH2.0, but further decreasing pH resulted in acid-induced refolding of the 
secondary structure to nearly native levels. The tertiary structure rigidity, 
monitored by near-UV CD, is lost under acidic and specific alkaline conditions 
(pH10.5 and pH9.5/37°C), where ALAS populates a molten globule state. As the 
enzyme becomes less structured with increased alkalinity, the chiral environment 
of the internal aldimine is also modified, with a shift from a 420nm to 330nm 
dichroic band. Under acidic conditions, the PLP cofactor dissociates from ALAS. 
Reaction with 8-anilino-1-naphthalenesulfonic acid corroborates increased 
exposure of hydrophobic clusters in the alkaline and acidic molten globules, 
although the reaction is more pronounced with the latter. Furthermore, quenching 
the intrinsic fluorescence of ALAS with acrylamide at pH1.0 and 9.5 yielded 
subtly different dynamic quenching constants. The alkaline molten globule state 
of ALAS is catalytically active (pH9.5/37°C), although the kcat value is 
significantly decreased. Finally, the binding of 5-aminolevulinate restricts 
conformational fluctuations in the alkaline molten globule. Overall, our 
findings prove how the structural plasticity of ALAS contributes to reaching a 
functional enzyme.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2014.09.013
PMCID: PMC4364929
PMID: 25240868