1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct;42(18):11721-32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku868. Epub
2014  Sep 23.

Interactions of the yeast mitochondrial RNA polymerase with the +1 and +2 
promoter bases dictate transcription initiation efficiency.

Deshpande AP(1), Patel SS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, RUTGERS-Robert Wood Johnson 
Medical School, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, RUTGERS-Robert Wood Johnson 
Medical School, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA patelss@rwjms.rutgers.edu.

Mitochondrial promoters of Saccharomyces cerevisiae share a conserved -8 to +1 
sequence with +1+2 AA, AG or AT initiation sequence, which dictates the 
efficiency of transcription initiation by the mitochondrial RNA polymerase Rpo41 
and its initiation factor Mtf1. We used 2-aminopurine fluorescence to monitor 
promoter melting and measured the kcat/Km of 2-mer synthesis to quantify 
initiation efficiency with systematic changes of the +1+2 base pairs to matched 
and mismatched pairs. We show that AA promoters are most efficient, followed by 
AG and then AT promoters, and the differences in their efficiencies stem 
specifically from differential melting of +1+2 region without affecting melting 
of the upstream -4 to -1 region. Inefficient +1+2 melting increases the initial 
NTPs Kms of the AG and AT promoters relative to AA or singly mispaired 
promoters. The 16-100-fold higher catalytic efficiency of AA initiation sequence 
relative to AG and AT, respectively, is partly due to Rpo41-Mtf1 interactions 
with the +1+2 non-template adenines that generate a stable pre-transcribing 
complex. We propose a model where the +2 base pair regulates the efficiency of 
initial transcription by controlling multiple steps including downstream 
promoter opening, +1+2 NTPs binding, and the rate of 2-mer synthesis.

Â© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku868
PMCID: PMC4191429
PMID: 25249624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]