1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Sep 25;10(9):e1004400. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004400. 
eCollection 2014 Sep.

Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus microRNAs induce metabolic transformation of 
infected cells.

Yogev O(1), Lagos D(2), Enver T(1), Boshoff C(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL Cancer Institute, Research Department of Cancer Biology, University 
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Immunology and Infection, Department of Biology and Hull York 
Medical School, University of York, York, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2014 Nov;12(11):723. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro3377.

Altered cell metabolism is inherently connected with pathological conditions 
including cancer and viral infections. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus 
(KSHV) is the etiological agent of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). KS tumour cells 
display features of lymphatic endothelial differentiation and in their vast 
majority are latently infected with KSHV, while a small number are lytically 
infected, producing virions. Latently infected cells express only a subset of 
viral genes, mainly located within the latency-associated region, among them 12 
microRNAs. Notably, the metabolic properties of KSHV-infected cells closely 
resemble the metabolic hallmarks of cancer cells. However, how and why KSHV 
alters host cell metabolism remains poorly understood. Here, we investigated the 
effect of KSHV infection on the metabolic profile of primary dermal 
microvascular lymphatic endothelial cells (LEC) and the functional relevance of 
this effect. We found that the KSHV microRNAs within the oncogenic cluster 
collaborate to decrease mitochondria biogenesis and to induce aerobic glycolysis 
in infected cells. KSHV microRNAs expression decreases oxygen consumption, 
increase lactate secretion and glucose uptake, stabilize HIF1Î± and decreases 
mitochondria copy number. Importantly this metabolic shift is important for 
latency maintenance and provides a growth advantage. Mechanistically we show 
that KSHV alters host cell energy metabolism through microRNA-mediated down 
regulation of EGLN2 and HSPA9. Our data suggest that the KSHV microRNAs induce a 
metabolic transformation by concurrent regulation of two independent pathways; 
transcriptional reprograming via HIF1 activation and reduction of mitochondria 
biogenesis through down regulation of the mitochondrial import machinery. These 
findings implicate viral microRNAs in the regulation of the cellular metabolism 
and highlight new potential avenues to inhibit viral latency.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004400
PMCID: PMC4177984
PMID: 25255370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.