1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 7;289(45):31411-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.607432. Epub 
2014 Sep 26.

Substrate-induced DNA polymerase β activation.

Beard WA(1), Shock DD(1), Batra VK(1), Prasad R(1), Wilson SH(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Laboratory of Structural Biology, NIEHS, National Institutes of 
Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709.
(2)From the Laboratory of Structural Biology, NIEHS, National Institutes of 
Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709 wilson5@niehs.nih.gov.

DNA polymerases and substrates undergo conformational changes upon forming 
protein-ligand complexes. These conformational adjustments can hasten or deter 
DNA synthesis and influence substrate discrimination. From structural comparison 
of binary DNA and ternary DNA-dNTP complexes of DNA polymerase β, several side 
chains have been implicated in facilitating formation of an active ternary 
complex poised for chemistry. Site-directed mutagenesis of these highly 
conserved residues (Asp-192, Arg-258, Phe-272, Glu-295, and Tyr-296) and kinetic 
characterization provides insight into the role these residues play during 
correct and incorrect insertion as well as their role in conformational 
activation. The catalytic efficiencies for correct nucleotide insertion for 
alanine mutants were wild type ∼ R258A > F272A ∼ Y296A > E295A > D192A. Because 
the efficiencies for incorrect insertion were affected to about the same extent 
for each mutant, the effects on fidelity were modest (<5-fold). The R258A mutant 
exhibited an increase in the single-turnover rate of correct nucleotide 
insertion. This suggests that the wild-type Arg-258 side chain generates a 
population of non-productive ternary complexes. Structures of binary and ternary 
substrate complexes of the R258A mutant and a mutant associated with gastric 
carcinomas, E295K, provide molecular insight into intermediate structural 
conformations not appreciated previously. Although the R258A mutant crystal 
structures were similar to wild-type enzyme, the open ternary complex structure 
of E295K indicates that Arg-258 stabilizes a non-productive conformation of the 
primer terminus that would decrease catalysis. Significantly, the open E295K 
ternary complex binds two metal ions indicating that metal binding cannot 
overcome the modified interactions that have interrupted the closure of the 
N-subdomain.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.607432
PMCID: PMC4223340
PMID: 25261471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]