1. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2014 Nov;33(6):592-7. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000103.

Monoclonal origin of peritoneal implants and lymph node deposits in serous 
borderline ovarian tumors (s-BOT) with high intratumoral homogeneity.

Horn LC(1), HÃ¶hn AK, Einenkel J, Siebolts U.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology (L.-C.H., A.K.H.), Division of Breast, Gynecologic & 
Perinatal Pathology Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology (J.E.), Institute of 
Trier Institute of Pathology (U.S.), Division Molecular Pathology, University of 
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Molecular studies have shown that the most prevalent mutations in serous ovarian 
borderline tumors (s-BOT) are BRAF and/or KRAS alterations. About one third of 
s-BOT represent peritoneal implants and/or lymph node involvement. These 
extraovarian deposits may be monoclonal or polyclonal in origin. To test both 
the hypotheses, mutational analyses using pyrosequencing for BRAF codon 600 and 
KRAS codon 12/13 and 61 of microdissected tissue was performed in 15 s-BOT and 
their invasive and noninvasive peritoneal implants. Two to 6 implants from 
different peritoneal sites were examined in 13 cases. Lymph node deposits were 
available for the analysis in 3 cases. Six s-BOT showed mutation in exon 2 codon 
12 of the KRAS proto-oncogen. Five additional cases showed BRAF p.V600E mutation 
representing an overall mutation rate of 73.3%. Multiple (2-6) peritoneal 
implants were analyzed after microdissection in 13 of 15 cases. All showed 
identical mutational results when compared with the ovarian site of the disease. 
All lymph node deposits, including those with multiple deposits in different 
nodes, showed identical results, suggesting high intratumoral mutational 
homogeneity. The evidence presented in this study and the majority of data 
reported in the literature support the hypothesis that s-BOT with their 
peritoneal implants and lymph node deposits show identical mutational status of 
BRAF and KRAS suggesting a monoclonal rather than a polyclonal disease regarding 
these both tested genetic loci. In addition, a high intratumoral genetic 
homogeneity can be suggested. In conclusion, the results of the present study 
support the monoclonal origin of s-BOT and their peritoneal implants and lymph 
node deposits.

DOI: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000103
PMID: 25272298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]