1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 21;289(47):32617-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.591958. Epub 
2014 Oct 6.

Structural basis of allosteric activation of sterile α motif and 
histidine-aspartate domain-containing protein 1 (SAMHD1) by nucleoside 
triphosphates.

Koharudin LM(1), Wu Y(1), DeLucia M(1), Mehrens J(1), Gronenborn AM(2), Ahn 
J(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Structural Biology and Pittsburgh Center for HIV-Host 
Protein Interactions, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania 15260.
(2)From the Department of Structural Biology and Pittsburgh Center for HIV-Host 
Protein Interactions, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania 15260 amg100@pitt.edu.
(3)From the Department of Structural Biology and Pittsburgh Center for HIV-Host 
Protein Interactions, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania 15260 jia12@pitt.edu.

Sterile α motif and histidine-aspartate domain-containing protein 1 (SAMHD1) 
plays a critical role in inhibiting HIV infection, curtailing the pool of dNTPs 
available for reverse transcription of the viral genome. Recent structural data 
suggested a compelling mechanism for the regulation of SAMHD1 enzymatic activity 
and revealed dGTP-induced association of two inactive dimers into an active 
tetrameric enzyme. Here, we present the crystal structures of SAMHD1 catalytic 
core (residues 113-626) tetramers, complexed with mixtures of nucleotides, 
including dGTP/dATP, dGTP/dCTP, dGTP/dTTP, and dGTP/dUTP. The combined 
structural and biochemical data provide insight into dNTP promiscuity at the 
secondary allosteric site and how enzymatic activity is modulated. In addition, 
we present biochemical analyses of GTP-induced SAMHD1 full-length 
tetramerization and the structure of SAMHD1 catalytic core tetramer in complex 
with GTP/dATP, revealing the structural basis of GTP-mediated SAMHD1 activation. 
Altogether, the data presented here advance our understanding of SAMHD1 function 
during cellular homeostasis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.591958
PMCID: PMC4239615
PMID: 25288794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]