1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2014 Oct 4;15:334. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-334.

Association between the awareness of osteoporosis and the quality of care for 
bone health among Korean women with osteoporosis.

Shin HY, Kang HC, Lee K, Park SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. smpark.snuh@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of osteoporosis is increasing and is a socio-economic 
burden worldwide. Although screening tests for osteoporosis in Korea are easily 
accessible, this condition remains undertreated. Evaluating post-diagnostic 
behavior changes may be helpful for improving the quality of care for bone 
health in osteoporotic patients.
METHODS: After reviewing the Fourth Korean National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey 2008-2009, 1,114 women with osteoporosis aged >50Â years were 
included in this cross-sectional study. Factors related to bone health were 
categorized into the following groups: (1) behavioral health (smoking, alcohol 
consumption, and physical activity); (2) measured factors (lean body mass [kg], 
appendicular skeletal muscle mass [kg], and serum vitamin D level [nmol/L]); and 
(3) nutritional factors (calcium intake, vitamin/mineral supplementation, and 
healthy supplementary food). Logistic regression analysis and analysis of 
covariance was conducted after adjusting for age, education, income, residential 
area, height, weight, and self-perceived health using a weighted method.
RESULTS: Doctors diagnosed 39.5% of patients with osteoporosis, and these 
patients were compared with the control group. The awareness group, who had been 
diagnosed with osteoporosis by a doctor, had a lower proportion of smokers and 
higher serum vitamin D level than the control group, who had never been 
diagnosed with osteoporosis. No other associations were found for quality of 
bone health care variables. The awareness group had higher odds ratios of 
vitamin/mineral replacement and healthy supplementary food but no other 
differences were observed, indicating the patients' beliefs in bone health care 
do not follow the recommended clinical guidelines (e.g. higher physical 
activity, lower alcohol consumption).
CONCLUSION: To improve the quality of care for bone health in osteoporotic 
patients, an initial step should be the development of post-diagnostic 
procedures such as patient counseling and education through a multi-team care 
approach.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-334
PMCID: PMC4194369
PMID: 25281307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]