1. J Mol Neurosci. 2014 Dec;54(4):837-47. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0431-3. Epub
2014  Oct 12.

Role of dynamic and mitochondrial mutations in neurodegenerative diseases with 
ataxia: lower repeats and LNAs at multiple loci as alternative pathogenesis.

Gul Lone W(1), Poornima S, Meena AK, Rao KP, Hasan Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Mahavir Hospital, AC Guards, Hyderabad, 500 004, 
India.

Spinocerebellar ataxia is a growing group of hereditary neurodegenerative 
diseases for which â‰¥30 different genetic loci have been identified. In this 
study, we assessed the repeats at eight spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) loci in 188 
clinical SCA patients and 100 individuals without any neurological signs. 
Results from the present study were able to identify 16/188 (8.5%) clinical 
ataxia patients with repeat expansions in the pathological range of SCA genes, 
with the majority having expansion at the SCA1, 2, and 3 loci. The present study 
further evaluated two mitochondrial mutations associated with ataxia, i.e., 
T8993G and A8344G. Six patients were identified with A8344G mutation and none 
had the mutation in ATPase 6 gene; however, G8994A variation was found in three 
cases. Overall, three cases had triplet repeat expansions as well as 
mitochondrial (mt) mutations, which indicates potential association of triplet 
repeat expansions and mitochondrial mutations. Both the molecular analysis of 
several SCA loci and two relevant mt mutations indicated that the majority of 
ataxia cases were still undiagnosed; hence, the following hypotheses were 
proposed and tested based on available data: (i) lower repeats than normal range 
and (ii) large normal alleles (LNAs) at multiple loci may be an alternative 
basis for disease pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-014-0431-3
PMID: 25303857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]