1. Korean J Pediatr. 2014 Sep;57(9):410-5. doi: 10.3345/kjp.2014.57.9.410. Epub 
2014 Sep 30.

Neurofibromatosis type 1: a single center's experience in Korea.

Kim MJ(1), Cheon CK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Maryknoll Medical Center, Pusan, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan National University School of Medicine, 
Yangsan, Korea.

PURPOSE: Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant condition caused by 
an NF1 gene mutation. NF1 is also a multisystem disorder that primarily affects 
the skin and nervous system. The goal of this study was to delineate the 
phenotypic characterization and assess the NF1 mutational spectrum in patients 
with NF1.
METHODS: A total of 42 patients, 14 females and 28 males, were enrolled in this 
study. Clinical manifestations and results of the genetic study were 
retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: Age of the patients at the time of NF1 diagnosis was 15.8±14.6 years 
(range, 1-62 years). Twelve patients (28.6%) had a family history of NF1. Among 
the 42 patients, Café-au-lait spots were shown in 42 (100%), neurofibroma in 31 
(73.8%), freckling in 22 (52.4%), and Lisch nodules in seven (16.7%). The most 
common abnormal finding in the brain was hamartoma (20%). Mental retardation was 
observed in five patients (11.9%), seizures in one patient (2.4%), and plexiform 
neurofibromas (PNFs) in four patients (9.5%). One patient with PNFs died due to 
a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor in the chest cavity. Genetic analysis 
of seven patients identified six single base substitutions (three missense and 
three nonsense) and one small deletion. Among these mutations, five (71.4%) were 
novel (two missense mutations: p.Leu1773Pro, p.His1170Leu; two nonsense 
mutations: p.Arg2517(*), p.Cys2371(*); one small deletion: p.Leu1944Phefs(*)6).
CONCLUSION: The clinical characteristics of 42 Korean patients with NF1 were 
extremely variable and the mutations of the NF1 gene were genetically 
heterogeneous with a high mutation-detection rate.

DOI: 10.3345/kjp.2014.57.9.410
PMCID: PMC4198956
PMID: 25324867

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.