1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 15;9(10):e110286. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110286. 
eCollection 2014.

MicroRNA-147b regulates vascular endothelial barrier function by targeting 
ADAM15 expression.

Chatterjee V(1), Beard RS Jr(1), Reynolds JJ(1), Haines R(2), Guo M(3), Rubin 
M(1), Guido J(1), Wu MH(2), Yuan SY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University of South 
Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of South Florida Morsani College of 
Medicine, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of California Davis School of Medicine, 
Sacramento, California, United States of America.

A disintegrin and metalloproteinase15 (ADAM15) has been shown to be upregulated 
and mediate endothelial hyperpermeability during inflammation and sepsis. This 
molecule contains multiple functional domains with the ability to modulate 
diverse cellular processes including cell adhesion, extracellular matrix 
degradation, and ectodomain shedding of transmembrane proteins. These 
characteristics make ADAM15 an attractive therapeutic target in various 
diseases. The lack of pharmacological inhibitors specific to ADAM15 prompted our 
efforts to identify biological or molecular tools to alter its expression for 
further studying its function and therapeutic implications. The goal of this 
study was to determine if ADAM15-targeting microRNAs altered ADAM15-induced 
endothelial barrier dysfunction during septic challenge by bacterial 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). An in silico analysis followed by luciferase reporter 
assay in human vascular endothelial cells identified miR-147b with the ability 
to target the 3' UTR of ADAM15. Transfection with a miR-147b mimic led to 
decreased total, as well as cell surface expression of ADAM15 in endothelial 
cells, while miR-147b antagomir produced an opposite effect. Functionally, 
LPS-induced endothelial barrier dysfunction, evidenced by a reduction in 
transendothelial electric resistance and increase in albumin flux across 
endothelial monolayers, was attenuated in cells treated with miR-147b mimics. In 
contrast, miR-147b antagomir exerted a permeability-increasing effect in 
vascular endothelial cells similar to that caused by LPS. Taken together, these 
data suggest the potential role of miR147b in regulating endothelial barrier 
function by targeting ADAM15 expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110286
PMCID: PMC4198252
PMID: 25333931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.