1. Front Pharmacol. 2014 Oct 6;5:224. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2014.00224. eCollection 
2014.

Protein redox chemistry: post-translational cysteine modifications that regulate 
signal transduction and drug pharmacology.

Wani R(1), Nagata A(2), Murray BW(1).

Author information:
(1)Oncology Research Unit, Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development San Diego, 
CA, USA.
(2)Worldwide Medicinal Chemistry, Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development San 
Diego, CA, USA.

The perception of reactive oxygen species has evolved over the past decade from 
agents of cellular damage to secondary messengers which modify signaling 
proteins in physiology and the disease state (e.g., cancer). New protein targets 
of specific oxidation are rapidly being identified. One emerging class of redox 
modification occurs to the thiol side chain of cysteine residues which can 
produce multiple chemically distinct alterations to the protein (e.g., 
sulfenic/sulfinic/sulfonic acid, disulfides). These post-translational 
modifications (PTM) are shown to affect the protein structure and function. 
Because redox-sensitive proteins can traffic between subcellular compartments 
that have different redox environments, cysteine oxidation enables a 
spatio-temporal control to signaling. Understanding ramifications of these 
oxidative modifications to the functions of signaling proteins is crucial for 
understanding cellular regulation as well as for informed-drug discovery 
process. The effects of EGFR oxidation of Cys797 on inhibitor pharmacology are 
presented to illustrate the principle. Taken together, cysteine redox PTM can 
impact both cell biology and drug pharmacology.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2014.00224
PMCID: PMC4186267
PMID: 25339904