1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 15;9(10):e110031. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110031. 
eCollection 2014.

SAX-3 (Robo) and UNC-40 (DCC) regulate a directional bias for axon guidance in 
response to multiple extracellular cues.

Tang X(1), Wadsworth WG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America.

Axons in Caenorhabditis elegans are guided by multiple extracellular cues, 
including UNC-6 (netrin), EGL-20 (wnt), UNC-52 (perlecan), and SLT-1 (slit). How 
multiple extracellular cues determine the direction of axon guidance is not well 
understood. We have proposed that an axon's response to guidance cues can be 
modeled as a random walk, i.e., a succession of randomly directed movement. 
Guidance cues dictate the probability of axon outgrowth activity occurring in 
each direction, which over time creates a directional bias. Here we provide 
further evidence for this model. We describe the effects that the UNC-40 (DCC) 
and SAX-3 (Robo) receptors and the UNC-6, EGL-20, UNC-52, and SLT-1 
extracellular cues have on the directional bias of the axon outgrowth activity 
for the HSN and AVM neurons. We find that the directional bias created by the 
cues depend on UNC-40 or SAX-3. UNC-6 and EGL-20 affect the directional bias for 
both neurons, whereas UNC-52 and SLT-1 only affect the directional bias for HSN 
and AVM, respectively. The direction of the bias created by the loss of a cue 
can vary and the direction depends on the other cues. The random walk model 
predicts this combinatorial regulation. In a random walk a probability is 
assigned for each direction of outgrowth, thus creating a probability 
distribution. The probability distribution for each neuron is determined by the 
collective effect of all the cues. Since the sum of the probabilities must equal 
one, each cue affects the probability of outgrowth in multiple directions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110031
PMCID: PMC4198195
PMID: 25333948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.