1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 23;9(10):e110965. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110965. 
eCollection 2014.

A polyketide synthase acyltransferase domain structure suggests a recognition 
mechanism for its hydroxymalonyl-acyl carrier protein substrate.

Park H(1), Kevany BM(1), Dyer DH(1), Thomas MG(1), Forest KT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, United States of America.

We have previously shown that the acyl transferase domain of ZmaA (ZmaA-AT) is 
involved in the biosynthesis of the aminopolyol polyketide/nonribosomal peptide 
hybrid molecule zwittermicin A from cereus UW85, and that it specifically 
recognizes the precursor hydroxymalonyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP) and transfers 
the hydroxymalonyl extender unit to a downstream second ACP via a transacylated 
AT domain intermediate. We now present the X-ray crystal structure of ZmaA-AT at 
a resolution of 1.7 Ã…. The structure shows a patch of solvent-exposed 
hydrophobic residues in the area where the AT is proposed to interact with the 
precursor ACP. We addressed the significance of the AT/ACP interaction in 
precursor specificity of the AT by testing whether malonyl- or methylmalonyl-ACP 
can be recognized by ZmaA-AT. We found that the ACP itself biases extender unit 
selection. Until now, structural information for ATs has been limited to ATs 
specific for the CoA-linked precursors malonyl-CoA and (2S)-methylmalonyl-CoA. 
This work contributes to polyketide synthase engineering efforts by expanding 
our knowledge of AT/substrate interactions with the structure of an AT domain 
that recognizes an ACP-linked substrate, the rare hydroxymalonate. Our structure 
suggests a model in which ACP interaction with a hydrophobic motif promotes 
secondary structure formation at the binding site, and opening of the adjacent 
substrate pocket lid to allow extender unit binding in the AT active site.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110965
PMCID: PMC4207774
PMID: 25340352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Funding provided to support 
the LS-CAT data collection facility is provided in part by the Michigan Economic 
Development Corporation and the Michigan Technology Tri-Corridor. However, there 
are absolutely no constraints on the use of data collected at the facility, on 
patent rights, on employment opportunities, etc. because of this funding. The 
authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials are not 
affected by this funding.