1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:424513. doi: 10.1155/2014/424513. Epub 2014 
Oct 14.

Solid tumor-targeting theranostic polymer nanoparticle in nuclear medicinal 
fields.

Makino A(1), Kimura S(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Imaging Research Center (BIRC), University of Fukui, Fukui 
910-1193, Japan ; Research and Education Program for Life Science, University of 
Fukui, Fukui 910-1193, Japan.
(2)Department of Material Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.

Polymer nanoparticles can be prepared by self-assembling of amphiphilic 
polymers, and various types of molecular assemblies have been reported. In 
particular, in medicinal fields, utilization of these polymer nanoparticles as 
carriers for drug delivery system (DDS) has been actively tried, and some 
nanoparticulate drugs are currently under preclinical evaluations. A 
radionuclide is an unstable nucleus and decays with emission of radioactive 
rays, which can be utilized as a tracer in the diagnostic imaging systems of PET 
and SPECT and also in therapeutic purposes. Since polymer nanoparticles can 
encapsulate most of diagnostic and therapeutic agents with a proper design of 
amphiphilic polymers, they should be effective DDS carriers of radionuclides in 
the nuclear medicinal field. Indeed, nanoparticles have been recently attracting 
much attention as common platform carriers for diagnostic and therapeutic drugs 
and contribute to the development of nanotheranostics. In this paper, recent 
developments of solid tumor-targeting polymer nanoparticles in nuclear medicinal 
fields are reviewed.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/424513
PMCID: PMC4213412
PMID: 25379530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]