1. Biochemistry. 2014 Dec 16;53(49):7835-45. doi: 10.1021/bi501247z. Epub 2014
Dec  3.

Phosphorylation of the kinase domain regulates autophosphorylation of myosin 
IIIA and its translocation in microvilli.

An BC(1), Sakai T, Komaba S, Kishi H, Kobayashi S, Kim JY, Ikebe R, Ikebe M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, United States.

Motor activity of myosin III is regulated by autophosphorylation. To investigate 
the role of the kinase activity on the transporter function of myosin IIIA 
(Myo3A), we identified the phosphorylation sites of kinase domain (KD), which is 
responsible for the regulation of kinase activity and thus motor function. Using 
mass spectrometry, we identified six phosphorylation sites in the KD, which are 
highly conserved among class III myosins and Ste20-related misshapen (Msn) 
kinases. Two predominant sites, Thr¹⁸⁴ and Thr¹⁸⁸, in KD are important for 
phosphorylation of the KD as well as the motor domain, which regulates the 
affinity for actin. In the Caco2 cells, the full-length human Myo3A (hMyo3AFull) 
markedly enlarged the microvilli, although it did not show discrete localization 
within the microvilli. On the other hand, hMyo3AFull(T184A) and 
hMyo3AFull(T188A) both showed clear localization at the microvilli tips. Our 
results suggest that Myo3A induces large actin bundle formation to form 
microvilli, and phosphorylation of KD at Thr¹⁸⁴ and Thr¹⁸⁸ is critical for the 
kinase activity of Myo3A, and regulation of Myo3A translocation to the tip of 
microvilli. Retinal extracts potently dephosphorylate both KD and motor domain 
without IQ motifs (MDIQo), which was inhibited by okadaic acid (OA) with 
nanomolar range and by tautomycetin (TMC) with micromolar range. The results 
suggest that Myo3A phosphatase is protein phosphatase type 2A (PP2A). Supporting 
this result, recombinant PP2Ac potently dephosphorylates both KD and MDIQo. We 
propose that the phosphorylation-dephosphorylation mechanism plays an essential 
role in mediating the transport and actin bundle formation and stability 
functions of hMyo3A.

DOI: 10.1021/bi501247z
PMCID: PMC4270376
PMID: 25402663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]