1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2015 Mar;388(3):283-93. doi: 
10.1007/s00210-014-1065-2. Epub 2014 Nov 23.

Development of phosphatase inhibitor-1 peptides acting as indirect activators of 
phosphatase 1.

Sotoud H(1), Borgmeyer U, Schulze C, El-Armouche A, Eschenhagen T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE) and DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular 
Research), partner site Hamburg/Kiel/Lübeck, Hamburg, Germany.

Phosphatase inhibitor-1 (I-1) inhibits the catalytic subunit of protein 
phosphatase type 1 (PP1c) in its protein kinase A (PKA)-phosphorylated form 
(I-1(P)). It thereby amplifies PKA signaling, which, in the heart, mediates both 
beneficial (acute) and adverse (chronic) effects of catecholamines. Genetic 
deletion of I-1 was associated with protection against catecholamine toxicity, 
making the PP1c-I-1(P) complex a potential therapeutic target for chronic heart 
disease. Here, we sought to define targetable interaction sites of I-1 and PP1c, 
concentrating on the N-terminal domain of I-1 which includes the PP1c binding 
motif ((9)KIQF(12)) as well as a poly-Arg stretch. Substitution of (9)KIQ(11) 
residues for analogous amino acids, (9)RLN(11), resulted in doubling of the IC50 
values, deletion of (9)KIQF(12) prevented I-1 PKA-dependent phosphorylation and 
thus activation. Mutation of the Arg residues preceding the PKA phosphorylation 
site (Thr35) to Ala (R/A(30-33)) abolished I-1 phosphorylation and its binding 
to and inhibition of PP1c. A series of synthetic peptides (4-11 residues) 
indicated that the KIQF motif as well as the surrounding anchoring residues was 
essential for interfering with the inhibitory effect of I-1(P) on PP1c, whereas 
the four Arg residues were not. Unexpectedly, the most effective nonapeptide 
(SPRKIQFTV) also antagonized the inhibitory effect of the non-conditional PP1 
inhibitor-2 with similar affinity. Incubation of neonatal rat cardiac myocytes 
with a poly-Arg-modified SPRKIQFTV (10 μM) reduced catecholamine-induced 
phosphorylation of phospholamban, a well-known PKA downstream target sensitive 
to PP1c. Our data reiterate the importance of the KIQF motif and provide a tool 
for antagonizing I-1 inhibitory effects on PP1c, i.e., activating PP1 in vivo.

DOI: 10.1007/s00210-014-1065-2
PMID: 25416155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]