1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Nov 20;10(11):e1004795. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004795. 
eCollection 2014 Nov.

The protein O-glucosyltransferase Rumi modifies eyes shut to promote rhabdomere 
separation in Drosophila.

Haltom AR(1), Lee TV(2), Harvey BM(3), Leonardi J(4), Chen YJ(5), Hong Y(5), 
Haltiwanger RS(3), Jafar-Nejad H(6).

Author information:
(1)Program in Genes & Development, The University of Texas Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas, United States of America; Department of 
Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Stony Brook University, Stony 
Brook, New York, United States of America.
(4)Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America; Program in Developmental Biology, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(6)Program in Genes & Development, The University of Texas Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas, United States of America; Department of 
Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America; Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

The protein O-glucosyltransferase Rumi/POGLUT1 regulates Drosophila Notch 
signaling by adding O-glucose residues to the Notch extracellular domain. Rumi 
has other predicted targets including Crumbs (Crb) and Eyes shut (Eys), both of 
which are involved in photoreceptor development. However, whether Rumi is 
required for the function of Crb and Eys remains unknown. Here we report that in 
the absence of Rumi or its enzymatic activity, several rhabdomeres in each 
ommatidium fail to separate from one another in a Notch-independent manner. Mass 
spectral analysis indicates the presence of O-glucose on Crb and Eys. However, 
mutating all O-glucosylation sites in a crb knock-in allele does not cause 
rhabdomere attachment, ruling out Crb as a biologically-relevant Rumi target in 
this process. In contrast, eys and rumi exhibit a dosage-sensitive genetic 
interaction. In addition, although in wild-type ommatidia most of the Eys 
protein is found in the inter-rhabdomeral space (IRS), in rumi mutants a 
significant fraction of Eys remains in the photoreceptor cells. The 
intracellular accumulation of Eys and the IRS defect worsen in rumi mutants 
raised at a higher temperature, and are accompanied by a âˆ¼50% decrease in the 
total level of Eys. Moreover, removing one copy of an endoplasmic reticulum 
chaperone enhances the rhabdomere attachment in rumi mutant animals. Altogether, 
our data suggest that O-glucosylation of Eys by Rumi ensures rhabdomere 
separation by promoting proper Eys folding and stability in a critical time 
window during the mid-pupal stage. Human EYS, which is mutated in patients with 
autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa, also harbors multiple Rumi target 
sites. Therefore, the role of O-glucose in regulating Eys may be conserved.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004795
PMCID: PMC4238978
PMID: 25412384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.