1. Mol Cell. 2014 Nov 6;56(3):436-445. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.09.013. Epub
2014  Oct 16.

Restriction of replication fork regression activities by a conserved SMC 
complex.

Xue X(1), Choi K(2), Bonner JN(2), Chiba T(1), Kwon Y(1), Xu Y(1), Sanchez H(3), 
Wyman C(3), Niu H(1), Zhao X(4), Sung P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(2)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY 10065, USA; Programs in Biochemistry, Cell, and Molecular Biology, Weill 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences of Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, 
USA.
(3)Departments of Radiation Oncology and Genetics, Cancer Genomics Center, 
Erasmus University Medical Center, 3000CA Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY 10065, USA; Programs in Biochemistry, Cell, and Molecular Biology, Weill 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences of Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, 
USA. Electronic address: zhaox1@mskcc.org.
(5)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address: 
patrick.sung@yale.edu.

Conserved, multitasking DNA helicases mediate diverse DNA transactions and are 
relevant for human disease pathogenesis. These helicases and their regulation 
help maintain genome stability during DNA replication and repair. We show that 
the structural maintenance of chromosome complex Smc5-Smc6 restrains the 
replication fork regression activity of Mph1 helicase, but not its D loop 
disruptive activity. This regulatory mechanism enables flexibility in 
replication fork repair without interfering with DNA break repair. In vitro 
studies find that Smc5-Smc6 binds to a Mph1 region required for efficient fork 
regression, preventing assembly of Mph1 oligomers at the junction of DNA forks. 
In vivo impairment of this regulatory mechanism compensates for the inactivation 
of another fork regression helicase and increases reliance on joint DNA 
structure removal or avoidance. Our findings provide molecular insights into 
replication fork repair regulation and uncover a role of Smc5-Smc6 in directing 
Mph1 activity toward a specific biochemical outcome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.09.013
PMCID: PMC4268010
PMID: 25439736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]