1. Mob DNA. 2014 Nov 30;5(1):27. doi: 10.1186/s13100-014-0027-z. eCollection
2014.

Tn5 transposition in Escherichia coli is repressed by Hfq and activated by 
over-expression of the small non-coding RNA SgrS.

Ross JA(1), Trussler RS(1), Black MD(1), McLellan CR(1), Haniford DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ONN6A 5C1 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Hfq functions in post-transcriptional gene regulation in a wide 
range of bacteria, usually by promoting base pairing of mRNAs with trans-encoded 
sRNAs. It was previously shown that Hfq down-regulates Tn10 transposition by 
inhibiting IS10 transposase expression at the post-transcriptional level. This 
provided the first example of Hfq playing a role in DNA transposition and led us 
to ask if a related transposon, Tn5, is similarly regulated.
RESULTS: We show that Hfq strongly suppresses Tn5 transposition in Escherichia 
coli by inhibiting IS50 transposase expression. However, in contrast to the 
situation for Tn10, Hfq primarily inhibits IS50 transposase transcription. As 
Hfq does not typically function directly in transcription, we searched for a 
transcription factor that also down-regulated IS50 transposase transcription and 
is itself under Hfq control. We show that Crp (cyclic AMP receptor protein) fits 
these criteria as: (1) disruption of the crp gene led to an increase in IS50 
transposase expression and the magnitude of this increase was comparable to that 
observed for an hfq disruption; and (2) Crp expression decreased in hfq (-) . We 
also demonstrate that IS50 transposase expression and Tn5 transposition are 
induced by over-expression of the sRNA SgrS and link this response to glucose 
limitation.
CONCLUSIONS: Tn5 transposition is negatively regulated by Hfq primarily through 
inhibition of IS50 transposase transcription. Preliminary results support the 
possibility that this regulation is mediated through Crp. We also provide 
evidence that glucose limitation activates IS50 transposase transcription and 
transposition.

DOI: 10.1186/s13100-014-0027-z
PMCID: PMC4265352
PMID: 25506402