1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2014 Dec 15;15:431. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-431.

Effects of hypoxia on anabolic and catabolic gene expression and DNA methylation 
in OA chondrocytes.

Alvarez K, de Andrés MC, Takahashi A, Oreffo RO(1).

Author information:
(1)Bone and Joint Research Group, Centre for Human Development, Stem Cells and 
Regeneration Human Development and Health, Institute of Developmental Sciences, 
University of Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK. roco@soton.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Cartilage is an avascular and aneural tissue. Chondrocytes thrive in 
this restricted environment of low oxygen tension and poor nutrient availability 
which has led to suggestions that hypoxia may be a protective mechanism against 
the development of osteoarthritis (OA). There is also a growing body of evidence 
to support the role of epigenetic factors in the pathogenesis of OA. However, 
few studies have investigated the epigenetic-OA process within a hypoxic 
environment. The current study has investigated the effects of hypoxia on gene 
expression and DNA methylation of anabolic and catabolic genes involved in the 
pathogenesis of OA.
METHODS: Chondrocytes extracted from OA femoral heads were incubated in normoxia 
and hypoxia (20% and 2% oxygen concentrations respectively). Interleukin 1-beta 
(IL-1β) plus oncostatin M (OSM), 5-azadeoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) or media alone 
(control) were added twice weekly to the incubated samples. After 5 weeks, 
levels of Collagen type IX (COL9A1), IL1B, and matrix metalloproteinase-13 
(MMP13) gene expression were measured using SYBR Green-based qRT-PCR and were 
correlated with methylation status analysed by pyrosequencing methodology.
RESULTS: Hypoxia resulted in a >50-fold and >10-fold increase in relative 
expression of COL9A1 and IL1B respectively. This was inversely correlated to the 
DNA methylation status of these genes. Expression of MMP13 was reduced at 2% 
oxygen tension in control cells. Relative expression of MMP13 increased in cells 
stimulated with IL-1β and 5-aza-dC in normoxic conditions, and this effect was 
eliminated at low oxygen tension although no correlation with methylation status 
was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate a role for hypoxia in the regulation of 
anabolic and catabolic gene expression and the influence of changes in DNA 
methylation. These results further support the role of epigenetics in OA and, 
critically, highlight the complex relationship between the physiological 
environment of cartilaginous cells and the osteoarthritic process with 
implications for therapeutic intervention and our understanding of OA 
pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-431
PMCID: PMC4301830
PMID: 25510649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]