1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014;15 Suppl 16(Suppl 16):S4. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-15-S16-S4. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

SCMHBP: prediction and analysis of heme binding proteins using propensity scores 
of dipeptides.

Liou YF, Charoenkwan P, Srinivasulu Y, Vasylenko T, Lai SC, Lee HC, Chen YH, 
Huang HL, Ho SY.

BACKGROUND: Heme binding proteins (HBPs) are metalloproteins that contain a heme 
ligand (an iron-porphyrin complex) as the prosthetic group. Several 
computational methods have been proposed to predict heme binding residues and 
thereby to understand the interactions between heme and its host proteins. 
However, few in silico methods for identifying HBPs have been proposed.
RESULTS: This work proposes a scoring card method (SCM) based method (named 
SCMHBP) for predicting and analyzing HBPs from sequences. A balanced dataset of 
747 HBPs (selected using a Gene Ontology term GO:0020037) and 747 non-HBPs 
(selected from 91,414 putative non-HBPs) with an identity of 25% was firstly 
established. Consequently, a set of scores that quantified the propensity of 
amino acids and dipeptides to be HBPs is estimated using SCM to maximize the 
predictive accuracy of SCMHBP. Finally, the informative physicochemical 
properties of 20 amino acids are identified by utilizing the estimated 
propensity scores to be used to categorize HBPs. The training and mean test 
accuracies of SCMHBP applied to three independent test datasets are 85.90% and 
71.57%, respectively. SCMHBP performs well relative to comparison with such 
methods as support vector machine (SVM), decision tree J48, and Bayes 
classifiers. The putative non-HBPs with high sequence propensity scores are 
potential HBPs, which can be further validated by experimental confirmation. The 
propensity scores of individual amino acids and dipeptides are examined to 
elucidate the interactions between heme and its host proteins. The following 
characteristics of HBPs are derived from the propensity scores: 1) aromatic side 
chains are important to the effectiveness of specific HBP functions; 2) a 
hydrophobic environment is important in the interaction between heme and binding 
sites; and 3) the whole HBP has low flexibility whereas the heme binding 
residues are relatively flexible.
CONCLUSIONS: SCMHBP yields knowledge that improves our understanding of HBPs 
rather than merely improves the prediction accuracy in predicting HBPs.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-S16-S4
PMCID: PMC4290654
PMID: 25522279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]