1. Nutrients. 2014 Dec 22;6(12):6095-109. doi: 10.3390/nu6126095.

The role of dietary fat throughout the prostate cancer trajectory.

Di Sebastiano KM(1), Mourtzakis M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue W., 
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada. kmdiseba@uwaterloo.ca.
(2)Department of Kinesiology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue W., 
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada. mmourtzakis@uwaterloo.ca.

Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer diagnosed world-wide; however, 
patients demonstrate exceptionally high survival rates. Many lifestyle factors, 
including obesity and diet, are considered risk factors for advanced prostate 
cancer. Dietary fat is a fundamental contributor to obesity and may be 
specifically important for prostate cancer patients. Prostate cancer treatment 
can result in changes in body composition, affecting quality of life for 
survivors by increasing the risk of co-morbidities, like cardiovascular disease 
and diabetes. We aim to examine dietary fat throughout the prostate cancer 
treatment trajectory, including risk, cancer development and survivorship. 
Focusing on one specific nutrient throughout the prostate cancer trajectory 
provides a unique perspective of dietary fat in prostate cancer and the 
mechanisms that may exacerbate prostate cancer risk, progression and recurrence. 
Through this approach, we noted that high intake of dietary fat, especially, 
high intake of animal and saturated fats, may be associated with increased 
prostate cancer risk. In contrast, a low-fat diet, specifically low in saturated 
fat, may be beneficial for prostate cancer survivors by reducing tumor 
angiogenesis and cancer recurrence. The insulin-like growth factor (IGF)/Akt 
signaling pathway appears to be the key pathway moderating dietary fat intake 
and prostate cancer development and progression.

DOI: 10.3390/nu6126095
PMCID: PMC4277017
PMID: 25533015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]