1. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 10;34(37):4879-89. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.409. Epub 2014 Dec
 22.

NCOA3-mediated upregulation of mucin expression via transcriptional and 
post-translational changes during the development of pancreatic cancer.

Kumar S(1), Das S(1), Rachagani S(1), Kaur S(1), Joshi S(1), Johansson SL(2), 
Ponnusamy MP(1), Jain M(1)(3), Batra SK(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(3)Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE, USA.
(4)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

Pancreatic cancer (PC) is characterized by aberrant overexpression of mucins 
that contribute to its pathogenesis. Although the inflammatory cytokines 
contribute to mucin overexpression, the mucin profile of PC is markedly distinct 
from that of normal or inflamed pancreas. We postulated that de novo expression 
of various mucins in PC involves chromatin modifications. Analysis of chromatin 
modifying enzymes by PCR array identified differential expression of NCOA3 in 
MUC4-expressing PC cell lines. Immunohistochemistry analysis in tumor tissues 
from patients and spontaneous mouse models, and microarray analysis following 
the knockdown of NCOA3 were performed to elucidate its role in mucin regulation 
and overall impact on PC. Silencing of NCOA3 in PC cell lines resulted in 
significant downregulation of two most differentially expressed mucins in PC, 
MUC4 and MUC1 (P<0.01). Immunohistochemistry analysis in PC tissues and 
metastatic lesions established an association between NCOA3 and mucin (MUC1 and 
MUC4) expression. Spontaneous mouse model of PC (K-ras(G12D); Pdx-1cre) showed 
early expression of Ncoa3 during pre-neoplastic lesions. Mechanistically, NCOA3 
knockdown abrogated retinoic acid-mediated MUC4 upregulation by restricting MUC4 
promoter accessibility as demonstrated by micrococcus nuclease digestion 
(P<0.05) and chromatin immuno-precipitation analysis. NCOA3 also created 
pro-inflammatory conditions by upregulating chemokines like CXCL1, 2, 5 and 
CCL20 (P<0.001). AKT, ubiquitin C, ERK1/2 and NF-ÎºB occupied dominant nodes in 
the networks significantly modulated after NCOA3 silencing. In addition, NCOA3 
stabilized mucins post translationally through fucosylation by FUT8, as the 
knockdown of FUT8 resulted in the downregulation of MUC4 and MUC1 at protein 
levels.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2014.409
PMCID: PMC4476953
PMID: 25531332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.