1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 26;9(12):e115444. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115444. 
eCollection 2014.

Characterization of the MeCP2R168X knockin mouse model for Rett syndrome.

Wegener E(1), Brendel C(1), Fischer A(2), Hülsmann S(3), Gärtner J(1), Huppke 
P(1).

Author information:
(1)University Medical Center Göttingen, Department of Child and Adolescent 
Health - Division of Neuropediatrics, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Göttingen, Germany; University 
Medical Center Göttingen, Department for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Center for Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the Brain 
(CNMPB), Göttingen, Germany.

Rett syndrome, one of the most common causes of mental retardation in females, 
is caused by mutations in the X chromosomal gene MECP2. Mice deficient for MeCP2 
recapitulate some of the symptoms seen in patients with Rett syndrome. It has 
been shown that reactivation of silent MECP2 alleles can reverse some of the 
symptoms in these mice. We have generated a knockin mouse model for 
translational research that carries the most common nonsense mutation in Rett 
syndrome, R168X. In this article we describe the phenotype of this mouse model. 
In male MeCP2(R168X) mice life span was reduced to 12-14 weeks and bodyweight 
was significantly lower than in wild type littermates. First symptoms including 
tremor, hind limb clasping and inactivity occurred at age 27 days. At age 6 
weeks nest building, rotarod, open-field and elevated plus maze experiments 
showed impaired motor performance, reduced activity and decreased anxiety-like 
behavior. Plethysmography at the same time showed apneas and irregular breathing 
with reduced frequency. Female MeCP2R168X mice showed no significant 
abnormalities except decreased performance on the rotarod at age 9 months. In 
conclusion we show that the male MeCP2(R168X) mice have a phenotype similar to 
that seen in MECP2 knockout mouse models and are therefore well suited for 
translational research. The female mice, however, have a much milder and less 
constant phenotype making such research with this mouse model more challenging.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115444
PMCID: PMC4277341
PMID: 25541993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.