1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 30;9(12):e115877. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115877. 
eCollection 2014.

Irreversible denaturation of maltodextrin glucosidase studied by differential 
scanning calorimetry, circular dichroism, and turbidity measurements.

Goyal M(1), Chaudhuri TK(2), Kuwajima K(3).

Author information:
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience and Institute for Molecular 
Science, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, 
Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan; School of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute 
of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi, 110016, India.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz 
Khas, New Delhi, 110016, India.
(3)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience and Institute for Molecular 
Science, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, 
Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan; Department of Functional Molecular Science, 
School of Physical Sciences, the Graduate University for Advanced Studies 
(Sokendai), 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan; The 
Center for the Promotion of Integrated Sciences (CPIS), the Graduate University 
for Advance Studies (Sokendai), Shonan Village, Hayama, Kanagawa, 240-0193, 
Japan; School of Computational Sciences, Korea Institute for Advanced Study 
(KIAS), Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul, 130-722, Korea.

Thermal denaturation of Escherichia coli maltodextrin glucosidase was studied by 
differential scanning calorimetry, circular dichroism (230 nm), and 
UV-absorption measurements (340 nm), which were respectively used to monitor 
heat absorption, conformational unfolding, and the production of solution 
turbidity. The denaturation was irreversible, and the thermal transition 
recorded at scan rates of 0.5-1.5 K/min was significantly scan-rate dependent, 
indicating that the thermal denaturation was kinetically controlled. The absence 
of a protein-concentration effect on the thermal transition indicated that the 
denaturation was rate-limited by a mono-molecular process. From the analysis of 
the calorimetric thermograms, a one-step irreversible model well represented the 
thermal denaturation of the protein. The calorimetrically observed thermal 
transitions showed excellent coincidence with the turbidity transitions 
monitored by UV-absorption as well as with the unfolding transitions monitored 
by circular dichroism. The thermal denaturation of the protein was thus 
rate-limited by conformational unfolding, which was followed by a rapid 
irreversible formation of aggregates that produced the solution turbidity. It is 
thus important to note that the absence of the protein-concentration effect on 
the irreversible thermal denaturation does not necessarily means the absence of 
protein aggregation itself. The turbidity measurements together with 
differential scanning calorimetry in the irreversible thermal denaturation of 
the protein provided a very effective approach for understanding the mechanisms 
of the irreversible denaturation. The Arrhenius-equation parameters obtained 
from analysis of the thermal denaturation were compared with those of other 
proteins that have been reported to show the one-step irreversible thermal 
denaturation. Maltodextrin glucosidase had sufficiently high kinetic stability 
with a half-life of 68 days at a physiological temperature (37Â°C).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115877
PMCID: PMC4280130
PMID: 25548918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.