1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 29;9(12):e115779. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115779. 
eCollection 2014.

Integration of developmental and environmental signals via a polyadenylation 
factor in Arabidopsis.

Liu M(1), Xu R(1), Merrill C(2), Hong L(3), Von Lanken C(2), Hunt AG(2), Li 
QQ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45045, United States of 
America.
(2)Department of Plant and Soil Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 
40506, United States of America.
(3)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education on Costal Wetland Ecosystems, 
College of the Environment and Ecology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 
361102, China.
(4)Department of Biology, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45045, United States of 
America; Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education on Costal Wetland 
Ecosystems, College of the Environment and Ecology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 
Fujian 361102, China; Rice Research Institute, Fujian Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350003, China.

The ability to integrate environmental and developmental signals with 
physiological responses is critical for plant survival. How this integration is 
done, particularly through posttranscriptional control of gene expression, is 
poorly understood. Previously, it was found that the 30 kD subunit of 
Arabidopsis cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (AtCPSF30) is a 
calmodulin-regulated RNA-binding protein. Here we demonstrated that mutant 
plants (oxt6) deficient in AtCPSF30 possess a novel range of phenotypes--reduced 
fertility, reduced lateral root formation, and altered sensitivities to 
oxidative stress and a number of plant hormones (auxin, cytokinin, gibberellic 
acid, and ACC). While the wild-type AtCPSF30 (C30G) was able to restore normal 
growth and responses, a mutant AtCPSF30 protein incapable of interacting with 
calmodulin (C30GM) could only restore wild-type fertility and responses to 
oxidative stress and ACC. Thus, the interaction with calmodulin is important for 
part of AtCPSF30 functions in the plant. Global poly(A) site analysis showed 
that the C30G and C30GM proteins can restore wild-type poly(A) site choice to 
the oxt6 mutant. Genes associated with hormone metabolism and auxin responses 
are also affected by the oxt6 mutation. Moreover, 19 genes that are linked with 
calmodulin-dependent CPSF30 functions, were identified through genome-wide 
expression analysis. These data, in conjunction with previous results from the 
analysis of the oxt6 mutant, indicate that the polyadenylation factor AtCPSF30 
is a regulatory hub where different signaling cues are transduced, presumably 
via differential mRNA 3' end formation or alternative polyadenylation, into 
specified phenotypic outcomes. Our results suggest a novel function of a 
polyadenylation factor in environmental and developmental signal integration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115779
PMCID: PMC4278772
PMID: 25546057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.