1. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2015 Feb;28(2):166-70. doi: 10.5713/ajas.14.0383.

Bovine Genome-wide Association Study for Genetic Elements to Resist the 
Infection of Foot-and-mouth Disease in the Field.

Lee BY(1), Lee KN(1), Lee T(1), Park JH(1), Kim SM(1), Lee HS(1), Chung DS(2), 
Shim HS(3), Lee HK(4), Kim H(1).

Author information:
(1)Foot-and-Mouth Disease Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, Anyang 
430-757, Korea .
(2)Gangwon Veterinary Service Laboratory, Chuncheon 220-822, Korea .
(3)Gyeonggido Veterinary Service, Suwon 441-460, Korea .
(4)Genomic Informatics Center, Hankyong National University, Anseong 456-749, 
Korea .

Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) is a highly contagious disease affecting 
cloven-hoofed animals and causes severe economic loss and devastating effect on 
international trade of animal or animal products. Since FMD outbreaks have 
recently occurred in some Asian countries, it is important to understand the 
relationship between diverse immunogenomic structures of host animals and the 
immunity to foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV). We performed genome wide 
association study based on high-density bovine single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) chip for identifying FMD resistant loci in Holstein cattle. Among 624532 
SNP after quality control, we found that 11 SNPs on 3 chromosomes (chr17, 22, 
and 15) were significantly associated with the trait at the p.adjust <0.05 after 
PERMORY test. Most significantly associated SNPs were located on chromosome 17, 
around the genes Myosin XVIIIB and Seizure related 6 homolog (mouse)-like, which 
were associated with lung cancer. Based on the known function of the genes 
nearby the significant SNPs, the FMD resistant animals might have ability to 
improve their innate immune response to FMDV infection.

DOI: 10.5713/ajas.14.0383
PMCID: PMC4283160
PMID: 25557811