1. J Pers Med. 2013 Apr 29;3(2):70-81. doi: 10.3390/jpm3020070.

Personalized cancer care conference.

Zänker KS(1), Mihich E(2), Huber HP(3), Borresen-Dale AL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Immunology 
and Experimental Oncology, ZBAF, University Witten/Herdecke, Witten 58448, 
Germany. ksz@uni-wh.de.
(2)Dana Faber Cancer Institute, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.
(3)Fritz-Bender-Foundation, Munich 80803, Germany.
(4)Institute for Cancer Research, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University 
Hospital, Oslo N-0310, Norway.

The Oslo University Hospital (Norway), the K.G. Jebsen Centre for Breast Cancer 
Research (Norway), The Radiumhospital Foundation (Norway) and the 
Fritz-Bender-Foundation (Germany) designed under the conference chairmen (E. 
Mihich, K.S. Zänker, A.L. Borresen-Dale) and advisory committee (A. Borg, Z. 
Szallasi, O. Kallioniemi, H.P. Huber) a program at the cutting edge of 
"PERSONALIZED CANCER CARE: Risk prediction, early diagnosis, progression and 
therapy resistance." The conference was held in Oslo from September 7 to 9, 2012 
and the science-based presentations concerned six scientific areas: (1) Genetic 
profiling of patients, prediction of risk, late side effects; (2) Molecular 
profiling of tumors and metastases; (3) Tumor-host microenvironment interaction 
and metabolism; (4) Targeted therapy; (5) Translation and (6) Informed consent, 
ethical challenges and communication. Two satellite workshops on (i) Ion 
Ampliseq-a novel tool for large scale mutation detection; and (ii) Multiplex RNA 
ISH and tissue homogenate assays for cancer biomarker validation were 
additionally organized. The report concludes that individual risk prediction in 
carcinogenesis and/or metastatogenesis based on polygenic profiling may be 
useful for intervention strategies for health care and therapy planning in the 
future. To detect distinct and overlapping DNA sequence alterations in tumor 
samples and adjacent normal tissues, including point mutations, small insertions 
or deletions, copy number changes and chromosomal rearrangements will eventually 
make it possible to design personalized management plans for individualized 
patients. However, large individualized datasets need a new approach in 
bio-information technology to reduce this enormous data dimensionally to simply 
working hypotheses about health and disease for each individual.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm3020070
PMCID: PMC4251400
PMID: 25562519