1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Dec 17;8:428. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00428. 
eCollection 2014.

Glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 expression by a distinct population of mouse 
vestibular supporting cells.

Tavazzani E(1), Tritto S(2), Spaiardi P(1), Botta L(3), Manca M(1), Prigioni 
I(1), Masetto S(1), Russo G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia Pavia, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia Pavia, Italy 
; Laboratory of Neurophysiology, Brain Connectivity Center, C. Mondino National 
Neurological Institute Pavia, Italy.
(3)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "L. Spallanzani", University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy.

Erratum in
    Front Cell Neurosci. 2015 Apr 01;9:101. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00101.

The function of the enzyme glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) is to convert glutamate 
in Î³-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Glutamate decarboxylase exists as two major 
isoforms, termed GAD65 and GAD67, that are usually expressed in GABA-containing 
neurons in the central nervous system. GAD65 has been proposed to be associated 
with GABA exocytosis whereas GAD67 with GABA metabolism. In the present 
immunofluorescence study, we have investigated the presence of the two GAD 
isoforms in the semicircular canal cristae of wild type and GAD67-GFP knock-in 
mice. While no evidence for GAD65 expression was found, GAD67 was detected in a 
distinct population of peripherally-located supporting cells, but not in hair 
cells or in centrally-located supporting cells. GABA, on the other hand, was 
found in all supporting cells. The present result indicate that only a discrete 
population of supporting cells use GAD67 to synthesize GABA. This is the first 
report of a marker that allows to distinguish two populations of supporting 
cells in the vestibular epithelium. On the other hand, the lack of GABA and GAD 
enzymes in hair cells excludes its involvement in afferent transmission.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00428
PMCID: PMC4269132
PMID: 25565962