1. Mol Diagn Ther. 2015 Feb;19(1):25-33. doi: 10.1007/s40291-014-0126-z.

Polymorphism of organic cation transporter 2 improves glucose-lowering effect of 
metformin via influencing its pharmacokinetics in Chinese type 2 diabetic 
patients.

Hou W(1), Zhang D, Lu W, Zheng T, Wan L, Li Q, Bao Y, Liu F, Jia W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Jiaotong University 
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Clinical Medical Center of 
Diabetes, Shanghai Key Clinical Center of Metabolic Diseases, Shanghai Institute 
for Diabetes, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Diabetes, Shanghai, 200233, People's 
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate how the organic 
cation transporter 2 nucleotide polymorphism at site 808 (G → T) affects 
metformin pharmacokinetics and its long-term anti-diabetic effect.
METHODS: A total of 220 newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes patients taking oral 
metformin were recruited, genotyped and then divided into three groups by 
SLC22A2 genotypes (G/G, G/T, T/T). Nine patients in the GG genotype group, five 
patients in the GT genotype group and four patients in the TT genotype group 
were randomly selected for the metformin pharmacokinetic study. A randomized 
cohort study with 1-year follow-up was performed to clarify the metformin 
pharmacodynamics.
RESULTS: After 1 year, the decrease in glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels in 
subjects with the heterozygous variant genotype (GT) was significantly greater 
than in those with the wild-type homozygote (-2.2 % in GT vs. -1.1 % in GG, P < 
0.05) after adjustment for baseline HbA1c levels, exercise and diet in each 
group. There were also differences in the pharmacokinetic parameters (95 % 
confidence interval) of metformin between these two groups [area under the 
concentration-time curve (AUC)0-∞ 19.7 (15.7-23.8) vs. 14.3 (11.7-16.9) μg h/L; 
renal clearance (CLr) 16.8 (8.5-25.0) vs. 34.1 (24.9-43.2) L/h; tubular 
secretion clearance (CLt) 8.1 (2.2-18.1) vs. 22.7 (15.5-29.8) L/h; all P < 
0.05]. Multivariate analysis further revealed that the presence of T alleles and 
gender were independent influencing factors of urine excretion of metformin (P < 
0.05).
CONCLUSION: As well as gender, the glucose-lowering efficiency of metformin can 
be enhanced by SLC22A2 808G > T variants through the delay of its transportation 
and CLr in Chinese type 2 diabetes populations.

DOI: 10.1007/s40291-014-0126-z
PMID: 25573751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]