1. J Neurol Sci. 2015 Feb 15;349(1-2):124-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.12.041. Epub
 2015 Jan 5.

Candidate pathway-based genetic association study of platinum and 
platinum-taxane related toxicity in a cohort of primary lung cancer patients.

Johnson C(1), Pankratz VS(1), Velazquez AI(1), Aakre JA(1), Loprinzi CL(1), 
Staff NP(1), Windebank AJ(2), Yang P(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology, Oncology, Health Sciences Research, Division of 
Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Departments of Neurology, Oncology, Health Sciences Research, Division of 
Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN, USA. Electronic address: windebank.anthony@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is a common 
toxicity secondary to chemotherapy. Genetic factors may be important in 
predisposing patients to this adverse effect.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied 950 primary lung cancer patients, who received 
platinum or platinum-combination drug chemotherapy and who had DNA available for 
study. We analyzed epidemiological risk factors in 279 CIPN patients and 456 
non-CIPN patients and genetic risk factors in 141 CIPN patients and 259 non-CIPN 
patients. The risk factors studied included demographic, diagnostic, and 
treatment data, as well as 174 tag SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) across 
43 candidate genes in the glutathione, cell cycle, DNA repair, cell signaling, 
and apoptosis pathways.
RESULTS: Patients who had diabetes mellitus were more likely to have CIPN 
(p=0.0002). Other epidemiologic risk factors associated with CIPN included 
number of cycles (p=0.0004) and type of concurrent chemotherapy (p<0.001). SNPs 
most associated with CIPN were in glutathione peroxidase 7 (GPX7) gene (p values 
0.0015 and 0.0028, unadjusted and adjusted) and in ATP-binding cassette 
sub-family C member 4 (ABCC4) gene (p values 0.037 and 0.006, unadjusted and 
adjusted). We also found other suggestive associations in 
methyl-o-guanine-methyl-transferase (MGMT) and glutathione-S-transferase (GST) 
isoforms.
CONCLUSIONS: Epidemiological and genetic risk factors associated with CIPN in 
this cohort, included the type of chemotherapy drug, intensity of chemotherapy 
treatment, and genes known to be associated with chemotherapy resistance. These 
findings suggest that differentiating between cytotoxic and neurotoxic 
mechanisms of chemotherapy drugs is challenging but represents an important step 
toward individualized therapy and improving quality of life for patients.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.12.041
PMCID: PMC4334320
PMID: 25586538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]