1. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2015 Mar 18;6(3):476-84. doi: 10.1021/cn500325v. Epub 2015 
Jan 27.

The first structure-activity relationship studies for designer receptors 
exclusively activated by designer drugs.

Chen X(1), Choo H(2)(3), Huang XP(2), Yang X(1), Stone O(2), Roth BL(2), Jin 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)†Departments of Structural and Chemical Biology, Oncological Sciences, and 
Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, New York 10029, United States.
(2)‡National Institute of Mental Health - Psychoactive Drug Screening Program, 
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, United States.
(3)§Center for Neuro-Medicine, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, 
Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, Republic of Korea.

Over the past decade, two independent technologies have emerged and been widely 
adopted by the neuroscience community for remotely controlling neuronal 
activity: optogenetics which utilize engineered channelrhodopsin and other 
opsins, and chemogenetics which utilize engineered G protein-coupled receptors 
(Designer Receptors Exclusively Activated by Designer Drugs (DREADDs)) and other 
orthologous ligand-receptor pairs. Using directed molecular evolution, two types 
of DREADDs derived from human muscarinic acetylcholine receptors have been 
developed: hM3Dq which activates neuronal firing, and hM4Di which inhibits 
neuronal firing. Importantly, these DREADDs were not activated by the native 
ligand acetylcholine (ACh), but selectively activated by clozapine N-oxide 
(CNO), a pharmacologically inert ligand. CNO has been used extensively in rodent 
models to activate DREADDs, and although CNO is not subject to significant 
metabolic transformation in mice, a small fraction of CNO is apparently 
metabolized to clozapine in humans and guinea pigs, lessening the translational 
potential of DREADDs. To effectively translate the DREADD technology, the next 
generation of DREADD agonists are needed and a thorough understanding of 
structure-activity relationships (SARs) of DREADDs is required for developing 
such ligands. We therefore conducted the first SAR studies of hM3Dq. We explored 
multiple regions of the scaffold represented by CNO, identified interesting SAR 
trends, and discovered several compounds that are very potent hM3Dq agonists but 
do not activate the native human M3 receptor (hM3). We also discovered that the 
approved drug perlapine is a novel hM3Dq agonist with >10 000-fold selectivity 
for hM3Dq over hM3.

DOI: 10.1021/cn500325v
PMCID: PMC4368042
PMID: 25587888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]