1. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jan 13;16(1):1772-90. doi: 10.3390/ijms16011772.

Mechanisms and implications of dual-acting methotrexate in folate-targeted 
nanotherapeutic delivery.

Wong PT(1), Choi SK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Michigan Nanotechnology Institute for 
Medicine and Biological Sciences, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, USA. ptw@med.umich.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Michigan Nanotechnology Institute for 
Medicine and Biological Sciences, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, USA. skchoi@med.umich.edu.

The rational design of a nanoplatform in drug delivery plays a crucial role in 
determining its targeting specificity and efficacy in vivo. A conventional 
approach relies on the surface conjugation of a nanometer-sized particle with 
two functionally distinct types of molecules, one as a targeting ligand, and the 
other as a therapeutic agent to be delivered to the diseased cell. However, an 
alternative simplified approach can be used, in which a single type of molecule 
displaying dual function as both a targeting ligand and therapeutic agent is 
conjugated to the nanoparticle. In this review, we evaluate the validity of this 
new strategy by using methotrexate, which displays multifunctional mechanisms of 
action. Methotrexate binds to the folate receptor, a surface biomarker 
frequently overexpressed in tumor cells, and also inhibits dihydrofolate 
reductase, an enzyme critical for cell survival and division. Thus we describe a 
series of fifth generation poly(amido amine) dendrimers conjugated with 
methotrexate, and discuss several lines of evidence supporting the efficacy of 
this new platform strategy based on surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy, 
enzyme activity assays, and cell-based studies with folate receptor (+) KB 
cancer cells.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms16011772
PMCID: PMC4307333
PMID: 25590303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]