1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:180234. doi:
10.1155/2014/180234.  Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Immunostimulatory activity of protein hydrolysate from oviductus ranae on 
macrophage in vitro.

Huang D(1), Yang L(1), Wang C(2), Ma S(1), Cui L(1), Huang S(2), Sheng X(2), 
Weng Q(1), Xu M(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Biological Science and Technology, Beijing Forestry University, 
Beijing 100083, China ; Beijing Key Laboratory of Forest Food Processing and 
Safety, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing 100083, China.
(2)College of Biological Science and Technology, Beijing Forestry University, 
Beijing 100083, China.

Oviductus Ranae is the dry oviduct of Rana chensinensis, which is also called R. 
chensinensis oil. Oviductus Ranae is a valuable Chinese crude drug and is 
recorded in the Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the immunostimulatory activity of protein hydrolysate 
of Oviductus Ranae (ORPH) and to assess its possible mechanism. Immunomodulatory 
activity of ORPH was examined in murine macrophage RAW 264.7 cells. The effect 
of ORPH on the phagocytic activity of macrophages was determined by the neutral 
red uptake assay. After treatment with ORPH, NO production levels in the culture 
supernatant were investigated by Griess assay. The mRNA and protein expressions 
of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) were detected by RT-PCR and Western 
blotting. The production of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 after treatment with ORPH was 
measured using ELISA assay. In addition, NF-κB levels were also investigated by 
Western blot. The results showed that ORPH enhanced the phagocytosis of 
macrophage, increased productions of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and NO in RAW 264.7 
cells, and upregulated the mRNA and protein expression of iNOS. Besides, NF-κB, 
levels in RAW 264.7 cells were elevated after ORPH treatment. These findings 
suggested that ORPH might stimulate macrophage activities by activating the 
NF-κB pathway.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/180234
PMCID: PMC4283414
PMID: 25610475