1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:957107. doi: 10.1155/2014/957107. Epub 2014 
Nov 25.

Cheminformatics models for inhibitors of Schistosoma mansoni thioredoxin 
glutathione reductase.

Gaba S(1), Jamal S(2), Open Source Drug Discovery Consortium(2), Scaria V(1).

Author information:
(1)GN Ramachandran Knowledge Center for Genome Informatics, CSIR Institute of 
Genomics and Integrative Biology, Mall Road, Delhi 110007, India.
(2)CSIR Open Source Drug Discovery Unit, Anusandhan Bhawan, 2 Rafi Marg, Delhi 
110001, India.

Schistosomiasis is a neglected tropical disease caused by a parasite Schistosoma 
mansoni and affects over 200 million annually. There is an urgent need to 
discover novel therapeutic options to control the disease with the recent 
emergence of drug resistance. The multifunctional protein, thioredoxin 
glutathione reductase (TGR), an essential enzyme for the survival of the 
pathogen in the redox environment has been actively explored as a potential drug 
target. The recent availability of small-molecule screening datasets against 
this target provides a unique opportunity to learn molecular properties and 
apply computational models for discovery of activities in large molecular 
libraries. Such a prioritisation approach could have the potential to reduce the 
cost of failures in lead discovery. A supervised learning approach was employed 
to develop a cost sensitive classification model to evaluate the biological 
activity of the molecules. Random forest was identified to be the best 
classifier among all the classifiers with an accuracy of around 80 percent. 
Independent analysis using a maximally occurring substructure analysis revealed 
10 highly enriched scaffolds in the actives dataset and their docking against 
was also performed. We show that a combined approach of machine learning and 
other cheminformatics approaches such as substructure comparison and molecular 
docking is efficient to prioritise molecules from large molecular datasets.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/957107
PMCID: PMC4275605
PMID: 25629082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]