1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 10;112(6):1767-72. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1424818112. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

Structural and biochemical studies of HCMV gH/gL/gO and Pentamer reveal mutually 
exclusive cell entry complexes.

Ciferri C(1), Chandramouli S(1), Donnarumma D(2), Nikitin PA(3), Cianfrocco 
MA(4), Gerrein R(1), Feire AL(3), Barnett SW(1), Lilja AE(1), Rappuoli R(5), 
Norais N(2), Settembre EC(1), Carfi A(6).

Author information:
(1)Novartis Vaccines, Cambridge, MA 02139;
(2)Novartis Vaccines, 53100 Siena, Italy;
(3)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Emeryville, CA 94608;
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138; and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115.
(5)Novartis Vaccines, 53100 Siena, Italy; rino.rappuoli@novartis.com 
andrea.carfi@novartis.com.
(6)Novartis Vaccines, Cambridge, MA 02139; rino.rappuoli@novartis.com 
andrea.carfi@novartis.com.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in 
transplant patients and the leading viral cause of birth defects after 
congenital infection. The glycoprotein complexes gH/gL/gO and 
gH/gL/UL128/UL130/UL131A (Pentamer) are key targets of the human humoral 
response against HCMV and are required for HCMV entry into fibroblasts and 
endothelial/epithelial cells, respectively. We expressed and characterized 
soluble forms of gH/gL, gH/gL/gO, and Pentamer. Mass spectrometry and 
mutagenesis analysis revealed that gL-Cys144 forms disulfide bonds with 
gO-Cys351 in gH/gL/gO and with UL128-Cys162 in the Pentamer. Notably, Pentamer 
harboring the UL128-Cys162Ser/gL-Cys144Ser mutations had impaired syncytia 
formation and reduced interference of HCMV entry into epithelial cells. Electron 
microscopy analysis showed that HCMV gH/gL resembles HSV gH/gL and that gO and 
UL128/UL130/UL131A bind to the same site at the gH/gL N terminus. These data are 
consistent with gH/gL/gO and Pentamer forming mutually exclusive cell entry 
complexes and reveal the overall location of gH/gL-, gH/gL/gO-, and 
Pentamer-specific neutralizing antibody binding sites. Our results provide, to 
our knowledge, the first structural view of gH/gL/gO and Pentamer supporting the 
development of vaccines and antibody therapeutics against HCMV.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1424818112
PMCID: PMC4330774
PMID: 25624487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The sponsor is a 
full-time employee of Novartis Vaccines, as are S.C., R.G., S.W.B., N.N., 
E.C.S., and A.C.