1. J Virol. 2015 Apr;89(8):4117-25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03532-14. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Mammalian adaptive mutations of the PA protein of highly pathogenic avian H5N1 
influenza virus.

Yamaji R(1), Yamada S(2), Le MQ(3), Ito M(1), Sakai-Tagawa Y(1), Kawaoka Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan shinya@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
kawaoka@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
(3)National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(4)Division of Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan Department of Pathobiological 
Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, USA Department of Special Pathogens, International Research 
Center for Infectious Diseases, Institute of Medical Science, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan shinya@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp kawaoka@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza A viruses continue to circulate among avian 
species and cause sporadic cases of human infection. Therefore, the threat of a 
pandemic persists. However, the human cases of H5N1 infection have been limited 
mainly to individuals in close contact with infected poultry. These findings 
suggest that the H5N1 viruses need to acquire adaptive mutations to gain a 
replicative advantage in mammalian cells to break through the species barrier. 
Many amino acid mutations of the polymerase complex have been reported to 
enhance H5N1 virus growth in mammalian cells; however, the mechanism for H5N1 
virus of adaptation to humans remains unclear. Here, we propose that the PA of 
an H5N1 influenza virus isolated from a human in Vietnam (A/Vietnam/UT36285/2010 
[36285]) increased the ability of an avian H5N1 virus 
(A/chicken/Vietnam/TY31/2005 [Ck/TY31]) to grow in human lung epithelial A549 
cells. The five PA amino acid substitutions V44I, V127A, C241Y, A343T, and 
I573V, which are rare in H5N1 viruses from human and avian sources, enhanced the 
growth capability of this virus in A549 cells. Moreover, these mutations 
increased the pathogenicity of the virus in mice, suggesting that they 
contribute to adaptation to mammalian hosts. Intriguingly, PA-241Y, which 36285 
encodes, is conserved in more than 90% of human seasonal H1N1 viruses, 
suggesting that PA-241Y contributes to virus adaptation to human lung cells and 
mammalian hosts.
IMPORTANCE: Many amino acid substitutions in highly pathogenic H5N1 avian 
influenza viruses have been shown to contribute to adaptation to mammalian 
hosts. However, no naturally isolated H5N1 virus has caused extensive 
human-to-human transmission, suggesting that additional, as-yet unidentified 
amino acid mutations are needed for adaptation to humans. Here, we report that 
five amino acid substitutions in PA (V44I, V127A, C241Y, A343T, and I573V) 
contribute to the replicative efficiency of H5N1 viruses in human lung cells and 
to high virulence in mice. These results are helpful for assessing the pandemic 
risk of isolates and further our understanding of the mechanism of H5N1 virus 
adaptation to mammalian hosts.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03532-14
PMCID: PMC4442342
PMID: 25631084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]