1. Aging Cell. 2015 Apr;14(2):228-35. doi: 10.1111/acel.12307. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Aberrant post-translational modifications compromise human myosin motor function 
in old age.

Li M(1), Ogilvie H, Ochala J, Artemenko K, Iwamoto H, Yagi N, Bergquist J, 
Larsson L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77, 
Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Clinical 
Neurophysiology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.

Novel experimental methods, including a modified single fiber in vitro motility 
assay, X-ray diffraction experiments, and mass spectrometry analyses, have been 
performed to unravel the molecular events underlying the aging-related 
impairment in human skeletal muscle function at the motor protein level. The 
effects of old age on the function of specific myosin isoforms extracted from 
single human muscle fiber segments, demonstrated a significant slowing of 
motility speed (P < 0.001) in old age in both type I and IIa myosin heavy chain 
(MyHC) isoforms. The force-generating capacity of the type I and IIa MyHC 
isoforms was, on the other hand, not affected by old age. Similar effects were 
also observed when the myosin molecules extracted from muscle fibers were 
exposed to oxidative stress. X-ray diffraction experiments did not show any 
myofilament lattice spacing changes, but unraveled a more disordered filament 
organization in old age as shown by the greater widths of the 1, 0 equatorial 
reflections. Mass spectrometry (MS) analyses revealed eight age-specific myosin 
post-translational modifications (PTMs), in which two were located in the motor 
domain (carbonylation of Pro79 and Asn81) and six in the tail region 
(carbonylation of Asp900, Asp904, and Arg908; methylation of Glu1166; 
deamidation of Gln1164 and Asn1168). However, PTMs in the motor domain were only 
observed in the IIx MyHC isoform, suggesting PTMs in the rod region contributed 
to the observed disordering of myosin filaments and the slowing of motility 
speed. Hence, interventions that would specifically target these PTMs are 
warranted to reverse myosin dysfunction in old age.

© 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.12307
PMCID: PMC4364835
PMID: 25645586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]