1. BMC Cell Biol. 2015 Feb 6;16:1. doi: 10.1186/s12860-015-0047-7.

Hydrophobicity of protein determinants influences the recognition of substrates 
by EDEM1 and EDEM2 in human cells.

Sokołowska I, Piłka ES, Sandvig K, Węgrzyn G, Słomińska-Wojewódzka M.

BACKGROUND: EDEM1 and EDEM2 are crucial regulators of the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER)-associated degradation (ERAD) that extracts misfolded glycoproteins from 
the calnexin chaperone system. The degradation of ERAD substrates involves 
mannose trimming of N-linked glycans; however the precise mechanism of substrate 
recognition and sorting to the ERAD pathway is still poorly understood. It has 
previously been demonstrated that EDEM1 and EDEM2 binding does not require the 
trimming of substrate glycans or even ERAD substrate glycosylation, thus 
suggesting that both chaperones probably recognize misfolded regions of aberrant 
proteins.
RESULTS: In this work, we focused on the substrate recognition by EDEM1 and 
EDEM2, asking whether hydrophobicity of protein determinants might be important 
for these interactions in human cells. In the study we used ricin, a protein 
toxin that utilizes the ERAD pathway in its retrotranslocation from the ER to 
the cytosol, and a model misfolded protein, the pancreatic isoform of human 
β-secretase, BACE457. Mutations in the hydrophobic regions of these proteins 
allowed us to obtain mutated forms with increased and decreased hydrophobicity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide the first evidence that recognition of ERAD 
substrates by EDEM1 and EDEM2 might be determined by a sufficiently high 
hydrophobicity of protein determinants. Moreover, EDEM proteins can bind 
hydrophobic transmembrane regions of misfolded ERAD substrates. These data 
contribute to the general understanding of the regulation of ERAD in mammalian 
cells.

DOI: 10.1186/s12860-015-0047-7
PMCID: PMC4340280
PMID: 25655076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]