1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2015 Jan 22;5:223. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00223.
 eCollection 2014.

Global O-GlcNAc Levels Modulate Transcription of the Adipocyte Secretome during 
Chronic Insulin Resistance.

Wollaston-Hayden EE(1), Harris RB(2), Liu B(3), Bridger R(4), Xu Y(3), Wells 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia , Athens, GA , 
USA ; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia , 
Athens, GA , USA.
(2)Department of Physiology, Georgia Health Sciences University , Augusta, GA , 
USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia , 
Athens, GA , USA.
(4)Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia , Athens, GA , 
USA.

Increased flux through the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway and the corresponding 
increase in intracellular glycosylation of proteins via O-linked 
Î²-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is sufficient to induce insulin resistance (IR) 
in multiple systems. Previously, our group used shotgun proteomics to identify 
multiple rodent adipocytokines and secreted proteins whose levels are modulated 
upon the induction of IR by indirectly and directly modulating O-GlcNAc levels. 
We have validated the relative levels of several of these factors using 
immunoblotting. Since adipocytokines levels are regulated primarily at the level 
of transcription and O-GlcNAc alters the function of many transcription factors, 
we hypothesized that elevated O-GlcNAc levels on key transcription factors are 
modulating secreted protein expression. Here, we show that upon the elevation of 
O-GlcNAc levels and the induction of IR in mature 3T3-F442a adipocytes, the 
transcript levels of multiple secreted proteins reflect the modulation observed 
at the protein level. We validate the transcript levels in male mouse models of 
diabetes. Using inguinal fat pads from the severely IR db/db mouse model and the 
mildly IR diet-induced mouse model, we have confirmed that the secreted proteins 
regulated by O-GlcNAc modulation in cell culture are likewise modulated in the 
whole animal upon a shift to IR. By comparing the promoters of similarly 
regulated genes, we determine that Sp1 is a common cis-acting element. 
Furthermore, we show that the LPL and SPARC promoters are enriched for Sp1 and 
O-GlcNAc modified proteins during insulin resistance in adipocytes. Thus, the 
O-GlcNAc modification of proteins bound to promoters, including Sp1, is linked 
to adipocytokine transcription during insulin resistance.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00223
PMCID: PMC4302944
PMID: 25657638