1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015 May;1344(1):66-77. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12718. Epub 2015
Feb  27.

Ketamine as a promising prototype for a new generation of rapid-acting 
antidepressants.

Abdallah CG(1), Averill LA, Krystal JH.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurosciences Division, United States Department of Veterans 
Affairs, National Center for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, VA Connecticut 
Healthcare System, West Haven, Connecticut; Department of Psychiatry, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.

The discovery of ketamine's rapid and robust antidepressant effects opened a 
window into a new generation of antidepressants. Multiple controlled trials and 
open-label studies have demonstrated these effects across a variety of patient 
populations known to often achieve little to no response from traditional 
antidepressants. Ketamine has been generally well tolerated across patient 
groups, with transient mild-to-moderate adverse effects during infusion. 
However, the optimal dosing and route of administration and the safety of 
chronic treatment are not fully known. This review summarizes the clinical 
effects of ketamine and its neurobiological underpinnings and mechanisms of 
action, which may provide insight into the neurobiology of depression, relevant 
biomarkers, and treatment targets. Moreover, we offer suggestions for future 
research that may continue to advance the field forward and ultimately improve 
the psychopharmacologic interventions available for those individuals struggling 
with depressive and trauma-related disorders.

Published 2015. This article is U.S. Government work and is in the public domain 
in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.12718
PMCID: PMC4412785
PMID: 25727103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest Dr. Averill declares no 
conflicts of interest.