1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2015 Jul;95(1):1-11. doi: 
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.02.004. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

Erdheim-Chester disease: a systematic review.

Cives M(1), Simone V(1), Rizzo FM(1), Dicuonzo F(2), Cristallo Lacalamita M(2), 
Ingravallo G(3), Silvestris F(4), Dammacco F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, University of Bari "A. 
Moro", Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroradiology, University of Bari "A. Moro", Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Bari "A. Moro", Bari, Italy.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, University of Bari "A. 
Moro", Bari, Italy. Electronic address: francesco.silvestris@uniba.it.

Erdheim-Chester disease (ECD) is a rare form of non-Langerhans-cell 
histiocytosis, associated in more than 50% of cases to BRAF(V600E) mutations in 
early multipotent myelomonocytic precursors or in tissue-resident histiocytes. 
It encompasses a spectrum of disorders ranging from asymptomatic bone lesions to 
multisystemic, life-threatening variants. We reviewed all published reports of 
histologically-confirmed ECD and explored clinical, radiological, prognostic and 
therapeutic characteristics in a population of 448 patients, including a unique 
patient from our Department. To find a clinically relevant signature defining 
differentiated prognostic profiles, the patients' disease features were compared 
in relation to their CNS involvement that occurred in 56% of the entire 
population. Diabetes insipidus, visual disturbances, pyramidal and 
extra-pyramidal syndromes were the most recurrent neurological signs, whereas 
concomitant pituitary involvement, retro-orbital masses and axial lesions in the 
presence of symmetric bilateral osteosclerosis of long bones depicted the 
typical ECD clinical picture. Patients with CNS infiltration showed a lower 
occurrence of heart involvement and a higher incidence of bone, skin, 
retro-peritoneal, lung, aortic and renal infiltration. No difference in the 
therapeutic algorithm was found after stratification for CNS involvement. A 
better understanding of the disease pathogenesis, including BRAF deregulation, 
in keeping with improved prognostic criteria, will provide novel suggestions for 
the management of ECD.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.02.004
PMID: 25744785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]