1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 10;11(3):e1005076. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005076. 
eCollection 2015 Mar.

Maternal filaggrin mutations increase the risk of atopic dermatitis in children: 
an effect independent of mutation inheritance.

Esparza-Gordillo J(1), Matanovic A(1), Marenholz I(1), Bauerfeind A(2), Rohde 
K(2), Nemat K(3), Lee-Kirsch MA(3), Nordenskjöld M(4), Winge MC(4), Keil T(5), 
Krüger R(6), Lau S(6), Beyer K(6), Kalb B(6), Niggemann B(6), Hübner N(2), 
Cordell HJ(7), Bradley M(8), Lee YA(1).

Author information:
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum (MDC) for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany; Clinic 
for Pediatric Allergy, Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Max-Delbrück-Centrum (MDC) for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Klinik fur Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Institute for Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics, Charité 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(7)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden; Dermatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Solna Karolinska 
University Hospital, Stockholm, Solna, Sweden.

Epidemiological studies suggest that allergy risk is preferentially transmitted 
through mothers. This can be due to genomic imprinting, where the phenotype 
effect of an allele depends on its parental origin, or due to maternal effects 
reflecting the maternal genome's influence on the child during prenatal 
development. Loss-of-function mutations in the filaggrin gene (FLG) cause skin 
barrier deficiency and strongly predispose to atopic dermatitis (AD). We 
investigated the 4 most prevalent European FLG mutations (c.2282del4, p.R501X, 
p.R2447X, and p.S3247X) in two samples including 759 and 450 AD families. We 
used the multinomial and maximum-likelihood approach implemented in the 
PREMIM/EMIM tool to model parent-of-origin effects. Beyond the known role of FLG 
inheritance in AD (R1meta-analysis = 2.4, P = 1.0 x 10-36), we observed a strong 
maternal FLG genotype effect that was consistent in both independent family sets 
and for all 4 mutations analysed. Overall, children of FLG-carrier mothers had a 
1.5-fold increased AD risk (S1 = 1.50, Pmeta-analysis = 8.4 x 10-8). Our data 
point to two independent and additive effects of FLG mutations: i) carrying a 
mutation and ii) having a mutation carrier mother. The maternal genotype effect 
was independent of mutation inheritance and can be seen as a non-genetic 
transmission of a genetic effect. The FLG maternal effect was observed only when 
mothers had allergic sensitization (elevated allergen-specific IgE antibody 
plasma levels), suggesting that FLG mutation-induced systemic immune responses 
in the mother may influence AD risk in the child. Notably, the maternal effect 
reported here was stronger than most common genetic risk factors for AD recently 
identified through genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Our study highlights 
the power of family-based studies in the identification of new etiological 
mechanisms and reveals, for the first time, a direct influence of the maternal 
genotype on the offspring's susceptibility to a common human disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005076
PMCID: PMC4355615
PMID: 25757221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.