1. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 May;35(10):1727-40. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01436-14. Epub 2015
Mar  9.

The C2 Domain and Altered ATP-Binding Loop Phosphorylation at Ser³⁵⁹ Mediate the 
Redox-Dependent Increase in Protein Kinase C-δ Activity.

Gong J(1), Yao Y(1), Zhang P(2), Udayasuryan B(3), Komissarova EV(1), Chen J(4), 
Sivaramakrishnan S(3), Van Eyk JE(2), Steinberg SF(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA 
sfs1@columbia.edu.

The diverse roles of protein kinase C-δ (PKCδ) in cellular growth, survival, and 
injury have been attributed to stimulus-specific differences in PKCδ signaling 
responses. PKCδ exerts membrane-delimited actions in cells activated by agonists 
that stimulate phosphoinositide hydrolysis. PKCδ is released from membranes as a 
Tyr(313)-phosphorylated enzyme that displays a high level of lipid-independent 
activity and altered substrate specificity during oxidative stress. This study 
identifies an interaction between PKCδ's Tyr(313)-phosphorylated hinge region 
and its phosphotyrosine-binding C2 domain that controls PKCδ's enzymology 
indirectly by decreasing phosphorylation in the kinase domain ATP-positioning 
loop at Ser(359). We show that wild-type (WT) PKCδ displays a strong preference 
for substrates with serine as the phosphoacceptor residue at the active site 
when it harbors phosphomimetic or bulky substitutions at Ser(359.) In contrast, 
PKCδ-S359A displays lipid-independent activity toward substrates with either a 
serine or threonine as the phosphoacceptor residue. Additional studies in 
cardiomyocytes show that oxidative stress decreases Ser(359) phosphorylation on 
native PKCδ and that PKCδ-S359A overexpression increases basal levels of 
phosphorylation on substrates with both phosphoacceptor site serine and 
threonine residues. Collectively, these studies identify a C2 domain-pTyr(313) 
docking interaction that controls ATP-positioning loop phosphorylation as a 
novel, dynamically regulated, and physiologically relevant structural 
determinant of PKCδ catalytic activity.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01436-14
PMCID: PMC4405634
PMID: 25755284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]