1. Autophagy. 2015;11(2):385-402. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1009779.

Defects in calcium homeostasis and mitochondria can be reversed in Pompe 
disease.

Lim JA(1), Li L, Kakhlon O, Myerowitz R, Raben N.

Author information:
(1)a Laboratory of Muscle Stem Cells and Gene Regulation; National Institute of 
Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases ; National Institutes of Health; 
Bethesda ; MD USA.

Mitochondria-induced oxidative stress and flawed autophagy are common features 
of neurodegenerative and lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs). Although defective 
autophagy is particularly prominent in Pompe disease, mitochondrial function has 
escaped examination in this typical LSD. We have found multiple mitochondrial 
defects in mouse and human models of Pompe disease, a life-threatening cardiac 
and skeletal muscle myopathy: a profound dysregulation of Ca(2+) homeostasis, 
mitochondrial Ca(2+) overload, an increase in reactive oxygen species, a 
decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential, an increase in caspase-independent 
apoptosis, as well as a decreased oxygen consumption and ATP production of 
mitochondria. In addition, gene expression studies revealed a striking 
upregulation of the Î² 1 subunit of L-type Ca(2+) channel in Pompe muscle cells. 
This study provides strong evidence that disturbance of Ca(2+) homeostasis and 
mitochondrial abnormalities in Pompe disease represent early changes in a 
complex pathogenetic cascade leading from a deficiency of a single lysosomal 
enzyme to severe and hard-to-treat autophagic myopathy. Remarkably, L-type 
Ca(2+)channel blockers, commonly used to treat other maladies, reversed these 
defects, indicating that a similar approach can be beneficial to the plethora of 
lysosomal and neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1009779
PMCID: PMC4502791
PMID: 25758767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]