1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 17;10(3):e0119886. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119886. 
eCollection 2015.

High frequency of transmitted HIV-1 Gag HLA class I-driven immune escape 
variants but minimal immune selection over the first year of clade C infection.

Gounder K(1), Padayachi N(1), Mann JK(1), Radebe M(1), Mokgoro M(1), van der 
Stok M(1), Mkhize L(1), Mncube Z(1), Jaggernath M(1), Reddy T(2), Walker BD(3), 
Ndung'u T(4).

Author information:
(1)HIV Pathogenesis Programme, Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, Nelson R. 
Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 719 Umbilo Road, 
Durban, South Africa; KwaZulu-Natal Research Institute for Tuberculosis and HIV, 
Nelson R. Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 719 Umbilo 
Road, Durban, South Africa.
(2)Biostatistics Unit, Medical Research Council, 491 Peter Mokaba Road, 
Overport, Durban, South Africa.
(3)HIV Pathogenesis Programme, Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, Nelson R. 
Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 719 Umbilo Road, 
Durban, South Africa; Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, 400 Technology 
Square, Cambridge, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, 4000 Jones Bridge Road, Chevy Chase, MD, United States 
of America.
(4)HIV Pathogenesis Programme, Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, Nelson R. 
Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 719 Umbilo Road, 
Durban, South Africa; KwaZulu-Natal Research Institute for Tuberculosis and HIV, 
Nelson R. Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 719 Umbilo 
Road, Durban, South Africa; Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, 400 Technology 
Square, Cambridge, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Max Planck 
Institute for Infection Biology, Charitestra√üe 1, Berlin, Germany.

In chronic HIV infection, CD8+ T cell responses to Gag are associated with lower 
viral loads, but longitudinal studies of HLA-restricted CD8+ T cell-driven 
selection pressure in Gag from the time of acute infection are limited. In this 
study we examined Gag sequence evolution over the first year of infection in 22 
patients identified prior to seroconversion. A total of 310 and 337 full-length 
Gag sequences from the earliest available samples (median = 14 days after 
infection [Fiebig stage I/II]) and at one-year post infection respectively were 
generated. Six of 22 (27%) individuals were infected with multiple variants. 
There was a trend towards early intra-patient viral sequence diversity 
correlating with viral load set point (p = 0.07, r = 0.39). At 14 days post 
infection, 59.7% of Gag CTL epitopes contained non-consensus polymorphisms and 
over half of these (35.3%) comprised of previously described CTL escape 
variants. Consensus and variant CTL epitope proportions were equally distributed 
irrespective of the selecting host HLA allele and most epitopes remained 
unchanged over 12 months post infection. These data suggest that intrapatient 
diversity during acute infection is an indicator of disease outcome. In this 
setting, there is a high rate of transmitted CTL escape variants and limited 
immune selection in Gag during the first year of infection. These data have 
relevance for vaccine strategies designed to elicit effective CD8+ T cell immune 
responses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119886
PMCID: PMC4363590
PMID: 25781986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.