1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 25;10(3):e0121764. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121764. 
eCollection 2015.

Stability of the octameric structure affects plasminogen-binding capacity of 
streptococcal enolase.

Cork AJ(1), Ericsson DJ(1), Law RH(2), Casey LW(3), Valkov E(3), Bertozzi C(3), 
Stamp A(3), Jovcevski B(4), Aquilina JA(4), Whisstock JC(2), Walker MJ(1), Kobe 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences and Institute for Molecular 
Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 4072, Australia; Australian 
Infectious Disease Research Centre, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 
4072, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the ARC Centre of 
Excellence in Structural and Functional Microbial Genomics, Monash University, 
Melbourne, VIC, 3800, Australia.
(3)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences and Institute for Molecular 
Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 4072, Australia.
(4)School of Biological Sciences and Illawarra Health and Medical Research, 
University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, 2522, Australia.

Group A Streptococcus (GAS) is a human pathogen that has the potential to cause 
invasive disease by binding and activating human plasmin(ogen). Streptococcal 
surface enolase (SEN) is an octameric Î±-enolase that is localized at the GAS 
cell surface. In addition to its glycolytic role inside the cell, SEN functions 
as a receptor for plasmin(ogen) on the bacterial surface, but the understanding 
of the molecular basis of plasmin(ogen) binding is limited. In this study, we 
determined the crystal and solution structures of GAS SEN and characterized the 
increased plasminogen binding by two SEN mutants. The plasminogen binding 
ability of SENK312A and SENK362A is ~2- and ~3.4-fold greater than for the 
wild-type protein. A combination of thermal stability assays, native mass 
spectrometry and X-ray crystallography approaches shows that increased 
plasminogen binding ability correlates with decreased stability of the octamer. 
We propose that decreased stability of the octameric structure facilitates the 
access of plasmin(ogen) to its binding sites, leading to more efficient 
plasmin(ogen) binding and activation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121764
PMCID: PMC4373793
PMID: 25807546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors confirm that 
author Prof. Bostjan Kobe is a PLOS ONE Academic Editor and this does not alter 
the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE Editorial policies and criteria.