1. Neurol Sci. 2015 Aug;36(8):1441-8. doi: 10.1007/s10072-015-2160-y. Epub 2015
Mar  25.

Time-course of protection by the selective A2A receptor antagonist SCH58261 
after transient focal cerebral ischemia.

Melani A(1), Dettori I, Corti F, Cellai L, Pedata F.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Neuroscience, 
Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health (NEUROFARBA), University of Florence, 
Viale Pieraccini, 6, 50139, Florence, Italy, alessia.melani@unifi.it.

Evidence indicates that the adenosine A2A receptor subtype is of critical 
importance in stroke. In previous studies, in the model of permanent middle 
cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAo), the adenosine A2A receptor antagonist, 
SCH58261, administered soon after ischemia, proved protective against excessive 
glutamate outflow in the first 4 h after ischemia and against neurological 
deficit and tissue damage evaluated 24 h after pMCAo. In the present work, we 
investigated if neuroprotective effect of SCH58261 was maintained 7 days after 
transient MCAo (tMCAo). SCH58261 (0.01 mg/kg, i.p.), administered twice/day for 
7 days, protected from neurological deficit 1 day after tMCAo, but no more after 
5 and 7 days. Two days after tMCAo, SCH58261 did not reduce blood cell 
infiltration, evaluated as HIS-48 positive cells, into ischemic striatal and 
cortical tissue. Moreover, 7 days after tMCAo, SCH58261 has not protected 
ischemic areas from damage and has not ameliorated myelin organization into the 
ischemic striatum. Protection by the A2A receptor antagonist 24 h after ischemia 
is attributable to reduced excitotoxicity. Seven days after ischemia the early 
protective effect of the A2A receptor antagonist likely has been overwhelmed by 
a secondary damage due to blood cell infiltration and neuroinflammation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-015-2160-y
PMID: 25805704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]