1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2015 Jun;43(6):803-11. doi: 10.1124/dmd.114.061713. Epub
2015  Mar 24.

Mechanistic investigation of the preclinical pharmacokinetics and interspecies 
scaling of PF-05231023, a fibroblast growth factor 21-antibody protein 
conjugate.

Giragossian C(1), Vage C(1), Li J(1), Pelletier K(1), Piché-Nicholas N(1), 
Rajadhyaksha M(1), Liras J(1), Logan A(1), Calle RA(1), Weng Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Pfizer Inc., Groton, Connecticut (C.G., C.V., Ju.L., K.P., M.R., A.L.); and 
Pfizer Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts (N.-P.N., Je.L., R.A.C., Y.W.).
(2)Pfizer Inc., Groton, Connecticut (C.G., C.V., Ju.L., K.P., M.R., A.L.); and 
Pfizer Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts (N.-P.N., Je.L., R.A.C., Y.W.) 
yan.weng2@pfizer.com.

PF-05231023, a long-acting fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) analog, was 
generated by covalently conjugating two engineered [des-His1, Ala129Cys]FGF21 
molecules to a nontargeting human IgG1 κ scaffold. The pharmacokinetics (PK) of 
PF-05231023 after i.v. and s.c. administration was evaluated in rats and monkeys 
using two enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays with high specificity for 
biologically relevant intact N termini (NT) and C termini (CT) of FGF21. Intact 
CT of FGF21 displayed approximately 5-fold faster systemic plasma clearance 
(CL), an approximately 2-fold lower steady-state volume of distribution, and at 
least 5-fold lower bioavailability compared with NT. In vitro serum stability 
studies in monkeys and humans suggested that the principal CL mechanism for 
PF-05231023 was degradation by serum proteases. Direct scaling of in vitro serum 
degradation rates for intact CT of FGF21 underestimated in vivo CL 5-fold, 
1.4-fold, and 2-fold in rats, monkeys, and humans, respectively. The reduced 
steady-state volume of distribution and the bioavailability for intact CT 
relative to NT in rats and monkeys were compatible with proteolytic degradation 
occurring outside the plasma compartment via an unidentified mechanism. Human CL 
and PK profiles for intact NT and CT of FGF21 were well predicted using monkey 
single-species allometric and Dedrick scaling. Physiologically based 
pharmacokinetic models incorporating serum stability data and an extravascular 
extraction term based on differential bioavailability of intact NT and CT of 
FGF21 in monkeys improved accuracy of human PK predictions relative to Dedrick 
scaling. Mechanistic physiologically based pharmacokinetic models of this nature 
may be highly valuable for predicting human PK of fusion proteins, synthetically 
conjugated proteins, and other complex biologics.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.114.061713
PMID: 25805881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]