1. Nutrients. 2015 Mar 25;7(4):2134-44. doi: 10.3390/nu7042134.

Sourdough fermentation of wheat flour does not prevent the interaction of 
transglutaminase 2 with α2-gliadin or gluten.

Engström N(1), Sandberg AS(2), Scheers N(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Food and Nutrition Science, Department of Biology and Biological 
Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, S-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden. 
niklas.engstrom@chalmers.se.
(2)Division of Food and Nutrition Science, Department of Biology and Biological 
Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, S-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden. 
ann-sofie.sandberg@chalmers.se.
(3)Division of Food and Nutrition Science, Department of Biology and Biological 
Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, S-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden. 
nathalie.scheers@chalmers.se.

The enzyme transglutaminase 2 (TG2) plays a crucial role in the initiation of 
celiac disease by catalyzing the deamidation of gluten peptides. In susceptible 
individuals, the deamidated peptides initiate an immune response leading to 
celiac disease. Several studies have addressed lactic fermentation plus addition 
of enzymes as a means to degrade gluten in order to prevent adverse response in 
celiacs. Processing for complete gluten degradation is often harsh and is not 
likely to yield products that are of comparable characteristics as their 
gluten-containing counterparts. We are concerned that incomplete degradation of 
gluten may have adverse effects because it leads to more available TG2-binding 
sites on gluten peptides. Therefore, we have investigated how lactic acid 
fermentation affects the potential binding of TG2 to gluten protein in wheat 
flour by means of estimating TG2-mediated transamidation in addition to 
measuring the available TG2-binding motif QLP, in α2-gliadin. We show that 
lactic fermentation of wheat flour, as slurry or as part of sourdough bread, did 
not decrease the TG2-mediated transamidation, in the presence of a primary 
amine, to an efficient level (73%-102% of unfermented flour). Nor did the lactic 
fermentation decrease the available TG2 binding motif QLP in α2-gliadin to a 
sufficient extent in sourdough bread (73%-122% of unfermented control) to be 
useful for celiac safe food.

DOI: 10.3390/nu7042134
PMCID: PMC4425136
PMID: 25816160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]