1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Jul 15;286(2):135-41. doi: 
10.1016/j.taap.2015.03.018. Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Proteasome activity is important for replication recovery, CHK1 phosphorylation 
and prevention of G2 arrest after low-dose formaldehyde.

Ortega-Atienza S(1), Green SE(1), Zhitkovich A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, 
Providence, RI 02912, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, 
Providence, RI 02912, USA. Electronic address: anatoly_zhitkovich@brown.edu.

Formaldehyde (FA) is a human carcinogen with numerous sources of environmental 
and occupational exposures. This reactive aldehyde is also produced endogenously 
during metabolism of drugs and other processes. DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) 
are considered to be the main genotoxic lesions for FA. Accumulating evidence 
suggests that DPC repair in high eukaryotes involves proteolysis of crosslinked 
proteins. Here, we examined a role of the main cellular proteolytic machinery 
proteasomes in toxic responses of human lung cells to low FA doses. We found 
that transient inhibition of proteasome activity increased cytotoxicity and 
diminished clonogenic viability of FA-treated cells. Proteasome inactivation 
exacerbated suppressive effects of FA on DNA replication and increased the 
levels of the genotoxic stress marker γ-H2AX in normal human cells. A transient 
loss of proteasome activity in FA-exposed cells also caused delayed 
perturbations of cell cycle, which included G2 arrest and a depletion of S-phase 
populations at FA doses that had no effects in control cells. Proteasome 
activity diminished p53-Ser15 phosphorylation but was important for FA-induced 
CHK1 phosphorylation, which is a biochemical marker of DPC proteolysis in 
replicating cells. Unlike FA, proteasome inhibition had no effect on cell 
survival and CHK1 phosphorylation by the non-DPC replication stressor 
hydroxyurea. Overall, we obtained evidence for the importance of proteasomes in 
protection of human cells against biologically relevant doses of FA. 
Biochemically, our findings indicate the involvement of proteasomes in 
proteolytic repair of DPC, which removes replication blockage by these highly 
bulky lesions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.03.018
PMCID: PMC4458209
PMID: 25817892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]