1. RNA Biol. 2015;12(2):186-96. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1017211.

The VrrA sRNA controls a stationary phase survival factor Vrp of Vibrio 
cholerae.

Sabharwal D(1), Song T, Papenfort K, Wai SN.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Molecular Biology; The Laboratory for Molecular Infection 
Medicine Sweden (MIMS) , Umeå Centre for Microbial Research (UCMR); Umeå 
University , Umeå , Sweden.

Small non-coding RNAs (sRNAs) are emerging regulatory elements in bacteria. The 
Vibrio cholerae sRNA VrrA has previously been shown to down-regulate outer 
membrane proteins (OmpA and OmpT) and biofilm matrix protein (RbmC) by 
base-pairing with the 5' region of the corresponding mRNAs. In this study, we 
present an additional target of VrrA in V. cholerae, the mRNA coding for the 
ribosome binding protein Vrp. Vrp is homologous to ribosome-associated inhibitor 
A (RaiA) of Escherichia coli which facilitates stationary phase survival through 
ribosome hibernation. We show that VrrA down-regulates Vrp protein synthesis by 
base-pairing to the 5' region of vrp mRNA and that the regulation requires the 
RNA chaperone protein, Hfq. We further demonstrate that Vrp is highly expressed 
during stationary phase growth and associates with the ribosome of V. cholerae. 
The effect of the Vrp protein in starvation survival is synergistic with that of 
the VC2530 protein, a homolog of the E. coli hibernation promoting factor HPF, 
suggesting a combined role for these proteins in ribosome hibernation in V. 
cholerae. Vrp and VC2530 are important for V. cholerae starvation survival under 
nutrient deficient conditions. While VC2530 is down-regulated in cells lacking 
vrrA, mutation of vrp results in VC2530 activation. This is the first report 
indicating a regulatory role for an sRNA, modulating stationary factors involved 
in bacterial ribosome hibernation.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1017211
PMCID: PMC4615753
PMID: 25826569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]