1. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Aug;42(8):1295-307. doi: 10.1007/s11033-015-3874-x. Epub
2015  Apr 11.

Functional constituents of a local serotonergic system, intrinsic to the human 
coronary artery smooth muscle cells.

Baskar K(1), Sur S, Selvaraj V, Agrawal DK.

Author information:
(1)Center for Clinical and Translational Science, Creighton University School of 
Medicine, CRISS II Room 510, 2500 California Plaza, Omaha, NE, 68178, USA.

Human coronary artery smooth muscle cells (HCASMCs) play an important role in 
the pathogenesis of coronary atherosclerosis and coronary artery diseases (CAD). 
Serotonin is a mediator known to produce vascular smooth muscle cell mitogenesis 
and contribute to coronary atherosclerosis. We hypothesize that the HCASMC 
possesses certain functional constituents of the serotonergic system such as: 
tryptophan hydroxylase and serotonin transporter. Our aim was to examine the 
presence of functional tryptophan hydroxylase-1 (TPH1) and serotonin transporter 
(SERT) in HCASMCs. The mRNA transcripts by qPCR and protein expression by 
Western blot of TPH1 and SERT were examined. The specificity and accuracy of the 
primers were verified using DNA gel electrophoresis and sequencing of qPCR 
products. The functionality of SERT was examined using a fluorescence dye-based 
serotonin transporter assay. The enzymatic activity of TPH was evaluated using 
UPLC. The HCASMCs expressed both mRNA transcripts and protein of SERT and TPH. 
The qPCR showed a single melt curve peak for both transcripts and in sequence 
analysis the amplicons were aligned with the respective genes. SERT and TPH 
enzymatic activity was present in the HCASMCs. Taken together, both TPH and SERT 
are functionally expressed in HCASMCs. These findings are novel and represent an 
initial step in examining the clinical relevance of the serotonergic system in 
HCASMCs and its role in the pathogenesis of coronary atherosclerosis and CAD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-015-3874-x
PMCID: PMC4506849
PMID: 25861735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors have no other 
relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity 
with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or 
materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.