1. BMC Cancer. 2015 Apr 8;15:232. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1252-7.

Effect of liver transplantation in combined hepatocellular and cholangiocellular 
carcinoma: a case series.

Wu D(1), Shen ZY(2), Zhang YM(3), Wang J(4), Zheng H(5), Deng YL(6), Pan C(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Orient Organ Transplant Center, The 
First Center Hospital of Tianjin, Tianjin, 300192, China. 13920989565@139.com.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Orient Organ Transplant Center, The 
First Center Hospital of Tianjin, Tianjin, 300192, China. 
zhongyangshen@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Orient Organ Transplant Center, The 
First Center Hospital of Tianjin, Tianjin, 300192, China. 
zhangyamin@medmail.com.cn.
(4)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Orient Organ Transplant Center, The 
First Center Hospital of Tianjin, Tianjin, 300192, China. edi20000@sina.com.
(5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Orient Organ Transplant Center, The 
First Center Hospital of Tianjin, Tianjin, 300192, China. 
zhenghong@medmail.com.cn.
(6)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Orient Organ Transplant Center, The 
First Center Hospital of Tianjin, Tianjin, 300192, China. 
dengyonglin@medmail.com.cn.
(7)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Orient Organ Transplant Center, The 
First Center Hospital of Tianjin, Tianjin, 300192, China. 
pancheng@medmail.com.cn.

BACKGROUND: Liver transplantation is a treatment option for combined 
hepatocellular and cholangiocellular carcinoma (cHCC-CC) but its prognostic 
significance remains unclear. The present study aimed to evaluate the 
therapeutic effects of liver transplantation on cHCC-CC and analyze the 
clinicopathological factors affecting prognosis.
METHODS: Retrospective analysis of the clinicopathological data of a case series 
of 21 patients with cHCC-CC who underwent orthotopic liver transplantation from 
April 2000 to April 2011 was performed. Cumulative survival rate and tumor-free 
survival rate were calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method followed by the 
log-rank test.
RESULTS: The operative survival rate of the 21 patients was 100%; the 30 day 
mortality was 4.8% (1/21) and 90-day mortality was 9.5% (2/21); 1-, 2-, 3-, and 
5-year overall cumulative survival rates were 64%, 47%, 39%, and 39%, 
respectively; and the corresponding cumulative tumor-free survival rates were 
64%, 37%, 30%, and 30%, respectively. Cumulative tumor diameter, lymph node 
metastasis, macroscopic portal vein tumor thrombus, and mixed states according 
to Allen typing were identified as the primary influencing factors of poor 
prognosis (all P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Liver transplantation may be an effective therapeutic method for the 
treatment of cHCC-CC. Strict screening of potential liver transplantation 
candidates with cHCC-CC can help reduce the risks of tumor recurrence and 
metastasis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-015-1252-7
PMCID: PMC4409743
PMID: 25886479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]