1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Aug;85:138-47. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.04.010. Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Peroxynitrite and hydrogen peroxide elicit similar cellular stress responses 
mediated by the Ccp1 sensor protein.

Martins D(1), Bakas I(2), McIntosh K(2), English AM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada H4B 1R6; PROTEO, the FRQ-NT Network for Research on Protein Function, 
Structure, and Engineering, Québec, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada H4B 1R6.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada H4B 1R6; PROTEO, the FRQ-NT Network for Research on Protein Function, 
Structure, and Engineering, Québec, QC, Canada. Electronic address: 
Ann.English@concordia.ca.

Peroxynitrite [ONOO(H)] is an oxidant associated with deleterious effects in 
cells. Because it is an inorganic peroxide that reacts rapidly with peroxidases, 
we speculated that cells may respond to ONOO(H) and H2O2 challenge in a similar 
manner. We exposed yeast cells to SIN-1, a well-characterized ONOO(H) generator, 
and observed stimulation of catalase and peroxiredoxin (Prx) activities. 
Previously, we reported that H2O2 challenge increases these activities in 
wild-type cells and in cells producing the hyperactive mutant H2O2 sensor 
Ccp1(W191F) but not in Ccp1-knockout cells (ccp1Δ). We find here that the 
response of ccp1Δ and ccp1(W191F) cells to SIN-1 mirrors that to H2O2, 
identifying Ccp1 as a sensor of both peroxides. SIN-1 simultaneously releases 
(•)NO and O2(•-), which react to form ONOO(H), but exposure of the three strains 
separately to an (•)NO donor (spermine-NONOate) or an O2(•-) generator 
(paraquat) mainly depresses catalase or Prx activity, whereas co-challenge with 
the NONOate and paraquat stimulates these activities. Because Ccp1 appears to 
sense ONOO(H) in cells, we examined its reaction with ONOO(H) in vitro and found 
that peroxynitrous acid (ONOOH) rapidly (k2>10(6)M(-1)s(-1)) oxidizes purified 
Ccp1 to an intermediate with spectral and ferrocytochrome-oxidizing properties 
indistinguishable from those of its well-characterized compound I formed with 
H2O2. Importantly, the nitrite released from ONOOH is not oxidized to (•)NO2 by 
Ccp1(׳)s compound I, unlike peroxidases involved in immune defense. Overall, our 
results reveal that yeast cells mount a common antioxidant response to ONOO(H) 
and H2O2, with Ccp1 playing a pivotal role as an inorganic peroxide sensor.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.04.010
PMID: 25881547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]