1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 20;10(4):e0124248. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124248. 
eCollection 2015.

Expression of the AcrAB Components of the AcrAB-TolC Multidrug Efflux Pump of 
Yersinia enterocolitica Is Subject to Dual Regulation by OmpR.

Raczkowska A(1), Trzos J(1), Lewandowska O(1), Nieckarz M(1), Brzostek K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology, Faculty of 
Biology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

OmpR is a transcriptional regulator implicated in the control of various 
cellular processes and functions in Enterobacteriaceae. This study was 
undertaken to identify genes comprising the OmpR regulon in the human 
gastrointestinal pathogen Yersinia enterocolitica. Derivatives of an 
ompR-negative strain with random transposon insertions creating transcriptional 
fusions with the reporter gene lacZ were isolated. These were supplied with the 
wild-type ompR allele in trans and then screened for OmpR-dependent changes in 
Î²-galactosidase activity. Using this strategy, five insertions in genes/operons 
positively regulated by OmpR and two insertions in genes negatively regulated by 
this protein were identified. Genetic analysis of one of these fusion strains 
revealed that the gene acrR, encoding transcriptional repressor AcrR is 
negatively regulated by OmpR. Differential analysis of membrane proteins by 
SDS-PAGE followed by mass spectrometry identified the protein AcrB, a component 
of the AcrAB-TolC multidrug efflux pump, as being positively regulated by OmpR. 
Analysis of the activity of the acrR and acrAB promoters using gfp fusions 
confirmed their OmpR-dependent repression and activation, respectively. The 
identification of putative OmpR-binding sites and electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays confirmed that this regulator binds specifically to both promoter regions 
with different affinity. Examination of the activity of the acrR and acrAB 
promoters after the exposure of cells to different chemicals showed that bile 
salts can act as an OmpR-independent inducer. Taken together, our findings 
suggest that OmpR positively controls the expression of the AcrAB-TolC efflux 
pump involved in the adaptive response of Y. enterocolitica O:9 to different 
chemical stressors, thus conferring an advantage in particular ecological 
niches.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124248
PMCID: PMC4403819
PMID: 25893523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.