1. Hum Genet. 2015 Jul;134(7):717-35. doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1554-5. Epub 2015
Apr  21.

Compound mouse mutants of bZIP transcription factors Mafg and Mafk reveal a 
regulatory network of non-crystallin genes associated with cataract.

Agrawal SA(1), Anand D, Siddam AD, Kakrana A, Dash S, Scheiblin DA, Dang CA, 
Terrell AM, Waters SM, Singh A, Motohashi H, Yamamoto M, Lachke SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 19716, 
USA.

Although majority of the genes linked to early-onset cataract exhibit lens fiber 
cell-enriched expression, our understanding of gene regulation in these cells is 
limited to function of just eight transcription factors and largely in the 
context of crystallins. We report on small Maf transcription factors Mafg and 
Mafk as regulators of several non-crystallin human cataract-associated genes in 
fiber cells and establish their significance to this disease. We applied a 
bioinformatics tool for cataract gene discovery iSyTE to identify Mafg and its 
co-regulators in the lens, and generated various null-allelic combinations of 
Mafg:Mafk mouse mutants for phenotypic and molecular analysis. By age 4 months, 
Mafg-/-:Mafk+/- mutants exhibit lens defects that progressively develop into 
cataract. High-resolution phenotypic characterization of Mafg-/-:Mafk+/- mouse 
lens reveals severely disorganized fiber cells, while microarray-based 
expression profiling identifies 97 differentially regulated genes (DRGs). 
Integrative analysis of Mafg-/-:Mafk+/- lens-DRGs with (1) binding motifs and 
genomic targets of small Mafs and their regulatory partners, (2) iSyTE lens 
expression data, and (3) interactions between DRGs in the String database, 
unravel a detailed small Maf regulatory network in the lens, several nodes of 
which are linked to cataract. This approach identifies 36 high-priority 
candidates from the original 97 DRGs. Significantly, 8/36 (22%) DRGs are 
associated with cataracts in human (GSTO1, MGST1, SC4MOL, UCHL1) or mouse 
(Aldh3a1, Crygf, Hspb1, Pcbd1), suggesting a multifactorial etiology that 
includes oxidative stress and misregulation of sterol synthesis. These data 
identify Mafg and Mafk as new cataract-associated candidates and define their 
function in regulating largely non-crystallin genes linked to human cataract.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-015-1554-5
PMCID: PMC4486474
PMID: 25896808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST None declared.