1. J Gen Virol. 2015 Aug;96(8):2336-2348. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.000157. Epub 2015
Apr  21.

RanBPM regulates Zta-mediated transcriptional activity in Epstein-Barr virus.

Yang YC(1), Feng TH(1), Chen TY(1), Huang HH(1), Hung CC(2), Liu ST(2), Chang 
LK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Science and Technology, College of Life Science, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, 106, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Chang-Gung University, Taoyuan, 333, Taiwan, ROC.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) expresses two immediate-early proteins, Rta and Zta, 
which are key transcription factors that can form a complex with MCAF1 at 
Zta-responsive elements (ZREs) to synergistically activate several viral lytic 
genes. Our previous research indicated that RanBPM interacts with Rta and 
enhances Rta sumoylation. Here we showed that RanBPM binds to Zta in vitro and 
in vivo, and acts as an intermediary protein in Rta-Zta complex formation. The 
Rta-RanBPM-Zta complex was observed to bind with ZREs in the transcriptional 
activation of key viral genes, such as BHLF1 and BHRF1, while the introduction 
of RanBPM short hairpin RNA (shRNA) subsequently reduced the synergistic 
activity of Zta and Rta. RanBPM was found to enhance Zta-dependent 
transcriptional activity via the inhibition of Zta sumoylation. Interestingly, 
Z-K12R, a sumoylation-defective mutant of Zta, demonstrated transcriptional 
activation capabilities that were stronger than those of Zta and apparently 
unaffected by RanBPM modulation. Finally, RanBPM silencing inhibited the 
expression of lytic proteins. Taken together, these results shed light on the 
mechanisms by which RanBPM regulates Zta-mediated transcriptional activation, 
and point to an important role for RanBPM in EBV lytic progression.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.000157
PMID: 25900136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]