1. Mol Med. 2015 Apr 21;21(1):346-54. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2012.00336.

Vitamin D Receptor Polymorphisms Are Associated with Reduced Esophageal Vitamin 
D Receptor Expression and Reduced Esophageal Adenocarcinoma Risk.

Janmaat VT(1), Van De Winkel A(1), Peppelenbosch MP(1), Spaander MC(1), 
Uitterlinden AG(2), Pourfarzad F(3), Tilanus HW(4), Rygiel AM(5), Moons LM(1), 
Arp PP(2), Krishnadath KK(5), Kuipers EJ(1)(2), Van Der Laan LJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC-University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Epidemiology and Clinical Chemistry, Erasmus 
MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Center for Experimental Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Epidemiological studies indicate that vitamin D exerts a protective effect on 
the development of various solid cancers. However, concerns have been raised 
regarding the potential deleterious role of high vitamin D levels in the 
development of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). This study investigated genetic 
variation in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) in relation to its expression and risk 
of Barrett esophagus (BE) and EAC. VDR gene regulation was investigated by 
immunohistochemistry, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
and gel shift assays. Fifteen haplotype tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) of the VDR gene were analyzed in 858 patients with reflux esophagitis 
(RE), BE or EAC and 202 healthy controls. VDR mRNA expression was higher in BE 
compared with squamous epithelium. VDR protein was located in the nucleus in BE. 
An rs1989969T/rs2238135G haplotype was identified in the 5' regulatory region of 
the VDR gene. It was associated with an approximately two-fold reduced risk of 
RE, BE and EAC. Analysis of a replication cohort was done for BE that confirmed 
this. The rs1989969T allele causes a GATA-1 transcription factor binding site to 
appear. The signaling of GATA-1, which is regarded as a negative transcriptional 
regulator, could explain the findings for rs1989969. The rs2238135G allele was 
associated with a significantly reduced VDR expression in BE; for the rs1989969T 
allele, a trend in reduced VDR expression was observed. We identified a VDR 
haplotype associated with reduced esophageal VDR expression and a reduced 
incidence of RE, BE and EAC. This VDR haplotype could be useful in identifying 
individuals who benefit most from vitamin D chemoprevention.

DOI: 10.2119/molmed.2012.00336
PMCID: PMC4534473
PMID: 25910066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]