1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 27;10(4):e0125563. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125563. 
eCollection 2015.

Toll-Interacting Protein Suppresses HIV-1 Long-Terminal-Repeat-Driven Gene 
Expression and Silences the Post-Integrational Transcription of Viral Proviral 
DNA.

Yang FC(1), Kuang WD(1), Li C(1), Sun WW(1), Qu D(1), Wang JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Institute Pasteur of 
Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Toll-interacting protein (Tollip) is a host adaptor protein for negatively 
regulating Toll-like receptor 2-, 4-, and IL-1R (interleukin-1 
receptor)-mediated signaling. We found that Tollip expression could be induced 
in MDDCs (monocyte-derived dendritic cells) by HIV-1 particles and recombinant 
gp120 glycoprotein. Hence, we investigated the role of Tollip in modulating 
HIV-1 infection. We found that Tollip expression suppressed NF-κB-dependent 
HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)-driven transcription and thus inhibited HIV-1 
infection. Our protein truncation experiments proved that the intact C-terminus 
of Tollip was required for inhibition of both NF-κB activity and HIV-1 
LTR-driven gene expression. Intriguingly, Tollip silenced the post-integrational 
transcription of HIV-1 proviral DNA, indicating the potential role of Tollip in 
maintaining viral persistence. Our results reveal the novel role of host factor 
Tollip in modulating HIV-1 infection, and may suggest the hijacking of Tollip as 
the negative regulator of the TLR pathway and even the downstream signaling, by 
HIV-1 for maintaining persistent infection. Further elucidation of the 
mechanisms by which HIV-1 induces Tollip expression and identification of the 
role of Tollip in modulating HIV-1 latency will facilitate the understanding of 
host regulation in viral replication and benefit the exploration of novel 
strategies for combating HIV-1 infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125563
PMCID: PMC4411168
PMID: 25915421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.