1. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 May 3;8:44. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0141-5.

Novel approaches in the management of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: 
potential promises for the future.

Goel G(1), Sun W(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 5150 
Centre Avenue, Fifth Floor, Pittsburgh, PA, 15232, USA. goelg@upmc.edu.
(2)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 5150 
Centre Avenue, Fifth Floor, Pittsburgh, PA, 15232, USA. sunw@upmc.edu.

Despite a few breakthroughs in therapy for advanced disease in the recent years, 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma continues to remain one of the most challenging 
human malignancies to treat. The overall prognosis for the majority of patients 
with pancreatic cancer is rather dismal, and therefore, more effective treatment 
options are being desperately sought. The practical goals of management are to 
improve the cure rates for patients with resectable disease, achieve a higher 
conversion rate of locally advanced tumor into potentially resectable disease, 
and finally, prolong the overall survival for those who develop metastatic 
disease. Our understanding of the complex genetic alterations, the implicated 
molecular pathways, and the role of desmoplastic stroma in pancreatic cancer 
tumorigenesis has increased several folds in the recent years. This has 
facilitated the development of novel therapeutic strategies against pancreatic 
cancer, some of which are currently under evaluation in ongoing preclinical and 
clinical studies. This review will summarize the existing treatment approaches 
for this devastating disease and also discuss the promising therapeutic 
approaches that are currently in different stages of clinical development.

DOI: 10.1186/s13045-015-0141-5
PMCID: PMC4431030
PMID: 25935754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]