1. PLoS One. 2015 May 6;10(5):e0127271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127271. 
eCollection 2015.

The Inner Nuclear Membrane Protein Nemp1 Is a New Type of RanGTP-Binding Protein 
in Eukaryotes.

Shibano T(1), Mamada H(2), Hakuno F(3), Takahashi S(3), Taira M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan; Departments of Animal 
Sciences and Agricultural Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agriculture 
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 
113-8657, Japan.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.
(3)Departments of Animal Sciences and Agricultural Biological Chemistry, 
Graduate School of Agriculture and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8657, Japan.

The inner nuclear membrane (INM) protein Nemp1/TMEM194A has previously been 
suggested to be involved in eye development in Xenopus, and contains two 
evolutionarily conserved sequences in the transmembrane domains (TMs) and the 
C-terminal region, named region A and region B, respectively. To elucidate the 
molecular nature of Nemp1, we analyzed its interacting proteins through those 
conserved regions. First, we found that Nemp1 interacts with itself and lamin 
through the TMs and region A, respectively. Colocalization of Nemp1 and lamin at 
the INM suggests that the interaction with lamin participates in the INM 
localization of Nemp1. Secondly, through yeast two-hybrid screening using region 
B as bait, we identified the small GTPase Ran as a probable Nemp1-binding 
partner. GST pulldown and co-immunoprecipitation assays using region B and Ran 
mutants revealed that region B binds directly to the GTP-bound Ran through its 
effector domain. Immunostaining experiments using transfected COS-7 cells 
revealed that full-length Nemp1 recruits Ran near the nuclear envelope, 
suggesting a role for Nemp1 in the accumulation of RanGTP at the nuclear 
periphery. At the neurula-to-tailbud stages of Xenopus embryos, nemp1 expression 
overlapped with ran in several regions including the eye vesicles. Co-knockdown 
using antisense morpholino oligos for nemp1 and ran caused reduction of cell 
densities and severe eye defects more strongly than either single knockdown 
alone, suggesting their functional interaction. Finally we show that Arabidopsis 
thaliana Nemp1-orthologous proteins interact with A. thaliana Ran, suggesting 
their evolutionally conserved physical and functional interactions possibly in 
basic cellular functions including nuclear transportation. Taken together, we 
conclude that Nemp1 represents a new type of RanGTP-binding protein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127271
PMCID: PMC4422613
PMID: 25946333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.