1. Bone. 2015 Sep;78:81-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.04.046. Epub 2015 May 5.

Bone metastasis in prostate cancer: Recurring mitochondrial DNA mutation reveals 
selective pressure exerted by the bone microenvironment.

Arnold RS(1), Fedewa SA(2), Goodman M(3), Osunkoya AO(4), Kissick HT(5), 
Morrissey C(6), True LD(7), Petros JA(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA; The Atlanta VA Medical Center, Decatur, GA 30033, USA.
(2)Emory University School of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology, 
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(3)Emory University School of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology, 
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Emory University Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.
(4)Department of Urology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA; The Atlanta VA Medical Center, Decatur, GA 30033, USA; Emory 
University Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Department of 
Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(5)Department of Urology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.
(6)Department of Urology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA 
98195, USA.
(8)Department of Urology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA; The Atlanta VA Medical Center, Decatur, GA 30033, USA; Emory 
University Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; Department of 
Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA; 
Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic address: jpetros@emory.edu.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2016 Sep;196(3):957-8. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2016.06.026.

BACKGROUND: Cancer progression and metastasis occur such that cells with 
acquired mutations enhancing growth and survival (or inhibiting cell death) 
increase in number, a concept that has been recognized as analogous to Darwinian 
evolution of species since Peter C. Nowell's description in 1976. Selective 
forces include those intrinsic to the host (including metastatic site) as well 
as those resulting from anti-cancer therapies. By examining the mutational 
status of multiple tumor sites within an individual patient some insight may be 
gained into those genetic variants that enhance site-specific metastasis. By 
comparing these data across multiple individuals, recurrent patterns may 
identify alterations that are fundamental to successful site-specific 
metastasis.
METHODS: We sequenced the mitochondrial genome in 10 prostate cancer patients 
with bone metastases enrolled in a rapid autopsy program. Patients had late 
stage disease and received androgen ablation and frequently other systemic 
therapies. For each of 9 patients, 4 separate tissues were sequenced: the 
primary prostate cancer, a soft tissue metastasis, a bone metastasis and an 
uninvolved normal tissue that served as the non-cancerous control. An additional 
(10th) patient had no primary prostate available for sequencing but had both 
metastatic sites (and control DNA) sequenced. We then examined the number and 
location of somatically acquired mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations in the 
primary tumor and two metastatic sites in each individual patient. Finally, we 
compared patients with each other to determine any common patterns of somatic 
mutation.
RESULTS: Somatic mutations were significantly more numerous in the bone compared 
to either the primary tumor or soft tissue metastases. A missense mutation at 
nucleotide position (n.p.) 10398 (A10398G; Thr114Ala) in the respiratory complex 
I gene ND3 was the most common (7 of 10 patients) and was detected only in the 
bone. Other notable somatic mutations that occurred in more than one patient 
include a tRNA Arg mutation at n.p. 10436 and a tRNA Thr mutation at n.p. 15928. 
The tRNA Arg mutation was restricted to bone metastases and occurred in three of 
10 patients (30%). Somatic mutation at 15928 was not restricted to the bone and 
also occurred in three patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Mitochondrial genomic variation was greater in metastatic sites 
than in the primary tumor and bone metastases had statistically significantly 
greater numbers of somatic mutations than either the primary or the soft tissue 
metastases. The genome was not mutated randomly. At least one mutational 
"hot-spot" was identified at the individual base level (nucleotide position 
10398 in bone metastases) indicating a pervasive selective pressure for bone 
metastatic cells that had acquired the 10398 mtDNA mutation. Two additional 
recurrent mutations (tRNA Arg and tRNA Thr) support the concept of bone 
site-specific "survival of the fittest" as revealed by variation in the 
mitochondrial genome and selective pressure exerted by the metastatic site.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.04.046
PMCID: PMC4466124
PMID: 25952970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]