1. J Med Virol. 2015 Oct;87(10):1702-15. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24227. Epub 2015 May
12.

IFN-λ gene polymorphisms as predictive factors in chronic hepatitis C 
treatment-naive patients without access to protease inhibitors.

Olmedo DB(1), Cader SA(1), Porto LC(1).

Author information:
(1)Histocompatibility and Cryopreservation Laboratory, Rio de Janeiro State 
University, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The single nucleotides polymorphisms analyses in the regions near the IL28B gene 
in patients chronically infected with genotype 1 hepatitis C virus (HCV) are an 
important predictive factor for sustained virological response (SVR). The aim 
was to assess the predictive value of the polymorphisms of the IL28B/IFNL3 gene 
in patients chronically infected with genotype 1 for the viral clearance 
obtained after initial treatment including admixed populations. A systematic 
review was conducted, using a meta-analysis in the PubMed, Embase, LILACS, and 
SCIELO using MesH and DECS in 42 studies. The parameters were IL28B 
polymorphisms, rs12979860, rs8099917, and rs12980275, SVR ratio, and OR (odds 
ratio). OR and confidence Interval of 95% (95%CI), were calculated by fixed or 
random effects models. Heterogeneity, sensitivity analysis, and publication bias 
were also performed. Significant differences were noted between carriers groups 
with the major versus minor allele at rs12979860 CC versus CT/TT-genotype 
(OR = 4.18; 95%CI = 3.37-5.17), rs8099917 TT versus TG/GG-genotype (OR = 4.07; 
95%CI = 2.94-5.63), and rs12980275 AA versus AA/AG-genotype (OR = 5.34; 
95%CI = 1.60-17.82). There was selection bias in the rs8099917 analysis (Egger's 
regression P = 0.049), which reversed after performing a sensitivity analysis 
(P = 0.510). The incorporation of SNP analyses in IL28B/IFNL3 gene during the 
diagnosis process in Brazil should be used as a complementary tool to determine 
the appropriate treatment for HCV genotype 1. Here, we confirm that the 
rs12979860 CC, rs8099917 TT, and rs12980275 AA genotype-carriers have favorable 
responses to standard therapy, including two studies with Brazilian population, 
and this information should be considered.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24227
PMID: 25970604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]