1. PLoS Genet. 2015 May 21;11(5):e1005135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005135. 
eCollection 2015 May.

Turning Saccharomyces cerevisiae into a Frataxin-Independent Organism.

Yoon H(1), Knight SA(1), Pandey A(2), Pain J(2), Turkarslan S(3), Pain D(2), 
Dancis A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States 
of America.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers 
University, Newark, New Jersey, United States of America.
(3)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 May 21;11(5):e1005192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005192.

Frataxin (Yfh1 in yeast) is a conserved protein and deficiency leads to the 
neurodegenerative disease Friedreich's ataxia. Frataxin is a critical protein 
for Fe-S cluster assembly in mitochondria, interacting with other components of 
the Fe-S cluster machinery, including cysteine desulfurase Nfs1, Isd11 and the 
Isu1 scaffold protein. Yeast Isu1 with the methionine to isoleucine substitution 
(M141I), in which the E. coli amino acid is inserted at this position, corrected 
most of the phenotypes that result from lack of Yfh1 in yeast. This suppressor 
Isu1 behaved as a genetic dominant. Furthermore frataxin-bypass activity 
required a completely functional Nfs1 and correlated with the presence of 
efficient scaffold function. A screen of random Isu1 mutations for 
frataxin-bypass activity identified only M141 substitutions, including Ile, Cys, 
Leu, or Val. In each case, mitochondrial Nfs1 persulfide formation was enhanced, 
and mitochondrial Fe-S cluster assembly was improved in the absence of frataxin. 
Direct targeting of the entire E. coli IscU to ∆yfh1 mitochondria also 
ameliorated the mutant phenotypes. In contrast, expression of IscU with the 
reverse substitution i.e. IscU with Ile to Met change led to worsening of the 
∆yfh1 phenotypes, including severely compromised growth, increased sensitivity 
to oxygen, deficiency in Fe-S clusters and heme, and impaired iron homeostasis. 
A bioinformatic survey of eukaryotic Isu1/prokaryotic IscU database entries 
sorted on the amino acid utilized at the M141 position identified unique 
groupings, with virtually all of the eukaryotic scaffolds using Met, and the 
preponderance of prokaryotic scaffolds using other amino acids. The 
frataxin-bypassing amino acids Cys, Ile, Leu, or Val, were found predominantly 
in prokaryotes. This amino acid position 141 is unique in Isu1, and the 
frataxin-bypass effect likely mimics a conserved and ancient feature of the 
prokaryotic Fe-S cluster assembly machinery.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005135
PMCID: PMC4440810
PMID: 25996596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.