1. PLoS Genet. 2015 May 22;11(5):e1005235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005235. 
eCollection 2015 May.

Monoallelic loss of the imprinted gene Grb10 promotes tumor formation in 
irradiated Nf1+/- mice.

Mroue R(1), Huang B(1), Braunstein S(1), Firestone AJ(2), Nakamura JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Jun 15;11(6):e1005327. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005327.

Imprinted genes are expressed from only one parental allele and heterozygous 
loss involving the expressed allele is sufficient to produce complete loss of 
protein expression. Genetic alterations are common in tumorigenesis but the role 
of imprinted genes in this process is not well understood. In earlier work we 
mutagenized mice heterozygous for the Neurofibromatosis I tumor suppressor gene 
(NF1) to model radiotherapy-associated second malignant neoplasms that arise in 
irradiated NF1 patients. Expression analysis of tumor cell lines established 
from our mouse models identified Grb10 expression as widely absent. Grb10 is an 
imprinted gene and polymorphism analysis of cell lines and primary tumors 
demonstrates that the expressed allele is commonly lost in diverse Nf1 mutant 
tumors arising in our mouse models. We performed functional studies to test 
whether Grb10 restoration or loss alter fundamental features of the tumor 
growth. Restoring Grb10 in Nf1 mutant tumors decreases proliferation, decreases 
soft agar colony formation and downregulates Ras signaling. Conversely, Grb10 
silencing in untransformed mouse embryo fibroblasts significantly increased cell 
proliferation and increased Ras-GTP levels. Expression of a constitutively 
activated MEK rescued tumor cells from Grb10-mediated reduction in colony 
formation. These studies reveal that Grb10 loss can occur during in vivo 
tumorigenesis, with a functional consequence in untransformed primary cells. In 
tumors, Grb10 loss independently promotes Ras pathway hyperactivation, which 
promotes hyperproliferation, an early feature of tumor development. In the 
context of a robust Nf1 mutant mouse model of cancer this work identifies a 
novel role for an imprinted gene in tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005235
PMCID: PMC4441450
PMID: 26000738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.