1. mBio. 2015 May 26;6(3):e00686-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00686-15.

Temporal hierarchy of gene expression mediated by transcription factor binding 
affinity and activation dynamics.

Gao R(1), Stock AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Advanced 
Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University-Robert Wood Johnson Medical 
School, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Advanced 
Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University-Robert Wood Johnson Medical 
School, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA stock@cabm.rutgers.edu.

Understanding cellular responses to environmental stimuli requires not only the 
knowledge of specific regulatory components but also the quantitative 
characterization of the magnitude and timing of regulatory events. The 
two-component system is one of the major prokaryotic signaling schemes and is 
the focus of extensive interest in quantitative modeling and investigation of 
signaling dynamics. Here we report how the binding affinity of the PhoB 
two-component response regulator (RR) to target promoters impacts the level and 
timing of expression of PhoB-regulated genes. Information content has often been 
used to assess the degree of conservation for transcription factor (TF)-binding 
sites. We show that increasing the information content of PhoB-binding sites in 
designed phoA promoters increased the binding affinity and that the binding 
affinity and concentration of phosphorylated PhoB (PhoB~P) together dictate the 
level and timing of expression of phoA promoter variants. For various 
PhoB-regulated promoters with distinct promoter architectures, expression levels 
appear not to be correlated with TF-binding affinities, in contrast to the 
intuitive and oversimplified assumption that promoters with higher affinity for 
a TF tend to have higher expression levels. However, the expression timing of 
the core set of PhoB-regulated genes correlates well with the binding affinity 
of PhoB~P to individual promoters and the temporal hierarchy of gene expression 
appears to be related to the function of gene products during the phosphate 
starvation response. Modulation of the information content and binding affinity 
of TF-binding sites may be a common strategy for temporal programming of the 
expression profile of RR-regulated genes.
IMPORTANCE: A single TF often orchestrates the expression of multiple genes in 
response to environmental stimuli. It is not clear how different TF-binding 
sites within the regulon dictate the expression profile. Our studies of 
Escherichia coli PhoB, a response regulator that controls expression of a core 
set of phosphate assimilation genes in response to phosphate starvation, showed 
that expression levels of PhoB-regulated genes are under sophisticated control 
and do not follow a simple correlation with the binding affinity of PhoB~P to 
individual promoters. However, the expression timing correlates with the 
PhoB-binding affinity and gene functions. Genes involved in direct Pi uptake 
contain high-affinity sites and are transcribed earlier than genes involved in 
phosphorus scavenging. This illustrates an elaborate mechanism of temporally 
programmed gene expression, even for nondevelopmental pathways.

Copyright Â© 2015 Gao and Stock.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00686-15
PMCID: PMC4447250
PMID: 26015501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]