1. Structure. 2015 Jul 7;23(7):1336-43. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.04.018. Epub 2015
 Jun 4.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ski7 Is a GTP-Binding Protein Adopting the 
Characteristic Conformation of Active Translational GTPases.

Kowalinski E(1), Schuller A(2), Green R(2), Conti E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Cell Biology Department, Max Planck Institute of 
Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology and 
Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(3)Department of Structural Cell Biology Department, Max Planck Institute of 
Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany. Electronic 
address: conti@biochem.mpg.de.

Ski7 is a cofactor of the cytoplasmic exosome in budding yeast, functioning in 
both mRNA turnover and non-stop decay (NSD), a surveillance pathway that 
degrades faulty mRNAs lacking a stop codon. The C-terminal region of Ski7 
(Ski7C) shares overall sequence similarity with the translational GTPase 
(trGTPase) Hbs1, but whether Ski7 has retained the properties of a trGTPase is 
unclear. Here, we report the high-resolution structures of Ski7C bound to either 
intact guanosine triphosphate (GTP) or guanosine diphosphate-Pi. The individual 
domains of Ski7C adopt the conformation characteristic of active trGTPases. 
Furthermore, the nucleotide-binding site of Ski7C shares similar features 
compared with active trGTPases, notably the presence of a characteristic 
monovalent cation. However, a suboptimal polar residue at the putative catalytic 
site and an unusual polar residue that interacts with the γ-phosphate of GTP 
distinguish Ski7 from other trGTPases, suggesting it might function rather as a 
GTP-binding protein than as a GTP-hydrolyzing enzyme.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2015.04.018
PMCID: PMC4509514
PMID: 26051716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]