1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 22;5:11408. doi: 10.1038/srep11408.

Unraveling a molecular determinant for clathrin-independent internalization of 
the M2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor.

Wan M(1), Zhang W(1), Tian Y(1), Xu C(1), Xu T(2), Liu J(1), Zhang R(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, College 
of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(2)1] Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China [2] National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, 
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Endocytosis and postendocytic sorting of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) is 
important for the regulation of both their cell surface density and signaling 
profile. Unlike the mechanisms of clathrin-dependent endocytosis (CDE), the 
mechanisms underlying the control of GPCR signaling by clathrin-independent 
endocytosis (CIE) remain largely unknown. Among the muscarinic acetylcholine 
receptors (mAChRs), the M4 mAChR undergoes CDE and recycling, whereas the M2 
mAChR is internalized through CIE and targeted to lysosomes. Here we 
investigated the endocytosis and postendocytic trafficking of M2 mAChR based on 
a comparative analysis of the third cytoplasmic domain in M2 and M4 mAChRs. For 
the first time, we identified that the sequence (374)KKKPPPS(380) servers as a 
sorting signal for the clathrin-independent internalization of M2 mAChR. 
Switching (374)KKKPPPS(380) to the i3 loop of the M4 mAChR shifted the receptor 
into lysosomes through the CIE pathway; and therefore away from CDE and 
recycling. We also found another previously unidentified sequence that guides 
CDE of the M2 mAChR, (361)VARKIVKMTKQPA(373), which is normally masked in the 
presence of the downstream sequence (374)KKKPPPS(380). Taken together, our data 
indicate that endocytosis and postendocytic sorting of GPCRs that undergo CIE 
could be sequence-dependent.

DOI: 10.1038/srep11408
PMCID: PMC4476042
PMID: 26094760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]