1. Exp Neurobiol. 2015 Jun;24(2):156-68. doi: 10.5607/en.2015.24.2.156. Epub 2015
 Jun 17.

Chronic Antidepressant Treatment in Normal Mice Induces Anxiety and Impairs 
Stress-coping Ability.

Baek IS(1), Park JY(2), Han PL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 
120-750, Korea. ; Department of Chemistry and Nano Science, Ewha Womans 
University, Seoul 120-750, Korea.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 
120-750, Korea.

Antidepressants are clinically used for patients with major depression. 
Antidepressant treatments in certain groups of patients are effective for 
relieving depression as well as anxiety disorder. However, it is not clearly 
known whether the use of current antidepressants in healthy persons is 
beneficial for upcoming depression- and anxiety-inducing life events. To address 
this question, normal mice were intraperitoneally administered with imipramine 
or fluoxetine for more than 2 weeks, and behaviors related to anxiety and 
depression were evaluated. Mice treated with imipramine or fluoxetine for more 
than 14 days exhibited significantly decreased immobility time in the forced 
swim test and tail suspension test, but these mice exhibited enhanced anxiety in 
several behavioral tests. Furthermore, chronic antidepressant treatments 
followed by sub-threshold level of stress in normal mice profoundly aggravated 
antidepressant-induced anxiety-like behaviors without further affecting 
depression-related behaviors. Chronic antidepressant treatments followed by 
sub-threshold level of stress produced swollen vesicles and ulcerations on the 
lips as well as a watery and inflammatory nose. Mice given chronic 
antidepressant treatments displayed intestinal abnormalities evidenced by a 
highly enlarged and inflamed small intestine full of defecation materials. These 
results suggest that chronic antidepressant treatment in normal mice provokes 
anxiety-like behaviors and impairs their stress-coping ability.

DOI: 10.5607/en.2015.24.2.156
PMCID: PMC4479812
PMID: 26113795