1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 6;10(7):e0132211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132211. 
eCollection 2015.

Revisiting the Diego Blood Group System in Amerindians: Evidence for 
Gene-Culture Comigration.

Bégat C(1), Bailly P(2), Chiaroni J(2), Mazières S(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, EFS, ADES UMR 7268, 13916 Marseille, France.
(2)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, EFS, ADES UMR 7268, 13916 Marseille, France; 
Etablissement Français du Sang Alpes Méditerranée, 13392 Marseille cedex 5, 
France.

Six decades ago the DI*A allele of the Diego blood group system was instrumental 
in proving Native American populations originated from Siberia. Since then, it 
has received scant attention. The present study was undertaken to reappraise 
distribution of the DI*A allele in 144 Native American populations based on 
current knowledge. Using analysis of variance tests, frequency distribution was 
studied according to geographical, environmental, and cultural parameters. 
Frequencies were highest in Amazonian populations. In contrast, DI*A was 
undetectable in subarctic, Fuegian, Panamanian, Chaco and Yanomama populations. 
Closer study revealed a correlation that this unequal distribution was 
correlated with language, suggesting that linguistic divergence was a driving 
force in the expansion of DI*A among Native Americans. The absence of DI*A in 
circumpolar Eskimo-Aleut and Na-Dene speakers was consistent with a late 
migratory event confined to North America. Distribution of DI*A in subtropical 
areas indicated that gene and culture exchanges were more intense within than 
between ecozones. Bolstering the utility of classical genetic markers in 
biological anthropology, the present study of the expansion of Diego blood group 
genetic polymorphism in Native Americans shows strong evidence of gene-culture 
comigration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132211
PMCID: PMC4493026
PMID: 26148209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.