1. FEBS Lett. 2015 Jul 22;589(16):2087-93. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.029.
Epub  2015 Jul 3.

The human ATF1 rs11169571 polymorphism increases essential hypertension risk 
through modifying miRNA binding.

Yang S(1), Gao Y(2), Liu G(1), Li J(1), Shi K(1), Du B(1), Si D(1), Yang P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, China-Japan Union Hospital, Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.
(2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, China-Japan Union Hospital, Jilin 
University, Changchun, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, China-Japan Union Hospital, Jilin University, 
Changchun, China. Electronic address: pyang@jlu.edu.cn.

Activating transcription factor 1 (ATF1) may be involved in essential 
hypertension (EH) by induction of NADPH oxidase 1 (NOX1) and radical oxygen 
species (ROSs) production. Abnormal expression of ATF1 was found in EH in 
previous microarray analysis. Here we tested whether a single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) located in the 3'-untranslated region (3'UTR) of ATF1 was 
associated with EH susceptibility by affecting microRNA (miRNA) binding. In 
silico analysis indicated that rs11169571 (T>C) was a candidate SNP to modulate 
miRNA: ATF1 mRNA complex, with the greatest changed energy for hsa-miR-1283, and 
the luciferase reporter analysis showed that miR-1283 inhibited the activity of 
the reporter vector carrying -T allele, but not the -C allele. In addition, 
inhibition of miR-1283 in HA-VSMCs enhanced the expression of ATF1 mRNA as well 
as the ROS levels. Further case-control study showed that rs11169571 was 
significantly associated with increased risk of EH. Finally, we observed an 
increased ATF1 protein level in peripheral blood of EH patients with CC carriers 
compared to TT carriers of rs11169571, with an intermediate ATF1 level in TC 
carriers. These results suggested that rs11169571 of ATF1 gene may be associated 
with EH, and the SNP-modified posttranscriptional gene regulation by miRNAs 
could be a potentially pathogenetic mechanism of EH.

Copyright Â© 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.029
PMID: 26149214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]