1. Mol Immunol. 2015 Oct;67(2 Pt B):276-86. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.06.021.
Epub  2015 Jul 7.

Complement factor H, FHR-3 and FHR-1 variants associate in an extended haplotype 
conferring increased risk of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.

Bernabéu-Herrero ME(1), Jiménez-Alcázar M(2), Anter J(3), Pinto S(3), Sánchez 
Chinchilla D(3), Garrido S(4), López-Trascasa M(4), Rodríguez de Córdoba S(3), 
Sánchez-Corral P(5).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPAZ, Paseo de la 
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain; Ciber de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPAZ, Paseo de la 
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040 Madrid, 
Spain; Ciber de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain.
(4)Unidad de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPAZ, Paseo de la 
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain; Ciber de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPAZ, Paseo de la 
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain; Ciber de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: pilar.sanchezcorral@salud.madrid.org.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a severe thrombotic microangiopathy 
affecting the renal microvasculature and is associated with complement 
dysregulation caused by mutations or autoantibodies. Disease penetrance and 
severity is modulated by inheritance of "risk" polymorphisms in the complement 
genes MCP, CFH and CFHR1. We describe the prevalence of mutations, the frequency 
of risk polymorphisms and the occurrence of anti-FH autoantibodies in a Spanish 
aHUS cohort (n=367). We also report the identification of a polymorphism in 
CFHR3 (c.721C>T; rs379370) that is associated with increased risk of aHUS 
(OR=1.78; CI 1.22-2.59; p=0.002), and is most frequently included in an extended 
risk haplotype spanning the CFH-CFHR3-CFHR1 genes. This extended haplotype 
integrates polymorphisms in the promoter region of CFH and CFHR3, and is 
associated with poorer evolution of renal function and decreased FH levels. The 
CFH-CFHR3-CFHR1 aHUS-risk haplotype seems to be the same as was previously 
associated with protection against meningococcal infections, suggesting that the 
genetic variability in this region is limited to a few extended haplotypes, each 
with opposite effects in various human diseases. These results suggest that the 
combination of quantitative and qualitative variations in the complement 
proteins encoded by CFH, CFHR3 and CFHR1 genes is key for the association of 
these haplotypes with disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.06.021
PMID: 26163426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]