1. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2015 Sep;103(9):741-6. doi: 
10.1002/bdra.23343. Epub 2015 Jul 15.

Heme oxygenase-1 promoter polymorphisms and risk of spina bifida.

Fujioka K(1), Yang W(1), Wallenstein MB(1), Zhao H(1), Wong RJ(1), Stevenson 
DK(1), Shaw GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatal and Developmental Medicine, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Spina bifida is the most common form of neural tube defects (NTDs). 
Etiologies of NTDs are multifactorial, and oxidative stress is believed to play 
a key role in NTD development. Heme oxygenase (HO), the rate-limiting enzyme in 
heme degradation, has multiple protective properties including mediating 
antioxidant processes, making it an ideal candidate for study. The inducible HO 
isoform (HO-1) has two functional genetic polymorphisms: (GT)n dinucleotide 
repeats and A(-413)T SNP (rs2071746), both of which can affect its promoter 
activity. However, no study has investigated a possible association between HO-1 
genetic polymorphisms and risk of NTDs.
METHODS: This case-control study included 152 spina bifida cases (all 
myelomeningoceles) and 148 non-malformed controls obtained from the California 
Birth Defects Monitoring Program reflecting births during 1990 to 1999. Genetic 
polymorphisms were determined by polymerase chain reaction and amplified 
fragment length polymorphisms/restriction fragment length polymorphisms using 
genomic DNA extracted from archived newborn blood spots. Genotype and haplotype 
frequencies of two HO-1 promoter polymorphisms between cases and controls were 
compared.
RESULTS: For (GT)n dinucleotide repeat lengths and the A(-413)T SNP, no 
significant differences in allele frequencies or genotypes were found. Linkage 
disequilibrium was observed between the HO-1 polymorphisms (D': 0.833); however, 
haplotype analyses did not show increased risk of spina bifida overall or by 
race/ethnicity.
CONCLUSION: Although, an association was not found between HO-1 polymorphisms 
and risk of spina bifida, we speculate that the combined effect of low HO-1 
expression and exposures to known environmental oxidative stressors (low folate 
status or diabetes), may overwhelm antioxidant defenses and increase risk of 
NTDs and warrants further study.

Â© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bdra.23343
PMCID: PMC6532789
PMID: 26173399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.