1. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol. 2015;2015:817862. doi: 10.1155/2015/817862. Epub 2015
 Jun 22.

Ovarian and Renal Vein Thrombosis: A Rare Cause of Fever Outer the Postpartum 
Period.

Togan T(1), Turan H(1), Cifci E(2), Çiftci C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Başkent 
Universitesi, Konya Uygulama ve Arastirma Merkezi, Hoca Cihan Mahallesi Saray 
Caddesi, No. 1, Selcuklu, Konya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Radyoloji, Başkent Universitesi, Konya Uygulama ve Arastirma 
Merkezi, Hoca Cihan Mahallesi Saray Caddesi, No. 1, Selcuklu, Konya, Turkey.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Jınekoloji, Başkent Universitesi, Konya Uygulama 
ve Arastirma Merkezi, Hoca Cihan Mahallesi Saray Caddesi, No. 1, Selcuklu, 
Konya, Turkey.

Although there is no other underlying disease, women can sometimes experience 
rare and serious diseases such as ovarian vein thrombosis (OVT) and renal vein 
thrombosis (RVT) after giving birth. The widespread development of thrombosis is 
treated for the first time in this study. Stasis, coagulation factor 
abnormalities, and intimal damage to the venous thrombosis risk can increase 
during pregnancy. It was mentioned that it diagnoses an abnormality in the 
hypercoagulability half of women with OVT. Despite the hypercoagulant 
abnormality observed in pregnant women, it was very unusual that the renal vein 
thrombosis led to this complication. It can lead to severe complication of OVT 
which can even cause death. It was the first time that the renal vein and 
ovarian vein thrombosis were observed in the postpartum period, and there was no 
coagulation abnormality. It is known that the thrombus in the postpartum period 
can be observed with the fever of unknown origin. The problematic, but rarely 
observed, postpartum disease such as ovarian venous thrombosis (OVT) is 
generally observed in the right ovarian vein. In this disease, avoiding the 
resulting laparotomy heparin and intravenous antibiotics is best solution for 
the patient. If it is to be noted a fever for unknown reasons, that it be 
thrombosis.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/817862
PMCID: PMC4491556
PMID: 26185694