1. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Jul 8;9:91. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00091. eCollection 
2015.

Oxidative stress and Parkinson's disease.

Blesa J(1), Trigo-Damas I(1), Quiroga-Varela A(2), Jackson-Lewis VR(3).

Author information:
(1)Centro Integral de Neurociencias A.C., HM Puerta del Sur, Hospitales de 
Madrid, Móstoles and Medical School, CEU San Pablo University, Madrid Spain.
(2)Department of Medicine, Clinica Neurologica, Ospedale Santa Maria della 
Misericordia - Università di Perugia, Perugia Italy.
(3)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY 
USA.

Parkinson disease (PD) is a chronic, progressive neurological disease that is 
associated with a loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars 
compacta of the brain. The molecular mechanisms underlying the loss of these 
neurons still remain elusive. Oxidative stress is thought to play an important 
role in dopaminergic neurotoxicity. Complex I deficiencies of the respiratory 
chain account for the majority of unfavorable neuronal degeneration in PD. 
Environmental factors, such as neurotoxins, pesticides, insecticides, dopamine 
(DA) itself, and genetic mutations in PD-associated proteins contribute to 
mitochondrial dysfunction which precedes reactive oxygen species formation. In 
this mini review, we give an update of the classical pathways involving these 
mechanisms of neurodegeneration, the biochemical and molecular events that 
mediate or regulate DA neuronal vulnerability, and the role of PD-related gene 
products in modulating cellular responses to oxidative stress in the course of 
the neurodegenerative process.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00091
PMCID: PMC4495335
PMID: 26217195