1. Int J Endocrinol. 2015;2015:595164. doi: 10.1155/2015/595164. Epub 2015 Jul
22.

A Novel Mutation in the CYP11B1 Gene Causes Steroid 11β-Hydroxylase Deficient 
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia with Reversible Cardiomyopathy.

Alqahtani MA(1), Shati AA(2), Zou M(3), Alsuheel AM(2), Alhayani AA(1), 
Al-Qahtani SM(2), Gilban HM(1), Meyer BF(3), Shi Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Aseer Central Hospital, Abha 62523, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Child Health, College of Medicine, King Khalid University, Abha 
61421, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, 
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to steroid 11β-hydroxylase deficiency 
is the second most common form of CAH, resulting from a mutation in the CYP11B1 
gene. Steroid 11β-hydroxylase deficiency results in excessive mineralcorticoids 
and androgen production leading to hypertension, precocious puberty with acne, 
enlarged penis, and hyperpigmentation of scrotum of genetically male infants. In 
the present study, we reported 3 male cases from a Saudi family who presented 
with penile enlargement, progressive darkness of skin, hypertension, and 
cardiomyopathy. The elder patient died due to heart failure and his younger 
brothers were treated with hydrocortisone and antihypertensive medications. Six 
months following treatment, cardiomyopathy disappeared with normal blood 
pressure and improvement in the skin pigmentation. The underlying molecular 
defect was investigated by PCR-sequencing analysis of all coding exons and 
intron-exon boundary of the CYP11B1 gene. A novel biallelic mutation c.780 G>A 
in exon 4 of the CYP11B1 gene was found in the patients. The mutation created a 
premature stop codon at amino acid 260 (p.W260 (∗) ), resulting in a truncated 
protein devoid of 11β-hydroxylase activity. Interestingly, a somatic mutation at 
the same codon (c.779 G>A, p.W260 (∗) ) was reported in a patient with papillary 
thyroid cancer (COSMIC database). In conclusion, we have identified a novel 
nonsense mutation in the CYP11B1 gene that causes classic steroid 
11β-hydroxylase deficient CAH. Cardiomyopathy and cardiac failure can be 
reversed by early diagnosis and treatment.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/595164
PMCID: PMC4525762
PMID: 26265915