1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jun 1;8(6):7391-6. eCollection 2015.

Association between ACE polymorphisms and osteoarthritis susceptibility.

Qing Z(1), Ye J(1).

Author information:
(1)Honghui Hospital Affiliated to Medical College of Xi'an Jiao Tong University 
Friendship Road, Xi'an, China.

OBJECTIVE: The present study was designed to investigate the association of 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) rs4343 and rs4362 polymorphisms with the 
susceptibility to osteoarthritis (OA).
METHODS: 109 knee OA patients and 114 healthy people were enrolled in the study. 
Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) 
was used to perform the genotyping for two groups and the linkage disequilibrium 
and haplotype were analyzed using Haploview software. The differences of 
genotype and allele frequencies were analyzed by Ï‡(2) test and Fisher's exact 
test. The relationship between ACE polymorphisms and OA susceptibility was 
represented by odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs).
RESULTS: The genotypes distributions of ACE rs4343 and rs4362 polymorphisms in 
control groups were accordance with HWE. ACE rs4343 polymorphism was associated 
with the significantly increased risk of OA (AG vs. AA: OR=2.41, P=0.003; GG vs. 
AA: OR=5.35, P=0.015; G vs. A: OR=2.27, P<0.001). Similarly, rs4362 
polymorphisms was also a risk factor for OA (CT vs. CC: OR=2.60, P=0.005; TT vs. 
CC: OR=3.15, P=0.003; T vs. C: OR=1.88, P=0.001). The result of haplotype 
analysis showed complete linkage disequilibrium in rs 4343 and rs 4362 
polymorphisms. The G-T haplotype significantly increased OA susceptibility, but 
A-C is a protective factor for the occurrence of OA.
CONCLUSION: Significant correlation exists between ACE rs4343 and rs4362 
polymorphisms and OA. In haplotype analysis, A-C haplotype may provide 
protection against OA, and G-T haplotype may be a risk factor for the 
development of OA.

PMCID: PMC4525975
PMID: 26261641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]