1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 25;465(3):414-420. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.024. Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Identification of novel regulatory NFAT and TFII-I binding elements in the 
calbindin-D28k promoter in response to serum deprivation.

Hajibeigi A(#)(1), Dioum EM(#)(2), Guo J(1), Öz OK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 
75390-9153, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 
75390-9153, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Calbindin-D28k, a key regulator of calcium homeostasis plays a cytoprotective 
role in various tissues. We used serum free (SFM) and charcoal stripped serum 
(csFBS) culture media as models of cellular stress to modulate calbindin D28k 
expression and identify regulatory cis-elements and trans-acting factors in 
kidney and beta cells. The murine calbindin-D28k promoter activity was 
significantly upregulated under SFM or csFBS condition. Promoter analysis 
revealed evolutionary conserved regulatory cis-elements and deletion of 23 nt 
from +117/+139 as critical for basal transcription. Bioinformatics analysis of 
the promoter revealed conserved NFAT and TFII regulators elements. Forced 
expression of NFAT stimulated promoter activity. Inhibition of NFAT 
transcriptional activity by FK506 attenuated calbindin-D28k expression. TFII-I 
was shown to be necessary for basal promoter activity and to act cooperatively 
with NFAT. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, NFAT was shown to 
bind to both proximal and distal promoter regions. ChIP assays also revealed 
recruitment of TFII to the -36/+139 region. Knockdown of TFII-I decreased 
promoter activity. In summary, calbindin-D28k expression during serum 
deprivation is partly regulated by NFAT and TF-II. This regulation may be 
important in vivo during ischemia and growth factor withdrawal to regulate 
cellular function and maintenance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.024
PMCID: PMC4595168
PMID: 26260319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]