1. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167A(12):2998-3005. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37337. Epub
 2015 Aug 22.

Chronic pain in Noonan Syndrome: A previously unreported but common symptom.

Vegunta S(1), Cotugno R(2), Williamson A(2), Grebe TA(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix, Arizona.
(2)Department of Pediatric Pain Management, Phoenix Children's Hospital, 
Phoenix, Arizona.
(3)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Phoenix Children's Hospital, Phoenix, 
Arizona.

Noonan syndrome (NS) is a multiple malformation syndrome characterized by 
pulmonic stenosis, cardiomyopathy, short stature, lymphatic dysplasia, 
craniofacial anomalies, cryptorchidism, clotting disorders, and learning 
disabilities. Eight genes in the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway are implicated in 
NS. Chronic pain is an uncommon feature. To investigate the prevalence of pain 
in NS, we distributed a two-part questionnaire about pain among NS individuals 
at the Third International Meeting on Genetic Syndromes of the Ras/MAPK Pathway. 
The first part of the questionnaire queried demographic information among all NS 
participants. The second part was completed by individuals with chronic pain. 
Questions included musculoskeletal problems and clinical features of pain. 
Forty-five questionnaires were analyzed; 53% of subjects were female. Mean age 
was 17 (2-48) years; 47% had a PTPN11 mutation. Sixty-two percent (28/45) of 
individuals with NS experienced chronic pain. There was a significant 
relationship between prevalence of pain and residing in a cold climate 
(P = 0.004). Pain occurred commonly in extremities/joints and head/trunk, but 
more commonly in extremities/joints (P = 0.066). Subjects with hypermobile 
joints were more likely to have pain (P = 0.052). Human growth hormone treatment 
was not statistically significant among subjects without chronic pain 
(P = 0.607). We conclude that pain is a frequent and under-recognized clinical 
feature of NS. Chronic pain may be associated with joint hypermobility and 
aggravated by colder climate. Our study is a preliminary investigation that 
should raise awareness about pain as a common symptom in children and adults 
with NS.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37337
PMID: 26297936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]