1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Aug 28;11(8):e1005139. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005139. 
eCollection 2015 Aug.

The Activation of Phytophthora Effector Avr3b by Plant Cyclophilin is Required 
for the Nudix Hydrolase Activity of Avr3b.

Kong G(1), Zhao Y(1), Jing M(1), Huang J(1), Yang J(1), Xia Y(1), Kong L(1), Ye 
W(1), Xiong Q(1), Qiao Y(2), Dong S(1), Ma W(3), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Plant Protection, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, University of California, 
Riverside, Riverside, California, United States of America; National Key 
Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, Institute of Crop 
Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, University of California, 
Riverside, Riverside, California, United States of America.

Plant pathogens secrete an arsenal of effector proteins to impair host immunity. 
Some effectors possess enzymatic activities that can modify their host targets. 
Previously, we demonstrated that a Phytophthora sojae RXLR effector Avr3b acts 
as a Nudix hydrolase when expressed in planta; and this enzymatic activity is 
required for full virulence of P. sojae strain P6497 in soybean (Glycine max). 
Interestingly, recombinant Avr3b produced by E. coli does not have the hydrolase 
activity unless it was incubated with plant protein extracts. Here, we report 
the activation of Avr3b by a prolyl-peptidyl isomerase (PPIase), cyclophilin, in 
plant cells. Avr3b directly interacts with soybean cyclophilin GmCYP1, which 
activates the hydrolase activity of Avr3b in a PPIase activity-dependent manner. 
Avr3b contains a putative Glycine-Proline (GP) motif; which is known to confer 
cyclophilin-binding in other protein substrates. Substitution of the Proline 
(P132) in the putative GP motif impaired the interaction of Avr3b with GmCYP1; 
as a result, the mutant Avr3bP132A can no longer be activated by GmCYP1, and is 
also unable to promote Phytophthora infection. Avr3b elicits hypersensitive 
response (HR) in soybean cultivars producing the resistance protein Rps3b, but 
Avr3bP132A lost its ability to trigger HR. Furthermore, silencing of GmCYP1 
rendered reduced cell death triggered by Avr3b, suggesting that GmCYP1-mediated 
Avr3b maturation is also required for Rps3b recognition. Finally, cyclophilins 
of Nicotiana benthamiana can also interact with Avr3b and activate its enzymatic 
activity. Overall, our results demonstrate that cyclophilin is a "helper" that 
activates the enzymatic activity of Avr3b after it is delivered into plant 
cells; as such, cyclophilin is required for the avirulence and virulence 
functions of Avr3b.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005139
PMCID: PMC4552650
PMID: 26317500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.