1. Gene. 2016 Jan 10;575(2 Pt 1):191-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.08.047. Epub
2015  Aug 28.

Tetra-primer ARMS-PCR identified four pivotal genetic variations in bovine 
PNPLA3 gene and its expression patterns.

Wang ZN(1), Cai HF(1), Li MX(1), Cao XK(1), Lan XY(1), Lei CZ(1), Chen H(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi 
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, 
China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi 
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, 
China. Electronic address: chenhong1212@263.net.

Patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing protein 3 (PNPLA3), a member of the 
patatin like phospholipase domain-containing (PNPLA) family, plays an important 
role in energy balance, fat metabolism regulation, glucose metabolism and fatty 
liver disease. Tetra-primer amplification refractory mutation system PCR 
(T-ARMS-PCR) is a new method offering fast detection and extreme simplicity at a 
negligible cost for SNP genotyping. In this paper, we investigated the genetic 
variations at different ages of 660 Chinese indigenous cattle belonging to three 
breeds (QC, NY, JX) and applied T-ARMS-PCR and PCR-RFLP methods to genotype four 
SNPs, SNP1: g.A2980G, SNP2: g.A2996T, SNP3: g.A36718G, SNP4: g.G36850A. The 
statistical analyses indicated that these 4 SNPs affected growth traits markedly 
(P<0.05) in QC population, whereas combined haplotypes were not (P>0.05). The 
qPCR (quantitative PCR) indicated that bovine PNPLA3 gene was exclusively 
expressed in fat tissues. Besides, the analysis between SNP and mRNA expression 
revealed that, in SNP1, the expression of AG was much higher than AA and GG 
(P<0.05), which was in accordance with the results of growth traits association 
analysis, while the results of SNP4 was not. These results supported high 
potential that SNPs of bovine PNPLA3 gene might be utilized as genetic markers 
in marker-assisted selection (MAS) for Chinese cattle breeding programs.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.08.047
PMID: 26318478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]