1. FEBS J. 2015 Nov;282(22):4402-14. doi: 10.1111/febs.13506. Epub 2015 Oct 3.

Role of nucleotides in stabilization of the phospholamban/cardiac Ca²⁺ pump 
inhibitory complex examined with use of metal fluorides.

Chen Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Krannert Institute of Cardiology and Department of Medicine, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.

Phospholamban (PLB) inhibits the activity of the cardiac calcium pump SERCA2a. 
We previously showed that PLB with engineered Cys residues only cross-linked 
with the Ca(2+) -free E2 intermediate of SERCA2a. Formation of E2•PLB prevents 
Ca(2+) binding at the high-affinity Ca(2+) binding sites, blocking the enzyme 
kinetic cycle. Here we further studied the synergistic action of PLB and ATP on 
E2 in terms of prevention of formation of the phosphorylated E2P-like states 
stabilized by metal fluorides. SERCA2a was co-expressed in insect cell 
microsomes with PLB mutants of normal or super-inhibitory strength, with 
cross-linkable mutations at either the cytosolic side (N30C) or the luminal side 
(V49C) of PLB. For normal-strength PLB mutants, in the absence of nucleotide, 
metal fluorides totally inhibited both SERCA2a enzyme activity and cross-linking 
of PLB to SERCA2a at both sites, suggesting that PLB dissociates from SERCA2a in 
the E2P-like states. However, under the same conditions, super-inhibitory PLB 
mutants prevented total enzyme inhibition by metal fluorides. Further, the 
cross-linking of super-inhibitory PLB to SERCA2a was only partially inhibited by 
metal fluorides, but was drastically restored upon sequential addition of ATP. 
These results revealed the equilibrium between E2•PLB, E2•ATP, or E2•ATP•PLB 
states and E2P-like states, suggesting that the synergistic binding of ATP and 
PLB to SERCA is very strong, sufficient to prevent formation of E2 
phosphoenzymes, even when stabilized by metal fluorides.

© 2015 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13506
PMID: 26337774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]