1. Hepatology. 2015 Dec;62(6):1742-56. doi: 10.1002/hep.28142. Epub 2015 Oct 29.

The dual and opposite role of the TM6SF2-rs58542926 variant in protecting 
against cardiovascular disease and conferring risk for nonalcoholic fatty liver: 
A meta-analysis.

Pirola CJ(1), Sookoian S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biology of Complex Diseases, Institute 
of Medical Research A Lanari-IDIM, University of Buenos Aires-National 
Scientific and Technical Research Council (CONICET), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(2)Department of Clinical and Molecular Hepatology, Institute of Medical 
Research A Lanari-IDIM, University of Buenos Aires-National Scientific and 
Technical Research Council (CONICET), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

The aim of this work was to estimate the strength of the effect of the TM6SF2 
E167K (rs58542926 C/T) variant on blood lipid traits and nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD) across different populations. We performed a systematic 
review by a meta-analysis; literature searches identified 10 studies. The 
rs58542926 exerts a significant role in modulating lipid traits, including total 
cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), triglycerides 
(TG), and NAFLD. However, this influence on lipids and NAFLD is opposite between 
genotypes in the dominant model of inheritance. Pooled estimates of random 
effects in 101,326 individuals showed that carriers of the minor T allele (EK+KK 
individuals), compared with subjects homozygous for the ancestral C allele (EE 
genotype), are protected from cardiovascular disease (CVD), showing lower levels 
of TC, LDL-C, and TG; the differences in mean ± standard error (mg/dL) are -8.38 
± 1.56, -3.7 ± 0.9, and -9.4 ± 2.1, respectively. The rs58542926 variant was not 
associated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in a large sample (n = 
91,937). In contrast, carriers of the T allele showed a moderate effect on the 
risk of NAFLD (odds ratio: 2.13; 95% confidence interval: 1.36-3.30; P = 0.0009; 
n = 3273) and approximately ∼2.2% higher lipid fat content when compared with 
homozygous EE (n = 3,413).
CONCLUSIONS: The rs58542926 appears to be an important modifier of blood lipid 
traits in different populations. As a challenge for personalized medicine, the 
C-allele, which has an overall frequency as high as 93%, is associated with 
higher blood lipids, whereas the T allele confers risk for NAFLD; in turn, CVD 
and NAFLD are strongly related outcomes. Although the variant confers protection 
against CVD at the expense of an increased risk of NAFLD, it does not explain 
the link between these two complex diseases.

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.28142
PMID: 26331730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]