1. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 3;5:13728. doi: 10.1038/srep13728.

The novel ABC transporter ABCH1 is a potential target for RNAi-based insect pest 
control and resistance management.

Guo Z(1), Kang S(1), Zhu X(1), Xia J(1), Wu Q(1), Wang S(1), Xie W(1), Zhang 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Protection, Institute of Vegetables and Flowers, Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China.

Insect pests cause serious crop damage and develop high-level resistance to 
chemical insecticides and Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) insecticidal Cry toxins. A 
new promising approach for controlling them and overcoming this resistance is 
RNA interference (RNAi). The RNAi-based insect control strategy depends on the 
selection of suitable target genes. In this study, we cloned and characterized a 
novel ABC transporter gene PxABCH1 in diamondback moth, Plutella xylostella 
(L.). Phylogenetic analysis showed that PxABCH1 is closely related to ABCA and 
ABCG subfamily members. Spatial-temporal expression detection revealed that 
PxABCH1 was expressed in all tissues and developmental stages, and highest 
expressed in head and male adult. Midgut sequence variation and expression 
analyses of PxABCH1 in all the susceptible and Bt-resistant P. xylostella 
strains and the functional analysis by sublethal RNAi demonstrated that Cry1Ac 
resistance was independent of this gene. Silencing of PxABCH1 by a relatively 
high dose of dsRNA dramatically reduced its expression and resulted in larval 
and pupal lethal phenotypes in both susceptible and Cry1Ac-resistant P. 
xylostella strains. To our knowledge, this study provides the first insight into 
ABCH1 in lepidopterans and reveals it as an excellent target for RNAi-based 
insect pest control and resistance management.

DOI: 10.1038/srep13728
PMCID: PMC4558546
PMID: 26333918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]