1. Mol Immunol. 2015 Dec;68(2 Pt A):357-66. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.08.011.
Epub  2015 Sep 3.

The nonstructural protein 11 of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome 
virus inhibits NF-κB signaling by means of its deubiquitinating activity.

Wang D(1), Fan J(1), Fang L(1), Luo R(1), Ouyang H(1), Ouyang C(1), Zhang H(1), 
Chen H(1), Li K(2), Xiao S(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China; The Cooperative 
Innovation Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan 430070, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China; The Cooperative 
Innovation Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan 430070, China. 
Electronic address: vet@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Since its emergence in the late 1980s, porcine reproductive and respiratory 
syndrome (PRRS) has been devastating the swine industry worldwide. The causative 
agent is an Arterivirus, referred to as PRRS virus (PRRSV). The pathogenic 
mechanisms of PRRS are poorly understood, but are believed to correlate with the 
ability of PRRSV to inhibit immune responses of the host. However, precisely how 
the virus is capable of doing so remains obscure. In this study, we showed that 
PRRSV infection led to reduced ubiquitination of cellular proteins. Screening 
all of the 12 nonstructural proteins (Nsps) encoded by PRRSV revealed that, 
apart from the Nsp2 which contains the deubiqintinating (DUB) ovarian tumor 
(OTU) domain, Nsp11, which encodes a unique and conserved endoribonuclease 
(NendoU) throughout the Nidovirus order, also possesses DUB activity. In vivo 
assay demonstrated that Nsp11 specifically removed lysine 48 (K48)-linked 
polyubiquitin chains and the conserved sites C112, H144, D173, K180, and Y219 
were critical for its DUB activity. Remarkably, DUB activity was responsible for 
the capacity of Nsp11 to inhibit nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) activation. Mutations 
abrogating the DUB activity of Nsp11 toward K48-linked polyubiquitin chains of 
IκBα nullified the suppressive effect on NF-κB. Our data add Nsp11 to the list 
of DUBs encoded by PRRSV and uncover a novel mechanism by which PRRSV cripples 
host innate immune responses.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.08.011
PMCID: PMC7112538
PMID: 26342881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]