1. Biochem J. 2015 Sep 1;470(2):255-262. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150610. Epub 2015 Jul
14.

A mutant O-GlcNAcase as a probe to reveal global dynamics of protein 
O-GlcNAcylation during Drosophila embryonic development.

Mariappa D(#)(1), Selvan N(#)(2), Borodkin V(1), Alonso J(1), Ferenbach AT(1), 
Shepherd C(3), Navratilova IH(3), vanAalten DMF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life 
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH, United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Molecular Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, University of 
Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, College of Life 
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Biochem J. 2015 Dec 1;472(2):e25-6. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150970.

O-GlcNAcylation is a reversible type of serine/threonine glycosylation on 
nucleocytoplasmic proteins in metazoa. Various genetic approaches in several 
animal models have revealed that O-GlcNAcylation is essential for embryogenesis. 
However, the dynamic changes in global O-GlcNAcylation and the underlying 
mechanistic biology linking them to embryonic development is not understood. One 
of the limiting factors towards characterizing changes in O-GlcNAcylation has 
been the limited specificity of currently available tools to detect this 
modification. In the present study, harnessing the unusual properties of an 
O-GlcNAcase (OGA) mutant that binds O-GlcNAc (O-N-acetylglucosamine) sites with 
nanomolar affinity, we uncover changes in protein O-GlcNAcylation as a function 
of Drosophila development.

Â© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20150610
PMCID: PMC4941924
PMID: 26348912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]