1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Nov 15;24(22):6505-14. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv359. Epub 2015 
Sep 11.

Accelerated reproductive aging in females lacking a novel centromere protein 
SYCP2L.

Zhou J(1), Stein P(2), Leu NA(3), Chmátal L(2), Xue J(4), Ma J(5), Huang X(6), 
Lampson MA(2), Schultz RM(2), Wang PJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Veterinary Medicine, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA, Xinhua 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, 
China.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, 433 South University 
Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA and.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Veterinary Medicine, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Veterinary Medicine, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA, State Key 
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, 
China.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Veterinary Medicine, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA, Department 
of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, 433 South University Avenue, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA and.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing 210029, China.
(7)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Veterinary Medicine, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA, 
pwang@vet.upenn.edu.

Menopause results from loss of ovarian function and marks the end of a woman's 
reproductive life. Alleles of the human SYCP2L locus are associated with age at 
natural menopause (ANM). SYCP2L is a paralogue of the synaptonemal complex 
protein SYCP2 and is expressed exclusively in oocytes. Here we report that 
SYCP2L localizes to centromeres of dictyate stage oocytes, which represent the 
limited pool of primordial oocytes that are formed perinatally and remain 
arrested till ovulation. Centromere localization of SYCP2L requires its 
C-terminal portion, which is missing in truncated variants resulting from 
low-frequency nonsense mutations identified in humans. Female mice lacking 
SYCP2L undergo a significantly higher progressive loss of oocytes with age 
compared with wild-type females and are less fertile. Specifically, the pool of 
primordial oocytes becomes more rapidly depleted in SYCP2L-deficient than in 
wild-type females, such that with aging, fewer oocytes undergo maturation in 
developing follicles. We find that a human SYCP2L intronic single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) rs2153157, which is associated with ANM, changes the splicing 
efficiency of U12-type minor introns and may therefore regulate the steady-state 
amount of SYCP2L transcript. Furthermore, the more efficiently spliced allele of 
this intronic SNP in SYCP2L is associated with increased ANM. Our results 
suggest that SYCP2L promotes the survival of primordial oocytes and thus provide 
functional evidence for its association with ANM in humans.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv359
PMCID: PMC4614708
PMID: 26362258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]