1. Ren Fail. 2015 Nov;37(10):366-71. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2015.1088349. Epub
2015  Sep 18.

Analysis of gene mutations in PKD1/PKD2 by multiplex ligation-dependent probe 
amplification: some new findings.

Yu G(1)(2)(3), Qian X(1), Wu Y(1), Li X(4), Chen J(1), Xu J(2)(3), Qi J(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Urology , Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University , Shanghai , P.R. China .
(2)b Fudan Institute of Urology, Fudan University , Shanghai , P.R. China .
(3)c Department of Urology , Huashan Hospital, Fudan University , Shanghai , 
P.R. China , and.
(4)d Medical examination center, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University , Shanghai , P.R. China.

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a serious genetic 
disorder that can lead to chronic renal disease. Protein dysfunction caused by 
mutations in the genes polycystic kidney disease 1 (PKD1) and polycystic kidney 
disease 2 (PKD2) is an important factor in the pathogenesis of ADPKD. In the 
present study, 30 Chinese patients with confirmed diagnosis of ADPKD, based on 
ultrasound or computerized tomography (CT) findings were selected, and the exon 
copy numbers of PKD1 and PKD2 were determined using multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification (MLPA). MLPA identified exon deletion in 1 case, suspected 
exon deletion in 4 cases, and suspected duplications in 3 cases. One case of 
suspected exon deletion was confirmed using quantitative real-time polymerase 
chain reaction (q-PCR) and sequencing (PKD2 exon 8). A missense mutation was 
observed in 1 case of exon deletion using q-PCR and sequencing (PKD1 exon 40, 
c.11333 C>A). The cases of suspected duplications were verified by q-PCR, and 
the copy number of exon 6 of PKD1 in 1 case of suspected duplication was 3.8 
times greater than that in normal controls. Our findings provide new insights 
into ADPKD screening and mark a possibly meaningful step toward improved 
diagnosis and treatment of patients with ADPKD.

DOI: 10.3109/0886022X.2015.1088349
PMID: 26381842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]