1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 25;10(9):e0138650. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138650. 
eCollection 2015.

Deep Sequencing for Evaluation of Genetic Stability of Influenza 
A/California/07/2009 (H1N1) Vaccine Viruses.

Laassri M, Zagorodnyaya T(1), Plant EP(1), Petrovskaya S(1), Bidzhieva B(1), Ye 
Z(1), Simonyan V(1), Chumakov K(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, US Food and Drug 
Administration, 10903 New Hampshire Avenue, Silver Spring, Maryland, 20993, 
United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015 Nov 02;10(11):e0142248. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142248. 
Majid, Laassri [corrected to Laassri, Majid].

Virus growth during influenza vaccine manufacture can lead to mutations that 
alter antigenic properties of the virus, and thus may affect protective potency 
of the vaccine. Different reassortants of pandemic "swine" H1N1 influenza A 
vaccine (121XP, X-179A and X-181) viruses as well as wild type 
A/California/07/2009(H1N1) and A/PR/8/34 strains were propagated in embryonated 
eggs and used for DNA/RNA Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq sequencing. The RNA sequences 
of these viruses published in NCBI were used as references for alignment of the 
sequencing reads generated in this study. Consensus sequences of these viruses 
differed from the NCBI-deposited sequences at several nucleotides. 121XP stock 
derived by reverse genetics was more heterogeneous than X-179A and X-181 stocks 
prepared by conventional reassortant technology. Passaged 121XP virus contained 
four non-synonymous mutations in the HA gene. One of these mutations (Lys226Glu) 
was located in the Ca antigenic site of HA (present in 18% of the population). 
Two non-synonymous mutations were present in HA of viruses derived from X-179A: 
Pro314Gln (18%) and Asn146Asp (78%). The latter mutation located in the Sa 
antigenic site was also detected at a low level (11%) in the wild-type 
A/California/07/2009(H1N1) virus, and was present as a complete substitution in 
X-181 viruses derived from X-179A virus. In the passaged X-181 viruses, two 
mutations emerged in HA: a silent mutation A1398G (31%) in one batch and G756T 
(Glu252Asp, 47%) in another batch. The latter mutation was located in the 
conservative region of the antigenic site Ca. The protocol for RNA sequencing 
was found to be robust, reproducible, and suitable for monitoring genetic 
consistency of influenza vaccine seed stocks.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138650
PMCID: PMC4583247
PMID: 26407068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.