1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2016 Jan;63:50-8. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2015.09.017.  Epub 2015 Sep 21.

Local oxytocin tempers anxiety by activating GABAA receptors in the hypothalamic 
paraventricular nucleus.

Smith AS(1), Tabbaa M(1), Lei K(1), Eastham P(1), Butler MJ(1), Linton L(1), 
Altshuler R(1), Liu Y(1), Wang Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Program in Neuroscience, Florida State 
University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology and Program in Neuroscience, Florida State 
University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA. Electronic address: zwang@psy.fsu.edu.

Oxytocin (Oxt) is released in various hypothalamic and extrahypothalamic brain 
areas in response to anxiogenic stimuli to regulate aspects of emotionality and 
stress coping. We examined the anxiolytic action of Oxt in the hypothalamic 
paraventricular nucleus (PVN) while appraising if Oxt recruits GABA neurons to 
inhibit the behavioral, hormonal, and neuronal response to stress in female 
prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster). Voles received an injection of Oxt in the 
PVN either before or after an elevated platform stress to determine a 
time-course for the effects of Oxt on the hormonal stress response. 
Subsequently, we evaluated if ante-stress injections of Oxt affected 
anxiety-like behaviors as well as neuronal activity in the PVN, using real-time 
in-vivo retrodialysis and immunohistochemistry with c-Fos expression as a 
biomarker of neural activity. In addition, we exposed voles to Oxt and a GABAA 
receptor antagonist, concurrently, to evaluate the impact of pharmacological 
blockade of GABAA receptors on the anxiolytic effects of Oxt. Elevated platform 
stress amplified anxiety-like behaviors and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) 
axis activity-catalyzing corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) neuronal 
activity and augmenting corticosterone release in circulation. Ante-stress Oxt 
injections in the PVN blocked these stress effects while promoting PVN GABA 
activity and release. Post-stress Oxt treatments were ineffective. The 
anxiolytic effects of Oxt were hindered by concurrent pharmacological blockade 
of GABAA receptors. Together, our data demonstrate ante-stress treatments of Oxt 
in the PVN inhibit stress activation of the HPA axis through recruitment of 
GABAergic neurons, providing insights to the local circuitry and potential 
therapeutically-relevant mechanisms.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2015.09.017
PMCID: PMC4695278
PMID: 26415118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.