1. Proc Biol Sci. 2015 Oct 7;282(1816):20150885. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2015.0885.

The SOS response increases bacterial fitness, but not evolvability, under a 
sublethal dose of antibiotic.

Torres-Barceló C(1), Kojadinovic M(2), Moxon R(3), MacLean RC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK Institut des 
Sciences de l'Evolution, CNRS-Université Montpellier 2, Montpellier, France 
clara.torres@univ-montp2.fr.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK.
(3)University of Oxford Medical Sciences Division, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Exposure to antibiotics induces the expression of mutagenic bacterial 
stress-response pathways, but the evolutionary benefits of these responses 
remain unclear. One possibility is that stress-response pathways provide a 
short-term advantage by protecting bacteria against the toxic effects of 
antibiotics. Second, it is possible that stress-induced mutagenesis provides a 
long-term advantage by accelerating the evolution of resistance. Here, we 
directly measure the contribution of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa SOS pathway to 
bacterial fitness and evolvability in the presence of sublethal doses of 
ciprofloxacin. Using short-term competition experiments, we demonstrate that the 
SOS pathway increases competitive fitness in the presence of ciprofloxacin. 
Continued exposure to ciprofloxacin results in the rapid evolution of increased 
fitness and antibiotic resistance, but we find no evidence that SOS-induced 
mutagenesis accelerates the rate of adaptation to ciprofloxacin during a 200 
generation selection experiment. Intriguingly, we find that the expression of 
the SOS pathway decreases during adaptation to ciprofloxacin, and this helps to 
explain why this pathway does not increase long-term evolvability. Furthermore, 
we argue that the SOS pathway fails to accelerate adaptation to ciprofloxacin 
because the modest increase in the mutation rate associated with SOS mutagenesis 
is offset by a decrease in the effective strength of selection for increased 
resistance at a population level. Our findings suggest that the primary 
evolutionary benefit of the SOS response is to increase bacterial competitive 
ability, and that stress-induced mutagenesis is an unwanted side effect, and not 
a selected attribute, of this pathway.

© 2015 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2015.0885
PMCID: PMC4614765
PMID: 26446807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]