1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2015 Sep 24;2(5):e153. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000000153. eCollection 2015 Oct.

GRIN1 polymorphisms do not affect susceptibility or phenotype in NMDA receptor 
encephalitis.

Day GS(1), Prüss H(1), Benseler SM(1), Paton TA(1), Paterson AD(1), Andrade 
DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (G.S.D., D.M.A.), Division of Neurology, and Dalla 
Lana School of Public Health (A.D.P.), University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Department of Neurology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, and German Center 
for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) (H.P.), Berlin, Germany; Department of 
Rheumatology, Alberta Children's Hospital, and Research Institute (S.M.B.), 
University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Centre for Applied Genomics (T.A.P., 
A.D.P.), The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; and 
University Health Network (D.M.A.), Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether distinct single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
within the glutamate receptor ionotropic NMDA 1 gene (GRIN1) are associated with 
NMDA receptor (NMDAR) encephalitis and whether these same variants are 
associated with variability in the clinical presentation and course of affected 
patients.
METHODS: We performed clinical follow-up on 48 patients with NMDAR encephalitis 
and NMDAR autoantibodies detected in serum or CSF. All RefSeq GRIN1 coding exons 
were sequenced in 39 Caucasian-European patients, and the frequencies of SNPs 
were compared with those of an ethnically similar population using a 
case-control study design. Predetermined clinical variables were compared 
between patients with and without identified SNPs.
RESULTS: Two SNPs were identified in GRIN1: 24 (62%) Caucasian-European patients 
with NMDAR encephalitis had alternate alleles at both rs6293 (exon 6) and 
rs1126442 (exon 7; exon numbering according to NM_001185090). The SNPs were in 
complete linkage disequilibrium. The frequency of these variants did not differ 
between patients with NMDAR encephalitis and ethnically matched individuals in 
the general population. No differences in clinical presentation, measures of 
disease severity, clinical course, or outcomes were observed between patients 
with different genotypes at these SNPs.
CONCLUSION: Disease susceptibility or course in patients with NMDAR encephalitis 
was not strongly affected by SNPs in GRIN1. This study provides an estimate of 
the frequency of SNPs in GRIN1 in patients with NMDAR encephalitis and 
emphasizes the need for multisite collaborative studies enrolling larger numbers 
of patients to identify the genetic contributions to NMDAR encephalitis.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000000153
PMCID: PMC4582904
PMID: 26443875