1. Nature. 2015 Oct 29;526(7575):723-7. doi: 10.1038/nature15375. Epub 2015 Oct
12.

Crystal structure of the 500-kDa yeast acetyl-CoA carboxylase holoenzyme dimer.

Wei J(1), Tong L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York 
10027, USA.

Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) has crucial roles in fatty acid metabolism and is 
an attractive target for drug discovery against diabetes, cancer and other 
diseases. Saccharomyces cerevisiae ACC (ScACC) is crucial for the production of 
very-long-chain fatty acids and the maintenance of the nuclear envelope. ACC 
contains biotin carboxylase (BC) and carboxyltransferase (CT) activities, and 
its biotin is linked covalently to the biotin carboxyl carrier protein (BCCP). 
Most eukaryotic ACCs are 250-kilodalton (kDa), multi-domain enzymes and function 
as homodimers and higher oligomers. They contain a unique, 80-kDa central region 
that shares no homology with other proteins. Although the structures of the BC, 
CT and BCCP domains and other biotin-dependent carboxylase holoenzymes are 
known, there is currently no structural information on the ACC holoenzyme. Here 
we report the crystal structure of the full-length, 500-kDa holoenzyme dimer of 
ScACC. The structure is remarkably different from that of the other 
biotin-dependent carboxylases. The central region contains five domains and is 
important for positioning the BC and CT domains for catalysis. The structure 
unexpectedly reveals a dimer of the BC domain and extensive conformational 
differences compared to the structure of the BC domain alone, which is a 
monomer. These structural changes reveal why the BC domain alone is 
catalytically inactive and define the molecular mechanism for the inhibition of 
eukaryotic ACC by the natural product soraphen A and by phosphorylation of a Ser 
residue just before the BC domain core in mammalian ACC. The BC and CT active 
sites are separated by 80 Ã…, and the entire BCCP domain must translocate during 
catalysis.

DOI: 10.1038/nature15375
PMCID: PMC4838907
PMID: 26458104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]