1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 9;10(10):e0140231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140231. 
eCollection 2015.

Genome Analysis of Pseudomonas fluorescens PCL1751: A Rhizobacterium that 
Controls Root Diseases and Alleviates Salt Stress for Its Plant Host.

Cho ST(1), Chang HH(1), Egamberdieva D(2), Kamilova F(3), Lugtenberg B(4), Kuo 
CH(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute for Landscape Biogeochemistry, Leibniz Centre for Agricultural 
Landscape Research (ZALF), Eberswalder str. 84, MÃ¼ncheberg, Germany.
(3)Koppert Biological Systems, Veilingweg 14, 2651 BE Berkel en Rodenrijs, the 
Netherlands.
(4)Institute of Biology, Sylvius Laboratory, Leiden University, Leiden, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Molecular and Biological Agricultural Sciences Program, Taiwan International 
Graduate Program, National Chung Hsing University and Academia Sinica, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.

Pseudomonas fluorescens PCL1751 is a rod-shaped Gram-negative bacterium isolated 
from the rhizosphere of a greenhouse-grown tomato plant in Uzbekistan. It 
controls several plant root diseases caused by Fusarium fungi through the 
mechanism of competition for nutrients and niches (CNN). This mechanism does not 
rely on the production of antibiotics, so it avoids the concerns of resistance 
development and is environmentally safe. Additionally, this bacterium promotes 
plant growth by alleviating salt stress for its plant host. To investigate the 
genetic mechanisms that may explain these observations, we determined the 
complete genome sequence of this bacterium, examined its gene content, and 
performed comparative genomics analysis with other Pseudomonas strains. The 
genome of P. fluorescens PCL1751 consisted of one circular chromosome that is 
6,143,950 base-pairs (bp) in size; no plasmid was found. The annotation included 
19 rRNA, 70 tRNA, and 5,534 protein-coding genes. The gene content analysis 
identified a large number of genes involved in chemotaxis and motility, 
colonization of the rhizosphere, siderophore biosynthesis, and osmoprotectant 
production. In contrast, the pathways involved in the biosynthesis of 
phytohormones or antibiotics were not found. Comparison with other Pseudomonas 
genomes revealed extensive variations in their genome size and gene content. The 
presence and absence of secretion system genes were highly variable. As 
expected, the synteny conservation among strains decreased as a function of 
phylogenetic divergence. The integration of prophages appeared to be an 
important driver for genome rearrangements. The whole-genome gene content 
analysis of this plant growth-promoting rhizobacterium (PGPR) provided some 
genetic explanations to its phenotypic characteristics. The extensive and 
versatile substrate utilization pathways, together with the presence of many 
genes involved in competitive root colonization, provided further support for 
the finding that this strain achieves biological control of pathogens through 
effective competition for nutrients and niches.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140231
PMCID: PMC4599888
PMID: 26452056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: CHK is serving as an 
Academic Editor for PLOS ONE. FK is employed by a commercial company, Koppert 
Biological Systems, and received support in the form of her salary. These 
affiliations do not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing 
data and materials.