1. Gene Ther. 2016 Feb;23(2):223-30. doi: 10.1038/gt.2015.96. Epub 2015 Oct 15.

Photoreceptor-targeted gene delivery using intravitreally administered AAV 
vectors in dogs.

Boyd RF(1), Sledge DG(2), Boye SL(3), Boye SE(3), Hauswirth WW(3), Kom√°romy 
AM(1), Petersen-Jones SM(1), Bartoe JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Small Animal Clinical Sciences, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 
USA.
(2)Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.

Erratum in
    Gene Ther. 2016 Apr;23(4):400. doi: 10.1038/gt.2016.10.

Delivery of therapeutic transgenes to retinal photoreceptors using 
adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors has traditionally required subretinal 
injection. Recently, photoreceptor transduction efficiency following 
intravitreal injection (IVT) has improved in rodent models through use of 
capsid-mutant AAV vectors; but remains limited in large animal models. Thickness 
of the inner limiting membrane (ILM) in large animals is thought to impair 
retinal penetration by AAV. Our study compared two newly developed AAV vectors 
containing multiple capsid amino acid substitutions following IVT in dogs. The 
ability of two promoter constructs to restrict reporter transgene expression to 
photoreceptors was also evaluated. AAV vectors containing the 
interphotoreceptor-binding protein (IRBP) promoter drove expression exclusively 
in rod and cone photoreceptors, with transduction efficiencies of ~4% of cones 
and 2% of rods. Notably, in the central region containing the cone-rich visual 
streak, 15.6% of cones were transduced. Significant regional variation existed, 
with lower transduction efficiencies in the temporal regions of all eyes. This 
variation did not correlate with ILM thickness. Vectors carrying a cone-specific 
promoter failed to transduce a quantifiable percentage of cone photoreceptors. 
The newly developed AAV vectors containing the IRBP promoter were capable of 
producing photoreceptor-specific transgene expression following IVT in the dog.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2015.96
PMCID: PMC4840844
PMID: 26467396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The remaining authors 
declare no conflict of interest.