1. Methods Enzymol. 2015;564:427-53. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2015.07.007. Epub 2015
Aug  8.

An Integrated Spin-Labeling/Computational-Modeling Approach for Mapping Global 
Structures of Nucleic Acids.

Tangprasertchai NS(1), Zhang X(1), Ding Y(1), Tham K(1), Rohs R(2), Haworth 
IS(3), Qin PZ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA; Molecular and Computational Biology Program, Department of 
Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA; Molecular and Computational Biology Program, Department of 
Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, 
USA. Electronic address: pzq@usc.edu.

The technique of site-directed spin labeling (SDSL) provides unique information 
on biomolecules by monitoring the behavior of a stable radical tag (i.e., spin 
label) using electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy. In this 
chapter, we describe an approach in which SDSL is integrated with computational 
modeling to map conformations of nucleic acids. This approach builds upon a SDSL 
tool kit previously developed and validated, which includes three components: 
(i) a nucleotide-independent nitroxide probe, designated as R5, which can be 
efficiently attached at defined sites within arbitrary nucleic acid sequences; 
(ii) inter-R5 distances in the nanometer range, measured via pulsed EPR; and 
(iii) an efficient program, called NASNOX, that computes inter-R5 distances on 
given nucleic acid structures. Following a general framework of data mining, our 
approach uses multiple sets of measured inter-R5 distances to retrieve "correct" 
all-atom models from a large ensemble of models. The pool of models can be 
generated independently without relying on the inter-R5 distances, thus allowing 
a large degree of flexibility in integrating the SDSL-measured distances with a 
modeling approach best suited for the specific system under investigation. As 
such, the integrative experimental/computational approach described here 
represents a hybrid method for determining all-atom models based on 
experimentally-derived distance measurements.

Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2015.07.007
PMCID: PMC4641853
PMID: 26477260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]