1. J Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 26;211(2):455-68. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201506114. Epub 2015 
Oct 19.

Molecular control of irreversible bistability during trypanosome developmental 
commitment.

Domingo-Sananes MR(1), Szöőr B(1), Ferguson MA(2), Urbaniak MD(3), Matthews 
KR(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, Institute for Immunology and 
Infection Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh EH9 3JT, Scotland, UK.
(2)Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, College of Life 
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK.
(3)Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, College of Life 
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK Division of 
Biomedical and Life Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medicine, Lancaster 
University, Lancaster LA1 4YG, England, UK m.urbaniak@lancaster.ac.uk 
keith.matthews@ed.ac.uk.
(4)Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, Institute for Immunology and 
Infection Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh EH9 3JT, Scotland, UK m.urbaniak@lancaster.ac.uk 
keith.matthews@ed.ac.uk.

The life cycle of Trypanosoma brucei involves developmental transitions that 
allow survival, proliferation, and transmission of these parasites. One of 
these, the differentiation of growth-arrested stumpy forms in the mammalian 
blood into insect-stage procyclic forms, can be induced synchronously in vitro 
with cis-aconitate. Here, we show that this transition is an irreversible 
bistable switch, and we map the point of commitment to differentiation after 
exposure to cis-aconitate. This irreversibility implies that positive feedback 
mechanisms operate to allow commitment (i.e., the establishment of "memory" of 
exposure to the differentiation signal). Using the reversible translational 
inhibitor cycloheximide, we show that this signal memory requires new protein 
synthesis. We further performed stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell 
culture to analyze synchronized parasite populations, establishing the protein 
and phosphorylation profile of parasites pre- and postcommitment, thereby 
defining the "commitment proteome." Functional interrogation of this data set 
identified Nek-related kinase as the first-discovered protein kinase controlling 
the initiation of differentiation to procyclic forms.

© 2015 Domingo Sananes et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201506114
PMCID: PMC4621835
PMID: 26483558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]