1. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 3;6(34):35358-71. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6139.

Age-dependent uncoupling of mitochondria from Ca2⁺ release units in skeletal 
muscle.

Pietrangelo L(1), D'Incecco A(1), Ainbinder A(2), Michelucci A(1), Kern H(3), 
Dirksen RT(2), Boncompagni S(1), Protasi F(1).

Author information:
(1)CeSI - Center for Research on Aging & DNICS, Department of Neuroscience, 
Imaging and Clinical Sciences, University G. d'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA.
(3)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Electrical Stimulation and Physical 
Rehabilitation & Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
Wilhelminenspital, Vienna, Austria.

Calcium release units (CRUs) and mitochondria control myoplasmic [Ca2+] levels 
and ATP production in muscle, respectively. We recently reported that these two 
organelles are structurally connected by tethers, which promote proximity and 
proper Ca2+ signaling.Here we show that disposition, ultrastructure, and density 
of CRUs and mitochondria and their reciprocal association are compromised in 
muscle from aged mice. Specifically, the density of CRUs and mitochondria is 
decreased in muscle fibers from aged (>24 months) vs. adult (3-12 months), with 
an increased percentage of mitochondria being damaged and misplaced from their 
normal triadic position. A significant reduction in tether (13.8 ± 0.4 vs. 5.5 ± 
0.3 tethers/100 µm2) and CRU-mitochondrial pair density (37.4 ± 0.8 vs. 27.0 ± 
0.7 pairs/100 µm2) was also observed in aged mice. In addition, myoplasmic Ca2+ 
transient (1.68 ± 0.08 vs 1.37 ± 0.03) and mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake (9.6 ± 
0.050 vs 6.58 ± 0.54) during repetitive high frequency tetanic stimulation were 
significantly decreased. Finally oxidative stress, assessed from levels of 
3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT), Cu/Zn superoxide-dismutase (SOD1) and Mn superoxide 
dismutase (SOD2) expression, were significantly increased in aged mice. The 
reduced association between CRUs and mitochondria with aging may contribute to 
impaired cross-talk between the two organelles, possibly resulting in reduced 
efficiency in activity-dependent ATP production and, thus, to age-dependent 
decline of skeletal muscle performance.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6139
PMCID: PMC4742110
PMID: 26485763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST There is no conflict of 
interest.