1. Stem Cells Dev. 2016 Jan 15;25(2):160-77. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0284. Epub
2015  Dec 1.

Microarray Analyses Reveal Marked Differences in Growth Factor and Receptor 
Expression Between 8-Cell Human Embryos and Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Vlismas A(1), Bletsa R(1), Mavrogianni D(1), Mamali G(1), Pergamali M(1), 
Dinopoulou V(1)(2), Partsinevelos G(1), Drakakis P(1), Loutradis D(1), Kiessling 
AA(2).

Author information:
(1)1 1st Obstetrics and Gynecology Department of University of Athens, 
"Alexandra" Maternity Hospital , Athens, Greece .
(2)2 Bedford Research Foundation , Bedford, Massachusetts.

Previous microarray analyses of RNAs from 8-cell (8C) human embryos revealed a 
lack of cell cycle checkpoints and overexpression of core circadian oscillators 
and cell cycle drivers relative to pluripotent human stem cells [human embryonic 
stem cells/induced pluripotent stem (hES/iPS)] and fibroblasts, suggesting 
growth factor independence during early cleavage stages. To explore this 
possibility, we queried our combined microarray database for expression of 487 
growth factors and receptors. Fifty-one gene elements were overdetected on the 
8C arrays relative to hES/iPS cells, including 14 detected at least 80-fold 
higher, which annotated to multiple pathways: six cytokine family (CSF1R, IL2RG, 
IL3RA, IL4, IL17B, IL23R), four transforming growth factor beta (TGFB) family 
(BMP6, BMP15, GDF9, ENG), one fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family 
[FGF14(FH4)], one epidermal growth factor member (GAB1), plus CD36, and CLEC10A. 
8C-specific gene elements were enriched (73%) for reported circadian-controlled 
genes in mouse tissues. High-level detection of CSF1R, ENG, IL23R, and IL3RA 
specifically on the 8C arrays suggests the embryo plays an active role in 
blocking immune rejection and is poised for trophectoderm development; robust 
detection of NRG1, GAB1, -2, GRB7, and FGF14(FHF4) indicates novel roles in 
early development in addition to their known roles in later development. 
Forty-four gene elements were underdetected on the 8C arrays, including 11 at 
least 80-fold under the pluripotent cells: two cytokines (IFITM1, TNFRSF8), five 
TGFBs (BMP7, LEFTY1, LEFTY2, TDGF1, TDGF3), two FGFs (FGF2, FGF receptor 1), 
plus ING5, and WNT6. The microarray detection patterns suggest that hES/iPS 
cells exhibit suppressed circadian competence, underexpression of early 
differentiation markers, and more robust expression of generic pluripotency 
genes, in keeping with an artificial state of continual uncommitted cell 
division. In contrast, gene expression patterns of the 8C embryo suggest that it 
is an independent circadian rhythm-competent equivalence group poised to signal 
its environment, defend against maternal immune rejection, and begin the rapid 
commitment events of early embryogenesis.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2015.0284
PMCID: PMC4733324
PMID: 26493868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]