1. Am J Hematol. 2016 Jan;91(1):50-8. doi: 10.1002/ajh.24221.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms: A decade of discoveries and treatment advances.

Tefferi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are clonal stem cell diseases, first 
conceptualized in 1951 by William Dameshek, and historically included chronic 
myeloid leukemia (CML), polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia (ET), 
and primary myelofibrosis (PMF). In 1960, Nowell and Hungerford discovered an 
invariable association between the Philadelphia chromosome (subsequently shown 
to harbor the causal BCR-ABL1 mutation) and CML; accordingly, the term MPN is 
primarily reserved for PV, ET, and PMF, although it includes other related 
clinicopathologic entities, according to the World Health Organization (WHO) 
classification system. In 2005, William Vainchenker and others described a Janus 
kinase 2 mutation (JAK2V617F) in MPN and this was followed by a series of 
additional descriptions of mutations that directly or indirectly activate 
JAK-STAT: JAK2 exon 12, myeloproliferative leukemia virus oncogene (MPL) and 
calreticulin (CALR) mutations. The discovery of these, mostly mutually 
exclusive, "driver" mutations has contributed to revisions of the WHO diagnostic 
criteria and risk stratification in MPN. Mutations other than JAK2, CALR and MPL 
have also been described in MPN and shown to provide additional prognostic 
information. From the standpoint of treatment, over the last 50 years, Louis 
Wasserman from the Unites States and Tiziano Barbui from Italy had skillfully 
organized and led a number of important clinical trials, whose results form the 
basis for current treatment strategies in MPN. More recently, allogeneic stem 
cell transplant, as a potentially curative treatment modality, and JAK 
inhibitors, as palliative drugs, have been added to the overall therapeutic 
armamentarium in myelofibrosis. In the current review, I will summarize the 
important advances made in the last 10 years regarding the science and practice 
of MPN.

Â© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.24221
PMID: 26492355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]