1. Microb Cell Fact. 2015 Oct 26;14:170. doi: 10.1186/s12934-015-0357-7.

Engineering an efficient and tight D-amino acid-inducible gene expression system 
in Rhodosporidium/Rhodotorula species.

Liu Y(1), Koh CMJ(1), Ngoh ST(1), Ji L(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomaterials and Biocatalysts Group, Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 1 
Research Link, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117604, Singapore.
(2)Biomaterials and Biocatalysts Group, Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 1 
Research Link, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117604, Singapore. 
jilh@tll.org.sg.

Erratum in
    Microb Cell Fact. 2017 Jun 14;16(1):107. doi: 10.1186/s12934-017-0726-5.

BACKGROUND: Rhodosporidium and Rhodotorula are two genera of oleaginous red 
yeast with great potential for industrial biotechnology. To date, there is no 
effective method for inducible expression of proteins and RNAs in these hosts.
RESULTS: We have developed a luciferase gene reporter assay based on a new 
codon-optimized LUC2 reporter gene (RtLUC2), which is flanked with CAR2 homology 
arms and can be integrated into the CAR2 locus in the nuclear genome at >90 % 
efficiency. We characterized the upstream DNA sequence of a D-amino acid oxidase 
gene (DAO1) from R. toruloides ATCC 10657 by nested deletions. By comparing the 
upstream DNA sequences of several putative DAO1 homologs of Basidiomycetous 
fungi, we identified a conserved DNA motif with a consensus sequence of 
AGGXXGXAGX11GAXGAXGG within a 0.2 kb region from the mRNA translation initiation 
site. Deletion of this motif led to strong mRNA transcription under non-inducing 
conditions. Interestingly, DAO1 promoter activity was enhanced about fivefold 
when the 108 bp intron 1 was included in the reporter construct. We identified a 
conserved CT-rich motif in the intron with a consensus sequence of 
TYTCCCYCTCCYCCCCACWYCCGA, deletion or point mutations of which drastically 
reduced promoter strength under both inducing and non-inducing conditions. 
Additionally, we created a selection marker-free DAO1-null mutant (âˆ†dao1e) which 
displayed greatly improved inducible gene expression, particularly when both 
glucose and nitrogen were present in high levels. To avoid adding unwanted 
peptide to proteins to be expressed, we converted the original translation 
initiation codon to ATC and re-created a translation initiation codon at the 
start of exon 2. This promoter, named P DAO1-in1m1 , showed very similar 
luciferase activity to the wild-type promoter upon induction with D-alanine. The 
inducible system was tunable by adjusting the levels of inducers, carbon source 
and nitrogen source.
CONCLUSION: The intron 1-containing DAO1 promoters coupled with a DAO1 null 
mutant makes an efficient and tight D-amino acid-inducible gene expression 
system in Rhodosporidium and Rhodotorula genera. The system will be a valuable 
tool for metabolic engineering and enzyme expression in these yeast hosts.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-015-0357-7
PMCID: PMC4624585
PMID: 26502730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]