1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2015 Oct 9;3:151. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2015.00151. 
eCollection 2015.

Effect of Ceramic Scaffold Architectural Parameters on Biological Response.

Gariboldi MI(1), Best SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy, Cambridge Centre for Medical 
Materials, University of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK.

Numerous studies have focused on the optimization of ceramic architectures to 
fulfill a variety of scaffold functional requirements and improve biological 
response. Conventional fabrication techniques, however, do not allow for the 
production of geometrically controlled, reproducible structures and often fail 
to allow the independent variation of individual geometric parameters. Current 
developments in additive manufacturing technologies suggest that 3D printing 
will allow a more controlled and systematic exploration of scaffold 
architectures. This more direct translation of design into structure requires a 
pipeline for design-driven optimization. A theoretical framework for systematic 
design and evaluation of architectural parameters on biological response is 
presented. Four levels of architecture are considered, namely (1) surface 
topography, (2) pore size and geometry, (3) porous networks, and (4) macroscopic 
pore arrangement, including the potential for spatially varied architectures. 
Studies exploring the effect of various parameters within these levels are 
reviewed. This framework will hopefully allow uncovering of new relationships 
between architecture and biological response in a more systematic way as well as 
inform future refinement of fabrication techniques to fulfill architectural 
necessities with a consideration of biological implications.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2015.00151
PMCID: PMC4598804
PMID: 26501056