1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2016 Jan;29(1):29-57. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00019-15.

A Structure-Based Classification of Class A β-Lactamases, a Broadly Diverse 
Family of Enzymes.

Philippon A(1), Slama P(2), Dény P(3), Labia R(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes, Service de Bactériologie, Paris, France 
philippona@free.fr.
(2)Independent Researcher, Paris, France.
(3)Université Paris 3, UFR SMBH, Groupe des Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Seine 
Saint Denis, Centre de Recherches en Cancérologie de Lyon INSERM U1052 UMR CNRS 
5286, Lyon, France.
(4)Laboratoire Universitaire de Biodiversité et d'Ecologie Microbienne, Quimper, 
France.

For medical biologists, sequencing has become a commonplace technique to support 
diagnosis. Rapid changes in this field have led to the generation of large 
amounts of data, which are not always correctly listed in databases. This is 
particularly true for data concerning class A β-lactamases, a group of key 
antibiotic resistance enzymes produced by bacteria. Many genomes have been 
reported to contain putative β-lactamase genes, which can be compared with 
representative types. We analyzed several hundred amino acid sequences of class 
A β-lactamase enzymes for phylogenic relationships, the presence of specific 
residues, and cluster patterns. A clear distinction was first made between 
dd-peptidases and class A enzymes based on a small number of residues (S70, K73, 
P107, 130SDN132, G144, E166, 234K/R, 235T/S, and 236G [Ambler numbering]). Other 
residues clearly separated two main branches, which we named subclasses A1 and 
A2. Various clusters were identified on the major branch (subclass A1) on the 
basis of signature residues associated with catalytic properties (e.g., 
limited-spectrum β-lactamases, extended-spectrum β-lactamases, and 
carbapenemases). For subclass A2 enzymes (e.g., CfxA, CIA-1, CME-1, PER-1, and 
VEB-1), 43 conserved residues were characterized, and several significant 
insertions were detected. This diversity in the amino acid sequences of 
β-lactamases must be taken into account to ensure that new enzymes are 
accurately identified. However, with the exception of PER types, this diversity 
is poorly represented in existing X-ray crystallographic data.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00019-15
PMCID: PMC4771212
PMID: 26511485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]