1. Front Nutr. 2015 Oct 19;2:32. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2015.00032. eCollection 2015.

Interaction of Isoflavones and Endophyte-Infected Tall Fescue Seed Extract on 
Vasoactivity of Bovine Mesenteric Vasculature.

Jia Y(1), Harmon DL(1), Flythe MD(2), Klotz JL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal and Food Sciences, University of Kentucky , Lexington, 
KY , USA.
(2)Forage-Animal Production Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, United 
States Department of Agriculture , Lexington, KY , USA.

It was hypothesized that isoflavones may attenuate ergot alkaloid-induced 
vasoconstriction and possibly alleviate diminished contractility of vasculature 
after exposure to ergot alkaloids. The objective of this study was to determine 
if prior incubation of bovine mesenteric vasculature with the isoflavones 
formononetin (F), biochanin A (B), or an ergovaline-containing tall fescue seed 
extract (EXT) and their combinations affect ergotamine (ERT)-induced 
contractility. Multiple segments of mesenteric artery and vein supporting the 
ileal flange of the small intestine were collected from Angus heifers at 
slaughter (n = 5, bodyweight = 639 ± 39 kg). Duplicates of each vessel type were 
incubated in tissue culture flasks at 37°C with a 50-mL volume of 
Krebs-Henseleit buffer containing: only buffer (control); or 1 × 10(-6) M EXT; 
F; or B; and combinations of 1 × 10(-6) M EXT + F; 1 × 10(-6) M EXT + B; 
1 × 10(-6) M F + B; or 1 × 10(-6) M EXT + F + B. After incubation for 2 h, 
sections were mounted in a multimyograph chamber. The ERT dose responses were 
normalized to 0.12 M KCl. Pretreatment with F, B, and F + B without EXT resulted 
in similar contractile responses to ERT in mesenteric artery and all incubations 
containing EXT resulted in a complete loss of vasoactivity to ERT. In mesenteric 
artery pretreated with EXT, treatments that contained B had higher contractile 
responses (P < 0.05) at ERT concentrations of 1 × 10(-7) and 5 × 10(-7) M. Also, 
treatments containing B tended (P < 0.1) to have greater responses than 
treatments without B at ERT concentrations of 1 × 10(-6), 5 × 10(-6), and 
5 × 10(-5) M. In mesenteric vein pretreated with EXT, treatments containing F 
had greater contractile responses to ERT at 1 × 10(-5), 5 × 10(-5), and 
1 × 10(-4) M (P < 0.05). These data indicated that F and B at 1 × 10(-6) M and 
their combination did not impact the overall contractile response to ERT in 
mesenteric vasculature. However, F and B may offset some of the vasoconstriction 
caused by prior exposure to ergot alkaloids.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2015.00032
PMCID: PMC4610206
PMID: 26539437