1. Nat Commun. 2015 Nov 4;6:8755. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9755.

MITF and c-Jun antagonism interconnects melanoma dedifferentiation with 
pro-inflammatory cytokine responsiveness and myeloid cell recruitment.

Riesenberg S(1), Groetchen A(1), Siddaway R(2), Bald T(3), Reinhardt J(1), 
Smorra D(1), Kohlmeyer J(3), Renn M(3), Phung B(4), Aymans P(3), Schmidt T(5), 
Hornung V(5), Davidson I(6), Goding CR(2), Jönsson G(4), Landsberg J(3), Tüting 
T(3), Hölzel M(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit for RNA Biology, Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical 
Pharmacology, University Hospital Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53105 Bonn, 
Germany.
(2)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Headington, 
Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK.
(3)Laboratory for Experimental Dermatology, Department of Dermatology, 
University Hospital Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53105 Bonn, Germany.
(4)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Barngatan 2B, Lund 221 85, Sweden.
(5)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University Hospital, University of Bonn, 
Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(6)Department of Functional Genomics and Cancer, Institut de Génétique et de 
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, 
Illkirch Cédex 67404, France.

Inflammation promotes phenotypic plasticity in melanoma, a source of non-genetic 
heterogeneity, but the molecular framework is poorly understood. Here we use 
functional genomic approaches and identify a reciprocal antagonism between the 
melanocyte lineage transcription factor MITF and c-Jun, which interconnects 
inflammation-induced dedifferentiation with pro-inflammatory cytokine 
responsiveness of melanoma cells favouring myeloid cell recruitment. We show 
that pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α instigate gradual suppression of 
MITF expression through c-Jun. MITF itself binds to the c-Jun regulatory genomic 
region and its reduction increases c-Jun expression that in turn amplifies 
TNF-stimulated cytokine expression with further MITF suppression. This 
feed-forward mechanism turns poor peak-like transcriptional responses to TNF-α 
into progressive and persistent cytokine and chemokine induction. Consistently, 
inflammatory MITF(low)/c-Jun(high) syngeneic mouse melanomas recruit myeloid 
immune cells into the tumour microenvironment as recapitulated by their human 
counterparts. Our study suggests myeloid cell-directed therapies may be useful 
for MITF(low)/c-Jun(high) melanomas to counteract their growth-promoting and 
immunosuppressive functions.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms9755
PMCID: PMC4659938
PMID: 26530832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]