1. Cell Biosci. 2015 Nov 4;5:60. doi: 10.1186/s13578-015-0051-9. eCollection
2015.

The function, regulation and therapeutic implications of the tumor suppressor 
protein, PML.

Guan D(1), Kao HY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University, and Comprehensive Cancer Center of Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106 USA.

The tumor suppressor protein, promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML), was 
originally identified in acute promyelocytic leukemia due to a chromosomal 
translocation between chromosomes 15 and 17. PML is the core component of 
subnuclear structures called PML nuclear bodies (PML-NBs), which are disrupted 
in acute promyelocytic leukemia cells. PML plays important roles in cell cycle 
regulation, survival and apoptosis, and inactivation or down-regulation of PML 
is frequently found in cancer cells. More than 120 proteins have been 
experimentally identified to physically associate with PML, and most of them 
either transiently or constitutively co-localize with PML-NBs. These 
interactions are associated with many cellular processes, including cell cycle 
arrest, apoptosis, senescence, transcriptional regulation, DNA repair and 
intermediary metabolism. Importantly, PML inactivation in cancer cells can occur 
at the transcriptional-, translational- or post-translational- levels. However, 
only a few somatic mutations have been found in cancer cells. A better 
understanding of its regulation and its role in tumor suppression will provide 
potential therapeutic opportunities. In this review, we discuss the role of PML 
in multiple tumor suppression pathways and summarize the players and stimuli 
that control PML protein expression or subcellular distribution.

DOI: 10.1186/s13578-015-0051-9
PMCID: PMC4632682
PMID: 26539288