1. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Dec 7;54(50):15246-9. doi:
10.1002/anie.201508506.  Epub 2015 Nov 6.

In-Membrane Chemical Modification (IMCM) for Site-Specific Chromophore Labeling 
of GPCRs.

Sušac L(1), O'Connor C(1)(2), Stevens RC(2), Wüthrich K(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps 
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037 (USA).
(2)Departments of Biological Sciences and Chemistry, Bridge Institute, 
University of Southern California, 3430 South Vermont Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 
90089 (USA).
(3)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps 
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037 (USA). 
wuthrich@scripps.edu.
(4)Skaggs Institute of Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037 (USA). wuthrich@scripps.edu.
(5)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zurich, Otto-Stern-Weg 5, 
8093 Zurich (Switzerland). wuthrich@scripps.edu.

We present in-membrane chemical modification (IMCM) for obtaining selective 
chromophore labeling of intracellular surface cysteines in G-protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs) with minimal mutagenesis. This method takes advantage of the 
natural protection of most cysteines by the membrane environment. Practical use 
of IMCM is illustrated with the site-specific introduction of chromophores for 
NMR and fluorescence spectroscopy in the human κ-opioid receptor (KOR) and the 
human A2A adenosine receptor (A2A AR). IMCM is applicable to a wide range of 
in vitro studies of GPCRs, including single-molecule spectroscopy, and is a 
promising platform for in-cell spectroscopy experiments.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.201508506
PMCID: PMC4747426
PMID: 26545333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]