1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015 Dec;50(12):1230-6. doi: 10.1002/ppul.23313. Epub 2015
Nov  5.

Treatment burden in patients with at least one class IV or V CFTR mutation.

Dewulf J(1), Vermeulen F(1), Wanyama S(2), Thomas M(2), Proesmans M(1), Dupont 
L(3), De Boeck K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals of Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Scientific Institute of Public Health, on behalf of the Belgian CF Registry, 
Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Pulmonology, University Hospitals of Leuven, Belgium.

CFTR mutations are grouped according to disease-causing mechanism. Several 
studies demonstrated that patients having at least one mutation of class IV/V, 
present with a milder phenotype, but little is known about their relative 
treatment burden. We compared treatment burden between patients with two class 
I, II, or III mutations and patients with at least one mutation of class IV/V in 
the 2010 database of the Belgian CF Registry. We calculated a "Treatment Burden 
Index" (TBI) by assigning long term therapies to categories low, medium and high 
intensity, for differential weighing in the total score. There were 779 patients 
with two known class I/II/III mutations and 94 patients with at least one class 
IV/V mutation. Compared to class I/II/III, class IV/V patients had a lower 
median number of clinic visits (4 vs. 5; P < 0.001), a lower risk of 
hospitalization (24.7% vs. 50.8%; P < 0.001) and intravenous antibiotic 
treatment (23.5% vs. 46.0%; P < 0.001) and a lower median TBI (6 vs. 9; P < 
0.001). These differences remained significant when only class IV/V patients 
with pancreatic insufficiency (n = 31) were considered. This study clearly 
demonstrates the significantly lower treatment burden in patients with CF and at 
least one class IV/V mutation compared to patients with two class I/II/III 
mutations and contributes to providing better individual counseling at time of 
diagnosis.

Â© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.23313
PMID: 26540286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]