1. Brain. 2016 Jan;139(Pt 1):73-85. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv320. Epub 2015 Nov 10.

ALS5/SPG11/KIAA1840 mutations cause autosomal recessive axonal 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Montecchiani C(1), Pedace L(1), Lo Giudice T(2), Casella A(1), Mearini M(1), 
Gaudiello F(1), Pedroso JL(3), Terracciano C(4), Caltagirone C(5), Massa R(4), 
St George-Hyslop PH(6), Barsottini OG(3), Kawarai T(7), Orlacchio A(8).

Author information:
(1)1 Laboratorio di Neurogenetica, CERC - IRCCS Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy.
(2)1 Laboratorio di Neurogenetica, CERC - IRCCS Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy 2 
Dipartimento di Medicina dei Sistemi, Università di Roma "Tor Vergata", Rome, 
Italy.
(3)3 Department of Neurology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)2 Dipartimento di Medicina dei Sistemi, Università di Roma "Tor Vergata", 
Rome, Italy.
(5)2 Dipartimento di Medicina dei Sistemi, Università di Roma "Tor Vergata", 
Rome, Italy 4 Laboratorio di Neurologia Clinica e Comportamentale, IRCCS Santa 
Lucia, Rome, Italy.
(6)5 Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 6 Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 7 Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(7)8 Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Tokushima University Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.
(8)1 Laboratorio di Neurogenetica, CERC - IRCCS Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy 2 
Dipartimento di Medicina dei Sistemi, Università di Roma "Tor Vergata", Rome, 
Italy a.orlacchio@hsantalucia.it.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is a group of hereditary peripheral neuropathies 
that share clinical characteristics of progressive distal muscle weakness and 
atrophy, foot deformities, distal sensory loss, as well as diminished tendon 
reflexes. Hundreds of causative DNA changes have been found, but much of the 
genetic basis of the disease is still unexplained. Mutations in the 
ALS5/SPG11/KIAA1840 gene are a frequent cause of autosomal recessive hereditary 
spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum and peripheral axonal neuropathy, 
and account for ∼ 40% of autosomal recessive juvenile amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis. The overlap of axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with both diseases, 
as well as the common autosomal recessive inheritance pattern of thin corpus 
callosum and axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in three related patients, 
prompted us to analyse the ALS5/SPG11/KIAA1840 gene in affected individuals with 
autosomal recessive axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. We investigated 28 
unrelated families with autosomal recessive axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 
defined by clinical, electrophysiological, as well as pathological evaluation. 
Besides, we screened for all the known genes related to axonal autosomal 
recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT2A2/HMSN2A2/MFN2, CMT2B1/LMNA, 
CMT2B2/MED25, CMT2B5/NEFL, ARCMT2F/dHMN2B/HSPB1, CMT2K/GDAP1, CMT2P/LRSAM1, 
CMT2R/TRIM2, CMT2S/IGHMBP2, CMT2T/HSJ1, CMTRID/COX6A1, ARAN-NM/HINT and 
GAN/GAN), for the genes related to autosomal recessive hereditary spastic 
paraplegia with thin corpus callosum and axonal peripheral neuropathy (SPG7/PGN, 
SPG15/ZFYVE26, SPG21/ACP33, SPG35/FA2H, SPG46/GBA2, SPG55/C12orf65 and 
SPG56/CYP2U1), as well as for the causative gene of peripheral neuropathy with 
or without agenesis of the corpus callosum (SLC12A6). Mitochondrial disorders 
related to Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 were also excluded by sequencing 
POLG and TYMP genes. An additional locus for autosomal recessive 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2H on chromosome 8q13-21.1 was excluded by 
linkage analysis. Pedigrees originated in Italy, Brazil, Canada, England, Iran, 
and Japan. Interestingly, we identified 15 ALS5/SPG11/KIAA1840 mutations in 12 
families (two sequence variants were never reported before, p.Gln198* and 
p.Pro2212fs*5). No large deletions/duplications were detected in these patients. 
The novel mutations seemed to be pathogenic since they co-segregated with the 
disease in all pedigrees and were absent in 300 unrelated controls. Furthermore, 
in silico analysis predicted their pathogenic effect. Our results indicate that 
ALS5/SPG11/KIAA1840 is the causative gene of a wide spectrum of clinical 
features, including autosomal recessive axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

© The Author (2015). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awv320
PMCID: PMC5839554
PMID: 26556829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]