1. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Nov 4;6:965. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00965. eCollection 
2015.

Integrative analysis and expression profiling of secondary cell wall genes in C4 
biofuel model Setaria italica reveals targets for lignocellulose bioengineering.

Muthamilarasan M(1), Khan Y(1), Jaishankar J(1), Shweta S(1), Lata C(2), Prasad 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Plant Genome Research New Delhi, India.
(2)Division of Plant-Microbe Interactions, CSIR-National Botanical Research 
Institute Lucknow, India.

Several underutilized grasses have excellent potential for use as bioenergy 
feedstock due to their lignocellulosic biomass. Genomic tools have enabled 
identification of lignocellulose biosynthesis genes in several sequenced plants. 
However, the non-availability of whole genome sequence of bioenergy grasses 
hinders the study on bioenergy genomics and their genomics-assisted crop 
improvement. Foxtail millet (Setaria italica L.; Si) is a model crop for 
studying systems biology of bioenergy grasses. In the present study, a 
systematic approach has been used for identification of gene families involved 
in cellulose (CesA/Csl), callose (Gsl) and monolignol biosynthesis (PAL, C4H, 
4CL, HCT, C3H, CCoAOMT, F5H, COMT, CCR, CAD) and construction of physical map of 
foxtail millet. Sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis of identified 
proteins showed that monolignol biosynthesis proteins were highly diverse, 
whereas CesA/Csl and Gsl proteins were homologous to rice and Arabidopsis. 
Comparative mapping of foxtail millet lignocellulose biosynthesis genes with 
other C4 panicoid genomes revealed maximum homology with switchgrass, followed 
by sorghum and maize. Expression profiling of candidate lignocellulose genes in 
response to different abiotic stresses and hormone treatments showed their 
differential expression pattern, with significant higher expression of SiGsl12, 
SiPAL2, SiHCT1, SiF5H2, and SiCAD6 genes. Further, due to the evolutionary 
conservation of grass genomes, the insights gained from the present study could 
be extrapolated for identifying genes involved in lignocellulose biosynthesis in 
other biofuel species for further characterization.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00965
PMCID: PMC4631826
PMID: 26583030