1. Immunity. 2015 Nov 17;43(5):945-58. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.10.012.

Pulmonary Epithelial Cell-Derived Cytokine TGF-β1 Is a Critical Cofactor for 
Enhanced Innate Lymphoid Cell Function.

Denney L(1), Byrne AJ(1), Shea TJ(1), Buckley JS(1), Pease JE(1), Herledan 
GM(1), Walker SA(1), Gregory LG(1), Lloyd CM(2).

Author information:
(1)Inflammation, Repair & Development, National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ UK.
(2)Inflammation, Repair & Development, National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ UK. Electronic address: 
c.lloyd@imperial.ac.uk.

Epithelial cells orchestrate pulmonary homeostasis and pathogen defense and play 
a crucial role in the initiation of allergic immune responses. Maintaining the 
balance between homeostasis and inappropriate immune activation and associated 
pathology is particularly complex at mucosal sites that are exposed to billions 
of potentially antigenic particles daily. We demonstrated that epithelial 
cell-derived cytokine TGF-β had a central role in the generation of the 
pulmonary immune response. Mice that specifically lacked epithelial cell-derived 
TGF-β1 displayed a reduction in type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), resulting 
in suppression of interleukin-13 and hallmark features of the allergic response 
including airway hyperreactivity. ILCs in the airway lumen were primed to 
respond to TGF-β by expressing the receptor TGF-βRII and ILC chemoactivity was 
enhanced by TGF-β. These data demonstrate that resident epithelial cells 
instruct immune cells, highlighting the central role of the local environmental 
niche in defining the nature and magnitude of immune reactions.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.10.012
PMCID: PMC4658339
PMID: 26588780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]