1. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 23;10(11):e0141847. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141847. 
eCollection 2015.

Genetic Susceptibility to Cardiac and Digestive Clinical Forms of Chronic Chagas 
Disease: Involvement of the CCR5 59029 A/G Polymorphism.

de Oliveira AP(1), Bernardo CR(1), Camargo AV(1), Ronchi LS(2), Borim AA(2)(3), 
de Mattos CC(1), de Campos Júnior E(2)(3), Castiglioni L(4), Netinho JG(2)(3), 
Cavasini CE(5), Bestetti RB(6), de Mattos LC(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Imunogenética, Departamento de Biologia Molecular, Faculdade 
de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, Avenida Brigadeiro Faria Lima, 5416, 
15090-000, São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Cirurgia, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, 
Avenida Brigadeiro Faria Lima, 5416, 15090-000, São José do Rio Preto, SP, 
Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Cirurgia Geral, Fundação Faculdade Regional de 
Medicina-Hospital de Base, Avenida Brigadeiro Faria Lima, 5544, 15090-000, São 
José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Epidemiologia e Saúde Coletiva, Faculdade de Medicina de São 
José do Rio Preto, Avenida Brigadeiro Faria Lima, 5416, 15090-000, São José do 
Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.
(5)Centro de Investigação de Microrganismos, Departamento de Doenças 
Dermatológicas, Infecciosas e Parasitárias, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do 
Rio Preto, Avenida Brigadeiro Faria Lima, 5416, 15090-000, São José do Rio 
Preto, SP, Brazil.
(6)Departamento de Cardiologia e Cirurgia Cardiovascular, Faculdade de Medicina 
de São José do Rio Preto, Avenida Brigadeiro Faria Lima, 5416, 15090-000, São 
José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.

The clinical manifestations of chronic Chagas disease include the cardiac form 
of the disease and the digestive form. Not all the factors that act in the 
variable clinical course of this disease are known. This study investigated 
whether the CCR5Δ32 (rs333) and CCR5 59029 A/G (promoter region--rs1799987) 
polymorphisms of the CCR5 gene are associated with different clinical forms of 
chronic Chagas disease and with the severity of left ventricular systolic 
dysfunction in patients with chronic Chagas heart disease (CCHD). The antibodies 
anti-T. cruzi were identified by ELISA. PCR and PCR-RFLP were used to identify 
the CCR5Δ32 and CCR5 59029 A/G polymorphisms. The chi-square test was used to 
compare variables between groups. There was a higher frequency of the AA 
genotype in patients with CCHD compared with patients with the digestive form of 
the disease and the control group. The results also showed a high frequency of 
the AG genotype in patients with the digestive form of the disease compared to 
the other groups. The results of this study show that the CCR5Δ32 polymorphism 
does not seem to influence the different clinical manifestations of Chagas 
disease but there is involvement of the CCR5 59029 A/G polymorphism in 
susceptibility to the different forms of chronic Chagas disease. Besides, these 
polymorphisms do not influence left ventricular systolic dysfunction in patients 
with CCHD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141847
PMCID: PMC4657911
PMID: 26599761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.