1. Schizophr Bull. 2016 May;42(3):843-50. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbv166. Epub 2015
Nov  23.

DRD2 Schizophrenia-Risk Allele Is Associated With Impaired Striatal Functioning 
in Unaffected Siblings of Schizophrenia Patients.

Vink M(1), de Leeuw M(2), Luykx JJ(2), van Eijk KR(2), van den Munkhof HE(2), 
van Buuren M(3), Kahn RS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University Medical Center Utrecht, Brain Center 
Rudolf Magnus, Utrecht, The Netherlands; m.vink@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University Medical Center Utrecht, Brain Center 
Rudolf Magnus, Utrecht, The Netherlands;
(3)Department for Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.

A recent Genome-Wide Association Study showed that the rs2514218 single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in close proximity to dopamine receptor D2 is 
strongly associated with schizophrenia. Further, an in silico experiment showed 
that rs2514218 has a cis expression quantitative trait locus effect in the basal 
ganglia. To date, however, the functional consequence of this SNP is unknown. 
Here, we used functional Magnetic resonance imaging to investigate the impact of 
this risk allele on striatal activation during proactive and reactive response 
inhibition in 45 unaffected siblings of schizophrenia patients. We included 
siblings to circumvent the illness specific confounds affecting striatal 
functioning independent from gene effects. Behavioral analyses revealed no 
differences between the carriers (n= 21) and noncarriers (n= 24). Risk allele 
carriers showed a diminished striatal response to increasing proactive 
inhibitory control demands, whereas overall level of striatal activation in 
carriers was elevated compared to noncarriers. Finally, risk allele carriers 
showed a blunted striatal response during successful reactive inhibition 
compared to the noncarriers. These data are consistent with earlier reports 
showing similar deficits in schizophrenia patients, and point to a failure to 
flexibly engage the striatum in response to contextual cues. This is the first 
study to demonstrate an association between impaired striatal functioning and 
the rs2514218 polymorphism. We take our findings to indicate that striatal 
functioning is impaired in carriers of the DRD2 risk allele, likely due to 
dopamine dysregulation at the DRD2 location.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Maryland Psychiatric Research Center. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbv166
PMCID: PMC4838092
PMID: 26598739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]