1. Cells Tissues Organs. 2016;201(1):26-37. doi: 10.1159/000441349. Epub 2015 Nov
 28.

Effects of FGFR Signaling on Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of Apert 
Dental Cells.

Lu C(1), Huguley S, Cui C, Cabaniss LB, Waite PD, Sarver DM, Mamaeva OA, 
MacDougall M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Oral Health Research, School of Dentistry, UAB - The University 
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Ala., USA.

The Apert syndrome is a rare congenital disorder most often arising from S252W 
or P253R mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR2). Numerous 
studies have focused on the regulatory role of Apert FGFR2 signaling in bone 
formation, whereas its functional role in tooth development is largely unknown. 
To investigate the role of FGFR signaling in cell proliferation and odontogenic 
differentiation of human dental cells in vitro, we isolated dental pulp and 
enamel organ epithelia (EOE) tissues from an Apert patient carrying the S252W 
FGFR2 mutation. Apert primary pulp and EOE cells were established and shown to 
exhibit normal morphology and express alkaline phosphatase under differentiation 
conditions. Similar to control cells, Apert dental pulp and EOE cells expressed 
all FGFRs, with highest levels of FGFR1 followed by FGFR2 and low levels of 
FGFR3 and FGFR4. However, Apert cells had increased cell growth compared with 
control cells. Distinct from previous findings in osteoblast cells, 
gain-of-function S252W FGFR2 mutation did not upregulate the expression of 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and platelet-derived growth factor 
receptor (PDGFRα), but elevated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 
signaling in cells after EGF stimulation. Unexpectedly, there was little effect 
of the S252W mutation on odontogenic gene expression in dental pulp and EOE 
cells. However, after inhibition of total FGFR signaling or ERK signaling, the 
expression of odontogenic genes was upregulated in both dental cell types, 
indicating the negative effect of whole FGFR signaling on odontogenic 
differentiation. This study provides novel insights on FGFR signaling and a 
common Apert FGFR2 mutation in the regulation of odontogenic differentiation of 
dental mesenchymal and epithelial cells.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000441349
PMID: 26613250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]