1. Viruses. 2015 Dec 1;7(12):6241-50. doi: 10.3390/v7122935.

Rapid Construction of Stable Infectious Full-Length cDNA Clone of Papaya Leaf 
Distortion Mosaic Virus Using In-Fusion Cloning.

Tuo D(1), Shen W(2), Yan P(3), Li X(4), Zhou P(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Resources of Tropical Crops, Ministry 
of Agriculture, Institute of Tropical Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chinese 
Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou 571101, China. 
tuodecai@itbb.org.cn.
(2)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Resources of Tropical Crops, Ministry 
of Agriculture, Institute of Tropical Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chinese 
Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou 571101, China. 
dnaswt@hotmail.com.
(3)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Resources of Tropical Crops, Ministry 
of Agriculture, Institute of Tropical Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chinese 
Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou 571101, China. 
yanpu@itbb.org.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Resources of Tropical Crops, Ministry 
of Agriculture, Institute of Tropical Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chinese 
Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou 571101, China. 
lixiaoying@itbb.org.cn.
(5)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Resources of Tropical Crops, Ministry 
of Agriculture, Institute of Tropical Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chinese 
Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou 571101, China. 
zhoupeng@itbb.org.cn.

Papaya leaf distortion mosaic virus (PLDMV) is becoming a threat to papaya and 
transgenic papaya resistant to the related pathogen, papaya ringspot virus 
(PRSV). The generation of infectious viral clones is an essential step for 
reverse-genetics studies of viral gene function and cross-protection. In this 
study, a sequence- and ligation-independent cloning system, the In-Fusion(Â®) 
Cloning Kit (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA), was used to construct 
intron-less or intron-containing full-length cDNA clones of the isolate 
PLDMV-DF, with the simultaneous scarless assembly of multiple viral and intron 
fragments into a plasmid vector in a single reaction. The intron-containing 
full-length cDNA clone of PLDMV-DF was stably propagated in Escherichia coli. In 
vitro intron-containing transcripts were processed and spliced into biologically 
active intron-less transcripts following mechanical inoculation and then 
initiated systemic infections in Carica papaya L. seedlings, which developed 
similar symptoms to those caused by the wild-type virus. However, no infectivity 
was detected when the plants were inoculated with RNA transcripts from the 
intron-less construct because the instability of the viral cDNA clone in 
bacterial cells caused a non-sense or deletion mutation of the genomic sequence 
of PLDMV-DF. To our knowledge, this is the first report of the construction of 
an infectious full-length cDNA clone of PLDMV and the splicing of 
intron-containing transcripts following mechanical inoculation. In-Fusion 
cloning shortens the construction time from months to days. Therefore, it is a 
faster, more flexible, and more efficient method than the traditional multistep 
restriction enzyme-mediated subcloning procedure.

DOI: 10.3390/v7122935
PMCID: PMC4690859
PMID: 26633465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]