1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Jan 8;469(2):270-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.11.106. Epub 2015 Nov 26.

A novel frameshift variant of COCH supports the hypothesis that 
haploinsufficiency is not a cause of autosomal dominant nonsyndromic deafness 9.

Masuda M(1), Mutai H(2), Arimoto Y(3), Nakano A(4), Matsunaga T(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Auditory Disorders, National Institute of Sensory Organs, 
National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical Center, 2-5-1 Higashigaoka 
Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8902, Japan; Department of Otolaryngology, School of 
Medicine, Kyorin University, 6-20-2 Shinkawa, Mitaka-shi, Tokyo 181-8611, Japan. 
Electronic address: masoeur13@mac.com.
(2)Laboratory of Auditory Disorders, National Institute of Sensory Organs, 
National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical Center, 2-5-1 Higashigaoka 
Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8902, Japan. Electronic address: 
mutaihideki@kankakuki.go.jp.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Chiba Children's Hospital, 579-1 Hetacho, 
Midori-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba 266-0007, Japan. Electronic address: 
y.armt1@pref.chiba.lg.jp.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Chiba Children's Hospital, 579-1 Hetacho, 
Midori-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba 266-0007, Japan. Electronic address: 
a.nkn@pref.chiba.lg.jp.
(5)Laboratory of Auditory Disorders, National Institute of Sensory Organs, 
National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical Center, 2-5-1 Higashigaoka 
Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8902, Japan; Medical Genetics Center, National Hospital 
Organization Tokyo Medical Center, 2-5-1 Higashigaoka Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8902, 
Japan. Electronic address: matsunagatatsuo@kankakuki.go.jp.

COCH (coagulation factor C homology) encodes cochlin, and certain mutations of 
COCH cause autosomal dominant nonsyndromic deafness 9 (DFNA9). Hearing loss due 
to COCH mutation begins in adulthood, and 17 missense mutations and two in-frame 
mutations have been reported. Studies with animal and cellular models have 
suggested that the underlying biological mechanism of DFNA9 is the 
dominant-negative effect of mutated COCH and not haploinsufficiency. However, no 
human cases of DFNA9 that support this hypothesis have been reported. The 
proband of the present case was an 18-year-old male with congenital or infantile 
hearing loss. Targeted next-generation sequencing analysis detected a 
heterozygous novel frameshift mutation of COCH (c.146dupT, p.C50LfsX8) in the 
proband, whose hearing loss began earlier than what is typical for DFNA9. His 
mother also carried the mutation but had normal hearing. Consequently, the 
mutation was not considered to be the cause of the proband's hearing loss. This 
family is the first case of a truncating COCH variant and supports the 
hypothesis that COCH haploinsufficiency is not the cause of hearing loss in 
humans.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.11.106
PMID: 26631968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]