1. Br J Pharmacol. 2015 Dec;172(24):5942-55. doi: 10.1111/bph.13351.

The Concise Guide to PHARMACOLOGY 2015/16: Other ion channels.

Alexander SP(1), Kelly E(2), Marrion N(2), Peters JA(3), Benson HE(4), Faccenda 
E(4), Pawson AJ(4), Sharman JL(4), Southan C(4), Davies JA(4); CGTP 
Collaborators.

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Nottingham Medical School, 
Nottingham,, NG7 2UH, UK.
(2)School of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 
1TD, UK.
(3)Neuroscience Division, Medical Education Institute, Ninewells Hospital and 
Medical School, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 9SY, UK.
(4)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH8 
9XD, UK.

The Concise Guide to PHARMACOLOGY 2015/16 provides concise overviews of the key 
properties of over 1750 human drug targets with their pharmacology, plus links 
to an open access knowledgebase of drug targets and their ligands 
(www.guidetopharmacology.org), which provides more detailed views of target and 
ligand properties. The full contents can be found at 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.13351/full. Other ion channels 
are one of the eight major pharmacological targets into which the Guide is 
divided, with the others being: G protein-coupled receptors, ligand-gated ion 
channels, voltage-gated ion channels, nuclear hormone receptors, catalytic 
receptors, enzymes and transporters. These are presented with nomenclature 
guidance and summary information on the best available pharmacological tools, 
alongside key references and suggestions for further reading. The Concise Guide 
is published in landscape format in order to facilitate comparison of related 
targets. It is a condensed version of material contemporary to late 2015, which 
is presented in greater detail and constantly updated on the website 
www.guidetopharmacology.org, superseding data presented in the previous Guides 
to Receptors & Channels and the Concise Guide to PHARMACOLOGY 2013/14. It is 
produced in conjunction with NC-IUPHAR and provides the official IUPHAR 
classification and nomenclature for human drug targets, where appropriate. It 
consolidates information previously curated and displayed separately in 
IUPHAR-DB and GRAC and provides a permanent, citable, point-in-time record that 
will survive database updates.

Â© 2015 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.13351
PMCID: PMC4718214
PMID: 26650442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]