1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jan 29;44(2):926-39. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1365. Epub
2015  Dec 10.

Concerted removal of the Erb1-Ytm1 complex in ribosome biogenesis relies on an 
elaborate interface.

Thoms M(1), Ahmed YL(1), Maddi K(1), Hurt E(2), Sinning I(3).

Author information:
(1)Heidelberg University Biochemistry Center (BZH), INF 328, D-69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(2)Heidelberg University Biochemistry Center (BZH), INF 328, D-69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany ed.hurt@bzh.uni-heidelberg.de.
(3)Heidelberg University Biochemistry Center (BZH), INF 328, D-69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany irmi.sinning@bzh.uni-heidelberg.de.

The complicated process of eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis involves about 200 
assembly factors that transiently associate with the nascent pre-ribosome in a 
spatiotemporally ordered way. During the early steps of 60S subunit formation, 
several proteins, collectively called A3 cluster factors, participate in the 
removal of the internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1) from 27SA3 pre-rRNA. Among 
these factors is the conserved hetero-trimeric Nop7-Erb1-Ytm1 complex (or human 
Pes1-Bop1-Wdr12), which is removed from the evolving pre-60S particle by the AAA 
ATPase Rea1 to allow progression in the pathway. Here, we clarify how Ytm1 and 
Erb1 interact, which has implications for the release mechanism of both factors 
from the pre-ribosome. Biochemical studies show that Ytm1 and Erb1 bind each 
other via their ß-propeller domains. The crystal structure of the Erb1-Ytm1 
heterodimer determined at 2.67Å resolution reveals an extended interaction 
surface between the propellers in a rarely observed binding mode. 
Structure-based mutations in the interface that impair the Erb1-Ytm1 interaction 
do not support growth, with specific defects in 60S subunit synthesis. Under 
these mutant conditions, it becomes clear that an intact Erb1-Ytm1 complex is 
required for 60S maturation and that loss of this stable interaction prevents 
ribosome production.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1365
PMCID: PMC4737154
PMID: 26657628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]