1. J Behav Med. 2016 Jun;39(3):465-71. doi: 10.1007/s10865-015-9704-8. Epub 2015 
Dec 10.

Successful weight loss maintenance associated with morning chronotype and better 
sleep quality.

Ross KM(1), Graham Thomas J(2), Wing RR(2).

Author information:
(1)Weight Control & Diabetes Research Center, Department of Psychiatry and Human 
Behavior, Alpert Medical School of Brown University & The Miriam Hospital, 196 
Richmond St., Providence, RI, 02903, USA. Kathryn_Ross@brown.edu.
(2)Weight Control & Diabetes Research Center, Department of Psychiatry and Human 
Behavior, Alpert Medical School of Brown University & The Miriam Hospital, 196 
Richmond St., Providence, RI, 02903, USA.

It is not known whether individuals successful at long term weight loss 
maintenance differ in chronotype (i.e., being a "morning" or "evening" person) 
or sleep habits compared to those who are overweight and obese. We compared 
Morningness-Eveningness Questionnaire (MEQ) and Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index 
scores of 690 National Weight Control Registry (NWCR) members (73 % female, 93 % 
white, age = 51.7 ± 12.5, BMI = 26.4 ± 5.1) to 75 enrollees in two behavioral 
weight loss interventions (INT; 77 % female, 88 % white, age = 55.7 ± 10.4, 
BMI = 36.2 ± 4.7). Controlling for age, MEQ scores were higher in NWCR than INT, 
p = .004, such that more NWCR than INT were morning-types and fewer were evening 
types, p = .014. Further, NWCR participants reported better sleep quality, 
longer sleep duration, and shorter latency to sleep onset compared to INT, 
ps < .05, and fewer NWCR participants reported <6 or <7 h of sleep, ps < .01. 
Future studies should examine if these factors change as a result of weight loss 
or are predictors of weight outcome.

DOI: 10.1007/s10865-015-9704-8
PMCID: PMC4854772
PMID: 26660638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.