1. Eur J Biochem. 1989 Jul 15;183(1):57-67. doi: 
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1989.tb14896.x.

NMR analysis of site-specific mutants of yeast phosphoglycerate kinase. An 
investigation of the triose-binding site.

Fairbrother WJ(1), Walker PA, Minard P, Littlechild JA, Watson HC, Williams RJ.

Author information:
(1)Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory, University of Oxford, England.

Site-specific mutants of yeast phosphoglycerate kinase have been produced in 
order to investigate the roles of the 'basic-patch' residues, arginine 168 and 
histidine 170. The fully-conserved residue, arginine 168, has been replaced with 
a lysine (R168K) and a methionine (R168M) residue, while the non-conserved 
histidine 170 has been replaced with an aspartate (H170D). Comparison of the 
500-MHz 1H-NMR spectra of the mutant proteins with that of wild-type 
phosphoglycerate kinase shows that the overall fold of the mutants remains 
essentially unaltered from that of the native enzyme. Results of NOE experiments 
indicate that there are only very minor changes in structure in the vicinity of 
the mutations. These mutations have also led to firm sequence-specific resonance 
assignments to histidines 62, 167 and 170. NMR studies of 3-phosphoglycerate 
binding show that decreasing the positive charge in the sequence 168-170 reduces 
the binding of this substrate (by about 15-fold and 4-fold for mutants R168M and 
H170D respectively). Mutant R168K binds 3-phosphoglycerate with an affinity 
about twofold less than that of the native enzyme. Significantly, the activity 
of mutant H170D, measured at saturating substrate concentrations, is unchanged 
from that of the wild-type enzyme. This indicates that this residue is not of 
major importance in the binding or reaction of 3-phosphoglycerate. The 
observation is in agreement with results obtained for the wild-type enzyme, 
which indicate that 3-phosphoglycerate interacts most strongly with histidine 62 
and least strongly with histidine 170, as would be predicted from the X-ray 
crystal structure. Substitution of positively charged arginine 168 with neutral 
methionine (or positively charged lysine) does not cause a detectable change in 
the pKa values of the neighbouring histidine groups, in as much as they remain 
below 3. The results reported here indicate that the observed reduction in 
catalytic efficiency relates less to direct electrostatic effects than to the 
mutants' inability to undergo 3-phosphoglycerate-induced conformational changes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1989.tb14896.x
PMID: 2666135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]