1. Dev Cell. 2015 Dec 21;35(6):775-88. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.11.017. Epub
2015  Dec 10.

Phosphorylation of an HP1-like Protein Regulates Heterochromatin Body Assembly 
for DNA Elimination.

Kataoka K(1), Mochizuki K(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences 
(IMBA), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences 
(IMBA), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
kazufumi.mochizuki@imba.oeaw.ac.at.

Heterochromatic loci are often assembled into higher-order heterochromatin 
bodies in diverse eukaryotes. However, the formation and biological roles of 
heterochromatin bodies are poorly understood. In the ciliated protozoan 
Tetrahymena, de novo heterochromatin body formation is accompanied by programmed 
DNA elimination. Here, we show that the heterochromatin body component Jub1p 
promotes heterochromatin body formation and dephosphorylation of the 
Heterochromatin Protein 1-like protein Pdd1p. Through the mutagenesis of the 
phosphorylated residues of Pdd1p, we demonstrate that Pdd1p dephosphorylation 
promotes the electrostatic interaction between Pdd1p and RNA in vitro and 
heterochromatin body formation in vivo. We therefore propose that 
heterochromatin body is assembled by the Pdd1p-RNA interaction. Pdd1p 
dephosphorylation and Jub1p are required for heterochromatin body formation and 
DNA elimination but not for local heterochromatin assembly, indicating that 
heterochromatin body plays an essential role in DNA elimination.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.11.017
PMCID: PMC4695338
PMID: 26688337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]