1. Pancreas. 2016 Aug;45(7):967-73. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000000585.

Proglucagon-Derived Peptides Do Not Significantly Affect Acute Exocrine Pancreas 
in Rats.

Akalestou E(1), Christakis I, Solomou AM, Minnion JS, Rutter GA, Bloom SR.

Author information:
(1)From the Sections of *Investigative Medicine and â€ Cell Biology and Functional 
Genomics, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of 
Medicine, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVES: Reports have suggested a link between treatment with glucagon-like 
peptide 1 (GLP-1) analogs and an increased risk of pancreatitis. Oxyntomodulin, 
a dual agonist of both GLP-1 and glucagon receptors, is currently being 
investigated as a potential antiobesity therapy, but little is known about its 
pancreatic safety. The aim of the study was to investigate the acute effect of 
oxyntomodulin and other proglucagon-derived peptides on the rat exocrine 
pancreas.
METHODS: Glucagon-like peptide 1, oxyntomodulin, glucagon, and exendin-4 were 
infused into anesthetized rats to measure plasma amylase concentration changes. 
In addition, the effect of each peptide on both amylase release and 
proliferation in rat pancreatic acinar (AR42J) and primary isolated ductal cells 
was determined.
RESULTS: Plasma amylase did not increase postpeptide infusion, compared with 
vehicle and cholecystokinin; however, oxyntomodulin inhibited plasma amylase 
when coadministered with cholecystokinin. None of the peptides caused a 
significant increase in proliferation rate or amylase secretion from acinar and 
ductal cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The investigated peptides do not have an acute effect on the 
exocrine pancreas with regard to proliferation and plasma amylase, when 
administered individually. Oxyntomodulin seems to be a potent inhibitor of 
amylase release, potentially making it a safer antiobesity agent regarding 
pancreatitis, compared with GLP-1 agonists.

DOI: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000000585
PMCID: PMC4820085
PMID: 26731187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]