1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Feb 29;44(4):1909-23. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1527. Epub 
2016 Jan 5.

Human nonsense-mediated mRNA decay factor UPF2 interacts directly with eRF3 and 
the SURF complex.

López-Perrote A(1), Castaño R(1), Melero R(1), Zamarro T(1), Kurosawa H(2), 
Ohnishi T(2), Uchiyama A(2), Aoyagi K(2), Buchwald G(3), Kataoka N(4), Yamashita 
A(5), Llorca O(6).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (Spanish National Research Council), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 
3-9, Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 236-0004, Japan.
(3)Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Structural Cell Biology, 
Am Klopferspitz 18, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany.
(4)Medical Innovation Center, Laboratory for Malignancy Control Research, Kyoto 
University Graduate School of Medicine, 53, Shogoin Kawaharacho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 
606-8507, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 
3-9, Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 236-0004, Japan 
yamasita@yokohama-cu.ac.jp.
(6)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (Spanish National Research Council), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040 
Madrid, Spain ollorca@cib.csic.es.

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is an mRNA degradation pathway that regulates 
gene expression and mRNA quality. A complex network of macromolecular 
interactions regulates NMD initiation, which is only partially understood. 
According to prevailing models, NMD begins by the assembly of the SURF 
(SMG1-UPF1-eRF1-eRF3) complex at the ribosome, followed by UPF1 activation by 
additional factors such as UPF2 and UPF3. Elucidating the interactions between 
NMD factors is essential to comprehend NMD, and here we demonstrate 
biochemically and structurally the interaction between human UPF2 and eukaryotic 
release factor 3 (eRF3). In addition, we find that UPF2 associates with SURF and 
ribosomes in cells, in an UPF3-independent manner. Binding assays using a 
collection of UPF2 truncated variants reveal that eRF3 binds to the C-terminal 
part of UPF2. This region of UPF2 is partially coincident with the UPF3-binding 
site as revealed by electron microscopy of the UPF2-eRF3 complex. Accordingly, 
we find that the interaction of UPF2 with UPF3b interferes with the assembly of 
the UPF2-eRF3 complex, and that UPF2 binds UPF3b more strongly than eRF3. 
Together, our results highlight the role of UPF2 as a platform for the transient 
interactions of several NMD factors, including several components of SURF.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1527
PMCID: PMC4770235
PMID: 26740584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]