1. Neurol Sci. 2016 May;37(5):655-62. doi: 10.1007/s10072-015-2473-x. Epub 2016
Jan  11.

Lack of association between the Angiogenin (ANG) rs11701 polymorphism and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis risk: a meta-analysis.

Pan LS(1), Deng XB(1), Wang Z(1), Leng HL(1), Zhu XP(1), Ding D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The People's Hospital of Yichun City, Yichun 
University, 88 West Zhong Shan Road, Yichun, 336000, Jiangxi, People's Republic 
of China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The People's Hospital of Yichun City, Yichun 
University, 88 West Zhong Shan Road, Yichun, 336000, Jiangxi, People's Republic 
of China. neurodd@163.com.

To perform a meta-analysis to help resolve the controversy of whether the 
Angiogenin (ANG) rs11701 polymorphism is associated with amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) risk. A literature search of PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, 
Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure, Wanfang and SinoMed was conducted for 
eligible studies published up to Jun 5, 2015. The strength of the association 
between the polymorphism and ALS susceptibility was estimated by odds ratio (OR) 
and associated 95 % confidence interval (CI). The pooled ORs were assessed for 
the dominant model (TG + GG vs. TT), recessive model (GG vs. TG + TT), 
heterozygote model (TG vs. TT), homozygote model (GG vs. TT) and allele model (G 
vs. T). Ten eligible articles were identified, which reported 14 case-control 
studies and a total of 5807 cases and 3861 controls. Analysis of pooled ORs and 
95 % CIs suggested lack of association between the ANG rs11701 polymorphism and 
risk for ALS, Familial ALS or Sporadic ALS (all p value for z test >0.05). A 
stratified analysis according to Caucasian or Han Chinese origin further showed 
that the rs11701 polymorphism was not associated with the disease risk in 
Caucasians or Han Chinese. There is no difference in the polymorphism 
frequencies between patients with FALS or SALS. The ANG rs11701 polymorphism was 
not associated with risk for ALS, FALS or SALS. There is no difference between 
the polymorphism frequencies in patients with FALS or SALS. Further 
well-designed studies with larger populations are required to validate these 
results.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-015-2473-x
PMID: 26753798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]