1. Atherosclerosis. 2016 Mar;246:193-201. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.12.009. Epub 2015 Dec 12.

Post-GWAS methodologies for localisation of functional non-coding variants: 
ANGPTL3.

Oldoni F(1), Palmen J(2), Giambartolomei C(3), Howard P(2), Drenos F(2), Plagnol 
V(3), Humphries SE(2), Talmud PJ(2), Smith AJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, 
University College London, London, UK; Department of Molecular Genetics, 
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, 
University College London, London, UK.
(3)UCL Genetics Institute, University College London, London, UK.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, 
University College London, London, UK. Electronic address: 
Andrew.J.P.Smith@ucl.ac.uk.

Genome-wide association studies have confirmed the involvement of non-coding 
angiopoietin-like 3 (ANGPTL3) gene variants with coronary artery disease, levels 
of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), triglycerides and ANGPTL3 mRNA 
transcript. Extensive linkage disequilibrium at the locus, however, has hindered 
efforts to identify the potential functional variants. Using regulatory 
annotations from ENCODE, combined with functional in vivo assays such as 
allele-specific formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements, 
statistical approaches including eQTL/lipid colocalisation, and traditional in 
vitro methodologies including electrophoretic mobility shift assay and 
luciferase reporter assays, variants affecting the ANGPTL3 regulome were 
examined. From 253 variants associated with ANGPTL3 mRNA expression, and/or 
lipid traits, 46 were located within liver regulatory elements and potentially 
functional. One variant, rs10889352, demonstrated allele-specific effects on 
DNA-protein interactions, reporter gene expression and chromatin accessibility, 
in line with effects on LDL-C levels and expression of ANGPTL3 mRNA. The ANGPTL3 
gene lies within DOCK7, although the variant is within non-coding regions 
outside of ANGPTL3, within DOCK7, suggesting complex long-range regulatory 
effects on gene expression. This study illustrates the power of combining 
multiple genome-wide datasets with laboratory data to localise functional 
non-coding variation and provides a model for analysis of regulatory variants 
from GWAS.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.12.009
PMCID: PMC4773290
PMID: 26800306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]