1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2016 Apr;73:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.01.008. 
Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Global profiling of lysine acetylation in human histoplasmosis pathogen 
Histoplasma capsulatum.

Xie L(1), Fang W(2), Deng W(1), Yu Z(1), Li J(2), Chen M(2), Liao W(2), Xie 
J(3), Pan W(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Modern Biopharmaceuticals, State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of 
Eco-Environment and Bio-Resource of the Three Gorges Area, Key Laboratory of 
Eco-environments in Three Gorges Reservoir Region, Ministry of Education, School 
of Life Sciences, Southwest University, Beibei, Chongqing, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Medical Mycology, Department of 
Dermatology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Institute of Modern Biopharmaceuticals, State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of 
Eco-Environment and Bio-Resource of the Three Gorges Area, Key Laboratory of 
Eco-environments in Three Gorges Reservoir Region, Ministry of Education, School 
of Life Sciences, Southwest University, Beibei, Chongqing, China. Electronic 
address: georgex@swu.edu.cn.
(4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Medical Mycology, Department of 
Dermatology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 
China. Electronic address: panweihua@medmail.com.cn.

Histoplasma capsulatum is the causative agent of human histoplasmosis, which can 
cause respiratory and systemic mycosis in immune-compromised individuals. Lysine 
acetylation, a protein posttranslational protein modification, is widespread in 
both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Although increasing evidence suggests that 
lysine acetylation may play critical roles in fungus physiology, very little is 
known about its extent and function in H. capsulatum. To comprehensively profile 
protein lysine acetylation in H. capsulatum, we performed a global acetylome 
analysis through peptide prefractionation, antibody enrichment, and LC-MS/MS 
analysis, identifying 775 acetylation sites on 456 acetylated proteins; and 
functionally analysis showing their involvement in different biological 
processes. We defined six types of acetylation site motifs, and the results 
imply that lysine residue of polypeptide with tyrosine at the -1 and +1 
positions, histidine at the +1 position, and phenylalanine (F) at the +1 and +2 
position is a preferred substrate of lysine acetyltransferase. Moreover, some 
virulence factors candidates including calmodulin and DnaK are acetylated. In 
conclusion, our data set may serve as an important resource for the elucidation 
of associations between functional protein lysine acetylation and virulence in 
H. capsulatum.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.01.008
PMID: 26806293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]