1. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 23;7(8):9600-12. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7144.

Prevalence and spectrum of BRCA germline variants in mainland Chinese familial 
breast and ovarian cancer patients.

Kim YC(1), Zhao L(1), Zhang H(1), Huang Y(1), Cui J(1), Xiao F(1), Downs B(1), 
Wang SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, College of Medicine, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

Germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the most penetrating genetic 
predispositions for breast and ovarian cancer, and their presence is largely 
ethnic-specific. Comprehensive information about the prevalence and spectrum of 
BRCA mutations has been collected in European and North American populations. 
However, similar information is lacking in other populations, including the 
mainland Chinese population despite its large size of 1.4 billion accounting for 
one fifth of the world's population. Herein, we performed an extensive 
literature analysis to collect BRCA variants identified from mainland Chinese 
familial breast and ovarian cancer patients. We observed 137 distinct BRCA1 
variants in 409 of 3,844 and 80 distinct BRCA2 variants in 157 of 3,024 mainland 
Chinese patients, with an estimated prevalence of 10.6% for BRCA1 and 5.2% for 
BRCA2. Of these variants, only 40.3% in BRCA1 and 42.5% in BRCA2 are listed in 
current Breast Cancer Information Core database. We observed higher frequent 
variation in BRCA1 exons 11A, 11C, 11D, and 24 and BRCA2 exon 10 in Chinese 
patients than in the patients of other populations. The most common pathogenic 
variant in BRCA1 wasc.981_982delAT in exon 11A, and in BRCA2 c.3195_3198delTAAT 
in exon 11B and c.5576_5579delTTAA in exon 11E; the most common novel variant in 
BRCA1 was c.919A>G in exon 10A, and in BRCA2 c.7142delC in exon 14. None of the 
variants overlap with the founder mutations in other populations. Our analysis 
indicates that the prevalence of BRCA variation in mainland Chinese familial 
breast and ovarian cancer patients is at a level similar to but the spectrum is 
substantially different from the ones of other populations.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7144
PMCID: PMC4891063
PMID: 26848529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
competing interests.