1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2016 Aug;87(8):871-8. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2015-311890. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

The prediagnostic phase of Parkinson's disease.

Noyce AJ(1), Lees AJ(1), Schrag AE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Reta Lila Weston Institute for 
Neurological Studies, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

The field of prediagnostic Parkinson's disease (PD) is fast moving with an 
expanding range of clinical and laboratory biomarkers, and multiple strategies 
seeking to discover those in the earliest stages or those 'at risk'. It is 
widely believed that the highest likelihood of securing neuroprotective benefit 
from drugs will be in these subjects, preceding current point of diagnosis of 
PD. In this review, we outline current knowledge of the prediagnostic phase of 
PD, including an up-to-date review of risk factors (genetic and environmental), 
their relative influence, and clinical features that occur prior to diagnosis. 
We discuss imaging markers across a range of modalities, and the emerging 
literature on fluid and peripheral tissue biomarkers. We then explore current 
initiatives to identify individuals at risk or in the earliest stages that might 
be candidates for future clinical trials, what we are learning from these 
initiatives, and how these studies will bring the field closer to realistically 
commencing primary or secondary preventive trials for PD. Further progress in 
this field hinges on greater clinical and biological description, and 
understanding of the prediagnostic, peridiagnostic and immediate postdiagnostic 
stages of PD. Identifying subjects 3-5â€…years before they are currently diagnosed 
may be an ideal group for neuroprotective trials. At the very least, these 
initiatives will help clarify the stage before and around diagnosis, enabling 
the field to push into unchartered territory at the earliest stages of disease.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2015-311890
PMCID: PMC4975823
PMID: 26848171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]