1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 1;7(9):10073-89. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7164.

eIF4B is a convergent target and critical effector of oncogenic Pim and 
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathways in Abl transformants.

Chen K(1), Yang J(1)(2), Li J(1), Wang X(1), Chen Y(1), Huang S(3), Chen 
JL(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing 100101, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Immune Mechanism and Intervention on Serious Disease in 
Hebei Province, Department of Immunology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 
050017, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University 
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.
(4)College of Animal Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, 
Fuzhou 350002, China.

Activation of eIF4B correlates with Abl-mediated cellular transformation, but 
the precise mechanisms are largely unknown. Here we show that eIF4B is a 
convergent substrate of JAK/STAT/Pim and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways in Abl 
transformants. Both pathways phosphorylated eIF4B in Abl-transformed cells, and 
such redundant regulation was responsible for the limited effect of single 
inhibitor on Abl oncogenicity. Persistent inhibition of one signaling pathway 
induced the activation of the other pathway and thereby restored the 
phosphorylation levels of eIF4B. Simultaneous inhibition of the two pathways 
impaired eIF4B phosphorylation more effectively, and synergistically induced 
apoptosis in Abl transformed cells and inhibited the growth of engrafted tumors 
in nude mice. Similarly, the survival of Abl transformants exhibited a higher 
sensitivity to the pharmacological inhibition, when combined with the 
shRNA-based silence of the other pathway. Interestingly, such synergy was 
dependent on the phosphorylation status of eIF4B on Ser422, as overexpression of 
eIF4B phosphomimetic mutant S422E in the transformants greatly attenuated the 
synergistic effects of these inhibitors on Abl oncogenicity. In contrast, eIF4B 
knockdown sensitized Abl transformants to undergo apoptosis induced by the 
combined blockage. Collectively, the results indicate that eIF4B integrates the 
signals from Pim and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways in Abl-expressing leukemic cells, 
and is a promising therapeutic target for such cancers.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7164
PMCID: PMC4891105
PMID: 26848623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.