1. Colomb Med (Cali). 2015 Dec 30;46(4):176-82.

Characterization of polymorphisms of genes ADH2, ADH3, ALDH2 and CYP2E1 and 
relationship to the alcoholism in a Colombian population.

Méndez C(1), Rey M(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetic Group, Facultad de Medicina, Instituto de Genética, Maestría 
en genética Humana, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia.

OBJECTIVE: Identify and characterize polymorphisms of genes ADH2, ADH3, ALDH2 
and CYP2E1 in a Colombian population residing in the city of Bogotá and 
determine its possible relationship to the alcoholism.
METHODS: ADH2, ADH3, ALDH2, and CYP2E1 genotypes a population of 148 individuals 
with non-problematic alcohol and 65 individuals with alcoholism were determined 
with TaqMan probes and PCR-RFLP. DNA was obtained from peripheral blood white 
cells.
RESULTS: Significant difference was found in family history of alcoholism and 
use of other psychoactive substances to compare alcoholics with controls. When 
allelic frequencies for each category (gender) were considered, frequency of A2 
allele carriers in ADH2 was found higher in male patients than controls. In 
women, the relative frequency for c1 allele in CYP2E1 was lower in controls than 
alcoholics. The ALDH2 locus is monomorphic. No significant differences in allele 
distributions of the loci examined to compare two populations were observed, 
however when stratifying the same trend was found that these differences tended 
to be significant.
CONCLUSIONS: This study allows us to conclude the positive association between 
family history of alcoholism and alcoholism suggesting that there is a 
favourable hereditary predisposition. Since substance dependence requires 
interaction of multiple genes, the combination of genotypes ADH2 * 2, CYP2E1 * 1 
combined with genotype homozygous ALDH2 * 1 found in this study could be leading 
to the population to a potential risk to alcoholism.

Publisher: OBJETIVO: Identificar y caracterizar los polimorfismos de los genes 
ADH2, ADH3, ALDH2 y CYP2E1 de colombianos residentes en la ciudad de Bogotá y 
determinar su posible relación con el alcoholismo.
MÉTODOS: Se determinaron los genotipos ADH2, ADH3, ALDH2 y CYP2E1 a una 
población de 148 individuos con un consumo no problemático de alcohol y 65 
individuos con alcoholismo. La genotipificación se realizó con sondas TaqMan y 
PCR-RFLP, el ADN se obtuvo de células blancas de sangre periférica.
RESULTADOS: Se encontró diferencia significativa en la historia familiar de 
alcoholismo y el uso de otras sustancias psicoactivas. Cuando se consideraron 
frecuencias alélicas para cada categoría (género), la frecuencia de portadores 
del alelo A2 en ADH2 se encontró mayor en los pacientes masculinos que los 
controles. En las mujeres, la frecuencia relativa para el alelo C1 de CYP2E1 fue 
menor en controles que en alcohólicos. El locus ALDH2 es monomórfico. No se 
observaron diferencias significativas en las distribuciones alélicas de los loci 
examinadas al comparar las dos poblaciones, sin embargo al estratificar las 
mismas se encontró una tendencia a que esas diferencias fueran significativas.
CONCLUSIONES: Este estudio nos permite concluir la asociación positiva entre 
historia familiar de alcoholismo y el alcoholismo, lo que sugiere que existe una 
predisposición hereditaria favorable. Dado que la dependencia de sustancias 
requiere la interacción de múltiples genes como ADH2*2, CYP2E1*1 combinado con 
el genotipo homocigótico ALDH2*1 hallados en este estudio podría estar llevando 
a la población a un riesgo potencial hacia el alcoholismo.

PMCID: PMC4732507
PMID: 26848198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Manifest not present 
conflicts of interest