1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 1;7(9):10472-85. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7228.

The sonic hedgehog signaling pathway stimulates anaplastic thyroid cancer cell 
motility and invasiveness by activating Akt and c-Met.

Williamson AJ(1), Doscas ME(2), Ye J(2), Heiden KB(3), Xing M(4), Li Y(5), Prinz 
RA(6), Xu X(7)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Rush Medical College, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(4)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, The Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center and Department of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Surgery, NorthShore University Health System, Evanston, IL, 
USA.
(7)Center for Comparative Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu Province, China.

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is highly activated in thyroid neoplasms and 
promotes thyroid cancer stem-like cell phenotype, but whether the Shh pathway 
regulates thyroid tumor cell motility and invasiveness remains unknown. Here, we 
report that the motility and invasiveness of two anaplastic thyroid tumor cell 
lines, KAT-18 and SW1736, were inhibited by two inhibitors of the Shh pathway 
(cyclopamine and GANT61). Consistently, the cell motility and invasiveness was 
decreased by Shh and Gli1 knockdown, and was increased by Gli1 overexpression in 
KAT-18 cells. Mechanistic studies revealed that Akt and c-Met phosphorylation 
was decreased by a Gli1 inhibitor and by Shh and Gli1 knockdown, but was 
increased by Gli1 overexpression. LY294002, a PI-3 kinase inhibitor, and a c-Met 
inhibitor inhibited the motility and invasiveness of Gli1-transfected KAT-18 
cells more effectively than the vector-transfected cells. Knockdown of Snail, a 
transcription factor regulated by the Shh pathway, led to decreased cell 
motility and invasiveness in KAT-18 and SW1736 cells. However, key 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers including E-cadherin and 
vimentin as well as Slug were not affected by cyclopamine and GANT61 in either 
SW1736 or WRO82, a well differentiated follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line. 
Our data suggest that the Shh pathway-stimulated thyroid tumor cell motility and 
invasiveness is largely mediated by AKT and c-Met activation with little 
involvement of EMT.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7228
PMCID: PMC4891133
PMID: 26859575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the 
impartiality of the research reported.