1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2016;2016:4137908. doi: 10.1155/2016/4137908. Epub 2016 
Jan 10.

Phenolic Rich Extract from Clinacanthus nutans Attenuates 
Hyperlipidemia-Associated Oxidative Stress in Rats.

Sarega N(1), Imam MU(2), Ooi DJ(2), Chan KW(2), Md Esa N(3), Zawawi N(4), Ismail 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biomedicine, Institute of Bioscience, Universiti 
Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia; Department of Nutrition and 
Dietetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 
43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Biomedicine, Institute of Bioscience, Universiti 
Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Food Science, Faculty of Food Science and Technology, 
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.

Clinacanthus nutans is used as traditional medicine in Asia but there are 
limited scientific studies to support its use. In this study, the stem and leaf 
of C. nutans were extracted using solvents of differing polarities, and their 
antioxidant capacities were determined using multiple antioxidant assays. The 
water and aqueous methanolic leaf extracts were further fractionated and their 
antioxidant capacities and phenolic compositions were tested. Furthermore, the 
efficacies of the water and aqueous methanolic leaf extracts were tested against 
hyperlipidemia-induced oxidative stress in rats. Serum and hepatic antioxidant 
and oxidative stress markers were tested after feeding the rats with high fat 
diet together with the extracts or simvastatin for 7 weeks. The results 
indicated that both leaf extracts attenuated oxidative stress through increasing 
serum antioxidant enzymes activity and upregulating the expression of hepatic 
antioxidant genes. Multiple phenolic compounds were detected in the extracts and 
fractions of C. nutans, although protocatechuic acid was one of the most 
abundant and may have contributed significantly towards the bioactivities of the 
extracts. However, synergistic effects of different phenolics may have 
contributed to the overall bioactivities. C. nutans can be a good source of 
functional ingredients for the management of oxidative stress-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/4137908
PMCID: PMC4737004
PMID: 26881026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]