1. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2016 Feb;30(1):87-100. doi: 10.1007/s10557-016-6648-3.

Human Genetics and the Causal Role of Lipoprotein(a) for Various Diseases.

Kronenberg F(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular 
and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Sch√∂pfstr. 41, 6020, 
Innsbruck, Austria. Florian.Kronenberg@i-med.ac.at.

Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] is a highly atherogenic lipoprotein that is under strong 
genetic control by the LPA gene locus. Genetic variants including a highly 
polymorphic copy number variation of the so called kringle IV repeats at this 
locus have a pronounced influence on Lp(a) concentrations. High concentrations 
of Lp(a) as well as genetic variants which are associated with high Lp(a) 
concentrations are both associated with cardiovascular disease which very 
strongly supports causality between Lp(a) concetrations and cardiovascular 
disease. This method of using a genetic variant that has a pronounced influence 
on a biomarker to support causality with an outcome is called Mendelian 
randomization approach and was applied for the first time two decades ago with 
data from Lp(a) and cardiovascular disease. This approach was also used to 
demonstrate a causal association between high Lp(a) concentrations and aortic 
valve stenosis, between low concentrations and type-2 diabetes mellitus and to 
exclude a causal association between Lp(a) concentrations and venous thrombosis. 
Considering the high frequency of these genetic variants in the population makes 
Lp(a) the strongest genetic risk factor for cardiovascular disease identified so 
far. Promising drugs that lower Lp(a) are on the horizon but their efficacy in 
terms of reducing clinical outcomes still has to be shown.

DOI: 10.1007/s10557-016-6648-3
PMCID: PMC4789197
PMID: 26896185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]