1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2016 Apr 1;24(7):1469-79. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.02.015.
Epub  2016 Feb 9.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of new fluorinated and chlorinated 
indenoisoquinoline topoisomerase I poisons.

Beck DE(1), Lv W(1), Abdelmalak M(2), Plescia CB(2), Agama K(2), Marchand C(2), 
Pommier Y(2), Cushman M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, College of 
Pharmacy, and the Purdue Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN 47907, United States.
(2)Developmental Therapeutics Branch and Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, 
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 21892, 
United States.
(3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, College of 
Pharmacy, and the Purdue Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN 47907, United States. Electronic address: cushman@purdue.edu.

Fluorine and chlorine are metabolically stable, but generally less active 
replacements for a nitro group at the 3-position of indenoisoquinoline 
topoisomerase IB (Top1) poisons. A number of strategies were employed in the 
present investigation to enhance the Top1 inhibitory potencies and cancer cell 
growth inhibitory activities of halogenated indenoisoquinolines. In several 
cases, the new compounds' activities were found to rival or surpass those of 
similarly substituted 3-nitroindenoisoquinolines, and several unusually potent 
analogs were discovered through testing in human cancer cell cultures. A 
hydroxyethylaminopropyl side chain on the lactam nitrogen of two halogenated 
indenoisoquinoline Top1 inhibitors was found to also impart inhibitory activity 
against tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterases 1 and 2 (TDP1 and TDP2), which are 
enzymes that participate in the repair of DNA damage induced by Top1 poisons.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.02.015
PMCID: PMC4789169
PMID: 26906474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
financial interest: Mark Cushman is on the Board of Directors of and is an 
investor in Linus Oncology, Inc., which has licensed indenoisoquinoline 
intellectual property owned by Purdue University. Neither Linus Oncology, Inc., 
nor any other commercial company sponsored or provided other direct financial 
support to the author or his laboratory for the research reported in this 
article. The remaining authors have no competing and/or relevant financial 
interest to disclose.