1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2016 Apr;23(4):295-301. doi: 10.1530/ERC-16-0043. Epub
2016  Feb 24.

Prevalence and phenotypic correlations of EIF1AX mutations in thyroid nodules.

Karunamurthy A(1), Panebianco F(1), J Hsiao S(1), Vorhauer J(1), Nikiforova 
MN(1), Chiosea S(1), Nikiforov YE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of PathologyUniversity of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of PathologyUniversity of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA nikiforovye@upmc.edu.

The EIF1AX gene mutations have been recently found in papillary thyroid 
carcinoma (PTC) and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC). The prevalence of these 
mutations in other types of thyroid cancers and benign nodules is unknown. In 
this study, we analyzed the occurrence of EIF1AX mutations in exons 2, 5, and 6 
of the gene in a series of 266 thyroid tumors and hyperplastic nodules by either 
Sanger or next-generation sequencing (ThyroSeq v.2). In addition, 647 thyroid 
fine-needle aspiration (FNA) samples with indeterminate cytology were analyzed. 
Using surgically removed samples, EIF1AX mutations were detected in 3/86 (2.3%) 
PTC, 1/4 (25%) ATC, 0/53 follicular carcinomas, 0/12 medullary carcinomas, 2/27 
(7.4%) follicular adenomas, and 1/80 (1.3%) hyperplastic nodules. Among five 
mutation-positive FNA samples with surgical follow-up, one nodule was PTC and 
others were benign follicular adenomas or hyperplastic nodules. Overall, among 
33 mutations identified, A113_splice mutation at the intron 5/exon 6 splice site 
of EIF1AX was the most common. All four carcinomas harbored A113_splice mutation 
and three of them had one or more coexisting mutations, typically RAS All PTC 
carrying EIF1AX mutations were encapsulated follicular variants. In summary, 
this study shows that EIF1AX mutations occur not only in thyroid carcinomas, but 
also in benign nodules. The most common mutation hotspot is the A113_splice, 
followed by a cluster of mutations in exon 2. When found in thyroid FNA samples, 
EIF1AX mutations confer ~20% risk of cancer; the risk is likely to be higher in 
nodules carrying a A113_splice mutation and when EIF1AX coexists with RAS 
mutations.

Â© 2016 Society for Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-16-0043
PMCID: PMC5494715
PMID: 26911375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]