1. Cells. 2016 Feb 24;5(1):8. doi: 10.3390/cells5010008.

Matefin/SUN-1 Phosphorylation on Serine 43 Is Mediated by CDK-1 and Required for 
Its Localization to Centrosomes and Normal Mitosis in C. elegans Embryos.

Zuela N(1), Gruenbaum Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Life Science, Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. noam.zuela@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Genetics, Institute of Life Science, Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. gru@vms.huji.ac.il.

Matefin/SUN-1 is an evolutionary conserved C. elegans inner nuclear membrane 
SUN-domain protein. By creating a bridge with the KASH-domain protein ZYG-12, it 
connects the nucleus to cytoplasmic filaments and organelles. Matefin/SUN-1 is 
expressed in the germline where it undergoes specific phosphorylation at its 
N-terminal domain, which is required for germline development and homologous 
chromosome pairing. The maternally deposited matefin/SUN-1 is then essential for 
embryonic development. Here, we show that in embryos, serine 43 of matefin/SUN-1 
(S43) is phosphorylated in a CDK-1 dependent manner and is localized throughout 
the cell cycle mostly to centrosomes. By generating animals expressing 
phosphodead S43A and phosphomimetic S43E mutations, we show that phosphorylation 
of S43 is required to maintain centrosome integrity and function, as well as for 
the localization of ZYG-12 and lamin. Expression of S43E in early embryos also 
leads to an increase in chromatin structural changes, decreased progeny and to 
almost complete embryonic lethality. Down regulation of emerin further increases 
the occurrence of chromatin organization abnormalities, indicating possible 
collaborative roles for these proteins that is regulated by S43 phosphorylation. 
Taken together, these results support a role for phosphorylation of serine 43 in 
matefin/SUN-1 in mitosis.

DOI: 10.3390/cells5010008
PMCID: PMC4810093
PMID: 26927181