1. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2016 Oct;27(7):817-821. doi: 
10.1097/MBC.0000000000000551.

Activation of the tissue factor-dependent extrinsic pathway and its relation to 
JAK2 V617F mutation status in patients with essential thrombocythemia.

Gadomska G(1), Stankowska K, Boinska J, Bartoszewska-Kubiak A, Haus O, Rość D.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Hematology and Malignant Diseases of Hematopoietic System, 
Faculty of Medicine bDepartment of Pathophysiology, Faculty of Pharmacy 
cDepartment of Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Nicolaus Copernicus 
University in Toruń, Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Poland.

Thrombotic complications may occur in 7.6-29.4% of patients with essential 
thrombocythemia. According to the cellular theory, tissue factor (TF) activating 
extrinsic blood coagulation pathway is essential for the activation of blood 
clotting. The aim of the study was to evaluate the activation of the 
TF-dependent extrinsic pathway in patients with essential thrombocythemia, 
depending on the presence or absence of the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) V617F 
mutation. The study included 74 newly diagnosed patients (F/M: 47/27; mean age 
61 years) with essential thrombocythemia (Tefferi and Vardiman, Leukemia 2008; 
22(1):14-22). Patients were diagnosed in the Department of Clinical Hematology 
and Hematological Malignancies University Hospital No. 2, Bydgoszcz, Poland. The 
control group consisted of 30 healthy volunteers (F/M: 17/13; mean age 49 
years). The concentration and activity of TF and TF pathway inhibitor (TFPI) 
were measured using ELISA method. In patients with essential thrombocythemia, we 
observed a higher concentration of TF [median (Me) = 686.90 vs 164.28 pg/ml] and 
over 10-fold higher activity of TF (Me = 46.05 vs 4.01 pmol/l) when compared 
with the control group. We also reported significantly higher activity of TFPI 
compared with the control group (Me = 1.93 vs 1.78 U/ml). Moreover, a 
concentration of TFPI was significantly lower in patients with essential 
thrombocythemia with JAK2 V617F mutation as compared with patients without the 
mutation (Me = 1.90 vs 2.16 U/ml; P = 0.039639). Increased TF activity and 
concentration is responsible for higher procoagulant potential in patients with 
essential thrombocythemia. Reduced activity of TFPI in patients with essential 
thrombocythemia with JAK2 V617F mutation indicates an increased prothrombotic 
risk in this group of patients.

DOI: 10.1097/MBC.0000000000000551
PMID: 26945263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]