1. J Res Natl Inst Stand Technol. 2015 Mar 11;120:37-57. doi:
10.6028/jres.120.004.  eCollection 2015.

Revision of the NIST Standard for (223)Ra: New Measurements and Review of 2008 
Data.

Zimmerman BE(1), Bergeron DE(1), Cessna JT(1), Fitzgerald R(1), Pibida L(1).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

After discovering a discrepancy in the transfer standard currently being 
disseminated by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), we 
have performed a new primary standardization of the alpha-emitter (223)Ra using 
Live-timed Anticoincidence Counting (LTAC) and the Triple-to-Double Coincidence 
Ratio Method (TDCR). Additional confirmatory measurements were made with the 
CIEMAT-NIST efficiency tracing method (CNET) of liquid scintillation counting, 
integral γ-ray counting using a NaI(Tl) well counter, and several High Purity 
Germanium (HPGe) detectors in an attempt to understand the origin of the 
discrepancy and to provide a correction. The results indicate that a -9.5 % 
difference exists between activity values obtained using the former transfer 
standard relative to the new primary standardization. During one of the 
experiments, a 2 % difference in activity was observed between dilutions of the 
(223)Ra master solution prepared using the composition used in the original 
standardization and those prepared using 1 mol·L(-1) HCl. This effect appeared 
to be dependent on the number of dilutions or the total dilution factor to the 
master solution, but the magnitude was not reproducible. A new calibration 
factor ("K-value") has been determined for the NIST Secondary Standard 
Ionization Chamber (IC "A"), thereby correcting the discrepancy between the 
primary and secondary standards.

DOI: 10.6028/jres.120.004
PMCID: PMC4730682
PMID: 26958437