1. Front Chem. 2016 Feb 29;4:8. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2016.00008. eCollection 2016.

Surface Analysis of Gold Nanoparticles Functionalized with Thiol-Modified 
Glucose SAMs for Biosensor Applications.

Spampinato V(1), Parracino MA(2), La Spina R(3), Rossi F(3), Ceccone G(3).

Author information:
(1)European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Health and Consumer 
ProtectionIspra, Italy; Istituto di Fisica dei Plasmi, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
RicercheMilano, Italy.
(2)European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Health and Consumer 
ProtectionIspra, Italy; Technical Department, Nanoimmunotech S.LZaragoza, Spain.
(3)European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Health and Consumer 
Protection Ispra, Italy.

In this work, Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS), 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) 
have been used to characterize the surface chemistry of gold substrates before 
and after functionalization with thiol-modified glucose self-assembled 
monolayers and subsequent biochemical specific recognition of maltose binding 
protein (MBP). The results indicate that the surface functionalization is 
achieved both on flat and nanoparticles gold substrates thus showing the 
potential of the developed system as biodetection platform. Moreover, the method 
presented here has been found to be a sound and valid approach to characterize 
the surface chemistry of nanoparticles functionalized with large molecules. Both 
techniques were proved to be very useful tools for monitoring all the 
functionalization steps, including the investigation of the biological behavior 
of the glucose-modified particles in the presence of the maltose binding 
protein.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2016.00008
PMCID: PMC4770020
PMID: 26973830