1. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 26;7(17):23801-11. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8181.

Hypoxia-regulated gene expression explains differences between melanoma cell 
line-derived xenografts and patient-derived xenografts.

Bhadury J(1), Einarsdottir BO(1), Podraza A(1), Bagge RO(1), Stierner U(2), Ny 
L(2), Dávila López M(3), Nilsson JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy at 
the University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy 
at the University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(3)The Bioinformatics Core Facility at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.

Cell line-derived xenografts (CDXs) are an integral part of drug efficacy 
testing during development of new pharmaceuticals against cancer but their 
accuracy in predicting clinical responses in patients have been debated. 
Patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) are thought to be more useful for predictive 
biomarker identification for targeted therapies, including in metastatic 
melanoma, due to their similarities to human disease. Here, tumor biopsies from 
fifteen patients and ten widely-used melanoma cell lines were transplanted into 
immunocompromised mice to generate PDXs and CDXs, respectively. Gene expression 
profiles generated from the tumors of these PDXs and CDXs clustered into 
distinct groups, despite similar mutational signatures. Hypoxia-induced gene 
signatures and overexpression of the hypoxia-regulated miRNA hsa-miR-210 
characterized CDXs. Inhibition of hsa-miR-210 with decoys had little phenotypic 
effect in vitro but reduced sensitivity to MEK1/2 inhibition in vivo, suggesting 
down-regulation of this miRNA could result in development of resistance to MEK 
inhibitors.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8181
PMCID: PMC5029664
PMID: 27009863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.