1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0152159. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152159. 
eCollection 2016.

Identification of Regulatory Mutations in SERPINC1 Affecting Vitamin D Response 
Elements Associated with Antithrombin Deficiency.

Toderici M(1), de la Morena-Barrio ME(1), Padilla J(1), Miñano A(1), Antón 
AI(1), Iniesta JA(2), Herranz MT(3), Fernández N(4), Vicente V(1), Corral J(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Hematología y Oncología Médica, Hospital Universitario Morales 
Meseguer, Centro Regional de Hemodonación, Universidad de Murcia, IMIB-Arrixaca, 
Murcia, Spain.
(2)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Murcia, Spain.
(3)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Universitario Morales Meseguer, 
Murcia, Spain.
(4)Servicio de Hematología y Hemoterapia, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, 
Zaragoza, Spain.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016 Jul 21;11(7):e0159987. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159987.

Antithrombin is a crucial anticoagulant serpin whose even moderate deficiency 
significantly increases the risk of thrombosis. Most cases with antithrombin 
deficiency carried genetic defects affecting exons or flanking regions of 
SERPINC1.We aimed to identify regulatory mutations inSERPINC1 through sequencing 
the promoter, intron 1 and 2 of this gene in 23 patients with antithrombin 
deficiency but without known genetic defects. Three cases with moderate 
antithrombin deficiency (63-78%) carried potential regulatory mutations. One 
located 200 bp before the initiation ATG and two in intron 1. These mutations 
disrupted two out of five potential vitamin D receptor elements (VDRE) 
identified in SERPINC1 with different software. One genetic defect, 
c.42-1060_-1057dupTTGA, was a new low prevalent polymorphism (MAF: 0.01) with 
functional consequences on plasma antithrombin levels. The relevance of the 
vitamin D pathway on the regulation of SERPINC1 was confirmed in a cell model. 
Incubation of HepG2 with paricalcitol, a vitamin D analog, increased 
dose-dependently the levels of SERPINC1transcripts and antithrombin released to 
the conditioned medium. This study shows further evidence of the transcriptional 
regulation of SERPINC1 by vitamin D and first describes the functional and 
pathological relevance of mutations affecting VDRE of this gene. Our study opens 
new perspectives in the search of new genetic defects involved in antithrombin 
deficiency and the risk of thrombosis as well as in the design of new 
antithrombotic treatments.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152159
PMCID: PMC4803246
PMID: 27003919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.