1. Food Sci Nutr. 2015 Sep 29;4(2):198-206. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.273. eCollection
2016  Mar.

Screening of microorganisms from Antarctic surface water and cytotoxicity 
metabolites from Antarctic microorganisms.

Zheng L(1), Yang K(1), Liu J(2), Sun M(1), Zhu J(1), Lv M(1), Kang D(1), Wang 
W(1), Xing M(1), Li Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Sustainable Utilization of Marine Fisheries Resources 
Ministry of Agriculture Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute Chinese Academy 
of Fishery Sciences Qingdao 266071 China.
(2)Medical College Qingdao University Qingdao 266021 China.

The Antarctic is a potentially important library of microbial resources and new 
bioactive substances. In this study, microorganisms were isolated from surface 
water samples collected from different sites of the Antarctic. 
3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) 
assay-based cytotoxicity-tracking method was used to identify Antarctic marine 
microorganism resources for antitumor lead compounds. The results showed that a 
total of 129 Antarctic microorganism strains were isolated. Twelve strains 
showed potent cytotoxic activities, among which a Gram-negative, rod-shaped 
bacterium, designated as N11-8 was further studied. Phylogenetic analysis based 
on 16S rRNA gene sequence showed that N11-8 belongs to the genus Bacillus. 
Fermented active products of N11-8 with molecular weights of 1-30 kDa had higher 
inhibitory effects on different cancaer cells, such as BEL-7402 human 
hepatocellular carcinoma cells, U251 human glioma cells, RKO human colon 
carcinoma cells, A549 human lung carcinoma cells, and MCF-7 human breast 
carcinoma cells. However, they displayed lower cytotoxicity against HFL1 human 
normal fibroblast lung cells. However, they displayed lower cytotoxicity against 
HFL1 human normal fibroblast lung cells. Microscopic observations showed that 
the fermented active products have inhibitory activity on BEL-7402 cells similar 
to that of mitomycin C. Further studies indicated that the fermented active 
products have high pH and high thermal stability. In conclusion, most strains 
isolated in this study may be developed as promising sources for the discovery 
of antitumor bioactive substances. The fermented active products of Antarctic 
marine Bacillus sp. N11- 8 are expected to be applied in the prevention and 
treatment of cancer.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.273
PMCID: PMC4779476
PMID: 27004109