1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2015 Dec 29;6:13-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2015.12.001. 
eCollection 2016 Mar.

Successful therapy for protein-losing enteropathy caused by chronic 
neuronopathic Gaucher disease.

Mhanni AA(1), Kozenko M(2), Hartley JN(3), Deneau M(4), El-Matary W(5), 
Rockman-Greenberg C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Canada; 
Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Canada.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Canada.

Gaucher disease (OMIM #230800) is caused by β-glucosidase deficiency and 
primarily involves the mononuclear phagocyte system (also called 
Reticuloendothelial System or Macrophage System). The disease is classified into 
three main phenotypes based on the presence or absence of neurological 
manifestations: non-neuronopathic (type 1), acute neuronopathic (type 2) and 
chronic neuronopathic (type 3). Typical manifestations include 
hepatosplenomegaly, skeletal deformities, hematological abnormalities, 
interstitial lung fibrosis and neurodegeneration in neuronopathic cases. 
Mesenteric lymphadenopathy with resultant protein losing enteropathy (PLE) has 
only been rarely described. Mesenteric lymphadenopathy may lead to intestinal 
lymphatic obstruction and secondary lymphangiectasia resulting in chronic 
diarrhea, abdominal pain and weight loss. Fecal protein loss with secondary 
hypoalbuminemia can be significant. We report a male with Chronic Neuronopathic 
Gaucher disease (GD) (homozygous for c.1448T > C (NM_000157.3) GBA mutation) who 
at 16 years of age developed intractable abdominal pain, diarrhea and weight 
loss. This was caused by PLE secondary to intestinal lymphangiectasia caused by 
calcified mesenteric lymphadenopathy despite prior long term enzyme replacement 
therapy (ERT) and/or substrate reduction therapy (SRT). His older similarly 
affected sister who had been receiving treatment with ERT and/or SRT remains 
stable on these treatments with no evidence of mesenteric lymphadenopathy. 
Medical management with total parenteral nutrition, daily medium chain 
triglyceride-oil (MCT) supplementation, low dose oral budesonide, continued oral 
SRT and an increased dose of parenteral ERT has stabilized his condition with 
resolution of the gastrointestinal symptoms and appropriate weight gain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2015.12.001
PMCID: PMC4789350
PMID: 27014572