1. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 19;7(16):22893-910. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8290.

Enhancing DPYSL3 gene expression via a promoter-targeted small activating RNA 
approach suppresses cancer cell motility and metastasis.

Li C(1), Jiang W(1)(2), Hu Q(1)(3), Li LC(4), Dong L(1), Chen R(1), Zhang Y(1), 
Tang Y(1), Thrasher JB(1), Liu CB(3), Li B(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 
66160, USA.
(2)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Hospital, Guangdong Medical University, 
Zhanjiang 524001, China.
(3)Institute of Cell Therapy, China Three Gorges University, Yichang 443002, 
China.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100073, China.

To explore a novel strategy in suppressing tumor metastasis, we took the 
advantage of a recent RNA activation (RNAa) theory and used small double-strand 
RNA molecules, termed as small activating RNAs (saRNA) that are complimentary to 
target gene promoter, to enhance transcription of metastasis suppressor gene. 
The target gene in this study is Dihydro-pyrimidinase-like 3 (DPYSL3, protein 
name CRMP4), which was identified as a metastatic suppressor in prostate 
cancers. There are two transcriptional variants of DPYSL3 gene in human genome, 
of which the variant 2 is the dominant transcript (DPYSL3v2, CRMP4a) but is also 
significantly down-regulated in primary prostate cancers. A total of 8 saRNAs 
for DPYSL3v1 and 14 saRNAs for DPYSL3v2 were tested in multiple prostate cancer 
cell lines. While none of the saRNAs significantly altered DPYSL3v1 expression, 
4 saRNAs showed a strong enhancing effect on DPYSL3v2 expression, resulting in 
reduced cell mobility in vitro. To achieve a prostate cancer-specific delivery 
for in vivo testing, we conjugated the most potent saV2-9 RNA molecule with the 
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA)-targeting aptamer A10-3.2. The 
conjugates successful increased DPYSL3v2 gene expression in PSMA-positive but 
not PSMA-negative prostate cancer cells. In nude mice bearing orthotopic 
xenograft of prostate cancer, a 10-day consecutive treatment with the saV2-9 
conjugates significantly suppress distal metastasis compared to the control 
saRNAs. Analysis of xenograft tissues revealed that DPYSL3v2 expression was 
largely increased in saV2-9 conjugate-treated group compared to the control 
group. In conclusion, DPYSL3v2 promoter-targeted saRNA molecules might be used 
as an adjunctive therapy to suppress prostate cancer metastasis.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8290
PMCID: PMC5008410
PMID: 27014974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.