1. Sci Rep. 2016 Apr 12;6:24289. doi: 10.1038/srep24289.

Antibiofilm effect enhanced by modification of 1,2,3-triazole and palladium 
nanoparticles on polysulfone membranes.

Cheng H(1)(2), Xie Y(3), Villalobos LF(4), Song L(1), Peinemann KV(4), Nunes 
S(3), Hong PY(2).

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 401122, China.
(2)King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Water 
Desalination and Reuse Center (WDRC), Biological and Environmental Sciences 
&Engineering Division (BESE), Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia.
(3)King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Biological and 
Environmental Sciences &Engineering Division (BESE), Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi 
Arabia.
(4)King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Advanced Membrane 
and Porous Materials (AMPM), Physical Sciences &Engineering Division (PSE), 
Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia.

Biofouling impedes the performance of membrane bioreactors. In this study, we 
investigated the antifouling effects of polysulfone membranes that were modified 
by 1,2,3-triazole and palladium (Pd) nanoparticles. The modified membranes were 
evaluated for antibacterial and antifouling efficacy in a monoculture species 
biofilm (i.e., drip flow biofilm reactor, DFR) and mixed species biofilm 
experiment (i.e., aerobic membrane reactor, AeMBR). 1,2,3-triazole and Pd 
nanoparticles inhibited growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in both aerobic and 
anaerobic conditions. The decrease in bacterial growth was observed along with a 
decrease in the amount of total polysaccharide within the monoculture species 
biofilm matrix. When the modified membranes were connected to AeMBR, the 
increase in transmembrane pressure was lower than that of the non-modified 
membranes. This was accompanied by a decrease in protein and polysaccharide 
concentrations within the mixed species biofilm matrix. Biomass amount in the 
biofilm layer was also lower in the presence of modified membranes, and there 
was no detrimental effect on the performance of the reactor as evaluated from 
the nutrient removal rates. 16S rRNA analysis further attributed the delay in 
membrane fouling to the decrease in relative abundance of selected bacterial 
groups. These observations collectively point to a lower fouling occurrence 
achieved by the modified membranes.

DOI: 10.1038/srep24289
PMCID: PMC4828667
PMID: 27068576