1. Oncotarget. 2016 May 17;7(20):29166-76. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8688.

Mitochondrial DNA content in breast cancer: Impact on in vitro and in vivo 
phenotype and patient prognosis.

Weerts MJ(1), Sieuwerts AM(1), Smid M(1), Look MP(1), Foekens JA(1), Sleijfer 
S(1), Martens JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Cancer Genomics, Erasmus MC Cancer 
Institute, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Reduced mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content in breast cancer cell lines has been 
associated with transition towards a mesenchymal phenotype, but its clinical 
consequences concerning breast cancer dissemination remain unidentified. Here, 
we aimed to clarify the link between mtDNA content and a mesenchymal phenotype 
and its relation to prognosis of breast cancer patients. We analyzed mtDNA 
content in 42 breast cancer cell lines and 207 primary breast tumor specimens 
using a combination of quantitative PCR and array-based copy number analysis. By 
associating mtDNA content with expression levels of genes involved in 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and with the intrinsic breast cancer 
subtypes, we could not identify a relation between low mtDNA content and 
mesenchymal properties in the breast cancer cell lines or in the primary breast 
tumors. In addition, we explored the relation between mtDNA content and 
prognosis in our cohort of primary breast tumor specimens that originated from 
patients with lymph node-negative disease who did not receive any (neo)adjuvant 
systemic therapy. When patients were divided based on the tumor quartile levels 
of mtDNA content, those in the lowest quarter (â‰¤ 350 mtDNA molecules per cell) 
showed a poorer 10-year distant metastasis-free survival than patients with > 
350 mtDNA molecules per cell (HR 0.50 [95% CI 0.29-0.87], P = 0.015). The poor 
prognosis was independent of established clinicopathological markers (HR 0.54 
[95% CI 0.30-0.97], P = 0.038). We conclude that, despite a lack of evidence 
between mtDNA content and EMT, low mtDNA content might provide meaningful 
prognostic value for distant metastasis in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8688
PMCID: PMC5045386
PMID: 27081694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare that they have no conflicts of 
interest.