1. Bone Res. 2016 Apr 5;4:16005. doi: 10.1038/boneres.2016.5. eCollection 2016.

The biological function of type I receptors of bone morphogenetic protein in 
bone.

Lin S(1), Svoboda KK(2), Feng JQ(2), Jiang X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Ninth People's Hospital Affiliated with 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Department 
of Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M Baylor College of Dentistry, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M Baylor College of Dentistry , 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Prosthodontics, Ninth People's Hospital Affiliated with 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine , Shanghai, China.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) have multiple roles in skeletal development, 
homeostasis and regeneration. BMPs signal via type I and type II 
serine/threonine kinase receptors (BMPRI and BMPRII). In recent decades, genetic 
studies in humans and mice have demonstrated that perturbations in BMP signaling 
via BMPRI resulted in various diseases in bone, cartilage, and muscles. In this 
review, we focus on all three types of BMPRI, which consist of activin-like 
kinase 2 (ALK2, also called type IA activin receptor), activin-like kinase 3 
(ALK3, also called BMPRIA), and activin-like kinase 6 (ALK6, also called 
BMPRIB). The research areas covered include the current progress regarding the 
roles of these receptors during myogenesis, chondrogenesis, and osteogenesis. 
Understanding the physiological and pathological functions of these receptors at 
the cellular and molecular levels will advance drug development and tissue 
regeneration for treating musculoskeletal diseases and bone defects in the 
future.

DOI: 10.1038/boneres.2016.5
PMCID: PMC4820739
PMID: 27088043