1. Acta Biochim Pol. 2016;63(2):359-64. doi: 10.18388/abp.2015_1188. Epub 2016
Apr  26.

Association and polymorphism study of seven candidate genes with reproductive 
traits in three pig breeds in Hungary.

Hunyadi-Bagi Á(1), Balogh P(2), Nagy K(1), Kusza S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Biotechnology and Nature Conservation, 
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
(2)Institute of Sectoral Economics and Methodology, University of Debrecen, 
Debrecen, Hungary.

Seven genes (BF, EGF, ESR, FSHB, H2AFZ, LEP and PRLP) were studied as candidate 
gene influencing eleven reproduction traits (interval between litters (IBL), 
percent of litter (PL), number of litters (NL), number of piglets born dead 
(NBD), number of piglet born alive (NBA), total number born (TNB), mean of born 
alive (MBA), mean of born dead (MBD), mean of born total (MBT), mean of piglets 
at 21 days of age (M21D) and growth rate (GR) in three pig breeds (Hungarian 
Large White (HLW), Duroc and Pietrain) by PCR-RFLP. Based on the observed vs. 
expected genotypes frequencies populations across loci were in Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium (P>0.05). In case HLW breed ESR and FSHβ genes were in 
disequilibrium. Association study suggested that only EGF gene showed 
significant influence on the trait NBA and TNB. The AA genotype are preferable 
for sows, associated with higher NBA and TNB. The longest IBL, and the highest 
NL is associated with AB and AA genotype of EGF gene. IBL is significantly 
shorter in case of pigs with AB and AA alleles than BB alleles of PRLP genes. 
Selection for these SNPs could improve the reproductivity in the studied breeds.

DOI: 10.18388/abp.2015_1188
PMID: 27119729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]