1. Oncotarget. 2016 May 24;7(21):31413-28. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8920.

Artemisinin and its derivatives can significantly inhibit lung tumorigenesis and 
tumor metastasis through Wnt/β-catenin signaling.

Tong Y(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Zheng H(2), Zheng L(1)(2), Liu W(1)(2), Wu J(2), Ou 
R(2), Zhang G(2), Li F(2), Hu M(2)(3), Liu Z(1)(2), Lu L(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong, 510515, China.
(2)International Institute for Translational Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou 
University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510006, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of 
Pharmacy, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, 77030, USA.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most prevalent malignancy worldwide 
given its high incidence, considerable mortality, and poor prognosis. The 
anti-malaria compounds artemisinin (ART), dihydroartemisinin (DHA), and 
artesunate (ARTS) reportedly have anti-cancer potential, although the underlying 
mechanisms remain unclear. In this work, we used flow cytometry to show that 
ART, DHA, and ARTS could inhibit the proliferation of A549 and H1299 cells by 
arresting cell cycle in G1 phase. Meanwhile, tumor malignancy including 
migration, invasion, cancer stem cells, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
were also significantly suppressed by these compounds. Furthermore, ART, DHA, 
and ARTS remarkably decreased tumor growth in vivo. By using IWP-2, the 
inhibitor of Wnt/β-catenin pathway, and Wnt5a siRNA, we found that ART, DHA, and 
ARTS could render tumor inhibition partially dependent on Wnt/β-catenin 
inactivation. These compounds could strikingly decrease the protein level of 
Wnt5-a/b and simultaneously increase those of NKD2 and Axin2, ultimately 
resulting in β-catenin downregulation. In summary, our findings revealed that 
ART, DHA, and ARTS could suppress lung-tumor progression by inhibiting 
Wnt/β-catenin pathway, thereby suggesting a novel target for ART, DHA, and ARTS 
in cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8920
PMCID: PMC5058767
PMID: 27119499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.