1. PLoS Genet. 2016 May 13;12(5):e1006028. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006028. 
eCollection 2016 May.

Mitochondrial Polyadenylation Is a One-Step Process Required for mRNA Integrity 
and tRNA Maturation.

Bratic A(1), Clemente P(2), Calvo-Garrido J(3), Maffezzini C(2), Felser A(2), 
Wibom R(2)(4), Wedell A(3)(4), Freyer C(2)(4), Wredenberg A(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of 
Ageing, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Polyadenylation has well characterised roles in RNA turnover and translation in 
a variety of biological systems. While polyadenylation on mitochondrial 
transcripts has been suggested to be a two-step process required to complete 
translational stop codons, its involvement in mitochondrial RNA turnover is less 
well understood. We studied knockdown and knockout models of the mitochondrial 
poly(A) polymerase (MTPAP) in Drosophila melanogaster and demonstrate that 
polyadenylation of mitochondrial mRNAs is exclusively performed by MTPAP. 
Further, our results show that mitochondrial polyadenylation does not regulate 
mRNA stability but protects the 3' terminal integrity, and that despite a lack 
of functioning 3' ends, these trimmed transcripts are translated, suggesting 
that polyadenylation is not required for mitochondrial translation. 
Additionally, loss of MTPAP leads to reduced steady-state levels and disturbed 
maturation of tRNACys, indicating that polyadenylation in mitochondria might be 
important for the stability and maturation of specific tRNAs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006028
PMCID: PMC4866704
PMID: 27176048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.