1. Proc Nutr Soc. 2016 Aug;75(3):405-14. doi: 10.1017/S0029665116000197. Epub
2016  May 12.

Riboflavin status, MTHFR genotype and blood pressure: current evidence and 
implications for personalised nutrition.

McAuley E(1), McNulty H(1), Hughes C(1), Strain JJ(1), Ward M(1).

Author information:
(1)Northern Ireland Centre for Food and Health,University of 
Ulster,Coleraine,BT52 1SA,UK.

Clinical deficiency of the B-vitamin riboflavin (vitamin B2) is largely confined 
to developing countries; however accumulating evidence indicates that suboptimal 
riboflavin status is a widespread problem across the developed world. Few 
international data are available on riboflavin status as measured by the 
functional biomarker, erythrocyte glutathione reductase activation coefficient, 
considered to be the gold standard index. One important role of riboflavin in 
the form of flavin dinucleotide is as a co-factor for the folate-metabolising 
enzyme methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR). Homozygosity for the common 
C677T polymorphism in MTHFR, affecting over 10 % of the UK and Irish populations 
and up to 32 % of other populations worldwide, has been associated with an 
increased risk of CVD, and more recently with hypertension. This review will 
explore available studies reporting riboflavin status worldwide, the interaction 
of riboflavin with the MTHFR C677T polymorphism and the potential role of 
riboflavin in personalised nutrition. Evidence is accumulating for a novel role 
of riboflavin as an important modulator of blood pressure (BP) specifically in 
individuals with the MTHFR 677TT genotype, with results from a number of recent 
randomised controlled trials demonstrating that riboflavin supplementation can 
significantly reduce systolic BP by 5-13 mmHg in these genetically at risk 
adults. Studies are however required to investigate the BP-lowering effect of 
riboflavin in different populations and in response to doses higher than 1Â·6 
mg/d. Furthermore, work focusing on the translation of this research to health 
professionals and patients is also required.

DOI: 10.1017/S0029665116000197
PMID: 27170501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]