1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Sep 19;44(16):7605-17. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw426. Epub 
2016 May 13.

An epigenetic switch regulates de novo DNA methylation at a subset of 
pluripotency gene enhancers during embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Petell CJ(1), Alabdi L(1), He M(1), San Miguel P(2), Rose R(1), Gowher H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.
(2)DNA Sequencing Core Facility, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA 
Purdue University Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
IN 47907, USA hgowher@purdue.edu.

Coordinated regulation of gene expression that involves activation of lineage 
specific genes and repression of pluripotency genes drives differentiation of 
embryonic stem cells (ESC). For complete repression of pluripotency genes during 
ESC differentiation, chromatin at their enhancers is silenced by the activity of 
the Lsd1-Mi2/NuRD complex. The mechanism/s that regulate DNA methylation at 
these enhancers are largely unknown. Here, we investigated the affect of the 
Lsd1-Mi2/NuRD complex on the dynamic regulatory switch that induces the local 
interaction of histone tails with the Dnmt3 ATRX-DNMT3-DNMT3L (ADD) domain, thus 
promoting DNA methylation at the enhancers of a subset of pluripotency genes. 
This is supported by previous structural studies showing a specific interaction 
between Dnmt3-ADD domain with H3K4 unmethylated histone tails that is disrupted 
by histone H3K4 methylation and histone acetylation. Our data suggest that 
Dnmt3a activity is triggered by Lsd1-Mi2/NuRD-mediated histone deacetylation and 
demethylation at these pluripotency gene enhancers when they are inactivated 
during mouse ESC differentiation. Using Dnmt3 knockout ESCs and the inhibitors 
of Lsd1 and p300 histone modifying enzymes during differentiation of E14Tg2A and 
ZHBTc4 ESCs, our study systematically reveals this mechanism and establishes 
that Dnmt3a is both reader and effector of the epigenetic state at these target 
sites.

Â© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw426
PMCID: PMC5027477
PMID: 27179026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]