1. eNeuro. 2016 May 12;3(2):ENEURO.0099-15.2016. doi:
10.1523/ENEURO.0099-15.2016.  eCollection 2016 Mar-Apr.

Bid Promotes K63-Linked Polyubiquitination of Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor 
Associated Factor 6 (TRAF6) and Sensitizes to Mutant SOD1-Induced 
Proinflammatory Signaling in Microglia.

Kinsella S(1), König HG(1), Prehn JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Centre for the Study of 
Neurological Disorders, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland , 123 St. Stephen's 
Green , Dublin 2, Ireland.

Mutations in the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene contribute to motoneuron 
degeneration and are evident in 20% of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
cases. Mutant SOD1 induces microglial activation through a stimulation of 
Toll-like receptors 2 and 4 (TLR2 and TLR4). In the present study, we identified 
the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family protein Bid as a positive regulator of mutant 
SOD1-induced TLR-nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) signaling in microglia. bid-deficient 
primary mouse microglia showed reduced NF-κB signaling in response to TLR4 
activation or exposure to conditioned medium derived from SOD1 (G93A) expressing 
NSC-34 cells. Attenuation of NF-κB signaling in bid-deficient microglia was 
associated with lower levels of phosphorylated IKKα/β and p65, with a delayed 
degradation of IκBα and enhanced degradation of Peli1. Upstream of IKK, we found 
that Bid interacted with, and promoted, the K63-linked polyubiquitination of the 
E3 ubiquitin ligase tumor necrosis factor receptor associated factor 6 (TRAF6) 
in microglia. Our study suggests a key role for Bid in the regulation of 
TLR4-NF-κB proinflammatory signaling during mutant SOD1-induced disease 
pathology. Bid promotes TLR4-NF-κB signaling by interacting with TRAF6 and 
promoting TRAF6 K63-linked polyubiquitination in microglia.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0099-15.2016
PMCID: PMC4870272
PMID: 27257617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.