1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 6;6:27275. doi: 10.1038/srep27275.

Influenza A viruses suppress cyclooxygenase-2 expression by affecting its mRNA 
stability.

Dudek SE(1)(1), Nitzsche K(1)(1), Ludwig S(1)(1)(2), Ehrhardt C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology (IMV), Centre for Molecular Biology of 
Inflammation (ZMBE), Westfaelische Wilhelms-University Muenster, 
Von-Esmarch-Str. 56, D-48149 Muenster, Germany.
(2)Cluster of Excellence Cells in Motion, University of Muenster, Muenster, 
Germany.

Infection with influenza A viruses (IAV) provokes activation of cellular defence 
mechanisms contributing to the innate immune and inflammatory response. In this 
process the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) plays an important role in the induction of 
prostaglandin-dependent inflammation. While it has been reported that COX-2 is 
induced upon IAV infection, in the present study we observed a down-regulation 
at later stages of infection suggesting a tight regulation of COX-2 by IAV. Our 
data indicate the pattern-recognition receptor RIG-I as mediator of the initial 
IAV-induced COX-2 synthesis. Nonetheless, during on-going IAV replication 
substantial suppression of COX-2 mRNA and protein synthesis could be detected, 
accompanied by a decrease in mRNA half-life. Interestingly, COX-2 mRNA stability 
was not only imbalanced by IAV replication but also by stimulation of cells with 
viral RNA. Our results reveal tristetraprolin (TTP), which is known to bind 
COX-2 mRNA and promote its rapid degradation, as regulator of COX-2 expression 
in IAV infection. During IAV replication and viral RNA accumulation TTP mRNA 
synthesis was induced, resulting in reduced COX-2 levels. Accordingly, the 
down-regulation of TTP resulted in increased COX-2 protein expression after IAV 
infection. These findings indicate a novel IAV-regulated cellular mechanism, 
contributing to the repression of host defence and therefore facilitating viral 
replication.

DOI: 10.1038/srep27275
PMCID: PMC4893666
PMID: 27265729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]