1. Differentiation. 2016 Oct-Nov;92(4):204-215. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2016.05.006. 
Epub 2016 Jun 1.

Sox9 overexpression in uterine epithelia induces endometrial gland hyperplasia.

Gonzalez G(1), Mehra S(1), Wang Y(1), Akiyama H(2), Behringer RR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Gifu University, Gifu City 501-1194, Japan.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: rrb@mdanderson.org.

SOX9 is a high mobility group transcription factor that is required in many 
biological processes, including cartilage differentiation, endoderm progenitor 
maintenance, hair differentiation, and testis determination. SOX9 has also been 
linked to colorectal, prostate, and lung cancer. We found that SOX9 is expressed 
in the epithelium of the adult mouse and human uterus, predominantly marking the 
uterine glands. To determine if SOX9 plays a role in the development of 
endometrial cancer we overexpressed Sox9 in the uterine epithelium using a 
progesterone receptor-Cre mouse model. Sox9 overexpression in the uterine 
epithelium led to the formation of simple and complex cystic glandular 
structures in the endometrium of aged-females. Histological analysis revealed 
that these structures appeared morphologically similar to structures present in 
patients with endometrial hyperplastic lesions and endometrial polyps that are 
thought to be precursors of endometrial cancer. The molecular mechanisms that 
cause the glandular epithelium to become hyperplastic, leading to endometrial 
cancer are still poorly understood. These findings indicate that chronic 
overexpression of Sox9 in the uterine epithelium can induce the development of 
endometrial hyperplastic lesions. Thus, SOX9 expression may be a factor in the 
formation of endometrial cancer.

Copyright Â© 2016 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diff.2016.05.006
PMCID: PMC5133190
PMID: 27262401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]