1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Sep;1861(9 Pt A):1111-1120. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbalip.2016.06.009. Epub 2016 Jun 16.

Effect of preduodenal lipase inhibition in suckling rats on dietary octanoic 
acid (C8:0) gastric absorption and plasma octanoylated ghrelin concentration.

Lemarié F(1), Cavalier JF(2), Garcia C(1), Boissel F(1), Point V(2), Catheline 
D(1), Legrand P(1), Carrière F(2), Rioux V(3).

Author information:
(1)Agrocampus Ouest-INRA, USC 1378, Laboratoire de Biochimie et Nutrition 
Humaine, Rennes, France.
(2)CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université, UMR 7282, Enzymologie Interfaciale et de 
Physiologie de la Lipolyse, Marseille, France.
(3)Agrocampus Ouest-INRA, USC 1378, Laboratoire de Biochimie et Nutrition 
Humaine, Rennes, France. Electronic address: vincent.rioux@agrocampus-ouest.fr.

Part of medium chain fatty acids (MCFAs) coming from dietary triglycerides (TGs) 
can be directly absorbed through the gastric mucosa after the action of 
preduodenal lipase (lingual lipase in the rat). MCFA gastric absorption, 
particularly that of octanoic acid (C8:0), may have a physiological importance 
in the octanoylation of ghrelin, the orexigenic gastric peptide acting as an 
endogenous ligand of the hypothalamic growth hormone secretagogue receptor 1a 
(GHSR-1a). However, the amount of C8:0 absorbed in the stomach and its metabolic 
fate still haven't been clearly characterized. The purpose of the present study 
was to further characterize and quantify the importance of preduodenal lipase 
activity on the release and gastric absorption of dietary C8:0 and on the 
subsequent ghrelin octanoylation in the stomach mucosa. Fifteen days old rats 
received fat emulsions containing triolein or [1,1,1-(13)C]-Tri-C8:0 and a 
specific inhibitor of preduodenal lipase, 
5-(2-(benzyloxy)ethoxy)-3-(3-phenoxyphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazol-2(3H)-one or 
BemPPOX. The fate of the (13)C-C8:0 was followed in rat tissues after 30 and 
120min of digestion and octanoylated ghrelin was measured in the plasma. This 
work (1) demonstrates that part of C8:0 coming from Tri-C8:0 is directly 
absorbed at the gastric level, (2) allows the estimation of C8:0 gastric 
absorption level (1.3% of the (13)C-C8:0 in sn-3 position after 30min of 
digestion), as well as (3) the contribution of rat lingual lipase to total 
lipolysis and to duodenal absorption of dietary FAs (at least 30%), (4) shows no 
short-term effect of dietary Tri-C8:0 consumption and subsequent increase of 
C8:0 gastric tissue content on plasma octanoylated ghrelin concentration.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2016.06.009
PMID: 27317984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]