1. Transl Psychiatry. 2016 Jun 21;6(6):e843. doi: 10.1038/tp.2016.103.

Crucial roles of the CHRNB3-CHRNA6 gene cluster on chromosome 8 in nicotine 
dependence: update and subjects for future research.

Wen L(1), Yang Z(1), Cui W(1), Li MD(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious 
Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, 
Hangzhou, China.
(2)Air Center for Air Pollution and Health, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioral Sciences, University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable death throughout the world. 
Nicotine, the primary addictive compound in tobacco, plays a vital role in the 
initiation and maintenance of its use. Nicotine exerts its pharmacological roles 
through nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), which are ligand-gated ion 
channels consisting of five membrane-spanning subunits. Besides the CHRNA4, 
CHRNB2 and CHRNA5/A3/B4 cluster on chromosome 15, which has been investigated 
intensively, recent evidence from both genome-wide association studies and 
candidate gene-based association studies has revealed the crucial roles of the 
CHRNB3-CHRNA6 gene cluster on chromosome 8 in nicotine dependence (ND). These 
studies demonstrate two distinct loci within this region. The first one is 
tagged by rs13277254, upstream of the CHRNB3 gene, and the other is tagged by 
rs4952, a coding single nucleotide polymorphism in exon 5 of that gene. 
Functional studies by genetic manipulation in mice have shown that α6*-nAChRs, 
located in the ventral tegmental area (VTA), are of great importance in 
controlling nicotine self-administration. However, when the α6 subunit is 
selectively re-expressed in the VTA of the α6(-/-) mouse by a lentiviral vector, 
the reinforcing property of nicotine is restored. To further determine the role 
of α6*-nAChRs in the process of nicotine-induced reward and withdrawal, genetic 
knock-in strains have been examined, which showed that replacement of Leu with 
Ser in the 9' residue in the M2 domain of α6 produces nicotine-hypersensitive 
mice (α6 L9'S) with enhanced dopamine release. Moreover, nicotine-induced 
upregulation may be another ingredient in the pathology of nicotine addiction 
although the effect of chronic nicotine exposure on the expression of 
α6-containing receptors is controversial. To gain a better understanding of the 
pathological processes underlying ND and ND-related behaviors and to promote the 
development of effective smoking cessation therapies, we here present the most 
recent studies concerning the genetic effects of the CHRNB3-CHRNA6 gene cluster 
in ND.

DOI: 10.1038/tp.2016.103
PMCID: PMC4931601
PMID: 27327258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]