1. Elife. 2016 Jun 23;5:e16691. doi: 10.7554/eLife.16691.

Set1/COMPASS and Mediator are repurposed to promote epigenetic transcriptional 
memory.

D'Urso A(1), Takahashi YH(2), Xiong B(3), Marone J(1), Coukos R(1), 
Randise-Hinchliff C(1), Wang JP(3), Shilatifard A(2), Brickner JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, 
United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, United States.
(3)Department of Statistics, Northwestern University, Evanston, United States.

In yeast and humans, previous experiences can lead to epigenetic transcriptional 
memory: repressed genes that exhibit mitotically heritable changes in chromatin 
structure and promoter recruitment of poised RNA polymerase II preinitiation 
complex (RNAPII PIC), which enhances future reactivation. Here, we show that 
INO1 memory in yeast is initiated by binding of the Sfl1 transcription factor to 
the cis-acting Memory Recruitment Sequence, targeting INO1 to the nuclear 
periphery. Memory requires a remodeled form of the Set1/COMPASS 
methyltransferase lacking Spp1, which dimethylates histone H3 lysine 4 
(H3K4me2). H3K4me2 recruits the SET3C complex, which plays an essential role in 
maintaining this mark. Finally, while active INO1 is associated with Cdk8(-) 
Mediator, during memory, Cdk8(+) Mediator recruits poised RNAPII PIC lacking the 
Kin28 CTD kinase. Aspects of this mechanism are generalizable to yeast and 
conserved in human cells. Thus, COMPASS and Mediator are repurposed to promote 
epigenetic transcriptional poising by a highly conserved mechanism.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.16691
PMCID: PMC4951200
PMID: 27336723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AS: Reviewing editor, eLife. The other authors 
declare that no competing interests exist.