1. Mol Immunol. 2016 Aug;76:49-54. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.06.009. Epub 2016
Jun  24.

CD209 promoter polymorphisms associate with HCV infection and 
pegylated-interferon plus ribavirin treatment response.

Zupin L(1), Polesello V(2), Alberi G(2), Moratelli G(3), Crocè SL(3), Masutti 
F(3), Pozzato G(3), Crovella S(4), Segat L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy. Electronic address: luisa.zupin@burlo.trieste.it.
(2)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy; Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", 
Trieste, Italy.

Hepatitis C is a severe liver disease caused by hepatitis C virus that could 
persist in the host causing progression towards chronic disease in about 80% of 
the cases. Pegylated-interferon plus ribavirin was the gold standard therapy, 
however treatment's response was quite variable among individuals and different 
host/viral factors may play a role in disease outcome. The cluster of 
differentiation 209 (CD209 antigen) is a component of the innate immune system 
able to recognize HCV and consequently activating the immune response. We 
enrolled 203 Italian HCV infected patients and 220 healthy controls 
investigating if five promoter polymorphisms within CD209 gene (encoding for 
CD209 antigen) correlated with HCV infection susceptibility, spontaneous viral 
clearance and interferon treatment response. CD209 -939G>A and -871A>G 
polymorphisms associated with HCV infection susceptibility, while, CD209 -871A>G 
and -336A>G polymorphisms associated with response to treatment. In conclusion, 
CD209 polymorphisms could play a role in the susceptibility to HCV infection as 
well as interferon treatment response in our study population from North-East of 
Italy.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.06.009
PMID: 27348632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]