1. Bosn J Basic Med Sci. 2016 Aug 2;16(3):215-21. doi: 10.17305/bjbms.2016.1232. 
Epub 2016 Jun 29.

Missense splice variant (g.20746A>G, p.Ile183Val) of interferon gamma receptor 1 
(IFNGR1) coincidental with mycobacterial osteomyelitis - a screen of 
osteoarticular lesions.

Bińczak-Kuleta A(1), Szwed A, Walter MR, Kołban M, Ciechanowicz A, Clark JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Biochemistry, Pomeranian Medical 
University in Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland. binia@pum.edu.pl.

Previously, dominant partial interferon-gamma receptor 1 (IFN-g-R1) 
susceptibility to environmental mycobacteria was found with IFNGR1 deletions or 
premature stop. Our aim was to search for IFNGR1 variants in patients with 
mycobacterial osteoarticular lesions. Biopsies from the patients were examined 
for acid-fast bacilli, inflammatory cell infiltration, and mycobacterial niacin. 
Mycobacterial rRNA was analyzed using a target-amplified rRNA probe test. 
Peripheral-blood-leukocyte genomic DNA was isolated from 19 patients using the 
QIAamp DNA Mini Kit, and all IFNGR1 exons were sequenced using an ABIPRISM 3130 
device. After the discovery of an exon 5 variant, a Polish newborn population 
sample (n = 100) was assayed for the discovered variant. Splice sites and 
putative amino acid interactions were analyzed. All patients tested were 
positive for mycobacteria; one was heterozygous for the IFNGR1 exon 5 
single-nucleotide-missense substitution (g.20746A>G, p.Ile183Val). No other 
variant was found. The splice analysis indicated the creation of an exonic 
splicing silencer, and alternatively, molecular graphics indicated that the 
p.Ile183Val might alter beta-strand packing (loss of van der Waals contacts; 
Val183/Pro205), possibly altering the IFN-g-R1/IFN-g-R2 interaction. The 
probability of non-deleterious variant was estimated as <10%. Heterozygous 
IFNGR1:p.Ile183Val (frequency 0.003%) was found to be coincidental with 
mycobacterial osteomyelitis. The small amount of variation detected in the 
patients with osteoarticular lesions indicates that screens should not yet be 
restricted: Intronic variants should be analyzed as well as the other genes 
affecting Type 1 T-helper-cell-mediated immunity.

DOI: 10.17305/bjbms.2016.1232
PMCID: PMC4978114
PMID: 27356097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]