1. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Jul 27;138(29):9158-65. doi: 10.1021/jacs.6b03462. Epub
2016  Jul 18.

Convergent Mechanistic Features between the Structurally Diverse N- and 
O-Methyltransferases: Glycine N-Methyltransferase and Catechol 
O-Methyltransferase.

Zhang J(1), Klinman JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, ‡Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, and 
§California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California , 
Berkeley, California 94720, United States.

Although an enormous and still growing number of biologically diverse 
methyltransferases have been reported and identified, a comprehensive 
understanding of the enzymatic methyl transfer mechanism is still lacking. 
Glycine N-methyltransferase (GNMT), a member of the family that acts on small 
metabolites as the substrate, catalyzes methyl transfer from 
S-adenosyl-l-methionine (AdoMet) to glycine to form S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine 
and sarcosine. We report primary carbon ((12)C/(14)C) and secondary 
((1)H3/(3)H3) kinetic isotope effects at the transferred methyl group, together 
with (1)H3/(3)H3 binding isotope effects for wild-type GNMT and a series of 
Tyr21 mutants. The data implicate a compaction effect in the methyl transfer 
step that is conferred by the protein structure. Furthermore, a remarkable 
similarity of properties is observed between GNMT and catechol 
O-methyltransferase, despite significant differences between these enzymes with 
regard to their active site structures and catalyzed reactions. We attribute 
these results to a catalytically relevant reduction in the methyl donor-acceptor 
distance that is dependent on a tyrosine side chain positioned behind the 
methyl-bearing sulfur of AdoMet.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.6b03462
PMCID: PMC5270642
PMID: 27355841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.