1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jul 11;6:29572. doi: 10.1038/srep29572.

Otosclerosis Associated with a De Novo Mutation -832G > A in the TGFB1 Gene 
Promoter Causing a Decreased Expression Level.

Priyadarshi S(1), Hansdah K(1), Ray CS(2), Biswal NC(2), Ramchander PV(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Nalco Square, Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar, 
India.
(2)Department of Ear, Nose, and Throat (ENT), Shrirama Chandra Bhanj (SCB) 
Medical College, Cuttack, India.

Otosclerosis (OTSC) is defined by abnormal bone remodeling in the otic capsule 
of middle ear which leads to conductive hearing loss. In our previous study, we 
have identified a de novo heterozygous mutation -832G > A in the promoter of 
TGFB1 in an otosclerosis patient. In the present study, we progressively 
screened this mutation in a cohort of 254 cases and 262 controls. The family 
members of the patient positive for -832G > A variation were also screened and 
found inheritance of this variation only to her daughter. Interestingly, this 
variation is associated with a decreased level of the TGFB1 transcript in the 
patient compared to her parents and controls. In silico analysis of this 
mutation predicted the altered binding of two transcription factors v-Myb and 
MZF1 in the mutated promoter sequence. Further, functional analysis of this 
mutation using in vitro luciferase and electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
revealed that this variation is associated with decreased gene expression. In 
conclusion, this study established the fact that TGFB1 mutation -832G > A 
altered the TGFB1 promoter activity, which could affect the susceptibility to 
otosclerosis development. Further, systemic analysis of TGFB1 gene sequence and 
expression analysis of this gene might reveal its precise role in the 
pathogenesis of otosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1038/srep29572
PMCID: PMC4941736
PMID: 27404893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]