1. PLoS One. 2016 Jul 18;11(7):e0159294. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159294. 
eCollection 2016.

Serum Amyloid P Component Ameliorates Neurological Damage Caused by Expressing a 
Lysozyme Variant in the Central Nervous System of Drosophila melanogaster.

Helmfors L(1), Bergkvist L(1), Brorsson AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Biotechnology, Department of Physics, Chemistry and 
Biology, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

Lysozyme amyloidosis is a hereditary disease in which mutations in the gene 
coding for lysozyme leads to misfolding and consequently accumulation of amyloid 
material. To improve understanding of the processes involved we expressed human 
wild type (WT) lysozyme and the disease-associated variant F57I in the central 
nervous system (CNS) of a Drosophila melanogaster model of lysozyme amyloidosis, 
with and without co-expression of serum amyloid p component (SAP). SAP is known 
to be a universal constituent of amyloid deposits and to associate with lysozyme 
fibrils. There are clear indications that SAP may play an important role in 
lysozyme amyloidosis, which requires further elucidation. We found that flies 
expressing the amyloidogenic variant F57I in the CNS have a shorter lifespan 
than flies expressing WT lysozyme. We also identified apoptotic cells in the 
brains of F57I flies demonstrating that the flies' neurological functions are 
impaired when F57I is expressed in the nerve cells. However, co-expression of 
SAP in the CNS prevented cell death and restored the F57I flies' lifespan. Thus, 
SAP has the apparent ability to protect nerve cells from damage caused by F57I. 
Furthermore, it was found that co-expression of SAP prevented accumulation of 
insoluble forms of lysozyme in both WT- and F57I-expressing flies. Our findings 
suggest that the F57I mutation affects the aggregation process of lysozyme 
resulting in the formation of cytotoxic species and that SAP is able to prevent 
cell death in the F57I flies by preventing accumulation of toxic F57I 
structures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159294
PMCID: PMC4948765
PMID: 27428539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.