1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jul 19;6:29771. doi: 10.1038/srep29771.

Highly Multiplexed RNA Aptamer Selection using a Microplate-based Microcolumn 
Device.

Reinholt SJ(1), Ozer A(2), Lis JT(2), Craighead HG(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 
14853, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 
14853, USA.

We describe a multiplexed RNA aptamer selection to 19 different targets 
simultaneously using a microcolumn-based device, MEDUSA (Microplate-based 
Enrichment Device Used for the Selection of Aptamers), as well as a modified 
selection process, that significantly reduce the time and reagents needed for 
selections. We exploited MEDUSA's reconfigurable design between parallel and 
serially-connected microcolumns to enable the use of just 2 aliquots of starting 
library, and its 96-well microplate compatibility to enable the continued use of 
high-throughput techniques in downstream processes. Our modified selection 
protocol allowed us to perform the equivalent of a 10-cycle selection in the 
time it takes for 4 traditional selection cycles. Several aptamers were 
discovered with nanomolar dissociation constants. Furthermore, aptamers were 
identified that not only bound with high affinity, but also acted as inhibitors 
to significantly reduce the activity of their target protein, mouse decapping 
exoribonuclease (DXO). The aptamers resisted DXO's exoribonuclease activity, and 
in studies monitoring DXO's degradation of a 30-nucleotide substrate, less than 
1 μM of aptamer demonstrated significant inhibition of DXO activity. This 
aptamer selection method using MEDUSA helps to overcome some of the major 
challenges with traditional aptamer selections, and provides a platform for 
high-throughput selections that lends itself to process automation.

DOI: 10.1038/srep29771
PMCID: PMC4949599
PMID: 27432610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]