1. Hum Genet. 2016 Nov;135(11):1251-1262. doi: 10.1007/s00439-016-1714-2. Epub
2016  Jul 26.

Association of kidney structure-related gene variants with type 2 
diabetes-attributed end-stage kidney disease in African Americans.

Guan M(1), Ma J(2)(3), Keaton JM(1)(4), Dimitrov L(1), Mudgal P(1), Stromberg 
M(1), Bonomo JA(1)(4), Hicks PJ(1), Freedman BI(2)(4), Bowden DW(1)(4)(5), Ng 
MC(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Medical Center 
Boulevard, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157, USA.
(2)Section on Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Center for Diabetes Research, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, 
NC, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, 
NC, USA.
(6)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Medical Center 
Boulevard, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157, USA. 
mng@wakehealth.edu.
(7)Center for Diabetes Research, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, 
NC, USA. mng@wakehealth.edu.

African Americans (AAs) are at higher risk for developing end-stage kidney 
disease (ESKD) compared to European Americans. Genome-wide association studies 
have identified variants associated with diabetic and non-diabetic kidney 
diseases. Nephropathy loci, including SLC7A9, UMOD, and SHROOM3, have been 
implicated in the maintenance of normal glomerular and renal tubular structure 
and function. Herein, 47 genes important in podocyte, glomerular basement 
membrane, mesangial cell, mesangial matrix, renal tubular cell, and renal 
interstitium structure were examined for association with type 2 diabetes 
(T2D)-attributed ESKD in AAs. Single-variant association analysis was performed 
in the discovery stage, including 2041 T2D-ESKD cases and 1140 controls 
(non-diabetic, non-nephropathy). Discrimination analyses in 667 T2D 
cases-lacking nephropathy excluded T2D-associated SNPs. Nominal associations 
were tested in an additional 483 T2D-ESKD cases and 554 controls in the 
replication stage. Meta-analysis of 4218 discovery and replication samples 
revealed three significant associations with T2D-ESKD at CD2AP and MMP2 (P corr 
< 0.05 corrected for effective number of SNPs in each locus). Removal of APOL1 
renal-risk genotype carriers revealed additional association at five loci, 
TTC21B, COL4A3, NPHP3-ACAD11, CLDN8, and ARHGAP24 (P corr < 0.05). Genetic 
variants at COL4A3, CLDN8, and ARHGAP24 were potentially pathogenic. Gene-based 
associations revealed suggestive significant aggregate effects of coding 
variants at four genes. Our findings suggest that genetic variation in kidney 
structure-related genes may contribute to T2D-attributed ESKD in the AA 
population.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-016-1714-2
PMCID: PMC5053912
PMID: 27461219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.