1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Sep 30;44(17):8376-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw666. Epub 
2016 Jul 28.

DNA binding proteins explore multiple local configurations during docking via 
rapid rebinding.

Ganji M(1), Docter M(1), Le Grice SF(2), Abbondanzieri EA(3).

Author information:
(1)Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Department of Bionanoscience, TU Delft, 
2629HZ, Delft, The Netherlands.
(2)Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, 
USA.
(3)Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Department of Bionanoscience, TU Delft, 
2629HZ, Delft, The Netherlands e.a.abbondanzieri@tudelft.nl.

Finding the target site and associating in a specific orientation are essential 
tasks for DNA-binding proteins. In order to make the target search process as 
efficient as possible, proteins should not only rapidly diffuse to the target 
site but also dynamically explore multiple local configurations before diffusing 
away. Protein flipping is an example of this second process that has been 
observed previously, but the underlying mechanism of flipping remains unclear. 
Here, we probed the mechanism of protein flipping at the single molecule level, 
using HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) as a model system. In order to test the 
effects of long-range attractive forces on flipping efficiency, we varied the 
salt concentration and macromolecular crowding conditions. As expected, 
increased salt concentrations weaken the binding of RT to DNA while increased 
crowding strengthens the binding. Moreover, when we analyzed the flipping 
kinetics, i.e. the rate and probability of flipping, at each condition we found 
that flipping was more efficient when RT bound more strongly. Our data are 
consistent with a view that DNA bound proteins undergo multiple rapid re-binding 
events, or short hops, that allow the protein to explore other configurations 
without completely dissociating from the DNA.

Â© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw666
PMCID: PMC5041478
PMID: 27471033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]