1. Autism Res. 2017 Jan;10(1):66-77. doi: 10.1002/aur.1665. Epub 2016 Aug 1.

Serotonin neuron abnormalities in the BTBR mouse model of autism.

Guo YP(1)(2), Commons KG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative, and Pain Medicine, Boston 
Children's Hospital; Department of Anaesthesia, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts.

The inbred mouse strain BTBR T+ Itpr3tf /J (BTBR) is studied as a model of 
idiopathic autism because they are less social and more resistant to change than 
other strains. Forebrain serotonin receptors and the response to serotonin drugs 
are altered in BTBR mice, yet it remains unknown if serotonin neurons themselves 
are abnormal. In this study, we found that serotonin tissue content and the 
density of serotonin axons is reduced in the hippocampus of BTBR mice in 
comparison to C57BL/6J (C57) mice. This was accompanied by possible compensatory 
changes in serotonin neurons that were most pronounced in regions known to 
provide innervation to the hippocampus: the caudal dorsal raphe (B6) and the 
median raphe. These changes included increased numbers of serotonin neurons and 
hyperactivation of Fos expression. Metrics of serotonin neurons in the rostral 
2/3 of the dorsal raphe and serotonin content of the prefrontal cortex were less 
impacted. Thus, serotonin neurons exhibit region-dependent abnormalities in the 
BTBR mouse that may contribute to their altered behavioral profile. Autism Res 
2017, 10: 66-77. © 2016 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/aur.1665
PMCID: PMC5518607
PMID: 27478061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]