1. PLoS One. 2016 Aug 3;11(8):e0159957. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159957. 
eCollection 2016.

Locating and Activating Molecular 'Time Bombs': Induction of Mycolata Prophages.

Dyson ZA(1), Brown TL(1), Farrar B(1), Doyle SR(2), Tucci J(1), Seviour RJ(3), 
Petrovski S(3).

Author information:
(1)La Trobe Institute of Molecular Sciences, Bendigo, VIC, Australia.
(2)Department of Animal, Plant & Soil Sciences, Latrobe University, Bundoora, 
VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Microbiology, La Trobe University 
Bundoora, VIC, Australia.

Little is known about the prevalence, functionality and ecological roles of 
temperate phages for members of the mycolic acid producing bacteria, the 
Mycolata. While many lytic phages infective for these organisms have been 
isolated, and assessed for their suitability for use as biological control 
agents of activated sludge foaming, no studies have investigated how temperate 
phages might be induced for this purpose. Bioinformatic analysis using the PHAge 
Search Tool (PHAST) on Mycolata whole genome sequence data in GenBank for 
members of the genera Gordonia, Mycobacterium, Nocardia, Rhodococcus, and 
Tsukamurella revealed 83% contained putative prophage DNA sequences. Subsequent 
prophage inductions using mitomycin C were conducted on 17 Mycolata strains. 
This led to the isolation and genome characterization of three novel 
Caudovirales temperate phages, namely GAL1, GMA1, and TPA4, induced from 
Gordonia alkanivorans, Gordonia malaquae, and Tsukamurella paurometabola, 
respectively. All possessed highly distinctive dsDNA genome sequences.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159957
PMCID: PMC4972346
PMID: 27487243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.