1. J Pathol Clin Res. 2014 Nov 5;1(1):3-17. doi: 10.1002/cjp2.1. eCollection 2015
 Jan.

The molecular background of mucinous carcinoma beyond MUC2.

Hugen N(1), Simons M(2), HaliloviÄ‡ A(2), van der Post RS(2), Bogers AJ(2), 
Marijnissen-van Zanten MA(2), de Wilt JH(1), Nagtegaal ID(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery Radboud University Medical Center Nijmegen The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pathology Radboud University Medical Center Nijmegen The 
Netherlands.

The increasing interest of the oncology community in tumour classification and 
prediction of outcome to targeted therapies has put emphasis on an improved 
identification of tumour types. Colorectal mucinous adenocarcinoma (MC) is a 
subtype that is characterized by the presence of abundant extracellular mucin 
that comprises at least 50% of the tumour volume and is found in 10-15% of 
colorectal cancer patients. MC development is poorly understood, however, the 
distinct clinical and pathological presentation of MC suggests a deviant 
development and molecular background. In this review we identify common 
molecular and genetic alterations in colorectal MC. MC is characterized by a 
high rate of MUC2 expression. Mutation rates in the therapeutically important 
RAS/RAF/MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways are significantly higher in MC compared with 
non-mucinous adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, mucinous adenocarcinoma shows higher 
rates of microsatellite instability and is more frequently of the CpG island 
methylator phenotype. Although the majority of MCs arise from the large 
intestine, this subtype also develops in other organs, such as the stomach, 
pancreas, biliary tract, ovary, breast and lung. We compared findings from 
colorectal MC with tumour characteristics of MCs from other organs. In these 
organs, MCs show different mutation rates in the RAS/RAF/MAPK and PI3K/AKT 
pathways as well, but a common mucinous pathway cannot be identified. 
Identification of conditions and molecular aberrations that are associated with 
MC generates insight into the aetiology of this subtype and improves 
understanding of resistance to therapies.

DOI: 10.1002/cjp2.1
PMCID: PMC4858120
PMID: 27499889