1. Mol Microbiol. 2016 Nov;102(4):545-561. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13478. Epub 2016 Sep
4.

The roles of AtxA orthologs in virulence of anthrax-like Bacillus cereus G9241.

Scarff JM(1), Raynor MJ(2), Seldina YI(1), Ventura CL(1), Koehler TM(2), O'Brien 
AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of 
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas 
Health Sciences Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.

AtxA is a critical transcriptional regulator of plasmid-encoded virulence genes 
in Bacillus anthracis. Bacillus cereus G9241, which caused an anthrax-like 
infection, has two virulence plasmids, pBCXO1 and pBC210, that each harbor toxin 
genes and a capsule locus. G9241 also produces two orthologs of AtxA: AtxA1, 
encoded on pBCXO1, and AtxA2, encoded on pBC210. The amino acid sequence of 
AtxA1 is identical to that of AtxA from B. anthracis, while the sequences of 
AtxA1 and AtxA2 are 79% identical and 91% similar to one another. We found by 
qRT-PCR that AtxA1 and AtxA2 function as positive regulators of toxin (AtxA1) 
and capsule operon (both) transcription in G9241 and that a ΔatxA1 mutant 
produced lower levels of the anthrax toxins and no hyaluronic acid capsule. 
Deletion of atxA1 or atxA2 decreased the virulence of spores administered 
intranasally or subcutaneously to C57BL/6 mice but not to A/J mice, and deletion 
of both genes rendered spores avirulent in A/J mice. In addition, unlike AtxA1, 
AtxA2 did not form stable homomultimers in vitro, although AtxA1 and AtxA2 
formed heterodimers. Our data show that AtxA1 is the primary regulator of G9241 
virulence factor expression and that AtxA1 and AtxA2 are both required for full 
virulence.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13478
PMCID: PMC5118089
PMID: 27490458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]