1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Oct;101(10):3555-3558. doi:
10.1210/jc.2016-2319.  Epub 2016 Aug 17.

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism and Short Stature in Patients with Diabetes Due to 
Neurogenin 3 Deficiency.

Rubio-Cabezas O(1), Gómez JL(1), Gleisner A(1), Hattersley AT(1), Codner E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology (O.R.-C.), Hospital Infantil 
Universitario Niño Jesús, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria La Princesa, 
28007 Madrid, Spain; Department of Pediatrics (J.L.G.), Complejo Hospitalario 
Torrecárdenas, 04009 Almería, Spain; Department of Pediatrics (A.G.), University 
of Concepcion, School of Medicine, 4070038 Concepción, Chile; Institute for 
Biomedical and Clinical Science (A.T.H.), University of Exeter Medical School, 
Exeter EX2 5DW, United Kingdom; and Institute of Maternal and Child Research 
(E.C.), School of Medicine, University of Chile, 8360160 Santiago, Chile.

CONTEXT: Biallelic mutations in NEUROG3 are known to cause early-onset 
malabsorptive diarrhea due to congenital anendocrinosis and diabetes mellitus at 
a variable age. No other endocrine disorders have been described so far. We 
report four patients with homozygous NEUROG3 mutations who presented with short 
stature and failed to show any signs of pubertal development.
CASE DESCRIPTION: Four patients (two males, two females) were diagnosed with 
homozygous mutations in NEUROG3 on the basis of congenital malabsorptive 
diarrhea and diabetes. All four had severe short stature and failed to develop 
secondary sexual characteristics at an appropriate age, despite some having 
normal body mass index. The absence of gonadal function persisted into the third 
decade in one patient. Upon testing, both basal and stimulated LH and FSH levels 
were low, with the remaining pituitary hormones within the normal range. 
Magnetic resonance imaging scans of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis did not 
reveal structural abnormalities. A diagnosis of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
was made, and replacement therapy with sex hormones was started.
CONCLUSIONS: The high reproducibility of this novel phenotype suggests that 
central hypogonadism and short stature are common findings in patients with 
mutations in NEUROG3. Growth rate needs to be carefully monitored in these 
patients, who also should be routinely screened for hypogonadism when they reach 
the appropriate age. NEUROG3 mutations expand on the growing number of genetic 
causes of acquired hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2016-2319
PMCID: PMC5052352
PMID: 27533310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]