1. PLoS One. 2016 Aug 22;11(8):e0161261. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161261. 
eCollection 2016.

IDH1/2 Mutants Inhibit TET-Promoted Oxidation of RNA 5mC to 5hmC.

Xu Q(1), Wang K(1), Wang L(1), Zhu Y(1), Zhou G(1), Xie D(1), Yang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Institute of Cancer Stem 
Cell, DaLian Medical University, 9 Western Lvshun South Road, Dalian, Liaoning 
116044, China.

TETs (TET1/2/3) play critical roles in multi cellular processes through DNA 
demethylation driven by oxidation of DNA 5mdC to 5hmdC. Interestingly, recent 
studies indicated that TETs also oxidate RNA 5mC to 5hmC. However, little is 
known about the distribution of RNA 5hmC and the regulatory mechanism of RNA 
5hmC in human. Here, we show that 5hmC is enriched in mRNA, and IDH1/2 mutants 
inhibit TET-promoted oxidation of RNA 5mC to 5hmC. Since IDH1/2 mutations have 
been described to block the DNA oxidative activity of TETs, we hypothesized that 
IDH1/2 mutations might also inhibit the RNA oxidative activity of TETs. To 
evaluate the role of IDH1/2 mutations in RNA 5hmC, TETs with/without IDH1/2 
mutants were overexpressed in human HEK293 cells. Resultant DNA and RNA were 
digested and analyzed by triple-quadrupole LC mass spectrometer. DNA 5hmdC and 
RNA 5hmC modifications were quantified with external calibration curves of 
appropriate standards. It was found that compared with total RNA (5hmC/C: less 
than 2 X 10-7), mRNA showed much higher 5hmC level (5hmC/C: âˆ¼7 X 10-6). Further 
study indicated that IDH1/2 mutants showed significant ability to inhibit 
TET-promoted RNA5hmC. Consistent with this result, overexpression of IDH1/2 
mutants also inhibited TET catalytic domain-promoted oxidation of RNA. In this 
study, we show not only the enrichment of 5hmC in mRNA, but also a regulatory 
mechanism of RNA 5hmC-IDH1/2 mutations inhibit TET-promoted RNA 5hmC, which 
suggests an involvement of IDH1/2 mutations in tumorigenesis through the 
deregulation of RNA biology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161261
PMCID: PMC4993491
PMID: 27548812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.