1. Biol Open. 2016 Oct 15;5(10):1388-1399. doi: 10.1242/bio.020487.

The decapping activator Edc3 and the Q/N-rich domain of Lsm4 function together 
to enhance mRNA stability and alter mRNA decay pathway dependence in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Huch S(1), Müller M(1), Muppavarapu M(1), Gommlich J(1), Balagopal V(1), Nissan 
T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Umeå SE-901 87, Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Umeå SE-901 87, Sweden 
tracy.nissan@umu.se.

The rate and regulation of mRNA decay are major elements in the proper control 
of gene expression. Edc3 and Lsm4 are two decapping activator proteins that have 
previously been shown to function in the assembly of RNA granules termed P 
bodies. Here, we show that deletion of edc3, when combined with a removal of the 
glutamine/asparagine rich region of Lsm4 (edc3Δ lsm4ΔC) reduces mRNA stability 
and alters pathways of mRNA degradation. Multiple tested mRNAs exhibited reduced 
stability in the edc3Δ lsm4ΔC mutant. The destabilization was linked to an 
increased dependence on Ccr4-mediated deadenylation and mRNA decapping. Unlike 
characterized mutations in decapping factors that either are neutral or are able 
to stabilize mRNA, the combined edc3Δ lsm4ΔC mutant reduced mRNA stability. We 
characterized the growth and activity of the major mRNA decay systems and 
translation in double mutant and wild-type yeast. In the edc3Δ lsm4ΔC mutant, we 
observed alterations in the levels of specific mRNA decay factors as well as 
nuclear accumulation of the catalytic subunit of the decapping enzyme Dcp2. 
Hence, we suggest that the effects on mRNA stability in the edc3Δ lsm4ΔC mutant 
may originate from mRNA decay protein abundance or changes in mRNPs, or 
alternatively may imply a role for P bodies in mRNA stabilization.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.020487
PMCID: PMC5087693
PMID: 27543059

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing or financial 
interests.