1. Nano Lett. 2016 Sep 14;16(9):5951-61. doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b02995. Epub 
2016 Aug 25.

Mechanosensing Controlled Directly by Tyrosine Kinases.

Yang B(1), Lieu ZZ(1), Wolfenson H(2), Hameed FM(1), Bershadsky AD(1)(3), Sheetz 
MP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Mechanobiology Institute, National University of Singapore , Singapore 
117411.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University , New York, New York 
10027, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 
76100, Israel.

To understand how cells form tissues, we need to understand how the tyrosine 
kinases are involved in controlling cell mechanics, whether they act directly as 
parts of mechanosensing machines or indirectly. Cells test the critical 
parameter of matrix rigidity by locally contracting ("pinching") matrices and 
measuring forces, and the depletion of contractile units causes transformation. 
We report here that knocking down the receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), AXL, and 
ROR2, alters rigidity sensing and increases the magnitude or duration of local 
contraction events, respectively. Phospho-AXL and ROR2 localize to contraction 
units and bind major contractile components, tropomyosin 2.1 (AXL), myosin IIA 
(AXL), and filamin A (ROR2). At a molecular level, phosphorylated AXL localizes 
to active myosin filaments and phosphorylates tropomyosin at a tyrosine critical 
for adhesion formation. ROR2 binding of ligand is unnecessary, but binding 
filamin A helps function. Thus, AXL and ROR2 alter rigidity sensing and 
consequently morphogenic processes by directly controlling local mechanosensory 
contractions without ligands.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b02995
PMCID: PMC5330949
PMID: 27559755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Notes The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.