1. Antiviral Res. 2016 Oct;134:216-225. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2016.08.022.
Epub  2016 Aug 26.

Preclinical evaluation of a mercaptobenzamide and its prodrug for NCp7-targeted 
inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus.

Hartman TL(1), Yang L(1), Helfrick AN(1), Hassink M(2), Shank NI(2), George 
Rosenker K(2), Scerba MT(2), Saha M(2), Hughes E(3), Wang AQ(3), Xu X(3), Gupta 
P(2), Buckheit RW Jr(4), Appella DH(5).

Author information:
(1)ImQuest Biosciences, Frederick, MD, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)NCATS, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)ImQuest Biosciences, Frederick, MD, USA. Electronic address: 
rbuckheit@imquestbio.com.
(5)Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic 
address: appellad@niddk.nih.gov.

Although the effective use of highly active antiretroviral therapy results in 
the suppression of virus production in infected individuals, it does not 
eliminate the infection and low level virus production in cells harboring virus 
in sanctuary sites. Thus, the continued search for new antiretroviral agents 
with unique and different mechanisms of HIV inhibition remains critical, and 
compounds that can reduce the level of virus production from cells already 
infected with HIV, as opposed to preventing de novo infection, would be of great 
benefit. A mercaptobenzamide (MDH-1-38) and its prodrug (NS1040) are being 
developed as potential therapeutic compounds targeting the zinc finger of HIV 
nucleocapsid. In the presence of esterase enzymes, NS1040 is designed to be 
converted to MDH-1-38 which has antiviral activity. While we presume that NS1040 
is rapidly converted to MDH-1-38 in all experiments, the two compounds were 
tested side-by-side to determine whether the presence of a prodrug affects the 
antiviral activity or mechanism of action. The two compounds were evaluated 
against a panel of HIV-1 clinical isolates in human PBMCs and 
monocyte-macrophages and yielded EC50 values ranging from 0.7 to 13 μM with no 
toxicity up to 100 μM. MDH-1-38 and NS1040 remained equally active in human 
PBMCs in the presence of added serum proteins as well as against HIV-1 isolates 
resistant to reverse transcriptase, integrase or protease inhibitors. Cell-based 
and biochemical mechanism of antiviral action assays demonstrated MDH-1-38 and 
NS1040 were virucidal at concentrations of 15 and 50 μM, respectively. Cell to 
cell transmission of HIV in multiple passages was significantly reduced in 
CEM-SS and human PBMCs by reducing progeny virus infectivity at compound 
concentrations greater than 2 μM. The combination of either MDH-1-38 or NS1040 
with other FDA-approved HIV drugs yielded additive to synergistic antiviral 
interactions with no evidence of antiviral antagonism or synergistic toxicity. 
Serial dose escalation was used in attempts to select for HIV strains resistant 
to MDH-1-38 and NS1040. Virus at several passages failed to replicate in cells 
treated at increased compound concentrations, which is consistent with the 
proposed mechanism of action of the virus inactivating compounds. Through 14 
passages, resistance to the compounds has not been achieved. Most HIV inhibitors 
with mechanism of antiviral action targeting a viral protein would have selected 
for a drug resistant virus within 14 passages. These studies indicate that these 
NCp7-targeted compounds represent new potent anti-HIV drug candidates which 
could be effectively used in combination with all approved anti-HIV drugs.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2016.08.022
PMCID: PMC7113734
PMID: 27568924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]