1. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2016 Aug;41(8):777-82. doi: 
10.11817/j.issn.1672-7347.2016.08.001.

[Association between gene polymorphism of calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase 4 
and efficacy of amlodipine in the treatment of hypertension in Chinese Han 
nationality].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhong G(1), Chen Y(1), Liu L(1), Liu Y(1), Yang L(1), Luo Y(1), Yao J(1).

Author information:
(1)Internatioal Medical Center, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha 410008, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms 
of calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase 4 (CAMK4) and the therapeutic effect of 
amlodipine in essential hypertensive patients in Chinese Han nationality. 
METHODS: A total of 108 mild-to-moderate essential hypertension patients in 
Chinese Han nationality were treated with amlodipine for 8 weeks at a dosage of 
5 mg/d. Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism was 
performed to detect the genotypes (rs10491334). Blood pressure was measured and 
analyzed. 
RESULTS: The result of rs10491334 polymorphism of CAMK4 was consistent with 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium distribution and the frequencies of C allele and T 
allele were 88.89% and 11.11%, respectively. The systolic blood pressure and 
diastolic blood pressure before amlodipine treatment were not statistically 
different among different genotype carriers (P>0.05). The blood pressure was 
significantly reduced in all patients after amlodipine treatment (P<0.05). 
Systolic blood pressure was significantly decreased in patients with rs10491334 
CC genotype and CT genotype compared with those patients with rs10491334 TT 
genotype. Total effective rates of CT and TT carriers were higher than those of 
the CC genotype carriers (P<0.01). 
CONCLUSION: The CAMK4 gene polymorphism might be associated with the efficacy of 
calcium channel blocker in treating mild-to-moderate essential hypertension 
patients.

Publisher: 
目的：研究二氢吡啶类钙通道阻滞药(氨氯地平)的降压疗效与汉族高血压人群钙/钙调素依赖性激酶4 (CAMK4)单核苷酸多态性间的关联。方法：对108例轻、中度汉族原发性高血压患者给予氨氯地平 
5 
mg/d，为期8周的治疗，采用聚合酶链反应限制性片段长度多态性技术对CAMK4基因rs10491334位点进行分型，同时分析基因型与氨氯地平降压疗效间的关系。结果：CAMK4基因频率分布符合Hardy-Weinberg平衡分布。C，T等位基因的频率分别为88.89%和11.11%。患者治疗前各基因型组的收缩压和舒张压比较差异无统计学意义(P>0.05)；治疗后，各基因型原发性高血压患者收缩压和舒张压较治疗前下降(P<0.05)。CC型与CT型在降低收缩压幅度方面显著优于TT型(P<0.05)，CC型高血压患者的总有效率明显高于CT及TT型患者(P<0.01)。结论：轻、中度汉族原发性高血压患者CAMK4基因rs10491334位点基因多态性与服用钙通道阻滞药的降压疗效有相关性。.

DOI: 10.11817/j.issn.1672-7347.2016.08.001
PMID: 27600002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]