1. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Oct;38(4):1111-24. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2016.2732. Epub 2016 
Sep 7.

Targeted next-generation sequencing helps to decipher the genetic and phenotypic 
heterogeneity of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Cecconi M(1), Parodi MI(1), Formisano F(2), Spirito P(2), Autore C(3), Musumeci 
MB(3), Favale S(4), Forleo C(4), Rapezzi C(5), Biagini E(5), Davì S(1), Canepa 
E(1), Pennese L(1), Castagnetta M(1), Degiorgio D(1), Coviello DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics, E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy.
(2)Cardiology Unit, E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy.
(3)Cardiology Unit, St. Andrea Hospital, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(4)Cardiology Unit, Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, 
University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, S. Orsola 
Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is mainly associated with myosin, heavy 
chain 7 (MYH7) and myosin binding protein C, cardiac (MYBPC3) mutations. In 
order to better explain the clinical and genetic heterogeneity in HCM patients, 
in this study, we implemented a target-next generation sequencing (NGS) assay. 
An Ion AmpliSeq™ Custom Panel for the enrichment of 19 genes, of which 9 of 
these did not encode thick/intermediate and thin myofilament (TTm) proteins and, 
among them, 3 responsible of HCM phenocopy, was created. Ninety-two DNA samples 
were analyzed by the Ion Personal Genome Machine: 73 DNA samples (training set), 
previously genotyped in some of the genes by Sanger sequencing, were used to 
optimize the NGS strategy, whereas 19 DNA samples (discovery set) allowed the 
evaluation of NGS performance. In the training set, we identified 72 out of 73 
expected mutations and 15 additional mutations: the molecular diagnosis was 
achieved in one patient with a previously wild-type status and the 
pre-excitation syndrome was explained in another. In the discovery set, we 
identified 20 mutations, 5 of which were in genes encoding non-TTm proteins, 
increasing the diagnostic yield by approximately 20%: a single mutation in genes 
encoding non-TTm proteins was identified in 2 out of 3 borderline HCM patients, 
whereas co-occuring mutations in genes encoding TTm and 
galactosidase alpha (GLA) altered proteins were characterized in a male with HCM 
and multiorgan dysfunction. Our combined targeted NGS-Sanger sequencing-based 
strategy allowed the molecular diagnosis of HCM with greater efficiency than 
using the conventional (Sanger) sequencing alone. Mutant alleles encoding 
non-TTm proteins may aid in the complete understanding of the genetic and 
phenotypic heterogeneity of HCM: co-occuring mutations of genes encoding TTm and 
non-TTm proteins could explain the wide variability of the HCM phenotype, 
whereas mutations in genes encoding only the non-TTm proteins are identifiable 
in patients with a milder HCM status.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2016.2732
PMCID: PMC5029966
PMID: 27600940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]