1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 12;6:33029. doi: 10.1038/srep33029.

Elastic instabilities in planar elongational flow of monodisperse polymer 
solutions.

Haward SJ(1), McKinley GH(2), Shen AQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, Onna-son, Okinawa, 904-0495, 
Japan.
(2)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 
02139, United States.

We investigate purely elastic flow instabilities in the almost ideal planar 
stagnation point elongational flow field generated by a microfluidic 
optimized-shape cross-slot extensional rheometer (OSCER). We use time-resolved 
flow velocimetry and full-field birefringence microscopy to study the behavior 
of a series of well-characterized viscoelastic polymer solutions under 
conditions of low fluid inertia and over a wide range of imposed deformation 
rates. At low deformation rates the flow is steady and symmetric and appears 
Newtonian-like, while at high deformation rates we observe the onset of a flow 
asymmetry resembling the purely elastic instabilities reported in 
standard-shaped cross-slot devices. However, for intermediate rates, we observe 
a new type of elastic instability characterized by a lateral displacement and 
time-dependent motion of the stagnation point. At the onset of this new 
instability, we evaluate a well-known dimensionless criterion M that predicts 
the onset of elastic instabilities based on geometric and rheological scaling 
parameters. The criterion yields maximum values of M which compare well with 
critical values of M for the onset of elastic instabilities in viscometric 
torsional flows. We conclude that the same mechanism of tension acting along 
curved streamlines governs the onset of elastic instabilities in both 
extensional (irrotational) and torsional (rotational) viscoelastic flows.

DOI: 10.1038/srep33029
PMCID: PMC5018825
PMID: 27616181