1. Front Immunol. 2016 Aug 29;7:323. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00323. eCollection 
2016.

NK Cell Influence on the Outcome of Primary Epstein-Barr Virus Infection.

Chijioke O(1), Landtwing V(2), Münz C(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zürich, Zürich, 
Switzerland; Viral Immunobiology, Institute of Experimental Immunology, 
University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Viral Immunobiology, Institute of Experimental Immunology, University of 
Zürich , Zürich , Switzerland.

The herpesvirus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was discovered as the first human 
candidate tumor virus in Burkitt's lymphoma more than 50 years ago. Despite its 
strong growth transforming capacity, more than 90% of the human adult population 
carries this virus asymptomatically under near perfect immune control. The mode 
of primary EBV infection is in part responsible for EBV-associated diseases, 
including Hodgkin's lymphoma. It is, therefore, important to understand which 
circumstances lead to symptomatic primary EBV infection, called infectious 
mononucleosis (IM). Innate immune control of lytic viral replication by 
early-differentiated natural killer (NK) cells was found to attenuate IM 
symptoms and continuous loss of the respective NK cell subset during the first 
decade of life might predispose for IM during adolescence. In this review, we 
discuss the evidence that NK cells are involved in the immune control of EBV, 
mechanisms by which they might detect and control lytic EBV replication, and 
compare NK cell subpopulations that expand during different human herpesvirus 
infections.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00323
PMCID: PMC5002423
PMID: 27621731