1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2016 Dec;123(12):1369-1379. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-016-1620-8. Epub 2016 Sep 14.

Estrogen receptor beta polymorphisms and cognitive performance in women: 
associations and modifications by genetic and environmental influences.

Fehsel K(1), Schikowski T(2), Jänner M(3), Hüls A(2), Voussoughi M(2), Schulte 
T(3), Vierkötter A(2), Teichert T(4)(5), Herder C(4)(5), Sugiri D(2), Krämer 
U(2), Luckhaus C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine 
University Düsseldorf, Bergische Landstrasse 2, 40629, Düsseldorf, Germany. 
Fehsel@uni-duesseldorf.de.
(2)IUF - Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine (IUF), 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine 
University Düsseldorf, Bergische Landstrasse 2, 40629, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Institute for Clinical Diabetology, German Diabetes Center, Leibniz Center 
for Diabetes Research at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, 
Germany.
(5)German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD e.V.), München-Neuherberg, Germany.

Genetic and environmental risk factors contribute to the pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer's dementia. Besides known genetic risk factors like the apolipoprotein 
(APO) Eε4 allele, single nuclear polymorphisms (SNPs) of the estrogen receptors 
(ESRs) are candidate genetic risk factors, while air pollution represents an 
environmental risk factor for dementia. Effects of these risk factors and their 
interaction were investigated in the SALIA cohort of 834 non-demented elderly 
women. Cognitive function was assessed by the CERAD-plus test battery. Air 
pollution was estimated by land use regression (LUR) models. Genotyping was 
carried out for nine ESR1 and ESR2 SNPs and two ApoE SNPs. Carriers of minor 
ESR2 alleles showed significantly reduced cognitive performance in the CERAD 
total score with most pronounced deficits in semantic memory (rs1256062, 
rs10144225, and rs2274705) and executive function (rs1256062). The minor allele 
effects of ESR2 were stronger in carriers of APOEε4 for the cognitive domain 
'executive function' (p value of interaction 0.023 for rs1256062). The 
investigated ESR1 SNPs were not associated with cognition. Furthermore, we found 
a significant gene-environment interaction between the ESR2 SNP rs1256062 and 
air pollution on cognition. Carriers of two major alleles of rs1256062 were more 
susceptible for an air pollution-induced decrease in performance of 'figure 
copying' than carriers of minor alleles (p value of interaction, e.g., 0.031 for 
PM2.5). In conclusion, ESR2 but not ESR1 minor alleles were associated with 
lower cognitive performance in elderly women with an indication of a gene-gene 
interaction with APOEε4. We also found indications for gene-environment 
interactions of ESR2 with traffic-related air pollution exposure on cognitive 
performance.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-016-1620-8
PMID: 27629499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]