1. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 16;11(9):e0162902. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0162902. 
eCollection 2016.

Stop Codon Polymorphisms in the Human SLC9A1 Gene Disrupt or Compromise Na+/H+ 
Exchanger Function.

Li X(1), Augustine A(1), Chen S(1), Fliegel L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7, Canada.

The NHE1 isoform of the mammalian Na+/H+ exchanger is a ubiquitous plasma 
membrane protein that regulates intracellular pH in mammalian cells by removing 
one intracellular proton in exchange for one extracellular sodium. Deletion of 
the NHE1 gene (SLC9A1) affects the growth and motor ability of mice and humans 
but mutations and polymorphisms of the gene are only beginning to be 
characterized. NHE1 has a cytosolic C-terminal regulatory tail of approximately 
315 amino acids and a 500 amino acid membrane domain. We examined the functional 
effects of three human stop codon mutations at amino acids 321, 449 and 735 in 
comparison with a mutant that had a shortened tail region (543 stop codon). The 
short mutants, 321, 449 and 543 stop codon mutant proteins, lost NHE1 activity 
and expression, and did not target to the plasma membrane. Protein for these 
short mutants was more rapidly degraded than the wild type and 735 ending 
proteins. The 735 terminating mutant, with the membrane domain and much of the 
cytosolic tail, had reduced protein expression and activity. The results 
demonstrate that early stop codon polymorphisms have significant and deleterious 
effects on the activity of the SLC9A1 protein product. The 735-NHE1 mutant, 
without the last 80 amino acids, had more minor defects. Surprisingly, retention 
of a proximal 43 amino acids adjacent to the membrane domain did little to 
maintain NHE1 expression, targeting and activity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0162902
PMCID: PMC5026351
PMID: 27636896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.