1. Int J Genomics. 2016;2016:5427062. doi: 10.1155/2016/5427062. Epub 2016 Aug
18.

Genome-Wide Analysis of Genes Encoding Methionine-Rich Proteins in Arabidopsis 
and Soybean Suggesting Their Roles in the Adaptation of Plants to Abiotic 
Stress.

Chu HD(1), Le QN(2), Nguyen HQ(3), Le DT(1).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant and Cell Technology, Agricultural Genetics 
Institute, Vietnam Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Pham Van Dong Road, Hanoi, 
Vietnam.
(2)National Key Laboratory of Plant and Cell Technology, Agricultural Genetics 
Institute, Vietnam Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Pham Van Dong Road, Hanoi, 
Vietnam; Department of Biochemistry and Plant Physiology, Faculty of Biology, 
VNU-University of Science, Vietnam National University-Hanoi, Nguyen Trai 
Street, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Plant Physiology, Faculty of Biology, 
VNU-University of Science, Vietnam National University-Hanoi, Nguyen Trai 
Street, Hanoi, Vietnam.

Oxidation and reduction of methionine (Met) play important roles in scavenging 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and signaling in living organisms. To understand 
the impacts of Met oxidation and reduction in plants during stress, we surveyed 
the genomes of Arabidopsis and soybean (Glycine max L.) for genes encoding 
Met-rich proteins (MRPs). We found 121 and 213 genes encoding MRPs in 
Arabidopsis and soybean, respectively. Gene annotation indicated that those with 
known function are involved in vital cellular processes such as transcriptional 
control, calcium signaling, protein modification, and metal transport. Next, we 
analyzed the transcript levels of MRP-coding genes under normal and stress 
conditions. We found that 57 AtMRPs were responsive either to drought or to high 
salinity stress in Arabidopsis; 35 GmMRPs were responsive to drought in the leaf 
of late vegetative or early reproductive stages of soybean. Among the MRP genes 
with a known function, the majority of the abiotic stress-responsive genes are 
involved in transcription control and calcium signaling. Finally, Arabidopsis 
plant which overexpressed an MRP-coding gene, whose transcripts were 
downregulated by abiotic stress, was more sensitive to paraquat than the 
control. Taken together, our report indicates that MRPs participate in various 
vital processes of plants under normal and stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/5427062
PMCID: PMC5007304
PMID: 27635394