1. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2017 Aug;32(4):324-340. doi: 10.1111/omi.12175. Epub 2016 
Nov 24.

Structural and functional analysis of de-N-acetylase PgaB from 
periodontopathogen Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans.

Parthiban C(1), Varudharasu D(2), Shanmugam M(1), Gopal P(1), Ragunath C(3), 
Thomas L(4), Nitz M(5), Ramasubbu N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Biology, Rutgers School of Dental Medicine, Newark, NJ, 
USA.
(2)Selvam Structure Based Drug Design Laboratory, Selvam College of Technology, 
Namakkal, Tamilnadu, India.
(3)Scientific Chemical Technologies, Malden, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, 
USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

The oral pathogen Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans uses pga gene locus for 
the production of an exopolysaccharide made up of a linear homopolymer of 
β-1,6-N-acetyl-d-glucosamine (PGA). An enzyme encoded by the pgaB of the pga 
operon in A. actinomycetemcomitans is a de-N-acetylase, which is used to alter 
the PGA. The full length enzyme (AaPgaB) and the N-terminal catalytic domain 
(residues 25-290, AaPgaBN) from A. actinomycetemcomitans were cloned, expressed 
and purified. The enzymatic activities of the AaPgaB enzymes were determined 
using 7-acetoxycoumarin-3-carboxylic acid as the substrate. The AaPgaB enzymes 
displayed significantly lower de-N-acetylase activity compared with the activity 
of the deacetylase PdaA from Bacillus subtilis, a member of the CE4 family of 
enzymes. To delineate the differences in the activity and the active site 
architecture, the structure of AaPgaBN was determined. The AaPgaBN structure has 
two metal ions in the active site instead of one found in other CE4 enzymes. 
Based on the crystal structure comparisons among the various CE4 enzymes, two 
residues, Q51 and R271, were identified in AaPgaB, which could potentially 
affect the enzyme activity. Of the two mutants generated, Q51E and R271K, the 
variant Q51E showed enhanced activity compared with AaPgaB, validating the 
requirement that an activating aspartate residue in the active site is essential 
for higher activity. In summary, our study provides the first structural 
evidence for a di-nuclear metal site at the active site of a member of the CE4 
family of enzymes, evidence that AaPgaBN is catalytically active and that mutant 
Q51E exhibits higher de-N-acetylase activity.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/omi.12175
PMCID: PMC11471279
PMID: 27706922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]