1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2010 Jan 7;3(1):59-109. doi: 10.3390/ph3010059.

A Novel Category of Anti-Hypertensive Drugs for Treating Salt-Sensitive 
Hypertension on the Basis of a New Development Concept.

Katori M(1), Majima M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Kitasato University, 
Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. hy3m-ktr@asahi-net.or.jp.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Kitasato University, 
Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan.

Terrestrial animals must conserve water and NaCl to survive dry environments. 
The kidney reabsorbs 95% of the sodium filtered from the glomeruli before sodium 
reaches the distal connecting tubules. Excess sodium intake requires the renal 
kallikrein-kinin system for additional excretion. Renal kallikrein is secreted 
from the distal connecting tubule cells of the kidney, and its substrates, low 
molecular kininogen, from the principal cells of the cortical collecting ducts 
(CD). Formed kinins inhibit reabsorption of NaCl through bradykinin (BK)-Bâ‚‚ 
receptors, localized along the CD. Degradation pathway of BK by kinin-destroying 
enzymes in urine differs completely from that in plasma, so that ACE inhibitors 
are ineffective. Urinary BK is destroyed mainly by a carboxypeptidase-Y-like 
exopeptidase (CPY) and partly by a neutral endopeptidase (NEP). Inhibitors of 
CPY and NEP, ebelactone B and poststatin, respectively, were found. Renal 
kallikrein secretion is accelerated by potassium and ATP-sensitive potassium 
(KATP) channel blockers, such as PNU-37883A. Ebelactone B prevents DOCA-salt 
hypertension in rats. Only high salt intake causes hypertension in animals 
deficient in BK-B2 receptors, tissue kallikrein, or kininogen. Hypertensive 
patients, and spontaneously hypertensive rats, excrete less kallikrein than 
normal subjects, irrespective of races, and become salt-sensitive. Ebelactone B, 
poststatin, and KATP channel blockers could become novel antihypertensive drugs 
by increase in urinary kinin levels. Roles of kinin in cardiovascular diseases 
were discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ph3010059
PMCID: PMC3991021
PMID: 27713243