1. Oncotarget. 2016 Dec 20;7(51):85624-85640. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12928.

Epigenetic regulation of cancer biology and anti-tumor immunity by EZH2.

Christofides A(1)(2), Karantanos T(1)(2)(3), Bardhan K(1)(2), Boussiotis 
VA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)General Internal Medicine Section, Boston Medical Center, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

Polycomb group proteins regulate chromatin structure and have an important 
regulatory role on gene expression in various cell types. Two polycomb group 
complexes (Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) and 2 (PRC2)) have been 
identified in mammalian cells. Both PRC1 and PRC2 compact chromatin, and also 
catalyze histone modifications. PRC1 mediates monoubiquitination of histone H2A, 
whereas PRC2 catalyzes methylation of histone H3 on lysine 27. These alterations 
of histones can lead to altered gene expression patterns by regulating chromatin 
structure. Numerous studies have highlighted the role of the PRC2 catalytic 
component enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in neoplastic development and 
progression, and EZH2 mutations have been identified in various malignancies. 
Through modulating the expression of critical genes, EZH2 is actively involved 
in fundamental cellular processes such as cell cycle progression, cell 
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. In addition to cancer cells, EZH2 
also has a decisive role in the differentiation and function of T effector and T 
regulatory cells. In this review we summarize the recent progress regarding the 
role of EZH2 in human malignancies, highlight the molecular mechanisms by which 
EZH2 aberrations promote the pathogenesis of cancer, and discuss the anti-tumor 
effects of EZH2 targeting via activating direct anti-cancer mechanisms and 
anti-tumor immunity.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12928
PMCID: PMC5356764
PMID: 27793053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST There is no conflict of 
interest.