1. Int J Endocrinol. 2016;2016:4581094. doi: 10.1155/2016/4581094. Epub 2016 Oct
3.

Arterial Calcium Stimulation with Hepatic Venous Sampling in the Localization 
Diagnosis of Endogenous Hyperinsulinism.

Moreno-Moreno P(1), Alhambra-Expósito MR(1), Herrera-Martínez AD(1), 
Palomares-Ortega R(2), Zurera-Tendero L(3), Espejo Herrero JJ(3), Gálvez-Moreno 
MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Maimonides Institute for Biomedical Research of Cordoba (IMIBIC), Córdoba, 
Spain; Endocrinology and Nutrition Service, Reina Sofia University Hospital, 
Córdoba, Spain.
(2)Endocrinology and Nutrition Service, Reina Sofia University Hospital, 
Córdoba, Spain.
(3)Radiology Department, Reina Sofia University Hospital, Córdoba, Spain.

Objective. The aim of this study was to assess the utility of arterial calcium 
stimulation with hepatic venous sampling (ASVS) in the localization diagnosis of 
endogenous hyperinsulinism. Patients and Methods. A retrospective descriptive 
study was performed including patients with endogenous hyperinsulinism who 
underwent ASVS. The histopathological diagnosis in patients who underwent a 
surgical procedure was used as the reference for the statistical study of the 
accuracy of this technique. Results. 30 patients were included with endogenous 
hyperinsulinism and nonconclusive imaging diagnosis was included. ASVS was 
performed in all cases. Surgery was performed in 20 cases. Insulinoma was 
removed in 19 patients; the location of all cases was detected in the ASVS. All 
cases of endogenous hyperinsulinism had a positive result for the ASVS, with 
this association being statistically significant (χ2 = 15.771; p < 0.001). A 
good and statistically significant agreement was obtained between 
histopathologic diagnosis and ASVS results (K = 0.518, p < 0.001). Conclusions. 
ASVS is a useful procedure in the localization diagnosis of endogenous 
hyperinsulinism undetected by other imaging tests. This technique allows the 
localization of intrapancreatic insulinomas and represents useful tool for the 
diagnosis and surgical management of these tumors.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/4581094
PMCID: PMC5066019
PMID: 27795707