1. J Med Chem. 2016 Nov 10;59(21):9881-9889. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b01244. 
Epub 2016 Nov 2.

Structure-Based Design of a Covalent Inhibitor of the SET Domain-Containing 
Protein 8 (SETD8) Lysine Methyltransferase.

Butler KV(1), Ma A(1), Yu W(2), Li F(2), Tempel W(2), Babault N(1), 
Pittella-Silva F(3), Shao J(1), Wang J(3), Luo M(3), Vedadi M(2)(4), Brown 
PJ(2), Arrowsmith CH(2)(4), Jin J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences and Department of Oncological 
Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai , New York, New York 10029, 
United States.
(2)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto , Toronto, Ontario M5G 
1L7, Canada.
(3)Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center , New York, New York 10065, United States.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto , Toronto, 
Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

Selective inhibitors of protein lysine methyltransferases, including SET 
domain-containing protein 8 (SETD8), are highly desired, as only a fraction of 
these enzymes are associated with high-quality inhibitors. From our previously 
discovered SETD8 inhibitor, we developed a more potent analog and solved a 
cocrystal structure, which is the first crystal structure of SETD8 in complex 
with a small-molecule inhibitor. This cocrystal structure allowed the design of 
a covalent inhibitor of SETD8 (MS453), which specifically modifies a cysteine 
residue near the inhibitor binding site, has an IC50 value of 804 nM, reacts 
with SETD8 with near-quantitative yield, and is selective for SETD8 against 28 
other methyltransferases. We also solved the crystal structure of the covalent 
inhibitor in complex with SETD8. This work provides atomic-level perspective on 
the inhibition of SETD8 by small molecules and will help identify high-quality 
chemical probes of SETD8.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b01244
PMCID: PMC5148670
PMID: 27804297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]