1. Genet Mol Res. 2016 Oct 17;15(4). doi: 10.4238/gmr15048511.

Role of IL-8 rs4073 and rs2227306 polymorphisms in the development of primary 
gouty arthritis in a Chinese population.

Cui YX(1), Zhao H(2), Guo HQ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatism, Yan'an University Affiliated Hospital, Yan'an, 
China cuiyixia557@126.com.
(2)Department of Rheumatism, Yan'an University Affiliated Hospital, Yan'an, 
China.

In this study, we investigated the role of two single nucleotide polymorphisms 
in the promoter region of the interleukin-8 gene (IL-8; rs4073 and rs2227306) in 
the susceptibility to primary gouty arthritis in a Chinese population. Three 
hundred and twelve patients with primary gouty arthritis and 340 healthy 
controls were recruited from the Yan'an University Affiliated Hospital between 
January 2014 and March 2015. The IL-8 rs4073 and rs2227306 polymorphisms were 
genotyped by polymerase chain reaction combined with restriction fragment length 
polymorphism. Unconditional multiple-logistic regression analysis revealed that 
the TT genotype of rs4073 was correlated with primary gouty arthritis risk, 
compared to the AA genotype [adjusted odds ratio (OR) = 1.65, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) = 1.08-2.54; P = 0.02]. In addition, the IL-8 rs4073 T allele was 
associated with a significant elevated risk of primary gouty arthritis, in 
comparison to the A allele (OR = 1.34, 95%CI = 1.07-1.67; P = 0.01). However, we 
observed no significant relationship between the IL-8 rs2227306 polymorphism and 
primary gouty arthritis risk. The results of this study suggest that the IL-8 
rs4073 polymorphism could be a marker for primary gouty arthritis development.

DOI: 10.4238/gmr15048511
PMID: 27813564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]