1. Indian J Hematol Blood Transfus. 2016 Dec;32(4):437-441. doi: 
10.1007/s12288-015-0620-4. Epub 2015 Dec 17.

JAK2 V617F Mutation in Adult T Cell Leukemia-Lymphoma.

Ayatollahi H(1), Sadeghian MH(1), Keramati MR(1), Karimiani EG(1), Jafarian 
AH(1), Shirdel A(2), Rahimi H(2), Zangane-Far ME(1), Shajiei A(1), Sheikhi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Molecular Pathology Research Center, Department of Hematology and 
Blood Bank, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

Adult T cell Leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) is a mature T-cell neoplasm that has strong 
association with the human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-I) infection. This 
infection is endemic in our region (north eastern Iran). It has been highlighted 
that Janus Kinase family proteins and specially JAK2 mutations have a pivotal 
role in the development of many types of hematological malignancies and in 
particular myeloproliferative neoplasms. So far, the underlying molecular 
mechanisms leading to the ATL are not well understood. Therefore, in this study 
it was hypothesized that JAK2 (V617F) mutation may be present in samples from 
patients with ATL. This case control study was performed in north-eastern Iran. 
Using polymerase chain reaction, JAK2 (V617F) mutation was performed in 20 DNA 
samples from ATL patients and 20 HTLV-1 asymptomatic carriers (control group). 
The results of ATL subjects and the control group were compared by using SPSS 
software. In the case group 13 (65 %) and 7 patients (35 %) were male and female 
respectively, with the age range between 40 and 80 years. Only one patients has 
JAK2 mutation and this mutation was absent in 95 % of ATL patients as well as 
the HTLV-1 asymptomatic carriers. The results of our study demonstrated that 
JAK2 V617F mutation is not a common phenomenon in ATL. However, further studies 
are required to investigate the possible dysregulation of JAK signaling in ATL.

DOI: 10.1007/s12288-015-0620-4
PMCID: PMC5074958
PMID: 27812253