1. Pathol Oncol Res. 2017 Jul;23(3):525-535. doi: 10.1007/s12253-016-0146-6. Epub
 2016 Nov 7.

The hOGG1 Ser326Cys Gene Polymorphism and Breast Cancer Risk in Saudi 
Population.

Alanazi M(1), Pathan AAK(1)(2), Shaik JP(1), Alhadheq A(1), Khan Z(1), Khan 
W(3), Al Naeem A(4), Parine NR(5).

Author information:
(1)Genome Research Chair, Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, King 
Saud University, P.O. Box 2455, 11451, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(2)Integrated Gulf Biosystems, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(3)Basic Sciences Department, College of Science and Health Professions, King 
Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, P.O Box 3660, Riyadh, 11426, 
Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Women's Imaging, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia.
(5)Genome Research Chair, Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, King 
Saud University, P.O. Box 2455, 11451, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
reddyparine@gmail.com.

The purpose of this study was to test the association between human 8-oxoguanine 
glycosylase 1 (hOGG1) gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to breast cancer in 
Saudi population. We have also aimed to screen the hOGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism 
effect on structural and functional properties of the hOGG1 protein using in 
silico tools. We have analyzed four SNPs of hOGG1 gene among Saudi breast cancer 
patients along with healthy controls. Genotypes were screened using TaqMan SNP 
genotype analysis method. Experimental data was analyzed using Chi-square, t 
test and logistic regression analysis using SPSS software (v.16). In silco 
analysis was conducted using discovery studio and HOPE program. Genotypic 
analysis showed that hOGG1 rs1052133 (Ser326Cys) is significantly associated 
with breast cancer samples in Saudi population, however rs293795 (T >C), 
rs2072668 (C>G) and rs2075747 (G >A) did not show any association with breast 
cancer. The hOGG1 SNP rs1052133 (Ser326Cys) minor allele T showed a significant 
association with breast cancer samples (OR = 1.78, χ2 = 7.86, p = 0.02024). In 
silico structural analysis was carried out to compare the wild type (Ser326) and 
mutant (Cys326) protein structures. The structural prediction studies revealed 
that Ser326Cys variant may destabilize the protein structure and it may disturb 
the hOGG1 function. Taken together this is the first In silico study report to 
confirm Ser326Cys variant effect on structural and functional properties of 
hOGG1 gene and Ser326Cys role in breast cancer susceptibility in Saudi 
population.

DOI: 10.1007/s12253-016-0146-6
PMID: 27822728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]