1. AIDS. 2017 Jan 2;31(1):35-48. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000001309.

HIV persists in CCR6+CD4+ T cells from colon and blood during antiretroviral 
therapy.

Gosselin A(1), Wiche Salinas TR, Planas D, Wacleche VS, Zhang Y, Fromentin R, 
Chomont N, Cohen ÉA, Shacklett B, Mehraj V, Ghali MP, Routy JP, Ancuta P.

Author information:
(1)aCHUM-Research Centre bDepartment of Microbiology, Infectiology and 
Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal cInstitut de Recherche 
Clinique de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada dUniversity of California Davis, 
Davis, California, USA eChronic Viral Illness Service and Research Institute 
fDivision of Gastroenterology and Hepatology gDivision of Hematology, McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, Québec, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this article is to investigate the contribution of 
colon and blood CD4 T-cell subsets expressing the chemokine receptor CCR6 to HIV 
persistence during antiretroviral therapy.
DESIGN: Matched sigmoid biopsies and blood samples (n = 13) as well as 
leukapheresis (n = 20) were collected from chronically HIV-infected individuals 
receiving antiretroviral therapy. Subsets of CD4 T cells with distinct 
differentiation/polarization profiles were identified using surface markers as 
follows: memory (TM, CD45RA), central memory (TCM; CD45RACCR7), effector 
(TEM/TM; CD45RACCR7), Th17 (CCR6CCR4), Th1Th17 (CCR6CXCR3), Th1 (CCR6CXCR3), and 
Th2 (CCR6CCR4).
METHODS: We used polychromatic flow cytometry for cell sorting, nested real-time 
PCR for HIV DNA quantification, ELISA and flow cytometry for HIV p24 
quantification. HIV reactivation was induced by TCR triggering in the 
presence/absence of all-trans retinoic acid.
RESULTS: Compared with blood, the frequency of CCR6 TM was higher in the colon. 
In both colon and blood compartments, CCR6 TM were significantly enriched in HIV 
DNA when compared with their CCR6 counterparts (n = 13). In blood, integrated 
HIV DNA levels were significantly enriched in CCR6 versus CCR6 TCM of four of 
five individuals and CCR6 versus CCR6 TEM of three of five individuals. Among 
blood TCM, Th17 and Th1Th17 contributed the most to the pool of cells harboring 
integrated HIV DNA despite their reduced frequency compared with Th2, which were 
infected the least. HIV reactivation was induced by TCR triggering and/or 
retinoic acid exposure at higher levels in CCR6 versus CCR6 TM, TCM, and TEM.
CONCLUSION: CCR6 is a marker for colon and blood CD4 T cells enriched for 
replication-competent HIV DNA. Novel eradication strategies should target HIV 
persistence in CCR6CD4 T cells from various anatomic sites.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000001309
PMCID: PMC5131694
PMID: 27835617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]