1. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2016 Dec;17(4):521-527. doi:
10.1007/s11154-016-9398-4.

The micropapillary/hobnail variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma: A review of 
series described in the literature compared to a series from one southern Italy 
pathology institution.

Ieni A(1), Barresi V(2), Cardia R(2), Licata L(2), Di Bari F(3)(4)(5), Benvenga 
S(3)(4)(5), Tuccari G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Pathology "Gaetano Barresi" - Section of Pathological 
Anatomy, A.O.U. Polyclinic G.Martino, 98125, Messina, Italy. aieni@unime.it.
(2)Department of Human Pathology "Gaetano Barresi" - Section of Pathological 
Anatomy, A.O.U. Polyclinic G.Martino, 98125, Messina, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Messina, 
Messina, Italy.
(4)Master Program on Childhood, Adolescent and Women's Endocrine Health, 
University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(5)Interdepartmental Program of Molecular & Clinical Endocrinology and Women's 
Endocrine Health, University Hospital, A.O.U. Policlinico G. Martino, Messina, 
Italy.

Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) has a good prognosis with a 10-yr survival 
greater than 90%. Recently, a micro-papillary pattern with hobnail appearance 
(MPHC) in PTC has been indicated as associated with poor prognosis, but this 
suggestion is based only on a few cases from geographical areas different from 
ours. Two-hundred ninety-nine consecutive PTC cases were collected between the 
years of 1992 and 2014 at our institution. The corresponding histologic sections 
(at least 6 for each case) were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and reviewed 
independently by two pathologists to reach a consensus on the identification and 
quantification of the MPHC. As done in other cohorts, parallel serial sections 
were stained with antisera for thyroglobulin, epithelial membrane antigen, 
thyroid-transcription-factor-1 and Ki 67. BRAF gene mutation at codon 600 and 
RET/PTC1 gene rearrangements were searched. A comparative statistical analysis 
was done between the present series and previously published series. Of the 295 
PTC, 124 (42.5%) were follicular, 104 (35%) classic, 34 (11.5%) sclerosing, 15 
(5%) tall cells, 10 (3.4%) Warthin-like, and 8 (2.7%) MPHC. Four MHPC cases 
(50%) harbored the BRAF V600E variant, while one was positive for RET/PTC1 
rearrangement. Our rate of MPHC-PTC (2.7%) is 2X to 8X greater than those 
reported previously for cohorts from North America + North Italy, Korea and 
Mexico. MPHC prognosis appears to be better compared to other cohorts, probably 
due to not only to the lower rate of the vascular invasion, but also to the 
smaller size of the MPHC-PTC nodule.

DOI: 10.1007/s11154-016-9398-4
PMID: 27896649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]