1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jan 25;45(2):527-540. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1097. Epub 
2016 Nov 28.

C 3-symmetric opioid scaffolds are pH-responsive DNA condensation agents.

McStay N(1), Molphy Z(1), Coughlan A(1), Cafolla A(2), McKee V(1), Gathergood 
N(3), Kellett A(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical Sciences and National Institute for Cellular 
Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland.
(2)School of Physical Sciences, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, 
Ireland.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, 
12618 Tallinn, Estonia nicholas.gathergood@ttu.ee.
(4)School of Chemical Sciences and National Institute for Cellular 
Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland 
andrew.kellett@dcu.ie.

Herein we report the synthesis of tripodal C3-symmetric opioid scaffolds as 
high-affinity condensation agents of duplex DNA. Condensation was achieved on 
both supercoiled and canonical B-DNA structures and identified by agarose 
electrophoresis, viscosity, turbidity and atomic force microscopy (AFM) 
measurements. Structurally, the requirement of a tris-opioid scaffold for 
condensation is demonstrated as both di- (C2-symmetric) and mono-substituted 
(C1-symmetric) mesitylene-linked opioid derivatives poorly coordinate dsDNA. 
Condensation, observed by toroidal and globule AFM aggregation, arises from 
surface-binding ionic interactions between protonated, cationic, tertiary amine 
groups on the opioid skeleton and the phosphate nucleic acid backbone. Indeed, 
by converting the 6-hydroxyl group of C3-morphine ( MC3: ) to methoxy 
substituents in C3-heterocodeine ( HC3: ) and C3-oripavine ( OC3: ) molecules, 
dsDNA compaction is retained thus negating the possibility of phosphate-hydroxyl 
surface-binding. Tripodal opioid condensation was identified as pH dependent and 
strongly influenced by ionic strength with further evidence of cationic 
amine-phosphate backbone coordination arising from thermal melting analysis and 
circular dichroism spectroscopy, with compaction also witnessed on synthetic 
dsDNA co-polymers poly[d(A-T)2] and poly[d(G-C)2]. On-chip microfluidic analysis 
of DNA condensed by C3-agents provided concentration-dependent protection 
(inhibition) to site-selective excision by type II restriction enzymes: BamHI, 
HindIII, SalI and EcoRI, but not to the endonuclease DNase I.

Â© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw1097
PMCID: PMC5314759
PMID: 27899572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]