1. Med Sci Monit. 2016 Dec 3;22:4736-4741. doi: 10.12659/msm.898193.

Association Between Cytokines and Their Receptor Antagonist Gene Polymorphisms 
and Clinical Risk Factors and Acute Rejection Following Renal Transplantation.

Ding S(1), Xie J(2), Wan Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Nursing Department, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan, China (mainland).
(2)Department of Transplant Surgery, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND Acute rejection (AR) after renal transplantation affects both patient 
and graft survival. There is growing evidence of the genetic association between 
cytokine or its receptor antagonist and AR in solid organ transplantation. The 
objectives of this study were to investigate the role of recipient TNF β, IL-10, 
IL-1β, and IL-1 receptor antagonist (ra) gene polymorphism, as well as 
traditional clinical variables such as panel-reactive antibody (PRA) levels, 
donor type, and HLA mismatches in AR following renal transplantation. MATERIAL 
AND METHODS TNF β (+252A/G), IL-10 (-592A/C), IL-1β (-511C/T) and IL-1ra (86 bp 
VNTR) gene polymorphisms were determined in 195 renal allograft recipients with 
and without AR, using PCR. Both these genotypic variants and clinical risk 
factors were investigated for correlation with AR within the first year after 
renal transplantation. RESULTS Patients with increased pre-transplant PRA levels 
(P<0.001) and donor type (P=0.012) were prone to the development of AR. After 
adjusting for all variables of P<0.2, a PRA level >10% (OR=4.515, 95% confidence 
intervals=1.738-11.727, P=0.002) and the receipt of a graft from a donation 
after cardiac death (DCD) donor (OR=2.437, 95% confidence intervals=1.047-5.673, 
P=0.039) remained significantly associated with AR in a multivariate logistic 
regression analysis. No correlation could be found between recipients with an 
episode and absence of acute rejection and the gene polymorphisms of these 
cytokines investigated in the present study. CONCLUSIONS This study shows that 
the presence of increased pre-transplant levels of PRA and the receipt of a 
graft from DCD donor other than cytokine gene polymorphisms are significant risk 
factors for AR in renal transplantation. To reduce the occurrence of AR, 
clinicians should take necessary measures to lower the PRA levels and pay more 
attention to patients who received a graft from a DCD donor.

DOI: 10.12659/msm.898193
PMCID: PMC5142584
PMID: 27913812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.