1. Infect Dis Ther. 2017 Mar;6(1):1-35. doi: 10.1007/s40121-016-0140-z. Epub 2016
 Dec 1.

A Review of Experimental and Off-Label Therapies for Clostridium difficile 
Infection.

Fehér C(1), Soriano A(2)(3)(4), Mensa J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Clínic of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain. cfeher@clinic.ub.es.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Clínic of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)August Pi i Sunyer Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

In spite of increased awareness and the efforts taken to optimize Clostridium 
difficile infection (CDI) management, with the limited number of currently 
available antibiotics for C. difficile the halt of this increasing epidemic 
remains out of reach. There are, however, close to 80 alternative treatment 
methods with controversial anti-clostridial efficacy or in experimental phase 
today. Indeed, some of these therapies are expected to become acknowledged 
members of the recommended anti-CDI arsenal within the next few years. None of 
these alternative treatment methods can respond in itself to all the major 
challenges of CDI management, which are primary prophylaxis in the susceptible 
population, clinical cure of severe cases, prevention of recurrences, and 
forestallment of asymptomatic C. difficile carriage and in-hospital spread. Yet, 
the greater the variety of treatment choices on hand, the better combination 
strategies can be developed to reach these goals in the future. The aim of this 
article is to provide a comprehensive summary of these experimental and 
currently off-label therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.1007/s40121-016-0140-z
PMCID: PMC5336415
PMID: 27910000