1. Metab Eng. 2017 Jan;39:159-168. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2016.11.010. Epub 2016
Dec  3.

Biosensor-assisted transcriptional regulator engineering for Methylobacterium 
extorquens AM1 to improve mevalonate synthesis by increasing the acetyl-CoA 
supply.

Liang WF(1), Cui LY(1), Cui JY(2), Yu KW(3), Yang S(2), Wang TM(1), Guan CG(1), 
Zhang C(4), Xing XH(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Industrial Biocatalysis, Ministry of Education; Department 
of Chemical Engineering, Center for Synthetic & System Biology, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing 100084, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, 
China.
(3)College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 
10084, China.
(4)Key Laboratory for Industrial Biocatalysis, Ministry of Education; Department 
of Chemical Engineering, Center for Synthetic & System Biology, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing 100084, China. Electronic address: 
chongzhang@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Acetyl-CoA is not only an important intermediate metabolite for cells but also a 
significant precursor for production of industrially interesting metabolites. 
Methylobacterium extorquens AM1, a model strain of methylotrophic cell factories 
using methanol as carbon source, is of interest because it produces abundant 
coenzyme A compounds capable of directing to synthesis of different useful 
compounds from methanol. However, acetyl-CoA is not always efficiently 
accumulated in M. extorquens AM1, as it is located in the center of three cyclic 
central metabolic pathways. Here we successfully demonstrated a strategy for 
sensor-assisted transcriptional regulator engineering (SATRE) to control 
metabolic flux re-distribution to increase acetyl-CoA flux from methanol for 
mevalonate production in M. extorquens AM1 with introduction of mevalonate 
synthesis pathway. A mevalonate biosensor was constructed and we succeeded in 
isolating a mutated strain (Q49) with a 60% increase in mevalonate concentration 
(an acetyl-CoA-derived product) following sensor-based high-throughput screening 
of a QscR transcriptional regulator library. The mutated QscR-49 regulator 
(Q8*,T61S,N72Y,E160V) lost an N-terminal α-helix and underwent a change in the 
secondary structure of the RD-I domain at the C terminus, two regions that are 
related to its interaction with DNA. 13C labeling analysis revealed that 
acetyl-CoA flux was improved by 7% and transcriptional analysis revealed that 
QscR had global effects and that two key points, NADPH generation and fumC 
overexpression, might contribute to the carbon flux re-distribution. A fed-batch 
fermentation in a 5-L bioreactor for QscR-49 mutant yielded a mevalonate 
concentration of 2.67g/L, which was equivalent to an overall yield of 0.055mol 
acetyl-CoA/mol methanol, the highest yield among engineered strains of M. 
extorquens AM1. This work was the first attempt to regulate M. extorquens AM1 on 
transcriptional level and provided molecular insights into the mechanism of 
carbon flux regulation.

Copyright © 2016 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2016.11.010
PMID: 27919791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]