1. Toxins (Basel). 2016 Dec 6;8(12):366. doi: 10.3390/toxins8120366.

Yeast Reporter Assay to Identify Cellular Components of Ricin Toxin A Chain 
Trafficking.

Becker B(1), Schnöder T(2), Schmitt MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology, Department of Biosciences and Center of Human and 
Molecular Biology (ZHMB), Saarland University, Saarbrücken D-66123, Germany. 
b.becker@microbiol.uni-sb.de.
(2)Molecular and Cell Biology, Department of Biosciences and Center of Human and 
Molecular Biology (ZHMB), Saarland University, Saarbrücken D-66123, Germany. 
Tina.Schnoeder@med.uni-jena.de.
(3)Molecular and Cell Biology, Department of Biosciences and Center of Human and 
Molecular Biology (ZHMB), Saarland University, Saarbrücken D-66123, Germany. 
mjs@microbiol.uni-sb.de.

RTA, the catalytic A-subunit of the ribosome inactivating A/B toxin ricin, 
inhibits eukaryotic protein biosynthesis by depurination of 28S rRNA. Although 
cell surface binding of ricin holotoxin is mainly mediated through its B-subunit 
(RTB), sole application of RTA is also toxic, albeit to a significantly lower 
extent, suggesting alternative pathways for toxin uptake and transport. Since 
ricin toxin trafficking in mammalian cells is still not fully understood, we 
developed a GFP-based reporter assay in yeast that allows rapid identification 
of cellular components required for RTA uptake and subsequent transport through 
a target cell. We hereby show that Ypt6p, Sft2p and GARP-complex components play 
an important role in RTA transport, while neither the retromer complex nor COPIB 
vesicles are part of the transport machinery. Analyses of yeast knock-out 
mutants with chromosomal deletion in genes whose products regulate 
ADP-ribosylation factor GTPases (Arf-GTPases) and/or retrograde Golgi-to-ER 
(endoplasmic reticulum) transport identified Sso1p, Snc1p, Rer1p, Sec22p, 
Erv46p, Gea1p and Glo3p as novel components in RTA transport, suggesting the 
developed reporter assay as a powerful tool to dissect the multistep processes 
of host cell intoxication in yeast.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins8120366
PMCID: PMC5198560
PMID: 27929418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.