1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2017 Jan 22;482(4):1278-1283. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.12.028. Epub 2016 Dec 7.

Ras mutants enhance the ability of cells to anticipate future lethal stressors.

Zacharioudakis I(1), Papagiannidis D(1), Gounalaki N(2), Stratidaki I(2), 
Kafetzopoulos D(2), Tzamarias D(3).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation of Research and 
Technology, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(3)Biology Department, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. Electronic 
address: Tzamaria@imbb.forth.gr.

Organisms integrate information of current environmental stressors and can 
adjust themselves against harmful events that might occur in the future. The 
molecular processes that lead to such "anticipatory" behaviors, although of 
great interest, are mostly unexplored and the minimal genetic requirements for 
reconfiguring key signaling networks in order either to create or to strengthen 
such vital "anticipatory" capabilities is largely unknown. We identified new 
"anticipatory" phenotypes in yeast cells by evolving yeast strains that strongly 
associate a present modest stress with a future deadly one. Whole genome 
sequencing and classic genetic analysis revealed that two dominant negative ras2 
alleles (ras2-K23N and ras2-G17C) displayed a strong "anticipatory" ability 
being highly resistant to oxidative stress, extremely thermotolerant and long 
lived only following an initial mild heat shock. We suggest that such 
"anticipatory" phenotypes can be easily evolved by a single point mutation in a 
key signaling protein, the Ras2 small GTPase, and we propose a molecular model 
describing how specific ras2 alleles, and not null ras2 mutants, or mutations in 
other components of the Ras/cAMP pathway, can enhance the "predictive ability" 
of cells for future lethal stressors.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.12.028
PMID: 27939892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]