1. Int J Genomics. 2016;2016:4503840. doi: 10.1155/2016/4503840. Epub 2016 Nov
14.

Profiling of the Predicted Circular RNAs in Ductal In Situ and Invasive Breast 
Cancer: A Pilot Study.

Galasso M(1), Costantino G(1), Pasquali L(2), Minotti L(1), Baldassari F(1), 
Corr√† F(1), Agnoletto C(1), Volinia S(1).

Author information:
(1)LTTA, Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University 
of Ferrara, Via Fossato di Mortara 70, 44123 Ferrara, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine (CMM) L8:02, Karolinska 
Institutet, 17176 Stockholm, Sweden.

The recent advantage obtained by next generation sequencing allows a depth 
investigation of a new "old" kind of noncoding transcript, the circular RNAs. 
Circular RNAs are nontranslated RNAs, typically nonpolyadenylated, with a 
resistance to exonucleases that gives them the ability to be more stable than 
the common linear RNA isoforms. We used a bioinformatic detection tool 
(CIRCexplorer) to research predictive circRNAs from the next generation 
sequenced data of five samples of ductal in situ carcinoma (DCIS) and matched 
adjacent invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). Furthermore, we also investigated the 
circular RNAs expressed in MCF7, an invasive breast ductal carcinoma cell line. 
We described the genomic context of the predicted circular RNAs and we address 
the hypothetical possible functional roles. This study showed a perspective of a 
panel of predictive circRNAs identified and the function that circRNAs could 
exert.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/4503840
PMCID: PMC5124670
PMID: 27965971

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.