1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 14;6:39230. doi: 10.1038/srep39230.

Insulin-induced Effects on the Subcellular Localization of AKT1, AKT2 and AS160 
in Rat Skeletal Muscle.

Zheng X(1), Cartee GD(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Muscle Biology Laboratory, School of Kinesiology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Institute of Gerontology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

AKT1 and AKT2, the AKT isoforms that are highly expressed in skeletal muscle, 
have distinct and overlapping functions, with AKT2 more important for 
insulin-stimulated glucose metabolism. In adipocytes, AKT2 versus AKT1 has 
greater susceptibility for insulin-mediated redistribution from cytosolic to 
membrane localization, and insulin also causes subcellular redistribution of AKT 
Substrate of 160 kDa (AS160), an AKT2 substrate and crucial mediator of 
insulin-stimulated glucose transport. Although skeletal muscle is the major 
tissue for insulin-mediated glucose disposal, little is known about AKT1, AKT2 
or AS160 subcellular localization in skeletal muscle. The major aim of this 
study was to determine insulin's effects on the subcellular localization and 
phosphorylation of AKT1, AKT2 and AS160 in skeletal muscle. Rat skeletal muscles 
were incubated ex vivo ± insulin, and differential centrifugation was used to 
isolate cytosolic and membrane fractions. The results revealed that: 1) insulin 
increased muscle membrane localization of AKT2, but not AKT1; 2) insulin 
increased AKT2 phosphorylation in the cytosol and membrane fractions; 3) insulin 
increased AS160 localization to the cytosol and membranes; and 4) insulin 
increased AS160 phosphorylation in the cytosol, but not membranes. These results 
demonstrate distinctive insulin effects on the subcellular redistribution of 
AKT2 and its substrate AS160 in skeletal muscle.

DOI: 10.1038/srep39230
PMCID: PMC5155274
PMID: 27966646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]