1. Redox Biol. 2017 Apr;11:192-204. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2016.12.009. Epub 2016
Dec  9.

A review of redox signaling and the control of MAP kinase pathway in plants.

Liu Y(1), He C(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Forest Resources Conservation and Utilization in the 
Southwest Mountains of China, Ministry of Education, College of Forestry, 
Southwest Forestry University, 300 Bailong Si, Kunming 650224, Yunnan, People's 
Republic of China; Key Laboratory for Forest Genetic and Tree Improvement & 
Propagation in Universities of Yunnan Province, College of Forestry, Southwest 
Forestry University, 300 Bailong Si, Kunming 650224, Yunnan, People's Republic 
of China. Electronic address: ykliu@swfu.edu.cn.
(2)Key Laboratory for Forest Genetic and Tree Improvement & Propagation in 
Universities of Yunnan Province, College of Forestry, Southwest Forestry 
University, 300 Bailong Si, Kunming 650224, Yunnan, People's Republic of China.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades are evolutionarily conserved 
modules among eukaryotic species that range from yeast, plants, flies to 
mammals. In eukaryotic cells, reactive oxygen species (ROS) has both 
physiological and toxic effects. Both MAPK cascades and ROS signaling are 
involved in plant response to various biotic and abiotic stresses. It has been 
observed that not only can ROS induce MAPK activation, but also that disturbing 
MAPK cascades can modulate ROS production and responses. This review will 
discuss the potential mechanisms by which ROS may activate and/or regulate MAPK 
cascades in plants. The role of MAPK cascades and ROS signaling in regulating 
gene expression, stomatal function, and programmed cell death (PCD) is also 
discussed. In addition, the relationship between Rboh-dependent ROS production 
and MAPK activation in PAMP-triggered immunity will be reviewed.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2016.12.009
PMCID: PMC5157795
PMID: 27984790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]