1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jan 3;114(1):89-94. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1619571114.  Epub 2016 Dec 19.

Triazoles inhibit cholesterol export from lysosomes by binding to NPC1.

Trinh MN(1), Lu F(1), Li X(2)(3), Das A(1), Liang Q(4), De Brabander JK(4), 
Brown MS(5), Goldstein JL(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 
10065.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX 75390.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390; mike.brown@utsouthwestern.edu 
joe.goldstein@utsouthwestern.edu.

Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1), a membrane protein of lysosomes, is required for the 
export of cholesterol derived from receptor-mediated endocytosis of LDL. 
Lysosomal cholesterol export is reportedly inhibited by itraconazole, a triazole 
that is used as an antifungal drug [Xu et al. (2010) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
107:4764-4769]. Here we show that posaconazole, another triazole, also blocks 
cholesterol export from lysosomes. We prepared P-X, a photoactivatable 
cross-linking derivative of posaconazole. P-X cross-linked to NPC1 when added to 
intact cells. Cross-linking was inhibited by itraconazole but not by 
ketoconazole, an imidazole that does not block cholesterol export. Cross-linking 
of P-X was also blocked by U18666A, a compound that has been shown to bind to 
NPC1 and inhibit cholesterol export. P-X also cross-linked to purified NPC1 that 
was incorporated into lipid bilayer nanodiscs. In this in vitro system, 
cross-linking of P-X was inhibited by itraconazole, but not by U18666A. P-X 
cross-linking was not prevented by deletion of the N-terminal domain of NPC1, 
which contains the initial binding site for cholesterol. In contrast, P-X 
cross-linking was reduced when NPC1 contained a point mutation (P691S) in its 
putative sterol-sensing domain. We hypothesize that the sterol-sensing domain 
has a binding site that can accommodate structurally different ligands.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1619571114
PMCID: PMC5224357
PMID: 27994139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.