1. Proteins. 2017 Apr;85(4):561-570. doi: 10.1002/prot.25220. Epub 2017 Jan 18.

Conformational stability of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor as 
influenced by glycosylation, dimerization and EGF hormone binding.

Taylor ES(1), Pol-Fachin L(2)(3), Lins RD(2)(3), Lower SK(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geology, Kent State University, North Canton, Ohio, 44720.
(2)Aggeu Magalhães Research Center, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Recife, Pernambuco, 
50740-465, Brazil.
(3)Department of Fundamental Chemistry, Federal University of Pernambuco, 
Recife, Pernambuco, 50740-560, Brazil.
(4)School of Environment and Natural Resources, Ohio State University, 275 
Mendenhall Laboratory, Columbus, Ohio, 43210.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an important transmembrane 
glycoprotein kinase involved the initiation or perpetuation of signal 
transduction cascades within cells. These processes occur after EGFR binds to a 
ligand [epidermal growth factor (EGF)], thus inducing its dimerization and 
tyrosine autophosphorylation. Previous publications have highlighted the 
importance of glycosylation and dimerization for promoting proper function of 
the receptor and conformation in membranes; however, the effects of these 
associations on the protein conformational stability have not yet been 
described. Molecular dynamics simulations were performed to characterize the 
conformational preferences of the monomeric and dimeric forms of the EGFR 
extracellular domain upon binding to EGF in the presence and absence of N-glycan 
moieties. Structural stability analyses revealed that EGF provides the most 
conformational stability to EGFR, followed by glycosylation and dimerization, 
respectively. The findings also support that EGF-EGFR binding takes place 
through a large-scale induced-fitting mechanism. Proteins 2017; 85:561-570. © 
2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.25220
PMCID: PMC5835389
PMID: 28019699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]