1. ChemistryOpen. 2016 Nov 11;5(6):531-534. doi: 10.1002/open.201600101. 
eCollection 2016 Dec.

Detection of Ligand-induced Conformational Changes in the Activation Loop of 
Aurora-A Kinase by PELDOR Spectroscopy.

Burgess SG(1), Grazia Concilio M(2), Bayliss R(1), Fielding AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Astbury Centre for Structural and Molecular Biology Faculty of Biological 
Sciences University of Leeds Leeds LS2 9JT United Kingdom.
(2)The Photon Science Institute and School of Chemistry University of Manchester 
Manchester M13 9PL United Kingdom.

The structure of protein kinases has been extensively studied by protein 
crystallography. Conformational movement of the kinase activation loop is 
thought to be crucial for regulation of activity; however, in many cases the 
position of the activation loop in solution is unknown. Protein kinases are an 
important class of therapeutic target and kinase inhibitors are classified by 
their effect on the activation loop. Here, we report the use of pulsed electron 
double resonance (PELDOR) and site-directed spin labeling to monitor 
conformational changes through the insertion of MTSL 
[S-(1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-2,5-dihydro-1â€‰H-pyrrol-3-yl)methyl 
methanesulfonothioate] on the dynamic activation loop and a stable site on the 
outer surface of the enzyme. The action of different ligands such as 
microtubule-associated protein (TPX2) and inhibitors could be discriminated as 
well as their ability to lock the activation loop in a fixed conformation. This 
study provides evidence for structural adaptations that could be used for drug 
design and a methodological approach that has potential to characterize 
inhibitors in development.

DOI: 10.1002/open.201600101
PMCID: PMC5167317
PMID: 28032021