1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2016 Dec 5;371(1709):20150462. doi: 
10.1098/rstb.2015.0462.

Medical mycology and fungal immunology: new research perspectives addressing a 
major world health challenge.

Gow NA(1), Netea MG(2).

Author information:
(1)Aberdeen Fungal Group, Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK n.gow@abdn.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre 
and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases (RCI), Nijmegen, 6500HB, The 
Netherlands.

Fungi cause more than a billion skin infections, more than 100 million mucosal 
infections, 10 million serious allergies and more than a million deaths each 
year. Global mortality owing to fungal infections is greater than for malaria 
and breast cancer and is equivalent to that owing to tuberculosis (TB) and HIV. 
These statistics evidence fungal infections as a major threat to human health 
and a major burden to healthcare budgets worldwide. Those patients who are at 
greatest risk of life-threatening fungal infections include those who have 
weakened immunity or have suffered trauma or other predisposing infections such 
as HIV. To address these global threats to human health, more research is 
urgently needed to understand the immunopathology of fungal disease and human 
disease susceptibility in order to augment the advances being made in fungal 
diagnostics and drug development. Here, we highlight some recent advances in 
basic research in medical mycology and fungal immunology that are beginning to 
inform clinical decisions and options for personalized medicine, vaccine 
development and adjunct immunotherapies.This article is part of the themed issue 
'Tackling emerging fungal threats to animal health, food security and ecosystem 
resilience'.

Â© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2015.0462
PMCID: PMC5095541
PMID: 28080988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]