1. Exp Ther Med. 2016 Dec;12(6):3851-3858. doi: 10.3892/etm.2016.3885. Epub 2016 
Nov 8.

Role of Wnt/β-catenin, Wnt/c-Jun N-terminal kinase and Wnt/Ca(2+) pathways in 
cisplatin-induced chemoresistance in ovarian cancer.

Huang L(1), Jin Y(1), Feng S(1), Zou Y(1), Xu S(1), Qiu S(1), Li L(2), Zheng 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Computing, Brain Cognition Computing Lab, University of Kent, 
Kent CT2 7NZ, UK.

The aim of the present study was to explore the expression of Wnt signaling 
proteins β-catenin, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent 
protein kinase II (CaMKII) in ovarian cancer cells, and assess the correlation 
between this expression and cisplatin-induced chemoresistance. SKOV3 ovarian 
carcinoma cells and SKOV3/DDP (cisplatin resistant) cells were treated with 
cisplatin in the absence or presence of a Wnt signaling activator (CHIR-99021, 
glycogen synthase kinase 3β inhibitor) or inhibitor (XAV-939, tankyrase 
inhibitor). Following incubation for 48 h, cell viability, proliferation and 
cytotoxicity were measured using a sensitive colorimetric cell counting kit. 
Expression levels of β-catenin, JNK and CaMKII were detected by western blot and 
immunofluorescence staining. The results of the current study identified that 
β-catenin and JNK expression levels were significantly higher (P<0.01 and P<0.05 
respectively), while CaMKII expression was lower (P>0.05), in SKOV3/DDP cells 
compared with SKOV3 cells. Moreover, following treatment with 20 µM cisplatin, 
reduced expression of β-catenin and JNK (P<0.05 and P<0.01 respectively), and 
increased expression of CaMKII (P<0.01), was observed in SKOV3 and SKOV3/DPP 
cell lines. Furthermore, inhibition of β-catenin signaling by XAV-939 
effectively reversed cisplatin chemoresistance in SKOV3/DDP cells. Similarly, 
XAV-939 downregulated JNK expression (P<0.001), but upregulated CaMKII 
expression (P<0.001), in SKOV3/DDP cells. In conclusion, abnormal activation of 
Wnt/β-catenin and Wnt/JNK signaling pathways in ovarian cancer cells promotes 
cisplatin resistance, while the Wnt/Ca2+ signaling pathway reduces cisplatin 
resistance. This indicates that β-catenin, JNK and CaMKII are potential 
therapeutic targets in chemoresistant ovarian cancers.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2016.3885
PMCID: PMC5228322
PMID: 28101169