1. Front Plant Sci. 2017 Jan 4;7:1998. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.01998. eCollection 
2016.

New Candidate Genes Affecting Rice Grain Appearance and Milling Quality Detected 
by Genome-Wide and Gene-Based Association Analyses.

Wang X(1), Pang Y(1), Wang C(1), Chen K(2), Zhu Y(2), Shen C(1), Ali J(3), Xu 
J(4), Li Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Crop Sciences/National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and 
Genetic Improvement, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences Beijing, China.
(2)Agricultural Genomics Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences 
Shenzhen, China.
(3)International Rice Research Institute Metro Manila, Philippines.
(4)Institute of Crop Sciences/National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and 
Genetic Improvement, Chinese Academy of Agricultural SciencesBeijing, China; 
Agricultural Genomics Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
SciencesShenzhen, China; Shenzhen Institute of Breeding and Innovation, Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural SciencesShenzhen, China.
(5)Institute of Crop Sciences/National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and 
Genetic Improvement, Chinese Academy of Agricultural SciencesBeijing, China; 
Shenzhen Institute of Breeding and Innovation, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
SciencesShenzhen, China.

Appearance and milling quality are two crucial properties of rice grains 
affecting its market acceptability. Understanding the genetic base of rice grain 
quality could considerably improve the high quality breeding. Here, we carried 
out an association analysis to identify QTL affecting nine rice grain appearance 
and milling quality traits using a diverse panel of 258 accessions selected from 
3K Rice Genome Project and evaluated in two environments Sanya and Shenzhen. 
Genome-wide association analyses using 22,488 high quality SNPs identified 72 
QTL affecting the nine traits. Combined gene-based association and haplotype 
analyses plus functional annotation allowed us to shortlist 19 candidate genes 
for seven important QTL regions affecting the grain quality traits, including 
two cloned genes (GS3 and TUD), two fine mapped QTL (qGRL7.1 and qPGWC7) and 
three newly identified QTL (qGL3.4, qGW1.1, and qGW10.2). The most likely 
candidate gene(s) for each important QTL were also discussed. This research 
demonstrated the superior power to shortlist candidate genes affecting complex 
phenotypes by the strategy of combined GWAS, gene-based association and 
haplotype analyses. The identified candidate genes provided valuable sources for 
future functional characterization and genetic improvement of rice appearance 
and milling quality.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2016.01998
PMCID: PMC5209347
PMID: 28101096