1. J Med Chem. 2017 Feb 23;60(4):1325-1342. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b01355.
Epub  2017 Feb 10.

Novel Selective Estrogen Receptor Downregulators (SERDs) Developed against 
Treatment-Resistant Breast Cancer.

Xiong R(1), Zhao J(1), Gutgesell LM(1), Wang Y(1), Lee S(1), Karumudi B(1), Zhao 
H(1), Lu Y(1), Tonetti DA(1), Thatcher GR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry & Pharmacognosy, ‡Department of 
Biopharmaceutical Sciences, University of Illinois College of Pharmacy, 
University of Illinois at Chicago , 833 S. Wood St., Chicago, Illinois 60612, 
United States.

Resistance to the selective estrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen and to 
aromatase inhibitors that lower circulating estradiol occurs in up to 50% of 
patients, generally leading to an endocrine-independent ER+ phenotype. Selective 
ER downregulators (SERDs) are able to ablate ER and thus, theoretically, to 
prevent survival of both endocrine-dependent and -independent ER+ tumors. The 
clinical SERD fulvestrant is hampered by intramuscular administration and 
undesirable pharmacokinetics. Novel SERDs were designed using the 
6-OH-benzothiophene (BT) scaffold common to arzoxifene and raloxifene. 
Treatment-resistant (TR) ER+ cell lines (MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:TAM1) were used for 
optimization, followed by validation in the parent endocrine-dependent cell line 
(MCF-7:WS8), in 2D and 3D cultures, using ERα in-cell westerns, ERE-luciferase, 
and cell viability assays, with 2 (GDC-0810/ARN-810) used for comparison. Two BT 
SERDs with superior in vitro activity to 2 were studied for bioavailability and 
shown to cause regression of a TR, endocrine-independent ER+ xenograft superior 
to that with 2.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b01355
PMCID: PMC5786431
PMID: 28117994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]