1. Anal Biochem. 2017 Apr 1;522:37-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2017.01.014. Epub 2017
Jan  19.

Split luciferase-based biosensors for characterizing EED binders.

Li L(1), Feng L(2), Shi M(2), Zeng J(2), Chen Z(2), Zhong L(2), Huang L(2), Guo 
W(2), Huang Y(2), Qi W(2), Lu C(2), Li E(2), Zhao K(2), Gu J(3).

Author information:
(1)China Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 4218 Jinke Road, Shanghai 
201203, China. Electronic address: ling-1.li@novartis.com.
(2)China Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 4218 Jinke Road, Shanghai 
201203, China.
(3)China Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 4218 Jinke Road, Shanghai 
201203, China. Electronic address: Justin.gu@novartis.com.

The EED (embryonic ectoderm development) subunit of the Polycomb repressive 
complex 2 (PRC2) plays an important role in the feed forward regulation of the 
PRC2 enzymatic activity. We recently identified a new class of allosteric PRC2 
inhibitors that bind to the H3K27me3 pocket of EED. Multiple assays were 
developed and used to identify and characterize this type of PRC2 inhibitors. 
One of them is a genetically encoded EED biosensor based on the EED[G255D] 
mutant and the split firefly luciferase. This EED biosensor can detect the 
compound binding in the transfected cells and in the in vitro biochemical 
assays. Compared to other commonly used cellular assays, the EED biosensor assay 
has the advantage of shorter compound incubation with cells. The in vitro EED 
biosensor is much more sensitive than other label-free biophysical assays (e.g. 
DSF, ITC). Based on the crystal structure, the DSF data as well as the biosensor 
assay data, it's most likely that compound-induced increase in the luciferase 
activity of the EED[G255D] biosensor results from the decreased non-productive 
interactions between the EED subdomain and other subdomains within the biosensor 
construct. This new insight of the mechanism might help to broaden the use of 
the split luciferase based biosensors.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2017.01.014
PMID: 28111304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]