1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2017 Mar;104:9-16. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2017.01.015. Epub 
2017 Jan 25.

The effect of PKA-mediated phosphorylation of ryanodine receptor on SR Ca(2+) 
leak in ventricular myocytes.

Bovo E(1), Huke S(2), Blatter LA(3), Zima AV(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Loyola University Chicago, 2160 
South First Avenue, Maywood, IL 60153, United States.
(2)Medicine-Division of Cardiovascular Disease, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, 901 19th Street South, Birmingham, AL 35294, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Physiology, Rush University Medical 
Center, 1750 West Harrison Street, Chicago, IL 60612, United States.
(4)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Loyola University Chicago, 2160 
South First Avenue, Maywood, IL 60153, United States. Electronic address: 
azima@luc.edu.

Functional impact of cardiac ryanodine receptor (type 2 RyR or RyR2) 
phosphorylation by protein kinase A (PKA) remains highly controversial. In this 
study, we characterized a functional link between PKA-mediated RyR2 
phosphorylation level and sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ release and leak in 
permeabilized rabbit ventricular myocytes. Changes in cytosolic [Ca2+] and 
intra-SR [Ca2+]SR were measured with Fluo-4 and Fluo-5N, respectively. Changes 
in RyR2 phosphorylation at two PKA sites, serine-2031 and -2809, were measured 
with phospho-specific antibodies. cAMP (10μM) increased Ca2+ spark frequency 
approximately two-fold. This effect was associated with an increase in SR Ca2+ 
load from 0.84 to 1.24mM. PKA inhibitory peptide (PKI; 10μM) abolished the 
cAMP-dependent increase of SR Ca2+ load and spark frequency. When SERCA was 
completely blocked by thapsigargin, cAMP did not affect RyR2-mediated Ca2+ leak. 
The lack of a cAMP effect on RyR2 function can be explained by almost maximal 
phosphorylation of RyR2 at serine-2809 after sarcolemma permeabilization. This 
high RyR2 phosphorylation level is likely the consequence of a balance shift 
between protein kinase and phosphatase activity after permeabilization. When 
RyR2 phosphorylation at serine-2809 was reduced to its "basal" level (i.e. RyR2 
phosphorylation level in intact myocytes) using kinase inhibitor staurosporine, 
SR Ca2+ leak was significantly reduced. Surprisingly, further dephosphorylation 
of RyR2 with protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) markedly increased SR Ca2+ leak. At the 
same time, phosphorylation of RyR2 at serine 2031 did not significantly change 
under identical experimental conditions. These results suggest that RyR2 
phosphorylation by PKA has a complex effect on SR Ca2+ leak in ventricular 
myocytes. At an intermediate level of RyR2 phosphorylation SR Ca2+ leak is 
minimal. However, complete dephosphorylation and maximal phosphorylation of RyR2 
increases SR Ca2+ leak.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2017.01.015
PMCID: PMC5337148
PMID: 28131630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]