1. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2017 May;28(3):252-259. doi:
10.1097/ICU.0000000000000359.

CRISPR applications in ophthalmologic genome surgery.

Cabral T(1), DiCarlo JE, Justus S, Sengillo JD, Xu Y, Tsang SH.

Author information:
(1)aJonas Children's Vision Care, and Bernard & Shirlee Brown Glaucoma 
Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University Medical Center 
bEdward S Harkness Eye Institute, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, 
USA cDepartment of Ophthalmology, Federal University of Espírito Santo, Vitoria, 
Brazil dDepartment of Ophthalmology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil eState University of New York Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA 
fDepartment of Ophthalmology, Xin Hua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai, China gDepartment of Pathology & Cell Biology, Institute 
of Human Nutrition, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The present review seeks to summarize and discuss the 
application of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
(CRISPR)-associated systems (Cas) for genome editing, also called genome 
surgery, in the field of ophthalmology.
RECENT FINDINGS: Precision medicine is an emerging approach for disease 
treatment and prevention that takes into account the variability of an 
individual's genetic sequence. Various groups have used CRISPR-Cas genome 
editing to make significant progress in mammalian preclinical models of eye 
disease, the basic science of eye development in zebrafish, the in vivo 
modification of ocular tissue, and the correction of stem cells with therapeutic 
applications. In addition, investigators have creatively used the targeted 
mutagenic potential of CRISPR-Cas systems to target pathogenic alleles in vitro.
SUMMARY: Over the past year, CRISPR-Cas genome editing has been used to correct 
pathogenic mutations in vivo and in transplantable stem cells. Although 
off-target mutagenesis remains a concern, improvement in CRISPR-Cas technology 
and careful screening for undesired mutations will likely lead to clinical eye 
therapeutics employing CRISPR-Cas systems in the near future.

DOI: 10.1097/ICU.0000000000000359
PMCID: PMC5511789
PMID: 28141764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest J.E.D. is an author of a 
patent application filed on CRISPR/Cas9 application for genome engineering in 
eukaryotes (PCT/US2014/045691)