1. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 15;7:42596. doi: 10.1038/srep42596.

TaWRKY70 transcription factor in wheat QTL-2DL regulates downstream metabolite 
biosynthetic genes to resist Fusarium graminearum infection spread within spike.

Kage U(1), Yogendra KN(1), Kushalappa AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Plant Science Department, McGill University, 2111 Lakeshore road, Sainte Anne 
De Bellevue, Quebec, Canada H9X3V9.

A semi-comprehensive metabolomics was used to identify the candidate metabolites 
and genes to decipher mechanisms of resistance in wheat near-isogenic lines 
(NILs) containing QTL-2DL against Fusarium graminearum (Fg). Metabolites, with 
high fold-change in abundance, belonging to hydroxycinnamic acid amides (HCAAs): 
such as coumaroylagmatine, coumaroylputrescine and Fatty acids: phosphatidic 
acids (PAs) were identified as resistance related induced (RRI) metabolites in 
rachis of resistant NIL (NIL-R), inoculated with Fg. A WRKY like transcription 
factor (TF) was identified within the QTL-2DL region, along with three 
resistance genes that biosynthesized RRI metabolites. Sequencing and in-silico 
analysis of WRKY confirmed it to be wheat TaWRKY70. Quantitative real time-PCR 
studies showed a higher expression of TaWRKY70 in NIL-R as compared to NIL-S 
after Fg inoculation. Further, the functional validation of TaWRKY70 based on 
virus induced gene silencing (VIGS) in NIL-R, not only confirmed an increased 
fungal biomass but also decreased expressions of downstream resistance genes: 
TaACT, TaDGK and TaGLI1, along with decreased abundances of RRI metabolites 
biosynthesized by them. Among more than 200 FHB resistance QTL identified in 
wheat, this is the first QTL from which a TF was identified, and its downstream 
target genes as well as the FHB resistance functions were deciphered.

DOI: 10.1038/srep42596
PMCID: PMC5309853
PMID: 28198421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.