1. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 13;7:42363. doi: 10.1038/srep42363.

Experimental Study of the Biological Properties of Human Embryonic Stem 
Cell-Derived Retinal Progenitor Cells.

Shao J(1), Zhou PY(1), Peng GH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450000, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, General Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation 
Army, Beijing 100853, China.

Retinal degenerative diseases are among the leading causes of blindness 
worldwide, and cell replacement is considered as a promising therapeutic. 
However, the resources of seed cells are scarce. To further explore this type of 
therapy, we adopted a culture system that could harvest a substantial quantity 
of retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) 
within a relatively short period of time. Furthermore, we transplanted these 
RPCs into the subretinal spaces of Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) rats. We 
quantified the thickness of the treated rats' outer nuclear layers (ONLs) and 
explored the visual function via electroretinography (ERG). It was found that 
the differentiated cells expressed RPC markers and photoreceptor progenitor 
markers. The transplanted RPCs survived for at least 12 weeks, resulting in 
beneficial effects on the morphology of the host retina, and led to a 
significant improvement in the visual function of the treated animals. These 
therapeutic effects suggest that the hESCs-derived RPCs could delay degeneration 
of the retina and partially restore visual function.

DOI: 10.1038/srep42363
PMCID: PMC5304228
PMID: 28205557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.