1. Oncotarget. 2017 Feb 21;8(8):12596-12606. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.15392.

Analysis of acquired mutations in transgenes arising in Ba/F3 transformation 
assays: findings and recommendations.

Watanabe-Smith K(1), Godil J(2), Agarwal A(3)(4), Tognon C(5)(6), Druker 
B(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Oregon Health & Science University, Knight Cancer 
Institute, Portland, OR, USA.
(2)Honors College, College of Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, 
USA.
(3)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Knight Cancer Institute, Portland, OR, USA.
(4)Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
OR, USA.
(5)Oregon Health & Science University, Knight Cancer Institute, Portland, OR, 
USA.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Portland, OR, USA.

Comment in
    Oncotarget. 2017 Mar 28;8(13):20523-20524. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.16268.

The identification and functional validation of potentially oncogenic mutations 
in leukemia is an essential step toward a future of personalized targeted 
therapy. To assess the oncogenic capacity of individual mutations, reliable and 
scalable in vitro experimental approaches are required. Since 1988, researchers 
have used the IL-3 dependent Ba/F3 transformation assay to validate the 
oncogenic potential of mutations to drive factor-independent growth. Here we 
report a previously unrecognized phenomenon whereby Ba/F3 cells, engineered to 
express weakly transforming mutations, present with additional acquired 
mutations in the expressed transgene following factor withdrawal. Using four 
mutations with known transformative capacity in three cytokine receptors 
(CSF2RB, CSF3R and IL7R), we demonstrate that the mutated receptors are highly 
susceptible to acquiring additional mutations. These acquired mutations of 
unknown functional significance are selected by factor withdrawal but appear to 
exist prior to the removal of growth factor. This anomaly has the potential to 
confound efforts to both validate and characterize oncogenic mutations in 
leukemia, particularly when it is not standard practice to sequence validate 
cDNAs from transformed Ba/F3 lines. We present specific recommendations to 
detect and mitigate this phenomenon in future research using Ba/F3 
transformation assays, along with methods to make the Ba/F3 assay more 
quantitative.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.15392
PMCID: PMC5355038
PMID: 28208123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to disclose.