1. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2017 Jul;42(7):732-737. doi: 10.1139/apnm-2016-0382. 
Epub 2017 Feb 16.

Exercise timing and blood lactate concentrations in individuals with type 2 
diabetes.

Heden TD(1)(1), Liu Y(1)(1), Kanaley JA(1)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, University of Missouri, 
Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

The purpose of this study was to characterize how resistance exercise prior to 
or after a meal alters fasting and postprandial blood lactate concentrations in 
individuals with type 2 diabetes. Obese individuals with type 2 diabetes (N = 
12) completed three 2-day trials, including (i) no exercise (NoEx), (ii) 
resistance exercise prior to dinner (Ex-M), and (iii) resistance exercise 
beginning at 45 min postdinner (M-Ex). During day 1 of each trial, fasting and 
postprandial blood lactate concentrations, perceived exertion, and substrate 
oxidation were measured, and subsequently on day 2 the following morning fasting 
blood lactate was measured. The premeal lactate incremental area under the curve 
(iAUC) during Ex-M (109 ± 66 mmol·L-1·1.6 h-1) was over 100-fold greater (P < 
0.01) compared with NoEx (-15 ± 24 mmol·L-1·1.6 h-1) and M-Ex (-2 ± 18 
mmol·L-1·1.6 h-1). The postprandial lactate iAUC during M-Ex (304 ± 116 
mmol·L-1·4 h-1) was over 2-fold greater (P < 0.01) compared with NoEx (149 ± 74 
mmol·L-1·4 h-1) and Ex-M (-140 ± 196 mmol·L-1·4 h-1). Average lactate during 
exercise was ∼45% greater (P = 0.03) during M-Ex (3.2 ± 0.9 mmol/L) compared 
with Ex-M (2.2 ± 0.9 mmol/L), but the change in lactate during Ex-M (2.4 ± 1.6 
mmol/L) or M-Ex (2.3 ± 1.3 mmol/L) was not different (P > 0.05). Perceived 
exertion, substrate oxidation, or fasting blood lactate concentrations the day 
after testing were not different between trials. Blood lactate concentrations 
during acute resistance exercise are greater when exercise is performed in the 
postprandial period. Acute resistance exercise performed the night prior does 
not alter fasting blood lactate concentrations the following morning.

Cette étude a pour objectif de préciser le mécanisme par lequel un exercice 
contre résistance effectué avant ou après un repas modifie la concentration 
sanguine de lactate à jeun et après un repas chez des diabétiques de type 2. Des 
obèses présentant un diabète de type 2 (N = 12) participent à trois essais de 2 
jours : (i) pas d’exercice (« NoEx »), (ii) un exercice contre résistance avant 
le repas (« Ex-M ») et (iii) un exercice contre résistance débutant 45 min après 
le repas (« M-Ex »). Au jour 1 de chaque essai, on mesure la concentration 
sanguine de lactate à jeun et postprandiale, la perception de l’intensité de 
l’exercice et l’oxydation des substrats; au matin du jour 2, on mesure la 
concentration sanguine de lactate à jeun. La surface croissante sous la courbe 
(« iAUC ») de lactate avant le repas dans la condition Ex-M (109 ± 66 
mmol·L−1·1.6 h−1) est plus de 100 fois plus élevée (P < 0,01) comparativement à 
NoEx (−15 ± 24 mmol·L−1·1.6 h−1) et M-Ex (−2 ± 18 mmol·L−1·1.6 h−1). L’iAUC de 
lactate postprandial dans la condition M-Ex (304 ± 116 mmol·L−1·4 h−1) est plus 
de 2 fois plus élevée (P < 0,01) comparativement à NoEx (149 ± 74 mmol·L−1·4 
h−1) et Ex-M (−140 ± 196 mmol·L−1·4 h−1). La concentration moyenne de lactate 
sanguin durant l’exercice est ~45 % plus élevée (P = 0,03) durant M-Ex (3,2 ± 
0,9 mmol/L) comparativement à Ex-M (2,2 ± 0,9 mmol/L), mais la variation de 
lactate dans la condition Ex-M (2,4 ± 1,6 mmol/L) ou M-Ex (2,3 ± 1,3 mmol/L) 
n’est pas différente (P > 0,05). La perception de l’intensité de l’exercice, 
l’oxydation des substrats ou la concentration sanguine de lactate à jeun le jour 
suivant le test ne diffèrent pas d’une condition à l’autre. La concentration 
sanguine de lactate au cours de la séance ponctuelle d’exercice contre 
résistance est plus élevée quand l’exercice est effectué durant la période 
postprandiale. La réalisation d’une séance ponctuelle d’exercice contre 
résistance la veille au soir ne modifie pas la concentration sanguine de lactate 
à jeun du lendemain. [Traduit par la Rédaction]

DOI: 10.1139/apnm-2016-0382
PMCID: PMC9627643
PMID: 28208021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement We have no 
conflict of interest to report.