1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2017 May;24(3):173-182. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000333.

Genetic control of erythropoiesis.

Tumburu L(1), Thein SL.

Author information:
(1)National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute/NIH, Sickle Cell Branch, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The discovery of several genetic variants associated with 
erythroid traits and subsequent elucidation of their functional mechanisms are 
exemplars of the power of the new genetic and genomic technology. The present 
review highlights findings from recent genetic studies related to the control of 
erythropoiesis and dyserythropoiesis, and fetal hemoglobin, an erythroid-related 
trait.
RECENT FINDINGS: Identification of the genetic modulators of erythropoiesis 
involved two approaches: genome-wide association studies (GWASs) using single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays that revealed the common genetic variants 
associated with erythroid phenotypes (hemoglobin, red cell count, MCV, MCH) and 
fetal hemoglobin; and massive parallel sequencing such as whole genome 
sequencing (WGS) and whole exome sequencing (WES) that led to the discovery of 
the rarer variants (GFI1B, SBDS, RPS19, PKLR, EPO, EPOR, KLF1, GATA1). 
Functional and genomic studies aided by computational approaches and gene 
editing technology refined the regions encompassing the putative causative SNPs 
and confirmed their regulatory role at different stages of erythropoiesis.
SUMMARY: Five meta-analysis of GWASs identified 17 genetic loci associated with 
erythroid phenotypes, which are potential regulators of erythropoiesis. Some of 
these loci showed pleiotropy associated with multiple erythroid traits, 
suggesting undiscovered molecular mechanisms and challenges underlying erythroid 
biology. Other sequencing strategies (WGS and WES) further elucidated the role 
of rare variants in dyserythropoiesis. Integration of common and rare variant 
studies with functional assays involving latest genome-editing technologies will 
significantly improve our understanding of the genetics underlying 
erythropoiesis and erythroid disorders.

DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000333
PMCID: PMC10755646
PMID: 28212192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts of 
interest.