1. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2016 Dec 21;4(1):e1248273. doi: 
10.1080/21690707.2016.1248273. eCollection 2016.

Understanding the roles of intrinsic disorder in subunits of hemoglobin and the 
disease process of sickle cell anemia.

Fitzsimmons R(1), Amin N(1), Uversky VN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida , Tampa, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA; USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Research Institute, 
Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA; 
Laboratory of Structural Dynamics, Stability and Folding of Proteins, Institute 
of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia.

One of the common genetic disorders is sickle cell anemia, in which 2 recessive 
alleles must meet to allow for destruction and alteration in the morphology of 
red blood cells. This usually leads to loss of proper binding of oxygen to 
hemoglobin and curved, sickle-shaped erythrocytes. The mutation causing this 
disease occurs in the 6th codon of the HBB gene encoding the hemoglobin subunit 
β (β-globin), a protein, serving as an integral part of the adult hemoglobin A 
(HbA), which is a heterotetramer of 2 α chains and 2 β chains that is 
responsible for binding to the oxygen in the blood. This mutation changes a 
charged glutamic acid to a hydrophobic valine residue and disrupts the tertiary 
structure and stability of the hemoglobin molecule. Since in the field of 
protein intrinsic disorder, charged and polar residues are typically considered 
as disorder promoting, in opposite to the order-promoting non-polar hydrophobic 
residues, in this study we attempted to answer a question if intrinsic disorder 
might have a role in the pathogenesis of sickle cell anemia. To this end, 
several disorder predictors were utilized to evaluate the presence of 
intrinsically disordered regions in all subunits of human hemoglobin: α, β, δ, 
ε, ζ, γ1, and γ2. Then, structural analysis was completed by using the 
SWISS-MODEL Repository to visualize the outputs of the disorder predictors. 
Finally, Uniprot STRING and D2P2 were used to determine biochemical interactome 
and protein partners for each hemoglobin subunit along with analyzing their 
posttranslational modifications. All these properties were used to determine any 
differences between the 6 different types of subunits of hemoglobin and to 
correlate the mutation leading to sickle cell anemia with intrinsic disorder 
propensity.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2016.1248273
PMCID: PMC5314875
PMID: 28232898