1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2017 Apr;52:70-80. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2017.02.009. Epub 
2017 Feb 16.

Inorganic arsenic inhibits the nucleotide excision repair pathway and reduces 
the expression of XPC.

Holcomb N(1), Goswami M(1), Han SG(2), Scott T(1), D'Orazio J(1), Orren DK(1), 
Gairola CG(1), Mellon I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicology and Cancer Biology, The Markey Cancer Center, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States.
(2)Toxicology Laboratory, Department of Food Science and Biotechnology of Animal 
Resources, College of Animal Bioscience and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul 
05029, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Toxicology and Cancer Biology, The Markey Cancer Center, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States. Electronic address: 
mellon@uky.edu.

Chronic exposure to arsenic, most often through contaminated drinking water, has 
been linked to several types of cancer in humans, including skin and lung 
cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying its role in causing cancer are not 
well understood. There is evidence that exposure to arsenic can enhance the 
carcinogenicity of UV light in inducing skin cancers and may enhance the 
carcinogenicity of tobacco smoke in inducing lung cancers. The nucleotide 
excision repair (NER) pathway removes different types of DNA damage including 
those produced by UV light and components of tobacco smoke. The aim of the 
present study was to investigate the effect of sodium arsenite on the NER 
pathway in human lung fibroblasts (IMR-90 cells) and primary mouse 
keratinocytes. To measure NER, we employed a slot-blot assay to quantify the 
introduction and removal of UV light-induced 6-4 photoproducts (6-4 PP) and 
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs). We find a concentration-dependent 
inhibition of the removal of 6-4 PPs and CPDs in both cell types treated with 
arsenite. Treatment of both cell types with arsenite resulted in a significant 
reduction in the abundance of XPC, a protein that is critical for DNA damage 
recognition in NER. The abundance of RNA expressed from several key NER genes 
was also significantly reduced by treatment of IMR-90 cells with arsenite. 
Finally, treatment of IMR-90 cells with MG-132 abrogated the reduction in XPC 
protein, suggesting an involvement of the proteasome in the reduction of XPC 
protein produced by treatment of cells with arsenic. The inhibition of NER by 
arsenic may reflect one mechanism underlying the role of arsenic exposure in 
enhancing cigarette smoke-induced lung carcinogenesis and UV light-induced skin 
cancer, and it may provide some insights into the emergence of arsenic trioxide 
as a chemotherapeutic agent.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2017.02.009
PMCID: PMC5535078
PMID: 28237621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest