1. Front Plant Sci. 2017 Feb 9;8:148. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00148. eCollection 
2017.

Comparative Genomics Integrated with Association Analysis Identifies Candidate 
Effector Genes Corresponding to Lr20 in Phenotype-Paired Puccinia triticina 
Isolates from Australia.

Wu JQ(1), Sakthikumar S(2), Dong C(1), Zhang P(1), Cuomo CA(2), Park RF(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Agriculture and Environment, Plant Breeding Institute, The 
University of Sydney Narellan, NSW, Australia.
(2)Genome Sequencing and Analysis Program, Broad Institute of Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT) and Harvard Cambridge, MA, USA.

Leaf rust is one of the most common and damaging diseases of wheat, and is 
caused by an obligate biotrophic basidiomycete, Puccinia triticina (Pt). In the 
present study, 20 Pt isolates from Australia, comprising 10 phenotype-matched 
pairs with contrasting pathogenicity for Lr20, were analyzed using whole genome 
sequencing. Compared to the reference genome of the American Pt isolate 1-1 BBBD 
Race 1, an average of 404,690 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) per isolate 
was found and the proportion of heterozygous SNPs was above 87% in the majority 
of the isolates, demonstrating a high level of polymorphism and a high rate of 
heterozygosity. From the genome-wide SNPs, a phylogenetic tree was inferred, 
which consisted of a large clade of 15 isolates representing diverse presumed 
clonal lineages including 14 closely related isolates and the more diverged 
isolate 670028, and a small clade of five isolates characterized by lower 
heterozygosity level. Principle component analysis detected three distinct 
clusters, corresponding exactly to the two major subsets of the small clade and 
the large clade comprising all 15 isolates without further separation of isolate 
670028. While genome-wide association analysis identified 302 genes harboring at 
least one SNP associated with Lr20 virulence (p < 0.05), a Wilcoxon rank sum 
test revealed that 36 and 68 genes had significant (p < 0.05) and marginally 
significant (p < 0.1) differences in the counts of non-synonymous mutations 
between Lr20 avirulent and virulent groups, respectively. Twenty of these genes 
were predicted to have a signal peptide without a transmembrane segment, and 
hence identified as candidate effector genes corresponding to Lr20. SNP analysis 
also implicated the potential involvement of epigenetics and small RNA in Pt 
pathogenicity. Future studies are thus warranted to investigate the biological 
functions of the candidate effectors as well as the gene regulation mechanisms 
at epigenetic and post-transcription levels. Our study is the first to integrate 
phenotype-genotype association with effector prediction in Pt genomes, an 
approach that may circumvent some of the technical difficulties in working with 
obligate rust fungi and accelerate avirulence gene identification.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00148
PMCID: PMC5298990
PMID: 28232843