1. Nutrition. 2017 Mar;35:139-145. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2016.11.005. Epub 2016 Dec
7.

Association of the dopamine D2 receptor rs1800497 polymorphism and eating 
behavior in Chilean children.

Obregón AM(1), Valladares M(2), Goldfield G(3).

Author information:
(1)Escuela de Nutrición y Dietética, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, 
Universidad San Sebastián, Concepción, Chile. Electronic address: 
Aniobregon@gmail.com.
(2)Unidad de Salud del Observatorio Regional de Paz y Seguridad (ORPAS), 
Universidad Bernardo O Higgins, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Studies have established a strong genetic component in eating 
behavior. The TaqI A1 polymorphism (rs1800497) has previously been associated 
with obesity and eating behavior. Additionally, this polymorphism has been 
associated with diminished dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) density, higher body 
mass, and food reinforcement. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
association between the DRD2 rs1800497 polymorphism and eating behavior in 
Chilean children.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study in which we selected 258 children (44% 
girls, 56% boys; ages 8-14 y) with a wide variation in body mass index. 
Anthropometric measurements were performed by standard procedures. Eating 
behavior was assessed using the Eating in Absence of Hunger Questionnaire 
(EAHQ), Child Eating Behavior Questionnaire, and the Food Reinforcement Value 
Questionnaire. Genotype of the rs1800497 was determined by polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. Association of the TaqI A1 
variant (T allele) with eating behavior was assessed using nonparametric tests.
RESULTS: Compared with normal-weight children, the obese group demonstrated 
higher scores on the External Eating and Fatigue/Boredom subscales of the EAHQ. 
Higher scores were assessed in Food Responsiveness, Emotional Overeating, 
Enjoyment to Food and Desire to Drink subscales (P < 0.001) and lower scores of 
the Satiety Responsiveness and Slowness in Eating (P < 0.05). In the 
sex-specific analysis, the TaqI A1 allele was associated with higher scores on 
Satiety Responsiveness and Emotional Undereating subscales in obese girls, and 
higher scores of Enjoyment of Food subscale in boys.
CONCLUSION: The TaqI A1 polymorphism may be a risk factor for eating behavior 
traits that may predispose children to greater energy intake and obesity.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nut.2016.11.005
PMID: 28241982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]