1. Gastroenterology. 2017 Jun;152(8):2037-2051.e22. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2017.02.018. Epub 2017 Feb 27.

Induction of Chromosome Instability by Activation of Yes-Associated Protein and 
Forkhead Box M1 in Liver Cancer.

Weiler SME(1), Pinna F(1), Wolf T(1), Lutz T(1), Geldiyev A(2), Sticht C(3), 
Knaub M(1), Thomann S(1), Bissinger M(1), Wan S(1), Rössler S(1), Becker D(4), 
Gretz N(3), Lang H(4), Bergmann F(1), Ustiyan V(5), Kalin TV(5), Singer S(1), 
Lee JS(6), Marquardt JU(4), Schirmacher P(1), Kalinichenko VV(5), Breuhahn K(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)International Educational-Scientific Center, Ashgabat City, Turkmenistan.
(3)Medical Faculty Mannheim, Medical Research Center, University of Heidelberg, 
Mannheim, Germany.
(4)Department of Medicine I, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
(5)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(6)Department of Systems Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas.
(7)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. 
Electronic address: kai.breuhahn@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Many different types of cancer cells have chromosome 
instability. The hippo pathway leads to phosphorylation of the transcriptional 
activator yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1, YAP), which regulates proliferation 
and has been associated with the development of liver cancer. We investigated 
the effects of hippo signaling via YAP on chromosome stability and 
hepatocarcinogenesis in humans and mice.
METHODS: We analyzed transcriptome data from 242 patients with hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) to search for gene signatures associated with chromosomal 
instability (CIN); we investigated associations with overall survival time and 
cancer recurrence using Kaplan-Meier curves. We analyzed changes in expression 
of these signature genes, at mRNA and protein levels, after small interfering 
RNA-mediated silencing of YAP in Sk-Hep1, SNU182, HepG2, or pancreatic cancer 
cells, as well as incubation with thiostrepton (an inhibitor of forkhead box M1 
[FOXM1]) or verteporfin (inhibitor of the interaction between YAP and TEA domain 
transcription factor 4 [TEAD4]). We performed co-immunoprecipitation and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments. We collected liver tissues from mice 
that express a constitutively active form of YAP (YAPS127A) and analyzed gene 
expression signatures and histomorphologic parameters associated with 
chromosomal instability. Mice were given injections of thiostrepton and livers 
were collected and analyzed by immunoblotting, immunohistochemistry, histology, 
and real-time polymerase chain reaction. We performed immunohistochemical 
analyses on tissue microarrays of 105 HCCs and 7 nontumor liver tissues.
RESULTS: Gene expression patterns associated with chromosome instability, called 
CIN25 and CIN70, were detected in HCCs from patients with shorter survival time 
or early cancer recurrence. TEAD4 and YAP were required for CIN25 and CIN70 
signature expression via induction and binding of FOXM1. Disrupting the 
interaction between YAP and TEAD4 with verteporfin, or inhibiting FOXM1 with 
thiostrepton, reduced the chromosome instability gene expression patterns. 
Hyperplastic livers and tumors from YAPS127A mice had increased CIN25 and CIN70 
gene expression patterns, aneuploidy, and defects in mitosis. Injection of 
YAPS127A mice with thiostrepton reduced liver overgrowth and signs of 
chromosomal instability. In human HCC tissues, high levels of nuclear YAP 
correlated with increased chromosome instability gene expression patterns and 
aneuploidy.
CONCLUSIONS: By analyzing cell lines, genetically modified mice, and HCC 
tissues, we found that YAP cooperates with FOXM1 to contribute to chromosome 
instability. Agents that disrupt this pathway might be developed as treatments 
for liver cancer. Transcriptome data are available in the Gene Expression 
Omnibus public database (accession numbers: GSE32597 and GSE73396).

Copyright © 2017 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2017.02.018
PMID: 28249813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]