1. Sci Rep. 2017 Mar 2;7:43203. doi: 10.1038/srep43203.

Mitochondrial DNA copy number augments performance of A(1)C and oral glucose 
tolerance testing in the prediction of type 2 diabetes.

Cho SB(1), Koh I(2), Nam HY(1), Jeon JP(1), Lee HK(3), Han BG(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genome Science, National Research Institute of Health, KCDC, 
Cheongju, 28159, Korea.
(2)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, 
04763, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Eulji University, Seoul, 
01830, Korea.

Here, we tested the performance of the mitochondrial DNA copy number (mtDNA-CN) 
in predicting future type 2 diabetes (n = 1108). We used the baseline clinical 
data (age, sex, body mass index, waist-to-hip ratio, systolic and diastolic 
blood pressure) and the mtDNA-CN, hemoglobin A1c (A1C) levels and results of 
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) including fasting plasma glucose, 1-hour 
glucose, and 2-hour glucose levels, to predict future diabetes. We built a 
prediction model using the baseline data and the diabetes status at biannual 
follow-up of 8 years. The mean area under curve (AUC) for all follow-ups of the 
full model including all variables was 0.92 ± 0.04 (mean ± standard deviation), 
while that of the model excluding the mtDNA-CN was 0.90 ± 0.03. The sensitivity 
of the f4ull model was much greater than that of the model not including 
mtDNA-CN: the mean sensitivities of the model with and without mtDNA-CN were 
0.60 ± 0.06 and 0.53 ± 0.04, respectively. We found that the mtDNA-CN of 
peripheral leukocytes is a biomarker that augments the predictive power for 
future diabetes of A1C and OGTT. We believe that these results could provide 
invaluable information for developing strategies for the management of diabetes.

DOI: 10.1038/srep43203
PMCID: PMC5333082
PMID: 28251996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.