1. Sci Rep. 2017 Mar 3;7:43337. doi: 10.1038/srep43337.

The role of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase-aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway in the 
TLR4-induced tolerogenic phenotype in human DCs.

Salazar F(1), Awuah D(1), Negm OH(1)(2), Shakib F(1), Ghaemmaghami AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Medical Microbiology and Immunology Department, Mansoura University, Egypt.

A controlled inflammatory response is required for protection against infection, 
but persistent inflammation causes tissue damage. Dendritic cells (DCs) have a 
unique capacity to promote both inflammatory and anti-inflammatory processes. 
One key mechanism involved in DC-mediated immunosuppression is the expression of 
tryptophan-metabolizing enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). IDO has been 
implicated in diverse processes in health and disease but its role in endotoxin 
tolerance in human DCs is still controversial. Here we investigated the role of 
IDO in shaping DCs phenotype and function under endotoxin tolerance conditions. 
Our data show that TLR4 ligation in LPS-primed DCs, induced higher levels of 
both IDO isoforms together with the transcription factor aryl-hydrocarbon 
receptor (AhR), compared to unprimed controls. Additionally, LPS conditioning 
induced an anti-inflammatory phenotype in DCs - with an increase in IL-10 and 
higher expression of programmed death ligand (PD-L)1 and PD-L2 - which were 
partially dependent on IDO. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the AhR-IDO 
pathway was responsible for the preferential activation of non-canonical NF-ÎºB 
pathway in LPS-conditioned DCs. These data provide new insight into the 
mechanisms of the TLR4-induced tolerogenic phenotype in human DCs, which can 
help the better understanding of processes involved in induction and resolution 
of chronic inflammation and tolerance.

DOI: 10.1038/srep43337
PMCID: PMC5335671
PMID: 28256612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.