1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Feb 15;8:205. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00205. eCollection
 2017.

Discovery and Characterization of Diazenylaryl Sulfonic Acids as Inhibitors of 
Viral and Bacterial Neuraminidases.

Hoffmann A(1), Richter M(1), von Grafenstein S(2), Walther E(1), Xu Z(1), 
Schumann L(1), Grienke U(3), Mair CE(3), Kramer C(2), Rollinger JM(3), Liedl 
KR(2), Schmidtke M(1), Kirchmair J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology and Antiviral Therapy, Jena University Hospital Jena, 
Germany.
(2)Centre for Chemistry and Biomedicine, Institute of General, Inorganic and 
Theoretical Chemistry, University of Innsbruck Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Centre for Chemistry and Biomedicine, Institute of General, Inorganic and 
Theoretical Chemistry, University of InnsbruckInnsbruck, Austria; Center for 
Bioinformatics, University of HamburgHamburg, Germany.

Viral neuraminidases are an established drug target to combat influenza. Severe 
complications observed in influenza patients are primarily caused by secondary 
infections with e.g., Streptococcus pneumoniae. These bacteria engage in a 
lethal synergism with influenza A viruses (IAVs) and also express 
neuraminidases. Therefore, inhibitors with dual activity on viral and bacterial 
neuraminidases are expected to be advantageous for the treatment of influenza 
infections. Here we report on the discovery and characterization of diazenylaryl 
sulfonic acids as dual inhibitors of viral and Streptococcus pneumoniae 
neuraminidase. The initial hit came from a virtual screening campaign for 
inhibitors of viral neuraminidases. For the most active compound, 
7-[2-[4-[2-[4-[2-(2-hydroxy-3,6-disulfo-1-naphthalenyl)diazenyl]-2-methylphenyl]diazenyl]-2-methylphenyl]diazenyl]-1,3-naphthalenedisulfonic 
acid (NSC65847; 1), the Ki-values measured in a fluorescence-based assay were 
lower than 1.5 Î¼M for both viral and pneumococcal neuraminidases. The compound 
also inhibited N1 virus variants containing neuraminidase inhibitor 
resistance-conferring substitutions. Via enzyme kinetics and nonlinear 
regression modeling, 1 was suggested to impair the viral neuraminidases and 
pneumococcal neuraminidase with a mixed-type inhibition mode. Given its 
antiviral and antipneumococcal activity, 1 was identified as a starting point 
for the development of novel, dual-acting anti-infectives.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00205
PMCID: PMC5309245
PMID: 28261167