1. Zookeys. 2017 Mar 2;(659):1-185. doi: 10.3897/zookeys.659.10717. eCollection 
2017.

Taxonomic revision and cladistic analysis of Avicularia Lamarck, 1818 (Araneae, 
Theraphosidae, Aviculariinae) with description of three new aviculariine genera.

Fukushima CS(1), Bertani R(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório Especial de Ecologia e Evolução, Instituto Butantan, Av. Vital 
Brazil, 1500 CEP 05503-900, São Paulo, Brazil.

The genus Avicularia Lamarck, 1818 is revised and all species are rediagnosed. 
The type species, described as Aranea avicularia Linnaeus, 1758, is the oldest 
mygalomorph species described and its taxonomic history is extensive and 
confusing. Cladistic analyses using both equal and implied weights were carried 
out with a matrix of 46 taxa from seven theraphosid subfamilies, and 71 
morphological and ecological characters. The optimal cladogram found with Piwe 
and concavity = 6 suggests Avicularia and Aviculariinae are monophyletic. 
Subfamily Aviculariinae includes Avicularia Lamarck, 1818, Typhochlaena C. L. 
Koch, 1850, Tapinauchenius Ausserer, 1871, Stromatopelma Karsch, 1881, Ephebopus 
Simon, 1892, Psalmopoeus Pocock, 1895, Heteroscodra Pocock, 1899, Iridopelma 
Pocock, 1901, Pachistopelma Pocock, 1901, Ybyraporagen. n., Caribenagen. n., and 
Antillenagen. n. The clade is supported by well-developed scopulae on tarsi and 
metatarsi, greatly extended laterally. Avicularia synapomorphies are juveniles 
bearing black tarsi contrasting with other lighter articles; spermathecae with 
an accentuated outwards curvature medially, and male palpal bulb with embolus 
medial portion and tegulum's margin form an acute angle in retrolateral view. 
Avicularia is composed of twelve species, including three new species: 
Avicularia avicularia (Linnaeus, 1818), Avicularia glauca Simon, 1891, 
Avicularia variegata (F. O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1896) stat. n., Avicularia 
minatrix Pocock, 1903, Avicularia taunayi (Mello-Leitão, 1920), Avicularia 
juruensis Mello-Leitão, 1923, Avicularia rufa Schiapelli & Gerschman, 1945, 
Avicularia purpurea Kirk, 1990, Avicularia hirschii Bullmer et al. 2006, 
Avicularia merianaesp. n., Avicularia lynnaesp. n., and Avicularia caeisp. n.. 
Avicularia species are distributed throughout Mexico, Costa Rica, Panama, 
Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana, Colombia, 
Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, and Brazil. Three new genera are erected to accommodate 
former Avicularia species: Caribenagen. n., composed of Caribena laeta (C. L. 
Koch, 1842), comb. n. and Caribena versicolor (Walckenaer, 1837), comb. n.; 
Antillenagen. n., with a single species, Antillena rickwesti (Bertani & Huff, 
2013), comb. n., both from the Caribbean; and Ybyraporagen. n., composed of 
Ybyrapora sooretama (Bertani & Fukushima, 2009), comb. n., Ybyrapora gamba 
(Bertani & Fukushima, 2009), comb. n. and Ybyrapora diversipes (C. L. Koch, 
1842), comb. n. from Brazilian rainforest. The subspecies Avicularia avicularia 
variegata F. O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1896 is elevated to species status, resulting 
in the combination Avicularia variegata (F. O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1896) stat. 
n.. The following new synonymies are established: Avicularia velutina Simon 
1889, Avicularia exilis Strand, 1907, Avicularia ancylochyra Mello-Leitão, 1923, 
Avicularia cuminami Mello-Leitão, 1930, and Avicularia nigrotaeniata 
Mello-Leitão, 1940 are junior synonyms of Avicularia avicularia; Avicularia 
bicegoi Mello-Leitão, 1923 is a junior synonym of Avicularia variegatastat. n., 
and Avicularia urticans Schmidt, 1994 is a junior synonym of Avicularia 
juruensis Mello-Leitão, 1923. Species transferred to other genera: Avicularia 
affinis (Nicolet, 1849) is transferred to Euathlus Ausserer, 1875, making the 
new combination Euathlus affinis (Nicolet, 1849), comb. n.; Avicularia 
subvulpina Strand, 1906 is transferred to Grammostola Simon, 1892, making the 
new combination Grammostola subvulpina (Strand, 1906), comb. n.; Avicularia 
aymara (Chamberlin, 1916) is transferred to Thrixopelma Schmidt, 1994, making 
the new combination Thrixopelma aymara (Chamberlin, 1916), comb. n.; Avicularia 
leporina (C. L. Koch, 1841) and Avicularia plantaris (C. L. Koch, 1842) are 
transferred to Iridopelma Pocock, 1901, making the new combinations Iridopelma 
leporina (C. L. Koch, 1841), comb. n. and Iridopelma plantaris (C. L. Koch, 
1842), comb. n.; the two last species are considered nomina dubia. The following 
species are considered nomina dubia: Avicularia hirsutissima (C. L. Koch, 1842) 
nomen dubium; Ischnocolus hirsutum Ausserer, 1875 nomen dubium; Ischnocolus 
gracilis Keyserling, 1891 nomen dubium; Avicularia arabica (Strand, 1908) nomen 
dubium; Araneus hirtipes (Fabricius, 1787) nomen dubium; Avicularia ochracea 
(Perty, 1833) nomen dubium; Avicularia walckenaerii (Perty, 1833) nomen dubium; 
Avicularia testacea (C. L. Koch, 1841) nomen dubium; Avicularia detrita (C. L. 
Koch, 1842) nomen dubium; Ischnocolus doleschalli Ausserer, 1871 nomen dubium; 
Avicularia metallica Ausserer, 1875 nomen dubium; Avicularia rapax (Ausserer, 
1875) nomen dubium; Avicularia holmbergi Thorell, 1890 nomen dubium; Avicularia 
aurantiaca Bauer, 1996 nomen dubium; Avicularia azuraklaasi Tesmoingt, 1996 
nomen dubium; Avicularia huriana Tesmoingt, 1996 nomen dubium; Avicularia 
ulrichea Tesmoingt, 1996 nomen dubium; Avicularia braunshauseni Tesmoingt, 1999 
nomen dubium; Avicularia geroldi Tesmoingt, 1999 nomen dubium; Avicularia 
soratae Strand, 1907 nomen dubium; Avicularia fasciculata Strand, 1907 nomen 
dubium; Avicularia fasciculata clara Strand, 1907 nomen dubium; and Avicularia 
surinamensis Strand, 1907 nomen dubium. Avicularia vestiaria (De Geer, 1778) is 
considered nomen nudum. Keys are provided for identification of all aviculariine 
genera, as well as to Avicularia, Caribenagen. n., Ybyraporagen. n. and 
Antillenagen. n. species. Maps with records and information on species habitat 
are also presented. Lectotypes are newly designed for Avicularia avicularia, 
Avicularia variegatastat. n., Avicularia juruensis, Caribena laetacomb. n., 
Euathlus affiniscomb. n. and a neotype is established for Caribena 
versicolorcomb. n.

DOI: 10.3897/zookeys.659.10717
PMCID: PMC5345366
PMID: 28331414