1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 May 5;45(8):4655-4666. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx114.

Inhibition of homologous phosphorolytic ribonucleases by citrate may represent 
an evolutionarily conserved communicative link between RNA degradation and 
central metabolism.

Stone CM(1), Butt LE(1), Bufton JC(1), Lourenco DC(1), Gowers DM(1), Pickford 
AR(1), Cox PA(2), Vincent HA(1), Callaghan AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences and Institute of Biomedical and Biomolecular 
Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, PO1 2DY, UK.
(2)School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences and Institute of Biomedical and 
Biomolecular Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, PO1 2DT, UK.

Ribonucleases play essential roles in all aspects of RNA metabolism, including 
the coordination of post-transcriptional gene regulation that allows organisms 
to respond to internal changes and environmental stimuli. However, as inherently 
destructive enzymes, their activity must be carefully controlled. Recent 
research exemplifies the repertoire of regulatory strategies employed by 
ribonucleases. The activity of the phosphorolytic exoribonuclease, 
polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase), has previously been shown to be modulated 
by the Krebs cycle metabolite citrate in Escherichia coli. Here, we provide 
evidence for the existence of citrate-mediated inhibition of ribonucleases in 
all three domains of life. In silico molecular docking studies predict that 
citrate will bind not only to bacterial PNPases from E. coli and Streptomyces 
antibioticus, but also PNPase from human mitochondria and the structurally and 
functionally related archaeal exosome complex from Sulfolobus solfataricus. 
Critically, we show experimentally that citrate also inhibits the 
exoribonuclease activity of bacterial, eukaryotic and archaeal PNPase homologues 
in vitro. Furthermore, bioinformatics data, showing key citrate-binding motifs 
conserved across a broad range of PNPase homologues, suggests that this 
regulatory mechanism may be widespread. Overall, our data highlight a 
communicative link between ribonuclease activity and central metabolism that may 
have been conserved through the course of evolution.

Â© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx114
PMCID: PMC5416783
PMID: 28334892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]