1. Sci Rep. 2017 Mar 24;7(1):412. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-00341-2.

Quantitative profiling of glycerophospholipids during mouse and human macrophage 
differentiation using targeted mass spectrometry.

Zhang C(1), Wang Y(2), Wang F(2), Wang Z(2), Lu Y(1), Xu Y(2), Wang K(2), Shen 
H(2), Yang P(2), Li S(3), Qin X(4), Yu H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi, China.
(2)Department of Systems Biology for Medicine and Institutes of Biomedical 
Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi, China. lis8858@126.com.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi, China. qinxue919@126.com.
(5)Department of Systems Biology for Medicine and Institutes of Biomedical 
Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China. 
hongxiuyu@fudan.edu.cn.

Macrophage lipid metabolism plays a pivotal role in innate and adaptive immune 
responses. Previous studies have shown that this process plays a role in 
infections and contributes to the pathogenesis of diabetes, atherosclerosis, and 
other immunometabolic diseases. M1 macrophages, or classically activated 
macrophages, are key players in the defense against bacterial infections. M2 
macrophages, or alternatively activated macrophages, are involved in 
anti-inflammatory responses. Using the multiple reaction monitoring method, we 
identified changes in lipid composition during the differentiation of human and 
murine macrophages. We detected over 300 lipid molecules in mammalian 
macrophages, and we observed a striking shift in the composition of 
glycerophospholipids (GLs) from saturated and monounsaturated to polyunsaturated 
during human macrophage polarization. Moreover, M2 macrophages showed a higher 
level of lysophospholipids (lysoGLs) than did M1 macrophages. The lysoPI species 
increased in human and mouse M2 macrophages, suggesting that they may be 
involved in M2 macrophage polarization and anti-inflammatory processes. 
Collectively, these results indicate that lipids may play a role in the pro- and 
anti-inflammatory activities of macrophages and may be markers of the macrophage 
activation state.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-00341-2
PMCID: PMC5428309
PMID: 28341849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.