1. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2017 Oct;17(5):361-373. doi: 10.1007/s40256-017-0221-8.

The Real Role of β-Blockers in Daily Cardiovascular Therapy.

Dézsi CA(1), Szentes V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Petz Aladár County Teaching Hospital, Vasvári Pál 
str. 2-4, 9024, Győr, Hungary. dcsa62@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Petz Aladár County Teaching Hospital, Vasvári Pál 
str. 2-4, 9024, Győr, Hungary.

The role of β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers) in cardiovascular therapy 
has been subject to diverse trends and changes over the decades. With the advent 
of a wide variety of excellent drugs for the treatment of antihypertension, 
β-blockers have been relegated from the first-line treatment of essential 
hypertension. However, they remain the drugs of first choice in recommendations 
from the respective medical societies for heart failure, coronary artery 
disease, and atrial fibrillation as well as in hypertension complicated with 
heart failure, angina pectoris, or prior myocardial infarction. When indicated, 
cardioselective β-blockers should be prescribed in patients with diabetes 
mellitus or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. We review the available 
evidence for the use of β-blockers in clinical conditions in which 
recommendations can be made for everyday practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s40256-017-0221-8
PMCID: PMC5591796
PMID: 28357786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors take responsibility for all aspects 
of the reliability and freedom from bias of the data presented and their 
discussed interpretation. FUNDING: No external funding was used in the 
preparation of this manuscript. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Csaba András Dézsi and 
Veronika Szentes have no conflicts of interest that are directly relevant to the 
contents of this manuscript.