1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 31;12(3):e0174667. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174667. 
eCollection 2017.

Targeted high throughput sequencing in hereditary ataxia and spastic paraplegia.

Iqbal Z(1), Rydning SL(1)(2), Wedding IM(1)(2), Koht J(2)(3), Pihlstr√∏m L(1)(2), 
Rengmark AH(1), Henriksen SP(1), Tallaksen CM(1)(2), Toft M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Neurology, Drammen Hospital, Vestre Viken Hospital Trust, 
Drammen, Norway.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2017 Oct 12;12(10):e0186571. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186571.

Hereditary ataxia and spastic paraplegia are heterogeneous monogenic 
neurodegenerative disorders. To date, a large number of individuals with such 
disorders remain undiagnosed. Here, we have assessed molecular diagnosis by gene 
panel sequencing in 105 early and late-onset hereditary ataxia and spastic 
paraplegia probands, in whom extensive previous investigations had failed to 
identify the genetic cause of disease. Pathogenic and likely-pathogenic variants 
were identified in 20 probands (19%) and variants of uncertain significance in 
ten probands (10%). Together these accounted for 30 probands (29%) and involved 
18 different genes. Among several interesting findings, dominantly inherited 
KIF1A variants, p.(Val8Met) and p.(Ile27Thr) segregated in two independent 
families, both presenting with a pure spastic paraplegia phenotype. Two 
homozygous missense variants, p.(Gly4230Ser) and p.(Leu4221Val) were found in 
SACS in one consanguineous family, presenting with spastic ataxia and isolated 
cerebellar atrophy. The average disease duration in probands with pathogenic and 
likely-pathogenic variants was 31 years, ranging from 4 to 51 years. In 
conclusion, this study confirmed and expanded the clinical phenotypes associated 
with known disease genes. The results demonstrate that gene panel sequencing and 
similar sequencing approaches can serve as efficient diagnostic tools for 
different heterogeneous disorders. Early use of such strategies may help to 
reduce both costs and time of the diagnostic process.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174667
PMCID: PMC5375131
PMID: 28362824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.