1. Neural Plast. 2017;2017:1389475. doi: 10.1155/2017/1389475. Epub 2017 Mar 8.

Assessed and Emerging Biomarkers in Stroke and Training-Mediated Stroke 
Recovery: State of the Art.

Gandolfi M(1), Smania N(1), Vella A(2), Picelli A(1), Chirumbolo S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy; UOC Neurorehabilitation, AOUI Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Immunology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata, Verona, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy.

Since the increasing update of the biomolecular scientific literature, 
biomarkers in stroke have reached an outstanding and remarkable revision in the 
very recent years. Besides the diagnostic and prognostic role of some 
inflammatory markers, many further molecules and biological factors have been 
added to the list, including tissue derived cytokines, growth factor-like 
molecules, hormones, and microRNAs. The literatures on brain derived growth 
factor and other neuroimmune mediators, bone-skeletal muscle biomarkers, 
cellular and immunity biomarkers, and the role of microRNAs in stroke recovery 
were reviewed. To date, biomarkers represent a possible challenge in the 
diagnostic and prognostic evaluation of stroke onset, pathogenesis, and 
recovery. Many molecules are still under investigation and may become promising 
and encouraging biomarkers. Experimental and clinical research should increase 
this list and promote new discoveries in this field, to improve stroke diagnosis 
and treatment.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/1389475
PMCID: PMC5360976
PMID: 28373915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.