1. Sci Rep. 2017 Apr 11;7:45904. doi: 10.1038/srep45904.

Cretaceous origin of the unique prey-capture apparatus in mega-diverse genus: 
stem lineage of Steninae rove beetles discovered in Burmese amber.

Żyła D(1), Yamamoto S(2), Wolf-Schwenninger K(3), Solodovnikov A(1).

Author information:
(1)Natural History Museum of Denmark, Biosystematics Section, Zoological Museum, 
Universitetsparken 15, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Entomological Laboratory, Graduate School of Bioresource and Bioenvironmental 
Sciences, Kyushu University, Hakozaki 6-10-1, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan.
(3)Staatliches Museum für Naturkunde Stuttgart, Präparation Bernstein und 
Entomologie, Rosenstein 1, 70191 Stuttgart, Germany.

Stenus is the largest genus of rove beetles and the second largest among 
animals. Its evolutionary success was associated with the adhesive labial 
prey-capture apparatus, a unique apomorphy of that genus. Definite Stenus with 
prey-capture apparatus are known from the Cenozoic fossils, while the age and 
early evolution of Steninae was hardly ever hypothesized. Our study of several 
Cretaceous Burmese amber inclusions revealed a stem lineage of Steninae that 
possibly possesses the Stenus-like prey-capture apparatus. Phylogenetic analysis 
of extinct and extant taxa of Steninae and putatively allied subfamilies of 
Staphylinidae with parsimony and Bayesian approaches resolved the Burmese amber 
lineage as a member of Steninae. It justified the description of a new extinct 
stenine genus Festenus with two new species, F. robustus and F. gracilis. The 
Late Cretaceous age of Festenus suggests an early origin of prey-capture 
apparatus in Steninae that, perhaps, drove the evolution towards the crown 
Stenus. Our analysis confirmed the well-established sister relationships between 
Steninae and Euaesthetinae and resolved Scydmaeninae as their next closest 
relative, the latter having no stable position in recent phylogenetic studies of 
rove beetles. Close affiliation of Megalopsidiinae, a subfamily often considered 
as a sister group to Euaesthetinae + Steninae clade, is rejected.

DOI: 10.1038/srep45904
PMCID: PMC5387741
PMID: 28397786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.