1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 13;12(4):e0175786. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175786. 
eCollection 2017.

Characterizing the anti-inflammatory and tissue protective actions of a novel 
Annexin A1 peptide.

Perretti M(1), Di Filippo C(2), D'Amico M(2), Dalli J(1).

Author information:
(1)The William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of 
Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples, 
Italy.

Inflammation in now appreciated to be at the centre of may diseases that affect 
Western civilization. Current therapeutics for managing these conditions may 
interfere with the host response leading to immune suppression. We recently 
developed an annexin (Anx) A1-derived peptide, coined CR-AnxA12-50, which 
displays potent pro-resolving and tissue protective actions. Herein, we designed 
a novel peptide using CR-AnxA12-50 as a template that was significantly more 
resistant to neutrophil-mediated degradation. This peptide, termed CR-AnxA12-48, 
retained high affinity and specificity to the pro-resolving Lipoxin A4 receptor 
(ALX) with an IC50 of ~20nM. CR-AnxA12-48 dose dependently (100fM-10nM) promoted 
the efferocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils, an action that was mediated by the 
murine orthologue of human ALX. The neutrophil-directed actions were also 
retained with human primary cells were CR-AnxA12-48 reduced human neutrophil 
recruitment to activated endothelial cells at concentrations as low as 100 pM. 
This protective action was mediated by human ALX, since incubation of 
neutrophils with an anti-ALX antibody reversed this anti-inflammatory actions of 
CR-AnxA12-48. Administration of this peptide to mice during dermal inflammation 
led to a significant and dose dependent decrease in neutrophil recruitment. This 
reduction in neutrophil numbers was more pronounced than that displayed by the 
parent peptide CR-AnxA12-50. CR-AnxA12-48 was also cardioprotecitve reducing 
infarct size and systemic chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 5 concentration following 
ischemia reperfusion injury. These findings identify CR-AnxA12-48 as a new ALX 
agonist that regulates phagocyte responses and displays tissue-protective 
actions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175786
PMCID: PMC5391094
PMID: 28407017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: JD and MP are inventors on 
a patent no. US20130072446 A1 entitled INFLAMMATORY PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTS that 
is licenced for ResoTher Pharma for further development. The other authors have 
no financial conflicts of interest. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS 
ONE policies on sharing data and materials.