1. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2017 May 17;8(5):943-954. doi:
10.1021/acschemneuro.7b00026.  Epub 2017 Apr 13.

Serotonin and Serotonin Transporters in the Adrenal Medulla: A Potential Hub for 
Modulation of the Sympathetic Stress Response.

Brindley RL(1), Bauer MB(1), Blakely RD(2), Currie KPM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center , 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, United States.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, and 
Florida Atlantic University Brain Institute, Florida Atlantic University , 
Jupiter, Florida 33458, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University , Nashville, Tennessee 
37232, United States.

Serotonin (5-HT) is an important neurotransmitter in the central nervous system 
where it modulates circuits involved in mood, cognition, movement, arousal, and 
autonomic function. The 5-HT transporter (SERT; SLC6A4) is a key regulator of 
5-HT signaling, and genetic variations in SERT are associated with various 
disorders including depression, anxiety, and autism. This review focuses on the 
role of SERT in the sympathetic nervous system. Autonomic/sympathetic 
dysfunction is evident in patients with depression, anxiety, and other diseases 
linked to serotonergic signaling. Experimentally, loss of SERT function (SERT 
knockout mice or chronic pharmacological block) has been reported to augment the 
sympathetic stress response. Alterations to serotonergic signaling in the CNS 
and thus central drive to the peripheral sympathetic nervous system are presumed 
to underlie this augmentation. Although less widely recognized, SERT is robustly 
expressed in chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla, the neuroendocrine arm of 
the sympathetic nervous system. Adrenal chromaffin cells do not synthesize 5-HT 
but accumulate small amounts by SERT-mediated uptake. Recent evidence 
demonstrated that 5-HT1A receptors inhibit catecholamine secretion from adrenal 
chromaffin cells via an atypical mechanism that does not involve modulation of 
cellular excitability or voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. This raises the 
possibility that the adrenal medulla is a previously unrecognized peripheral hub 
for serotonergic control of the sympathetic stress response. As a framework for 
future investigation, a model is proposed in which stress-evoked adrenal 
catecholamine secretion is fine-tuned by SERT-modulated autocrine 5-HT 
signaling.

DOI: 10.1021/acschemneuro.7b00026
PMCID: PMC5541362
PMID: 28406285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.