1. Neurobiol Dis. 2017 Sep;105:273-282. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2017.04.010. Epub 2017
 Apr 11.

Regulation of motor proteins, axonal transport deficits and adult-onset 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Brady ST(1), Morfini GA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, USA; Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA. 
Electronic address: stbrady@uic.edu.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, USA; Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA. 
Electronic address: gmorfini@uic.edu.

Neurons affected in a wide variety of unrelated adult-onset neurodegenerative 
diseases (AONDs) typically exhibit a "dying back" pattern of degeneration, which 
is characterized by early deficits in synaptic function and neuritic pathology 
long before neuronal cell death. Consistent with this observation, multiple 
unrelated AONDs including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's 
disease, and several motor neuron diseases feature early alterations in 
kinase-based signaling pathways associated with deficits in axonal transport 
(AT), a complex cellular process involving multiple intracellular trafficking 
events powered by microtubule-based motor proteins. These pathogenic events have 
important therapeutic implications, suggesting that a focus on preservation of 
neuronal connections may be more effective to treat AONDs than addressing 
neuronal cell death. While the molecular mechanisms underlying AT abnormalities 
in AONDs are still being analyzed, evidence has accumulated linking those to a 
well-established pathological hallmark of multiple AONDs: altered patterns of 
neuronal protein phosphorylation. Here, we present a short overview on the 
biochemical heterogeneity of major motor proteins for AT, their regulation by 
protein kinases, and evidence revealing cell type-specific AT specializations. 
When considered together, these findings may help explain how independent 
pathogenic pathways can affect AT differentially in the context of each AOND.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2017.04.010
PMCID: PMC5522763
PMID: 28411118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]