1. Sci Rep. 2017 Apr 20;7:45523. doi: 10.1038/srep45523.

YAP modulates TGF-β1-induced simultaneous apoptosis and EMT through upregulation 
of the EGF receptor.

Liu Y(1), He K(1), Hu Y(1), Guo X(1), Wang D(1), Shi W(1), Li J(1), Song J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular 
Cell Science, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, Shanghai Institute 
of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200031, 
China.

YAP is a transcriptional co-regulator that plays important roles in various 
patho-physiological processes, including the survival and death of cells. 
However, the effect of YAP on apoptosis and EMT, simultaneously mediated by 
TGF-β1, is not known. In this study, we demonstrate that YAP can modulate cell 
fate of apoptosis versus EMT by acting as a surviving factor. Overexpression of 
YAP in mouse mammary epithelial (NMuMG) cells suppressed TGF-β1-induced 
apoptosis, which shifted the cellular response predominantly toward EMT. In 
contrast, knockdown of YAP induced spontaneous apoptosis and enhanced 
TGF-β1-induced apoptosis, leading to a sharp decrease in the proportion of 
surviving cells that underwent EMT. These data suggest that YAP is an essential 
factor for modulating cellular responses to TGF-β1. Further investigation showed 
that YAP could regulate the expression level and activation of EGFR. Knockdown 
or inhibition of EGFR abolished the suppressive effect of YAP on apoptosis, 
whereas activation of EGFR by EGF significantly reduced apoptosis caused by the 
knockdown of YAP. The results indicate that EGFR and its activation are critical 
for YAP-mediated suppression of TGF-β1-induced apoptosis. This study provides a 
new understanding of the regulatory mechanism underlying the determination of 
cell fate in response to TGF-β1-mediated simultaneous apoptosis and EMT.

DOI: 10.1038/srep45523
PMCID: PMC5397873
PMID: 28425446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.