1. Alcohol. 2017 May;60:77-82. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2017.01.009. Epub 2017 Mar 
12.

Binge alcohol alters PNPLA3 levels in liver through epigenetic mechanism 
involving histone H3 acetylation.

Restrepo RJ(1), Lim RW(1), Korthuis RJ(1), Shukla SD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Pharmacology & Physiology, University of Missouri 
School of Medicine, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Pharmacology & Physiology, University of Missouri 
School of Medicine, Columbia, MO 65212, USA. Electronic address: 
shuklaSD@missouri.edu.

The human PNPLA3 (patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing 3) gene codes for 
a protein which is highly expressed in adipose tissue and liver, and is 
implicated in lipid homeostasis. While PNPLA3 protein contains regions 
homologous to functional lipolytic proteins, the regulation of its tissue 
expression is reflective of lipogenic genes. A naturally occurring genetic 
variant of PNPLA3 in humans has been linked to increased susceptibility to 
alcoholic liver disease. We have examined the modulatory effect of alcohol on 
PNPLA3 protein and mRNA expression as well as the association of its gene 
promoter with acetylated histone H3K9 by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) 
assay in rat hepatocytes in vitro, and in vivo in mouse and rat models of acute 
binge, chronic, and chronic followed by acute binge ethanol administration. 
Protein expression of PNPLA3 was significantly increased by alcohol in all three 
models used. PNPLA3 mRNA also increased, albeit to a varying degree. ChIP assay 
using H3AcK9 antibody showed increased association with the promoter of PNPLA3 
in hepatocytes and in mouse liver. This was less evident in rat livers in vivo 
except under chronic treatment. It is concluded for the first time that histone 
acetylation plays a role in the modulation of PNPLA3 levels in the liver exposed 
to binge ethanol both in vitro and in vivo.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2017.01.009
PMCID: PMC5533086
PMID: 28433418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]