1. Mol Biol Cell. 2017 Jun 15;28(12):1701-1711. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E16-12-0846.
Epub  2017 Apr 27.

Microtubule dynamics drive enhanced chromatin motion and mobilize telomeres in 
response to DNA damage.

Lawrimore J(1), Barry TM(1), Barry RM(1), York AC(1), Friedman B(1), Cook DM(1), 
Akialis K(1), Tyler J(1), Vasquez P(2), Yeh E(1), Bloom K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599.
(2)Department of Mathematics, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208.
(3)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599 kerry_bloom@unc.edu.

Chromatin exhibits increased mobility on DNA damage, but the biophysical basis 
for this behavior remains unknown. To explore the mechanisms that drive DNA 
damage-induced chromosome mobility, we use single-particle tracking of tagged 
chromosomal loci during interphase in live yeast cells together with polymer 
models of chromatin chains. Telomeres become mobilized from sites on the nuclear 
envelope and the pericentromere expands after exposure to DNA-damaging agents. 
The magnitude of chromatin mobility induced by a single double-strand break 
requires active microtubule function. These findings reveal how relaxation of 
external tethers to the nuclear envelope and internal chromatin-chromatin 
tethers, together with microtubule dynamics, can mobilize the genome in response 
to DNA damage.

© 2017 Lawrimore et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for 
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it 
is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E16-12-0846
PMCID: PMC5469612
PMID: 28450453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]