1. Oncotarget. 2017 Apr 18;8(16):26600-26612. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.15722.

Epigenetically altered miR-1247 functions as a tumor suppressor in pancreatic 
cancer.

Yi JM(1), Kang EJ(1), Kwon HM(1), Bae JH(1), Kang K(2), Ahuja N(3), Yang K(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Center, Dongnam Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences 
(DIRAMS), Busan, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan, Korea, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Department of Surgery, Oncology, and Urology, The Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Altered expression of microRNAs has been strongly implicated in human cancers, 
and growing evidence is emerging that a number of miRNAs are downregulated in 
cancer associated with CpG island hypermethylation. Although pancreatic cancer 
is one of the most malignant human cancers, the roles of miRNAs underlying the 
tumorigenesis of pancreatic cancer are still poorly understood. In the present 
study, we explored the molecular functional role of microRNA-1247 as tumor 
suppressor associated with epigenetic alteration in pancreatic cancer. CpG 
islands methylation of miR-1247 is frequently observed in various pancreatic 
cancer cell lines and in primary pancreatic tumors, but not in normal pancreatic 
tissue. Ectopic expression of miR-1247 in five pancreatic cancer cell lines 
results in suppressing of cell growth, proliferation, migration, and invasion in 
vitro and tumorigenicity of pancreatic cancer cells in vivo. Interestingly, we 
found one putative target gene of miR-1247, regulator of chromosome condensation 
2 (RCC2), harbored miR-1247 target sequences in the 3' UTR of its mRNA. In 
functional studies in vitro to understand the interaction between miR-1247 and 
RCC2, decreasing of RCC2 gene expression by miR-1247 was observed by 
immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry at both mRNA and protein levels. 
Moreover, luciferase reporter assay confirmed that RCC2 was a direct target of 
miR-1247. Taken together, our data suggest that CpG island hypermethylation of 
miR-1247 is responsible for its downregulation in pancreatic cancer, and ectopic 
expression of miR-1247 functions as a potential tumor suppressor targeting RCC2 
in pancreatic cancer cells.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.15722
PMCID: PMC5432282
PMID: 28460450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.