1. Mutat Res Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 2017 Apr;816-817:1-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.mrgentox.2017.02.004. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

EPHX1 Y113H polymorphism is associated with increased risk of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease in Kazakhstan population.

Akparova A(1), Abdrakhmanova B(2), Banerjee N(3), Bersimbaev R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Biology and Genomics, L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National 
University, 2, Satpayev str., Astana, 010008, Kazakhstan. Electronic address: 
akparova-a@yandex.kz.
(2)Department of General Biology and Genomics, L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National 
University, 2, Satpayev str., Astana, 010008, Kazakhstan.
(3)Cell Biology and Physiology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical 
Biology, 4, Raja S. C. Mullick Road, Kolkata,700032, India. Electronic address: 
2006.nilanjana@gmail.com.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a type of obstructive lung 
disease characterized by long term poor airflow which worsens over time. It is 
considered to be one of the top five chronic diseases of the world in terms of 
morbidity and mortality. Genetic variability has been found to contribute to the 
development of COPD. Although association between gene polymorphisms in EPHX1 
and TNF-a genes and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have been found 
but till date no genetic association studies have been done in the COPD affected 
Kazakhstan population. The aim of the present work was to investigate the 
association between the Y113H polymorphism (rs1051740) in EPHX1 gene and -308G/A 
polymorphism (rs1800629) in TNF-a gene and COPD in Kazakhstan population. A 
case-control study was conducted in Astana and Akmola regions of Kazakhstan, 
involving 55 cases with COPD and 52 healthy individuals who served as the 
controls. The polymorphisms were determined using conventional PCR and Sanger 
sequencing method. Results show that for the EPHX1 gene Y113H polymorphism, the 
presence of an "C" allele (TC/CC genotype) was significantly overrepresented in 
the COPD patients compared to the controls. For the TNF-a gene -308G/A 
polymorphism, no significant difference was found between the two groups. Thus 
we found that, Y113H polymorphism in EPHX1 gene contributed to increased 
susceptibility to COPD in the Kazakhstan population.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2017.02.004
PMID: 28464990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]