1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2017 May 5;130(9):1055-1061. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.204926.

Relationship between Modulator Recognition Factor 2/AT-rich Interaction Domain 
5B Gene Variations and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus or Lipid Metabolism in a 
Northern Chinese Population.

Sun LL(1), Zhang SJ(1), Chen MJ(1), Elena K(1), Qiao H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150000, China.

BACKGROUND: Four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the modulator 
recognition factor 2/AT-rich interaction domain 5B (MRF2/ARID5B) gene located at 
chromosome 10q21.2 have been shown to be associated with both type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) and coronary artery disease in a Japanese cohort. This study 
aimed to investigate the relationship between these SNPs (rs2893880, rs10740055, 
rs7087507, rs10761600) and new-onset T2DM and lipid metabolism in a Northern 
Chinese population.
METHODS: This was a case-control study. The rs2893880, rs10740055, rs7087507, 
and rs10761600 genetic variants were genotyped by SNPscan and analyzed in 
relation to T2DM susceptibility in 2000 individuals (999 with newly diagnosed 
T2DM and 1001 controls without diabetes mellitus). Associations between the 
MRF2/ARID5B genetic models and T2DM were determined by multivariate logistic 
regression.
RESULTS: Regarding the rs10740055 SNP, AA was associated with a higher risk of 
T2DM compared with codominant-type CC (adjusted by sex, age, and body mass index 
[BMI], P= 0.041, odds ratio [OR] = 1.421, 95% confidence interval [CI] 
1.014-1.991). Meanwhile, AA individuals were at increased risk of presenting 
with T2DM compared with individuals with CC or a single C (adjusted by sex, age, 
and BMI, P= 0.034, OR = 1.366, 95% CI 1.023-1.824). With respect to rs10761600, 
AT contributed to a higher risk of T2DM compared with AA (adjusted by sex, age, 
and BMI, P= 0.013, OR = 1.585, 95% CI 1.101-2.282), while TT also increased the 
risk of presenting with T2DM compared with AA or A (adjusted by sex, age, and 
BMI, P= 0.004, OR = 1.632, 95% CI 1.166-2.284). High-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (HDL-C) levels were significantly different among the three 
genotypes of rs7087507 in the controls (P = 0.048) (GG>GA).
CONCLUSIONS: The present results identified MRF2/ARID5B as a potential 
susceptibility gene for new-onset T2DM in a Northern Chinese population, while 
the rs7087507 SNP was associated with HDL-C levels. Further larger studies are 
required to validate these findings.

DOI: 10.4103/0366-6999.204926
PMCID: PMC5421175
PMID: 28469100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.