1. PLoS One. 2017 May 5;12(5):e0177077. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177077. 
eCollection 2017.

TRPV1 activation power can switch an action mode for its polypeptide ligands.

Nikolaev MV(1), Dorofeeva NA(1), Komarova MS(1), Korolkova YV(2), Andreev 
YA(2)(3), Mosharova IV(2), Grishin EV(2), Tikhonov DB(1), Kozlov SA(2).

Author information:
(1)I.M.Sechenov Institute of Evolutionary Physiology and Biochemistry RAS, 
St.Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russia.
(3)Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Institute of Molecular 
Medicine, Moscow, Russia.

TRPV1 (vanilloid) receptors are activated by different types of stimuli 
including capsaicin, acidification and heat. Various ligands demonstrate 
stimulus-dependent action on TRPV1. In the present work we studied the action of 
polypeptides isolated from sea anemone Heteractis crispa (APHC1, APHC2 and 
APHC3) on rat TRPV1 receptors stably expressed in CHO cells using 
electrophysiological recordings, fluorescent Ca2+ measurements and molecular 
modeling. The APHCs potentiated TRPV1 responses to low (3-300 nM) concentrations 
of capsaicin but inhibited responses to high (>3.0 Î¼M) concentrations. The 
activity-dependent action was also found for TRPV1 responses to 2APB and 
acidification. Thus the action mode of APHCs is bimodal and depended on the 
activation stimuli strength-potentiation of low-amplitude responses and no 
effect/inhibition of high-amplitude responses. The double-gate model of TRPV1 
activation suggests that APHC-polypeptides may stabilize an intermediate state 
during the receptor activation. Molecular modeling revealed putative binding 
site at the outer loops of TRPV1. Binding to this site can directly affect 
activation by protons and can be allosterically coupled with capsaicin site. The 
results are important for further investigations of both TRPV1 and its ligands 
for potential therapeutic use.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177077
PMCID: PMC5419573
PMID: 28475608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.