1. Int J Cardiol. 2017 Aug 1;240:409-413. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2017.04.104. Epub
 2017 May 1.

Dietary inflammatory potential is linked to cardiovascular disease risk burden 
in the US adult population.

Tyrovolas S(1), Koyanagi A(2), Kotsakis GA(3), Panagiotakos D(4), Shivappa N(5), 
Wirth MD(5), Hébert JR(5), Haro JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, Fundació Sant Joan 
de Déu, Barcelona, Spain; Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental, CIBERSAM, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
s.tyrovolas@pssjd.org.
(2)Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, Fundació Sant Joan 
de Déu, Barcelona, Spain; Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental, CIBERSAM, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Periodontics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, School of Health Science and 
Education, Harokopio University, Athens, Greece.
(5)Cancer Prevention and Control Program, University of South Carolina, 
Columbia, SC, USA; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Arnold School 
of Public Health, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA; Connecting 
Health Innovations LLC, Columbia, SC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dietary guidelines are a key tool in the public health quiver. 
Single nutrients have been linked to cardiovascular diseases, but existing 
metrics do not capture the overall effect of diet on inflammatory diseases. The 
aim of this study was to examine the association between dietary inflammatory 
potential and cardiovascular diseases risk factors (CVD-RFs) in a 
nationally-representative sample of non-institutionalized US adults using data 
from the continuous National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 
(2007-2012).
METHODS AND RESULTS: A sample of 7880 non-institutionalized US adults aged 
≥20years provided data on dietary habits and CVD-RFs (obesity; diabetes 
mellitus; hypertension; hypercholesterolemia). The total number of CVD-RFs was 
summed for each individual to create a CVD-RF morbidity index (range 0-4) as the 
outcome variable, used both as ordinal and dichotomous (no CVD-RFs versus at 
least one CVD-RF) variables. The association between the Dietary Inflammatory 
Index (DII) and at least one CVD-RF was dose-dependent, with participants in the 
3rd and 4th quartile of DII (i.e., more pro-inflammatory dietary habits) being 
1.37 (95%CI=1.11-1.68) and 1.50 (95%CI=1.19-1.90) times more likely, 
respectively, to have at least one CVD-RF, as compared to participants in the 
1st quartile of DII scores. Similar results were obtained for the ordinal 
logistic regression using the CVD-RF morbidity index as the outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Among US adults aged ≥20years, pro-inflammatory dietary patterns, 
as assessed by the DII, were associated with increased odds for CVD-RFs. Dietary 
guidelines aimed at lowering the DII may reduce the CVD-RF burden in US adults.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2017.04.104
PMCID: PMC5518308
PMID: 28487151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: No author declares a 
conflict of interest. All authors declare no support from any organization for 
the submitted work other than that described above.