1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Apr 24;8:633. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00633. eCollection
 2017.

Isoprenoid Pyrophosphate-Dependent Transcriptional Regulation of Carotenogenesis 
in Corynebacterium glutamicum.

Henke NA(1), Heider SAE(1), Hannibal S(1), Wendisch VF(1), Peters-Wendisch P(1).

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Prokaryotes, Faculty of Biology, Center for Biotechnology, 
Bielefeld UniversityBielefeld, Germany.

Corynebacterium glutamicum is a natural producer of the C50 carotenoid 
decaprenoxanthin. The crtEcg0722crtBIYEb operon comprises most of its genes for 
terpenoid biosynthesis. The MarR-type regulator encoded upstream and in 
divergent orientation of the carotenoid biosynthesis operon has not yet been 
characterized. This regulator, named CrtR in this study, is encoded in many 
actinobacterial genomes co-occurring with terpenoid biosynthesis genes. CrtR was 
shown to repress the crt operon of C. glutamicum since DNA microarray 
experiments revealed that transcript levels of crt operon genes were increased 
10 to 70-fold in its absence. Transcriptional fusions of a promoter-less gfp 
gene with the crt operon and crtR promoters confirmed that CrtR represses its 
own gene and the crt operon. Gel mobility shift assays with purified His-tagged 
CrtR showed that CrtR binds to a region overlapping with the -10 and -35 
promoter sequences of the crt operon. Isoprenoid pyrophosphates interfered with 
binding of CrtR to its target DNA, a so far unknown mechanism for regulation of 
carotenogenesis. The molecular details of protein-ligand interactions remain to 
be studied. Decaprenoxanthin synthesis by C. glutamicum wild type was enhanced 
10 to 30-fold upon deletion of crtR and was decreased 5 to 6-fold as result of 
crtR overexpression. Moreover, deletion of crtR was shown as metabolic 
engineering strategy to improve production of native and non-native carotenoids 
including lycopene, Î²-carotene, C.p. 450 and sarcinaxanthin.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00633
PMCID: PMC5401885
PMID: 28484430