1. Arch Toxicol. 2017 Aug;91(8):2827-2835. doi: 10.1007/s00204-017-1989-7. Epub 
2017 May 18.

Catalytic properties and heat stabilities of novel recombinant human 
N-acetyltransferase 2 allozymes support existence of genetic heterogeneity 
within the slow acetylator phenotype.

Hein DW(1)(2), Doll MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology and James Graham Brown Cancer 
Center, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. 
d.hein@louisville.edu.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Louisville Health 
Sciences Center, Kosair Charities CTR-Room 303, 505 South Hancock Street, 
Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. d.hein@louisville.edu.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology and James Graham Brown Cancer 
Center, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.

Human N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) catalyzes the N-acetylation of numerous 
aromatic amine drugs such as sulfamethazine (SMZ) and hydrazine drugs such as 
isoniazid (INH). NAT2 also catalyzes the N-acetylation of aromatic amine 
carcinogens such as 2-aminofluorene and the O- and N,O-acetylation of aromatic 
amine and heterocyclic amine metabolites. Genetic polymorphism in NAT2 modifies 
drug efficacy and toxicity as well as cancer risk. Acetyltransferase catalytic 
activities and heat stability associated with six novel NAT2 haplotypes 
(NAT2*6C, NAT2*14C, NAT2*14D, NAT2*14E, NAT2*17, and NAT2*18) were compared with 
that of the reference NAT2*4 haplotype following recombinant expression in 
Escherichia coli. N-acetyltransferase activities towards SMZ and INH were 
significantly (p < 0.0001) lower when catalyzed by the novel recombinant human 
NAT2 allozymes compared to NAT2 4. SMZ and INH N-acetyltransferase activities 
catalyzed by NAT2 14C and NAT2 14D were significantly lower (p < 0.001) than 
catalyzed by NAT2 6C and NAT2 14E. N-Acetylation catalyzed by recombinant human 
NAT2 17 was over several hundred-fold lower than by recombinant NAT2 4 
precluding measurement of its kinetic or heat inactivation constants. Similar 
results were observed for the O-acetylation of N-hydroxy-2-aminofluorene and 
N-hydroxy-2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo [4,5-b] pyridine and the 
intramolecular N,O-acetylation of N-hydroxy-N-acetyl-2-aminofluorene. The 
apparent V max of the novel recombinant NAT2 allozymes NAT2 6C, NAT2 14C, NAT2 
14D, and NAT2 14E towards AF, 4-aminobiphenyl (ABP), and 
3,2'-dimethyl-4-aminobiphenyl (DMABP) were each significantly (p < 0.001) lower 
while their apparent K m values did not differ significantly (p > 0.05) from 
recombinant NAT2 4. The apparent V max catalyzed by NAT2 14C and NAT2 14D were 
significantly lower (p < 0.05) than the apparent V max catalyzed by NAT2 6C and 
NAT2 14E towards AF, ABP, and DMABP. Heat inactivation rate constants for 
recombinant human NAT2 14C, 14D, 14E, and 18 were significantly (p < 0.05) 
higher than NAT2 4. These results provide further evidence of genetic 
heterogeneity within the NAT2 slow acetylator phenotype.

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-017-1989-7
PMCID: PMC5710007
PMID: 28523442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None