1. Hum Mutat. 2017 Aug;38(8):922-931. doi: 10.1002/humu.23263. Epub 2017 Jun 9.

RettBASE: Rett syndrome database update.

Krishnaraj R(1), Ho G(1)(2), Christodoulou J(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)NSW Centre for Rett Syndrome Research, Western Sydney Genetics Program, 
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia.
(2)Disciplines of Child and Adolescent, Child Health, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia.
(3)Genetic Medicine, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
Australia.
(4)Neurodevelopmental Genomics Research Group, Murdoch Childrens Research 
Institute and Department of Paediatrics, Melbourne Medical School, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked progressive neurodevelopmental disorder that 
primarily affects females. Mutations in the MECP2 gene have been attributed as 
the major genetic cause of RTT. Recently, mutations in CDKL5 and FOXG1 genes 
have also been suggested to give rise to RTT, although subsequent more extensive 
studies suggest that diseases resulting from mutations in these two genes should 
be considered as distinct clinical entities. While the genetic basis for the RTT 
has been recognized, so far there is no effective cure for the disease and the 
treatments available are mainly aimed at ameliorating clinical problems 
associated with the disorder. The swift identification of the mutations in 
children is crucial for pursuing the best therapeutic care. RettBASE was created 
in 2002 as a MECP2 variant database and has grown to become a comprehensive 
variant database for RTT and related clinical phenotypes, containing a curated 
collection of variants for MECP2, CDKL5, and FOXG1 genes. Here, we describe the 
development and growth of RettBASE after its inception in 2001. Currently, 
RettBASE holds a total of 4,668 variants in MECP2, 498 variants in CDKL5, and 64 
variants in FOXG1.

Â© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23263
PMID: 28544139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]