1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2017 May 12;5:52. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2017.00052. 
eCollection 2017.

Neural Stem Cell Plasticity: Advantages in Therapy for the Injured Central 
Nervous System.

Ottoboni L(1), Merlini A(1), Martino G(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroimmunology Unit, Division of Neuroscience, Institute of Experimental 
Neurology, San Raffaele Scientific InstituteMilan, Italy.

The physiological and pathological properties of the neural germinal stem cell 
niche have been well-studied in the past 30 years, mainly in animals and within 
given limits in humans, and knowledge is available for the cyto-architectonic 
structure, the cellular components, the timing of development and the energetic 
maintenance of the niche, as well as for the therapeutic potential and the cross 
talk between neural and immune cells. In recent years we have gained detailed 
understanding of the potentiality of neural stem cells (NSCs), although we are 
only beginning to understand their molecular, metabolic, and epigenetic profile 
in physiopathology and, further, more can be invested to measure quantitatively 
the activity of those cells, to model in vitro their therapeutic responses or to 
predict interactions in silico. Information in this direction has been put 
forward for other organs but is still limited in the complex and very less 
accessible context of the brain. A comprehensive understanding of the behavior 
of endogenous NSCs will help to tune or model them toward a desired response in 
order to treat complex neurodegenerative diseases. NSCs have the ability to 
modulate multiple cellular functions and exploiting their plasticity might make 
them into potent and versatile cellular drugs.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2017.00052
PMCID: PMC5427132
PMID: 28553634