1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jun 27;8(26):43048-43060. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.17889.

6-mercaptopurine promotes energetic failure in proliferating T cells.

Fernández-Ramos AA(1)(2), Marchetti-Laurent C(1)(2), Poindessous V(1)(2), 
Antonio S(2)(3), Laurent-Puig P(1)(2)(4), Bortoli S(2)(3), Loriot MA(1)(2)(4), 
Pallet N(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR-S 1147, Centre Universitaire des Saints-Pères, 75006 Paris, 
France.
(2)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75006 Paris, France.
(3)INSERM UMR-S 1124, Centre Universitaire des Saints-Pères, 75006 Paris, 
France.
(4)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, 
Service de Biochimie, 75015 Paris, France.

The anticancer drug 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) inhibits de novo purine synthesis 
and acts as an antiproliferative agent by interfering with protein, DNA and RNA 
synthesis and promoting apoptosis. Metabolic reprogramming is crucial for tumor 
progression to foster cancer cells growth and proliferation, and is regulated by 
mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) 
as well as the oncogenes Myc and hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF-1α). We 
hypothesized that 6-MP impacts metabolic remodeling through its action on 
nucleotide synthesis. The aim of our study is to provide a comprehensive 
characterization of the metabolic changes induced by 6-MP in leukemic T cells. 
Our results indicate that exposition to 6-MP rapidly reduces intracellular ATP 
concentration, leading to the activation of AMPK. In turn, mTOR, an AMPK target, 
was inhibited, and the expression of HIF-1α and Myc was reduced upon 6-MP 
incubation. As a consequence of these inhibitions, glucose and glutamine fluxes 
were strongly decreased. Notably, no difference was observed on glucose uptake 
upon exposition to 6-MP. In conclusion, our findings provide new insights into 
how 6-MP profoundly impacts cellular energetic metabolism by reducing ATP 
production and decreasing glycolytic and glutaminolytic fluxes, and how 6-MP 
modifies human leukemic T cells metabolism with potential antiproliferative 
effects.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.17889
PMCID: PMC5522126
PMID: 28574837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.