1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2017 May 30;97(20):1580-1583. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0376-2491.2017.20.016.

[Analysis of haematological phenotype and mutation spectrum of δ-globin gene 
from Guangdong area in Chinese Han prenatal population].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhong LY(1), Xie YJ, Chen PS, Feng YW, Liu M, Huang B, He XH, Gan X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

Objective: To analyze the genotype-phenotype correlations among southern Chinese 
Han prenatal population in Guangdong area with δ-globin gene mutation, so as to 
enrich the delta-thalassemia gene mutations data. Methods: A total of 33 cases 
were selected in 7 580 patients during prenatal thalassemia trait screening, 
from January 2012 to May 2015(including 10 males and 23 females, aged 22-48 
years old). Complete blood cell count was performed on a XE 4000i automatic 
hemocyte analyzer. Hb, HbF and HbA2 were tested by high performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC). Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood samples using 
a whole blood genomic DNA extraction kit. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was 
used to amplify three different fragments corresponding to the exons and the 
regulatory sequences using three different couples of primers for the δ-globin 
gene. Results: Twenty one of the 33 samples were positive for the δ-globin gene 
defects. Four previously known mutations were detected: including 12 cases for 
-77(T>C)[HBD c. -127 (T>C)](57.14%), 4 cases for -30 (T>C)[HBD c. -80 
(T>C)](19.05%), 1 case for codon 10 (-G) (HBD c. 31delG)(4.76%), and 1 case for 
HBD c. 244 C>T(4.76%). Three new δ-globin gene defects which had not yet been 
reported in database were detected, including 1 case for HBD c. 
22_24delGAG(4.76%), 1 case for HBD c. 347 C>T(4.76%), and one case for HBD c. 
349 C>G(4.76%). Conclusions: -77 (T>C) is the most common mutation in Chinese 
southern prenatal population. Three new HBD gene mutations are referred in this 
report, which provide the valuable information for genetic counseling and 
prenatal diagnosis in Guangdong area.

Publisher: 目的： 
研究中国广东地区汉族产前人群中δ地贫球蛋白基因(HBD)的突变类型以及各类型突变频率，并统计分析各类型突变的血液学变化，以丰富人群δ-地贫基因突变图谱。 方法： 
收集2012年1月至2015年5月在我院进行产前地中海贫血筛查的样本7 580例，筛选出符合条件的33例患者，男10例，女23例，年龄22～48岁。用XE 
4000i血细胞分析仪进行血细胞分析，高效液相色谱法(HPLC)进行血红蛋白(Hb)、血红蛋白A2(HbA2)和血红蛋白F(HbF)定量检测。提取基因组DNA后进行PCR扩增、基因测序方法检测目标样本基因突变。 
结果： 33例患者中检出21例存在δ-地贫突变，突变率约为0.277%(21/7 
580)。检测出7种不同的突变类型。其中4种为已知的突变类型，包括12例基因型为-77(T>C)[HBD c．-127 
(T>C)](57.14%)，4例为-30 (T>C)[HBD c．-80 (T>C)](19.05%)，1例为codon 10 (-G) (HBD 
c．31delG)(4.76%)，1例为HBD c．244 C>T；另外新发现3种突变，1例为HBD c．22_24delGAG(4.76%)，1例为HBD 
c．347 C>T(4.76%)，1例为HBD c．349 C>G(4.76%)。 结论： 
δ地贫基因突变类型多样，-77(T>C)是广东地区汉族产前人群最常见的δ球蛋白基因突变。本研究报道的3例新突变丰富了δ球蛋白基因的突变谱，应重视产前人群的δ球蛋白基因检测，对产前咨询和诊断有重要意义。.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0376-2491.2017.20.016
PMID: 28592066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]