1. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Jun 9;18(6):1236. doi: 10.3390/ijms18061236.

The Roles of Long Non-Protein-Coding RNAs in Osteo-Adipogenic Lineage 
Commitment.

Yoshioka H(1), Yoshiko Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Calcified Tissue Biology, Hiroshima University Institute of 
Biomedical and Health Sciences, 734-8553 Hiroshima, Japan. 
hirotaka@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Calcified Tissue Biology, Hiroshima University Institute of 
Biomedical and Health Sciences, 734-8553 Hiroshima, Japan. 
yyuji@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Osteoblasts and adipocytes share a common mesenchymal progenitor in the bone 
marrow. This implies that a reciprocal relationship exists between osteogenic 
and adipogenic differentiation. Further, cells of osteoblast lineage 
transdifferentiate into adipocytes under some circumstances. Dysregulation of 
osteo-adipogenic fate-determination leads to bone diseases such as osteoporosis, 
accompanied by an increase in bone marrow adipose tissue. Thus, the fine-tuning 
of osteo-adipogenesis is necessary for bone homeostasis. Osteo-adipogenic 
progression is governed by a complex crosstalk of extrinsic signals, 
transcription factors, and epigenetic factors. Long non-protein-coding RNAs 
(lncRNAs) act in part as epigenetic regulators in a broad range of biological 
activities, such as chromatin organization, transcriptional regulation, 
post-translational modifications, and histone modification. In this review, we 
highlight the roles of epigenetic regulators, particularly lncRNAs, in the 
osteo-adipogenic lineage commitment of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells and 
the adipogenic transdifferentiation of osteoblasts.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms18061236
PMCID: PMC5486059
PMID: 28598385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.