1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jun 9;7(1):3193. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-03506-1.

Regulatory Functions of Cellular Energy Sensor SNF1-Related Kinase1 for Leaf 
Senescence Delay through ETHYLENE- INSENSITIVE3 Repression.

Kim GD(1), Cho YH(1), Yoo SD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, KOREA 
University, 02841, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Life Science, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, KOREA 
University, 02841, Seoul, Korea. sangdong@korea.ac.kr.

Aging of living organisms is governed by intrinsic developmental programs, of 
which progression is often under the regulation of their cellular energy status. 
For example, calorie restriction is known to slow down aging of heterotrophic 
organisms from yeasts to mammals. In autotrophic plants cellular energy 
deprivation by perturbation of photosynthesis or sugar metabolism is also shown 
to induce senescence delay. However, the underlying molecular and biochemical 
mechanisms remain elusive. Our plant cell-based functional and biochemical 
assays have demonstrated that SNF1-RELATED KINASE1 (SnRK1) directly interacts, 
phosphorylates, and destabilizes the key transcription factor ETHYLENE 
INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3) in senescence-promoting hormone ethylene signaling. 
Combining chemical manipulation and genetic validation using extended 
loss-of-function mutants and gain-of-function transgenic lines, we further 
revealed that a SnRK1 elicitor, 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea enables 
to slow down senescence-associated leaf degreening through the regulation of 
EIN3 in Arabidopsis. Our findings enlighten that an evolutionary conserved 
cellular energy sensor SnRK1 plays a role in fine-tuning of organ senescence 
progression to avoid sudden death during the last step of leaf growth and 
development.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-03506-1
PMCID: PMC5466610
PMID: 28600557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.