1. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2017 Aug;39:74-82. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2017.05.007. Epub 
2017 Jun 16.

Small molecule probes for cellular death machines.

Li Y(1), Qian L(1), Yuan J(2).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Research Center on Biology and Chemistry, Shanghai 
Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 26 Qiuyue Rd, 
Pudong, Shanghai 201210, China.
(2)Interdisciplinary Research Center on Biology and Chemistry, Shanghai 
Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 26 Qiuyue Rd, 
Pudong, Shanghai 201210, China; Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical 
School, 240 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, United States. Electronic address: 
jyuan@hms.harvard.edu.

The past decade has witnessed a significant expansion of our understanding about 
the regulated cell death mechanisms beyond apoptosis. The application of 
chemical biological approaches had played a major role in driving these exciting 
discoveries. The discovery and use of small molecule probes in cell death 
research has not only revealed significant insights into the regulatory 
mechanism of cell death but also provided new drug targets and lead drug 
candidates for developing therapeutics of human diseases with huge unmet need. 
Here, we provide an overview of small molecule modulators for necroptosis and 
ferroptosis, two non-apoptotic cell death mechanisms, and discuss the molecular 
pathways and relevant pathophysiological mechanisms revealed by the judicial 
applications of such small molecule probes. We suggest that the development and 
applications of small molecule probes for non-apoptotic cell death mechanisms 
provide an outstanding example showcasing the power of chemical biology in 
exploring novel biological mechanisms.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2017.05.007
PMCID: PMC5581716
PMID: 28628894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]