1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2015 Oct 29;5:72-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2015.10.009. 
eCollection 2015 Dec.

Cognitive functioning in mild hyperphenylalaninemia.

de la Parra A(1), García MI(1), Waisbren SE(2), Cornejo V(1), Raimann E(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Metabolic Disease of INTA, University of Chile, 
Chile.
(2)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, United States.

Publisher: BACKGROUND: Hyperphenylalaninemia is a hereditary metabolic disorder 
that causes elevated blood phenylalanine (Phe). Hyperphenylalaninemias are 
classified as Phenylketonuria PKU (Phe > 6 mg/dL) or mild hyperphenylalaninemia 
(mHPA) (Phe 2–6 mg/dL). This study examines the cognitive functioning of early 
diagnosed children with mHPA compared with early diagnosed and treated children 
with PKU.
SAMPLE AND METHODS: Psychomotor development (BSID-II) at 12 and 36 months of 
age, and cognitive performance at 4 and 7 years of age (WPPSI and WISC-R), were 
assessed in 118 PKU and 97 mHPA patients. Cognitive profile analysis of WISC-R 
subscales in school age children was performed and results were compared between 
the two groups.
RESULTS: Both groups preformed within the average range. Scores were 
significantly higher in the mHPA group. The mean Mental Development Index (MDI) 
at 12 months of age was 98.1 in the mHPA group and 92.3 in the PKU group 
(p < 0.0002). At 36 months the MDI was 94.6 in the mHPA group and 84.7 in the 
PKU group (p = 0.0001. At age four years the mean Full Scale IQ was 106.5 (mHPA 
group) and 95.9 (PKU group) (p < 0.0001). At age seven years the mean Full Scale 
IQ was 100.9 (mHPA group) and 89.9 (PKU group) (p < 0.005). The pattern of 
deficits was similar in both groups, with relative weaknesses in working memory 
and attention.
CONCLUSIONS: Children with mHPA achieved cognitive performance well within the 
average range and attained significantly higher scores than children with PKU. 
However, they appeared to have relative weaknesses in working memory and 
attention, similar to children with PKU.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2015.10.009
PMCID: PMC5471391
PMID: 28649547