1. Structure. 2017 Jul 5;25(7):1100-1110.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2017.05.019. Epub
 2017 Jun 22.

Glycan Activation of a Sheddase: Electrostatic Recognition between Heparin and 
proMMP-7.

Fulcher YG(1), Prior SH(1), Masuko S(2), Li L(2), Pu D(2), Zhang F(2), Linhardt 
RJ(2), Van Doren SR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, 117 Schweitzer Hall, 
Columbia, MO 65211, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Center for Biotechnology and 
Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, 117 Schweitzer Hall, 
Columbia, MO 65211, USA. Electronic address: vandorens@missouri.edu.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans activate the matrix metalloproteinase-7 zymogen 
(proMMP-7) and recruit it in order to shed proteins from cell surfaces. This 
occurs in uterine and mammary epithelia, bacterial killing, lung healing, and 
tumor cell signaling. Basic tracks on proMMP-7 recognize polyanionic heparin, 
according to nuclear magnetic resonance and mutations disruptive of maturation. 
Contacts and proximity measurements guided docking of a heparin octasaccharide 
to proMMP-7. The reducing end fits into a basic pocket in the pro-domain while 
the chain continues toward the catalytic domain. Another oligosaccharide 
traverses a basic swath remote on the catalytic domain and inserts its reducing 
end into a slot formed with the basic C terminus. This latter association 
appears to support allosteric acceleration of proteolysis. The modes of binding 
account for extended, heterogeneous assemblies of proMMP-7 with heparinoids 
during maturation and for bridging to pro-α-defensins and proteoglycans. These 
associations support proteolytic release of activities at epithelial cell 
surfaces.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2017.05.019
PMCID: PMC5526709
PMID: 28648610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]