1. PLoS One. 2017 Jun 26;12(6):e0179677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179677. 
eCollection 2017.

Functional annotation of Alzheimer's disease associated loci revealed by GWASs.

Han Z(1), Huang H(1), Gao Y(1), Huang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) discovered a number of SNPs and genes 
associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, how these SNPs and genes 
influence the liability to AD is not fully understood. We deployed computational 
approaches to explore the function and action mechanisms of AD -related SNPs and 
genes identified by GWASs, including the effects of 195 GWAS lead SNPs and 338 
proxy SNPs on miRNAs binding and protein phosphorylation, their RegulomeDB and 
3DSNP scores, and gene ontology, pathway enrichment and protein-protein 
interaction network of 126 AD-associated genes. Our computational analysis 
identified 6 lead SNPs (rs10119, rs1048699, rs148763909, rs610932, rs6857 and 
rs714948) and 2 proxy SNPs (rs12539172 and rs2847655) that potentially impacted 
the miRNA binding. Lead SNP rs2296160 and proxy SNPs rs679620 and rs2228145 were 
identified as PhosSNPs potentially influencing protein phosphorylation. 
AD-associated genes showed enrichment of "regulation of beta-amyloid formation", 
"regulation of neurofibrillary tangle assembly", "leukocyte mediated immunity" 
and "protein-lipid complex assembly" signaling pathway. Protein-protein 
interaction network and functional module analyses identified 
highly-interconnected "hub" genes (APOE, PICALM, BIN1, ABCA7, CD2AP, CLU, CR1, 
MS4A4E and MS4A6A) and bottleneck genes (APOE, TOMM40, NME8, PICALM, CD2AP, 
ZCWPW1, FAM180B, GAB2 and PTK2B) that created three tight subnetworks. Our 
results provided the targets for further experimental assessment and further 
insight on AD pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179677
PMCID: PMC5484478
PMID: 28650998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.