1. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2017 Jun;121:57-59. doi: 
10.1016/j.plefa.2017.06.003. Epub 2017 Jun 14.

An association between PLA2G6 and PLA2G4C gene polymorphisms and schizophrenia 
risk and illness severity in a Croatian population.

Nadalin S(1), Buretić-Tomljanović A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, University of 
Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia. Electronic address: sergej.nadalin@medri.uniri.hr.
(2)Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, University of 
Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.

We investigated the allele and genotype frequency of the rs4375 and rs1549637 
polymorphisms in phospholipase A2 (PLA2)G6 and PLA2G4C genes in 203 patients 
with schizophrenia and 191 controls in a Croatian population. We hypothesized 
that these polymorphic variations might influence the age of schizophrenia onset 
and Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale psychopathology (PANSS) data. We 
detected a significant overrepresentation of the PLA2G6-CT and PLA2G4C-AT 
genotype combination in patients compared with controls (14.7% vs. 7.3%, P < 
0.05). The combined PLA2G6/PLA2G4C heterozygosity was associated with about a 
two-fold higher schizophrenia risk. We found no significant influence of the 
PLA2G6 and PLA2G4C polymorphisms on mean age at first hospital admission (P > 
0.05) and that the investigated polymorphisms significantly influenced the 
clinical psychopathology only in male patients. The PLA2G4C polymorphism 
accounted for approximately 12% of negative symptom severity; whereas, the 
PLA2G6/PLA2G4C interaction contributed to a similar extent to total PANSS 
symptom variations.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plefa.2017.06.003
PMID: 28651698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]