1. mBio. 2017 Jun 27;8(3):e00543-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00543-17.

Novel Plasmid-Mediated Colistin Resistance Gene mcr-3 in Escherichia coli.

Yin W(1), Li H(1), Shen Y(1), Liu Z(1), Wang S(1), Shen Z(1), Zhang R(2), Walsh 
TR(3), Shen J(1), Wang Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Disease, Institute of 
Infection and Immunity, Heath Park Hospital, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(4)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China 
wangyang@cau.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    mBio. 2017 Aug 15;8(4):e01166-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01166-17.

Comment in
    mBio. 2017 Oct 3;8(5):e01229-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01229-17.
    mBio. 2018 Aug 28;9(4):e01629-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01629-18.

The mobile colistin resistance gene mcr-1 has attracted global attention, as it 
heralds the breach of polymyxins, one of the last-resort antibiotics for the 
treatment of severe clinical infections caused by multidrug-resistant 
Gram-negative bacteria. To date, six slightly different variants of mcr-1, and a 
second mobile colistin resistance gene, mcr-2, have been reported or annotated 
in the GenBank database. Here, we characterized a third mobile colistin 
resistance gene, mcr-3 The gene coexisted with 18 additional resistance 
determinants in the 261-kb IncHI2-type plasmid pWJ1 from porcine Escherichia 
colimcr-3 showed 45.0% and 47.0% nucleotide sequence identity to mcr-1 and 
mcr-2, respectively, while the deduced amino acid sequence of MCR-3 showed 99.8 
to 100% and 75.6 to 94.8% identity to phosphoethanolamine transferases found in 
other Enterobacteriaceae species and in 10 Aeromonas species, respectively. pWJ1 
was mobilized to an E. coli recipient by conjugation and contained a plasmid 
backbone similar to those of other mcr-1-carrying plasmids, such as pHNSHP45-2 
from the original mcr-1-harboring E. coli strain. Moreover, a truncated 
transposon element, TnAs2, which was characterized only in Aeromonas 
salmonicida, was located upstream of mcr-3 in pWJ1. This ΔTnAs2-mcr-3 element 
was also identified in a shotgun genome sequence of a porcine E. coli isolate 
from Malaysia, a human Klebsiella pneumoniae isolate from Thailand, and a human 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium isolate from the United States. These 
results suggest the likelihood of a wide dissemination of the novel mobile 
colistin resistance gene mcr-3 among Enterobacteriaceae and aeromonads; the 
latter may act as a potential reservoir for mcr-3IMPORTANCE The emergence of the 
plasmid-mediated colistin resistance gene mcr-1 has attracted substantial 
attention worldwide. Here, we examined a colistin-resistant Escherichia coli 
isolate that was negative for both mcr-1 and mcr-2 and discovered a novel mobile 
colistin resistance gene, mcr-3 The amino acid sequence of MCR-3 aligned closely 
with phosphoethanolamine transferases from Enterobacteriaceae and Aeromonas 
species originating from both clinical infections and environmental samples 
collected in 12 countries on four continents. Due to the ubiquitous profile of 
aeromonads in the environment and the potential transfer of mcr-3 between 
Enterobacteriaceae and Aeromonas species, the wide spread of mcr-3 may be 
largely underestimated. As colistin has been and still is widely used in 
veterinary medicine and used at increasing frequencies in human medicine, the 
continuous monitoring of mobile colistin resistance determinants in 
colistin-resistant Gram-negative bacteria is imperative for understanding and 
tackling the dissemination of mcr genes in both the agricultural and health care 
sectors.

Copyright © 2017 Yin et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00543-17
PMCID: PMC5487729
PMID: 28655818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]