1. Front Plant Sci. 2017 Jun 12;8:1012. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.01012. eCollection
 2017.

Five Fatty Acyl-Coenzyme A Reductases Are Involved in the Biosynthesis of 
Primary Alcohols in Aegilops tauschii Leaves.

Wang M(1), Wu H(1), Xu J(2), Li C(1), Wang Y(1), Wang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, College of 
Agronomy, Northwest A&F UniversityYangling, China.
(2)Guizhou Rapeseed Institute, Guizhou Academy of Agricultural SciencesGuiyang, 
China.

The diploid Aegilops tauschii is the D-genome donor to hexaploid wheat (Triticum 
aestivum) and represents a potential source for genetic study in common wheat. 
The ubiquitous wax covering the aerial parts of plants plays an important role 
in protecting plants against non-stomatal water loss. Cuticular waxes are 
complex mixtures of very-long-chain fatty acids, alkanes, primary and/or 
secondary alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, esters, triterpenes, sterols, and 
flavonoids. In the present work, primary alcohols were identified as the major 
components of leaf cuticular wax in Ae. tauschii, with C26:0-OH being the 
dominant primary alcohol. Analysis by scanning electron microscope revealed that 
dense platelet-shaped wax crystals were deposited on leaf surfaces of Ae. 
tauschii. Ten putative wax biosynthetic genes encoding fatty acyl-coenzyme A 
reductase (FAR) were identified in the genome of Ae. tauschii. Five of these 
genes, Ae.tFAR1, Ae.tFAR2, Ae.tFAR3, Ae.tFAR4, and Ae.tFAR6, were found 
expressed in the leaf blades. Heterologous expression of the five Ae.tFARs in 
yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) showed that Ae.tFAR1, Ae.tFAR2, Ae.tFAR3, 
Ae.tFAR4, and Ae.tFAR6 were predominantly responsible for the accumulation of 
C16:0, C18:0, C26:0, C24:0, and C28:0 primary alcohols, respectively. In 
addition, nine Ae.tFAR paralogous genes were located on D chromosome of wheat 
and the wheat nullisomic-tetrasomic lines with the loss of Ae.tFAR3 and Ae.tFAR4 
paralogous genes had significantly reduced levels of primary alcohols in the 
leaf blades. Collectively, these data suggest that Ae.tFAR1, Ae.tFAR2, Ae.tFAR3, 
Ae.tFAR4, and Ae.tFAR6 encode alcohol-forming FARs involved in the biosynthesis 
of primary alcohols in the leaf blades of Ae. tauschii. The information obtained 
in Ae. tauschii enables us to better understand wax biosynthesis in common 
wheat.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2017.01012
PMCID: PMC5466989
PMID: 28659955