1. Biophys Chem. 2017 Oct;229:62-67. doi: 10.1016/j.bpc.2017.06.005. Epub 2017
Jun  19.

Discovery of a new mexiletine-derived agonist of the hERG K(+) channel.

Gualdani R(1), Cavalluzzi MM(2), Tadini-Buoninsegni F(3), Lentini G(2).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica "Ugo Schiff", Università di Firenze, via della 
Lastruccia 3, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (FI), Italy. Electronic address: 
roberta.gualdani@uclouvain.be.
(2)Dipartimento di Farmacia-Scienze del Farmaco, Università degli Studi di Bari 
"A. Moro", via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Chimica "Ugo Schiff", Università di Firenze, via della 
Lastruccia 3, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (FI), Italy.

The human Ether-a-go-go Related Gene (hERG) potassium channel plays a central 
role in the rapid component (IKr) of cardiac action potential repolarization 
phase. A large number of structurally different compounds block hERG and cause a 
high risk of arrhythmias. Among the drugs that block hERG channel, a few 
compounds have been identified as hERG channel activators. Such compounds may be 
useful, at least in theory, for the treatment of long term QT syndrome. Here we 
describe a new activator of hERG channel, named MC450. This compound is a 
symmetric urea, derived from (R)-mexiletine. Using patch-clamp recordings, we 
found that MC450 increased the activation current of hERG channel, with an EC50 
of 41±4μM. Moreover MC450 caused a depolarizing shift in the voltage dependence 
of inactivation from -64.1±1.2mV (control), to -35.9±1.4mV, whereas it had no 
effect on the voltage dependence of activation. Furthermore, MC450 slowed 
current inactivation and the effect of MC450 was attenuated by the 
inactivation-impaired double mutant G628C/S631C.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpc.2017.06.005
PMID: 28673509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]