1. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2017 Aug;21(8):795-804. doi: 
10.1080/14728222.2017.1351949. Epub 2017 Jul 12.

Pharmacological targeting of SPAK kinase in disorders of impaired epithelial 
transport.

Zhang J(1), Karimy JK(2), Delpire E(3), Kahle KT(4).

Author information:
(1)a Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences , University of Exeter 
Medical School, Hatherly Laboratory , Exeter , UK.
(2)b Department of Neurosurgery , Yale School of Medicine , New Haven , CT , 
USA.
(3)c Department of Anesthesiolgy , Vanderbilt University School of Medicine , 
Nashville , TN , USA.
(4)d Departments of Neurosurgery, Pediatrics, and Cellular & Molecular 
Physiology; and Centers for Mendelian Genomics , Yale School of Medicine , New 
Haven , CT , USA.

The mammalian SPS1-related proline/alanine-rich serine-threonine kinase SPAK 
(STK39) modulates ion transport across and between epithelial cells in response 
to environmental stimuli such osmotic stress and inflammation. Research over the 
last decade has established a central role for SPAK in the regulation of ion and 
water transport in the distal nephron, colonic crypts, and pancreatic ducts, and 
has implicated deregulated SPAK signaling in NaCl-sensitive hypertension, 
ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, and cystic fibrosis. Areas covered: We 
review recent advances in our understanding of the role of SPAK kinase in the 
regulation of epithelial transport. We highlight how SPAK signaling - including 
its upstream Cl- sensitive activators, the WNK kinases, and its downstream ion 
transport targets, the cation- Cl- cotransporters contribute to human disease. 
We discuss prospects for the pharmacotherapeutic targeting of SPAK kinase in 
specific human disorders that feature impaired epithelial homeostasis. Expert 
opinion: The development of novel drugs that antagonize the SPAK-WNK 
interaction, inhibit SPAK kinase activity, or disrupt SPAK kinase activation by 
interfering with its binding to MO25α/β could be useful adjuncts in essential 
hypertension, inflammatory colitis, and cystic fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1080/14728222.2017.1351949
PMCID: PMC6081737
PMID: 28679296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest The authors have no 
relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity 
with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or 
materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, 
honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or patents 
received or pending, or royalties.