1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2017 Aug;5(8):685-694. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-16-0330.
 Epub 2017 Jul 3.

Combining Local Immunotoxins Targeting Mesothelin with CTLA-4 Blockade 
Synergistically Eradicates Murine Cancer by Promoting Anticancer Immunity.

Leshem Y(1)(2), O'Brien J(1), Liu X(1), Bera TK(1), Terabe M(3), Berzofsky 
JA(3), Bossenmaier B(4), Niederfellner G(4), Tai CH(1), Reiter Y(2), Pastan 
I(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Faculty of Biology and Technion 
Integrated Cancer Center, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 
Israel.
(3)Vaccine Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, Discovery Oncology, 
Innovation Center Penzberg, Roche Diagnostics GmbH Penzberg, Germany.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. 
pastani@mail.nih.gov.

Immune checkpoint blockade using antibodies to cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated 
antigen 4 (CTLA-4) benefits a limited number of cancer patients. SS1P and 
LMB-100 are immunotoxins that target mesothelin. We observed delayed responses 
to SS1P in patients with mesothelioma suggesting that antitumor immunity was 
induced. Our goal was to stimulate antitumor immunity by combining SS1P or 
LMB-100 with anti-CTLA-4. We constructed a BALB/c breast cancer cell line 
expressing human mesothelin (66C14-M), which was implanted in one or two 
locations. SS1P or LMB-100 was injected directly into established tumors and 
anti-CTLA-4 administered i.p. In mice with two tumors, one tumor was injected 
with immunotoxin and the other was not. The complete regression rate was 86% for 
the injected tumors and 53% for the uninjetced tumors. No complete regressions 
occurred when drugs were given separately. In regressing tumors, dying and dead 
tumor cells were intermingled with PMNs and surrounded by a collar of admixed 
eosinophils and mononuclear cells. Tumor regression was associated with 
increased numbers of tumor-infiltrating CD8+ cells and blocked by administration 
of antibodies to CD8. Surviving mice were protected from tumor rechallenge by 
66C14 cells not expressing mesothelin, indicating the development of antitumor 
immunity. The antitumor effect was abolished when a mutant noncytotoxic variant 
was used instead of LMB-100, showing that the antitumor response is not mediated 
by recognition of a foreign bacterial protein. Our findings support developing a 
therapy composed of immunotoxins and checkpoint inhibitors for patients. Cancer 
Immunol Res; 5(8); 685-94. ©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-16-0330
PMCID: PMC5549555
PMID: 28674083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: I.P. is an inventor on 
several patents on immunotoxins that have all been assigned to the NIH and has a 
Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (#2791) with Roche 
Pharmaceuticals.