1. Kidney Int. 2017 Oct;92(4):942-952. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.03.043. Epub 2017
 Jun 30.

Circulating complement factor H-related proteins 1 and 5 correlate with disease 
activity in IgA nephropathy.

Medjeral-Thomas NR(1), Lomax-Browne HJ(1), Beckwith H(1), Willicombe M(2), 
McLean AG(2), Brookes P(3), Pusey CD(4), Falchi M(5), Cook HT(1), Pickering 
MC(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Complement and Inflammation Research, Imperial College London, UK.
(2)Renal and Transplant Centre, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, 
UK.
(3)Histocompatibility & Immunogenetics, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, 
London, UK.
(4)Renal and Vascular Inflammation Section, Imperial College London, UK.
(5)Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London, 
UK.
(6)Centre for Complement and Inflammation Research, Imperial College London, UK. 
Electronic address: matthew.pickering@imperial.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2017 Oct;92(4):790-793. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.05.025.

IgA nephropathy (IgAN) is a common cause of chronic kidney disease and end-stage 
renal failure, especially in young people. Due to a wide range of clinical 
outcomes and difficulty in predicting response to immunosuppression, we need to 
understand why and identify which patients with IgAN will develop progressive 
renal impairment. A deletion polymorphism affecting the genes encoding the 
complement factor H-related protein (FHR)-1 and FHR-3 is robustly associated 
with protection against IgAN. Some FHR proteins, including FHR-1 and FHR-5, 
antagonize the ability of complement factor H (fH), the major negative regulator 
of the complement alternative pathway, to inhibit complement activation on 
surfaces, a process termed fH deregulation. From a large cohort of patients, we 
demonstrated that plasma FHR-1 and the FHR-1/fH ratio were elevated in IgAN and 
associated with progressive disease. Plasma FHR-1 negatively correlated with 
eGFR but remained elevated in patients with IgAN with normal eGFR. Serum FHR5 
was slightly elevated in IgAN but did not correlate with eGFR. Neither FHR5 
levels nor the FHR-5/fH ratio was associated with progressive disease. However, 
higher serum FHR-5 levels were associated with a lack of response to 
immunosuppression, the presence of endocapillary hypercellularity, and histology 
scores of disease severity (the Oxford Classification MEST score). Thus, FHR-1 
and FHR-5 have a role in IgAN disease progression.

Copyright © 2017 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.03.043
PMCID: PMC5611987
PMID: 28673452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]