1. Cent Eur J Immunol. 2017;42(1):68-72. doi: 10.5114/ceji.2017.67319. Epub 2017 
May 8.

Evaluation of inflammatory cytokines and oxidative stress markers in prostate 
cancer patients undergoing curative radiotherapy.

Abdel-Messeih PL(1), Nosseir NM(1), Bakhe OH(2).

Author information:
(1)Atomic Energy Authority, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Military Medical Academy, Cairo, Egypt.

Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related death in men. The 
present study was carried out to investigate the radiation response of serum 
cytokines and oxidative markers to find out if these novel biomarkers have 
significant applications regarding radiation outcome in prostate cancer 
patients. Significant elevations of prostatic specific antigen (PSA), asymmetric 
dimethyl arginine (ADMA) and nitric oxide (NO) were recorded in cancer prostate 
patients at the time of diagnosis compared to controls. Patients were subjected 
to radiotherapy post prostatectomy with a total dose of 66 Gy in 33 fractions (5 
sessions/week) for 7 weeks. At the end of the seventh week post radiotherapy, 
ADMA levels were accentuated while the levels of PSA and NO were lower than 
before therapy. The level of inflammatory cytokines (interleukins IL-4, IL-5 and 
interferon-gamma) in post radiation therapy patients were significantly elevated 
compared to both controls and prostate cancer patients. A significant inverse 
correlation was observed in prostate cancer patients between ADMA and NO. 
Moreover, a significant inverse correlation in post radiation therapy patients 
was observed between IL-5 and PSA. These results are highly suggestive that 
there is a specific cytokine response in patients undergoing curative 
radiotherapy for prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.5114/ceji.2017.67319
PMCID: PMC5470615
PMID: 28680332

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.