1. BMB Rep. 2017 Aug;50(8):391-392. doi: 10.5483/bmbrep.2017.50.8.120.

Survival of APC-mutant colorectal cancer cells requires interaction between 
tankyrase and a thiol peroxidase, peroxiredoxin II.

Kang DH(1), Lee JHS(2), Kang SW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Research Center for Cell Homeostasis, Ewha 
Womans University, Seoul 03760, Korea.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 03760, Korea.

Overexpression of mammalian 2-Cys peroxiredoxin (Prx) enzymes is observed in 
most cancer tissues. Nevertheless, their specific roles in colorectal cancer 
(CRC) progression has yet to be fully elucidated. Here, a novel molecular 
mechanism by which PrxII/Tankyrase (TNKS) interaction mediates survival of 
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)-mutant CRC cells was explored. In mice with an 
inactivating APC mutation, a model of spontaneous intestinal tumorigenesis, 
deletion of PrxII reduced intestinal adenomatous polyposis and thereby increased 
survival. In APC-mutant human CRC cells, PrxII depletion hindered PARP-dependent 
Axin1 degradation through TNKS inactivation. H2O2-sensitive Cys residues in the 
zincbinding domain of TNKS1 was found to be crucial for PARsylation activity. 
Mechanistically, direct binding of PrxII to ARC4/5 domains of TNKS conferred 
vital redox protection against oxidative inactivation. As a proof-of-concept 
experiment, a chemical compound targeting PrxII inhibited the growth of tumors 
xenografted with APC-mutation-positive CRC cells. Collectively, the results 
provide evidence revealing a novel redox mechanism for regulating TNKS activity 
such that physical interaction between PrxII and TNKS promoted survival of 
APC-mutant colorectal cancer cells by PrxII-dependent antioxidant shielding. 
[BMB Reports 2017; 50(8): 391-392].

DOI: 10.5483/bmbrep.2017.50.8.120
PMCID: PMC5595167
PMID: 28683851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]