1. Curr Surg Rep. 2017;5(8):17. doi: 10.1007/s40137-017-0180-7. Epub 2017 Jun 26.

Advances in Robotic Transaxillary Thyroidectomy in Europe.

Piccoli M(1), Mullineris B(1), Santi D(2), Gozzo D(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of General, Emergency Surgery and New Technologies, OCSAE (Ospedale 
Civile Sant'Agostino Estense), Via Giardini 1455, Baggiovara, Modena, Italy.
(2)Unit of Endocrinology, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural 
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The robotic surgical approach for minimally invasive thyroid 
surgery has been well described from the Korean surgeons and shows a wide spread 
diffusion in Asian area. This paper gives a systematic review aiming to pointed 
out the interest and the way of behaving of the European surgeons about the role 
of the robotic thyroidectomy (RT).
RECENT FINDINGS: A literature search was performed using Pubmed, MEDLINE, 
Cochrane and ClinicalTrials.gov databases, including only papers wrote from 
european surgeons enrolling patients operated in Europe. Outcomes of interest 
included patients characteristics, patients position, surgical devices, surgical 
technique, surgical outcomes, and complications. Eighteen studies have been 
included in the analysis, published from 2011 to 2017. An overall number of 1108 
patients were treated in studies included. In the 44.4% of studies (eight 
trials), the Kuppersmith position was chosen, whereas in the 22.2% (four 
trials), the Chung position was selected, with a mean length on axilla skin 
incision of 5.8 ± 1.5 cm. Considering the characteristics of the surgical 
technique, the mean total surgical time was 166.8 ± 36.6 min (including total 
thyroidectomy and loboisthmectomy together), divided three consecutive phases, 
such as mean working space was 50.7 ± 21.8 min, mean docking time 
16.0 ± 11.9 min and mean console time 102.87 ± 38.8 min. Considering the 
complications, only 50% of studies included reported data about acute 
complications. In particular, the most frequent was hypocalcemia, occurring in 
32 cases (2.9%). RLN palsy occurred in 29 patients (2.6%), definitive in 13.8% 
of these cases and transient in 86.2%. Only nine studies reported the discharge 
time, with a mean of 2.4 ± 1.2 days after surgery.
SUMMARY: Despite the papers included in the study show a different way of 
collecting data, the transaxillary approach for robotic thyroidectomy for 
European patients is both feasible and safe. This procedure has to be carried 
out by surgeons expert in thyroid surgery with knowledge in robotic procedure. 
In the future, the incoming of dedicated instruments could improve and developed 
this technique.

DOI: 10.1007/s40137-017-0180-7
PMCID: PMC5488127
PMID: 28680769

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest relevant to this manuscript. HUMAN AND ANIMAL RIGHTS AND 
INFORMED CONSENT: This article does not contain any studies with human or animal 
subjects performed by any of the authors.