1. Anal Chem. 2017 Aug 1;89(15):7852-7860. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b04194.
Epub  2017 Jul 20.

Hydrophobic Patch of Ubiquitin is Important for its Optimal Activation by 
Ubiquitin Activating Enzyme E1.

Singh RK(1), Kazansky Y(1), Wathieu D(1), Fushman D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Center for Biomolecular Structure 
and Organization, University of Maryland , College Park, Maryland 20742, United 
States.

Protein ubiquitination plays a role in essentially every process in eukaryotic 
cells. The attachment of ubiquitin (Ub) or Ub-like (UBL) proteins to target 
proteins is achieved by parallel but distinct cascades of enzymatic reactions 
involving three enzymes: E1, E2, and E3. The E1 enzyme functions at the apex of 
this pathway and plays a critical role in activating the C-terminus of ubiquitin 
or UBL, which is an essential step that triggers subsequent downstream transfer 
to their cognate E2s resulting in the fidelity of the Ub/UBL conjugation 
machinery. Despite the central role of the E1 enzyme in protein modification, a 
quantitative method to measure Ub/UBL activation by E1 is lacking. Here, we 
present a mass spectrometry-based assay to accurately measure the activation of 
Ub/UBL by E1 independent of the E2/E3 enzymes. Our method does not require 
radiolabeling of any components and therefore can be used in any biochemical 
laboratory having access to a mass spectrometer. This method allowed us to 
dissect the concerted process of E1-E2-catalyzed Ub conjugation in order to 
separately characterize the process of Ub activation and how it is affected by 
select mutations and other factors. We found that the hydrophobic patch of Ub is 
important for the optimal activation of Ub by E1. We further show that the 
blockers of the Ub-proteasome system such as ubistatin and fullerenol inhibit Ub 
activation by E1. Interestingly, our data indicate that the phosphorylation of 
Ub at the S65 position augments its activation by the E1 enzyme.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b04194
PMCID: PMC5573600
PMID: 28686836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]