1. Tumour Biol. 2017 Jul;39(7):1010428317706915. doi: 10.1177/1010428317706915.

Cordycepin induces apoptosis in human bladder cancer cells via activation of A3 
adenosine receptors.

Cao HL(1), Liu ZJ(2), Chang Z(3).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Medical Oncology, Shandong Jiaotong Hospital, Jinan, China.
(2)2 Department of Orthopaedics, Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, China.
(3)3 Department of Urology, General Hospital of Jinan Military Command, Jinan, 
China.

Bladder cancer is a neoplasm originated from bladder epithelial cells. The 
therapy for bladder cancer is so far not satisfactory. In this study, we 
examined the effects of Cordyceps militaris hot water extracts containing 
cordycepin on human bladder cells. Cordyceps militaris hot water extracts 
containing cordycepin was used to treat human T24 bladder carcinoma cells, and 
we found that Cordyceps militaris hot water extracts containing cordycepin 
decreased T24 cell survival in a dose-dependent manner, which was seemingly 
mediated by activation of A3 adenosine receptor and the subsequent inactivation 
of Akt pathways, resulting in increases in cleaved Caspase-3 and apoptosis. 
Overexpression of A3 adenosine receptor in T24 cells mimicked the effects of 
Cordyceps militaris hot water extracts, while A3 adenosine receptor depletion 
abolished the effects of Cordyceps militaris hot water extracts containing 
cordycepin. Together, these data suggest that Cordyceps militaris hot water 
extracts containing cordycepin may be a promising treatment for bladder cancer 
via A3 adenosine receptor activation.

DOI: 10.1177/1010428317706915
PMID: 28714368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]