1. Angiogenesis. 2017 Nov;20(4):547-555. doi: 10.1007/s10456-017-9566-5. Epub
2017  Jul 18.

Early prediction of tumor response to bevacizumab treatment in murine colon 
cancer models using three-dimensional dynamic contrast-enhanced ultrasound 
imaging.

Zhou J(1)(2), Zhang H(1), Wang H(1), Lutz AM(1), El Kaffas A(1), Tian L(3), 
Hristov D(4), Willmann JK(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford, School of 
Medicine, Stanford University, 300 Pasteur Drive, Room H1307, Stanford, CA, 
94305-5621, USA.
(2)Department of Ultrasound, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key 
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Health, Research and Policy, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford, School of 
Medicine, Stanford University, 300 Pasteur Drive, Room H1307, Stanford, CA, 
94305-5621, USA. willmann@stanford.edu.

Due to spatial tumor heterogeneity and consecutive sampling errors, it is 
critically important to assess treatment response following antiangiogenic 
therapy in three dimensions as two-dimensional assessment has been shown to 
substantially over- and underestimate treatment response. In this study, we 
evaluated whether three-dimensional (3D) dynamic contrast-enhanced ultrasound 
(DCE-US) imaging allows assessing early changes in tumor perfusion following 
antiangiogenic treatment (bevacizumab administered at a dose of 10 mg/kg b.w.), 
and whether these changes could predict treatment response in colon cancer 
tumors that either are responsive (LS174T tumors) or none responsive (CT26) to 
the proposed treatment. Our results showed that the perfusion parameters of 3D 
DCE-US including peak enhancement (PE) and area under curve (AUC) significantly 
decreased by up to 69 and 77%, respectively, in LS174T tumors within 1 day after 
antiangiogenic treatment (P = 0.005), but not in CT26 tumors (P > 0.05). 
Similarly, the percentage area of neovasculature significantly decreased in 
treated versus control LS174T tumors (P < 0.001), but not in treated versus 
control CT26 tumors (P = 0.796). Early decrease in both PE and AUC by 45-50% was 
predictive of treatment response in 100% (95% CI 69.2, 100%) of responding 
tumors, and in 100% (95% CI 88.4, 100%) and 86.7% (95% CI 69.3, 96.2%), 
respectively, of nonresponding tumors. In conclusion, 3D DCE-US provides 
clinically relevant information on the variability of tumor response to 
antiangiogenic therapy and may be further developed as biomarker for predicting 
treatment outcomes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10456-017-9566-5
PMCID: PMC5660665
PMID: 28721500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: There is no conflict of 
interest.