1. Neurosci Lett. 2017 Aug 24;656:72-76. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.07.014. Epub 
2017 Jul 17.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) gene are 
associated with sporadic Parkinson's disease in the North-eastern Han Chinese 
population.

Li X(1), Xue L(2), Sun J(3), Sun Y(4), Xie A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
China; Department of Neurology, Hospital of Integrated Traditional and Western 
Medicine, China.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Hospital of Integrated Traditional and Western 
Medicine, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
China.
(5)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
China. Electronic address: xieanmu@163.com.

Growing evidences suggested that inflammatory process played a critical role in 
the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD). Given that TLR2 has been 
implicated in the perpetuation of inflammatory responses in the central nervous 
system (CNS), we investigated the association between two genetic variants 
(rs3804099 and rs3804100) of TLR2 and sporadic PD in Han Chinese population. 395 
Han Chinese sporadic PD patients and 413 healthy age and gender-matched controls 
were genotyped using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. The sporadic PD patients showed a higher T 
allele frequency than the healthy-matched control (p=0.019). Furthermore 
rs3804099 dominate model TT versus (vs.) TC+CC increase the risk of sporadic PD 
(OR=1.376, 95%CI=1.043-1.814, p=024). From the subgroup analysis, the variant 
allele T of rs3804099 was higher in sporadic PD cases (73.1%) than in controls 
(67.4%) in the late-onset cohort. Meanwhile rs3804099 revealed significant 
association in dominant model: Subjects with TT genotypes vs. those with TC+CC 
genotype showed evident significant in late-onset cohort (LOPD OR=1.417, 
95%CI=1.051-1.911, p=022). In contrast, allele frequencies at rs3804100 were 
similar between patients and controls. Taken together, this study reveals that 
polymorphism of TLR2 locus is associated with risk of sporadic PD in the 
North-eastern part of Han Chinese population. Further studies are required to 
evaluate the association.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.07.014
PMID: 28729076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]