1. Genet Resour Crop Evol. 2017;64(6):1125-1132. doi: 10.1007/s10722-017-0518-0. 
Epub 2017 May 17.

Origin of rice (Oryza sativa L.) domestication genes.

Civáň P(1), Brown TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, School of Earth and Environmental 
Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

A number of genes that contribute to the domestication traits of cultivated rice 
have been identified. These include Sh4, Rc, PROG1 and LABA1, which are 
associated with non-shattering rachis, white pericarp, erect growth and barbless 
awns, respectively. The mutations giving rise to the "domestication alleles" of 
these genes are either invariable in cultivated rice, or have variability that 
is strictly associated with the phenotypic trait. This observation forms the 
basis to those current rice domestication models that envisage a single origin 
for the domesticated phenotype. Such models assume that the domestication 
alleles are absent or rare in wild rice, emerged under cultivation and spread 
across all rice groups by introgressive hybridization. We examined whole-genome 
sequencing datasets for wild and cultivated rice to test the former two 
assumptions. We found that the rc and laba1 alleles occur in wild rice with 
broad geographical distribution, and reach frequencies as high as 13 and 15%, 
respectively. These results are in agreement with previous observations of the 
prog1 and sh4 domestication alleles in wild populations. We also show that the 
diversity of the genomic regions surrounding the rc, laba1, prog1 and sh4 
alleles in wild accessions is greater than that in cultivated rice, suggesting 
that these alleles emerged prior to domestication. Our findings indicate that 
the possibility that independent rice groups obtained identical domestication 
alleles directly from the wild population needs to be considered.

DOI: 10.1007/s10722-017-0518-0
PMCID: PMC5498617
PMID: 28736485

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTERESTS: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest. AVAILABILITY OF DATA AND MATERIALS: In this 
article, data produced by third parties were used. The original data 
repositories are referenced in the text and our data extractions are summarised 
in the supporting file.