1. Nutr Res Pract. 2017 Aug;11(4):290-299. doi: 10.4162/nrp.2017.11.4.290. Epub 
2017 Jun 9.

Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 polymorphism interaction with spirulina 
immunomodulatory effects in healthy Korean elderly: A 16 week, double-blind 
randomized clinical trial.

Park HJ(1), Lee HS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, Kookmin University, Seoul 02707, Korea.
(2)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Dongseo University, 47 Jurye-ro, 
Sasang-gu, Busan 47011, Korea.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Spirulina is a known a functional food related to lipid 
profiles, immune functions, and antioxidant capacity. Circulating monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) level is associated with inflammation markers. 
Single nucleotide polymorphism in the MCP-1 promoter region -2518 have been 
identified and shown to affect gene transcription. Gene variation may also 
impact functional food supplementary effects. The current study investigated the 
interaction of MCP-1 -2518 polymorphism with spirulina supplements on 
anti-inflammatory capacity in Korean elderly.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: After genotyping, healthy elderly subjects (n = 78) were 
included in a randomized, double blind, and placebo controlled study. Baseline 
characteristic, body composition, and dietary intake were measured twice 
(baseline vs. week 16). For 16 weeks, subjects consumed 8 g either spirulina or 
placebo daily. Plasma MCP-1, interleukin (IL) -2, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-α, complement (C) 3, immunoglobulin (Ig) G, and Ig A concentrations and 
lymphocyte proliferation rate (LPR) were analyzed as inflammatory markers.
RESULTS: In the placebo group with A/A genotype, MCP-1 level was significantly 
increased, but the spirulina group with A/A genotype was unchanged. IL-2 was 
significantly increased only in subjects with spirulina supplementation. TNF-α 
was significantly reduced in subjects with the G carrier. C3 was significantly 
increased in the placebo group, particularly when A/A increased more than G, but 
not when spirulina was ingested. LPR was significantly different only in 
subjects with A/A genotype; there was a significant increase in 
phytohemagglutinin and lipopolysaccharide induced LPR in the spirulina group.
CONCLUSION: In healthy Korean elderly, spirulina supplementation may influence 
different inflammatory markers by the MCP-1 genotype. These results may be 
useful for customized dietary guidelines to improve immune function in Koreans.

DOI: 10.4162/nrp.2017.11.4.290
PMCID: PMC5537538
PMID: 28765775

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
potential conflicts of interests.