1. Front Immunol. 2017 Jul 20;8:815. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00815. eCollection 
2017.

Leishmania infantum Parasites Subvert the Host Inflammatory Response through the 
Adenosine A2(A) Receptor to Promote the Establishment of Infection.

Lima MHF(1), Sacramento LA(1), Quirino GFS(1), Ferreira MD(1), Benevides L(1), 
Santana AKM(2), Cunha FQ(1)(3), Almeida RP(2), Silva JS(1), Carregaro V(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunoparasitology, Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, 
School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Biology and Health Sciences, 
Federal University of Sergipe, Aracaju, Sergipe, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Inflammation and Pain, Department of Pharmacology, School of 
Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, 
Brazil.

Adenosine is an endogenously released purine nucleoside that signals through 
four widely expressed G protein-coupled receptors: A1, A2A, A2B, and A3. Of 
these, A2AR is recognized as mediating major adenosine anti-inflammatory 
activity. During cutaneous leishmaniasis, adenosine induces immunosuppression, 
which promotes the establishment of infection. Herein, we demonstrated that A2AR 
signaling is exploited by Leishmania infantum parasites, the etiologic agent 
that causes Visceral Leishmaniasis, to successfully colonize the vertebrate 
host. A2AR gene-deleted mice exhibited a well-developed cellular reaction with a 
strong Th1 immune response in the parasitized organs. An intense infiltration of 
activated neutrophils into the disease-target organs was observed in A2AR-/- 
mice. These cells were characterized by high expression of CXCR2 and CD69 on 
their cell surfaces and increased cxcl1 expression. Interestingly, this 
phenotype was mediated by IFN-γ on the basis that a neutralizing antibody 
specific to this cytokine prevented neutrophilic influx into parasitized organs. 
In evaluating the immunosuppressive effects, we identified a decreased number of 
CD4+ FOXP3+ T cells and reduced il10 expression in A2AR-/- infected mice. During 
ex vivo cell culture, A2AR-/- splenocytes produced smaller amounts of IL-10. In 
conclusion, we demonstrated that the A2AR signaling pathway is detrimental to 
development of Th1-type adaptive immunity and that this pathway could be 
associated with the regulatory process. In particular, it promotes parasite 
surveillance.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00815
PMCID: PMC5517451
PMID: 28775724