1. Ann Hum Genet. 2017 Nov;81(6):258-266. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12207. Epub 2017 Aug
8.

Prevalence of Mutations in Deafness-Causing Genes in Cochlear Implanted Patients 
with Profound Nonsyndromic Sensorineural Hearing Loss in Shandong Province, 
China.

Luo J(1)(2), Bai X(1)(2), Zhang F(1)(2), Xiao Y(1)(2), Gu L(1), Han Y(1)(2), Fan 
Z(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Xu L(1)(2), Wang H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Shandong Provincial 
Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Shandong, China.
(2)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Otology, Shandong, China.

The mutations of GJB2, SLC26A4, and mtDNA12SrRNA are the most common inherited 
causes of nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (NSHL) in China, yet previous 
genetic screenings were mainly carried on patients with moderate-to-profound 
impairment. We aimed to detect the mutation frequencies in NSHL population 
within a more specified range of severity. Patients with profound NSHL who had 
undergone cochlear implantation in the Shandong Provincial Hospital (Shandong, 
China) were recruited. The majority (n  =  472) were between 0.7 and 6 years 
old, and the remaining (n  =  63) were between 6 and 70 years old. In total, 115 
mutation alleles of the three genes were screened with SNP scan assay. Of the 
patients, 19.44% (104/535) were found to have GJB2 mutations, and the most 
common allele was c.235delC, followed by c.299_300delAT and c.109G>A. SLC26A4 
mutations were detected in 13.46% patients (72/535), and the most common allele 
was c.919-2A>G (IVS7-2A>G), followed by c.1174A>T and c.2168A>G. Seven patients 
(1.31%) carried mutations in mtDNA12SrRNA, with the alleles of m.1555A>G and 
m.1494C>T. We found the allele frequency of c.109G>A (GJB2) was relatively lower 
in the profound NSHL population in comparison to the moderate-to-profound ones, 
and the c.1174A>T (SLC26A4) relatively higher. It suggests those mutations may 
be connected with the degree of deafness, which needs more observations and 
analyses to support.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd/University College London.

DOI: 10.1111/ahg.12207
PMID: 28786104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]