1. Oncol Lett. 2017 Aug;14(2):2491-2498. doi: 10.3892/ol.2017.6414. Epub 2017 Jun
 19.

Role of depth of response and MTHFR genotype as predictors of fluorouracil 
rechallenge therapy for refractory metastatic colorectal cancer.

Kim KR(1), Yoon JH(1), Shim HJ(1), Hwang JE(1), Bae WK(1), Chung IJ(1), Kim 
HN(2), Shin MH(2), Cho SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Chonnam National University Medical School, 
Gwangju 61186, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical 
School, Gwangju 61186, Republic of Korea.

There is limited data on the clinical and biological parameters that enable the 
prediction of the benefits derived from additional chemotherapy after disease 
progression compared with standard chemotherapy in patients with metastatic 
colorectal cancer (mCRC). The present study evaluated the role of tumor response 
as a clinical parameter and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as a 
biomarker to predict the benefit of additional 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) rechallenge 
chemotherapy in patients with refractory mCRC. Tumor responses were 
retrospectively reviewed based on the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid 
Tumors, early tumor shrinkage (ETS) and depth of response (DoR) following 
first-line chemotherapy in patients with stage IV CRC. Together with these 
parameters, SNPs known to be associated with the response to chemotherapy were 
analyzed with survival outcomes. In total, the tumor responses of 242 patients 
with mCRC were evaluated. Overall response and ETS were identified in 110 
(45.4%) and 103 patients (42.6%), respectively, and the median DoR was 
38.5Â±30.08%. ETS and DoR were significantly associated with survival outcomes, 
including progression-free survival, post-progression survival and overall 
survival. Among these patients, SNPs were analyzed in 171 patients. X-ray repair 
cross complementing 1 (XRCC1) (AG/AA) with a DoR >60%, good performance status 
and the absence of bone lesions were associated with improved overall survival. 
In patients receiving third-line chemotherapy with 5-FU rechallenge therapy, the 
methylenetretrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) (C677T) CC genotype and a DoR >60% 
were significantly associated with a good prognosis in multivariate analysis. 
XRCC1 (AG/AA) was also associated with a good prognosis in patients with mCRC. 
Patients with a DoR >60% following first-line chemotherapy and a MTHFR (C677T) 
CC genotype exhibited a survival benefit from 5-FU retreatment. Therefore, the 
DoR and MTHFR genotype are potential markers for selecting patients with 
refractory mCRC that would benefit from 5-FU rechallenge therapy.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2017.6414
PMCID: PMC5530182
PMID: 28781687