1. Nature. 2017 Aug 10;548(7666):228-233. doi: 10.1038/nature23475. Epub 2017 Aug
 2.

Metabolic control of T(H)17 and induced T(reg) cell balance by an epigenetic 
mechanism.

Xu T(1), Stewart KM(2), Wang X(3), Liu K(1), Xie M(1), Ryu JK(1), Li K(1), Ma 
T(1)(4), Wang H(1), Ni L(3), Zhu S(1), Cao N(1), Zhu D(2), Zhang Y(1), 
Akassoglou K(1)(5), Dong C(3), Driggers EM(2), Ding S(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)The J. David Gladstone Institutes, 1650 Owens Street, San Francisco, 
California 94158, USA.
(2)Agios Pharmaceuticals, 38 Sidney Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.
(3)Institute for Immunology and School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 
100084, China.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, 
China.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2023 Feb;614(7946):E12-E14. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05603-2.
    Nature. 2023 Feb;614(7946):E1-E11. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05602-3.

Metabolism has been shown to integrate with epigenetics and transcription to 
modulate cell fate and function. Beyond meeting the bioenergetic and 
biosynthetic demands of T-cell differentiation, whether metabolism might control 
T-cell fate by an epigenetic mechanism is unclear. Here, through the discovery 
and mechanistic characterization of a small molecule, (aminooxy)acetic acid, 
that reprograms the differentiation of T helper 17 (TH17) cells towards induced 
regulatory T (iTreg) cells, we show that increased transamination, mainly 
catalysed by GOT1, leads to increased levels of 2-hydroxyglutarate in 
differentiating TH17 cells. The accumulation of 2-hydroxyglutarate resulted in 
hypermethylation of the Foxp3 gene locus and inhibited Foxp3 transcription, 
which is essential for fate determination towards TH17 cells. Inhibition of the 
conversion of glutamate to α-ketoglutaric acid prevented the production of 
2-hydroxyglutarate, reduced methylation of the Foxp3 gene locus, and increased 
Foxp3 expression. This consequently blocked the differentiation of TH17 cells by 
antagonizing the function of transcription factor RORγt and promoted 
polarization into iTreg cells. Selective inhibition of GOT1 with 
(aminooxy)acetic acid ameliorated experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in a 
therapeutic mouse model by regulating the balance between TH17 and iTreg cells. 
Targeting a glutamate-dependent metabolic pathway thus represents a new strategy 
for developing therapeutic agents against TH17-mediated autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/nature23475
PMCID: PMC6701955
PMID: 28783731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.