1. Cell Death Dis. 2017 Aug 10;8(8):e2986. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2017.369.

PDI is an essential redox-sensitive activator of PERK during the unfolded 
protein response (UPR).

Kranz P(1), Neumann F(1), Wolf A(1), Classen F(1), Pompsch M(1), Ocklenburg 
T(1), Baumann J(1), Janke K(1), Baumann M(1), Goepelt K(1), Riffkin H(1), Metzen 
E(1), Brockmeier U(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstraße 55, 
D45122 Essen, Germany.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress leads to activation of the unfolded protein 
response (UPR) that results in transient suppression of protein translation to 
allow recovery but leads to cell death when stress cannot be resolved. Central 
to initiation of the UPR is the activation of the ER transmembrane kinase 
protein kinase R (PKR)-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK). Here we report 
that the thiol oxidoreductase ERp57 and protein disulfide isomerase-A1 (PDI), 
which belong to the same family of luminal ER oxidoreductases, have strikingly 
opposing roles in the regulation of PERK function. In HCT116 colon carcinoma 
cells, lentiviral depletion of ERp57 resulted in oxidation of PDI and activation 
of PERK, whereas depletion or chemical inhibition of PDI reduced PERK signaling 
and sensitized the cancer cells to hypoxia and ER stress. We conclude that 
oxidized PDI acts as a PERK activator, whereas ERp57 keeps PDI in a reduced 
state in the absence of ER stress. Thus, our study defines a new interface 
between metabolic redox signaling and PERK-dependent activation of the UPR and 
has the potential to influence future cancer therapies that target PERK 
signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2017.369
PMCID: PMC5596557
PMID: 28796255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.