1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Aug 17;18(1):629. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-4039-1.

The impact of RNA sequence library construction protocols on transcriptomic 
profiling of leukemia.

Kumar A(1), Kankainen M(1)(2), Parsons A(1), Kallioniemi O(1)(3), Mattila 
P(1)(4), Heckman CA(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki Institute of Life 
Science, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 20, Tukholmankatu 8, FI-00014, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden.
(4)Finnish Red Cross Blood Service, Kivihaantie 7, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki Institute of Life 
Science, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 20, Tukholmankatu 8, FI-00014, 
Helsinki, Finland. caroline.heckman@helsinki.fi.

BACKGROUND: RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has become an indispensable tool to 
identify disease associated transcriptional profiles and determine the molecular 
underpinnings of diseases. However, the broad adaptation of the methodology into 
the clinic is still hampered by inconsistent results from different RNA-seq 
protocols and involves further evaluation of its analytical reliability using 
patient samples. Here, we applied two commonly used RNA-seq library preparation 
protocols to samples from acute leukemia patients to understand how 
poly-A-tailed mRNA selection (PA) and ribo-depletion (RD) based RNA-seq library 
preparation protocols affect gene fusion detection, variant calling, and gene 
expression profiling.
RESULTS: Overall, the protocols produced similar results with consistent 
outcomes. Nevertheless, the PA protocol was more efficient in quantifying 
expression of leukemia marker genes and showed better performance in the 
expression-based classification of leukemia. Independent qRT-PCR experiments 
verified that the PA protocol better represented total RNA compared to the RD 
protocol. In contrast, the RD protocol detected a higher number of non-coding 
RNA features and had better alignment efficiency. The RD protocol also recovered 
more known fusion-gene events, although variability was seen in fusion gene 
predictions.
CONCLUSION: The overall findings provide a framework for the use of RNA-seq in a 
precision medicine setting with limited number of samples and suggest that 
selection of the library preparation protocol should be based on the objectives 
of the analysis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-4039-1
PMCID: PMC5561555
PMID: 28818039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
Helsinki University Hospital Ethics Committee approved the study and collection 
of samples (permit numbers 239/13/03/00/2010, 303/13/03/01/2011). CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: Bone marrow (BM) aspirates from two AML and two ALL patients were 
collected after signed informed consent and with protocols in accordance with 
the Declaration of Helsinki. COMPETING INTERESTS: CAH has received research 
funding from Celgene, Orion, Pfizer, and Novartis unrelated to this study. OK 
has research funding from Bayer and Roche unrelated to this study. PUBLISHERâ€™S 
NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.