1. Nature. 2017 Aug 24;548(7668):420-425. doi: 10.1038/nature23484. Epub 2017 Aug
 16.

The primed SNARE-complexin-synaptotagmin complex for neuronal exocytosis.

Zhou Q(1)(2), Zhou P(1), Wang AL(1)(2), Wu D(1), Zhao M(1)(2), SÃ¼dhof TC(1), 
Brunger AT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Department of Structural 
Biology, Department of Photon Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California 
94305, USA.

Synaptotagmin, complexin, and neuronal SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide sensitive 
factor attachment protein receptor) proteins mediate evoked synchronous 
neurotransmitter release, but the molecular mechanisms mediating the cooperation 
between these molecules remain unclear. Here we determine crystal structures of 
the primed pre-fusion SNARE-complexin-synaptotagmin-1 complex. These structures 
reveal an unexpected tripartite interface between synaptotagmin-1 and both the 
SNARE complex and complexin. Simultaneously, a second synaptotagmin-1 molecule 
interacts with the other side of the SNARE complex via the previously identified 
primary interface. Mutations that disrupt either interface in solution also 
severely impair evoked synchronous release in neurons, suggesting that both 
interfaces are essential for the primed pre-fusion state. Ca2+ binding to the 
synaptotagmin-1 molecules unlocks the complex, allows full zippering of the 
SNARE complex, and triggers membrane fusion. The tripartite 
SNARE-complexin-synaptotagmin-1 complex at a synaptic vesicle docking site has 
to be unlocked for triggered fusion to start, explaining the cooperation between 
complexin and synaptotagmin-1 in synchronizing evoked release on the 
sub-millisecond timescale.

DOI: 10.1038/nature23484
PMCID: PMC5757840
PMID: 28813412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.