1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2017 Oct 5;372(1731):20160281. doi: 
10.1098/rstb.2016.0281.

SUMO, a small, but powerful, regulator of double-strand break repair.

Garvin AJ(1), Morris JR(2).

Author information:
(1)Birmingham Centre for Genome Biology and Institute of Cancer and Genomic 
Sciences, Medical and Dental School, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, 
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(2)Birmingham Centre for Genome Biology and Institute of Cancer and Genomic 
Sciences, Medical and Dental School, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, 
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK j.morris.3@bham.ac.uk.

The response to a DNA double-stranded break in mammalian cells is a process of 
sensing and signalling the lesion. It results in halting the cell cycle and 
local transcription and in the mediation of the DNA repair process itself. The 
response is launched through a series of post-translational modification 
signalling events coordinated by phosphorylation and ubiquitination. More 
recently modifications of proteins by Small Ubiquitin-like MOdifier (SUMO) 
isoforms have also been found to be key to coordination of the response (Morris 
et al. 2009 Nature462, 886-890 (doi:10.1038/nature08593); Galanty et al. 2009 
Nature462, 935-939 (doi:10.1038/nature08657)). However our understanding of the 
role of SUMOylation is slight compared with our growing knowledge of how 
ubiquitin drives signal amplification and key chromatin interactions. In this 
review we consider our current knowledge of how SUMO isoforms, SUMO conjugation 
machinery, SUMO proteases and SUMO-interacting proteins contribute to directing 
altered chromatin states and to repair-protein kinetics at a double-stranded DNA 
lesion in mammalian cells. We also consider the gaps in our understanding.This 
article is part of the themed issue 'Chromatin modifiers and remodellers in DNA 
repair and signalling'.

Â© 2017 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0281
PMCID: PMC5577459
PMID: 28847818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests.