1. Am J Physiol. 1987 Jun;252(6 Pt 1):E746-50. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.1987.252.6.E746.

Gut-liver interaction in glutamine homeostasis: portal ammonia role in uptake 
and metabolism.

Buttrose M, McKellar D, Welbourne TC.

The role of ammonia released by the gut on hepatic glutamine handling and 
metabolism was studied in postabsorptive anesthesized male Sprague-Dawley rats 
at spontaneous and elevated arterial glutamine concentrations. Glutamine 
handling and metabolite release across both organ beds were studied using 
arteriovenous concentration differences and simultaneously measured portal and 
hepatic venous plasma flows. At the spontaneous arterial glutamine load, 
fractional glutamine extraction, FE-Gln, by the gut and the liver was 24 and 
10%, respectively. At the elevated glutamine load, gut glutamine uptake doubled, 
while FE-Gln remained at 24%; however, portal ammonia and alanine increased and 
decreased, respectively. In response, hepatic FE-Gln increased to 28% with a 
large release of glutamate and urea. The role of portal ammonia in modulating 
hepatic glutamine uptake was studied by infusing NH4HCO3 directly into the 
portal vein. Increasing the portal load promptly stimulated hepatic glutamine 
uptake and glutamate and urea release. Mitochondria isolated from these livers 
produced more glutamate from glutamine, suggesting ammonia activation of hepatic 
glutaminase flux; in addition, citrulline formation increased, suggesting a 
coupling of glutaminase flux to urea synthesis. The results are consistent with 
portal ammonia release acting as a key informational molecule in interorgan 
glutamine flow.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.1987.252.6.E746
PMID: 2884886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]