1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Aug 31;13(8):e1006998. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006998. 
eCollection 2017 Aug.

Flavin monooxygenases regulate Caenorhabditis elegans axon guidance and growth 
cone protrusion with UNC-6/Netrin signaling and Rac GTPases.

Gujar MR(1), Stricker AM(1), Lundquist EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Program in Molecular, Cellular, and 
Developmental Biology, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, United States of 
America.

The guidance cue UNC-6/Netrin regulates both attractive and repulsive axon 
guidance. Our previous work showed that in C. elegans, the attractive 
UNC-6/Netrin receptor UNC-40/DCC stimulates growth cone protrusion, and that the 
repulsive receptor, an UNC-5:UNC-40 heterodimer, inhibits growth cone 
protrusion. We have also shown that inhibition of growth cone protrusion 
downstream of the UNC-5:UNC-40 repulsive receptor involves Rac GTPases, the Rac 
GTP exchange factor UNC-73/Trio, and the cytoskeletal regulator UNC-33/CRMP, 
which mediates Semaphorin-induced growth cone collapse in other systems. The 
multidomain flavoprotein monooxygenase (FMO) MICAL (Molecule Interacting with 
CasL) also mediates growth cone collapse in response to Semaphorin by directly 
oxidizing F-actin, resulting in depolymerization. The C. elegans genome does not 
encode a multidomain MICAL-like molecule, but does encode five flavin 
monooxygenases (FMO-1, -2, -3, -4, and 5) and another molecule, EHBP-1, similar 
to the non-FMO portion of MICAL. Here we show that FMO-1, FMO-4, FMO-5, and 
EHBP-1 may play a role in UNC-6/Netrin directed repulsive guidance mediated 
through UNC-40 and UNC-5 receptors. Mutations in fmo-1, fmo-4, fmo-5, and ehbp-1 
showed VD/DD axon guidance and branching defects, and variably enhanced unc-40 
and unc-5 VD/DD axon guidance defects. Developing growth cones in vivo of fmo-1, 
fmo-4, fmo-5, and ehbp-1 mutants displayed excessive filopodial protrusion, and 
transgenic expression of FMO-5 inhibited growth cone protrusion. Mutations 
suppressed growth cone inhibition caused by activated UNC-40 and UNC-5 
signaling, and activated Rac GTPase CED-10 and MIG-2, suggesting that these 
molecules are required downstream of UNC-6/Netrin receptors and Rac GTPases. 
From these studies we conclude that FMO-1, FMO-4, FMO-5, and EHBP-1 represent 
new players downstream of UNC-6/Netrin receptors and Rac GTPases that inhibit 
growth cone filopodial protrusion in repulsive axon guidance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006998
PMCID: PMC5597259
PMID: 28859089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.