1. Neuroreport. 2017 Oct 18;28(15):949-955. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000857.

Electroencephalogram characteristics during possession trances in healthy 
individuals.

Kawai N(1), Honda M, Nishina E, Yagi R, Oohashi T.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Research and Development, Foundation for Advancement of 
International Science, Tsukuba bComprehensive Research Organization, Waseda 
University cDepartment of Functional Brain Research, National Center of 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira dDepartment of Liberal Arts, The Open 
University of Japan, Chiba eDepartment of Early Childhood Education, Tokyo 
Seitoku College, Tokyo, Japan.

Despite intensive studies on cerebral activity during trances involving tranquil 
arousal states, there are little data on physiological basis of naturally 
induced possession trances involving hyperarousal active states because of the 
difficulty of gathering data from participants within a natural cultural context 
in the field. We investigated the characteristics of electroencephalograms 
(EEGs) that were specific for naturally induced possession trances involving 
hyperarousal states in actual rituals. We measured the EEG signals of 12 healthy 
participants, seven with trance and five without trance, before, during, and 
after a dedicatory ritual drama in Bali, Indonesia, using a custom-modified 
field telemetry system. During trance, θ (4-7.5 Hz), α-1 (8-9.5 Hz), α-2 
(10-12.5 Hz), and β (13-30 Hz) signals were significantly increased compared 
with those during the control phases. Such findings were not observed in 
participants without trance when they performed similar movements in the 
rituals. The α-1 and α-2 signals tended to remain elevated for several minutes 
postritual compared with those recorded during the preritual resting state. 
These results suggest that spontaneous EEG patterns during possession trances 
may be related, at least in part, to the activation of the reward-generating 
neuronal system situated in deep-lying brain structures and deactivation of the 
cerebral cortex.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000857
PMCID: PMC5610563
PMID: 28858037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]