1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2017 Sep;24(6):1195-1203. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2016.05.012. 
Epub 2016 May 25.

TNF-alpha -308G/A and -238G/A polymorphisms and its protein network associated 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Jamil K(1)(2), Jayaraman A(2), Ahmad J(3), Joshi S(4), Yerra SK(5).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Department, Bhagwan Mahavir Medical Research Centre, 10-1-1, Mahavir 
Marg, AC Guards, Hyderabad 500004, Telangana, India.
(2)Centre for Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, 
Jawaharlal Nehru Institute of Advanced Studies (JNIAS), Buddha Bhawan, 6th 
Floor, M.G. Road, Secunderabad 500003, Telangana, India.
(3)Zoology Department, Osmania University, Hyderabad 500007, Telangana, India.
(4)Mahavir Hospital and Research Centre, 10-1-1, Mahavir Marg, AC Guards, 
Hyderabad 500004, Telangana, India.
(5)Cardiology Department, Mahavir Hospital and Research Centre, 10-1-1, Mahavir 
Marg, AC Guards, Hyderabad 500004, Telangana, India.

Several reports document the role of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and 
lipid metabolism in the context of acute inflammation as a causative factor in 
obesity-associated insulin resistance and as one of the causative parameter of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Our aim was to investigate the association 
between -308G/A and -238G/A polymorphisms located in the promoter region of the 
TNF-α gene in T2DM in the Indian population with bioinformatics analysis of 
TNF-α protein networking with an aim to find new target sites for the treatment 
of T2DM. Demographics of 100 diabetes patients and 100 healthy volunteers were 
collected in a structured proforma and 3 ml blood samples were obtained from the 
study group, after approval of Institutional Ethics Committee of the hospital 
(IEC). The information on clinical parameters was obtained from medical records. 
Genomic DNA was extracted; PCR-RFLP was performed using TNF-α primers specific 
to detect the presence of SNPs. Various bioinformatics tools such as STRING 
software were used to determine its network with other associated genes. The 
PCR-RFLP studies showed that among the -238G/A types the GG genotype was 87%, GA 
genotype was 12% and AA genotype was 1%. Almost a similar pattern of results was 
obtained with TNF-α -308G/A polymorphism. The results obtained were evaluated 
statistically to determine the significance. By constructing TNF-α protein 
interaction network we could analyze ontology and hubness of the network to 
identify the networking of this gene which may influence the functioning of 
other genes in promoting T2DM. We could identify new targets in T2DM which may 
function in association with TNF-α. Through hub analysis of TNF-α protein 
network we have identified three novel proteins RIPK1, BIRC2 and BIRC3 which may 
contribute to TNF-mediated T2DM pathogenesis. In conclusion, our study indicated 
that some of the genotypes of TNF-α -308G/A, -238G/A were not significantly 
associated to type 2 diabetes mellitus, but TNF-α -308G/A polymorphism was 
reported to be a potent risk factor for diabetes in higher age (>45) groups. 
Also, the novel hub proteins may serve as new targets against TNF-α T2DM 
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2016.05.012
PMCID: PMC5562469
PMID: 28855812