1. BMJ Open. 2017 Aug 28;7(8):e015785. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-015785.

Protocol for a randomised, double-masked, sham-controlled phase 4 study on the 
efficacy, safety and tolerability of intravitreal aflibercept monotherapy 
compared with aflibercept with adjunctive photodynamic therapy in polypoidal 
choroidal vasculopathy: the ATLANTIC study.

Marques JP(1)(2)(3), Farinha C(1)(3), Costa MÂ(1), Ferrão Â(1), Nunes S(1), 
Silva R(1)(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Association for Investigation and Biomedical Research on Light and Image 
(AIBILI), Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra (FMUC), Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra 
(CHUC), Coimbra, Portugal.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to compare the efficacy and safety of 
intravitreal aflibercept (IVA) with sham photodynamic therapy (sPDT) versus IVA 
with verteporfin PDT (vPDT) in a Caucasian population with treatment-naive 
polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV), enrolling into a treat and extend (T&E) 
regimen.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: Randomised, double-masked, sham-controlled, multicentre 
phase 4 investigator-driven clinical trial. The primary outcomes are (1) change 
in best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) from baseline and (2) polyp regression at 
week 52, assessed by indocyanine green angiography (ICGA). Fifty patients with 
treatment-naive PCV will be recruited from Portuguese and Spanish clinical 
sites. Eligible patients will receive monthly IVA for 3 months (week 0, week 4 
and week 8). At week 16, all patients will repeat ICGA and undergo central 
randomisation (1:1 ratio) into one of the following groups: Group 1-IVA T&E + 
vPDT; Group 2-IVA T&E + sPDT. PDT will be performed at week 16, week 28 and week 
40 in the presence of active polyps. After week 16, the presence of macular 
fluid on optical coherence tomography will determine the schedule of 
observations. When present, the interval between visits/injections will decrease 
2 weeks (minimum 6 weeks). When not, the interval between visits/injections will 
increase 2 weeks (maximum 12 weeks). Efficacy will be evaluated based on BCVA, 
central retinal thickness and polyp regression. Safety parameters will include 
assessment of intraocular pressure, adverse events and serious adverse events.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: This study was designed and shall be implemented and 
reported in accordance with the International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) 
Harmonised Tripartite Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice, with applicable 
local regulations and with the ethical principles laid down in the Declaration 
of Helsinki. The study received approval from Comissão de Ética para a 
Investigação Clínica and Comité Ético de investigación Clínica del Hospital 
Universitari de Bellvitge.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: This study is registered under the EudraCT number: 
2015-001368-20 and the ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02495181.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-015785
PMCID: PMC5629716
PMID: 28851779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: We have read and understood 
BMJ policy on declaration of interests and declare the following interests: RS 
is a consultant for Alcon; Alimera Sciences; Allergan; Bayer; Novartis and THEA.