1. Neuroimage. 2018 Apr 1;169:23-45. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.09.009. Epub 
2017 Sep 8.

Adaptive cortical parcellations for source reconstructed EEG/MEG connectomes.

Farahibozorg SR(1), Henson RN(2), Hauk O(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK. Electronic address: sf513@cam.ac.uk.
(2)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.

There is growing interest in the rich temporal and spectral properties of the 
functional connectome of the brain that are provided by Electro- and 
Magnetoencephalography (EEG/MEG). However, the problem of leakage between brain 
sources that arises when reconstructing brain activity from EEG/MEG recordings 
outside the head makes it difficult to distinguish true connections from 
spurious connections, even when connections are based on measures that ignore 
zero-lag dependencies. In particular, standard anatomical parcellations for 
potential cortical sources tend to over- or under-sample the real spatial 
resolution of EEG/MEG. By using information from cross-talk functions (CTFs) 
that objectively describe leakage for a given sensor configuration and 
distributed source reconstruction method, we introduce methods for optimising 
the number of parcels while simultaneously minimising the leakage between them. 
More specifically, we compare two image segmentation algorithms: 1) a 
split-and-merge (SaM) algorithm based on standard anatomical parcellations and 
2) a region growing (RG) algorithm based on all the brain vertices with no prior 
parcellation. Interestingly, when applied to minimum-norm reconstructions for 
EEG/MEG configurations from real data, both algorithms yielded approximately 70 
parcels despite their different starting points, suggesting that this reflects 
the resolution limit of this particular sensor configuration and reconstruction 
method. Importantly, when compared against standard anatomical parcellations, 
resolution matrices of adaptive parcellations showed notably higher sensitivity 
and distinguishability of parcels. Furthermore, extensive simulations of 
realistic networks revealed significant improvements in network reconstruction 
accuracies, particularly in reducing false leakage-induced connections. Adaptive 
parcellations therefore allow a more accurate reconstruction of functional 
EEG/MEG connectomes.

Copyright Â© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.09.009
PMCID: PMC5864515
PMID: 28893608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]