1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2017 Oct;24(10):T119-T134. doi: 10.1530/ERC-17-0199.

The future: genetics advances in MEN1 therapeutic approaches and management 
strategies.

Agarwal SK(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases BranchNational Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA SunitaA@mail.nih.gov.

Comment in
    Hormones (Athens). 2022 Dec;21(4):743-745. doi: 10.1007/s42000-022-00356-z.

The identification of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) gene in 
1997 has shown that germline heterozygous mutations in the MEN1 gene located on 
chromosome 11q13 predisposes to the development of tumors in the MEN1 syndrome. 
Tumor development occurs upon loss of the remaining normal copy of the MEN1 gene 
in MEN1-target tissues. Therefore, MEN1 is a classic tumor suppressor gene in 
the context of MEN1. This tumor suppressor role of the protein encoded by the 
MEN1 gene, menin, holds true in mouse models with germline heterozygous Men1 
loss, wherein MEN1-associated tumors develop in adult mice after spontaneous 
loss of the remaining non-targeted copy of the Men1 gene. The availability of 
genetic testing for mutations in the MEN1 gene has become an essential part of 
the diagnosis and management of MEN1. Genetic testing is also helping to exclude 
mutation-negative cases in MEN1 families from the burden of lifelong clinical 
screening. In the past 20 years, efforts of various groups world-wide have been 
directed at mutation analysis, molecular genetic studies, mouse models, gene 
expression studies, epigenetic regulation analysis, biochemical studies and 
anti-tumor effects of candidate therapies in mouse models. This review will 
focus on the findings and advances from these studies to identify MEN1 germline 
and somatic mutations, the genetics of MEN1-related states, several protein 
partners of menin, the three-dimensional structure of menin and menin-dependent 
target genes. The ongoing impact of all these studies on disease prediction, 
management and outcomes will continue in the years to come.

Â© 2017 Society for Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-17-0199
PMCID: PMC5679100
PMID: 28899949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest The author declares that 
there is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the 
impartiality of this review.