1. Biosci Rep. 2017 Oct 31;37(5):BSR20171111. doi: 10.1042/BSR20171111. Print
2017  Oct 31.

Identification of differential plasma miRNA profiles in Chinese workers with 
occupational lead exposure.

Xu M(1), Yu Z(2), Hu F(3), Zhang H(2), Zhong L(2), Han L(2), An Y(4), Zhu B(2), 
Zhang H(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational Disease Prevention, Jiangsu Provincial Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing 210009, China hdzhangjscdc@yeah.net 
sosolou@126.com.
(2)Department of Occupational Disease Prevention, Jiangsu Provincial Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing 210009, China.
(3)Changzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Changzhou 213022, China.
(4)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Medical College of Soochow 
University, Suzhou 215123, China.

Elevated lead absorptions are hazardous factors in lead-related workers. 
Previous studies have found its toxic impacts on nervous, circulatory, and 
metabolic systems. We hypothesized that alteration of miRNAs profile in plasma 
was closely associated with lead exposure. We analyzed to identify lead-related 
miRNAs in workers occupationally exposed to lead. Microarray assay was performed 
to detect plasma miRNA between workers with high and minimal lead exposure in 
the discovery stage. The following prediction of miRNAs' candidate target genes 
was carried out by using miRecords, STRING, and KEGG databases. We finally 
identified four miRNAs significantly associated with high level of blood lead. 
miR-520c-3p (*P=0.014), miR-211 (*P=0.019), and miR-148a (*P=0.031) were 
downexpressed in workers with high lead exposure and with high blood lead level 
(BLL), while miR-572(*P=0.027) displayed an opposite profile. Functional 
analysis of miRNAs displayed that these miRNAs could trigger different cellular 
genes and pathways. People under chronic lead exposure had a diverse 
'fingerprint' plasma miRNA profile. Our study suggested that miR-520c-3p, 
miR-211, miR-148a, and miR-572 were the potential biomarkers for lead 
susceptibility in Chinese.

Â© 2017 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20171111
PMCID: PMC5662923
PMID: 28916729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.