1. Front Vet Sci. 2017 Sep 4;4:146. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2017.00146. eCollection 
2017.

Authorization and Toxicity of Veterinary Drugs and Plant Protection Products: 
Residues of the Active Ingredients in Food and Feed and Toxicity Problems 
Related to Adjuvants.

Klátyik S(1), Bohus P(2), Darvas B(1), Székács A(1).

Author information:
(1)Agro-Environmental Research Institute, National Agricultural Research and 
Innovation Centre, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Lamberti S.p.A., Albizzate, Italy.

Chemical substances applied in animal husbandry or veterinary medicine and in 
crop protection represent substantial environmental loads, and their residues 
occur in food and feed products. Product approval is governed differently in 
these two sectors in the European Union (EU), and the occurrence of veterinary 
drug (VD) and pesticide residues indicated by contamination notification cases 
in the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed of the EU also show characteristic 
differences. While the initial high numbers of VD residues reported in 2002 were 
successfully suppressed to less than 100 cases annually by 2006 and on, the 
number of notification cases for pesticide residues showed a gradual increase 
from a low (approximately 50 cases annually) initial level until 2005 to more 
than 250 cases annually after 2009, with a halt occurring only in 2016. Main 
notifiers of VD residues include Germany, Belgium, the UK, and Italy (63, 59, 
42, and 31 notifications announced, respectively), and main consigning countries 
of non-compliances are Vietnam, India, China, and Brazil (88, 50, 34, and 23 
notifications, respectively). Thus, countries of South and Southeast Asia are 
considered a vulnerable point with regard to VD residues entering the EU market. 
Unintended side effects of VDs and plant protection products may be caused not 
only by the active ingredients but also by various additives in these 
preparations. Adjuvants (e.g., surfactants) and other co-formulants used in 
therapeutic agents and feed additives, as well as in pesticide formulations have 
long been considered as inactive ingredients in the aspects of the required main 
biological effect of the pharmaceutical or pesticide, and in turn, legal 
regulations of the approval and marketing of these additives specified 
significantly less stringent risk assessment requirements, than those specified 
for the active ingredients. However, numerous studies have shown additive, 
synergistic, or antagonistic side effects between the active ingredients and 
their additives in formulated products; moreover, toxicity has been evidenced 
for various additives. Therefore, toxicological evaluation of surfactants and 
other additives is essential for proper environmental risk assessment of 
formulations used in agriculture including animal husbandry and plant 
protection.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2017.00146
PMCID: PMC5591397
PMID: 28929103