1. Nat Commun. 2017 Sep 21;8(1):644. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00758-3.

Combined activation of MAP kinase pathway and β-catenin signaling cause deep 
penetrating nevi.

Yeh I(1)(2), Lang UE(3), Durieux E(4), Tee MK(5), Jorapur A(5), Shain AH(5), 
Haddad V(6), Pissaloux D(6), Chen X(5), Cerroni L(7), Judson RL(5), LeBoit 
PE(5)(3), McCalmont TH(5)(3), Bastian BC(5)(3), de la Fouchardière A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, 94143, 
CA, USA. Iwei.Yeh@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, 94143, CA, 
USA. Iwei.Yeh@ucsf.edu.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, 94143, CA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Lyon-Sud, Lyon, 69310, France.
(5)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, 94143, 
CA, USA.
(6)Department of Biopathology, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, 69008, France.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, 8036, Austria.

Deep penetrating nevus (DPN) is characterized by enlarged, pigmented melanocytes 
that extend through the dermis. DPN can be difficult to distinguish from 
melanoma but rarely displays aggressive biological behavior. Here, we identify a 
combination of mutations of the β-catenin and mitogen-activated protein kinase 
pathways as characteristic of DPN. Mutations of the β-catenin pathway change the 
phenotype of a common nevus with BRAF mutation into that of DPN, with increased 
pigmentation, cell volume and nuclear cyclin D1 levels. Our results suggest that 
constitutive β-catenin pathway activation promotes tumorigenesis by overriding 
dependencies on the microenvironment that constrain proliferation of common 
nevi. In melanoma that arose from DPN we find additional oncogenic alterations. 
We identify DPN as an intermediate stage in the step-wise progression from nevus 
to melanoma. In summary, we delineate specific genetic alterations and their 
sequential order, information that can assist in the diagnostic classification 
and grading of these distinctive neoplasms.Deep penetrating nevi (DPN) are 
unusual melanocytic neoplasms with unknown genetic drivers. Here the authors 
show that majority of DPN harbor activating mutations in the β-catenin and the 
MAP-kinase pathways; this characteristic can help in the classification and 
grading of these distinctive neoplasms.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00758-3
PMCID: PMC5608693
PMID: 28935960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.