1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Sep 14;8:1764. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01764.
eCollection  2017.

Microbiome-Metabolome Responses to a High-Grain Diet Associated with the 
Hind-Gut Health of Goats.

Tao S(1), Tian P(1), Luo Y(1), Tian J(1), Hua C(1), Geng Y(1), Cong R(2), Ni 
Y(1), Zhao R(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Physiology and Biochemistry, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural UniversityNanjing, China.
(2)Animal physiology teaching and research office, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Northwest A & F UniversityYangling, China.

Studies on the effect of a high-concentrate (HC) diet on the hindgut microbiota 
and metabolome of ruminants are rarely reported. We used 454 pyrosequencing of 
16S rDNA genes and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry to evaluate the effects 
of long-term feeding (HL) or short-term (HS) feeding of an HC diet on changes in 
bacterial microbiota and their metabolites in the hindgut, with Guanzhong goat 
as a ruminant model. Results indicated that an HC diet decreased bacterial 
diversity and induced metabolic disorder in the hindgut. The levels of lactate, 
endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS), and volatile fatty acid concentrations were 
higher in the intestinal digesta of the HC goats than in those of the LC goats 
(P < 0.05). The level of beta-alanine decreased, whereas the levels of 
stigmasterol and quinic acid decreased in the cecal and colonic digesta of the 
HC goats. At the genus level, the abundance of Clostridium and Turicibacter was 
significantly increased in both the colonic and cecal digesta of the HC goats. 
Several potential relationships between metabolites and several microbial 
species were revealed in this study. The mRNA expression of the genes 
functionally associated with nutrients transport, including NHE2, NHE3, MCT1, 
and MCT4 were significantly downregulated in the colonic mucosa by the HC diet 
(P < 0.05). The expression levels of the genes related to the inflammatory 
response, including TLR4, MYD88, TNF-α, and IL-1β were markedly upregulated in 
the cecal mucosa by the HC diet (P < 0.05). Our results indicate that an HC diet 
induces microbiota dysbiosis, metabolic disorders, and mucosal damage in the 
hindgut of goats.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01764
PMCID: PMC5603706
PMID: 28959247