1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Sep 29;13(9):e1007036. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007036. 
eCollection 2017 Sep.

Functional divergence of chloroplast Cpn60α subunits during Arabidopsis embryo 
development.

Ke X(1), Zou W(1), Ren Y(1), Wang Z(1), Li J(1), Wu X(1), Zhao J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Hybrid Rice, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, China.

Chaperonins are a class of molecular chaperones that assist in the folding and 
assembly of a wide range of substrates. In plants, chloroplast chaperonins are 
composed of two different types of subunits, Cpn60α and Cpn60β, and duplication 
of Cpn60α and Cpn60β genes occurs in a high proportion of plants. However, the 
importance of multiple Cpn60α and Cpn60β genes in plants is poorly understood. 
In this study, we found that loss-of-function of CPNA2 (AtCpn60α2), a gene 
encoding the minor Cpn60α subunit in Arabidopsis thaliana, resulted in arrested 
embryo development at the globular stage, whereas the other AtCpn60α gene 
encoding the dominant Cpn60α subunit, CPNA1 (AtCpn60α1), mainly affected 
embryonic cotyledon development at the torpedo stage and thereafter. Further 
studies demonstrated that CPNA2 can form a functional chaperonin with CPNB2 
(AtCpn60β2) and CPNB3 (AtCpn60β3), while the functional partners of CPNA1 are 
CPNB1 (AtCpn60β1) and CPNB2. We also revealed that the functional chaperonin 
containing CPNA2 could assist the folding of a specific substrate, KASI 
(β-ketoacyl-[acyl carrier protein] synthase I), and that the KASI protein level 
was remarkably reduced due to loss-of-function of CPNA2. Furthermore, the 
reduction in the KASI protein level was shown to be the possible cause for the 
arrest of cpna2 embryos. Our findings indicate that the two Cpn60α subunits in 
Arabidopsis play different roles during embryo development through forming 
distinct chaperonins with specific AtCpn60β to assist the folding of particular 
substrates, thus providing novel insights into functional divergence of Cpn60α 
subunits in plants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007036
PMCID: PMC5636168
PMID: 28961247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.