1. Immunol Lett. 2018 Mar;195:9-17. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2017.09.011. Epub 2017
Sep  28.

Endogenous ligands of TLR4 promote unresolving tissue fibrosis: Implications for 
systemic sclerosis and its targeted therapy.

Bhattacharyya S(1), Varga J(2).

Author information:
(1)Northwestern Scleroderma Program, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 
United States. Electronic address: s-bhattacharyya@northwestern.edu.
(2)Northwestern Scleroderma Program, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 
United States.

Fibrosis, the hallmark of scleroderma or systemic sclerosis (SSc), is a complex, 
dynamic and generally irreversible pathophysiological process that leads to 
tissue disruption, and lacks effective therapy. While early-stage fibrosis 
resembles normal wound healing, in SSc fibrosis fails to resolve. Innate immune 
signaling via toll-like receptors (TLRs) has recently emerged as a key driver of 
persistent fibrotic response in SSc. Recurrent injury in genetically predisposed 
individual causes generation of "damage-associated molecular patterns" (DAMPs) 
such as fibronectin-EDA and tenascin-C. Sensing of these danger signals by TLR4 
on resident cells elicits potent stimulatory effects on fibrotic gene expression 
and myofibroblast differentiation, and appears to sensitize fibroblasts to the 
profibrotic stimulatory effect of TGF-β. Thus, DAMPs induce TLR4-mediated innate 
immune signaling on resident mesenchymal cells which drives the emergence and 
persistence of fibrotic cells in tissues, and underlies the switch from a 
self-limited repair response to non-resolving pathological fibrosis 
characteristic of SSc. In this review, we present current views of the DAMP-TLR4 
axis in driving sustained fibroblasts activation and its pathogenic roles in 
fibrosis progression in SSc, and potential anti-fibrotic approaches for 
selective therapeutic targeting of TLR4 signaling.

Copyright © 2017 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2017.09.011
PMCID: PMC5820196
PMID: 28964818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]