1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Nov 2;45(19):11305-11314. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx791.

Cmr1 enables efficient RNA and DNA interference of a III-B CRISPR-Cas system by 
binding to target RNA and crRNA.

Li Y(1)(2), Zhang Y(1), Lin J(3), Pan S(1), Han W(3), Peng N(1), Liang YX(1), 
She Q(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology and College of Life Science 
and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070 Wuhan, China.
(2)Archaea Centre, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maal⊘es 
Vej 5, Copenhagen Biocenter, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(3)Archaea Centre, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maal?es 
Vej 5, Copenhagen Biocenter, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.

CRISPR-Cas (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic 
repeats-CRISPR-associated) systems provide adaptive immunity against invasive 
nucleic acids guided by CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) in archaea and bacteria. Type III 
CRISPR-Cas effector complexes show RNA cleavage and RNA-activated DNA cleavage 
activity, representing the only known system of dual nucleic acid interference. 
Here, we investigated the function of Cmr1 by genetic assays of DNA and RNA 
interference activity in the mutants and biochemical characterization of their 
mutated Cmr complexes. Three cmr1α mutants were constructed including ΔβΔ1α, 
Δβ1α-M1 and Δβ1α-M2 among which the last two mutants carried a double and a 
quadruple mutation in the first α-helix region of Cmr1α. Whereas the double 
mutation of Cmr1α (W58A and F59A) greatly influenced target RNA capture, the 
quadruple mutation almost abolished crRNA binding to Cmr1α. We found that 
Cmr2α-6α formed a stable core complex that is active in both RNA and DNA 
cleavage and that Cmr1α strongly enhances the basal activity of the core complex 
upon incorporation into the ribonucleoprotein complex. Therefore, Cmr1 functions 
as an integral activation module in III-B systems, and the unique occurrence of 
Cmr1 in III-B systems may reflect the adaptive evolution of type III CRISPR-Cas 
systems in thermophiles.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx791
PMCID: PMC5737701
PMID: 28977458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]