1. J Cell Sci. 2017 Nov 15;130(22):3851-3861. doi: 10.1242/jcs.207829. Epub 2017 
Oct 11.

Multiple pathways facilitate the biogenesis of mammalian tail-anchored proteins.

Casson J(1), McKenna M(1), Haßdenteufel S(2), Aviram N(3), Zimmerman R(2), High 
S(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Function, School of Biological Sciences, 
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, Michael Smith Building, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland 
University, 66421 Homburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
7610001, Israel.
(4)Division of Molecular and Cellular Function, School of Biological Sciences, 
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, Michael Smith Building, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK 
stephen.high@manchester.ac.uk.

Tail-anchored (TA) proteins are transmembrane proteins with a single C-terminal 
transmembrane domain, which functions as both their subcellular targeting signal 
and membrane anchor. We show that knockout of TRC40 in cultured human cells has 
a relatively minor effect on endogenous TA proteins, despite their apparent 
reliance on this pathway in vitro These findings support recent evidence that 
the canonical TRC40 pathway is not essential for TA protein biogenesis in vivo 
We therefore investigated the possibility that other ER-targeting routes can 
complement the TRC40 pathway and identified roles for both the SRP pathway and 
the recently described mammalian SND pathway in TA protein biogenesis. We 
conclude that, although TRC40 normally plays an important role in TA protein 
biogenesis, it is not essential, and speculate that alternative pathways for TA 
protein biogenesis, including those identified in this study, contribute to the 
redundancy of the TRC40 pathway.

© 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.207829
PMCID: PMC5702047
PMID: 29021347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.