1. Sci Rep. 2017 Oct 26;7(1):14127. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-14367-z.

Improved performance of the artus Mycobacterium tuberculosis RG PCR kit in a low 
incidence setting: a retrospective monocentric study.

Kohlmorgen B(1), Elias J(1)(2), Schoen C(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Hygiene and Microbiology, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, DRK Kliniken Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute for Hygiene and Microbiology, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, 
Germany. cschoen@hygiene.uni-wuerzburg.de.

Tuberculosis (TB) and the spread of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) 
strains resistant against rifampin (RIF) and isoniazid (INH) pose a serious 
threat to global health. However, rapid and reliable MTBC detection along with 
RIF/INH susceptibility testing are challenging in low prevalence countries due 
to the higher rate of false positives. Here, we provide the first performance 
data for the artus MTBC PCR assay in a low prevalence setting. We analyze 1323 
respiratory and 311 non-respiratory samples with the artus MTBC PCR assay as 
well as by mycobacterial culture and microscopy. We propose retesting of 
specimens in duplicate and consideration of a determined cycle-threshold value 
cut-off greater than 34, as this significantly increases accuracy, specificity, 
and negative predictive value without affecting sensitivity. Furthermore, we 
tested fourteen MTBC positive samples with the GenoType MTBDRplus test and 
demonstrate that using an identical DNA extraction protocol for both assays does 
not impair downstream genotypic testing for RIF and INH susceptibility. In 
conclusion, our procedure optimizes the use of the artus MTB assay with workload 
efficient methods in a low incidence setting. Combining the modified artus MTB 
with the GenoType MTBDRplus assays allows rapid and accurate detection of MTBC 
and RIF/INH resistance.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-14367-z
PMCID: PMC5658397
PMID: 29074852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.