1. Hum Pathol. 2017 Dec;70:121-128. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2017.10.022. Epub 2017
 Oct 28.

Universal screening for Lynch syndrome in endometrial cancers: frequency of 
germline mutations and identification of patients with Lynch-like syndrome.

Dillon JL(1), Gonzalez JL(2), DeMars L(3), Bloch KJ(4), Tafe LJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical 
Center, Lebanon, NH.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical 
Center, Lebanon, NH; The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, 
03755.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, 
Lebanon, NH; The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, 03755.
(4)Familial Cancer Program, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical 
Center, Lebanon, NH; The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, 
03755; Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Lebanon, NH, 03756. Electronic address: 
Laura.J.Tafe@hitchcock.org.

Comment in
    Hum Pathol. 2018 Jun;76:170. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.01.029.
    Hum Pathol. 2018 Jun;76:169. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.01.028.

Lynch syndrome (LS) is an inherited clinical syndrome characterized by a high 
risk of colorectal, endometrial (lifetime risk of up to 60%), ovarian, and 
urinary tract cancers. The diagnosis is confirmed by identification of germline 
mutations in the DNA mismatch repair genes MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6, or EPCAM. In 
2015, our institution implemented universal screening of endometrial cancer (EC) 
hysterectomy specimens by mismatch repair immunohistochemistry (IHC) with reflex 
MLH1 promoter hypermethylation analysis for tumors with loss of MLH1/PMS2 
expression. Patients with tumors negative for MLH1 methylation and those with a 
loss of the heterodimer pair MSH2 and MSH6, or isolated loss of either PMS2 or 
MSH6 were referred to the Familial Cancer Program for genetic counseling and 
consideration of germline testing. Between May 2015 to Dec 2016, 233 EC patients 
were screened by IHC for LS with a median age of 63 years. Sixty tumors (27%) 
had abnormal IHC staining results. Fifty-one (22%) harbored heterodimeric loss 
of MLH1 and PMS2, 49 of which showed MLH1 promoter methylation (1 failure, 1 
negative). One showed loss of MLH1/PMS2 and MSH6, 2 showed loss of MSH2/MSH6, 
and 6 had isolated loss of MSH6 only. Ten patients underwent genetic counseling, 
and germline testing was performed in 8; LS was confirmed in 5 patients (2.1%). 
In addition, 3 patients with negative germline testing and presumed Lynch-like 
syndrome were identified and offered additional somatic testing. Universal 
screening for LS in EC patients has yielded positive results for identification 
of patients at risk for this inherited syndrome.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2017.10.022
PMID: 29107668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]