1. Sci Rep. 2017 Nov 6;7(1):14559. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-15226-7.

Enhanced Attentional Bias Variability in Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and its 
Relationship to More General Impairments in Cognitive Control.

Swick D(1)(2), Ashley V(3).

Author information:
(1)VA Northern California Health Care System, Martinez, CA, USA. 
swicklab@gmail.com.
(2)University of California, Davis, USA. swicklab@gmail.com.
(3)VA Northern California Health Care System, Martinez, CA, USA. 
v.ashley.07@gmail.com.

Hypervigilance towards threat is one of the defining features of post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD). This symptom predicts that individuals with PTSD will be 
biased to attend to potential dangers in the environment. However, cognitive 
tasks designed to assess visual-spatial attentional biases have shown mixed 
results. A newer proposal suggests that attentional bias is not a static 
phenomenon, but rather is characterized by fluctuations towards and away from 
threat. Here, we tested 28 combat Veterans with PTSD and 28 control Veterans on 
a dot probe task with negative-neutral word pairs. Combat-related words and 
generically negative words were presented in separate blocks. Replicating 
previous results, neither group showed a bias to attend towards or away from 
threat, but PTSD patients showed greater attentional bias variability (ABV), 
which correlated with symptom severity. However, the cognitive processes indexed 
by ABV are unclear. The present results indicated that ABV was strongly 
correlated with standard deviation at the reaction time (RT) level and with 
excessively long RTs (ex-Gaussian tau) related to cognitive failures. These 
findings suggest an overall increase in response variability unrelated to 
threat-related biases in spatial attention, and support a disruption in more 
general cognitive control processes in PTSD.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-15226-7
PMCID: PMC5673957
PMID: 29109521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.