1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017 Nov;96(46):e8741. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000008741.

The effectiveness of 2 consecutive intra-articular polydeoxyribonucleotide 
injections compared with intra-articular triamcinolone for hemiplegic shoulder 
pain: A STROBE-complaint retrospective study.

Park D(1), Yu KJ, Cho JY, Woo SB, Park J, Lee Z, Kim JM.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Rehabilitation Medicine, Daegu Fatima Hospital bDeparment of 
Phamacology, Kyungpook National Univeresity School of Medicine, Daegu, South 
Korea cMaster of Science in Management, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of intra-articular 
injection of polydeoxyribonucleotide (PDRN), compared with intraarticular 
triamcinolone (TA) injection, in subacute stroke patients with hemiplegic 
shoulder pain (HSP).Participants were subacute stroke patients with HSP who had 
undergone 2 consecutive intra-articular injections of TA or PDRN.Numeric rating 
scale (NRS) and passive range of motion (PROM) of hemiplegic shoulder were 
evaluated until 4 weeks after 2nd injection.In the results, there were 
significant improvements in all PROM measures 2 weeks after the second 
injection, compared with pre-injection results, in both groups (P < .05). In the 
PDRN group, however, none of the PROM measures were significantly improved at 3 
and 4 weeks after the second injection, compared with pre-injection results 
(P ≥ .05). When comparing pre-injection results with those at 4 weeks after the 
second injection, all PROM and NRS measures in the TA group were more improved 
than in the PDRN group, but this was not statistically significant (P ≥ .05).In 
conclusion, considering the systemic side effects of steroids, especially among 
patients with diabetes or metabolic syndrome, PDRN seems to be a worthwhile 
treatment option for HSP, although PDRN does not seem to have an equivalent 
persistence effects when compared with TA.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000008741
PMCID: PMC5704868
PMID: 29145323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interest or 
financial support.