1. Biochemistry. 2017 Dec 5;56(48):6321-6324. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00772. 
Epub 2017 Nov 16.

A Critical Role of Ser26 Hydrogen Bonding in Aβ42 Assembly and Toxicity.

Roychaudhuri R(1), Huynh TV(1), Whitaker TR(1), Hodara E(1), Condron MM(1), 
Teplow DB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , Los 
Angeles, California 90095, United States.
(2)Molecular Biology Institute and Brain Research Institute, University of 
California , Los Angeles, California 90095, United States.

Amyloid β-protein (Aβ) assembly is a seminal process in Alzheimer's disease. 
Elucidating the mechanistic features of this process is thought to be vital for 
the design and targeting of therapeutic agents. Computational studies of the 
most pathologic form of Aβ, the 42-residue Aβ42 peptide, have suggested that 
hydrogen bonding involving Ser26 may be particularly important in organizing a 
monomer folding nucleus and in subsequent peptide assembly. To study this 
question, we experimentally determined structure-activity relationships among 
Aβ42 peptides in which Ser26 was replaced with Gly, Ala, α-aminobutryic acid 
(Abu), or Cys. We observed that aliphatic substitutions (Ala and Abu) produced 
substantially increased rates of formation of β-sheet, hydrophobic surface, and 
fibrils, and higher levels of cellular toxicity. Replacement of the Ser hydroxyl 
group with a sulfhydryl moiety (Cys) did not have these effects. Instead, this 
peptide behaved like native Aβ42, even though the hydropathy of Cys was similar 
to that of Abu and very different from that of Ser. We conclude that H bonding 
of Ser26 is the factor most important in its contribution to Aβ42 conformation, 
assembly, and subsequent toxicity.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00772
PMID: 29140083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]