1. Circulation. 2017 Nov 21;136(21):2068-2082. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.030792.

Risk Stratification in Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy.

Calkins H(1), Corrado D(2), Marcus F(3).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology Division, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 
(H.C.).
(2)Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, University of Padova, 
Padua, Italy (D.C.).
(3)University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson (F.M.).

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is an inherited 
cardiomyopathy characterized by ventricular arrhythmias and an increased risk of 
sudden cardiac death. Although structural abnormalities of the right ventricle 
predominate, it is well recognized that left ventricular involvement is common, 
particularly in advanced disease, and that left-dominant forms occur. The 
pathological characteristic of ARVC is myocyte loss with fibrofatty replacement. 
Since the first detailed clinical description of the disorder in 1982, 
significant advances have been made in understanding this disease. Once the 
diagnosis of ARVC is established, the single most important clinical decision is 
whether a particular patient's sudden cardiac death risk is sufficient to 
justify placement of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator. The importance 
of this decision reflects the fact that ARVC is a common cause of sudden death 
in young people and that sudden death may be the first manifestation of the 
disease. This decision is particularly important because these are often young 
patients who are expected to live for many years. Although an implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator can save lives in individuals with this disease, it 
is also well recognized that implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy is 
associated with both short- and long-term complications. Decisions about the 
placement of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator are based on an estimate 
of a patient's risk of sudden cardiac death, as well as their preferences and 
values. The primary purpose of this article is to provide a review of the 
literature that concerns risk stratification in patients with ARVC and to place 
this literature in the framework of the 3 authors' considerable lifetime 
experiences in caring for patients with ARVC. The most important parameters to 
consider when determining arrhythmic risk include electric instability, 
including the frequency of premature ventricular contractions and sustained 
ventricular arrhythmia; proband status; extent of structural disease; cardiac 
syncope; male sex; the presence of multiple mutations or a mutation in TMEM43; 
and the patient's willingness to restrict exercise and to eliminate 
participation in competitive or endurance exercise.

Â© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.030792
PMCID: PMC5777304
PMID: 29158215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosure: Dr Corrado and 
Dr Marcus have no conflicts of interest to declare.