1. Sci Rep. 2017 Nov 24;7(1):16313. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-12796-4.

Disulfide loop cleavage of Legionella pneumophila PlaA boosts lysophospholipase 
A activity.

Lang C(1), Hiller M(1), Flieger A(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Enteropathogenic Bacteria and Legionella (FG11), Robert 
Koch-Institut, Burgstr. 37, D-38855, Wernigerode, Germany.
(2)Division of Enteropathogenic Bacteria and Legionella (FG11), Robert 
Koch-Institut, Burgstr. 37, D-38855, Wernigerode, Germany. fliegera@rki.de.

L. pneumophila, an important facultative intracellular bacterium, infects the 
human lung and environmental protozoa. At least fifteen phospholipases A (PLA) 
are encoded in its genome. Three of which, namely PlaA, PlaC, and PlaD, belong 
to the GDSL lipase family abundant in bacteria and higher plants. PlaA is a 
lysophospholipase A (LPLA) that destabilizes the phagosomal membrane in absence 
of a protective factor. PlaC shows PLA and glycerophospholipid: cholesterol 
acyltransferase (GCAT) activities which are activated by zinc metalloproteinase 
ProA via cleavage of a disulphide loop. In this work, we compared GDSL enzyme 
activities, their secretion, and activation of PlaA. We found that PlaA majorly 
contributed to LPLA, PlaC to PLA, and both substrate-dependently to GCAT 
activity. Western blotting revealed that PlaA and PlaC are type II-secreted and 
both processed by ProA. Interestingly, ProA steeply increased LPLA but 
diminished GCAT activity of PlaA. Deletion of 20 amino acids within a predicted 
disulfide loop of PlaA had the same effect. In summary, we propose a model by 
which ProA processes PlaA via disulfide loop cleavage leading to a steep 
increase in LPLA activity. Our results help to further characterize the L. 
pneumophila GDSL hydrolases, particularly PlaA, an enzyme acting in the 
Legionella-containing phagosome.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-12796-4
PMCID: PMC5701174
PMID: 29176577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.