1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2017 Dec 1;18(1):507. doi:
10.1186/s12891-017-1810-z.

COMT genotype and non-recovery after a whiplash injury in a Northern European 
population.

Rydman E(1), Comasco E(2), Pettersson H(3), Oreland L(2), Ponzer S(3), Ottosson 
C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset, Karolinska 
Institutet, -118 83, Stockholm, SE, Sweden. eric.rydman@ki.se.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset, Karolinska 
Institutet, -118 83, Stockholm, SE, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The COMT (Catechol-O-Methyl Transferase) gene may influence a 
person's vulnerability to develop long-term pain and some COMT single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) may associate with patterns of acute or chronic pain. Many 
patients with whiplash-associated disorders (WADs) suffer from long-term pain 
and other related symptoms, but it is less known if genetic factors play a role 
in the recovery process. The primary aim of this study was to evaluate whether 
self-reported non-recovery, including pain, was related to COMT genotype in 
patients with WAD. The secondary aim was to investigate whether or not 
background factors, including mental health, were related to genotype and 
non-recovery.
METHODS: A total of 133 patients with neck pain after a whiplash trauma were 
included. Background factors were collected and blood samples were taken during 
the acute phase after the accident. DNA was isolated from blood and used to 
genotype the SNPs rs6269, rs4633, rs4818 and rs4680 in the COMT gene; 
additionally haplotypes were estimated and haplogenotypes inferred. The patients 
were followed up after 12 months and asked to rate their recovery including 
pain, mental health and quality of life.
RESULTS: The overall reported non-recovery rate at 12 months was 44% with no 
significant differences in distribution of the COMT haplotypes. High levels of 
self-reported pain (OR 7.2) and anxiety (OR 4.4) after the accident were 
associated with non-recovery, but not related to the haplotypes. None of the 
other background factors were related to the haplotypes or non-recovery.
CONCLUSION: No association between self-reported non-recovery or pain levels and 
COMT haplotypes in patients with acute whiplash injuries could be detected. 
Independent replications are necessary to discard the hypothesis that COMT 
haplotypes do not influence non-recovery or pain levels in patients with acute 
whiplash injuries. High levels of initial pain and anxiety were associated with 
non-recovery, thereby confirming previously published reports.

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-017-1810-z
PMCID: PMC5709856
PMID: 29195501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study was approved by the Regional Research Ethics Committee Stockholm, Sweden 
and all patients gave written consent before inclusion (Dnr-240/01). CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they 
have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral 
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.