1. J Med Virol. 2018 Apr;90(4):692-698. doi: 10.1002/jmv.25000. Epub 2018 Jan 5.

Association of gene polymorphisms of pattern-recognition receptor signaling 
pathway with the risk and severity of hand, foot, and mouth disease caused by 
enterovirus 71 in Chinese Han population.

Li YP(1), Li M(1), Jia XL(1), Deng HL(1)(2), Wang WJ(1), Wu FP(1), Wang J(1)(2), 
Dang SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical 
College of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Xi'an Children's Hospital, Xi'an, China.

Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) caused by enterovirus 71 (EV71) presents 
with a wide variety of clinical manifestations. Host immune response is a factor 
that influences disease susceptibility and severity. We investigated the 
potential association of gene polymorphisms in the pattern recognition receptor 
(PRR) pathway with the risk and severity of EV71 infection. A total of 180 EV71 
HFMD cases (108 severe case; 72 mild cases) were enrolled. A group of 201 sex- 
and age-matched children was included as a control. All subjects were genotyped 
for the most common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the PRR and the 
PRR signaling pathway using the SNPscan multiple SNP typing method. Binary 
logistic regression analysis revealed statistically significant differences in 
polymorphism of RIG-1 between patients and controls (rs3739674 G vs C: 
OR = 1.502, 95%CI: 1.120-2.014; rs9695310 G vs C: OR = 1.782, 95%CI: 
1.312-2.419). Polymorphisms of RIG-1 rs3739674 (G vs C: OR = 2.047, 95%CI: 
1.307-3.205) and TLR3 rs5743305 (A vs T: OR = 0.346, 95%CI: 0.212-0.566) were 
found to be associated with disease severity. The results indicated that RIG-1 
(rs3739674 and rs9695310) polymorphisms are associated with an increased risk of 
EV71-induced HFMD in Chinese children, whereas RIG-1 rs3739674 and TLR3 
rs5743305 polymorphisms are associated with disease severity. These findings 
support an important role of innate immune mechanism in EV71 infection.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25000
PMID: 29235129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]