1. Oncotarget. 2017 Aug 10;8(59):100852-100862. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.20135. 
eCollection 2017 Nov 21.

Recent advances on uric acid transporters.

Xu L(1), Shi Y(1), Zhuang S(1)(2), Liu N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai 200120, China.
(2)Department of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital and Brown University School of 
Medicine, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Uric acid is the product of purine metabolism and its increased levels result in 
hyperuricemia. A number of epidemiological reports link hyperuricemia with 
multiple disorders, such as kidney diseases, cardiovascular diseases and 
diabetes. Recent studies also showed that expression and functional changes of 
urate transporters are associated with hyperuricemia. Uric acid transporters are 
divided into two categories: urate reabsorption transporters, including urate 
anion transporter 1 (URAT1), organic anion transporter 4 (OAT4) and glucose 
transporter 9 (GLUT9), and urate excretion transporetrs, including OAT1, OAT3, 
urate transporter (UAT), multidrug resistance protein 4 (MRP4/ABCC4), ABCG-2 and 
sodium-dependent phosphate transport protein. In the kidney, uric acid 
transporters decrease the reabsorption of urate and increase its secretion. 
These transporters' dysfunction would lead to hyperuricemia. As the function of 
urate transporters is important to control the level of serum uric acid, studies 
on the functional role of uric acid transporter may provide a new strategy to 
treat hyperuricemia associated diseases, such as gout, chronic kidney disease, 
hyperlipidemia, hypertension, coronary heart disease, diabetes and other 
disorders. This review article summarizes the physiology of urate reabsorption 
and excretion transporters and highlights the recent advances on their roles in 
hyperuricemia and various diseases.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.20135
PMCID: PMC5725069
PMID: 29246027

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No authors have any 
competing interests.