1. Nat Commun. 2017 Dec 19;8(1):2200. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-02287-5.

Dual blockade of the lipid kinase PIP4Ks and mitotic pathways leads to 
cancer-selective lethality.

Kitagawa M(1), Liao PJ(1), Lee KH(1), Wong J(1), Shang SC(2), Minami N(3), 
Sampetrean O(3), Saya H(3), Lingyun D(4), Prabhu N(4), Diam GK(4), Sobota R(5), 
Larsson A(4), Nordlund P(4)(5)(6), McCormick F(7), Ghosh S(8)(9), Epstein 
DM(1)(10), Dymock BW(2), Lee SH(11).

Author information:
(1)Program in Cancer & Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 
169857, Singapore.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117543, 
Singapore.
(3)Division of Gene Regulation, Institute for Advanced Medical Research, Keio 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 160-0082, Japan.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 
138673, Singapore.
(5)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR, Singapore, 138673, 
Singapore.
(6)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
SE-171 77, Sweden.
(7)UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA, 
94158-9001, USA.
(8)Department of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, Biomedical Biotechnology 
Research Institute, North Carolina Central University, Durham, NC, 27707, USA.
(9)Program in Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disorders and Centre for 
Computational Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 169857, Singapore.
(10)Center for Technology & Development (CTeD), Duke-NUS Medical School, 
Singapore, 169857, Singapore.
(11)Program in Cancer & Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 
169857, Singapore. sanghyun.lee@duke-nus.edu.sg.

Achieving robust cancer-specific lethality is the ultimate clinical goal. Here, 
we identify a compound with dual-inhibitory properties, named a131, that 
selectively kills cancer cells, while protecting normal cells. Through an 
unbiased CETSA screen, we identify the PIP4K lipid kinases as the target of 
a131. Ablation of the PIP4Ks generates a phenocopy of the pharmacological 
effects of PIP4K inhibition by a131. Notably, PIP4Ks inhibition by a131 causes 
reversible growth arrest in normal cells by transcriptionally upregulating 
PIK3IP1, a suppressor of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. Strikingly, Ras activation 
overrides a131-induced PIK3IP1 upregulation and activates the PI3K/Akt/mTOR 
pathway. Consequently, Ras-transformed cells override a131-induced growth arrest 
and enter mitosis where a131's ability to de-cluster supernumerary centrosomes 
in cancer cells eliminates Ras-activated cells through mitotic catastrophe. Our 
discovery of drugs with a dual-inhibitory mechanism provides a unique 
pharmacological strategy against cancer and evidence of cross-activation between 
the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways via a Ras˧PIK3IP1˧PI3K signaling 
network.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-02287-5
PMCID: PMC5736559
PMID: 29259156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.H.L., M.K., S.C.S., and B.W.D. are inventors 
on a filed patent application covering the discoveries of small molecules 
presented in this manuscript. The remaining authors declare no competing 
financial interests.