1. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open. 2017 Nov 2;5(11):e1549. doi: 
10.1097/GOX.0000000000001549. eCollection 2017 Nov.

Genetic Overview of Syndactyly and Polydactyly.

Ahmed H(1), Akbari H(1), Emami A(1), Akbari MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Women's College Research Institute, Women's College Hospital, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada; Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Hazrat 
Fatemeh Hospital, Burn Research Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran; and Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.

Syndactyly and polydactyly-respectively characterized by fused and supernumerary 
digits-are among the most common congenital limb malformations, with syndactyly 
presenting at an estimated incidence of 1 in 2,000-3,000 live births and 
polydactyly at a frequency of 1 in approximately 700-1,000 live births. Despite 
their relatively regular manifestation in the clinic, the etiologies of 
syndactyly and polydactyly remain poorly understood because of their phenotypic 
and genetic diversity. Further, even though concrete knowledge of genotypic 
links has been established for some variants of syndactyly and polydactyly, 
there appears to be no single comprehensive published summary of all syndromic 
and nonsyndromic syndactyly and polydactyly presentations, and there is 
decidedly no resource that maps all syndromic and nonsyndromic syndactylies and 
polydactylies to their genetic bases. This gap in the literature problematizes 
comprehensive carrier screening and prenatal diagnosis and complicates novel 
diagnostic attempts. This review thus attempts to collect all that is known 
about the genetic bases of syndromic and nonsyndromic syndactylies and 
polydactylies, as well as to highlight the dactyly manifestations for which no 
genetic bases are as yet known. Then, having established a summation of existing 
and missing knowledge, this work briefly outlines the diagnostic techniques that 
a genetics-reinforced understanding of syndactyly and polydactyly could inform.

DOI: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000001549
PMCID: PMC5732663
PMID: 29263957