1. Oncotarget. 2017 Oct 17;8(61):104525-104542. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.21869. 
eCollection 2017 Nov 28.

Human CRL4(DDB2) ubiquitin ligase preferentially regulates post-repair chromatin 
restoration of H3K56Ac through recruitment of histone chaperon CAF-1.

Zhu Q(1), Wei S(1), Sharma N(1), Wani G(1), He J(1), Wani AA(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 43210, OH.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, 43210, OH.
(3)James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, 43210, OH.

Acetylated histone H3 lysine 56 (H3K56Ac) diminishes in response to DNA damage 
but is restored following DNA repair. Here, we report that CRL4DDB2 ubiquitin 
ligase preferentially regulates post-repair chromatin restoration of H3K56Ac 
through recruitment of histone chaperon CAF-1. We show that H3K56Ac accumulates 
at DNA damage sites. The restoration of H3K56Ac but not H3K27Ac, H3K18Ac and 
H3K14Ac depends on CAF-1 function, whereas all these acetylations are mediated 
by CBP/p300. The CRL4DDB2 components, DDB1, DDB2 and CUL4A, are also required 
for maintaining the H3K56Ac and H3K9Ac level in chromatin, and for restoring 
H3K56Ac following induction of DNA photolesions and strand breaks. Depletion of 
CUL4A decreases the recruitment of CAF-1 p60 and p150 to ultraviolet radiation- 
and phleomycin-induced DNA damage. Neddylation inhibition renders CRL4DDB2 
inactive, decreases H3K56Ac level, diminishes CAF-1 recruitment and prevents 
H3K56Ac restoration. Mutation in the PIP box of DDB2 compromises its capability 
to elevate the H3K56Ac level but does not affect XPC ubiquitination. These 
results demonstrated a function of CRL4DDB2 in differential regulation of 
histone acetylation in response to DNA damage, suggesting a novel role of 
CRL4DDB2 in repair-driven chromatin assembly.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.21869
PMCID: PMC5732824
PMID: 29262658

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors do not have 
any conflicts interest.