1. Oncotarget. 2017 Nov 29;8(66):110221-110233. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.22753. 
eCollection 2017 Dec 15.

Structural determinant of BST-2-mediated regulation of breast cancer cell 
motility: a role for cytoplasmic tail tyrosine residues.

Naushad W(1)(2)(3), Mahauad-Fernandez WD(1)(4), Okeoma CM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(3)Atta-ur-Rahman School of Applied Bio sciences, National University of 
Sciences and Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(4)Division of Oncology, Departments of Medicine and Pathology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

There is now irrefutable evidence that overexpression of the innate immunity 
protein-BST-2, in breast cancer cells is implicated in tumor growth and 
progression. The cellular mechanisms that control BST-2-mediated effect in tumor 
progression involve enhancement of cancer cell motility-migration/invasion. 
However, the distinct structural elements of BST-2 that mediate breast cancer 
cell motility remain unknown. Here, we used various motility assays and 
different variants of BST-2 to examine the cellular and structural mechanisms 
controlling BST-2-mediated cell motility. We show that BST-2 silencing in 
various cancer cell lines inhibits cell motility. Restoration of BST-2 
expression using construct expressing wild type BST-2 rescues cell motility. 
Mutational analysis identifies the cytoplasmic tail of BST-2 as a novel 
regulator of cancer cell motility, because cell motility was significantly 
abrogated by substitution of the BST-2 cytoplasmic tail tyrosine residues to 
alanine residues. Furthermore, in a spheroid invasion model, BST-2-expressing 
tumor spheroids are highly invasive inside 3D Matrigel matrices. In this model, 
the spreading distance of BST-2-expressing spheroids was significantly higher 
than that of BST-2-suppressed spheroids. Collectively, our data reveal that i) 
BST-2-expressing breast cancer cells in spheroids are more motile than their 
BST-2-supressed counterparts; ii) BST-2 cytoplasmic tail regulates 
non-proteolytic (migration) and proteolytic (invasion) mechanisms of breast 
cancer cell motility; and iii) replacement of the tyrosine residues at positions 
6 and 8 in the cytoplasmic tail of BST-2 with alanine residues inhibits cell 
motility.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.22753
PMCID: PMC5746378
PMID: 29299143

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.