1. Blood Adv. 2017 Dec 26;1(27):2692-2702. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2017011098.

TFPIα interacts with FVa and FXa to inhibit prothrombinase during the initiation 
of coagulation.

Wood JP(1), Petersen HH(2), Yu B(3), Wu X(3), Hilden I(2), Mast AE(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
(2)Global Research, Novo Nordisk, Maaloev, Denmark.
(3)Discovery Technology China, Novo Nordisk Research Center China, Beijing, 
China.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.

Tissue factor pathway inhibitor α (TFPIα) inhibits prothrombinase, the 
thrombin-generating complex of factor Xa (FXa) and factor Va (FVa), during the 
initiation of coagulation. This inhibition requires binding of a conserved basic 
region within TFPIα to a conserved acidic region in FXa-activated and 
platelet-released FVa. In this study, the contribution of interactions between 
TFPIα and the FXa active site and FVa heavy chain to prothrombinase inhibition 
were examined to further define the inhibitory biochemistry. Removal of FXa 
active site binding by mutation or by deletion of the second Kunitz domain (K2) 
of TFPIα produced 17- or 34-fold weaker prothrombinase inhibition, respectively, 
establishing that K2 binding to the FXa active site is required for efficient 
inhibition. Substitution of the TFPIα basic region uncharged residues (Leu252, 
Ile253, Thr255) with Ala (TFPI-AAKA) produced 5.8-fold decreased inhibition. 
This finding was confirmed using a basic region peptide (Leu252-Lys261) and Ala 
substitution peptides, which established that the uncharged residues are 
required for prothrombinase inhibitory activity but not for binding the FVa 
acidic region. This suggests that the uncharged residues mediate a secondary 
interaction with FVa subsequent to acidic region binding. This secondary 
interaction seems to be with the FVa heavy chain, because the FV Leiden mutation 
weakened prothrombinase inhibition by TFPIα but did not alter TFPI-AAKA 
inhibitory activity. Thus, efficient inhibition of prothrombinase by TFPIα 
requires at least 3 intermolecular interactions: (1) the TFPIα basic region 
binds the FVa acidic region, (2) K2 binds the FXa active site, and (3) 
Leu252-Thr255 binds the FVa heavy chain.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2017011098
PMCID: PMC5745139
PMID: 29291252

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: A.E.M. receives 
grant support from Novo Nordisk. H.H.P., B.Y., X.W., and I.H. are employees of 
Novo Nordisk A/S. J.P.W. declares no competing financial interests.