1. Oncotarget. 2017 Nov 22;8(64):107744-107762. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.22632. 
eCollection 2017 Dec 8.

Cell death and restoration of TRAIL-sensitivity by ciglitazone in resistant 
cervical cancer cells.

Plissonnier ML(#)(1)(2), Fauconnet S(#)(1)(3), Bittard H(1)(3), Mougin C(1)(4), 
Rommelaere J(5), Lascombe I(1).

Author information:
(1)EA3181, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, LabEx LipSTIC ANR-11-LABX-0021, 
Besançon F-25030, France.
(2)Cancer Research Center of Lyon, INSERM U1052, Lyon F-69424, France.
(3)Department of Urology, University Hospital of Besançon, Besançon F-25030, 
France.
(4)Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Besançon, Besançon F-25030, 
France.
(5)German Cancer Research Center Tumor Virology F010, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Known activators of the Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor γ (PPARγ), 
thiazolidinediones (TZD) induce apoptosis in a variety of cancer cells through 
dependent and/or independent mechanisms of the receptor. We tested a panel of 
TZD (Rosiglitazone, Pioglitazone, Ciglitazone) to shed light on their potential 
therapeutic effects on three cervical cancer cell lines (HeLa, Ca Ski, C-33 A). 
In these cells, only ciglitazone triggered apoptosis through PPARγ-independent 
mechanisms and in particular via both extrinsic and intrinsic pathways in Ca Ski 
cells containing Human PapillomaVirus (HPV) type 16. It also inhibits cervical 
cancer xenograft development in nude mice. Ciglitazone kills cervical cancer 
cells by activating death receptor signalling pathway, caspase cascade and BH3 
interacting-domain death agonist (Bid) cleavage through the up-regulation of 
Death Receptor 4 (DR4)/DR5 and soluble and membrane-bound TNF related apoptosis 
inducing ligand (TRAIL). Importantly, the drug let TRAIL-resistant Ca Ski cells 
to respond to TRAIL through the downregulation of cellular FLICE-Like Inhibitory 
Protein (c-FLIP) level. For the first time, we revealed that ciglitazone is able 
to decrease E6 viral oncoprotein expression known to block TRAIL pathway and 
this was associated with cell death. Our results highlight the capacity of 
ciglitazone to restore TRAIL sensitivity and to prevent E6 blocking action to 
induce apoptosis in cervical cancer cells.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.22632
PMCID: PMC5746104
PMID: 29296202

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.