1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2017 Dec 12;10:415. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00415. 
eCollection 2017.

Chaperone-Mediated Regulation of Choline Acetyltransferase Protein Stability and 
Activity by HSC/HSP70, HSP90, and p97/VCP.

Morey TM(1)(2), Winick-Ng W(1)(2)(3), Seah C(1), Rylett RJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Research Laboratories, Robarts Research Institute, 
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine & 
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.
(3)Epigenetic Regulation and Chromatin Architecture Group, Berlin Institute for 
Medical Systems Biology, Max-Delbr√ºck Centre for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, 
Germany.

Choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) synthesizes the neurotransmitter acetylcholine 
in cholinergic neurons, and mutations of this enzyme are linked to the 
neuromuscular disorder congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS). One CMS-related 
mutation, V18M, reduces ChAT enzyme activity and cellular protein levels, and is 
located within a highly-conserved N-terminal proline-rich motif at residues 
14PKLPVPP20. We showed previously that disruption of this proline-rich motif by 
either proline-to-alanine mutation (P17A/P19A) or mutation of residue Val18 
(V18M) enhances ubiquitination and degradation of these mutant ChAT proteins 
expressed in cholinergic SN56 cells by an unknown mechanism. In this study, 
using proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID), co-immunoprecipitation 
and in situ proximity-ligation assay (PLA), we identified the heat shock 
proteins (HSPs) HSC/HSP70 and HSP90 as novel ChAT protein-interactors. These 
molecular chaperones are well-known for promoting the folding and stabilization 
of cellular proteins. Thus, we found that inhibition of HSPs by treatment of 
cells with either the HSC/HSP70 inhibitors 2-phenylethynesulfonamide (PES) or 
VER-155008, or the HSP90 inhibitor 17-AAG reduced cellular ChAT activity and 
solubility, and enhanced the ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent loss of 
ChAT protein. Importantly, the effects of HSP inhibition were greater for mutant 
ChAT proteins (P17A/P19A-ChAT and CMS-related V18M- and A513T-ChAT) compared to 
wild-type ChAT. HSPs can promote ubiquitination and degradation of terminally 
misfolded proteins through cooperative interaction with the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
CHIP/Stub1, and while we show that ChAT interacts with CHIP in situ, 
siRNA-mediated knock-down of CHIP had no effect on either wild-type or mutant 
ChAT protein levels. However, inhibition of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)- and 
HSP-associated co-chaperone p97/VCP prevented degradation of ubiquitinated ChAT. 
Together, these results identify novel mechanisms for the functional regulation 
of wild-type and CMS-related mutant ChAT by pro-stabilizing HSPs and the 
pro-degradative co-chaperone p97/VCP that may have broader implications for ChAT 
function during cellular stress and disease.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00415
PMCID: PMC5733026
PMID: 29311808