1. Front Immunol. 2017 Dec 19;8:1833. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01833. eCollection 
2017.

Co-Stimulation of BCR and Toll-Like Receptor 7 Increases Somatic Hypermutation, 
Memory B Cell Formation, and Secondary Antibody Response to Protein Antigen.

Castiblanco DP(1), Maul RW(1), Russell Knode LM(1), Gearhart PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology, National Institute on Aging, 
National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD, United States.

The goal of immunization is to produce both a flood of antibodies to neutralize 
antigen and memory cells to accelerate the secondary response. To enhance the 
generation of memory B cells, we examined the effect of co-engaging BCR and 
toll-like receptor (TLR) 7 receptors by immunizing mice with a hapten-protein 
antigen, NP-CGG, and a ligand, R837 (imiquimod). During the early and late 
primary responses, there was no augmentation with R837 on the number of germinal 
center B cells or serum antibody. However, in the niche of germinal centers, 
R837 increased somatic hypermutation in the canonical VH1-72 gene that encodes 
NP-specific antibody. Increased mutation was not due to enhanced expression of 
activation-induced deaminase, but was likely a result of selection for 
high-affinity B cells with altered codons in the gene. This correlated with the 
appearance of antigen-specific B cells with a memory phenotype, which was 
intrinsic to TLR7 on B cells. To determine if these memory cells produced a 
recall response after a secondary challenge, spleen cells from mice that were 
immunized with NP-CGG and R837 were adoptively transferred into muMT recipients, 
and boosted with NP-CGG. Cells from mice that initially received both antigen 
and R837 generated a robust increase in germinal center B cells, plasmablasts, 
plasma cells, and serum antibody, compared with their cohorts who received 
antigen alone. These results support the use of co-immunization with TLR7 
ligands to promote vigorous memory B cell responses to protein antigens.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01833
PMCID: PMC5742111
PMID: 29312329