1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2017 Dec 12;10:409. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00409. 
eCollection 2017.

Toll-Like Receptor 4 Mediates Methamphetamine-Induced Neuroinflammation through 
Caspase-11 Signaling Pathway in Astrocytes.

Du SH(1), Qiao DF(1), Chen CX(1), Chen S(1), Liu C(2), Lin Z(3), Wang H(1), Xie 
WB(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Forensic Medicine, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangzhou Forensic Science Institute, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Institute of Computational Comparative 
Medicine (ICCM), College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, KS, United States.

Methamphetamine (METH) is an amphetamine-typed stimulant drug that is 
increasingly being abused worldwide. Previous studies have shown that METH 
toxicity is systemic, especially targeting dopaminergic neurons in the central 
nervous system (CNS). However, the role of neuroinflammation in METH 
neurotoxicity remains unclear. We hypothesized that Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) 
and Caspase-11 are involved in METH-induced astrocyte-related neuroinflammation. 
We tested our hypothesis by examining the changes of TLR4 and Caspase-11 protein 
expression in primary cultured C57BL/6 mouse astrocytes and in the midbrain and 
striatum of mice exposed to METH with western blot and double immunofluorescence 
labeling. We also determined the effects of blocking Caspase-11 expression with 
wedelolactone (a specific inhibitor of Caspase-11) or siRNA on METH-induced 
neuroinflammation in astrocytes. Furthermore, we determined the effects of 
blocking TLR4 expression with TAK-242 (a specific inhibitor of TLR4) or siRNA on 
METH-induced neuroinflammation in astrocytes. METH exposure increased Caspase-11 
and TLR4 expression both in vitro and in vivo, with the effects in vitro being 
dose-dependent. Inhibition of Caspase-11 expression with either wedelolactone or 
siRNAs reduced the expression of inflammasome NLRP3 and pro-inflammatory 
cytokines. In addition, blocking TLR4 expression inhibited METH-induced 
activation of NF-ÎºB and Caspase-11 in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that 
TLR4-Caspase-11 pathway is involved in METH-induced neuroinflammation. These 
results indicate that Caspase-11 and TLR4 play an important role in METH-induced 
neuroinflammation and may be potential gene targets for therapeutics in 
METH-caused neurotoxicity.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00409
PMCID: PMC5733023
PMID: 29311802