1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jan 18;8(1):1103. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-19429-4.

Redundancy of protein disulfide isomerases in the catalysis of the inactivating 
disulfide switch in A Disintegrin and Metalloprotease 17.

Krossa S(1), Scheidig AJ(1), Grötzinger J(2), Lorenzen I(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Structural Biology, Kiel 
University, Am Botanischen Garten 9, 24118, Kiel, Germany.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry, Kiel University, Rudolf-Höber Str. 1, 24118, Kiel, 
Germany.
(3)Centre of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Structural Biology, Kiel 
University, Am Botanischen Garten 9, 24118, Kiel, Germany. 
ilorenzen@zbm.uni-kiel.de.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry, Kiel University, Rudolf-Höber Str. 1, 24118, Kiel, 
Germany. ilorenzen@zbm.uni-kiel.de.

A Disintegrin and Metalloprotease 17 (ADAM17) can cause the fast release of 
growth factors and inflammatory mediators from the cell surface. Its activity 
has to be turned on which occurs by various stimuli. The active form can be 
inactivated by a structural change in its ectodomain, related to the pattern of 
the formed disulphide bridges. The switch-off is executed by protein disulfide 
isomerases (PDIs) that catalyze an isomerization of two disulfide bridges and 
thereby cause a disulfide switch. We demonstrate that the integrity of the 
CGHC-motif within the active site of PDIs is indispensable. In particular, no 
major variation is apparent in the activities of the two catalytic domains of 
PDIA6. The affinities between PDIA1, PDIA3, PDIA6 and the targeted domain of 
ADAM17 are all in the nanomolar range and display no significant differences. 
The redundancy between PDIs and their disulfide switch activity in ectodomains 
of transmembrane proteins found in vitro appears to be a basic characteristic. 
However, different PDIs might be required in vivo for disulfide switches in 
different tissues and under different cellular and physiological situations.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-19429-4
PMCID: PMC5773583
PMID: 29348576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.