1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jan 24;8(1):1548. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-20028-6.

Single Plasmonic Structure Enhanced Dual-band Room Temperature Infrared 
Photodetection.

Tong J(1), Tobing LYM(1), Luo Y(1), Zhang D(2), Zhang DH(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological 
University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798, Singapore.
(2)Ministry of Education and Shanghai Key Lab of Modern Optical System, 
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, 516 Jungong Road, Shanghai, 
200093, China.
(3)School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological 
University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798, Singapore. EDHZHANG@ntu.edu.sg.

Dual-band photodetection in mid- and near-wave infrared spectral bands is of 
scientific interest and technological importance. Most of the state-of-the-art 
mid-infrared photodetectors normally operate at low temperature and/or suffer 
from toxicity and high cost due to limitations of material properties and device 
structures. The capability of surface plasmons in confining electromagnetic 
waves into extremely small volume provides an opportunity for improving the 
performance for room temperature operation. Here, we report an n-InAsSb/n-GaSb 
heterostructure photodiode integrated with plasmonic two-dimensional 
subwavelength hole array (2DSHA) for room temperature two band photodetection. 
We demonstrate that with a properly designed 2DSHA, room temperature 
detectivities of the heterostructure device can be enhanced to ~1.4 × 109 Jones 
and ~1.5 × 1011 Jones for the two bands peaked at 3.4 μm and 1.7 μm, 
respectively. In addition, we study the photocurrent enhancement in both 
photoconductor and heterojunction modes in the same integrated structure. The 
demonstration of single 2DSHA enhanced heterojunction photodiode brings a step 
closer to high sensitivity room temperature devices and systems which require 
multiband absorption.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-20028-6
PMCID: PMC5784088
PMID: 29367616

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.