1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Mar 16;46(5):2356-2369. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky017.

WOX11 recruits a histone H3K27me3 demethylase to promote gene expression during 
shoot development in rice.

Cheng S(1), Tan F(1), Lu Y(1), Liu X(2), Li T(3), Yuan W(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhou 
DX(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, 430070 Wuhan, China.
(2)Institute for Interdisciplinary Research, Jianghan University, 430056 Wuhan, 
China.
(3)Institute for Systems Biology, Jianghan University, 430056 Wuhan, China.
(4)Institute of Plant Science Paris-Saclay (IPS2), CNRS, INRA, Université 
Paris-sud 11, Université Paris- Saclay, Bâtiment 630, 91405 Orsay, France.

WUSCHEL-related homeobox (WOX) genes are key regulators of meristem activity and 
plant development, the chromatin mechanism of which to reprogram gene expression 
remains unclear. Histone H3K27me3 is a chromatin mark of developmentally 
repressed genes. How the repressive mark is removed from specific genes during 
plant development is largely unknown. Here, we show that WOX11 interacts with 
the H3K27me3 demethylase JMJ705 to activate gene expression during shoot 
development in rice. Genetic analysis indicates that WOX11 and JMJ705 
cooperatively control shoot growth and commonly regulate the expression of a set 
of genes involved in meristem identity, chloroplast biogenesis, and energy 
metabolism in the shoot apex. Loss of WOX11 led to increased H3K27me3 and 
overexpression of JMJ705 decreased the methylation levels at a subset of common 
targets. JMJ705 is associated with most of the WOX11-binding sites found in the 
tested common targets in vivo, regardless of presence or absence of the 
JMJ705-binding motif. Furthermore, wox11 mutation reduced JMJ705-binding to many 
targets genome-wide. The results suggest that recruitment of JMJ705 to specific 
developmental pathway genes is promoted by DNA-binding transcription factors and 
that WOX11 functions to stimulate shoot growth through epigenetic reprogramming 
of genes involved in meristem development and energy-generating pathways.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky017
PMCID: PMC5861455
PMID: 29361035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]