1. Stem Cells. 2018 May;36(5):785-795. doi: 10.1002/stem.2789. Epub 2018 Feb 9.

Reduced Cell Division Control Protein 42 Activity Compromises 
Hematopoiesis-Supportive Function of Fanconi Anemia Mesenchymal Stromal Cells.

Xu J(1)(2), Li X(1), Cole A(2), Sherman Z(2), Du W(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Brain Research and Rehabilitation, South China Normal 
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, West Virginia 
University, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.
(3)Alexander B. Osborn Hematopoietic Malignancy and Transplantation Program, 
West Virginia University Cancer Institute, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.

Hematopoietic stem cells preserve their ability to self-renew and differentiate 
to different lineages in the bone marrow (BM) niche, which is composed in large 
part by BM stromal cells. Studies have shown that altered signaling in the BM 
niche results in leukemia initiation or progression. Fanconi anemia (FA) is an 
inherited BM failure syndrome associated with extremely high risk of leukemic 
transformation. By using two FA mouse models, here we have investigated the 
hematopoiesis-supportive function of FA BM mesenchymal stroma cells (MSCs). We 
found that MSCs deficient for Fanca or Fancc gene are defective in proliferation 
and prone to undergo senescence in vitro. Mechanistically, we show that the 
activity of cell division control protein 42 (Cdc42), a Rho GTPase known to be a 
critical regulator for cytoskeleton organization, is significantly reduced in FA 
MSCs. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this reduction in Cdc42 activity plays a 
causal role in defective hematopoiesis-supportive function of the FA MSCs. The 
progenies of wild-type hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells cocultured on FA 
MSCs exhibit compromised self-renewal capacity both in vitro and in vivo. 
Genetic correction of FA deficiency restores Cdc42 activity and improves the 
hematopoiesis-supportive capacity of FA MSC. Finally, ectopic expression of a 
constitutively active Cdc42 mutant, Cdc42F28L, or pretreatment with Wnt5a, 
increases the active Cdc42 level and rescues the hematopoietic supportive 
defects of FA MSCs. Taken together, our results identify a novel link between 
Cdc42 activity and the hematopoiesis-supportive function of MSCs and suggest 
that a niche-specific increase of Cdc42 activity may be beneficial for FA 
therapy. Stem Cells 2018;36:785-795.

Â© AlphaMed Press 2018.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.2789
PMCID: PMC5918239
PMID: 29377497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Disclosure Statement There is no conflict 
of interest to disclose on the part of any authors.