1. Stem Cell Reports. 2018 Feb 13;10(2):583-599. doi:
10.1016/j.stemcr.2017.12.022.  Epub 2018 Jan 27.

Primary Cilia Are Dysfunctional in Obese Adipose-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Ritter A(1), Friemel A(1), Kreis NN(1), Hoock SC(1), Roth S(1), Kielland-Kaisen 
U(1), Brüggmann D(1), Solbach C(1), Louwen F(1), Yuan J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, School of Medicine, J. W. Goethe 
University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, School of Medicine, J. W. Goethe 
University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany. Electronic address: 
yuan@em.uni-frankfurt.de.

Adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (ASCs) have crucial functions, but their 
roles in obesity are not well defined. We show here that ASCs from obese 
individuals have defective primary cilia, which are shortened and unable to 
properly respond to stimuli. Impaired cilia compromise ASC functionalities. 
Exposure to obesity-related hypoxia and cytokines shortens cilia of lean ASCs. 
Like obese ASCs, lean ASCs treated with interleukin-6 are deficient in the 
Hedgehog pathway, and their differentiation capability is associated with 
increased ciliary disassembly genes like AURKA. Interestingly, inhibition of 
Aurora A or its downstream target the histone deacetylase 6 rescues the cilium 
length and function of obese ASCs. This work highlights a mechanism whereby 
defective cilia render ASCs dysfunctional, resulting in diseased adipose tissue. 
Impaired cilia in ASCs may be a key event in the pathogenesis of obesity, and 
its correction might provide an alternative strategy for combating obesity and 
its associated diseases.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2017.12.022
PMCID: PMC5830986
PMID: 29396182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]