1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2018 Mar 1;641:50-61. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2018.01.012.
Epub  2018 Jan 31.

Promoter analysis and transcriptional regulation of human carbonic anhydrase 
VIII gene in a MERRF disease cell model.

Lo CM(1), Ma YS(2), Wei YH(2), Hsieh BYT(3), Hsieh M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Tunghai University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Life Sciences, 
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Center for Mitochondrial 
Medicine and Free Radical Research, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, 
Taiwan, ROC.
(3)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(4)Department of Life Science, Tunghai University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC; Life 
Science Research Center, Tunghai University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic 
address: mhsieh@thu.edu.tw.

Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers (MERRF) is a maternally inherited 
mitochondrial neuromuscular disease. We previously reported a significant 
decrease of mRNA and protein levels of nuclear DNA-encoded carbonic anhydrase 
VIII (CA8) in MERRF cybrids harboring A8344G mutation in mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA). In this study, we established a reporter construct of luciferase 
gene-carrying hCA8 promoter containing several putative transcription 
factor-binding sites, including GC-box, AP-2 and TATA-binding element in the 
5'flanking region of the hCA8 gene. Using a series of mutated hCA8 promoter 
constructs, we demonstrated that a proximal GC-box, recognized by Sp1 and other 
Sp family members, may be a key cis-element functioning at the promoter. 
Additionally, a significant increase of the hCA8 promoter activity was observed 
in the wild-type and mutant cybrids with over-expression of eGFP-Sp1, but no 
detectable increase in the CA8 protein expression. In contrast, over-expression 
of Flag-Sp1 and Flag-Sp4 significantly increased the hCA8 promoter activity as 
well as endogenous CA8 protein expression in neuron-like HEK-293 T cells. 
However, down-regulation of Sp1, but not Sp4, in 293 T cells revealed a 
significant reduction of CA8 expression, suggesting that Sp1 is a predominant 
transcription factor for regulation of CA8 activity. Furthermore, our data 
indicate that chromatin structure may be involved in the expression of hCA8 gene 
in MERRF cybrids. Taken together, these results suggest that Sp1 transactivates 
hCA8 gene through the proximal GC box element in the promoter region. The key 
modulator-responsive factor to the mtDNA mutation and how it may affect nuclear 
hCA8 gene transcription need further investigations.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2018.01.012
PMID: 29407793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]