1. J Strength Cond Res. 2018 May;32(5):1311-1315. doi: 
10.1519/JSC.0000000000002457.

ACTN3 Genotype in Professional Sport Climbers.

Ginszt M(1), Michalak-Wojnowska M(2), Gawda P(1), Wojcierowska-Litwin M(2), 
Korszeń-Pilecka I(2), Kusztelak M(3), Muda R(4), Filip AA(2), Majcher P(1).

Author information:
(1)Chair and Department of Rehabilitation, Physiotherapy, and Balneotherapy, 
Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(2)Department of Cancer Genetics, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(3)Mazowieckie Rehabilitation Center "STOCER", Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Banking, Maria Curie-Skłodowska University of Lublin, Lublin, 
Poland.

Ginszt, M, Michalak-Wojnowska, M, Gawda, P, Wojcierowska-Litwin, M, 
Korszeń-Pilecka, I, Kusztelak, M, Muda, R, Filip, AA, and Majcher, P. ACTN3 
genotype in professional sport climbers. J Strength Cond Res 32(5): 1311-1315, 
2018-The functional RR genotype of the alpha-actinin-3 (ACTN3) gene has been 
reported to be associated with elite sprint/power athlete status. Although large 
and rapidly increasing number of studies have investigated the associations 
between the ACTN3 genotypes and athletic performance in various sport 
disciplines, there is a lack of studies on the genetic predisposition in sport 
climbing, which was selected to be part of the next Summer Olympic Games in 
Tokyo 2020 with three subdisciplines ("lead climbing," "speed climbing," and 
"bouldering"). The aim of the study is to determine the frequency distribution 
of ACTN3 genotypes and alleles in professional lead climbers and boulderers. 100 
professional sport climbers from Poland, Russia, and Austria were divided into 2 
equal groups: professional boulderers and professional lead climbers were 
involved in the study. ACTN3 allele frequencies and genotypes were compared with 
100 sedentary controls. Genotypes were determined using polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism method. The percent 
distribution of RR genotype in the boulderers was significantly higher than in 
lead climbers and controls (62 vs. 26%; 33%, respectively; χ = 17.230, p = 
0.0017). The frequencies of ACTN3 R allele in boulderers differed significantly 
from lead climbers and controls (77 vs. 51%; 58%, respectively; χ = 15.721, p = 
0.0004). The proportion of the ACTN3 RR genotype is significantly higher in 
boulderers than in lead climbers and may be related to the specific type of 
predisposition to this subdiscipline.

DOI: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000002457
PMCID: PMC5916482
PMID: 29401200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]