1. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2018 Feb 9;18(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s12872-018-0763-y.

Cytochrome P450 family 4 subfamily F member 2 (CYP4F2) rs1558139, rs2108622 
polymorphisms and susceptibility to several cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 
diseases.

Zhang T(1), Yu K(2), Li X(3).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Zibo, No.4 Emei Mountain 
Road, Boshan District, Zibo City, Shandong, 255200, People's Republic of China. 
zbsjnk@163.com.
(2)First Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Zibo, No.4 Emei Mountain 
Road, Boshan District, Zibo City, Shandong, 255200, People's Republic of China.
(3)China Medical University Hospital of Boshan District, Zibo City, Shandong, 
255200, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Inconsistent conclusions have been reported for the genetic 
relationship between CYP4F2 (Cytochrome P450 Family 4 Subfamily F Member 2) 
polymorphisms and the susceptibility to cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 
diseases.
METHODS: We performed a meta-analysis to assess the potential role of rs1558139 
C/T and rs2108622 G/A polymorphisms of CYP4F2 in the risks of cardiovascular and 
cerebrovascular diseases. The retrieval of four databases, including PubMed, Web 
of Science (WOS), China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI) and WANFANG 
DATA, was conducted. Mantel-Haenszel statistics for association test, Cochran's 
Q statistic, sensitivity analysis for heterogeneity assessment, and 
Begg's/Egger's tests for publication bias evaluation were performed under 
allele, homozygote, heterozygote, dominant, and recessive models, respectively.
RESULTS: A total of 597 articles were initially obtained by database searching, 
and twenty eligible articles were finally included. For rs1558139, a decreased 
risk of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases was observed in the overall 
meta-analysis and in "hypertension", "population-based" and "male" subgroups 
under models of T vs. C, CT vs. CC, and CT + TT vs. CC [all P values in 
association tests < 0.05, odds ratio (OR) < 1]. For rs2108622, a decreased 
coronary artery disease (CAD) risk was observed in the subgroup meta-analysis 
based on disease type under all genetic models (all P values in association 
tests < 0.05, OR< 1). Begg's/Egger's tests excluded the potential publication 
bias, while sensitivity analysis data supported the stability of the above 
results.
CONCLUSION: C/T genotype of CYP4AF2 rs1558139 may be linked to the decreased 
risk of hypertension in the male patients of Asian populations, while CYP4F2 
rs2108622 is likely associated with reduced susceptibility to CAD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12872-018-0763-y
PMCID: PMC5807755
PMID: 29426278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.