1. Hematology. 2018 Sep;23(8):567-573. doi: 10.1080/10245332.2018.1444920. Epub 
2018 Feb 27.

Novel mutation (R192C) in CYB5R3 gene causing NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase 
deficiency in eight Indian patients associated with autosomal recessive 
congenital methemoglobinemia type-I.

Kedar PS(1), Gupta V(1), Warang P(1), Chiddarwar A(1), Madkaikar M(1).

Author information:
(1)a National Institute of Immunohematology , Indian Council of Medical Research 
, Mumbai , India.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the cause of recessive congenital methemoglobinemia 
(RCM) in Indian families and to identify molecular defect associated with RCM.
METHODS: Eight cases of RCM have been addressed to our laboratory in order to 
investigate the cause of cyanosis associated with genetic disorders. 
NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase (cytb5r) enzyme activities were measured by 
standard methods, and molecular analysis was performed by polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) followed by DNA sequencing. The interpretation of mutation effect 
and the molecular modeling were performed by using specific software DEEP VIEW 
SWISS-PDB VIEWER and Pymol molecular graphics program.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Eight index cases from four unrelated families were 
referred for the cause of cyanosis. All patients showed mild to moderate 
cyanosis without mental retardation or any neurologic abnormalities. The 
methemoglobin levels were in the range of 11.5-22.41% with 50-70% reduction in 
CYTB5R activity. Spectroscopic analysis of the hemolysate showed normal peaks 
suggesting the absence of Hb-M. Molecular characterization showed a novel 
homozygous mutation p.Arg192Cys in CYB5R3 gene is an evolutionarily conserved 
position located in exon 7 in all eight index cases. The substitution of Cys is 
located on the interface of two domains of NADH-binding domain and is close 
proximity to the adenosine moiety would preclude the reciprocal ionic 
interaction (salt bridge) between Arg192 and Ile97 and may influence binding of 
the NADH coenzyme is hypothesized to cause disruption of hydrogen bonding and 
instability. Our study indicated that novel homozygous mutation p.Arg192Cys in 
CYB5R3 gene present in eight cases and the possibility of high prevalence of 
heterozygous in Indian population causing Type I RCM.

DOI: 10.1080/10245332.2018.1444920
PMID: 29482478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]