1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2018 May;17(5):885-896. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-0758. 
Epub 2018 Feb 26.

Antitumor Activity of Osimertinib, an Irreversible Mutant-Selective EGFR 
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor, in NSCLC Harboring EGFR Exon 20 Insertions.

Floc'h N(#)(1), Martin MJ(#)(2), Riess JW(#)(3), Orme JP(4), Staniszewska AD(2), 
Ménard L(2), Cuomo ME(4), O'Neill DJ(4), Ward RA(2), Finlay MRV(2), McKerrecher 
D(2), Cheng M(5), Vang DP(3), Burich RA(3), Keck JG(5), Gandara DR(3), Mack 
PC(3), Cross DAE(1).

Author information:
(1)IMED Oncology, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom. 
nicolas.floch@astrazeneca.com darren.cross@astrazeneca.com.
(2)IMED Oncology, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.
(3)University of California Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center, Sacramento, 
California.
(4)IMED Discovery science, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Jackson Laboratory West, Sacramento, California.
(#)Contributed equally

EGFR exon 20 insertions (Ex20Ins) account for 4% to 10% of EGFR activating 
mutations in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). EGFR Ex20Ins tumors are 
generally unresponsive to first- and second-generation EGFR inhibitors, and 
current standard of care for NSCLC patients with EGFR Ex20Ins is conventional 
cytotoxic chemotherapy. Therefore, the development of an EGFR TKI that can more 
effectively target NSCLC with EGFR Ex20Ins mutations represents a major advance 
for this patient subset. Osimertinib is a third-generation EGFR TKI approved for 
the treatment of advanced NSCLC harboring EGFR T790M; however, the activity of 
osimertinib in EGFR Ex20Ins NSCLC has yet to be fully assessed. Using CRISPR-Cas 
9 engineered cell lines carrying the most prevalent Ex20Ins mutations, namely 
Ex20Ins D770_N771InsSVD (22%) or Ex20Ins V769_D770InsASV (17%), and a series of 
patient-derived xenografts, we have characterized osimertinib and AZ5104 (a 
circulating metabolite of osimertinib) activities against NSCLC harboring 
Ex20Ins. We report that osimertinib and AZ5104 inhibit signaling pathways and 
cellular growth in Ex20Ins mutant cell lines in vitro and demonstrate sustained 
tumor growth inhibition of EGFR-mutant tumor xenograft harboring the most 
prevalent Ex20Ins in vivo The antitumor activity of osimertinib and AZ5104 in 
NSCLC harboring EGFR Ex20Ins is further described herein using a series of 
patient-derived xenograft models. Together these data support clinical testing 
of osimertinib in patients with EGFR Ex20Ins NSCLC. Mol Cancer Ther; 17(5); 
885-96. ©2018 AACR.

©2018 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-0758
PMCID: PMC5932243
PMID: 29483211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]