1. Exp Eye Res. 2018 May;170:108-116. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2018.02.022. Epub 2018 
Feb 24.

Analysis of 14-3-3 isoforms expressed in photoreceptors.

Inamdar SM(1), Lankford CK(1), Laird JG(1), Novbatova G(1), Tatro N(2), Whitmore 
SS(2), Scheetz TE(2), Baker SA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences and Institute for Vision 
Research, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; 
Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences and Institute for Vision Research, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. Electronic address: 
sheila-baker@uiowa.edu.

The 14-3-3 family of proteins has undergone considerable expansion in higher 
eukaryotes with humans and mice expressing seven isoforms (β, ε, η, γ, θ, ζ, and 
σ) from seven distinct genes (YWHAB, YWAHE, YWHAH, YWHAG, YWHAQ, YWHAZ, and 
SFN). Growing evidence indicates that while highly conserved, these isoforms are 
not entirely functionally redundant as they exhibit unique tissue expression 
profiles, subcellular localization, and biochemical functions. A key limitation 
in our understanding of 14-3-3 biology lies in our limited knowledge of 
cell-type specific 14-3-3 expression. Here we provide a characterization of 
14-3-3 expression in whole retina and isolated rod photoreceptors using 
reverse-transcriptase digital droplet PCR. We find that all 14-3-3 genes with 
the exception of SFN are expressed in mouse retina with YWHAQ and YWHAE being 
the most highly expressed. Rod photoreceptors are enriched in YWHAE (14-3-3 ε). 
Immunohistochemistry revealed that 14-3-3 ε and 14-3-3 ζ exhibit unique 
distributions in photoreceptors with 14-3-3 ε restricted to the inner segment 
and 14-3-3 ζ localized to the outer segment. Our data demonstrates that, in the 
retina, 14-3-3 isoforms likely serve specific functions as they exhibit unique 
expression levels and cell-type specificity. As such, future investigations into 
14-3-3 function in rod photoreceptors should be centered on 14-3-3 ε and 14-3-3 
ζ, depending on the subcellular region of question.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2018.02.022
PMCID: PMC5924652
PMID: 29486162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: none