1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2018 Mar 2;10:45-54. doi: 10.1016/j.omtn.2017.11.004. 
Epub 2017 Nov 14.

A Sensitive In Vitro Approach to Assess the Hybridization-Dependent Toxic 
Potential of High Affinity Gapmer Oligonucleotides.

Dieckmann A(1), Hagedorn PH(2), Burki Y(3), Brügmann C(3), Berrera M(3), Ebeling 
M(3), Singer T(3), Schuler F(3).

Author information:
(1)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center Basel, 
4070 Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address: andreas.dieckmann@roche.com.
(2)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center 
Copenhagen, 2970 Hørsholm, Denmark.
(3)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center Basel, 
4070 Basel, Switzerland.

The successful development of high-affinity gapmer antisense oligonucleotide 
(ASO) therapeutics containing locked nucleic acid (LNA) or constrained ethyl 
(cEt) substitutions has been hampered by the risk of hepatotoxicity. Here, we 
present an in vitro approach using transfected mouse fibroblasts to predict the 
potential hepatic liabilities of LNA-modified ASOs (LNA-ASOs), validated by 
assessing 236 different LNA-ASOs with known hepatotoxic potential. This in vitro 
assay accurately reflects in vivo findings and relates hepatotoxicity to RNase 
H1 activity, off-target RNA downregulation, and LNA-ASO-binding affinity. We 
further demonstrate that the hybridization-dependent toxic potential of LNA-ASOs 
is also evident in different cell types from different species, which indicates 
probable translatability of the in vitro results to humans. Additionally, we 
show that the melting temperature (Tm) of LNA-ASOs maintained below a threshold 
level of about 55°C greatly diminished the hepatotoxic potential. In summary, we 
have established a sensitive in vitro screening approach for assessing the 
hybridization-dependent toxic potential of LNA-ASOs, enabling prioritization of 
candidate molecules in drug discovery and early development.

Copyright © 2017 F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2017.11.004
PMCID: PMC5725219
PMID: 29499955