1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Mar 25;498(1):99-104. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.02.205. Epub 2018 Mar 1.

Harmines inhibit cancer cell growth through coordinated activation of apoptosis 
and inhibition of autophagy.

Geng X(1), Ren Y(1), Wang F(1), Tian D(1), Yao X(1), Zhang Y(2), Tang J(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Natural Products, College of 
Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, People's Republic of China; 
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Pharmacodynamic Constituents of TCM and New 
Drug Research, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western 
Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. Electronic 
address: yxz169@case.edu.
(3)Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Natural Products, College of 
Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, People's Republic of China; 
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Pharmacodynamic Constituents of TCM and New 
Drug Research, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, People's Republic of China. 
Electronic address: gztangjinshan@126.com.

Harmine and its analogs have long been considered as anticancer agents. In vitro 
analyses suggested that intercalating DNA or inhibiting topoisomerase might 
contribute to the cytotoxic effect of this class of compound. However, this idea 
has not been rigorously tested in intact cells. By synthesizing novel 
derivatives, here we demonstrate that harmines did not activate the DNA damage 
response, a cellular signaling commonly induced by agents that intercalate DNA 
or inhibit topoisomerase. These findings suggest that mechanisms other than DNA 
intercalating or topoisomerase inhibiting contribute to the toxicity of harmines 
in vivo. Using a novel N2-benzyl and N9-arylated alkyl compound 10f that has 
good solubility and stability as the model, we show that harmines strongly 
inhibited the growth of cancer cells originated from breast, lung, bone and 
pancreas, but not that of normal fibroblasts. We further show that 10f induced 
apoptosis and inhibited autophagy in a dose and time-dependent manner. An 
apoptosis inhibitor suppressed 10f-induced cell death. Together, our results 
reveal previously unidentified insights into the anticancer mechanism of 
harmines, supporting future development of this compound class in the treatment 
of human cancers.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.02.205
PMCID: PMC5857254
PMID: 29501493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.