1. Cell Death Dis. 2018 Mar 2;9(3):357. doi: 10.1038/s41419-018-0392-5.

The harsh microenvironment in infarcted heart accelerates transplanted bone 
marrow mesenchymal stem cells injury: the role of injured cardiomyocytes-derived 
exosomes.

Hu M(1), Guo G(1), Huang Q(1), Cheng C(1), Xu R(1), Li A(1), Liu N(2), Liu S(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, the Second Affiliated Hospital 
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510260, Guangdong, China.
(2)Guangzhou Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, the Second Affiliated Hospital 
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510260, Guangdong, China. 
lnn425@163.com.
(3)Guangzhou Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, the Second Affiliated Hospital 
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510260, Guangdong, China. 
liushiming@gzhmu.edu.cn.

Stem cell therapy can be used to repair and regenerate damaged hearts tissue; 
nevertheless, the low survival rate of transplanted cells limits their 
therapeutic efficacy. Recently, it has been proposed that exosomes regulate 
multiple cellular processes by mediating cell survival and communication among 
cells. The following study investigates whether injured cardiomyocytes-derived 
exosomes (cardiac exosomes) affect the survival of transplanted bone marrow 
mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) in infarcted heart. To mimic the harsh 
microenvironment in infarcted heart that the cardiomyocytes or transplanted 
BMSCs encounter in vivo, cardiomyocytes conditioned medium and cardiac exosomes 
collected from H2O2-treated cardiomyocytes culture medium were cultured with 
BMSCs under oxidative stress in vitro. Cardiomyocytes conditioned medium and 
cardiac exosomes significantly accelerated the injury of BMSCs induced by H2O2; 
increased cleaved caspase-3/caspase-3 and apoptotic percentage, and decreased 
the ratio of Bcl-2/Bax and cell viability in those cells. Next, we explored the 
role of cardiac exosomes in the survival of transplanted BMSCs in vivo by 
constructing a Rab27a knockout (KO) mice model by a transcription activator-like 
effector nuclease (TALEN) genome-editing technique; Rab27a is a family of 
GTPases, which has critical role in secretion of exosomes. Male mouse 
GFP-modified BMSCs were implanted into the viable myocardium bordering the 
infarction in Rab27a KO and wild-type female mice. The obtained results showed 
that the transplanted BMSCs survival in infarcted heart was increased in Rab27a 
KO mice by the higher level of Y-chromosome Sry DNA, GFP mRNA, and the GFP 
fluorescence signal intensity. To sum up, these findings revealed that the 
injured cardiomyocytes-derived exosomes accelerate transplanted BMSCs injury in 
infarcted heart, thus highlighting a new mechanism underlying the survival of 
transplanted cells after myocardial infarction.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-018-0392-5
PMCID: PMC5834521
PMID: 29500342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.