1. PLoS Biol. 2018 Mar 5;16(3):e2003067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2003067. 
eCollection 2018 Mar.

Spliced integrated retrotransposed element (SpIRE) formation in the human 
genome.

Larson PA(1), Moldovan JB(1), Jasti N(1), Kidd JM(1)(2), Beck CR(1), Moran 
JV(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(2)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2018 Mar 05;16(3):e2005470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2005470.

Human Long interspersed element-1 (L1) retrotransposons contain an internal RNA 
polymerase II promoter within their 5' untranslated region (UTR) and encode two 
proteins, (ORF1p and ORF2p) required for their mobilization (i.e., 
retrotransposition). The evolutionary success of L1 relies on the continuous 
retrotransposition of full-length L1 mRNAs. Previous studies identified 
functional splice donor (SD), splice acceptor (SA), and polyadenylation 
sequences in L1 mRNA and provided evidence that a small number of spliced L1 
mRNAs retrotransposed in the human genome. Here, we demonstrate that the 
retrotransposition of intra-5'UTR or 5'UTR/ORF1 spliced L1 mRNAs leads to the 
generation of spliced integrated retrotransposed elements (SpIREs). We 
identified a new intra-5'UTR SpIRE that is ten times more abundant than 
previously identified SpIREs. Functional analyses demonstrated that both 
intra-5'UTR and 5'UTR/ORF1 SpIREs lack Cis-acting transcription factor binding 
sites and exhibit reduced promoter activity. The 5'UTR/ORF1 SpIREs also produce 
nonfunctional ORF1p variants. Finally, we demonstrate that sequence changes 
within the L1 5'UTR over evolutionary time, which permitted L1 to evade the 
repressive effects of a host protein, can lead to the generation of new L1 
splicing events, which, upon retrotransposition, generates a new SpIRE 
subfamily. We conclude that splicing inhibits L1 retrotransposition, SpIREs 
generally represent evolutionary "dead-ends" in the L1 retrotransposition 
process, mutations within the L1 5'UTR alter L1 splicing dynamics, and that 
retrotransposition of the resultant spliced transcripts can generate 
interindividual genomic variation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2003067
PMCID: PMC5860796
PMID: 29505568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JVM is an inventor on the patent: “Kazazian, 
H.H., Boeke, J.D., Moran, J.V., and Dombroski, B.A. Compositions and methods of 
use of mammalian retrotransposons. Application No. 60/006,831; Patent No. 
6,150,160; Issued November 21, 2000.” JVM has not made any money from this 
patent and voluntarily discloses this information.