1. Anal Chem. 2018 Apr 3;90(7):4832-4839. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b00298. Epub
 2018 Mar 19.

Time-Gated Raman Spectroscopy for Quantitative Determination of Solid-State 
Forms of Fluorescent Pharmaceuticals.

Lipiäinen T(1), Pessi J(1), Movahedi P(2), Koivistoinen J(3), Kurki L(4), 
Tenhunen M(4), Yliruusi J(1), Juppo AM(1), Heikkonen J(2), Pahikkala T(2), 
Strachan CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy , 
University of Helsinki , Viikinkaari 5 E , FI-00790 Helsinki , Finland.
(2)Department of Future Technologies , University of Turku , Vesilinnantie 5 , 
FI-20500 Turku , Finland.
(3)Nanoscience Center, Department of Chemistry , University of Jyväskylä , P.O. 
Box 35, FI-40014 , Jyväskylä , Finland.
(4)TimeGate Instruments , Teknologiantie 5 , FI-90590 Oulu , Finland.

Raman spectroscopy is widely used for quantitative pharmaceutical analysis, but 
a common obstacle to its use is sample fluorescence masking the Raman signal. 
Time-gating provides an instrument-based method for rejecting fluorescence 
through temporal resolution of the spectral signal and allows Raman spectra of 
fluorescent materials to be obtained. An additional practical advantage is that 
analysis is possible in ambient lighting. This study assesses the efficacy of 
time-gated Raman spectroscopy for the quantitative measurement of fluorescent 
pharmaceuticals. Time-gated Raman spectroscopy with a 128 × (2) × 4 CMOS SPAD 
detector was applied for quantitative analysis of ternary mixtures of 
solid-state forms of the model drug, piroxicam (PRX). Partial least-squares 
(PLS) regression allowed quantification, with Raman-active time domain selection 
(based on visual inspection) improving performance. Model performance was 
further improved by using kernel-based regularized least-squares (RLS) 
regression with greedy feature selection in which the data use in both the Raman 
shift and time dimensions was statistically optimized. Overall, time-gated Raman 
spectroscopy, especially with optimized data analysis in both the spectral and 
time dimensions, shows potential for sensitive and relatively routine 
quantitative analysis of photoluminescent pharmaceuticals during drug 
development and manufacturing.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b00298
PMCID: PMC6150637
PMID: 29513001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
financial interest(s): Lauri Kurki and Mari Tenhunen are affiliated with the 
company that commercialized the CMOS SPAD detector technology used in this 
research.