1. Learn Mem. 2018 Mar 15;25(4):176-182. doi: 10.1101/lm.046946.117. Print 2018 
Apr.

Mechanisms of critical period in the hippocampus underlie object location 
learning and memory in infant rats.

Travaglia A(1), Steinmetz AB(1), Miranda JM(1), Alberini CM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York 10003, 
USA.
(2)Neuroscience Institute, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, 
USA.

Episodic memories in early childhood are rapidly forgotten, a phenomenon that is 
associated with "infantile amnesia," the inability of adults to remember 
early-life experiences. We recently showed that early aversive contextual memory 
in infant rats, which is in fact rapidly forgotten, is actually not lost, as 
reminders presented later in life reinstate a long-lasting and context-specific 
memory. We also showed that the formation of this infantile memory recruits in 
the hippocampus mechanisms typical of developmental critical periods. Here, we 
tested whether similar mechanisms apply to a nonaversive, hippocampal type of 
learning. We report that novel object location (nOL) learned at postnatal day 17 
(PN17) undergoes the typical rapid forgetting of infantile learning. However, a 
later reminder reinstates memory expression. Furthermore, as for aversive 
experiences, nOL learning at PN17 engages critical period mechanisms in the 
dorsal hippocampus: it induces a switch in the GluN2A/2B-NMDA receptor ratio, 
and brain-derived neurotrophic factor injected bilaterally into the dorsal 
hippocampus immediately after training results in long-lasting memory 
expression. We conclude that in infancy the hippocampus plays a necessary role 
in processing episodic and contextual memories, including nonaversive ones, and 
matures through a developmental critical period.

Â© 2018 Travaglia et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/lm.046946.117
PMCID: PMC5855526
PMID: 29545389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]