1. Front Genet. 2018 Mar 1;9:55. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00055. eCollection 2018.

Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor -173 G/C Polymorphism: A Global 
Meta-Analysis across the Disease Spectrum.

Illescas O(1), Gomez-Verjan JC(2), García-Velázquez L(3), Govezensky T(4), 
Rodriguez-Sosa M(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Biomedicina, Facultad de Estudios Superiores-Iztacala, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Tlalnepantla de Baz, Mexico.
(2)División de Investigación Básica, Instituto Nacional de Geriatría, Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Medicina Genómica y Toxicología Ambiental, Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(4)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.

Human macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a cytokine that plays a 
role in several metabolic and inflammatory processes. Single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) -173 G/C (rs755622) on MIF gene has been associated with 
numerous diseases, such as arthritis and cancer. However, most of the reports 
concerning the association of MIF with these and other pathologies are 
inconsistent and remain quite controversial. Therefore, we performed a 
meta-analysis from 96 case-control studies on -173 G/C MIF SNP and stratified 
the data according to the subjects geographic localization or the disease 
pathophysiology, in order to determine a more meaningful significance to this 
SNP. The polymorphism was strongly associated with an increased risk in 
autoimmune-inflammatory, infectious and age-related diseases on the dominant 
(OR: 0.74 [0.58-0.93], P < 0.01; OR: 0.81 [0.74-0.89], P < 0.0001; and OR: 0.81 
[0.76-0.87], P < 0.0001, respectively) and the recessive models (OR: 0.74 
[0.57-0.095], P < 0.01; OR: 0.66 [0.48-0.92], P < 0.0154; and OR: 0.70 
[0.60-0.82], P < 0.0001, respectively). Also, significant association was found 
in the geographic localization setting for Asia, Europe and Latin America 
subdivisions in the dominant (OR: 0.76 [0.69-0.84], P < 0.0001; OR: 0.77 
[0.72-0.83], P < 0.0001; OR: 0.61 [0.44-0.83], P-value: 0.0017, respectively) 
and overdominant models (OR: 0.85 [0.77-0.94], P < 0.0001; OR: 0.80 [0.75-0.86], 
P < 0.0001; OR: 0.73 [0.63-0.85], P-value: 0.0017, respectively). Afterwards, we 
implemented a network meta-analysis to compare the association of the 
polymorphism for two different subdivisions. We found a stronger association for 
autoimmune than for age-related or autoimmune-inflammatory diseases, and 
stronger association for infectious than for autoimmune-inflammatory diseases. 
We report for the first time a meta-analysis of rs755622 polymorphism with a 
variety of stratified diseases and populations. The study reveals a strong 
association of the polymorphism with autoimmune and infectious diseases. These 
results may help direct future research on MIF-173 G/C in diseases in which the 
relation is clearer and thus assist the search for more plausible applications.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00055
PMCID: PMC5839154
PMID: 29545822