1. Oncol Lett. 2018 Apr;15(4):4471-4476. doi: 10.3892/ol.2018.7856. Epub 2018 Jan
 25.

Colon cancers carrying BRAF V600E and β-catenin T41A activating mutations are 
resistant to numerous common anticancer drugs.

Xu G(1)(2), Li K(1), Zhang N(1), Zhu B(1), Feng G(2), Fan Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing 100038, P.R. China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing 100020, P.R. China.

Colorectal cancer is a common malignancy with a high prevalence and associated 
mortality rate. However, the preclinical tools currently used for drug 
development are insufficient. The aim of the present study was to establish and 
characterize a specific patient-derived colon cancer xenograft (PDCCX) mouse 
model for drug testing. Primary colon tumors were obtained from 10 patients by 
surgical resection, and tumor tissues were subsequently grafted into nude mice 
followed by consecutive passages. Primary tumors and xenograft tumors were 
collected and processed for DNA sequencing, histological evaluation and 
immunohistochemical staining. The responses of fifth-generation PDCCX mice to 
5-fluorouracil, oxaliplatin, and cetuximab were assessed. Two PDCCX cell lines 
were successfully established. The histology and protein expression levels of 
SMAD family member 3, epidermal growth factor receptor, c-MET, caudal type 
homeobox 2, E-cadherin and β-catenin in the xenograft tumors were consistently 
maintained from the primary cancer tissues. BRAF V600E and β-catenin T41A double 
mutations were identified in one cell line, and were associated with a lack of 
response to 5-fluorouracil, oxaliplatin and cetuximab treatment. This PDCCX cell 
line may provide a reliable tool for preclinical evaluation of the efficacy of 
novel therapies that may target the BRAF V600E and β-catenin mutations.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2018.7856
PMCID: PMC5835913
PMID: 29541216