1. Mol Cancer Res. 2018 Jun;16(6):947-960. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-17-0367.
Epub  2018 Mar 15.

D-2-Hydroxyglutarate Is Necessary and Sufficient for Isocitrate Dehydrogenase 1 
Mutant-Induced MIR148A Promoter Methylation.

Li T(1), Cox CD(1), Ozer BH(1), Nguyen NT(1), Nguyen HN(1), Lai TJ(1), Li S(1), 
Liu F(1), Kornblum HI(2), Liau LM(3), Nghiemphu PL(1), Cloughesy TF(1), Lai 
A(4).

Author information:
(1)Neuro-Oncology Program, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Pediatric 
Neurology, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, Molecular & 
Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(4)Neuro-Oncology Program, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California. 
albertlai@mednet.ucla.edu.

Mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) 1/2 converts α-ketoglutarate (α-KG) to D-2 
hydroxyglutarate (D-2-HG), a putative oncometabolite that can inhibit 
α-KG-dependent enzymes, including ten-eleven translocation methylcytosine 
dioxygenase (TET) DNA demethylases. We recently established that miRNAs are 
components of the IDH1 mutant-associated glioma CpG island methylator phenotype 
(G-CIMP) and specifically identified MIR148A as a tumor-suppressive miRNA within 
G-CIMP. However, the precise mechanism by which mutant IDH induces 
hypermethylation of MIR148A and other G-CIMP promoters remains to be elucidated. 
In this study, we demonstrate that treatment with exogenous D-2-HG induces 
MIR148A promoter methylation and transcriptional silencing in human embryonic 
kidney 293T (293T) cells and primary normal human astrocytes. Conversely, we 
show that the development of MIR148A promoter methylation in mutant 
IDH1-overexpressing 293T cells is abrogated via treatment with C227, an 
inhibitor of mutant IDH1 generation of D-2-HG. Using dot blot assays for global 
assessment of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC), we show that D-2-HG treatment 
reduces 5-hmC levels, whereas C227 treatment increases 5-hmC levels, strongly 
suggesting TET inhibition by D-2-HG. Moreover, we show that withdrawal of D-2-HG 
treatment reverses methylation with an associated increase in MIR148A transcript 
levels and transient generation of 5-hmC. We also demonstrate that RNA 
polymerase II binds endogenously to the predicted promoter region of MIR148A, 
validating the hypothesis that its transcription is driven by an independent 
promoter.Implications: Establishment of D-2-HG as a necessary and sufficient 
intermediate by which mutant IDH1 induces CpG island methylation of MIR148A will 
help with understanding the efficacy of selective mutant IDH1 inhibitors in the 
clinic. Mol Cancer Res; 16(6); 947-60. ©2018 AACR.

©2018 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-17-0367
PMCID: PMC5984679
PMID: 29545476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no potential conflicts of interest.