1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2018 Apr;88:308-318. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2018.03.006. Epub 
2018 Mar 14.

24S-hydroxycholesterol suppresses neuromuscular transmission in SOD1(G93A) mice: 
A possible role of NO and lipid rafts.

Mukhutdinova KA(1), Kasimov MR(1), Giniatullin AR(1), Zakyrjanova GF(2), Petrov 
AM(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Kazan State Medial University, Butlerova st. 49, 
Kazan 420012, Russia.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience, Kazan State Medial University, Butlerova st. 49, 
Kazan 420012, Russia; Laboratory of Biophysics of Synaptic Processes, Kazan 
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Federal Research Center "Kazan 
Scientific Center of RAS", P. O. Box 30, Lobachevsky St., 2/31, Kazan 420111, 
Russia.
(3)Institute of Neuroscience, Kazan State Medial University, Butlerova st. 49, 
Kazan 420012, Russia; Laboratory of Biophysics of Synaptic Processes, Kazan 
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Federal Research Center "Kazan 
Scientific Center of RAS", P. O. Box 30, Lobachevsky St., 2/31, Kazan 420111, 
Russia. Electronic address: aleksey.petrov@kazangmu.ru.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder 
characterized by the initial denervation of skeletal muscle and subsequent death 
of motor neurons. A dying-back pattern of ALS suggests a crucial role for 
neuromuscular junction dysfunction. In the present study, microelectrode 
recording of postsynaptic currents and optical detection of synaptic vesicle 
traffic (FM1-43 dye) and intracellular NO levels (DAF-FM DA) were used to 
examine the effect of the major brain-derived cholesterol metabolite 
24S-hydroxycholesterol (24S-HC, 0.4 μM) on neuromuscular transmission in the 
diaphragm of transgenic mice carrying a mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (SODG93A). 
We found that 24S-HC suppressed spontaneous neurotransmitter release and 
neurotransmitter exocytosis during high-frequency stimulation. The latter was 
accompanied by a decrease in both the rate of synaptic vesicle recycling and 
activity-dependent enhancement of NO production. Inhibition of NO synthase with 
L-NAME also attenuated synaptic vesicle exocytosis during high-frequency 
stimulation and completely abolished the effect of 24S-HC itself. Of note, 
24S-HC enhanced the labeling of synaptic membranes with B-subunit of cholera 
toxin, suggesting an increase in lipid ordering. Lipid raft-disrupting agents 
(methyl-β-cyclodextrin, sphingomyelinase) prevented the action of 24S-HC on both 
lipid raft marker labeling and NO synthesis. Together, these experiments 
indicate that 24S-HC is able to suppress the exocytotic release of 
neurotransmitter in response to intense activity via a NO/lipid raft-dependent 
pathway in the neuromuscular junctions of SODG93A mice.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcn.2018.03.006
PMID: 29550246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]