1. Arch Pharm Res. 2018 Jun;41(6):664-676. doi: 10.1007/s12272-018-1022-6. Epub 
2018 Mar 23.

The inhibitory effect of sodium baicalin on oseltamivir-resistant influenza A 
virus via reduction of neuraminidase activity.

Jin J(1), Chen Y(1), Wang D(2), Ma L(1), Guo M(1), Zhou C(3), Dou J(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, School of Life Science and 
Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, 24 Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Organic Chemistry, School of Science, China Pharmaceutical 
University, 24 Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, School of Life Science and 
Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, 24 Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. cl_zhou@cpu.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, School of Life Science and 
Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, 24 Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. doujie@cpu.edu.cn.

Baicalin was identified as a neuraminidase (NA) inhibitor displaying 
anti-influenza A virus (IAV) activity. However, its poor solubility in saline 
has limited its use in the clinic. We generated sodium baicalin and showed that 
it exhibited greatly increased solubility in saline. Its efficacy against 
oseltamivir-resistant mutant A/FM/1/47-H275Y (H1N1-H275Y) was evaluated in vitro 
and in vivo. Results showed that 10 μM of sodium baicalin inhibited A/FM/1/47 
(H1N1), A/Beijing/32/92 (H3N2) and H1N1-H275Y in MDCK cells in a dose-dependent 
manner, with inhibitory rates of 83.9, 75.9 and 47.7%, respectively. Intravenous 
administration of sodium baicalin at 100 mg/kg/d enabled the survival of 20% of 
H1N1-H275Y-infected mice. The treatment alleviated body weight loss and lung 
injury. Moreover, sodium baicalin exerted a clear inhibitory effect on NAs. The 
IC50 values of sodium baicalin against H1N1-H275Y and cells-expressing 
A/Anhui/1/2013-R294K (H7N9-R294K) NA protein (N9-R294K) were 214.4 μM and 
216.3 μM. Direct interactions between sodium baicalin and NA were observed, and 
we simulated the interactions of sodium baicalin with N9-R294K and N9 near the 
active sites of OC-N9-R294K and OC-N9. The residues responsible for the sodium 
baicalin-N9-R294K and sodium baicalin-N9 interactions were the same, confirming 
that sodium baicalin exerts effects on wild-type and oseltamivir-resistant viral 
strains.

DOI: 10.1007/s12272-018-1022-6
PMID: 29572682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]