1. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2018 May;32(5):623-632. doi:
10.1007/s10822-018-0115-0.  Epub 2018 Mar 28.

Molecular dynamics characterization of the SAMHD1 Aicardi-Goutières Arg145Gln 
mutant: structural determinants for the impaired tetramerization.

Cardamone F(1), Falconi M(1), Desideri A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Interuniversity Consortium, National Institute 
Biostructure and Biosystem (INBB), University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via della 
Ricerca Scientifica 1, 00133, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Biology, Interuniversity Consortium, National Institute 
Biostructure and Biosystem (INBB), University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via della 
Ricerca Scientifica 1, 00133, Rome, Italy. desideri@uniroma2.it.

Aicardi-Goutières syndrome, a rare genetic disorder characterized by 
calcification of basal ganglia, results in psychomotor delays and epilepsy 
states from the early months of children life. This disease is caused by 
mutations in seven different genes encoding proteins implicated in the 
metabolism of nucleic acids, including SAMHD1. Twenty SAMHD1 gene variants have 
been discovered and in this work, a structural characterization of the SAMHD1 
Aicardi-Goutières Arg145Gln mutant is reported by classical molecular dynamics 
simulation. Four simulations have been carried out and compared. Two concerning 
the wild-type SAMHD1 form in presence and absence of cofactors, in order to 
explain the role of cofactors in the SAMHD1 assembly/disassembly process and, 
two concerning the Arg145Gln mutant, also in presence and absence of cofactors, 
in order to have an accurate comparison with the corresponding native forms. 
Results show the importance of native residue Arg145 in maintaining the 
tetramer, interacting with GTP cofactor inside allosteric sites. Replacement of 
arginine in glutamine gives rise to a loosening of GTP-protein interactions, 
when cofactors are present in allosteric sites, whilst in absence of cofactors, 
the occurrence of intra and inter-chain interactions is observed in the mutant, 
not seen in the native enzyme, making energetically unfavourable the 
tetramerization process.

DOI: 10.1007/s10822-018-0115-0
PMID: 29594836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]