1. Matrix Biol. 2019 May;78-79:139-146. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.03.020. Epub 
2018 Mar 27.

TMEM2: A missing link in hyaluronan catabolism identified?

Yamaguchi Y(1), Yamamoto H(2), Tobisawa Y(2), Irie F(2).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, 
10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: 
yyamaguchi@sbpdiscovery.org.
(2)Human Genetics Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, 
10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Hyaluronan (HA) is a glycosaminoglycan (GAG) composed of repeating disaccharide 
units of glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine. HA is an extremely long, 
unbranched polymer, which often exceeds 106 Da and sometimes reaches 107 Da. A 
feature that epitomizes HA is its rapid turnover; one-third of the total body HA 
is turned over daily. The current model of HA catabolism postulates that 
high-molecular weight HA in the extracellular space is first cleaved into 
smaller fragments by a hyaluronidase(s) that resides at the cell surface, 
followed by internalization of fragments and their degradation into 
monosaccharides in lysosomes. Over the last decade, considerable research has 
shown that the HYAL family of hyaluronidases plays significant roles in HA 
catabolism. Nonetheless, the identity of a hyaluronidase responsible for the 
initial step of HA cleavage on the cell surface remains elusive, as biochemical 
and enzymological properties of HYAL proteins are not entirely consistent with 
those expected of cell surface hyaluronidases. Recent identification of 
transmembrane 2 (TMEM2) as a cell surface protein that possesses potent 
hyaluronidase activity suggests that it may be the "missing" cell surface 
hyaluronidase, and that novel models of HA catabolism should include this 
protein.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.03.020
PMCID: PMC6314907
PMID: 29601864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]