1. Front Physiol. 2018 Mar 20;9:244. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.00244. eCollection 
2018.

Dexamethasone Protects Against Tourniquet-Induced Acute Ischemia-Reperfusion 
Injury in Mouse Hindlimb.

Corrick RM(1), Tu H(1), Zhang D(1), Barksdale AN(1), Muelleman RL(1), Wadman 
MC(1), Li YL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE, United States.

Extremity injuries with hemorrhage have been a significant cause of death in 
civilian medicine and on the battlefield. The use of a tourniquet as an 
intervention is necessary for treatment to an injured limb; however, the 
tourniquet and subsequent release results in serious acute ischemia-reperfusion 
(IR) injury in the skeletal muscle and neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Much 
evidence demonstrates that inflammation is an important factor to cause acute IR 
injury. To find effective therapeutic interventions for tourniquet-induced acute 
IR injuries, our current study investigated effect of dexamethasone, an 
anti-inflammatory drug, on tourniquet-induced acute IR injury in mouse hindlimb. 
In C57/BL6 mice, a tourniquet was placed on unilateral hindlimb (left hindlimb) 
at the hip joint for 3 h, and then released for 24 h to induce IR. Three hours 
of tourniquet and 24 h of release (24-h IR) caused gastrocnemius muscle injuries 
including rupture of the muscle sarcolemma and necrosis (42.8 ± 2.3% for infarct 
size of the gastrocnemius muscle). In the NMJ, motor nerve terminals 
disappeared, and endplate potentials were undetectable in 24-h IR mice. There 
was no gastrocnemius muscle contraction in 24-h IR mice. Western blot data 
showed that inflammatory cytokines (TNFα and IL-1β) were increased in the 
gastrocnemius muscle after 24-h IR. Treatment with dexamethasone at the 
beginning of reperfusion (1 mg/kg, i.p.) significantly inhibited expression of 
TNFα and IL-1β, reduced rupture of the muscle sarcolemma and infarct size (24.8 
± 2.0%), and improved direct muscle stimulation-induced gastrocnemius muscle 
contraction in 24-h IR mice. However, this anti-inflammatory drug did not 
improve NMJ morphology and function, and sciatic nerve-stimulated skeletal 
muscle contraction in 24-h IR mice. The data suggest that one-time treatment 
with dexamethasone at the beginning of reperfusion only reduced structural and 
functional impairments of the skeletal muscle but not the NMJ through inhibiting 
inflammatory cytokines.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2018.00244
PMCID: PMC5870039
PMID: 29615933