1. Endocrinology. 1988 Mar;122(3):826-30. doi: 10.1210/endo-122-3-826.

Atrial natriuretic peptides: the role of phenylalanine on biological activity.

Craven TG(1), Kem DC, Schiebinger RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Science Center, 
Oklahoma City.

Previous studies have shown that atrial natriuretic peptides (ANPs) inhibit the 
secretion of aldosterone by isolated rat adrenal glomerulosa cells stimulated by 
angiotensin II, ACTH, and potassium. Structure-function studies have 
concentrated on the significance of the C- and N-terminal chains for the 
biological activity of the peptide. We investigated the role of phenylalanine at 
positions 8 and 26 by using [Ala8]human (h) ANP or [Ala26]hANP analogs to 
inhibit potassium-stimulated aldosterone secretion in granulosa cells. 
hANP-(1-28) inhibited potassium-stimulated aldosterone secretion with an IC50 of 
0.48 nM. Synthetic [Ala26]hANP inhibited the aldosterone response to potassium 
with an inhibitory curve relative to hANP-(1-28) (rIC50) of 6.0 nM, which was 
significantly greater than that for hANP (P less than 0.001). Synthetic 
[Ala8]hANP was markedly less effective as an inhibitor, with an estimated rIC50 
of 3.0 microM (P less than 0.0001). To determine whether the analogs act as 
competitive antagonists to hANP-(1-28), experiments were performed in which a 
fixed concentration (0.1 microM) of the analog was incubated in the presence of 
increasing concentrations of hANP-(1-28). When hANP-(1-28) was incubated with 
[Ala8]hANP, the rIC50 (0.2 nM) was significantly less than that for hANP-(1-28) 
alone (P less than 0.02). When hANP-(1-28) was incubated with [Ala26]hANP, the 
rIC50 was 0.1 nM. In summary, [Ala8]hANP and [Ala26]hANP were significantly less 
potent than hANP-(1-28) as inhibitors of aldosterone production from granulosa 
cells. Both analogs shifted the hANP-(1-28) dose-response curve to the left. 
Neither analog functioned as a competitive antagonist to hANP-(1-28). Our 
results indicate that the hydrophobic phenyl groups at these two positions are 
required for full biological potency of ANP as an inhibitor of aldosterone 
production.

DOI: 10.1210/endo-122-3-826
PMID: 2963740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]