1. Redox Biol. 2018 Jun;16:401-413. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2018.04.001. Epub 2018
Apr  3.

Defective protein repair under methionine sulfoxide A deletion drives autophagy 
and ARE-dependent gene transcription.

Pennington SM(1), Klutho PR(1), Xie L(1), Broadhurst K(1), Koval OM(1), 
McCormick ML(2), Spitz DR(2), Grumbach IM(3).

Author information:
(1)Abboud Cardiovascular Research Center, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, 
Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(2)Free Radical and Radiation Biology Program, Department of Radiation Oncology, 
Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, 
USA.
(3)Abboud Cardiovascular Research Center, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, 
Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; Free Radical and Radiation Biology Program, Department 
of Radiation Oncology, Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; Veterans Affairs Healthcare System, Iowa City, IA 
52246, USA. Electronic address: Isabella-grumbach@uiowa.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Reduction of oxidized methionines is emerging as a major protein 
repair pathway. The lack of methionine sulfoxide reductase A (MsrA) exacerbates 
cardiovascular disease phenotypes driven by increased oxidative stress. However, 
the role of MsrA on maintaining cellular homeostasis in the absence of excessive 
oxidative stress is less well understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Constitutive genetic deletion of MsrA increased formation 
of p62-containing protein aggregates, activated autophagy, and decreased a 
marker of apoptosis in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). The association of 
Keap1 with p62 was augmented in MsrA-/- VSMC. Keap1 targets the transcription 
factor Nrf2, which regulates antioxidant genes, for proteasomal degradation. 
However, in MsrA-/- VSMC, the association of Nrf2 with Keap1 was diminished. 
Whereas Nrf2 mRNA levels were not decreased in MsrA-/- VSMC, we detected 
decreased ubiquitination of Nrf2 and a corresponding increase in total Nrf2 
protein in the absence of biochemical markers of oxidative stress. Moreover, 
nuclear-localized Nrf2 was increased under MsrA deficiency, resulting in 
upregulation of Nrf2-dependent transcriptional activity. Consequently, 
transcription, protein levels and enzymatic activity of glutamate-cysteine 
ligase and glutathione reductase were greatly augmented in MsrA-/- VSMC.
SUMMARY: Our findings demonstrate that reversal of methionine oxidation is 
required for maintenance of cellular homeostasis in the absence of increased 
oxidative stress. These data provide the first link between autophagy and 
activation of Nrf2 in the setting of MsrA deletion.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2018.04.001
PMCID: PMC5953240
PMID: 29649787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]