1. Case Rep Cardiol. 2018 Feb 21;2018:9130852. doi: 10.1155/2018/9130852. 
eCollection 2018.

Acute Pericarditis Occurring Three Days after Intravesical Instillation of 
Mitomycin C after Transurethral Bladder Tumor Resection in a 64-Year-Old Woman.

Meghrajani V(1), Hashmi A(1), Lin SC(1), Plawes Z(2), Brejt S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Maimonides Medical Center, 4802 10th Avenue, 
Brooklyn, NY 11219, USA.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Maimonides Medical Center, 4802 10th Avenue, 
Brooklyn, NY 11219, USA.

We present a 64-year-old woman who developed symptoms of acute pericarditis 
three days after undergoing intravesical instillation of mitomycin C following 
transurethral bladder tumor resection. Mitomycin C is a chemotherapeutic agent 
which acts by alkylation of DNA and is known to be cardiotoxic when systemically 
administered. Despite classic pericarditis symptoms, the patient underwent an 
urgent coronary angiogram due to elevated cardiac troponin I level, EKG changes, 
and wall motion abnormalities on her echocardiogram. During her angiogram, it 
was found that she had multiple stenotic coronary artery lesions, with no acute 
total coronary occlusions, and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was done 
with placement of a single drug-eluting stent for a 95% stenotic lesion in the 
left anterior descending artery. The patient was discharged after an uneventful 
hospitalization on dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and prasugrel, and 
colchicine for pericarditis. It is likely that the patient's presentation was 
the result of a perimyocardial inflammatory process secondary to intravesically 
administered mitomycin C, rather than an acute coronary syndrome. While the 
pathophysiological basis of cardiotoxicity of systemically administered 
mitomycin C is well documented, more studies are needed to determine whether 
intravesical MMC may cause cardiotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/9130852
PMCID: PMC5841117
PMID: 29682358