1. Exp Ther Med. 2018 May;15(5):4325-4331. doi: 10.3892/etm.2018.5929. Epub 2018 
Mar 6.

Decreased expression of microRNA-223 promotes cell proliferation in 
hepatocellular carcinoma cells via the insulin-like growth factor-1 signaling 
pathway.

Zhang C(1), Zhang J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, The 
First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang 310058, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Jinhua People's Hospital, 
Jinhua, Zhejiang 321000, P.R. China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most harmful types of cancer. 
Previous studies have demonstrated that microRNA (miR)-223 is downregulated in 
the serum and tumor tissue of patients with HCC. The present study aimed to 
investigate the regulatory role of miR-223 on insulin-like growth factor-1 
receptor (IGF-1R) and downstream factors in HCC. The Hep3B cell line was 
transfected with miR-223 mimic and inhibitor. Following transfection, cell 
proliferation was analyzed using a cell counting kit 8 assay and cellular 
apoptosis was assessed using flow cytometry. The expression of key molecules in 
the IGF-1 signaling pathway, including IGF-1R, protein kinase B (Akt) and 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) were determined using reverse 
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blot analysis. 
The results demonstrated that the mRNA and protein levels of IGF-1R were 
decreased in cells transfected with miR-223. Transfection with miR-223 also 
decreased cell proliferation and promoted cell apoptosis. Expression of total 
Akt and ERK, and their active forms phosphorylated Akt and ERK, were also 
downregulated following transfection with miR-223. By contrast, transfection 
with miR-223 inhibitor did not induce any effects on Hep3B cell proliferation 
and apoptosis, and did not affect the expression of key molecules in the IGF-1 
pathway. Therefore, the results of the present study indicate that miR-223 
decreases the proliferation and promotes the apoptosis of HCC cells. Its 
molecular mechanism of action may at least partially occur via the direct 
regulation of IGF-1R and indirect reduction of the downstream molecules Akt and 
ERK.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2018.5929
PMCID: PMC5920509
PMID: 29725374