1. Hemoglobin. 2018 Mar;42(2):73-77. doi: 10.1080/03630269.2018.1452760. Epub
2018  May 10.

Prevalence and Characteristics of Priapism in Sickle Cell Disease.

Arduini GAO(1), Trovó de Marqui AB(2).

Author information:
(1)a Enfermeira pela Universidade Federal do Triângulo Mineiro (UFTM) , Uberaba 
, Minas Gerais , Brasil.
(2)b Professora Associada da Disciplina de Genética da UFTM , Uberaba , Minas 
Gerais , Brasil.

Priapism is a pathological condition of persistent penile erection in the 
absence of sexual arousal or desire. It is an urological emergency and its 
identification is important as lack of prompt treatment can result in erectile 
dysfunction. The aim of this study was to estimate and describe the 
characteristics (number of episodes, duration, time of occurrence and evolution) 
of priapism in patients with sickle cell disease. A bibliographical research was 
carried out in PubMed, searching for papers published in the last 5 years. 
Thirteen scientific articles were included in this review. The main results 
were: 1) the highest prevalence of priapism in males reported was 48.0% and the 
lowest 0.67%; 2) six studies were carried out on the African Continent (46.1%), 
three in America (23.1%), two in Europe (15.4%) and two in Asia (15.4%); 3) the 
main goal of ∼50.0% of the studies was to determine the rate of priapism in 
patients with sickle cell disease; 4) there was predominance of sickle cell 
anemia patients [homozygous Hb S (HBB: c.20A>T) genotype]; 5) the minimum age of 
patients with priapism was 7 years old and the maximum 30 years. In general, the 
episodes of priapism occurred during sleep, were recurrent and had variable 
duration. The prevalence of priapism are not real and the explanations include 
underreporting by patients, lack of awareness by physicians and lack of proper 
prospective studies. Priapism is a complication that deserves close attention 
due to its significant impact on the life of the patient with sickle cell 
disease and, therefore, should be further clarified.

DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2018.1452760
PMID: 29745276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]