1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2018 Sep;39(9):1453-1462. doi: 10.1038/aps.2017.211. Epub 
2018 May 17.

Correlation of the predisposition of Chinese children to cerebral palsy with 
nucleotide variation in pri-miR-124 that alters the non-canonical apoptosis 
pathway.

Li H(1), Wang XL(2), Wu YQ(1), Liu XM(1), Li AM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Yantai, 264000, China.
(2)Department of Gynecology, The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Yantai, 264000, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Yantai, 264000, China. woxinfeiyang_7777@126.com.

Cerebral palsy is a group of non-progressive motor impairment syndromes caused 
by brain lesions during development. Herein, we investigated the relationship 
between nucleotide variations in a miRNA coding region and the predisposition of 
Chinese children to cerebral palsy. A total of 233 CP patients and 256 healthy 
participants were enrolled, and 60 children were selected from each group for 
plasma miRNA detection. We screened the coding regions of pri-miR-124-1, -2, and 
-3 using PCR and sequencing. The expression of miR-124 was determined by 
qRT-PCR. Luciferase assays and Western blots were used to confirm the regulation 
of target genes by miR-124. The function of miR-124 was further identified in 
SH-SY5Y cells by detecting cell viability and apoptosis. We revealed that the 
rare alleles T of rs3802169 and G of rs191727850 were found to be associated 
with an increased risk of cerebral palsy (OR=3.71, 95% CI 1.74-7.92 and OR=2.18, 
95% CI 1.36-3.49, respectively). We further showed that the levels of mature 
miR-124 were down-regulated by the C-to-T variation in vitro. More importantly, 
the reduction of miR-124 resulting from the C-to-T change led to the 
less-efficient inhibition of the target genes ITGB1, LAMC1 and BECN1, which may 
play important roles during the development of the nervous system. Meanwhile, 
the reduction in the expression of miR-124 was also related to the increased 
nuclear translocation of apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) under oxidative stress, 
thereby inducing more cell apoptosis. Our results suggest that one functional 
polymorphism in pri-miR-124-1 might contribute to the genetic predisposition of 
Chinese children to cerebral palsy by disrupting the production of miR-124, 
which consequently interfered in the expression and function of the target genes 
of miR-124.

DOI: 10.1038/aps.2017.211
PMCID: PMC6289373
PMID: 29770797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]