1. Brain Behav. 2018 Jul;8(7):e01008. doi: 10.1002/brb3.1008. Epub 2018 Jun 1.

Taq1A polymorphism and medication effects on inhibitory action control in 
Parkinson disease.

McDonell KE(1), van Wouwe NC(1), Harrison MB(2), Wylie SA(3), Claassen DO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, United 
States.

BACKGROUND: Dopamine therapy in Parkinson disease (PD) can have differential 
effects on inhibitory action control, or the ability to inhibit reflexive or 
impulsive actions. Dopamine agonist (DAAg) medications, which preferentially 
target D2 and D3 receptors, can either improve or worsen control of impulsive 
actions in patients with PD. We have reported that the direction of this effect 
depends on baseline levels of performance on inhibitory control tasks. This 
observation suggests that there may exist certain biologic determinants that 
contribute to these patient-specific differences. We hypothesized that one 
important factor might be functional polymorphisms in D2-like receptor genes.
AIM: The goal of this study was to determine whether the direction of DAAg 
effects on inhibitory control depends on functional polymorphisms in the DRD2 
and DRD3 genes.
METHODS: Twenty-eight patients with PD were genotyped for known functional 
polymorphisms in DRD2 (rs6277 and rs1800497) and DRD3 (rs6280) receptors. These 
patients then completed the Simon conflict task both on and off DAAg therapy in 
a counterbalanced manner.
RESULTS: We found that patients with the rs1800497 Taq1A (A1) polymorphism 
(A1/A1 or A1/A2: 11 subjects) showed improved proficiency to suppress impulsive 
actions when on DAAg; conversely, patients with the A2/A2 allele (14 patients) 
became less proficient at suppressing incorrect response information on DAAg 
therapy (Group × Medication, F(1, 23) = 5.65, p < 0.05). Polymorphisms in rs6277 
and rs6280 were not associated with a differential medication response.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that certain DRD polymorphisms may determine 
the direction of DAAg effects on critical cognitive control processes impaired 
in PD. Our findings have implications for understanding pharmacogenomics 
interactions on a larger scale and the role these may play in the wide 
variability of treatment effects seen in the PD population.

© 2018 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.1008
PMCID: PMC6043698
PMID: 29856137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]