1. J Phys Chem Lett. 2018 Jun 21;9(12):3368-3371. doi:
10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b01586.  Epub 2018 Jun 7.

Extensive Sampling of the Cavity of the GroEL Nanomachine by Protein Substrates 
Probed by Paramagnetic Relaxation Enhancement.

WÃ¤lti MA(1), Libich DS(1), Clore GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 
20892-0520 , United States.

The chaperonin GroEL is a 800 kDa nanomachine comprising two heptameric rings, 
each of which encloses a large cavity or folding chamber. The GroEL cycle 
involves ATP-dependent capping of the cavity by the cochaperone GroES to create 
a nanocage in which a single protein molecule can fold. We investigate how 
protein substrates sample the cavity prior to encapsulation by GroES using 
paramagnetic relaxation enhancement to detect transient, sparsely populated 
interactions between apo GroEL, paramagnetically labeled at several sites within 
the cavity, and three variants of an SH3 protein domain (the fully native wild 
type, a triple mutant that exchanges between a folded state and an excited 
folding intermediate, and a stable folding intermediate mimetic). We show that 
the substrate not only interacts with the hydrophobic inner rim of GroEL at the 
mouth of the cavity but also penetrates deep within the cavity, transiently 
contacting the disordered C-terminal tail, and, in the case of the folding 
intermediate mimetic, the base as well. Transient interactions with the 
C-terminal tail may facilitate substrate capture and retention prior to 
encapsulation.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b01586
PMCID: PMC6029692
PMID: 29869885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Notes The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.