1. Nat Prod Rep. 2018 Sep 19;35(9):921-954. doi: 10.1039/c8np00019k.

Sphingolipid biosynthesis in man and microbes.

Harrison PJ(1), Dunn TM, Campopiano DJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Edinburgh, David Brewster Road, Edinburgh, 
EH9 3FJ, UK. Dominic.Campopiano@ed.ac.uk.

A new review covering up to 2018 Sphingolipids are essential molecules that, 
despite their long history, are still stimulating interest today. The reasons 
for this are that, as well as playing structural roles within cell membranes, 
they have also been shown to perform a myriad of cell signalling functions vital 
to the correct function of eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms. Indeed, 
sphingolipid disregulation that alters the tightly-controlled balance of these 
key lipids has been closely linked to a number of diseases such as diabetes, 
asthma and various neuropathologies. Sphingolipid biogenesis, metabolism and 
regulation is mediated by a large number of enzymes, proteins and second 
messengers. There appears to be a core pathway common to all 
sphingolipid-producing organisms but recent studies have begun to dissect out 
important, species-specific differences. Many of these have only recently been 
discovered and in most cases the molecular and biochemical details are only 
beginning to emerge. Where there is a direct link from classic biochemistry to 
clinical symptoms, a number a drug companies have undertaken a medicinal 
chemistry campaign to try to deliver a therapeutic intervention to alleviate a 
number of diseases. Where appropriate, we highlight targets where natural 
products have been exploited as useful tools. Taking all these aspects into 
account this review covers the structural, mechanistic and regulatory features 
of sphingolipid biosynthetic and metabolic enzymes.

DOI: 10.1039/c8np00019k
PMCID: PMC6148460
PMID: 29863195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]