1. J Immunother Cancer. 2018 Jun 4;6(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s40425-018-0356-4.

Targeting the TGFβ pathway with galunisertib, a TGFβRI small molecule inhibitor, 
promotes anti-tumor immunity leading to durable, complete responses, as 
monotherapy and in combination with checkpoint blockade.

Holmgaard RB(1), Schaer DA(1), Li Y(1), Castaneda SP(1), Murphy MY(1), Xu X(1), 
Inigo I(1), Dobkin J(1), Manro JR(2), Iversen PW(2), Surguladze D(1), Hall 
GE(1), Novosiadly RD(1), Benhadji KA(1), Plowman GD(1), Kalos M(1)(3), Driscoll 
KE(4).

Author information:
(1)0000 0000 2220 2544grid.417540.3Eli Lilly and Company 450 East 29th Street 
New York USA.
(2)0000 0000 2220 2544grid.417540.3Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and 
Company 46285 Indianapolis IN USA.
(3)Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson and Johnson Spring House PA USA.
(4)0000 0000 2220 2544grid.417540.3Eli Lilly and Company 450 East 29th Street 
New York USA Driscoll_kyla@lilly.com.

BACKGROUND: TGFβ signaling plays a pleotropic role in tumor biology, promoting 
tumor proliferation, invasion and metastasis, and escape from immune 
surveillance. Inhibiting TGFβ's immune suppressive effects has become of 
particular interest as a way to increase the benefit of cancer immunotherapy. 
Here we utilized preclinical models to explore the impact of the clinical stage 
TGFβ pathway inhibitor, galunisertib, on anti-tumor immunity at clinically 
relevant doses.
RESULTS: In vitro treatment with galunisertib reversed TGFβ and regulatory T 
cell mediated suppression of human T cell proliferation. In vivo treatment of 
mice with established 4T1-LP tumors resulted in strong dose-dependent anti-tumor 
activity with close to 100% inhibition of tumor growth and complete regressions 
upon cessation of treatment in 50% of animals. This effect was CD8+ T cell 
dependent, and led to increased T cell numbers in treated tumors. Mice with 
durable regressions rejected tumor rechallenge, demonstrating the establishment 
of immunological memory. Consequently, mice that rejected immunogenic 4T1-LP 
tumors were able to resist rechallenge with poorly immunogenic 4 T1 parental 
cells, suggesting the development of a secondary immune response via antigen 
spreading as a consequence of effective tumor targeting. Combination of 
galunisertib with PD-L1 blockade resulted in improved tumor growth inhibition 
and complete regressions in colon carcinoma models, demonstrating the potential 
synergy when cotargeting TGFβ and PD-1/PD-L1 pathways. Combination therapy was 
associated with enhanced anti-tumor immune related gene expression profile that 
was accelerated compared to anti-PD-L1 monotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Together these data highlight the ability of galunisertib to 
modulate T cell immunity and the therapeutic potential of combining galunisertib 
with current PD-1/L1 immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s40425-018-0356-4
PMCID: PMC5987416
PMID: 29866156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL: All animal studies were 
performed in accordance with federal and local laws, policies, regulations, and 
standards in effect at the time of their conduct. Laboratories conducting these 
studies were accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of 
Laboratory Animal Care, International and all study protocols were approved by 
each laboratory’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors disclose no potential conflicts of interest. All authors 
are current or former employees of Eli Lilly and Company. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.