1. Genetics. 2018 Aug;209(4):1345-1356. doi: 10.1534/genetics.118.301119. Epub
2018  Jun 15.

Genetic Modifiers of Neurodegeneration in a Drosophila Model of Parkinson's 
Disease.

Lavoy S(1)(2)(3), Chittoor-Vinod VG(1)(2)(3), Chow CY(4), Martin I(5)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Jungers Center for Neurosciences, Oregon Health and Science University, 
Portland, Oregon 97239.
(2)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, 
Oregon 97239.
(3)Parkinson Center of Oregon, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, 
Oregon 97239.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, Utah 84132.
(5)Jungers Center for Neurosciences, Oregon Health and Science University, 
Portland, Oregon 97239 martiia@ohsu.edu.

Disease phenotypes can be highly variable among individuals with the same 
pathogenic mutation. There is increasing evidence that background genetic 
variation is a strong driver of disease variability in addition to the influence 
of environment. To understand the genotype-phenotype relationship that 
determines the expressivity of a pathogenic mutation, a large number of 
backgrounds must be studied. This can be efficiently achieved using model 
organism collections such as the Drosophila Genetic Reference Panel (DGRP). 
Here, we used the DGRP to assess the variability of locomotor dysfunction in a 
LRRK2 G2019S Drosophila melanogaster model of Parkinson's disease (PD). We find 
substantial variability in the LRRK2 G2019S locomotor phenotype in different 
DGRP backgrounds. A genome-wide association study for candidate genetic 
modifiers reveals 177 genes that drive wide phenotypic variation, including 19 
top association genes. Genes involved in the outgrowth and regulation of 
neuronal projections are enriched in these candidate modifiers. RNAi functional 
testing of the top association and neuronal projection-related genes reveals 
that pros, pbl, ct, and CG33506 significantly modify age-related dopamine neuron 
loss and associated locomotor dysfunction in the Drosophila LRRK2 G2019S model. 
These results demonstrate how natural genetic variation can be used as a 
powerful tool to identify genes that modify disease-related phenotypes. We 
report novel candidate modifier genes for LRRK2 G2019S that may be used to 
interrogate the link between LRRK2, neurite regulation and neuronal degeneration 
in PD.

Copyright Â© 2018 by the Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.118.301119
PMCID: PMC6063243
PMID: 29907646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]