1. Molecules. 2018 Jun 19;23(6):1481. doi: 10.3390/molecules23061481.

Ponasterone A and F, Ecdysteroids from the Arctic Bryozoan Alcyonidium 
gelatinosum.

Hansen KØ(1), Isaksson J(2), Glomsaker E(3), Andersen JH(4), Hansen E(5).

Author information:
(1)Marbio, UiT-The Arctic University of Norway, Breivika, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway. 
kine.o.hanssen@uit.no.
(2)Department of Chemistry, UiT-The Arctic University of Norway, Breivika, 
N-9037 Tromsø, Norway. johan.isaksson@uit.no.
(3)Marbio, UiT-The Arctic University of Norway, Breivika, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway. 
eirin.glomsaker@gmail.com.
(4)Marbio, UiT-The Arctic University of Norway, Breivika, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway. 
jeanette.h.andersen@uit.no.
(5)Marbio, UiT-The Arctic University of Norway, Breivika, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway. 
espen.hansen@uit.no.

A new ecdysteroid, ponasterone F (1) and the previously reported compound 
ponasterone A (2) were isolated from specimens of the Arctic marine bryozoan 
Alcyonidium gelatinosum collected at Hopenbanken, off the coast of Edgeøya, 
Svalbard. The structure of 1 was elucidated, and the structure of 2 confirmed by 
spectroscopic methods including 1D and 2D NMR and analysis of HR-MS data. The 
compounds were evaluated for their ability to affect bacterial survival and cell 
viability, as well as their agonistic activities towards the estrogen receptors 
α and β. The compounds were not active in these assays. Compound 2 is an 
arthropod hormone controlling molting and are known to act as an allelochemical 
when produced by plants. Even though its structure has been previously reported, 
this is the first time a ponasterone has been isolated from a bryozoan. A. 
gelatinosum produced 1 and 2 in concentrations surpassing those expected of 
hormonal molecules, indicating their function as defence molecules against 
molting predators. This work adds to the chemical diversity reported from marine 
bryozoans and expanded our knowledge of the chemical modifications of the 
ponasterones.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules23061481
PMCID: PMC6100090
PMID: 29921766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.