1. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2018 Aug;18(8):775-784. doi: 
10.1080/14737140.2018.1489246.

The eighth edition American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) melanoma staging 
system: implications for melanoma treatment and care.

Keung EZ(1), Gershenwald JE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Surgical Oncology , The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center , Houston , TX , USA.
(2)b Melanoma and Skin Center , The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center , Houston , TX , USA.

The eighth edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) melanoma 
staging system was implemented in the United States on 1 January 2018. Areas 
covered: This article provides an overview of important changes in the eighth 
edition AJCC staging system from the seventh edition based on analyses of a 
large international melanoma database. The clinical implications of these 
changes for melanoma treatment are also discussed. Expert commentary: A 
standardized and contemporary cancer staging system that facilitates accurate 
risk stratification is essential to guide patient treatment. The eighth edition 
of the AJCC staging system is currently the most widely accepted approach to 
melanoma staging and classification at initial diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2018.1489246
PMCID: PMC7652033
PMID: 29923435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest JE Gershenwald has 
served on advisory boards for Merck, Syndax, and Castle Biosciences, unrelated 
to the content of this article. The authors have no other relevant affiliations 
or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial 
interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed 
in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.