1. Clin Genet. 2018 Oct;94(3-4):381-385. doi: 10.1111/cge.13410. Epub 2018 Aug 2.

Evidence for HNRNPH1 being another gene for Bain type syndromic mental 
retardation.

Pilch J(1), Koppolu AA(2)(3), Walczak A(2), Murcia Pienkowski VA(2)(3), 
Biernacka A(2)(3), Skiba P(4), Machnik-Broncel J(5), Gasperowicz P(2), Kosińska 
J(2), Rydzanicz M(2), Emich-Widera E(1), Płoski R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, 
Poland.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2019 Jun;95(6):734-735. doi: 10.1111/cge.13524.

The HNRNPH2-associated disease (mental retardation, X-linked, syndromic, Bain 
type [MRXSB, MIM #300986]) is caused by de novo mutations in the X-linked 
HNRNPH2 gene. MRXSB has been described in six female patients with dysmorphy, 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism, hypotonia and seizures. 
The reported HNRNPH2 mutations were clustered in the small domain encoding 
nuclear localization signal; in particular, the p.Arg206Trp was found in four 
independent de novo events. HNRNPH1 is a conserved autosomal paralogue of 
HNRNPH2 with a similar function in regulation of pre-mRNAs splicing but so far 
it has not been associated with human disease. We describe a boy with a disease 
similar to MRXSB in whom a novel de novo mutation c.616C>T (p.Arg206Trp) in 
HNRNPH1 was found (ie, the exact paralogue of the recurrent HNRNPH2 mutation). 
We propose that defective function of HNRNPH2 and HNRNPH1 nuclear localization 
signal has similar clinical consequences. An important difference between the 
two diseases is that the HNRNPH1-associated syndrome may occur in boys (as in 
the case of our proband) which is well explained by the autosomal (chr5q35.3) 
rather than X-linked localization of the HNRNPH2 gene.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13410
PMID: 29938792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]