1. RNA Biol. 2018;15(7):937-954. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2018.1481697. Epub 2018
Aug  21.

Global characterization of the Dicer-like protein DrnB roles in miRNA biogenesis 
in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum.

Liao Z(1), Kjellin J(1), Hoeppner MP(2)(3), Grabherr M(2), Söderbom F(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Uppsala University , Uppsala , 
Sweden.
(2)b Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology , Uppsala University , 
Uppsala , Sweden.
(3)c Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Institute of Clinical Molecular 
Biology , Kiel , Germany.

Update in
    RNA Biol. 2018;15(7):iii. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2018.1525144.

Micro (mi)RNAs regulate gene expression in many eukaryotic organisms where they 
control diverse biological processes. Their biogenesis, from primary transcripts 
to mature miRNAs, have been extensively characterized in animals and plants, 
showing distinct differences between these phylogenetically distant groups of 
organisms. However, comparably little is known about miRNA biogenesis in 
organisms whose evolutionary position is placed in between plants and animals 
and/or in unicellular organisms. Here, we investigate miRNA maturation in the 
unicellular amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, belonging to Amoebozoa, which 
branched out after plants but before animals. High-throughput sequencing of 
small RNAs and poly(A)-selected RNAs demonstrated that the Dicer-like protein 
DrnB is required, and essentially specific, for global miRNA maturation in D. 
discoideum. Our RNA-seq data also showed that longer miRNA transcripts, 
generally preceded by a T-rich putative promoter motif, accumulate in a drnB 
knock-out strain. For two model miRNAs we defined the transcriptional start 
sites (TSSs) of primary (pri)-miRNAs and showed that they carry the RNA 
polymerase II specific m7G-cap. The generation of the 3'-ends of these 
pri-miRNAs differs, with pri-mir-1177 reading into the downstream gene, and 
pri-mir-1176 displaying a distinct end. This 3´-end is processed to shorter 
intermediates, stabilized in DrnB-depleted cells, of which some carry a short 
oligo(A)-tail. Furthermore, we identified 10 new miRNAs, all DrnB dependent and 
developmentally regulated. Thus, the miRNA machinery in D. discoideum shares 
features with both plants and animals, which is in agreement with its 
evolutionary position and perhaps also an adaptation to its complex lifestyle: 
unicellular growth and multicellular development.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2018.1481697
PMCID: PMC6161686
PMID: 29966484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]