1. Toxins (Basel). 2018 Jul 4;10(7):278. doi: 10.3390/toxins10070278.

Engineering Botulinum Toxins to Improve and Expand Targeting and SNARE Cleavage 
Activity.

Fonfria E(1), Elliott M(2), Beard M(3), Chaddock JA(4), Krupp J(5).

Author information:
(1)Ipsen Bioinnovation, 102 Park Drive, Milton Park, Abingdon OX14 4RY, UK. 
elena.fonfria@ipsen.com.
(2)Ipsen Bioinnovation, 102 Park Drive, Milton Park, Abingdon OX14 4RY, UK. 
mark.elliott@ipsen.com.
(3)Ipsen Bioinnovation, 102 Park Drive, Milton Park, Abingdon OX14 4RY, UK. 
matthew.beard@ipsen.com.
(4)Ipsen Bioinnovation, 102 Park Drive, Milton Park, Abingdon OX14 4RY, UK. 
john.chaddock@ipsen.com.
(5)Ipsen Innovation, 5 Avenue du Canada, 91940 Les Ulis, France. 
johannes.krupp@ipsen.com.

Botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs) are highly successful protein therapeutics. Over 
40 naturally occurring BoNTs have been described thus far and, of those, only 2 
are commercially available for clinical use. Different members of the BoNT 
family present different biological properties but share a similar multi-domain 
structure at the molecular level. In nature, BoNTs are encoded by DNA in 
producing clostridial bacteria and, as such, are amenable to recombinant 
production through insertion of the coding DNA into other bacterial species. 
This, in turn, creates possibilities for protein engineering. Here, we review 
the production of BoNTs by the natural host and also recombinant production 
approaches utilised in the field. Applications of recombinant BoNT-production 
include the generation of BoNT-derived domain fragments, the creation of novel 
BoNTs with improved performance and enhanced therapeutic potential, as well as 
the advancement of BoNT vaccines. In this article, we discuss site directed 
mutagenesis, used to affect the biological properties of BoNTs, including 
approaches to alter their binding to neurons and to alter the specificity and 
kinetics of substrate cleavage. We also discuss the target secretion inhibitor 
(TSI) platform, in which the neuronal binding domain of BoNTs is substituted 
with an alternative cellular ligand to re-target the toxins to non-neuronal 
systems. Understanding and harnessing the potential of the biological diversity 
of natural BoNTs, together with the ability to engineer novel mutations and 
further changes to the protein structure, will provide the basis for increasing 
the scope of future BoNT-based therapeutics.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins10070278
PMCID: PMC6071219
PMID: 29973505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are Ipsen employees.