1. Ethiop J Health Sci. 2018 Mar;28(2):135-146. doi: 10.4314/ejhs.v28i2.5.

Identification of Prognostic and Susceptibility Markers in Chronic Myeloid 
Leukemia Using Next Generation Sequencing.

Shokeen Y(1), Sharma NR(2), Vats A(3), Taneja V(3), Minhas S(1), Jauhri M(1), 
Sankaran S(4), Aggarwal S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, Rajinder Nagar, 
Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health and Pediatric Emergency Consultant, 
School of Medicine, Addis Ababa University, Ethiopia; School of Bio-Engineering 
and Biosciences, Lovely Professional University, Jalandhar, Punjab, India.
(3)Department of Research, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, Rajinder Nagar, Delhi, India.
(4)Strand Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine. UAS Alumini Building, 
Veterinary College Campus, Bellary Road, Hebbal, Bangalore, India.

BACKGROUND: Incidence of Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is continuously 
increasing and expected to reach 100,000 patients every year by 2030. Though the 
discovery of Imatinib Mesylate (IM) has brought a paradigm shift in CML 
treatment, 20% patients show resistance to this tyrosine kinase inhibiter (TKI). 
Therefore, it is important to identify markers, which can predict the occurrence 
and prognosis of CML. Clinical Exome Sequencing, panel of more than 4800 genes, 
was performed in CML patients to identify prognostic and susceptibility markers 
in CML.
METHODS: Enrolled CML patients (n=18) were segregated as IM responders (n=10) 
and IM failures (n=8) as per European Leukemia Net (ELN), 2013 guidelines. 
Healthy controls (n=5) were also enrolled. DNA from blood of subjects was 
subjected to Next Generation Sequencing. Rare mutations present in one patient 
group and absent in another group were considered as prognostic markers, whereas 
mutations present in more than 50% patients were considered as susceptibility 
markers.
RESULT: Mutations in genes associated with cancer related functions were found 
in different patient groups. Four variants: rs116201358, rs4014596, rs52897880 
and rs2274329 in C8A, UNC93B1, APOH and CA6 genes, respectively, were present in 
IM responders; whereas rs4945 in MFGE8 was present in IM failures. Mutations in 
HLA-DRB1 (rs17878951), HLA-DRB5 (rs137863146), RPHN2 (rs193179333), CYP2F1 
(rs116958555), KCNJ12 (rs76684759) and FUT3 (rs151218854) were present as 
susceptibility markers.
CONCLUSION: The potential genetic markers discovered in this study can help in 
predicting response to IM as frontline therapy. Susceptibility markers may also 
be used as panel for individuals prone to have CML.

DOI: 10.4314/ejhs.v28i2.5
PMCID: PMC6016334
PMID: 29983511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]