1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Aug 21;46(14):6962-6973. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky588.

Initiation of homologous recombination at DNA nicks.

Maizels N(1)(2), Davis L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Discontinuities in only a single strand of the DNA duplex occur frequently, as a 
result of DNA damage or as intermediates in essential nuclear processes and DNA 
repair. Nicks are the simplest of these lesions: they carry clean ends bearing 
3'-hydroxyl groups that can undergo ligation or prime new DNA synthesis. In 
contrast, single-strand breaks also interrupt only one DNA strand, but they 
carry damaged ends that require clean-up before subsequent steps in repair. 
Despite their apparent simplicity, nicks can have significant consequences for 
genome stability. The availability of enzymes that can introduce a nick almost 
anywhere in a large genome now makes it possible to systematically analyze 
repair of nicks. Recent experiments demonstrate that nicks can initiate 
recombination via pathways distinct from those active at double-strand breaks 
(DSBs). Recombination at targeted DNA nicks can be very efficient, and because 
nicks are intrinsically less mutagenic than DSBs, nick-initiated gene correction 
is useful for genome engineering and gene therapy. This review revisits some 
physiological examples of recombination at nicks, and outlines experiments that 
have demonstrated that nicks initiate homology-directed repair by distinctive 
pathways, emphasizing research that has contributed to our current mechanistic 
understanding of recombination at nicks in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky588
PMCID: PMC6101574
PMID: 29986051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]