1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jun 22;9:1348. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01348. eCollection 
2018.

Integrin α2β1 Expression Regulates Matrix Metalloproteinase-1-Dependent 
Bronchial Epithelial Repair in Pulmonary Tuberculosis.

Brilha S(1)(2), Chong DLW(2), Khawaja AA(2), Ong CWM(1)(3), Guppy NJ(4), Porter 
JC(2), Friedland JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases and Immunity, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Inflammation and Tissue Repair, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)UCL Advanced Diagnostics, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) is caused by inhalation of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, which damages the bronchial epithelial barrier to establish local 
infection. Matrix metalloproteinase-1 plays a crucial role in the 
immunopathology of TB, causing breakdown of type I collagen and cavitation, but 
this collagenase is also potentially involved in bronchial epithelial repair. We 
hypothesized that the extracellular matrix (ECM) modulates M. 
tuberculosis-driven matrix metalloproteinase-1 expression by human bronchial 
epithelial cells (HBECs), regulating respiratory epithelial cell migration and 
repair. Medium from monocytes stimulated with M. tuberculosis induced 
collagenase activity in bronchial epithelial cells, which was reduced by ~87% 
when cells were cultured on a type I collagen matrix. Matrix metalloproteinase-1 
had a focal localization, which is consistent with cell migration, and overall 
secretion decreased by 32% on type I collagen. There were no associated changes 
in the specific tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases. Decreased matrix 
metalloproteinase-1 secretion was due to ligand-binding to the α2β1 integrin and 
was dependent on the actin cytoskeleton. In lung biopsies, samples from patients 
with pulmonary TB, integrin α2β1 is highly expressed on the bronchial 
epithelium. Areas of lung with disrupted collagen matrix showed an increase in 
matrix metalloproteinases-1 expression compared with areas where collagen was 
comparable to control lung. Type I collagen matrix increased respiratory 
epithelial cell migration in a wound-healing assay, and this too was matrix 
metalloproteinase-dependent, since it was blocked by the matrix 
metalloproteinase inhibitor GM6001. In summary, we report a novel mechanism by 
which α2β1-mediated signals from the ECM modulate matrix metalloproteinase-1 
secretion by HBECs, regulating their migration and epithelial repair in TB.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01348
PMCID: PMC6024194
PMID: 29988449