1. Cancer Manag Res. 2018 Jul 2;10:1817-1826. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S164911. 
eCollection 2018.

Downregulation of lncRNA OGFRP1 inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma progression by 
AKT/mTOR and Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathways.

Chen W(1), You J(1), Zheng Q(1), Zhu YY(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Liver Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medicine 
University, Fuzhou 350005, Fujian Province, China, zhuyueyong@fjmu.edu.cn; 
youjia503@fjmu.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Increasing evidence demonstrates that long noncoding RNAs 
(lncRNAs) play important roles in the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC) by regulating gene expression. However, the identification of functional 
lncRNAs in HCC remains insufficient. Our study aimed to investigate the function 
of lncRNA OGFRP1, which has not been functionally researched before, in Hep3B 
and HepG2 cells.
METHODS: lncRNA OGFRP1 in HCC cells was down-regulated by using RNAi technology. 
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to determine the mRNA 
expression of lncRNA OGFRP1. Cell proliferation was examined by CCK8 and clone 
formation assays. Cell cycle and apoptosis were analyzed by flow cytometry. Cell 
migration and invasion were assessed by using Scratch assay and transwell assay, 
respectively. Protein expression of signaling pathways was determined by using 
Western blot.
RESULTS: Cell proliferation of Hep3B was significantly inhibited by 
down-regulation of lncRNA OGFRP1 (P<0.05). Moreover, siOGFRP1 transfection 
induced Hep3B cell cycle arrest and apoptosis by regulating the expression of 
related proteins. Cell migration and invasion of Hep3B were also significantly 
inhibited by down-regulation of lncRNA OGFRP1. Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, 
involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), was inactivated by lncRNA 
OGFRP1 downregulation, including decreased expression of Wnt3a, β-catenin, 
N-cadherin and vimentin and increased expression of E-cadherin. We also found 
that the inhibitory effect of lncRNA OGFRP1 knockdown on Hep3B was mediated by 
the AKT/mTOR signaling pathway and IGF-1, an AKT signaling activator, could 
rescue the cellular phenotype. However, knockdown of lncRNA OGFRP1 did not 
influence cell proliferation, migration and invasion in HepG2 cells.
CONCLUSION: We found that downregulation of lncRNA OGFRP1 suppressed the 
proliferation and EMT of HCC Hep3B cells through AKT and Wnt/β-catenin signaling 
pathways. However, lncRNA OGFRP1 exhibited a differentiated function in 
different HCC cell lines, which required further study in the future.

DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S164911
PMCID: PMC6033083
PMID: 29997441

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.