1. Transl Psychiatry. 2018 Jul 13;8(1):131. doi: 10.1038/s41398-018-0184-9.

The major depressive disorder GWAS-supported variant rs10514299 in 
TMEM161B-MEF2C predicts putamen activation during reward processing in alcohol 
dependence.

Muench C(1), Schwandt M(2), Jung J(3), Cortes CR(4), Momenan R(4), Lohoff FW(5).

Author information:
(1)Section on Clinical Genomics and Experimental Therapeutics, National 
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Office of the Clinical Director, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Division of Intramural Clinical and Biological Research, National Institute 
on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(4)Clinical NeuroImaging Research Core, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Section on Clinical Genomics and Experimental Therapeutics, National 
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA. falk.lohoff@nih.gov.

Alcohol dependence (AD) frequently co-occurs with major depressive disorder 
(MDD). While this comorbidity is associated with an increase in disease burden, 
worse treatment outcomes, and greater economic costs, the underlying 
neurobiology remains poorly understood. A recent large-scale GWAS of MDD has 
identified a locus in the TMEM161B-MEF2C region (rs10514299) as a novel risk 
variant; however, the biological relevance of this variant has not yet been 
studied. Given previous reports of disrupted reward processing in both AD and 
MDD, we hypothesized that rs10514299 would be associated with differences in 
striatal BOLD responses during reward/loss anticipation in AD. DNA samples from 
45 recently detoxified patients with AD and 45 healthy controls (HC) were 
genotyped for rs10514299. Participants performed the Monetary Incentive Delay 
task in a 3-Tesla MRI scanner. Effects of rs10514299 on striatal activation 
during anticipation of high/low reward/loss were investigated. Furthermore, we 
examined associations between rs10514299 and lifetime AD diagnosis in two 
independent clinical samples [NIAAA: n = 1858 (1123 cases, 735 controls); SAGE: 
n = 3838 (1848 cases, 1990 controls)], as well as its association with 
depression severity in a subsample of individuals with a lifetime AD diagnosis 
(n = 953). Patients carrying the T allele showed significantly greater putamen 
activation during anticipation of high reward (p = 0.014), low reward (at 
trend-level; p = 0.081), high loss (p = 0.024), and low loss (p = 0.046) 
compared to HCs. Association analyses in the NIAAA sample showed a trend-level 
relationship between rs10514299 and a lifetime AD diagnosis in the European 
American subgroup (odds ratio = 0.82, p = 0.09). This finding was not replicated 
in the SAGE sample. In the NIAAA sample, the T allele was significantly 
associated with greater depression symptom severity in individuals with a 
lifetime AD diagnosis (β = 1.25, p = 0.02); this association was driven by the 
African American ancestry subgroup (β = 2.11, p = 0.008). We show for the first 
time that the previously identified MDD risk variant rs10514299 in 
TMEM161B-MEF2C predicts neuronal correlates of reward processing in an AD 
phenotype, possibly explaining part of the shared pathophysiology and 
comorbidity between the disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-018-0184-9
PMCID: PMC6045574
PMID: 30006604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.