1. Circulation. 2018 Nov 20;138(21):2359-2366. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031527.

Cardiomyopathy and Preeclampsia.

Gammill HS(1)(2), Chettier R(3), Brewer A(3)(4), Roberts JM(5), Shree R(1), 
Tsigas E(4), Ward K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle (H.S.G., R.S.).
(2)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle 
(H.S.G.).
(3)Taueret Laboratories LLC, Salt Lake City, UT (R.C., A.B., K.W.).
(4)The Preeclampsia Registry, Preeclampsia Foundation, Melbourne, FL (A.B., 
E.T.).
(5)Magee-Womens Research Institute, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and 
Reproductive Sciences, Epidemiology and Clinical and Translational Research, 
University of Pittsburgh, PA (J.M.R.).

Comment in
    Circulation. 2019 May 28;139(22):e1013-e1014. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.039017.

BACKGROUND: Preeclampsia is associated with diastolic dysfunction, peripartum 
cardiomyopathy, and both pre-existing and subsequent maternal cardiovascular 
disease. Gene mutations causing idiopathic cardiomyopathy were recently 
implicated in peripartum cardiomyopathy. We sought to determine whether 
cardiomyopathy gene mutations are also a contributory factor in preeclampsia.
METHODS: Subjects were participants in The Preeclampsia Registry and Biobank. 
After providing informed consent, subjects with a history of preeclampsia 
completed a detailed questionnaire and provided medical records for diagnostic 
confirmation. Saliva samples were collected for DNA isolation. Whole exome 
sequencing was performed to detect rare variants (minor allele frequency of 
<0.1%) in 43 genes associated with cardiomyopathy. Missense variants were deemed 
damaging missense if so classified by any of 7 standard function prediction 
algorithms. Variants were defined as loss-of-function if they caused a 
stop-gain, splicing, or frame-shift insertion or deletion. Results were compared 
with data from 2 control groups: unrelated women with a gynecologic disorder 
sequenced using the same methods and instruments (n=530) as well as published 
variant data from 33 000 subjects in the Exome Aggregation Consortium. 
Preeclampsia was not excluded in control groups.
RESULTS: Of 181 subjects with confirmed preeclampsia, 96% were white. 
Seventy-two percent had ≥1 preterm preeclampsia delivery <37 weeks. Among 
preeclampsia subjects, whole exome sequencing demonstrated 10 rare 
loss-of-function variants and 228 rare damaging missense variants in the 43 
cardiomyopathy genes considered. The prevalence of these loss-of-function 
variants was significantly higher in preeclampsia subjects (5.5%) compared with 
the local control (2.5%) population ( P=0.014). Sixty-eight percent of women 
with preeclampsia carried ≥1 loss-of-function or damaging missense variant (mean 
of 1.94 mutations). As seen with peripartum cardiomyopathy, most mutations (55%) 
were found in the TTN gene. Seventy-three percent of preeclampsia subjects had 
TTN mutations in the preeclampsia cohort versus 48% in local controls ( 
P=1.36E-11).
DISCUSSION: Women who develop preeclampsia are more likely to carry 
protein-altering mutations in genes associated with cardiomyopathy, particularly 
in TTN. Mutations promoting cardiomyopathy are prevalent in preeclampsia, 
idiopathic cardiomyopathy, and peripartum cardiomyopathy, and they are important 
risk factors for a widening spectrum of cardiovascular disorders. Detecting 
these variants should allow more specific diagnosis, classification, counseling, 
and management of women at risk.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031527
PMID: 30021846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]