1. Exp Neurol. 2019 Jan;311:305-312. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2018.07.008. Epub 
2018 Jul 18.

Defective daily temperature regulation in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

Braun MC(1), Castillo-Ruiz A(1), Indic P(1), Jung DY(2), Kim JK(3), Brown RH 
Jr(4), Swoap SJ(5), Schwartz WJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.
(2)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.
(3)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01655, USA; Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes, 
Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, 
MA 01655, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01655, USA. Electronic address: robert.brown@umassmed.edu.
(5)Department of Biology, Williams College, Williamstown, MA 01267, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01655, USA. Electronic address: 
william.schwartz@austin.utexas.edu.

Current understanding of the pathogenesis of the familial form of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis has been aided by the study of transgenic mice that 
over-express mutated forms of the human CuZn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) gene. 
While mutant SOD1 in motor neurons determines disease onset, other non-cell 
autonomous factors are critical for disease progression, and altered energy 
metabolism has been implicated as a contributing factor. Since most energy 
expended by laboratory mice is utilized to defend body temperature (Tb), we 
analyzed thermoregulation in transgenic mice carrying the G93A mutation of the 
human SOD1 gene, using implantable temperature data loggers to continuously 
record Tb for up to 85 days. At room (22 °C) ambient temperature, G93A mice 
exhibited a diminished amplitude of the daily Tb rhythm compared to C57BL/6J 
controls, secondary to decreased Tb values during the dark (behaviorally active) 
phase of the light-dark cycle. The defect arose at 85-99 days of age, around the 
age of symptom onset (as assessed by grip strength), well before observable 
weakness and weight loss, and could not be accounted for by decreased levels of 
locomotor activity or food consumption. Housing under thermoneutral (29 °C) 
ambient temperature partially rescued the defect, but age-dependently (only in 
animals >100 days of age), suggesting that the deficit in older mice was due in 
part to inadequate thermogenesis by "peripheral" thermogenic organs as the 
disease progressed. In younger mice, we found that cold-induced thermogenesis 
and energy expenditure were intact, hinting that an initial "central" defect 
might localize to the subparaventricular zone, involving neural output pathways 
from the circadian clock in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus to 
forebrain thermoregulatory circuitry.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2018.07.008
PMCID: PMC6263852
PMID: 30031021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors have 
no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, 
and/or publication of this article.