1. Acta Biomed. 2018 May 23;89(S5):11-21. doi: 10.23750/abm.v89iS4.7356.

The effect of different forms of dysglycemia during pregnancy on maternal and 
fetal outcomes in treated women and comparison with large cohort studies.

Soliman A(1), Salama H, Al Rifai H, De Sanctis V, Al-Obaidly S, Al Qubasi M, 
Olukade T.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Hamad Medical Center, Doha, Qatar. 
atsoliman@yahoo.com.

AIMS OF THE STUDY: We describe the impact of different forms of dysglycemia on 
maternal and neonatal health. This research is a part of the PEARL-Peristat 
Maternal and newborn registry, funded by Qatar National Research Fund (QNRF) 
Doha, Qatar.
METHODS: A population-based retrospective data analysis of 12,255 women with 
singleton pregnancies screened during the year 2016-2017, of which 3,027 women 
were identified with gestation diabetes mellitus (GDM) during pregnancy and 233 
were diabetic before pregnancy. Data on maternal outcome was collected from the 
PEARL-Peristat Maternal and newborn registry.
RESULTS: The prevalence of GDM and diabetes mellitus (DM) was 24.7 % and 1.9%, 
respectively. 55% of DM, 38% of GDM and 25.6% of controls were obese (p<0.001). 
71% of pregnant women with DM and 57.8% of those with GDM were older than 30 
years versus 44.2% of controls. Pregnant women with DM or GDM had higher 
prevalence of hypertension versus normal controls (9.9%, 5.5% and 3.5%, 
respectively; p<0.001). Among women with vaginal deliveries, the proportion of 
women with induction of labor was significantly higher in the DM and GDM 
compared to control subjects (33.9%, 26.5% and 12.4%, respectively; p<0.001). 
The number of women who underwent Cesarean section was significantly higher in 
the DM and GDM groups versus normal controls (51.9%, 36.8%, and 28.5%, 
respectively; p<0.001).Â  Preterm delivery was significantly higher in women with 
DM and GDM (13.7% and 9%, respectively versus normal women (6.4%); p<0.001). 
Babies of DM and GDM had significantly higher occurrence of respiratory distress 
(RDS) or transient tachypnea (TTS): 9% and 5.8 % versus normal controls (4.8%). 
Macrosomia was more prevalent in babies of DM (6.4%) and GDM (6.8%) compared to 
controls (5%) (p: <0.001). Significant hypoglycemic episodes occurred more 
frequently in babies of DM and GDM women (11.2% and 3%, respectively) versus 
controls (0.6%) (p: <0.001. Infants of DM and GDM mothers required more 
treatments of phototherapy (9.4% and 8.9%, respectively) versus those born to 
normal women (7.2%) (p: 0.006). The prevalence of congenital anomalies and 
neonatal death did not differ between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the improvement in the prenatal diagnosis and management of 
dysglycemia, there is still a higher prevalence of prematurity, macrosomia, and 
hypoglycemia in infants of mothers with DM and GDM. Measurements to reduce 
obesity and control dysglycemia in women during the childbearing period are 
highly required to prevent the still higher morbidity during pregnancy.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v89iS4.7356
PMCID: PMC6179089
PMID: 30049927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]