1. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2018 Nov;31(11):1685-1690. doi: 
10.5713/ajas.18.0173. Epub 2018 Jul 26.

Association of polymorphisms in Pit-1 gene with growth and feed efficiency in 
meat-type chickens.

Jin S(1), He T(1), Yang L(1), Tong Y(1), Chen X(1), Geng Z(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, 
Hefei 230036, China.

OBJECTIVE: The pituitary specific transcription factor-1 (Pit-1) gene is 
responsible for pituitary development and growth hormone expression and is 
regarded as a pivotal candidate gene for growth and production in chickens. 
Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the association of Pit-1 
polymorphisms with growth and feed efficiency traits in yellow meat-type 
chickens.
METHODS: In the present study, five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 
Pit-1 were selected and genotyped by high-throughput matrix-assisted laser 
desorption-ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry in 724 meat-type 
chickens.
RESULTS: Association analysis showed that rs13687126 of Pit-1 was strongly 
associated with body weight gain (BWG) and feed intake (FI) (p<0.05), and that 
rs13687128 was significantly correlated with body weight at 70 days of age 
(BW70), BWG and feed conversion ratio (FCR) (p<0.05). SNP rs13905622 was 
strongly related to BW70 and FCR (p<0.05). Furthermore, birds with the GG 
genotype of rs13687126 had larger BWG and FI than those with the AG genotype 
(p<0.05). Individuals with the TT genotype of rs13687128 were significantly 
higher BW70 and BWG than those of the CT and CC genotype, while FCR was just the 
opposite (p<0.05). For rs13905622, the AA chickens showed strongly larger BW70 
and lower FCR compared with the AT and TT chickens (p<0.05). Additionally, an 
ACA haplotype based on rs13687126, rs13687128, and rs13905622 had significant 
effects on BW70 and FCR (p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our studies thus provide crucial evidence for the relationship 
between polymorphisms of Pit-1 and growth and feed efficiency traits which may 
be useful for meat-type chicken breeding programs.

DOI: 10.5713/ajas.18.0173
PMCID: PMC6212749
PMID: 30056669

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST We certify that there is no 
conflict of interest with any financial organization regarding the material 
discussed in the manuscript.