1. Nutrients. 2018 Jul 31;10(8):1002. doi: 10.3390/nu10081002.

Genetic and Common Environmental Contributions to Familial Resemblances in 
Plasma Carotenoid Concentrations in Healthy Families.

Tremblay BL(1), Guénard F(2), Lamarche B(3), Pérusse L(4), Vohl MC(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Laval University, 2440 
Hochelaga Blvd, Quebec City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada. 
benedicte-l.tremblay.1@ulaval.ca.
(2)Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Laval University, 2440 
Hochelaga Blvd, Quebec City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada. 
frederic.guenard@fsaa.ulaval.ca.
(3)Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Laval University, 2440 
Hochelaga Blvd, Quebec City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada. benoit.lamarche@fsaa.ulaval.ca.
(4)Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Laval University, 2440 
Hochelaga Blvd, Quebec City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada. louis.perusse@kin.ulaval.ca.
(5)Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Laval University, 2440 
Hochelaga Blvd, Quebec City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada. 
marie-claude.vohl@fsaa.ulaval.ca.

Carotenoids have shown an interindividual variability that may be due to genetic 
factors. The only study that has reported heritability of serum α- and 
β-carotene has not considered the environmental component. This study aimed to 
estimate the contribution of both genetic and common environmental effects to 
the variance of carotenoid concentrations and to test whether their phenotypic 
correlations with cardiometabolic risk factors are explained by shared genetic 
and environmental effects. Plasma carotenoid concentrations (α-carotene, 
β-carotene, β-cryptoxanthin, lutein, lycopene, zeaxanthin, and total 
carotenoids) of 48 healthy subjects were measured. Heritability estimates of 
carotenoid concentrations were calculated using the variance component method. 
Lutein and lycopene showed a significant familial effect (p = 6 × 10-6 and 
0.0043, respectively). Maximal heritability, genetic heritability, and common 
environmental effect were computed for lutein (88.3%, 43.8%, and 44.5%, 
respectively) and lycopene (45.2%, 0%, and 45.2%, respectively). Significant 
phenotypic correlations between carotenoid concentrations and cardiometabolic 
risk factors were obtained for β-cryptoxanthin, lycopene, and zeaxanthin. 
Familial resemblances in lycopene concentrations were mainly attributable to 
common environmental effects, while for lutein concentrations they were 
attributable to genetic and common environmental effects. Common genetic and 
environmental factors may influence carotenoids and cardiometabolic risk 
factors, but further studies are needed to better understand the potential 
impact on disease development.

DOI: 10.3390/nu10081002
PMCID: PMC6116158
PMID: 30065157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.