1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2019 Jun;90:114-127. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2018.08.003. 
Epub 2018 Oct 11.

One protein to rule them all: The role of CCCTC-binding factor in shaping human 
genome in health and disease.

Lazniewski M(1), Dawson WK(2), Rusek AM(3), Plewczynski D(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Banacha 2c, 02-097 Warsaw, 
Poland; Department of Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical 
University of Warsaw, Banacha 1, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Banacha 2c, 02-097 Warsaw, 
Poland; Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life 
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 103-8657, 
Japan.
(3)Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Banacha 2c, 02-097 Warsaw, 
Poland; Clinical Molecular Biology Department, Medical University of Bialystok, 
Bialystok, Poland.
(4)Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Banacha 2c, 02-097 Warsaw, 
Poland; Centre for Innovative Research, Medical University of Bialystok, 
Bialystok, Poland; Faculty of Mathematics and Information Science, Warsaw 
University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: 
d.plewczynski@cent.uw.edu.pl.

The eukaryotic genome, constituting several billion base pairs, must be 
contracted to fit within the volume of a nucleus where the diameter is on the 
scale of μm. The 3D structure and packing of such a long sequence cannot be left 
to pure chance, as DNA must be efficiently used for its primary roles as a 
matrix for transcription and replication. In recent years, methods like 
chromatin conformation capture (including 3C, 4C, Hi-C, ChIA-PET and Multi-ChIA) 
and optical microscopy have advanced substantially and have shed new light on 
how eukaryotic genomes are hierarchically organized; first into 10-nm fiber, 
next into DNA loops, topologically associated domains and finally into 
interphase or mitotic chromosomes. This knowledge has allowed us to revise our 
understanding regarding the mechanisms governing the process of DNA 
organization. Mounting experimental evidence suggests that the key element in 
the formation of loops is the binding of the CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) to DNA; 
a protein that can be referred to as the chief organizer of the genome. However, 
CTCF does not work alone but in cooperation with other proteins, such as cohesin 
or Yin Yang 1 (YY1). In this short review, we briefly describe our current 
understanding of the structure of eukaryotic genomes, how they are established 
and how the formation of DNA loops can influence gene expression. We discuss the 
recent discoveries describing the 3D structure of the CTCF-DNA complex and the 
role of CTCF in establishing genome structure. Finally, we briefly explain how 
various genetic disorders might arise as a consequence of mutations in the CTCF 
target sequence or alteration of genomic imprinting.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2018.08.003
PMCID: PMC6642822
PMID: 30096365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]