1. Mol Vis. 2018 Jul 28;24:518-535. eCollection 2018.

Osmotic and hypoxic induction of the complement factor C9 in cultured human 
retinal pigment epithelial cells: Regulation of VEGF and NLRP3 expression.

Hollborn M(1), Ackmann C(1), Kuhrt H(2), Doktor F(1), Kohen L(1)(3), Wiedemann 
P(1), Bringmann A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Eye Hospital, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Anatomy, University of Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Helios Klinikum Aue, Aue, Germany.

PURPOSE: Variants of complement factor genes, hypoxia and oxidative stress of 
the outer retina, and systemic hypertension affect the risk of age-related 
macular degeneration. Hypertension often results from the high intake of dietary 
salt that increases extracellular osmolarity. We determined the effects of 
extracellular hyperosmolarity, hypoxia, and oxidative stress on the expression 
of complement genes in cultured (dedifferentiated) human RPE cells and 
investigated the effects of C9 siRNA and C9 protein on RPE cells.
METHODS: Hyperosmolarity was induced by adding 100 mM NaCl or sucrose to the 
culture medium. Hypoxia was induced by culturing cells in 1% O2 or by adding the 
hypoxia mimetic CoCl2. Oxidative stress was induced by adding H2O2. Gene and 
protein expression levels were determined with real-time RT-PCR, western blot, 
and ELISA analyses. The expression of the nuclear factor of activated T cell 5 
(NFAT5) and complement factor (C9) was knocked down with siRNA.
RESULTS: Extracellular hyperosmolarity, hypoxia, and oxidative stress strongly 
increased the transcription of the C9 gene, while the expression of the C3, C5, 
CFH, and CFB genes was moderately altered or not altered at all. Hyperosmolarity 
also induced a moderate increase in the cytosolic C9 protein level. The 
hyperosmotic C9 gene expression was reduced by inhibitors of the p38 MAPK, 
ERK1/2, JNK, and PI3K signal transduction pathways and of the transcription 
factors STAT3 and NFAT5. The hypoxic C9 gene expression was reduced by a STAT3 
inhibitor. The knockdown of C9 with siRNA decreased the hypoxic vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and NLRP3 gene expression, the hypoxic 
secretion of VEGF, and the hyperosmotic expression of the NLRP3 gene. Exogenous 
C9 protein inhibited the hyperosmotic expression of the C9 gene, the hypoxic and 
hyperosmotic VEGF gene expression, and the hyperosmotic expression of the NLRP3 
gene. Both C9 siRNA and C9 protein inhibited inflammasome activation under 
hyperosmotic conditions, as indicated by the decrease in the cytosolic level of 
mature IL-1Î².
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of the C9 gene in cultured RPE cells is highly 
induced by extracellular hyperosmolarity, hypoxia, and oxidative stress. The 
data may support the assumption that C9 gene expression may stimulate the 
expression of inflammatory (NLRP3) and angiogenic growth factors (VEGF) in RPE 
cells. Extracellular C9 protein may attenuate this effect, in part via negative 
regulation of the C9 mRNA level.

PMCID: PMC6066273
PMID: 30090015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]