1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2018 Jul;25(5):888-894. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2017.12.011.
Epub  2017 Dec 27.

Apatinib for heavily treated patients with non-small cell lung cancer: Report of 
a case series and literature review.

Yang D(1), Dai R(2), Zhang Q(3), Fang P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, People's Hospital of Tongling, Tongling, 
China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, USA.

Although many strategies have been developed for non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC), more secondary and further treatments are needed due to drug resistance 
or tumor recurrence. Apatinib is a novel oral antiangiogenic agent and in this 
study, we aim to investigate the clinical value of apatinib in heavily 
pretreated NSCLC. Here, we reported the characteristics, efficacy and adverse 
events of three patients treated with apatinib (500â€¯mg/day). We also summarized 
the currently available evidence and ongoing clinical trials regarding the use 
of apatinib in NSCLC. Two cases of adenocarcinoma and one case of squamous cell 
carcinoma were treated with apatinib due to disease progression after previous 
treatments of chemotherapy and epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI). All patients responded to apatinib rapidly and underwent 
drug resistance shortly afterwards. The patient with squamous cell carcinoma 
died of hemoptysis. Other adverse events were acceptable. All previous relevant 
studies were compared and showed similar results but a longer progression-free 
survival. Additionally, ongoing clinical trials were systematically searched and 
listed. In conclusion, apatinib shows some efficacy in heavily treated NSCLC and 
generally tolerable toxicity in non-squamous NSCLC. More solid evidence will be 
accessible in near future.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2017.12.011
PMCID: PMC6087811
PMID: 30108437