1. Medchemcomm. 2018 May 14;9(6):951-962. doi: 10.1039/c8md00070k. eCollection
2018  Jun 1.

Tricyclic xanthine derivatives containing a basic substituent: adenosine 
receptor affinity and drug-related properties.

Załuski M(1), Stanuch K(1), Karcz T(2), Hinz S(1), Latacz G(1), Szymańska E(1), 
Schabikowski J(1), Doroż-Płonka A(1), Handzlik J(1), Drabczyńska A(2), Müller 
CE(1), Kieć-Kononowicz K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Technology and Biotechnology of Drugs , Faculty of Pharmacy , 
Jagiellonian University Medical College , Kraków , Poland . Email: 
mfkonono@cyf-kr.edu.pl ; ; Tel: +48 12 6205580.
(2)PharmaCenter Bonn , Pharmaceutical Institute , Pharmaceutical Chemistry I , 
University of Bonn , An der Immenburg 4 , 53121 Bonn , Germany.

A library of 27 novel amide derivatives of annelated xanthines was designed and 
synthesized. The new compounds represent 1,3-dipropyl- and 
1,3-dibutyl-pyrimido[2,1-f]purinedione-9-ethylphenoxy derivatives including a 
CH2CONH linker between the (CH2)2-amino group and the phenoxy moiety. A 
synthetic strategy to obtain the final products was developed involving 
solvent-free microwave irradiation. The new compounds were evaluated for their 
adenosine receptor (AR) affinities. The most potent derivatives contained a 
terminal tertiary amino function. Compounds with nanomolar AR affinities and at 
the same time high water-solubility were obtained (A1 (Ki = 24-605 nM), A2A (Ki 
= 242-1250 nM), A2B (Ki = 66-911 nM) and A3 (Ki = 155-1000 nM)). 
2-(4-(2-(1,3-Dibutyl-2,4-dioxo-1,2,3,4,7,8-hexahydropyrimido[2,1-f]purin-9(6H)-yl)ethyl)phenoxy)-N-(3-(diethylamino)propyl)acetamide 
(27) and the corresponding N-(2-(pyrrolidin-1-yl)ethyl)acetamide (36) were found 
to be the most potent antagonists of the present series. While 27 showed CYP 
inhibition and moderate metabolic stability, 36 was found to possess suitable 
properties for in vivo applications. In an attempt to explain the affinity data 
for the synthesized compounds, molecular modeling and docking studies were 
performed using homology models of A1 and A2A adenosine receptors. The potent 
compound 36 was used as an example for discussion of the possible ligand-protein 
interactions. Moreover, the compounds showed high water-solubility indicating 
that the approach of introducing a basic side chain was successful for the class 
of generally poorly soluble AR antagonists.

DOI: 10.1039/c8md00070k
PMCID: PMC6071793
PMID: 30108984