1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2018 Dec;55(3):379-390. doi: 
10.1007/s12016-018-8702-3.

The Immunologic Role of IL-17 in Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis Pathogenesis.

Blauvelt A(1), Chiricozzi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Oregon Medical Research Center, 9495 SW Locust St, Suite G, Portland, OR,, 
97223, USA. ablauvelt@oregonmedicalresearch.com.
(2)Dermatology Unit, Department of Clinical and Translational Medicine, 
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Psoriasis is a chronic, immune-mediated, inflammatory disease that is 
pathogenically driven by proinflammatory cytokines. This article reviews the 
immunologic role of interleukin (IL)-17, the major effector cytokine in the 
pathogenesis of psoriatic disease, along with the rationale for targeting the 
IL-17 cytokine family (IL-17A, IL-17F, and IL-17 receptor A) in the treatment of 
psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. Emerging evidence indicates that major 
sources of IL-17A in patients with psoriatic disease are mast cells, γδ T cells, 
αβ T cells, and innate lymphoid cells in lesional skin and synovial fluid. 
Within the skin and joints, IL-17A acts on cellular targets, including 
keratinocytes, neutrophils, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, osteoclasts, 
chondrocytes, and osteoblasts, to stimulate production of various antimicrobial 
peptides, chemokines, and proinflammatory and proliferative cytokines, which, in 
turn, promote tissue inflammation and bone remodeling. The critical importance 
of the IL-23/IL-17A axis to the pathogenesis of psoriatic disease has resulted 
in many new biologic treatments targeting these cytokines. These biologics 
dramatically improve skin and joint symptoms in patients with moderate-to-severe 
psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-018-8702-3
PMCID: PMC6244934
PMID: 30109481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: A Blauvelt has been a 
scientific adviser and clinical study investigator for AbbVie, Aclaris, Akros, 
Allergan, Almirall, Amgen, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Celgene, Dermavant, Dermira, 
Inc., Eli Lilly and Company, Galderma, Genentech/Roche, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Janssen, Leo Pharma, Meiji, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Pfizer, Purdue 
Pharma, Regeneron, Revance, Sandoz, Sanofi Genzyme, Sienna Pharmaceuticals, Sun 
Pharma, UCB Pharma, Valeant, and Vidac, and a paid speaker for Janssen, 
Regeneron, and Sanofi Genzyme. A Chiricozzi has been a scientific consultant 
and/or clinical study investigator for AbbVie, Biogen, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Janssen, Leo Pharma, Novartis, Sanofi Genzyme, and a speaker for Eli Lilly and 
Company, Janssen, AbbVie, and Novartis. ETHICAL APPROVAL: This article does not 
contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by either 
author.