1. Med Sci Monit. 2018 Aug 20;24:5811-5819. doi: 10.12659/MSM.909865.

Lapatinib, a Dual Inhibitor of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) and 
HER-2, Enhances Radiosensitivity in Mouse Bladder Tumor Line-2 (MBT-2) Cells In 
Vitro and In Vivo.

Mu Y(1), Sun D(1).

Author information:
(1)Radiation Oncology Department of Gastrointestinal and Urinary and 
Musculoskeletal Cance, Liaoning Cancer Hospital and Institutes, Henyang, 
Liaoning, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of lapatinib, a dual 
inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and HER-2, on the 
radiosensitivity of murine bladder tumor line-2 (MBT-2) cells in vitro and in 
vivo. MATERIAL AND METHODS MBT-2 cells were pretreated with lapatinib at doses 
ranging from 200-1,000 nM for 30 min followed by radiation at doses ranging from 
2.5-10 Gy for 30 min. A clonogenic assay (colony formation assay) assessed cell 
survival. Western blot measured phosphorylated epidermal growth factor receptor 
(p-EGFR), phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT), and phosphorylated HER-2 (p-HER2) and the 
apoptosis marker, PARP. The C3H/HeN mouse tumor xenograft model underwent 
subcutaneous injection of MBT-2 cells; mice were divided into four groups, 
treated with lapatinib (200 mg/kg), radiation (15 Gy), a combination of both, 
and with vehicle (control). RESULTS Lapatinib pretreatment, combined with 
radiation, decreased MBT-2 cell survival, and suppressed radiation-activated 
levels of p-EGFR and p-HER-2. MBT-2 cells treated with a 10 Gy dose of radiation 
and 1000 nM of lapatinib showed combination index (CI) values of <1 indicating 
synergy. Increased expression of Î³-H2AX, indicated increased apoptosis. In mice 
with tumor xenografts, a daily dose of lapatinib (200 mg/kg/day) for seven days 
combined with radiation on the fourth day suppressed tumor growth to a greater 
degree than radiation alone. CONCLUSIONS Lapatinib treatment enhanced the 
radiation sensitivity in an in vitro and in vivo murine bladder cancer model by 
decreasing radiation-mediated EGFR and HER-2 activation, and by causing DNA 
damage leading to cell apoptosis.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.909865
PMCID: PMC6113922
PMID: 30125265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]