1. IBRO Rep. 2016 Sep 26;1:32-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ibror.2016.09.001. eCollection 
2016 Dec.

Presence of insoluble Tau following rotenone exposure ameliorates basic pathways 
associated with neurodegeneration.

Chaves RS(1), Kazi AI(1), Silva CM(1), Almeida MF(1), Lima RS(1), Carrettiero 
DC(2), Demasi M(3), Ferrari MFR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology - Institute for Biosciences, 
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Federal University of ABC, Sao Bernardo do Campo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Biophysics - Butantan Institute, Sao Paulo, 
SP, Brazil.

Protein aggregation is an important feature of neurodegenerative disorders. In 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) protein aggregates are composed of hyperphosphorylated 
Tau and amyloid beta peptide (AÎ²). Despite the involvement and identification of 
the molecular composition of these aggregates, their role in AD pathophysiology 
is not fully understood. However, depositions of these insoluble aggregates are 
typically reported as pathogenic and toxic for cell homeostasis. New evidences 
suggest that the deposition of these aggregates is a protective mechanism that 
preserves cell from toxic insults associated with the early stages of 
neurodegenerative diseases. To better understand the biological role of the 
protein aggregation with regard its effects in cellular homeostasis, the present 
study investigated the role of insoluble Tau and Tau aggregates on crucial 
cellular parameters such as redox homeostasis, proteasome activity and autophagy 
in hippocampal cell cultures and hippocampus of aged Lewis rats using a 
rotenone-induced aggregation model. Neurons were exposed to rotenone in 
different concentrations and exposure times aiming to determine the interval 
required for Tau aggregation. Our experimental design allowed us to demonstrate 
that rotenone exposure induces Tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation in a 
concentration and time-dependent manner. Oxidative stress triggered by rotenone 
exposure was observed with the absence of Tau aggregates and was reduced or 
absent when Tau aggregates were present. This reduction of oxidative stress 
along with the presence of insoluble Tau was independent of alterations in 
antioxidant enzymes activities or cell death. In addition, rotenone induced 
oxidative stress was mainly associated with decrease in proteasome activity and 
autophagy flux. Conversely, when insoluble Tau appeared, autophagy turns to be 
overactivated while proteasome activity remained low. Our studies significantly 
advance the understanding that Tau aggregation might exert protective cellular 
effects, at least briefly, when neurons are facing neurodegeneration stimulus. 
We believe that our data add more complexity for the understanding of protein 
aggregation role in AD etiology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibror.2016.09.001
PMCID: PMC6084878
PMID: 30135926