1. J Virol. 2018 Oct 12;92(21):e01362-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01362-18. Print 2018
Nov  1.

Epstein-Barr Virus Nuclear Antigen 3C Inhibits Expression of COBLL1 and the 
ADAM28-ADAMDEC1 Locus via Interaction with the Histone Lysine Demethylase KDM2B.

Gillman ACT(1), Parker G(2), Allday MJ(2), Bazot Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Virology, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, 
United Kingdom adam.gillman09@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Molecular Virology, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, 
United Kingdom.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) is a well-defined repressor of 
host gene expression in B cells transformed by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) that 
cooperates with various cellular factors. It is established that EBNA3C 
interacts with the cellular factor RBPJ (RBP-Jκ or CBF1) through two distinct 
motifs: the TFGC motif, also called the homology domain (HD) motif, and the VWTP 
motif. In this study, we investigated the role of each motif in EBNA3C 
transcriptional repression activity by using two novel recombinant viruses with 
single RBPJ interaction motifs mutated (EBNA3C HDmut and EBNA3C W227S). 
Infection of primary B cells with either of these recombinant EBVs led to the 
successful establishment of lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs). Gene expression 
analysis showed that full repression of EBNA3C target genes is not achieved by 
EBNA3C HDmut compared to that with EBNA3C W227S or the EBNA3C wild type (WT). 
Focusing on the well-characterized EBNA3C-repressed genes COBLL1, ADAM28, and 
ADAMDEC1, we investigated the mechanism of EBNA3C-mediated transcriptional 
repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis indicated that EBNA3C 
HDmut is still able to recruit Polycomb proteins BMI1 and SUZ12 to COBLL1 as 
efficiently as EBNA3C WT does, leading to the full deposition of the repressive 
histone mark H3K27me3. However, we found that the activation-associated 
chromatin mark H3K4me3 is highly enriched at EBNA3C target genes in LCLs 
expressing EBNA3C HDmut. We show here that EBNA3C interacts with the histone 
lysine demethylase KDM2B and that this interaction is important for H3K4me3 
removal and for the EBNA3C-mediated repression of COBLL1 and the ADAM28-ADAMDEC1 
locus.IMPORTANCE EBV is a virus associated with human cancers and is well known 
for its ability to transform B lymphocytes into continuously proliferating 
lymphoblastoid cell lines. EBNA3C is considered an oncoprotein and has been 
shown to be essential for B cell transformation by EBV. EBNA3C is well 
characterized as a viral transcription factor, but very little is known about 
its mechanisms of action. In the present study, we demonstrate that removal of 
the activating histone mark H3K4me3 and deposition of the repressive mark 
H3K27me3 by EBNA3C on COBLL1 are achieved by at least two distinct mechanisms. 
Furthermore, we discovered that EBNA3C interacts with the lysine demethylase 
KDM2B and that this interaction is important for its transcriptional repressive 
function. The findings in this study provide new insights into the mechanism 
used by the oncoprotein EBNA3C to repress cellular target genes.

Copyright © 2018 Gillman et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01362-18
PMCID: PMC6189496
PMID: 30135119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]