1. J Chem Inf Model. 2018 Sep 24;58(9):1926-1934. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00406. 
Epub 2018 Sep 6.

Catalytic Mechanism of Amyloid-β Peptide Degradation by Insulin Degrading 
Enzyme: Insights from Quantum Mechanics and Molecular Mechanics Style 
Møller-Plesset Second Order Perturbation Theory Calculation.

Lai R(1), Tang WJ(2), Li H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience, and 
Center for Integrated Biomolecular Communication , University of 
Nebraska-Lincoln , Lincoln , Nebraska 68588-0304 , United States.
(2)Ben May Department for Cancer Research , The University of Chicago , Chicago 
, Illinois 60637 , United States.

Insulin degrading enzyme (IDE), a metalloprotease that degrades amyloid-β (Aβ) 
peptides and insulin, is associated with Alzheimer's disease and diabetes. The 
mechanism of IDE catalyzed degrading of Aβ peptides, which is of fundamental 
importance in the design of therapeutic methods for Alzheimer's disease, has not 
been fully understood. In this work, combined quantum mechanics and molecular 
mechanics (QM/MM) style Møller-Plesset second order perturbation theory (MP2) 
geometry optimization calculations are performed to investigate the catalytic 
mechanism of the Aβ40 Phe19-Phe20 peptide bond cleavage by human IDE. The 
analyses using QM/MM MP2 optimization suggest that a neutral water molecule is 
at the active site of the enzyme-substrate (ES) complex. The water molecule is 
in hydrogen bonding with the nearby anionic Glu111 of IDE but not directly bound 
to the catalytic Zn ion. This is confirmed by QM/MM DFTB3 molecular dynamics 
simulation. Our studies also reveal that the hydrolysis of the Aβ40 Phe19-Phe20 
peptide bond by IDE consists of four key steps. The neutral water is first 
activated by moving toward and binding to the Zn ion. A gem-diol intermediate is 
then formed by the activated neutral water molecule attacking the C atom of the 
Phe19-Phe20 peptide bond. The next is the protonation of the N atom of 
Phe19-Phe20 peptide bond to form an intermediate with an elongated C-N bond. The 
final step is the breaking of the Phe19-Phe20 C-N bond. The final step is the 
rate-determining step with a calculated Gibbs free energy of activation of 17.34 
kcal/mol, in good agreement with the experimental value 16.7 kcal/mol. This 
mechanism provides the basis for the design of biochemical methods to modulate 
the activity of IDE in humans.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00406
PMCID: PMC6670292
PMID: 30133282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]