1. J Proteome Res. 2018 Dec 7;17(12):4243-4257. doi:
10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00372.  Epub 2018 Aug 31.

Integrated Dissection of Cysteine Oxidative Post-translational Modification 
Proteome During Cardiac Hypertrophy.

Wang J, Choi H, Chung NC, Cao Q, Ng DCM, Mirza B, Scruggs SB, Wang D, Garlid AO, 
Ping P.

Cysteine oxidative modification of cellular proteins is crucial for many aspects 
of cardiac hypertrophy development. However, integrated dissection of multiple 
types of cysteine oxidative post-translational modifications (O-PTM) of 
proteomes in cardiac hypertrophy is currently missing. Here we developed a novel 
discovery platform that encompasses a customized biotin switch-based 
quantitative proteomics pipeline and an advanced analytic workflow to 
comprehensively profile the landscape of cysteine O-PTM in an ISO-induced 
cardiac hypertrophy mouse model. Specifically, we identified a total of 1655 
proteins containing 3324 oxidized cysteine sites by at least one of the 
following three modifications: reversible cysteine O-PTM, cysteine sulfinylation 
(CysSO2H), and cysteine sulfonylation (CysSO3H). Analyzing the hypertrophy 
signatures that are reproducibly discovered from this computational workflow 
unveiled four biological processes with increased cysteine O-PTM. Among them, 
protein phosphorylation, creatine metabolism, and response to elevated Ca2+ 
pathways exhibited an elevation of cysteine O-PTM in early stages, whereas 
glucose metabolism enzymes were increasingly modified in later stages, 
illustrating a temporal regulatory map in cardiac hypertrophy. Our cysteine 
O-PTM platform depicts a dynamic and integrated landscape of the cysteine 
oxidative proteome, through the extracted molecular signatures, and provides 
critical mechanistic insights in cardiac hypertrophy. Data are available via 
ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010336.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00372
PMCID: PMC6650147
PMID: 30141336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosure The authors 
declare no competing financial interest.