1. Aging Cell. 2018 Dec;17(6):e12833. doi: 10.1111/acel.12833. Epub 2018 Aug 31.

Inflammaging impairs peripheral nerve maintenance and regeneration.

Büttner R(1), Schulz A(1)(2), Reuter M(1), Akula AK(1), Mindos T(1), Carlstedt 
A(1), Riecken LB(1), Baader SL(3), Bauer R(4), Morrison H(1).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz Institute on Aging, Fritz Lipmann Institute, Jena, Germany.
(2)Department of Genetics and Program in Cellular Neuroscience, 
Neurodegeneration and Repair, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut.
(3)Institute of Anatomy, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular Cell Biology, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.

The regenerative capacity of peripheral nerves declines during aging, 
contributing to the development of neuropathies, limiting organism function. 
Changes in Schwann cells prompt failures in instructing maintenance and 
regeneration of aging nerves; molecular mechanisms of which have yet to be 
delineated. Here, we identified an altered inflammatory environment leading to a 
defective Schwann cell response, as an underlying mechanism of impaired nerve 
regeneration during aging. Chronic inflammation was detected in intact uninjured 
old nerves, characterized by increased macrophage infiltration and raised levels 
of monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP1) and CC chemokine ligand 11 (CCL11). 
Schwann cells in the old nerves appeared partially dedifferentiated, accompanied 
by an activated repair program independent of injury. Upon sciatic nerve injury, 
an initial delayed immune response was followed by a persistent 
hyperinflammatory state accompanied by a diminished repair process. As a 
contributing factor to nerve aging, we showed that CCL11 interfered with Schwann 
cell differentiation in vitro and in vivo. Our results indicate that increased 
infiltration of macrophages and inflammatory signals diminish regenerative 
capacity of aging nerves by altering Schwann cell behavior. The study identifies 
CCL11 as a promising target for anti-inflammatory therapies aiming to improve 
nerve regeneration in old age.

© 2018 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.12833
PMCID: PMC6260910
PMID: 30168637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]