1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2019 Sep;167:44-49. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2018.09.028. Epub
2018  Sep 27.

Emerging roles of ADP-ribosyl-acceptor hydrolases (ARHs) in tumorigenesis and 
cell death pathways.

Bu X(1), Kato J(1), Moss J(2).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1590, USA.
(2)Pulmonary Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1590, USA. Electronic address: 
mossj@nhlbi.nih.gov.

Malignant transformation may occur in the background of post-translational 
modification, such as ADP-ribosylation, phosphorylation and acetylation. Recent 
genomic analysis of ADP-ribosylation led to the discovery of more than twenty 
ADP-ribosyltransferases (ARTs), which catalyze either mono- or 
poly-ADP-ribosylation. ARTs catalyze the attachment of ADP-ribose to acceptor 
molecules. The ADP-ribose-acceptor bond can then be cleaved by a family of 
hydrolases in a substrate-specific manner, which is dependent on the acceptor 
and its functional group, e.g., arginine (guanidino), serine (hydroxyl), 
aspartate (carboxyl). These hydrolases vary in structure and function, and 
include poly-ADP-ribose glycohydrolase (PARG), MacroD1, MacroD2, terminal 
ADP-ribose protein glycohydrolase 1 (TARG1) and ADP-ribosyl-acceptor hydrolases 
(ARHs). In murine models, PARG deficiency increased susceptibility to alkylating 
agents-induced carcinogenesis. Similarly, by cleaving mono-ADP-ribosylated 
arginine on target proteins, ARH1 appears to inhibit tumor formation, suggesting 
that ARH1 is a tumor-suppressor gene. Although ARH3 is similar to ARH1 in amino 
acid sequence and crystal structure, ARH3 does not cleave ADP-ribose-arginine, 
rather it degrades in an exocidic manner, the PAR polymer and cleaves 
O-acetyl-ADP-ribose (OAADPr) and the ADP-ribose-serine linkage in acceptor 
proteins. Under conditions of oxidative stress, ARH3-deficient cells showed 
increased cytosolic PAR accumulation and PARP-1 mediated cell death. These 
findings expand our understanding of ADP-ribosylation and provide new 
therapeutic targets for cancer treatment. In the present review, research on 
ARH1-regulated tumorigenesis and cell death pathways that are enhanced by ARH3 
deficiency are discussed.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2018.09.028
PMCID: PMC8339914
PMID: 30267646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest No 
potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.