1. Mol Ther. 2018 Nov 7;26(11):2567-2579. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2018.09.005. Epub 
2018 Sep 13.

RNAi-Mediated β-Catenin Inhibition Promotes T Cell Infiltration and Antitumor 
Activity in Combination with Immune Checkpoint Blockade.

Ganesh S(1), Shui X(2), Craig KP(2), Park J(2), Wang W(2), Brown BD(2), Abrams 
MT(2).

Author information:
(1)Dicerna Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA 02140, USA. Electronic address: 
sganesh@dicerna.com.
(2)Dicerna Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA 02140, USA.

Wnt/β-catenin signaling mediates cancer immune evasion and resistance to immune 
checkpoint therapy, in part by blocking cytokines that trigger immune cell 
recruitment. Inhibition of β-catenin may be an effective strategy for increasing 
the low response rate to these effective medicines in numerous cancer 
populations. DCR-BCAT is a nanoparticle drug product containing a chemically 
optimized RNAi trigger targeting CTNNB1, the gene that encodes β-catenin. In 
syngeneic mouse tumor models, β-catenin inhibition with DCR-BCAT significantly 
increased T cell infiltration and potentiated the sensitivity of the tumors to 
checkpoint inhibition. The combination of DCR-BCAT and immunotherapy yielded 
significantly greater tumor growth inhibition (TGI) compared to monotherapy in 
B16F10 melanoma, 4T1 mammary carcinoma, Neuro2A neuroblastoma, and Renca renal 
adenocarcinoma. Response to the RNAi-containing combination therapy was not 
dependent on Wnt activation status of the tumor. Importantly, this drug 
combination was associated with elevated levels of biomarkers of T cell-mediated 
cytotoxicity. Finally, when CTLA-4 and PD-1 antibodies were combined with 
DCR-BCAT in MMTV-Wnt1 transgenic mice, a genetic model of spontaneous Wnt-driven 
tumors, complete regressions were achieved in the majority of treated subjects. 
These data support RNAi-mediated β-catenin inhibition as an effective strategy 
to increase response rates to cancer immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2018 Dicerna Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2018.09.005
PMCID: PMC6225018
PMID: 30274786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]