1. J Clin Transl Hepatol. 2018 Sep 28;6(3):317-325. doi:
10.14218/JCTH.2018.00006.  Epub 2018 Jul 2.

Candidate Biomarkers of Liver Fibrosis: A Concise, Pathophysiology-oriented 
Review.

Bellan M(1)(2)(3), Castello LM(1)(4), Pirisi M(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, Università del Piemonte Orientale UPO, 
Novara, Italy.
(2)Division of Internal Medicine, "Sant'Andrea Hospital", Vercelli, Italy.
(3)IRCAD, Interdisciplinary Research Center of Autoimmune Diseases, Novara, 
Italy.
(4)Emergency Medicine Department, "AOU Maggiore della Carità", Novara, Italy.
(5)Division of Internal Medicine, "AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy.

Repair of sustained liver injury results in fibrosis (i.e. the accumulation of 
extracellular matrix proteins), and ultimately the complete distortion of 
parenchymal architecture of the liver, which we call cirrhosis. Detecting and 
staging of fibrosis is thus a mainstay in the management of chronic liver 
diseases, since many clinically relevant decisions, such as starting treatment 
and/or monitoring for complications including hepatocellular carcinoma, may 
depend on it. The gold standard for fibrosis staging is liver biopsy, the role 
of which, however, is questioned nowadays because of cost, hazards and poor 
acceptance by patients. On the other hand, imaging techniques and/or measurement 
of direct and indirect serum markers have not proved to be completely 
satisfactory under all circumstances as alternatives to liver biopsy. Making 
progress in this field is now more crucial than ever, since treatments for 
established fibrosis appear on the horizon. Fine dissection of the pathways 
involved in the pathophysiology of liver diseases has put forward several novel 
candidate biomarkers of liver fibrosis, such as growth arrest-specific6, 
Mac-2-binding protein, osteopontin, placental growth factor, 
growth/differentiation factor 15 and hepatocyte growth factor. All molecules 
have been suggested to have potential to complement or substitute methods 
currently used to stage liver diseases. Here, we review the pros and cons for 
their use in this setting.

DOI: 10.14218/JCTH.2018.00006
PMCID: PMC6160308
PMID: 30271745

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interests 
related to this publication.