1. Int J Mol Med. 2018 Dec;42(6):3371-3385. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2018.3907. Epub
2018  Oct 1.

Age-associated decline in Nrf2 signaling and associated mtDNA damage may be 
involved in the degeneration of the auditory cortex: Implications for central 
presbycusis.

Li Y(1), Zhao X(1), Hu Y(1), Sun H(1), He Z(1), Yuan J(1), Cai H(1), Sun Y(1), 
Huang X(1), Kong W(2), Kong W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R. China.

Central presbycusis is the most common sensory disorder in the elderly 
population, however, the underlying molecular mechanism remains unclear. 
NF‑E2‑related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a key transcription factor in the cellular 
response to oxidative stress, however, the role of Nrf2 in central presbycusis 
remains to be elucidated. The aim of the present study was to investigate the 
pathogenesis of central presbycusis using a mimetic aging model induced by 
D‑galactose (D‑gal) in vivo and in vitro. The degeneration of the cell was 
determined with transmission electron microscopy, terminal deoxynucleotidyl 
transferase‑mediated deoxyuridine 5'‑triphosphate nick‑end labeling staining, 
and senescence‑associated β‑galactosidase staining. The expression of protein 
was detected by western blotting and immunofluorescence. The quantification of 
the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 4,834‑base pair (bp) deletion and mRNA was 
detected by TaqMan quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and reverse 
transcription‑qPCR respectively. Cell apoptosis and intracellular ROS in vitro 
were determined with flow cytometry. The levels of nuclear Nrf2, and the mRNA 
levels of Nrf2‑regulated antioxidant genes, were downregulated in the auditory 
cortex of aging rats, which was accompanied by an increase in 
8‑hydroxy‑2'‑deoxyguanosine formation, an accumulation of mtDNA 4,834‑bp 
deletion, and neuron degeneration. In addition, oltipraz, a typical Nrf2 
activator, was found to protect cells against D‑gal‑induced mtDNA damage and 
mitochondrial dysfunction by activating Nrf2 target genes in vitro. It was also 
observed that activating Nrf2 with oltipraz inhibited cell apoptosis and delayed 
senescence. Taken together, the data of the present study suggested that the 
age‑associated decline in Nrf2 signaling activity and the associated mtDNA 
damage in the auditory cortex may be implicated in the degeneration of the 
auditory cortex. Therefore, the restoration of Nrf2 signaling activity may 
represent a potential therapeutic strategy for central presbycusis.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2018.3907
PMCID: PMC6202109
PMID: 30272261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]