1. Mol Pain. 2018 Jan-Dec;14:1744806918807102. doi: 10.1177/1744806918807102.
Epub  2018 Oct 1.

Predominant synaptic potentiation and activation in the right central amygdala 
are independent of bilateral parabrachial activation in the hemilateral 
trigeminal inflammatory pain model of rats.

Miyazawa Y(1)(2), Takahashi Y(1)(2), Watabe AM(2)(3), Kato F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Neuroscience, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)2 Center for Neuroscience of Pain, Jikei University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)3 Institute of Clinical Medicine and Research, Jikei University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Nociceptive signals originating in the periphery are conveyed to the brain 
through specific afferent and ascending pathways. The 
spino-(trigemino-)parabrachio-amygdaloid pathway is one of the principal 
pathways mediating signals from nociception-specific ascending neurons to the 
central amygdala, a limbic structure involved in aversive signal-associated 
emotional responses, including the emotional aspects of pain. Recent studies 
suggest that the right and left central amygdala play distinct roles in the 
regulation of nociceptive responses. Using a latent formalin inflammatory pain 
model of the rat, we analyzed the right-left differences in synaptic 
potentiation at the synapses formed between the fibers from the lateral 
parabrachial nucleus and central amygdala neurons as well as those in the c-Fos 
expression in the lateral parabrachial nucleus, central amygdala, and the 
basolateral/lateral amygdala after formalin injection to either the right or 
left side of the rat upper lip. Although the single-sided formalin injection 
caused a significant bilateral increase in c-Fos-expressing neurons in the 
lateral parabrachial nucleus with slight projection-side dependence, the 
increase in the amplitude of postsynaptic excitatory currents and the number of 
c-Fos-expressing neurons in the central amygdala occurred predominantly on the 
right side regardless of the side of the inflammation. Although there was no 
significant correlation in the number of c-Fos-expressing neurons between the 
lateral parabrachial nucleus and central amygdala in the formalin-injected 
animals, these numbers were significantly correlated between the basolateral 
amygdala and central amygdala. It is thus concluded that the lateral 
parabrachial nucleus-central amygdala synaptic potentiation reported in various 
pain models is not a simple Hebbian plasticity in which raised inputs from the 
lateral parabrachial nucleus cause lateral parabrachial nucleus-central amygdala 
potentiation but rather an integrative and adaptive response involving specific 
mechanisms in the right central amygdala.

DOI: 10.1177/1744806918807102
PMCID: PMC6243415
PMID: 30270724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]