1. Int J Endocrinol. 2018 Sep 13;2018:3470412. doi: 10.1155/2018/3470412. 
eCollection 2018.

Serum Matrix Metalloproteinase 9 and Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor 
(MIF) Are Increased in Young Healthy Nonobese Subjects with Positive Family 
History of Type 2 Diabetes.

Nikołajuk A(1), Matulewicz N(2), Stefanowicz M(2), Karczewska-Kupczewska 
M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Prophylaxis of Metabolic Diseases, Institute of Animal 
Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Olsztyn, Poland.
(2)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Medical University of Białystok, Białystok, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Metabolic Disorders, Medical University 
of Białystok, Białystok, Poland.

Insulin resistance increases the risk for cardiovascular disease (CVD) even in 
the absence of classic risk factors, such as hyperglycemia, hypertension, 
dyslipidemia, and obesity. Low-grade chronic inflammatory state is associated 
both with insulin resistance and atherosclerosis. An increased circulating level 
of proinflammatory proatherogenic factors and biomarkers of endothelial 
activation was observed in diabetes and CVD. The aim of our study was to assess 
serum proatherogenic and proinflammatory factors in young healthy nonobese 
subjects with positive family history of type 2 diabetes. We studied 74 young 
healthy nonobese subjects with normal glucose tolerance (age < 35 years, 
BMI < 30 kg/m2), 29 with positive family history of type 2 diabetes (relatives, 
25 males and 4 females) and 45 subjects without family history of diabetes 
(control group, 39 males and 6 females). Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp was 
performed, and serum concentrations of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 
(MCP-1), interleukin 18 (IL-18), macrophage inhibitory cytokine 1 (MIC-1), 
macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-9), 
and soluble forms of adhesion molecules were measured. Relatives had markedly 
lower insulin sensitivity (p = 0.019) and higher serum MMP-9 (p < 0.001) and MIF 
(p = 0.006), but not other chemokines and biomarkers of endothelial function. 
Insulin sensitivity correlated negatively with serum MMP-9 (r = -0.23, p = 
0.045). Our data show that young healthy subjects with positive family history 
of type 2 diabetes already demonstrate an increase in some nonclassical 
cardiovascular risk factors.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/3470412
PMCID: PMC6158960
PMID: 30302090