1. Acta Neuropathol. 2019 Jan;137(1):151-165. doi: 10.1007/s00401-018-1916-x.
Epub  2018 Oct 10.

Rapid lymphatic efflux limits cerebrospinal fluid flow to the brain.

Ma Q(1), Ries M(1), Decker Y(2), Müller A(3), Riner C(1), Bücker A(3), 
Fassbender K(2), Detmar M(1), Proulx ST(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, 
ETH Zurich, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 1-5/10, HCI H398, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of the Saarland, 66421, Homburg, Saar, 
Germany.
(3)Clinic for Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Saarland University 
Medical Center, 66421, Homburg, Saar, Germany.
(4)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, 
ETH Zurich, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 1-5/10, HCI H398, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland. 
steven.proulx@pharma.ethz.ch.

The relationships between cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and brain interstitial fluid 
are still being elucidated. It has been proposed that CSF within the 
subarachnoid space will enter paravascular spaces along arteries to flush 
through the parenchyma of the brain. However, CSF also directly exits the 
subarachnoid space through the cribriform plate and other perineural routes to 
reach the lymphatic system. In this study, we aimed to elucidate the functional 
relationship between CSF efflux through lymphatics and the potential influx into 
the brain by assessment of the distribution of CSF-infused tracers in awake and 
anesthetized mice. Using near-infrared fluorescence imaging, we showed that 
tracers quickly exited the subarachnoid space by transport through the lymphatic 
system to the systemic circulation in awake mice, significantly limiting their 
spread to the paravascular spaces of the brain. Magnetic resonance imaging and 
fluorescence microscopy through the skull under anesthetized conditions 
indicated that tracers remained confined to paravascular spaces on the surface 
of the brain. Immediately after death, a substantial influx of tracers occurred 
along paravascular spaces extending into the brain parenchyma. We conclude that 
under normal conditions a rapid CSF turnover through lymphatics precludes 
significant bulk flow into the brain.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-018-1916-x
PMCID: PMC6338719
PMID: 30306266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.