1. FEBS Lett. 2018 Nov;592(21):3563-3585. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13270. Epub 2018
 Oct 26.

Toward a unified picture of the exocytotic fusion pore.

Karatekin E(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Nanobiology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Paris, France.

Neurotransmitter and hormone release involve calcium-triggered fusion of a 
cargo-loaded vesicle with the plasma membrane. The initial connection between 
the fusing membranes, called the fusion pore, can evolve in various ways, 
including rapid dilation to allow full cargo release, slow expansion, repeated 
opening-closing and resealing. Pore dynamics determine the kinetics of cargo 
release and the mode of vesicle recycling, but how these processes are 
controlled is poorly understood. Previous reconstitutions could not monitor 
single pores, limiting mechanistic insight they could provide. Recently 
developed nanodisc-based fusion assays allow reconstitution and monitoring of 
single pores with unprecedented detail and hold great promise for future 
discoveries. They recapitulate various aspects of exocytotic fusion pores, but 
comparison is difficult because different approaches suggested very different 
exocytotic fusion pore properties, even for the same cell type. In this Review, 
I discuss how most of the data can be reconciled, by recognizing how different 
methods probe different aspects of the same fusion process. The resulting 
picture is that fusion pores have broadly distributed properties arising from 
stochastic processes which can be modulated by physical constraints imposed by 
proteins, lipids and membranes.

Â© 2018 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.13270
PMCID: PMC6353554
PMID: 30317539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]