1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2019 May;17(5):914-931. doi: 10.1111/pbi.13026. Epub 2018 
Dec 1.

Integrated transcriptome, small RNA and degradome sequencing approaches provide 
insights into Ascochyta blight resistance in chickpea.

Garg V(1)(2), Khan AW(1), Kudapa H(1), Kale SM(1), Chitikineni A(1), Qiwei S(3), 
Sharma M(4), Li C(3), Zhang B(5), Xin L(3), Kishor PBK(2), Varshney RK(1).

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence in Genomics & Systems Biology (CEGSB), International 
Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), Patancheru, 
Telangana, India.
(2)Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(3)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Integrated Crop Management, ICRISAT, Patancheru, Telangana, India.
(5)Department of Biology, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.

Ascochyta blight (AB) is one of the major biotic stresses known to limit the 
chickpea production worldwide. To dissect the complex mechanisms of AB 
resistance in chickpea, three approaches, namely, transcriptome, small RNA and 
degradome sequencing were used. The transcriptome sequencing of 20 samples 
including two resistant genotypes, two susceptible genotypes and one 
introgression line under control and stress conditions at two time points (3rd 
and 7th day post inoculation) identified a total of 6767 differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs). These DEGs were mainly related to pathogenesis-related 
proteins, disease resistance genes like NBS-LRR, cell wall biosynthesis and 
various secondary metabolite synthesis genes. The small RNA sequencing of the 
samples resulted in the identification of 651 miRNAs which included 478 known 
and 173 novel miRNAs. A total of 297 miRNAs were differentially expressed 
between different genotypes, conditions and time points. Using degradome 
sequencing and in silico approaches, 2131 targets were predicted for 629 miRNAs. 
The combined analysis of both small RNA and transcriptome datasets identified 12 
miRNA-mRNA interaction pairs that exhibited contrasting expression in resistant 
and susceptible genotypes and also, a subset of genes that might be 
post-transcriptionally silenced during AB infection. The comprehensive 
integrated analysis in the study provides better insights into the transcriptome 
dynamics and regulatory network components associated with AB stress in chickpea 
and, also offers candidate genes for chickpea improvement.

Â© 2018 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for 
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.13026
PMCID: PMC6472043
PMID: 30328278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.