1. Vet Res. 2018 Oct 19;49(1):107. doi: 10.1186/s13567-018-0603-1.

Bottlenecks in the transmission of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome 
virus (PRRSV1) to naïve pigs and the quasi-species variation of the virus during 
infection in vaccinated pigs.

Cortey M(1), Arocena G(2), Pileri E(2), Martín-Valls G(2), Mateu E(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Sanitat i d'Anatomia Animals, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain. marti.cortey@uab.cat.
(2)Departament de Sanitat i d'Anatomia Animals, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain.
(3)IRTA, Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA, IRTA-UAB), Campus de la 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain.

This paper describes the results of two experiments regarding porcine 
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV1): the first one studied the 
existence of bottlenecks in an experimental one-to-one model of transmission in 
pigs; while the second analysed the differences between viral quasi-species in 
vaccinated pigs that developed shorter or longer viraemias after natural 
challenge. Serum samples, as well as the initial inoculum, were deep-sequenced 
and a viral quasi-species was constructed per sample. For the first experiment, 
the results consistently reported a reduction in the quasi-species diversity 
after a transmission event, pointing to the existence of bottlenecks during 
PRRSV1 transmission. However, despite the identified preferred and un-preferred 
transmitted variants not being randomly distributed along the virus genome, it 
was not possible to identify any variant producing a structural change in any 
viral protein. In contrast, the mutations identified in GP2, nsp9 and M of the 
second experiment pointed to changes in the amino acid charges and the viral 
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase structure. The fact that the affected proteins are 
known targets of the immunity against PRRSV, plus the differential level of 
neutralizing antibodies present in pigs developing short or long viraemias, 
suggests that the immune response selected those changes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13567-018-0603-1
PMCID: PMC6389235
PMID: 30340626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]