1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018 Oct 9;12:344. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2018.00344. 
eCollection 2018.

Multiple Mechanisms Driving F-actin-Dependent Transport of Organelles to and 
From Secretory Sites in Bovine Chromaffin Cells.

Gimenez-Molina Y(1), Villanueva J(1), Francés MDM(1), Viniegra S(1), Gutiérrez 
LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Centro Mixto CSIC-Universidad Miguel Hernández, 
San Juan de Alicante, Spain.

Neuroendocrine chromaffin cells represent an excellent model to study the 
molecular mechanisms associated with the exo-endocytotic cycle of 
neurotransmitter release. In this study, EGFP-Lifeact and confocal microscopy 
has been used to analyze the re-organization of the cortical F-actin 
cytoskeleton associated to organelle transport during secretion with 
unprecedented detail. In these cells secretory events accumulate in 
temperature-sensitive and myosin II-dependent F-actin expansions and retractions 
affecting specific regions of the sub-membrane space. Interestingly, not only 
vesicles but also mitochondria are transported toward the plasmalemma during 
these expansions. Simultaneously, we found F-actin cytoskeletal retraction 
withdraws vesicles from the sub-plasmalemmal space, forming novel empty internal 
spaces into which organelles can be transported. In addition to these 
well-coordinated, F-actin-myosin II dependent processes that drive the transport 
of the majority of vesicles, fast transport of chromaffin vesicles was observed, 
albeit less frequently, which used F-actin comet tails nucleated from the 
granular membrane. Thus, upon cell stimulation F-actin structures use diverse 
mechanisms to transport organelles to and from the membrane during the 
exo-endocytotic cycle taking place in specific areas of cell periphery.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2018.00344
PMCID: PMC6190647
PMID: 30356839