1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Nov 6;115(45):E10596-E10604. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1811003115. Epub 2018 Oct 23.

Noncanonical role for the binding protein in substrate uptake by the MetNI 
methionine ATP Binding Cassette (ABC) transporter.

Nguyen PT(1), Lai JY(1)(2), Lee AT(1)(2), Kaiser JT(1), Rees DC(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena, CA 91125.
(3)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125; dcrees@caltech.edu.

The Escherichia coli methionine ABC transporter MetNI exhibits both 
high-affinity transport toward l-methionine and broad specificity toward 
methionine derivatives, including d-methionine. In this work, we characterize 
the transport of d-methionine derivatives by the MetNI transporter. 
Unexpectedly, the N229A substrate-binding deficient variant of the cognate 
binding protein MetQ was found to support high MetNI transport activity toward 
d-selenomethionine. We determined the crystal structure at 2.95 Å resolution of 
the ATPγS-bound MetNIQ complex in the outward-facing conformation with the N229A 
apo MetQ variant. This structure revealed conformational changes in MetQ 
providing substrate access through the binding protein to the transmembrane 
translocation pathway. MetQ likely mediates uptake of methionine derivatives 
through two mechanisms: in the methionine-bound form delivering substrate from 
the periplasm to the transporter (the canonical mechanism) and in the apo form 
by facilitating ligand binding when complexed to the transporter (the 
noncanonical mechanism). This dual role for substrate-binding proteins is 
proposed to provide a kinetic strategy for ABC transporters to transport both 
high- and low-affinity substrates present in a physiological concentration 
range.

Copyright © 2018 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1811003115
PMCID: PMC6233128
PMID: 30352853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.