1. Int J Oncol. 2019 Jan;54(1):87-97. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2018.4598. Epub 2018 Oct
19.

Identification of FOXM1 as a specific marker for triple‑negative breast cancer.

Tan Y(1), Wang Q(2), Xie Y(3), Qiao X(3), Zhang S(4), Wang Y(4), Yang Y(5), 
Zhang B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin 300052, 
P.R. China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Affiliated Hospital of Hebei University, Baoding, 
Hebei 071000, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Hospital of Hebei University, Baoding, 
Hebei 071000, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Hebei University Medical College, Baoding, Hebei 
071000, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to identify the therapeutic role of the forkhead box M1 
(FOXM1)‑associated pathway in triple‑negative breast cancer (TNBC). Using a 
Cancer Landscapes‑based analysis, a gene regulatory network model was 
constructed. The present results demonstrated that FOXM1 occupies a key position 
in gene networks and is a critical regulatory gene in breast cancer. Using 
breast carcinoma gene expression data from The Cancer Genome Atlas, it was 
identified that FOXM1 expression was increased in the basal‑like breast cancer 
subtype compared with other breast cancer subtypes. RNA‑sequencing analysis of 
MDA‑MB‑231 cells treated with 4 and 10 µl/ml Thiostrepton identified 
662 and 5,888 significantly differentially expressed genes, respectively. The 
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analyses demonstrated 
that FOXM1 was highly associated with multiple biological processes and was 
markedly associated with metabolic pathways in TNBC. The use of Search Tool for 
the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins provided a critical assessment and 
integration of protein‑protein interactions, and demonstrated the multiple 
important functions of FOXM1 in TNBC. Real‑time cell analysis, reverse 
transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain reaction and immunofluorescence 
staining were used to assess the anti‑tumor activity of Thiostrepton in TNBC 
cells in vitro. The present results identified that suppression of FOXM1 using 
Thiostrepton inhibited MDA‑MB‑231 cell proliferation and the expression of cell 
cycle‑associated genes, including cyclin A2, cyclin B2, checkpoint kinase 1, 
centrosomal protein 55 and polo like kinase 1. Immunofluorescence staining 
analysis demonstrated that vimentin, filamentous actin and zinc finger 
E‑box‑binding homeobox 1 were all decreased following treatment with 
Thiostrepton. Furthermore, a BALB/C nude mouse subcutaneous xenograft model was 
used to verify the function of FOXM1 in vivo. The present results demonstrated 
that FOXM1 inhibition significantly suppressed MDA‑MB‑231 cell tumorigenesis 
in vivo. Overall, the present results suggested that FOXM1 is a key gene that 
serves important roles in multiple biological processes in TNBC and that it may 
serve as a novel therapeutic target in TNBC.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2018.4598
PMCID: PMC6254995
PMID: 30365046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]