1. Dis Markers. 2018 Sep 27;2018:4310790. doi: 10.1155/2018/4310790. eCollection 
2018.

Clinical Value of Combined Determination of Serum B7-H4 with Carcinoembryonic 
Antigen, Osteopontin, or Tissue Polypeptide-Specific Antigen for the Diagnosis 
of Colorectal Cancer.

Wang P(1)(2), Li C(1)(2), Zhang F(1), Ma X(1)(2), Gai X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School of Beihua University, Jilin, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Jilin Province Education Department, 
Beihua University, Jilin, China.

AIM: B7-H4 is member of the B7 family that negatively regulates the immune 
response, which are associated with tumor development and prognosis. The present 
study is aimed at examining serum B7-H4 expression and exploring its 
contribution to diagnosis in patients with colorectal cancer.
METHODS: We determined serum expressions of B7-H4, carcinoembryonic antigen 
(CEA), osteopontin (OPN), and tissue polypeptide-specific antigen (TPS) in 59 
patients with colorectal cancer and 29 healthy volunteers and analyzed the 
diagnostic value of B7-H4 combined with CEA, OPN, or TPS detection for 
colorectal cancer. B7-H4, OPN, and TPS serum expressions were measured by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and CEA was measured by electrochemical 
luminescence detection.
RESULTS: Serum B7-H4 levels were significantly higher in colorectal cancer 
patients compared with paired normal controls (P = 0.001). B7-H4 serum level was 
positively correlated with infiltration depth, tumor masses, and lymph node 
metastasis (P = 0.004, P = 0.016, and P = 0.0052, respectively). We also 
detected serum expression of B7-H4 before and after radical resection and showed 
that B7-H4 levels decreased significantly during the first week postoperation (P 
= 0.0064). We used receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis to 
indicate the potential diagnostic values of these markers. The areas under the 
ROC curves (AUC) for B7-H4, OPN, TPS, and CEA were 0.867, 0.805, 0.812, and 
0.833, respectively. The optimal sensitivity and specificity of B7-H4 for 
discriminating between colon cancer patients and healthy controls were 88.2% and 
86.7%, respectively, using a cut-off of value of 78.89â€‰ng/mL. However, combined 
ROC analysis using B7-H4 and CEA revealed an AUC of 0.929, with a sensitivity of 
98.9% and a specificity of 80.4% for discriminating colon cancer patients from 
healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: B7-H4 was highly expressed in the serum in colorectal cancer 
patients. Detection of B7-H4 plus CEA showed significantly increased sensitivity 
and specificity for discriminating between colorectal cancer patients and 
healthy controls compared to individual detection of these markers. Combined 
detection of serum B7-H4 and CEA may thus have the potential to become a new 
laboratory method for the early clinical diagnosis and prognostic evaluation of 
colorectal cancer.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/4310790
PMCID: PMC6180982
PMID: 30363700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]