1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2018 Dec;65:422-428. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2018.10.038. 
Epub 2018 Oct 30.

The calcineurin regulatory subunit polymorphism and the treatment efficacy of 
tacrolimus for idiopathic membranous nephropathy.

Zhu Y(1), Zhang M(1), Wang F(1), Lu J(1), Chen R(1), Xie Q(1), Sun J(2), Xue 
J(3), Hao C(1), Lin S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, China. Electronic address: sunj5708@126.com.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China. Electronic address: xuejun@fudan.edu.cn.

Tacrolimus is considered to be one of the main therapeutic options for 
idiopathic membranous nephropathy (IMN). This study aimed to investigate the 
association of variants in genes encoding the binding protein and the drug 
target (calcineurin) of tacrolimus with the efficacy in IMN patients and the 
potential mechanism. Sixty-seven IMN patients treated with tacrolimus were 
enrolled retrospectively. Sanger sequencing was performed to search for variants 
in all exons of the genes in 8 IMN patients and genotype for the detected 
variants in the other 59 patients. The molecular mechanism underlying the 
relationship between the variants and the efficacy was explored in human 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and other cell lines. Single 
nucleotide polymorphism rs875 (T > C) in the 3'untranslated region (3'UTR) of 
PPP3R1 encoding calcineurin regulatory subunit was found to be associated with 
the treatment efficacy of tacrolimus for IMN. Patients carrying TT genotype had 
a significantly higher remission rate than those carrying TC/CC genotype (83% 
vs. 47%, P = 0.008). Western blot showed that the TT genotype carriers exhibited 
reduced PPP3R1 protein levels in PBMCs (P = 0.02). Compared with C allele, T 
allele displayed increased binding affinity for miR-582-5p in the luciferase 
reporter assay (P < 0.001). Moreover, knockdown of PPP3R1 in Jurkat T cell line 
enhanced the immunosuppressive effect of tacrolimus. Our study revealed the 
association of PPP3R1 3'UTR polymorphism rs875 with the efficacy of tacrolimus 
in IMN patients. The functional polymorphism might alter PPP3R1 expression via 
modulating the interaction of miR-582-5p with PPP3R1, which further affected the 
immunosuppressive effect of tacrolimus.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2018.10.038
PMID: 30388516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]