1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2018 Oct 16;9:595. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2018.00595.
 eCollection 2018.

Direct Crosstalk Between O-GlcNAcylation and Phosphorylation of Tau Protein 
Investigated by NMR Spectroscopy.

Bourré G(1), Cantrelle FX(1), Kamah A(1), Chambraud B(2), Landrieu I(1), 
Smet-Nocca C(1).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Lille, CNRS UMR8576, Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et 
Fonctionnelle, Lille, France.
(2)Univ. Paris XI, UMR 1195 Inserm, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.

The formation of intraneuronal fibrillar inclusions of tau protein is associated 
with several neurodegenerative diseases referred to as tauopathies including 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). A common feature of these pathologies is 
hyperphosphorylation of tau, the main component of fibrillar assemblies such as 
Paired Helical Filaments (PHFs). O-β-linked N-acetylglucosaminylation 
(O-GlcNAcylation) is another important posttranslational modification involved 
in regulation of tau pathophysiology. Among the benefits of O-GlcNAcylation, 
modulation of tau phosphorylation levels and inhibition of tau aggregation 
properties have been described while decreased O-GlcNAcylation could be involved 
in the raise of tau phosphorylation associated with AD. However, the molecular 
mechanisms at the basis of these observations remain to be defined. In this 
study, we identify by NMR spectroscopy O-GlcNAc sites in the longest isoform of 
tau and investigate the direct role of O-GlcNAcylation on tau phosphorylation 
and conversely, the role of phosphorylation on tau O-GlcNAcylation. We show here 
by a systematic examination of the quantitative modification patterns by NMR 
spectroscopy that O-GlcNAcylation does not modify phosphorylation of tau by the 
kinase activity of ERK2 or a rat brain extract while phosphorylation slightly 
increases tau O-GlcNAcylation by OGT. Our data suggest that indirect mechanisms 
act in the reciprocal regulation of tau phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation in 
vivo involving regulation of the enzymes responsible of phosphate and O-GlcNAc 
dynamics.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2018.00595
PMCID: PMC6198643
PMID: 30386294