1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2018 Oct 22;10:328. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00328. 
eCollection 2018.

A Single Bout of Aerobic Exercise Improves Motor Skill Consolidation in 
Parkinson's Disease.

Steib S(1), Wanner P(1), Adler W(2), Winkler J(3), Klucken J(3), Pfeifer K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sport Science and Sport, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, 
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Molecular Neurology, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander 
University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Background: Motor learning is impaired in Parkinson's disease (PD), with 
patients demonstrating deficits in skill acquisition (online learning) and 
consolidation (offline learning) compared to healthy adults of similar age. 
Recent studies in young adults suggest that single bouts of aerobic exercise 
(AEX), performed in close temporal proximity to practicing a new motor task, may 
facilitate motor skill learning. Thus, we aimed at investigating the effects of 
a single bout of aerobic cycling on online and offline learning in PD patients. 
Methods: 17 PD patients (Hoehn and Yahr 1 - 2.5, age: 64.4 ± 6.2) participated 
in this crossover study. Immediately prior to practicing a novel balance task, 
patients either performed 30 min of (i) moderate intensity (60-70% VO2max) 
aerobic cycling, or (ii) seated rest (order counterbalanced). The task required 
patients to stabilize a balance platform (stabilometer) in a horizontal position 
for 30 s. For each experimental condition, patients performed 15 acquisition 
trials, followed by a retention test 24 h later. We calculated time in balance 
(platform within ± 5° from horizontal) for each trial, and analyzed within- and 
between-subjects differences in skill acquisition (online learning) and skill 
retention (offline learning) using mixed repeated-measures ANOVA. Results: We 
found that the exercise bout had no effect on performance level or online gains 
during acquisition, despite affecting the time course of skill improvements 
(larger initial and reduced late skill gains). Aerobic cycling significantly 
improved offline learning, as reflected by larger 24-h skill retention compared 
to the rest condition. Conclusion: Our results suggest that a single bout of 
moderate-intensity AEX is effective in improving motor skill consolidation in PD 
patients. Thus, acute exercise may represent an effective strategy to enhance 
motor memory formation in this population. More work is necessary to understand 
the underlying mechanisms, the optimal scheduling of exercise, and the 
applicability to other motor tasks. Further, the potential for patients in later 
disease stages need to be investigated. The study was a priori registered at 
ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03245216).

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00328
PMCID: PMC6204491
PMID: 30405397