1. Aging (Albany NY). 2018 Nov 13;10(11):3283-3293. doi: 10.18632/aging.101632.

Uncoupling protein 4 (UCP4) gene variability in neurodegenerative disorders: 
further evidence of association in Frontotemporal dementia.

Montesanto A(#)(1), Crocco P(#)(1), Dato S(1), Geracitano S(1), Frangipane F(2), 
Colao R(2), Maletta R(2), Passarino G(1), Bruni AC(2), Rose G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Calabria, 
Rende, Italy.
(2)Regional Neurogenetic Centre, ASP CZ, Lamezia Terme, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Ongoing research suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction is a common hallmark in 
neurodegenerative diseases, pointing to mitochondrial uncoupling process as a 
critical player. We recently reported that rs9472817-C/G, an intronic variant of 
neuronal mitochondrial uncoupling protein-4 (UCP4/SLC25A27) gene affects the 
risk of late onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD), and that the variant's effect is 
strongly dependent on APOE-ε4 status. Here, we extended our analysis to a cohort 
of 751 subjects including late-onset familial and sporadic cases of 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD; 213), Parkinson disease (PD;96), and 442 healthy 
controls. In all subgroups, carriers of APOE-ε4 allele were at higher risk of 
disease. Regarding the rs9472817, no association was detected in familial FTD 
and both subgroups of PD patients. In sporadic FTD, as in LOAD, we found that 
the C allele increased the risk of disease of about 1.51-fold in a 
dose-dependent manner (p=0.013) independently from that conferred by APOE-ε4. 
Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) data of different brain regions 
suggest that rs9472817 likely exerts its effect by a cis-regulatory mechanism 
involving modulation of UCP4. If validated, the involvement of UCP4 in both FTD 
and LOAD might indicate interesting shared etiological factors which might give 
future therapeutic clues.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.101632
PMCID: PMC6286830
PMID: 30425186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.