1. Cureus. 2018 Sep 7;10(9):e3267. doi: 10.7759/cureus.3267.

Ventricular Fibrillation Cardiac Arrest in African American Male with Apical 
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.

Volney G(1), Wada H(2), Tatusov M(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Ross University School of Medicine, Roseau, DMA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Ross University School of Medicine, Bowie, USA.
(3)Medicine/Trauma and Critical Care, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, USA.

Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (AHCM) is a rare form of non-obstructive 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. It is rarely reported in African American patients, 
and more commonly reported in Japanese patients. AHCM involves hypertrophy of 
the apex of the left ventricle. It is considered to have a benign prognosis in 
terms of cardiovascular mortality, however arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death 
have been reported. We report a case of a 49-year-old African American male with 
a history of hypertension, who presented to the emergency department after in 
field defibrillation for ventricular fibrillation cardiac arrest with return of 
spontaneous circulation after 10 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
Features of left ventricular hypertrophy and deep T-wave inversions in V3-V6 
were noted on a 12-lead electrocardiogram which were suggestive of AHCM. Left 
heart catheterization with left ventriculography and coronary angiography 
confirmed the diagnosis of AHCM with the classic "ace of spades" sign. This case 
highlights the rare occurrence of AHCM with ventricular fibrillation cardiac 
arrest in an African American male, treated with hypertension management, 
aspirin, atorvastatin and automated implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator placement.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.3267
PMCID: PMC6221513
PMID: 30430056

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.