1. Urolithiasis. 2019 Feb;47(1):23-33. doi: 10.1007/s00240-018-1096-0. Epub 2018 
Nov 16.

Calcium-sensing receptor: evidence and hypothesis for its role in 
nephrolithiasis.

Vezzoli G(1), Macrina L(2), Magni G(2), Arcidiacono T(2).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Postgraduate School of Nephrology, IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Vita Salute University, 20132, Milan, Italy. 
vezzoli.giuseppe@hsr.it.
(2)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Postgraduate School of Nephrology, IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Vita Salute University, 20132, Milan, Italy.

Calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) is a plasma-membrane G protein-coupled receptor 
activated by extracellular calcium and expressed in kidney tubular cells. It 
inhibits calcium reabsorption in the ascending limb and distal convoluted tubule 
when stimulated by the increase of serum calcium levels; therefore, these 
tubular segments are enabled by CaSR to play a substantial role in the 
regulation of serum calcium levels. In addition, CaSR increases water and proton 
excretion in the collecting duct and promotes phosphate reabsorption and citrate 
excretion in the proximal tubule. These CaSR activities form a network in which 
they are integrated to protect the kidney against the negative effects of high 
calcium concentrations and calcium precipitates in urine. Therefore, the CaSR 
gene has been considered as a candidate to explain calcium nephrolithiasis. 
Epidemiological studies observed that calcium nephrolithiasis was associated 
with polymorphisms of the CaSR gene regulatory region, rs6776158, located within 
the promoter-1, rs1501899 located in the intron 1, and rs7652589 in the 
5'-untranslated region. These polymorphisms were found to reduce the 
transcriptional activity of promoter-1. Activating rs1042636 polymorphism 
located in exon 7 was associated with calcium nephrolithiasis and 
hypercalciuria. Genetic polymorphisms decreasing CaSR expression could 
predispose individuals to stones because they may impair CaSR protective effects 
against precipitation of calcium phosphate and oxalate. Activating polymorphisms 
rs1042636 could predispose to calcium stones by increasing calcium excretion. 
These findings suggest that CaSR may play a complex role in lithogenesis through 
different pathways having different relevance under different clinical 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00240-018-1096-0
PMID: 30446806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]