1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Nov 5;9:2659. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02659. eCollection
 2018.

Swine Enteric Colibacillosis in Spain: Pathogenic Potential of mcr-1 ST10 and 
ST131 E. coli Isolates.

García-Meniño I(1), García V(1), Mora A(1), Díaz-Jiménez D(1), Flament-Simon 
SC(1), Alonso MP(2), Blanco JE(1), Blanco M(1), Blanco J(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Referencia de Escherichia coli (LREC), Departamento de 
Microbioloxía e Parasitoloxía, Facultade de Veterinaria, Universidade de 
Santiago de Compostela (USC), Lugo, Spain.
(2)Unidad de Microbiología, Hospital Universitario Lucus Augusti (HULA), Lugo, 
Spain.

This is a wide epidemiological study of 499 E. coli isolates recovered from 179 
outbreaks of enteric colibacillosis from pig production farms in Spain during a 
period of 10 years. Most samples were of diarrheagenic cases occurred during the 
post-wean period (PWD) which showed to be significantly associated with ETEC 
(67%) followed by aEPEC (21.7%). On the contrary, aEPEC was more prevalent 
(60.3%) among diarrheas of suckling piglets, followed by ETEC (38.8%). STEC/ETEC 
or STEC were recovered in 11.3 and 0.9% of PWD and neonatal diarrhea, 
respectively. Detection of the F4 colonization factor was not significantly 
different between isolates recovered from neonatal pigs and those recovered post 
wean (40.5 versus 27.7%) while F18 was only present among PWD isolates (51.5% of 
ETEC, STEC, and STEC/ETEC isolates). We also found a high prevalence of 
resistance to colistin related to the presence of the mcr-1 gene (25.6% of the 
diarreagenic isolates). The characterization of 65 representative mcr-1 isolates 
showed that all were phenotypically resistant to colistin (>2 μg/ml), and most 
(61 of 65) multidrug-resistant (MDR). Six ETEC and one STEC mcr-1 isolates were 
also carriers of ESBL genes. In addition, other seven mcr-1 isolates harbored 
mcr-4 (three ETEC) and mcr-5 (two ETEC and two aEPEC) genes. In the phylogenetic 
analysis of the 65 mcr-1 diarrheagenic isolates we found that more than 50% (38 
out of 65) belonged to A-ST10 Cplx and from those, 29 isolates showed the 
clonotype CH11-24. In this study, we also recovered 18 ST131 isolates including 
seven mcr-1 carriers. To the best of our knowledge, this would be the first 
report of ST131 mcr-1 isolation in pigs. Worryingly, the swine mcr-1 ST131 
carriers also showed MDR, including to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 
tobramycin, gentamicin and ciprofloxacin. In the PFGE-macrorestriction 
comparison of clinical swine and human ST131, we found high similarities (≥85%) 
between two pig and two human ST131 isolates of virotype D5. Acquisition of 
mcr-1 by this specific clone means an increased risk due to its special feature 
of congregating virulence and resistance traits, together with its spread 
capability. Here we show a potential zoonotic swine source of ST131.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02659
PMCID: PMC6230658
PMID: 30455680