1. Molecules. 2018 Nov 17;23(11):3007. doi: 10.3390/molecules23113007.

DNA Replication: From Radioisotopes to Click Chemistry.

Ligasová A(1), Koberna K(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Institute of Molecular and Translational 
Medicine, Palacký University in Olomouc, Hněvotínská 5, 779 00 Olomouc, Czech 
Republic. anna.ligasova@upol.cz.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Institute of Molecular and Translational 
Medicine, Palacký University in Olomouc, Hněvotínská 5, 779 00 Olomouc, Czech 
Republic. karel.koberna@upol.cz.

The replication of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA are basic processes assuring 
the doubling of the genetic information of eukaryotic cells. In research of the 
basic principles of DNA replication, and also in the studies focused on the cell 
cycle, an important role is played by artificially-prepared nucleoside and 
nucleotide analogues that serve as markers of newly synthesized DNA. These 
analogues are incorporated into the DNA during DNA replication, and are 
subsequently visualized. Several methods are used for their detection, including 
the highly popular click chemistry. This review aims to provide the readers with 
basic information about the various possibilities of the detection of 
replication activity using nucleoside and nucleotide analogues, and to show the 
strengths and weaknesses of those different detection systems, including click 
chemistry for microscopic studies.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules23113007
PMCID: PMC6278288
PMID: 30453631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.