1. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2019 Aug;44(4):481-492. doi: 
10.1007/s13318-018-0531-5.

Conversion from Twice-Daily Prograf(®) to Once-Daily Advagraf(®) in Multi-ethnic 
Asian Adult Renal Transplant Recipients With or Without Concomitant Use of 
Diltiazem: Impact of CYP3A5 and MDR1 Genetic Polymorphisms on Tacrolimus 
Exposure.

Yau WP(1), Loh CW(2), Vathsala A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Science, National University of Singapore, 
18 Science Drive 4, Singapore, 117543, Republic of Singapore. phaywp@nus.edu.sg.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Science, National University of Singapore, 
18 Science Drive 4, Singapore, 117543, Republic of Singapore.
(3)National University Centre for Organ Transplantation, National University 
Hospital, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.
(4)Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Tacrolimus is the mainstay of immunosuppression in 
renal transplantation. Given that once-daily administration improves patient 
compliance, 1:1 dose conversion from twice-daily Prograf® to once-daily 
Advagraf® is recommended. Although cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A5 and multi-drug 
resistance 1 (MDR1) polymorphisms influence tacrolimus concentrations, it is 
unknown if these impact on conversion. This study investigated the change in the 
pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus after conversion from Prograf® to Advagraf® and 
examined the impact of CYP3A5 and MDR1 C3435T polymorphisms on those 
pharmacokinetics.
METHODS: A prospective open-label pharmacokinetic study of 1:1 conversion from 
Prograf® to Advagraf® with or without diltiazem was conducted on 26 stable renal 
transplant recipients. Blood samples were collected over 24 h during each phase, 
tacrolimus concentrations were assayed, and noncompartmental pharmacokinetic 
analysis was performed. All participants were genotyped for CYP3A5*3 and MDR1 
C3435T.
RESULTS: After conversion, without diltiazem, the area under the 
concentration-time curve at steady state from 0 to 24 h after dose 
administration (AUCss, 0-24) was significantly reduced [median 224 
(range 172-366) vs. 184 (104-347) ng·h/mL, p = 0.006, n = 26]. A decrease in 
tacrolimus exposure (median 21%) was only evident among CYP3A5 expressors [227 
(172-366) vs. 180 (104-347) ng·h/mL, p = 0.014, n = 18], not among 
non-expressors [215 (197-290) vs. 217 (129-281) ng·h/mL, p = 0.263, n = 8]. In 
contrast, among CYP3A5 expressors receiving diltiazem, AUCss, 0-24 did not 
change significantly upon conversion [229 (170-296) vs. 221 (123-342) ng·h/mL, 
p = 0.575, n = 10]. An independent effect was not evident for MDR1 C3435T 
polymorphism.
CONCLUSION: The high prevalence of CYP3A5 polymorphism among Asians may lead to 
a significant reduction in tacrolimus exposure with 1:1 dose conversion of 
Prograf® to Advagraf®. These results advocate for CYP3A5 determination prior to 
conversion, and suggest that 1:1.25 conversion should be used for CYP3A5 
expressors and 1:1 conversion for other patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s13318-018-0531-5
PMID: 30471066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]