1. J Vet Sci. 2019 Jan 31;20(1):27-33. doi: 10.4142/jvs.2019.20.1.27.

Development of an oligonucleotide microarray for simultaneous detection of two 
canine MDR1 genotypes and association between genotypes and chemotherapy side 
effects.

Lee JJ(1), Lin HY(1), Chen CA(1), Lin CS(1), Wang LC(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, 
Taiwan.

Canine MDR1 gene mutations produce translated P-glycoprotein, an active drug 
efflux transporter, resulting in dysfunction or over-expression. The 4-base 
deletion at exon 4 of MDR1 at nucleotide position 230 (nt230[del4]) in exon 4 
makes P-glycoprotein lose function, leading to drug accumulation and toxicity. 
The G allele of the c.-6-180Tï¼žG variation in intron 1 of MDR1 (single nucleotide 
polymorphism [SNP] 180) causes P-glycoprotein over-expression, making epileptic 
dogs resistant to phenobarbital treatment. Both of these mutations are reported 
to be common in collies. This study develops a more efficient method to detect 
these two mutations simultaneously, and clarifies the genotype association with 
the side effects of chemotherapy. Genotype distribution in Taiwan was also 
investigated. An oligonucleotide microarray was successfully developed for the 
detection of both genotypes and was applied to clinical samples. No 4-base 
deletion mutant allele was detected in dogs in Taiwan. However, the G allele 
variation of SNP 180 was spread across all dog breeds, not only in collies. The 
chemotherapy adverse effect percentages of the SNP 180 T/T, T/G, and G/G 
genotypes were 16.7%, 6.3%, and 0%, respectively. This study describes an 
efficient way for MDR1 gene mutation detection, clarifying genotype 
distribution, and the association with chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.4142/jvs.2019.20.1.27
PMCID: PMC6351760
PMID: 30481983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.