1. Molecules. 2018 Nov 29;23(12):3136. doi: 10.3390/molecules23123136.

Design of a Novel and Selective IRAK4 Inhibitor Using Topological Water Network 
Analysis and Molecular Modeling Approaches.

Lee MH(1), Balupuri A(2), Jung YR(3), Choi S(4), Lee A(5), Cho YS(6), Kang 
NS(7).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of New Drug Discovery and Development, Chungnam National 
University, 99 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34134, Korea. mhlee89@cnu.ac.kr.
(2)Graduate School of New Drug Discovery and Development, Chungnam National 
University, 99 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34134, Korea. balupuri@cnu.ac.kr.
(3)Graduate School of New Drug Discovery and Development, Chungnam National 
University, 99 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34134, Korea. 
daniel1356@naver.com.
(4)Graduate School of New Drug Discovery and Development, Chungnam National 
University, 99 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34134, Korea. 
swchoi2010@cnu.ac.kr.
(5)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, 1095 Dalgubeol-daero, Dalseo-Gu, 
Daegu 42601, Korea. a-rum925@hanmail.net.
(6)College of Pharmacy, Keimyung University, 1095 Dalgubeol-daero, Dalseo-Gu, 
Daegu 42601, Korea. yscho123@kmgw.kmu.ac.kr.
(7)Graduate School of New Drug Discovery and Development, Chungnam National 
University, 99 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34134, Korea. nskang@cnu.ac.kr.

Protein kinases are deeply involved in immune-related diseases and various 
cancers. They are a potential target for structure-based drug discovery, since 
the general structure and characteristics of kinase domains are relatively 
well-known. However, the ATP binding sites in protein kinases, which serve as 
target sites, are highly conserved, and thus it is difficult to develop 
selective kinase inhibitors. To resolve this problem, we performed molecular 
dynamics simulations on 26 kinases in the aqueous solution, and analyzed 
topological water networks (TWNs) in their ATP binding sites. Repositioning of a 
known kinase inhibitor in the ATP binding sites of kinases that exhibited a TWN 
similar to interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4 (IRAK4) allowed us to 
identify a hit molecule. Another hit molecule was obtained from a commercial 
chemical library using pharmacophore-based virtual screening and molecular 
docking approaches. Pharmacophoric features of the hit molecules were hybridized 
to design a novel compound that inhibited IRAK4 at low nanomolar levels in the 
in vitro assay.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules23123136
PMCID: PMC6321621
PMID: 30501110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.