1. Nat Commun. 2018 Dec 3;9(1):5132. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07519-w.

MTCH2-mediated mitochondrial fusion drives exit from naïve pluripotency in 
embryonic stem cells.

Bahat A(1), Goldman A(1), Zaltsman Y(1), Khan DH(2), Halperin C(1), Amzallag 
E(1), Krupalnik V(3), Mullokandov M(1), Silberman A(1), Erez A(1), Schimmer 
AD(2), Hanna JH(3), Gross A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, 7610001, 
Rehovot, Israel.
(2)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, 7610001, 
Rehovot, Israel.
(4)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, 7610001, 
Rehovot, Israel. atan.gross@weizmann.ac.il.

The role of mitochondria dynamics and its molecular regulators remains largely 
unknown during naïve-to-primed pluripotent cell interconversion. Here we report 
that mitochondrial MTCH2 is a regulator of mitochondrial fusion, essential for 
the naïve-to-primed interconversion of murine embryonic stem cells (ESCs). 
During this interconversion, wild-type ESCs elongate their mitochondria and 
slightly alter their glutamine utilization. In contrast, MTCH2-/- ESCs fail to 
elongate their mitochondria and to alter their metabolism, maintaining high 
levels of histone acetylation and expression of naïve pluripotency markers. 
Importantly, enforced mitochondria elongation by the pro-fusion protein 
Mitofusin (MFN) 2 or by a dominant negative form of the pro-fission protein 
dynamin-related protein (DRP) 1 is sufficient to drive the exit from naïve 
pluripotency of both MTCH2-/- and wild-type ESCs. Taken together, our data 
indicate that mitochondria elongation, governed by MTCH2, plays a critical role 
and constitutes an early driving force in the naïve-to-primed pluripotency 
interconversion of murine ESCs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07519-w
PMCID: PMC6277412
PMID: 30510213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.