1. Curr Protoc Cytom. 2019 Apr;88(1):e54. doi: 10.1002/cpcy.54. Epub 2018 Dec 17.

Flow Cytometry Analysis of Free Intracellular NAD(+) Using a Targeted Biosensor.

Eller JM(1), Stewart ML(2), Slepian AJ(2), Markwardt S(3), Wiedrick J(3), Cohen 
MS(4), Goodman RH(2), Cambronne XA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
Texas.
(2)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon.
(3)Biostatistics and Design Program, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, Oregon.
(4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, Oregon.

Flow cytometry approaches combined with a genetically encoded targeted 
fluorescent biosensor are used to determine the subcellular compartmental 
availability of the oxidized form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+ ). 
The availability of free NAD+ can affect the activities of NAD+ -consuming 
enzymes such as sirtuin, PARP/ARTD, and cyclic ADPR-hydrolase family members. 
Many methods for measuring the NAD+ available to these enzymes are limited 
because they cannot determine free NAD+ as it exists in various subcellular 
compartments distinctly from bound NAD+ or NADH. Here, an approach to express 
the sensor in mammalian cells, monitor NAD+ -dependent fluorescence intensity 
changes using flow cytometry approaches, and analyze data obtained is described. 
The benefit of flow cytometry approaches with the NAD+ sensor is the ability to 
monitor compartmentalized free NAD+ fluctuations simultaneously within many 
cells, which greatly facilitates analyses and calibration. © 2018 by John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cpcy.54
PMCID: PMC6422705
PMID: 30556645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest NAD+ sensors are available 
from Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU) under a material transfer 
agreement with the authors. MLS, MSC, RHG, and XAC are inventors on patent 
application PCT/US15/62003 for the NAD+ sensor.