1. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Dec 13;19(12):4028. doi: 10.3390/ijms19124028.

Peripheral Acid Sphingomyelinase Activity Is Associated with Biomarkers and 
Phenotypes of Alcohol Use and Dependence in Patients and Healthy Controls.

Mühle C(1), Weinland C(2), Gulbins E(3)(4), Lenz B(5), Kornhuber J(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), D-91054 Erlangen, Germany. 
christiane.muehle@uk-erlangen.de.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), D-91054 Erlangen, Germany. 
christian.weinland@uk-erlangen.de.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen, D-45259 Essen, 
Germany. erich.gulbins@uni-due.de.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0558, 
USA. erich.gulbins@uni-due.de.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), D-91054 Erlangen, Germany. bernd.lenz@uk-erlangen.de.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), D-91054 Erlangen, Germany. 
johannes.kornhuber@uk-erlangen.de.

By catalyzing the hydrolysis of sphingomyelin into ceramide, acid 
sphingomyelinase (ASM) changes the local composition of the plasma membrane with 
effects on receptor-mediated signaling. Altered enzyme activities have been 
noted in common human diseases, including alcohol dependence. However, the 
underlying mechanisms remain largely unresolved. Blood samples were collected 
from early-abstinent alcohol-dependent in-patients (n[♂] = 113, n[♀] = 87) and 
matched healthy controls (n[♂] = 133, n[♀] = 107), and analyzed for routine 
blood parameters and serum ASM activity. We confirmed increased secretory ASM 
activities in alcohol-dependent patients compared to healthy control subjects, 
which decreased slightly during detoxification. ASM activity correlated 
positively with blood alcohol concentration, withdrawal severity, biomarkers of 
alcohol dependence (liver enzyme activities of gamma-glutamyl transferase, 
alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase; homocysteine, 
carbohydrate-deficient transferrin; mean corpuscular volume, and creatine 
kinase). ASM activity correlated negatively with leukocyte and thrombocyte 
counts. ASM and gamma-glutamyl transferase were also associated in healthy 
subjects. Most effects were similar for males and females with different 
strengths. We describe previously unreported associations between ASM activity 
and markers of liver damage and myelosuppression. Further research should 
investigate whether this relationship is causal, or whether these parameters are 
part of a common pathway in order to gain insights into underlying mechanisms 
and develop clinical applications.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19124028
PMCID: PMC6320816
PMID: 30551571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.