1. Nat Commun. 2018 Dec 20;9(1):5405. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07769-8.

Murine hematopoietic stem cell activity is derived from pre-circulation embryos 
but not yolk sacs.

Ganuza M(1), Chabot A(1), Tang X(1), Bi W(2), Natarajan S(3), Carter R(3), Gawad 
C(3), Kang G(2), Cheng Y(1), McKinney-Freeman S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
38105, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
TN, 38105, USA.
(3)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
38105, USA.
(4)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
38105, USA. Shannon.McKinney-Freeman@stjude.org.

The embryonic site of definitive hematopoietic stem cell (dHSC) origination has 
been debated for decades. Although an intra-embryonic origin is well supported, 
the yolk sac (YS) contribution to adult hematopoiesis remains controversial. The 
same developmental origin makes it difficult to identify specific markers that 
discern between an intraembryonic versus YS-origin using a lineage trace 
approach. Additionally, the highly migratory nature of blood cells and the 
inability of pre-circulatory embryonic cells (i.e., 5-7 somite pairs (sp)) to 
robustly engraft in transplantation, even after culture, has precluded 
scientists from properly answering these questions. Here we report robust, 
multi-lineage and serially transplantable dHSC activity from cultured 2-7sp 
murine embryonic explants (Em-Ex). dHSC are undetectable in 2-7sp YS explants. 
Additionally, the engraftment from Em-Ex is confined to an emerging 
CD31+CD45+c-Kit+CD41- population. In sum, our work supports a model in which the 
embryo, not the YS, is the major source of lifelong definitive hematopoiesis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07769-8
PMCID: PMC6302089
PMID: 30573729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.