1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Jan 8;116(2):619-624. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1814027116. Epub 2018 Dec 24.

Mutational landscape of primary, metastatic, and recurrent ovarian cancer 
reveals c-MYC gains as potential target for BET inhibitors.

Li C(1), Bonazzoli E(2), Bellone S(2), Choi J(1), Dong W(1), Menderes G(2), 
Altwerger G(2), Han C(2), Manzano A(2), Bianchi A(2), Pettinella F(2), Manara 
P(2), Lopez S(2), Yadav G(2), Riccio F(2), Zammataro L(2), Zeybek B(2), 
Yang-Hartwich Y(2), Buza N(3), Hui P(3), Wong S(3), Ravaggi A(4), Bignotti E(4), 
Romani C(4), Todeschini P(4), Zanotti L(4), Zizioli V(4), Odicino F(4), 
Pecorelli S(4), Ardighieri L(5), Silasi DA(2), Litkouhi B(2), Ratner E(2), Azodi 
M(2), Huang GS(2), Schwartz PE(2), Lifton RP(1)(6), Schlessinger J(7), Santin 
AD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510.
(3)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510.
(4)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Angelo Nocivelli Institute of 
Molecular Medicine, University of Brescia, 25100 Brescia, Italy.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Brescia, 25100 Brescia, Italy.
(6)Laboratory of Human Genetics and Genomics, The Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY 10065.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510 
joseph.schlessinger@yale.edu.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Mar 19;116(12):5829. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1902633116.

Ovarian cancer remains the most lethal gynecologic malignancy. We analyzed the 
mutational landscape of 64 primary, 41 metastatic, and 17 recurrent fresh-frozen 
tumors from 77 patients along with matched normal DNA, by whole-exome sequencing 
(WES). We also sequenced 13 pairs of synchronous bilateral ovarian cancer (SBOC) 
to evaluate the evolutionary history. Lastly, to search for therapeutic targets, 
we evaluated the activity of the Bromodomain and Extra-Terminal motif (BET) 
inhibitor GS-626510 on primary tumors and xenografts harboring c-MYC 
amplifications. In line with previous studies, the large majority of germline 
and somatic mutations were found in BRCA1/2 (21%) and TP53 (86%) genes, 
respectively. Among mutations in known cancer driver genes, 77% were transmitted 
from primary tumors to metastatic tumors, and 80% from primary to recurrent 
tumors, indicating that driver mutations are commonly retained during ovarian 
cancer evolution. Importantly, the number, mutation spectra, and signatures in 
matched primary-metastatic tumors were extremely similar, suggesting 
transcoelomic metastases as an early dissemination process using preexisting 
metastatic ability rather than an evolution model. Similarly, comparison of SBOC 
showed extensive sharing of somatic mutations, unequivocally indicating a common 
ancestry in all cases. Among the 17 patients with matched tumors, four patients 
gained PIK3CA amplifications and two patients gained c-MYC amplifications in the 
recurrent tumors, with no loss of amplification or gain of deletions. Primary 
cell lines and xenografts derived from chemotherapy-resistant tumors 
demonstrated sensitivity to JQ1 and GS-626510 (P = 0.01), suggesting that oral 
BET inhibitors represent a class of personalized therapeutics in patients 
harboring recurrent/chemotherapy-resistant disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1814027116
PMCID: PMC6329978
PMID: 30584090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.