1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2019 Mar;18(3):613-620. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-18-0850. 
Epub 2018 Dec 26.

TGFβ Blockade Augments PD-1 Inhibition to Promote T-Cell-Mediated Regression of 
Pancreatic Cancer.

Principe DR(1)(2)(3), Park A(2), Dorman MJ(3), Kumar S(3), Viswakarma N(3), 
Rubin J(3), Torres C(4), McKinney R(4), Munshi HG(5), Grippo PJ(4), Rana A(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Illinois College of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois. Principe@illinois.edu.
(2)University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(5)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains remarkably lethal with a 5-year 
survival rate of 8%. This is mainly attributed to the late stage of 
presentation, as well as widespread resistance to conventional therapy. In 
addition, PDAC tumors are largely nonimmunogenic, and most patients have 
displayed incomplete responses to cancer immunotherapies. Our group has 
previously identified TGFβ as a crucial repressor of antitumor immune function 
in PDAC, particularly with respect to cytotoxic T lymphocytes. However, 
pharmacologic inhibition of TGFβ signaling has had limited efficacy in clinical 
trials, failing to promote a significant antitumor immune response. Hence, in 
this work, we extend our analysis to identify and circumvent the mechanisms of 
resistance to TGFβ signal inhibition in PDAC. Consistent with our previous 
observations, adoptive transfer of TGFβ-insensitive CD8+ T cells led to the near 
complete regression of neoplastic disease in vivo However, we demonstrate that 
this cannot be recapitulated via global reduction in TGFβ signaling, through 
either genetic ablation or pharmacologic inhibition of TGFBR1. In fact, tumors 
with TGFβ signal inhibition displayed increased PD-L1 expression and had no 
observable change in antitumor immunity. Using genetic models of advanced PDAC, 
we then determined that concomitant inhibition of both TGFβ and PD-L1 receptors 
led to a reduction in the neoplastic phenotype, improving survival and reducing 
disease-associated morbidity in vivo Combined, these data strongly suggest that 
TGFβ and PD-L1 pathway inhibitors may synergize in PDAC, and this approach 
warrants clinical consideration.

©2018 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-18-0850
PMCID: PMC6397698
PMID: 30587556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosure: The authors 
have no conflicts to disclose.