1. Plant Pathol J. 2018 Dec;34(6):514-531. doi: 10.5423/PPJ.OA.04.2018.0062. Epub
 2018 Dec 1.

A New Distinct Clade for Iranian Tomato spotted wilt virus Isolates Based on the 
Polymerase, Nucleocapsid, and Non-structural Genes.

Abadkhah M(1), Koolivand D(1), Eini O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Zanjan, 
Zanjan, Iran.

Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV; Genus Orthotospovirus: Family Tospoviridae) is 
one of the most destructive viruses affecting a wide range of horticultural 
crops on a worldwide basis. In 2015 and 2016, 171 leaf and fruit samples from 
tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) plants with viral symptoms were collected from the 
fields in various regions of Iran. ELISA test revealed that the samples were 
infected by TSWV. The results of RT-PCR showed that the expected DNA fragments 
of about 819 bp in length were amplified using a pair of universal primer 
corresponding to the RNA polymerase gene and DNA fragments of ca 777 bp and 724 
bp in length were amplified using specific primers that have been designed based 
on the nucleocapsid (N) and non-structural (NSs) genes, respectively. The 
amplified fragments were cloned into pTG19-T and sequenced. Sequence comparisons 
with those available in the GenBank showed that the sequences belong to TSWV. 
The high nucleotide identity and similarities of new sequences based on the L, 
N, and NSs genes showed that minor evolutionary differences exist amongst the 
isolates. The phylogenetic tree grouped all isolates six clades based on N and 
NSs genes. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the Iranian isolates were composed 
a new distinct clade based on a part of polymerase, N and NSs genes. To our 
knowledge, this is the first detailed study on molecular characterization and 
genetic diversity of TSWV isolates from tomato in Iran that could be known as 
new clade of TSWV isolates.

DOI: 10.5423/PPJ.OA.04.2018.0062
PMCID: PMC6305171
PMID: 30588225

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest On behalf of all authors, 
the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.