1. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2019 Mar;98:208-220. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.12.026. Epub 2019 Jan 3.

Progress in brain cannabinoid CB(2) receptor research: From genes to behavior.

Jordan CJ(1), Xi ZX(2).

Author information:
(1)Addiction Biology Unit, Molecular Targets and Medications Discovery Branch, 
National Institute on Drug Abuse, Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD, 
21224, USA.
(2)Addiction Biology Unit, Molecular Targets and Medications Discovery Branch, 
National Institute on Drug Abuse, Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD, 
21224, USA. Electronic address: zxi@mail.nih.gov.

The type 2 cannabinoid receptor (CB2R) was initially regarded as a peripheral 
cannabinoid receptor. However, recent technological advances in gene detection, 
alongside the availability of transgenic mouse lines, indicate that CB2Rs are 
expressed in both neurons and glial cells in the brain under physiological and 
pathological conditions, and are involved in multiple functions at cellular and 
behavioral levels. Brain CB2Rs are inducible and neuroprotective via 
up-regulation in response to various insults, but display species differences in 
gene and receptor structures, CB2R expression, and receptor responses to various 
CB2R ligands. CB2R transcripts also differ between the brain and spleen. In the 
brain, CB2A is the major transcript isoform, while CB2A and CB2B transcripts are 
present at higher levels in the spleen. These new findings regarding brain 
versus spleen CB2R isoforms may in part explain why early studies failed to 
detect brain CB2R gene expression. Here, we review evidence supporting the 
expression and function of brain CB2R from gene and receptor levels to cellular 
functioning, neural circuitry, and animal behavior.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.12.026
PMCID: PMC6401261
PMID: 30611802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure/Conflicts of Interest The authors 
have no personal or financial conflicts of interest.