1. Front Psychiatry. 2018 Dec 14;9:664. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00664.
eCollection  2018.

Using Baclofen to Explore GABA-B Receptor Function in Alcohol Dependence: 
Insights From Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Measures.

Durant CF(1), Paterson LM(1), Turton S(1), Wilson SJ(1), Myers JFM(1), 
Muthukumaraswamy S(2), Venkataraman A(1), Mick I(1), Paterson S(3), Jones T(1), 
Nahar LK(3), Cordero RE(3), Nutt DJ(1), Lingford-Hughes A(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychopharmacology Unit, Division of Brain Sciences, Department of 
Medicine, Centre for Psychiatry, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Toxicology Unit, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Brain Science, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Background: The role of GABA-B neurotransmission in addiction has recently 
received increased attention, with clinical trials indicating that baclofen, a 
GABA-B receptor agonist, may reduce alcohol consumption, craving and promote 
abstinence. However, the optimal dose to treat alcohol dependence is unclear 
with patients requesting and tolerating much higher doses of baclofen, compared 
with other clinical uses. We assessed the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics 
(PK/PD) of baclofen to provide insight into GABA-B sensitivity in this patient 
group, relative to controls. Methods: Male healthy volunteers (controls, n = 12) 
and abstinent alcohol dependent individuals (AD, n = 8) received single oral 
doses of baclofen or placebo in a 3-way crossover design. Controls received 
placebo/10 mg/60 mg baclofen in a randomized, double-blind design, AD received 
placebo/60 mg/90 mg baclofen in a single-blind design. PK/PD measures were 
recorded at baseline and multiple time-points up to 6 h post-dosing, including 
plasma baclofen, plasma growth hormone (GH), Subjective High Assessment Scale 
(SHAS) and biphasic alcohol effects scale (BAES). Repeated measures ANOVA 
analysis explored "change from baseline" dose, time, group, and interaction 
effects, t-tests compared peak effects. Results: Dose-dependent effects of 
baclofen on PK and PD measures were observed in both control and AD groups. 
Whilst there were no significant group differences in any baclofen PK parameters 
(t 1/2, t max , C max , AUC), marked differences in PD effects were clearly 
evident. In controls, 60 mg baclofen significantly increased total SHAS and BAES 
scores, and significantly increased plasma GH levels compared with placebo, with 
peak effects at 60-120 min, in line with its PK profile. In AD, 60 mg baclofen 
had limited effects on these parameters; SHAS scores, BAES scores and plasma GH 
levels were significantly blunted compared with controls (significant group*time 
interactions P = 0.0014, 0.0015 and P < 0.0001, respectively). Conclusions: Our 
study shows blunted sensitivity to baclofen in AD relative to controls, with no 
difference in PK suggesting a lower GABA-B receptor sensitivity. This may 
explain why higher baclofen doses are requested and tolerated in the treatment 
of alcohol dependence. Our data has implications for choice of dose in future 
clinical trials in AD and possibly other substances of dependence.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00664
PMCID: PMC6302106
PMID: 30618857