1. Int J Mol Med. 2019 Mar;43(3):1167-1178. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2018.4043. Epub
2018  Dec 31.

miRNA-20b inhibits cerebral ischemia-induced inflammation through targeting 
NLRP3.

Zhao J(1), Wang H(1), Dong L(1), Sun S(1), Li L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050051, 
P.R. China.

The present study was designed to investigate the role of microRNA (miRNA)‑20b 
in the inflammatory response during cerebral ischemia and the underlying 
mechanism following cerebral ischemia. A reverse transcription quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction assay was used to measure the expression of miRNA‑20b, 
and tumor necrosis factor α, interleukin (IL)‑6, IL‑18 and IL‑1β levels were 
measured using ELISA. In addition, the protein expression levels of NOD‑like 
receptor pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3), caspase‑1, IL‑1β and IL‑18 were 
determined by western blot analysis. It was determined that the expression of 
miRNA‑20b during cerebral ischemia was increased compared with the control 
group. The overexpression of miRNA‑20b increased the levels of IL‑1β and IL‑18 
in the cerebral ischemia group through activation of the NLRP3 signaling 
pathway. Conversely, the downregulation of miRNA‑20b suppressed IL‑1β and IL‑18 
levels in cerebral ischemia via suppression of the NLRP3 signaling pathway. 
Additionally, the overexpression of miRNA‑20b increased the levels of adenosine 
5'‑triphosphate (ATP) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the cerebral ischemia 
group, which were decreased following the downregulation of miRNA‑20b. The 
inhibition of NLRP3 decreased the pro‑inflammatory effects of miRNA‑20b in 
cerebral ischemia. Suppression of ATP decreases the pro‑inflammatory effects of 
miRNA‑20b in cerebral ischemia. Suppression of ROS also decreases the 
pro‑inflammatory effects of miRNA‑20b in cerebral ischemia. Collectively, the 
present study provided novel insight into the role of miRNA‑20b upregulation in 
the promotion of inflammation following cerebral infarction, suggesting that the 
miRNA‑20b/NLRP3 axis may be a putative therapeutic target in cerebral ischemia.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2018.4043
PMCID: PMC6365032
PMID: 30628668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]