1. J Pancreat Cancer. 2018 Jun 1;4(1):17-24. doi: 10.1089/pancan.2018.0004. 
eCollection 2018.

Precious Data: Interim Report from the Jefferson Pancreas Tumor Registry.

Yeo TP(1)(2), Lavu H(1), Nevler A(1)(3), Brumbaugh J(1), Vicchairelli D(1), 
Winter JM(1), Brody JR(1), Yeo CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery and the Jefferson Pancreas, Biliary and Related Cancer 
Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Thomas Jefferson University, Jefferson College of Nursing, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(3)The Dr. P. Borenstein Talpiot Medical Leadership Program, Chaim Sheba Medical 
Center, Israel.

Purpose: The Jefferson Pancreas Tumor Registry (JPTR) is a voluntary 
hospital-based registry of persons with pancreas and related periampullary 
cancers, premalignant lesions, and nonaffected family members (NAFMs). The 
ultimate goals of the JPTR are to provide a link between family history, gene 
mutations, and precision medicine therapy, and to identify high-risk NAFMs for 
potential surveillance screening. Methods: The JPTR is an Institutional Review 
Board approved longitudinal epidemiological study housed in the Department of 
Surgery at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital. Individuals who met the 
eligibility criteria and signed informed consent provide information on 
hereditary conditions, family history of cancers, environmental exposures, and 
occupational risk factors. Data are collected using a self-administered 
questionnaire, the electronic medical record, and the molecular analysis of 
tumor specimens. Results: Established in 2008, >725 persons have enrolled in the 
JPTR. The cohort is mostly composed of sporadic pancreas cancer, with 13% of 
enrollees having familial pancreas cancer and a control group comprising 
nonaffected persons. Data from the registry have been utilized to inform 
clinical studies, molecular investigations, and to shed light on and gain 
insight into the lived experience of persons with these conditions. Conclusion: 
The JPTR contains precious qualitative data and is an invaluable repository of 
information about persons with pancreatic and related tumors.

DOI: 10.1089/pancan.2018.0004
PMCID: PMC6145534
PMID: 30631853