1. Oncotarget. 2018 Dec 11;9(97):36975-36992. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.26432. 
eCollection 2018 Dec 11.

Insight into the PTEN - p85α interaction and lipid binding properties of the 
p85α BH domain.

Marshall JDS(1)(2), Mellor P(1), Ruan X(1), Whitecross DE(1), Moore SA(2), 
Anderson DH(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Group, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 
S7N 5E5, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, S7N 5E5, Canada.
(3)Cancer Research, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7N 
5E5, Canada.

The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway plays a key role in regulating 
cell growth and cell survival and is frequently deregulated in cancer cells. 
p85α regulates the p110α lipid kinase, and also stabilizes and stimulates PTEN, 
the lipid phosphatase that downregulates this pathway. In this report, we 
determined that the p85α BH domain binds several phosphorylated phosphoinositide 
lipids, an interaction that could help localize p85α to membranes rich in these 
lipids. We also identified key residues responsible for mediating PTEN - p85α 
complex formation. Based on these experimental results, a docking model for the 
PTEN - p85α BH domain complex was developed that is consistent with the known 
binding interactions for both PTEN and p85α. This model involves extensive 
side-chain and peptide backbone contacts between both the PASE and C2 domains of 
PTEN with the p85α BH domains. The p85α BH domain residues shown to be important 
for PTEN binding were p85α residues E212, Q221, K225, R228 and H234. We also 
verified experimentally the importance of PTEN-E91 in mediating the interaction 
with the p85α BH domain. These results shed new light on the mechanism of PTEN 
regulation by p85α.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.26432
PMCID: PMC6319338
PMID: 30651929

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.