1. Sci Rep. 2019 Jan 17;9(1):198. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-36618-3.

The circadian E3 ligase complex SCF(FBXL3+CRY) targets TLK2.

Correia SP(1), Chan AB(1), Vaughan M(1), Zolboot N(1), Perea V(1), Huber AL(1), 
Kriebs A(1), Moresco JJ(1), Yates JR 3rd(1), Lamia KA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA. klamia@scripps.edu.

We recently demonstrated that the circadian clock component CRY2 is an essential 
cofactor in the SCFFBXL3-mediated ubiquitination of c-MYC. Because our 
demonstration that CRY2 recruits phosphorylated substrates to SCFFBXL3 was 
unexpected, we investigated the scope of this role by searching for additional 
substrates of FBXL3 that require CRY1 or CRY2 as cofactors. Here, we describe an 
affinity purification mass spectrometry (APMS) screen through which we 
identified more than one hundred potential substrates of SCFFBXL3+CRY1/2, 
including the cell cycle regulated Tousled-like kinase, TLK2. Both CRY1 and CRY2 
recruit TLK2 to SCFFBXL3, and TLK2 kinase activity is required for this 
interaction. Overexpression or genetic deletion of CRY1 and/or CRY2 decreases or 
enhances TLK2 protein abundance, respectively. These findings reinforce the idea 
that CRYs function as co-factors for SCFFBXL3, provide a resource of potential 
substrates, and establish a molecular connection between the circadian and cell 
cycle oscillators via CRY-modulated turnover of TLK2.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-36618-3
PMCID: PMC6336870
PMID: 30655559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Papp Correia became an employee at Celgene, 
Inc., after her role in this project was completed. Celgene, Inc., had no 
involvement with or influence on this study, financial or otherwise. The other 
authors declare no competing interests.