1. G3 (Bethesda). 2019 Mar 7;9(3):867-877. doi: 10.1534/g3.118.200782.

Identification of Suppressor of Clathrin Deficiency-1 (SCD1) and Its Connection 
to Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Moorthy BT(1), Sharma A(1), Boettner DR(1), Wilson TE(2)(3), Lemmon SK(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami, 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami, 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, slemmon@miami.edu.

Clathrin is a major coat protein involved in vesicle formation during 
endocytosis and transport in the endosomal/trans Golgi system. Clathrin is 
required for normal growth of yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and in some 
genetic backgrounds deletion of the clathrin heavy chain gene (CHC1) is lethal. 
Our lab defined a locus referred to as " s uppressor of c lathrin d eficiency" 
(SCD1). In the presence of the scd1-v allele ("v" - viable), yeast cells lacking 
clathrin heavy chain survive but grow slowly, are morphologically abnormal and 
have many membrane trafficking defects. In the presence of scd1-i ("i"- 
inviable), chc1∆ causes lethality. As a strategy to identify SCD1, we used 
pooled linkage analysis and whole genome sequencing. Here, we report that PAL2 
(YHR097C) is the SCD1 locus. pal2∆ is synthetic lethal with chc1∆; whereas a 
deletion of its paralog, PAL1, is not synthetic lethal with clathrin deficiency. 
Like Pal1, Pal2 has two NPF motifs that are potential binding sites for EH 
domain proteins such as the early endocytic factor Ede1, and Pal2 associates 
with Ede1 Also, GFP-tagged Pal2p localizes to cortical patches containing other 
immobile phase endocytic coat factors. Overall, our data show that PAL2 is the 
SCD1 locus and the Pal2 protein has characteristics of an early factor involved 
in clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

Copyright © 2019 Moorthy et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.118.200782
PMCID: PMC6404604
PMID: 30679249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]