1. Biosci Rep. 2019 Feb 22;39(2):BSR20181833. doi: 10.1042/BSR20181833. Print
2019  Feb 28.

Metabolomic analysis reveals a protective effect of Fu-Fang-Jin-Qian-Chao herbal 
granules on oxalate-induced kidney injury.

Chen W(1), Liu WR(1)(2), Hou JB(1)(3), Ding JR(1), Peng ZJ(1), Gao SY(4), Dong 
X(4), Ma JH(5), Lin QS(6), Lu JR(7), Guo ZY(8).

Author information:
(1)Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, 
China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Seventh People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 200137, China.
(3)Department of Geriatric Nephrology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 
100853, China.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, 
China.
(5)Guangxi Wantong Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, 16 Dong Erli, South Zhongyao Road, 
Nanning, Guangxi 530003, China.
(6)Proteomics/Mass Spec Facility, Center for Functional Genomics, University at 
Albany, Rensselaer, NY 12144, U.S.A.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Seventh People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 200137, China 
jianraolu@aliyun.com drguozhiyong@163.com.
(8)Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China 
jianraolu@aliyun.com drguozhiyong@163.com.

Nephrolithiasis is one of the world's major public health burdens with a high 
incidence and a risk of persistent renal dysfunction. Fu-Fang-Jin-Qian-Chao 
granules (FFJQC), a traditional Chinese herb formula, is commonly used in 
treatment of nephrolithiasis. However, the therapeutic mechanism of FFJQC on 
kidney stone has still been a mystery. The objective of the present study is to 
explore the therapeutic mechanism of FFJQC on kidney injury and identify unique 
metabolomics patterns using a mouse model of kidney stone induced by a calcium 
oxalate (CaOx) deposition. Von Kossa staining and immuno-histopathological 
staining of osteopontin (OPN), cluster of differentiation 44 (CD44) and 
calbindin-D28k were conducted on renal sections. Biochemical analysis was 
performed on serum, urine, and kidney tissues. A metabolomics approach based on 
ultra-HPLC coupled with quadrupole-TOF-MS (UHPLC-Q-TOF/MS) was used for serum 
metabolic profiling. The immunohistopathological and biochemical analysis showed 
the therapeutic benefits of FFJQC. The expression levels of OPN and CD44 were 
decreased while calbindin-D28k increased after the CaOx injured mice were 
treated with FFJQC. In addition, total of 81 serum metabolites were identified 
to be associated with protective effects of FFJQC on CaOx crystal injured mice. 
Most of these metabolites were involved in purine, amino acid, membrane lipid 
and energy metabolism. Potential metabolite biomarkers were found for CaOx 
crystal-induced renal damage. Potential metabolite biomarkers of CaOx 
crystal-induced renal damage were found. FFJQC shows therapeutic benefits on 
CaOx crystal injured mice via regulation of multiple metabolic pathways 
including amino acids, purine, pyrimidine, glycerolipid, arachidonic acid (AA), 
sphingolipid, glycerophospholipid, and fatty acid.

Â© 2019 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20181833
PMCID: PMC6386768
PMID: 30737304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.