1. Sci Rep. 2019 Feb 11;9(1):1734. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-37584-6.

Early stages of aggregation of engineered α-synuclein monomers and oligomers in 
solution.

Li X(1)(2), Dong C(1)(2), Hoffmann M(2), Garen CR(2), Cortez LM(3), Petersen 
NO(4), Woodside MT(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2G2, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E1, Canada.
(3)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Centre for Prions and Protein 
Folding Diseases, and Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2M8, Canada.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2G2, 
Canada. nilsp@ualberta.ca.
(5)Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E1, Canada. 
michael.woodside@ualberta.ca.

α-Synuclein is a protein that aggregates as amyloid fibrils in the brains of 
patients with Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Small oligomers 
of α-synuclein are neurotoxic and are thought to be closely associated with 
disease. Whereas α-synuclein fibrillization and fibril morphologies have been 
studied extensively with various methods, the earliest stages of aggregation and 
the properties of oligomeric intermediates are less well understood because few 
methods are able to detect and characterize early-stage aggregates. We used 
fluorescence spectroscopy to investigate the early stages of aggregation by 
studying pairwise interactions between α-synuclein monomers, as well as between 
engineered tandem oligomers of various sizes (dimers, tetramers, and octamers). 
The hydrodynamic radii of these engineered α-synuclein species were first 
determined by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy and dynamic light 
scattering. The rate of pairwise aggregation between different species was then 
monitored using dual-color fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy, 
measuring the extent of association between species labelled with different dyes 
at various time points during the early aggregation process. The aggregation 
rate and extent increased with tandem oligomer size. Self-association of the 
tandem oligomers was found to be the preferred pathway to form larger 
aggregates: interactions between oligomers occurred faster and to a greater 
extent than interactions between oligomers and monomers, indicating that the 
oligomers were not as efficient in seeding further aggregation by addition of 
monomers. These results suggest that oligomer-oligomer interactions may play an 
important role in driving aggregation during its early stages.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-37584-6
PMCID: PMC6370846
PMID: 30741954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.