1. PLoS Genet. 2019 Feb 11;15(2):e1007988. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007988. 
eCollection 2019 Feb.

The CIN-TCP transcription factors promote commitment to differentiation in 
Arabidopsis leaf pavement cells via both auxin-dependent and independent 
pathways.

Challa KR(1), Rath M(1), Nath U(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore, India.

Cells in organ primordia undergo active proliferation at an early stage to 
generate sufficient number, before exiting proliferation and entering 
differentiation. However, how the actively proliferating cells are 
developmentally reprogrammed to acquire differentiation potential during organ 
maturation is unclear. Here, we induced a microRNA-resistant form of TCP4 at 
various developmental stages of Arabidopsis leaf primordium that lacked the 
activity of TCP4 and its homologues and followed its effect on growth 
kinematics. By combining this with spatio-temporal gene expression analysis, we 
show that TCP4 commits leaf cells within the transition zone to exit 
proliferation and enter differentiation. A 24-hour pulse of TCP4 activity was 
sufficient to impart irreversible differentiation competence to the actively 
dividing cells. A combination of biochemical and genetic analyses revealed that 
TCP4 imparts differentiation competence by promoting auxin response as well as 
by directly activating HAT2, a HD-ZIP II transcription factor-encoding gene that 
also acts downstream to auxin response. Our study offers a molecular link 
between the two major organ maturation factors, CIN-like TCPs and HD-ZIP II 
transcription factors and explains how TCP activity restricts the cell number 
and final size in a leaf.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007988
PMCID: PMC6386416
PMID: 30742619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.