1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2020 Apr;1466(1):17-23. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14028. Epub 2019
Feb  14.

The marrow stem cell niche in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.

Kaushansky K(1), Zhan H(1).

Author information:
(1)Stony Brook University School of Medicine, Stony Brook, New York.

The hematopoietic niche is composed of endothelial cells, mesenchymal stromal 
cells of several types, and megakaryocytes, and functions to support the 
survival, proliferation, and differentiation of normal hematopoietic stem cells 
(HSCs). An abundance of evidence from a range of hematological malignancies 
supports the concept that the niche also participates in the pathogenesis of 
malignant hematopoiesis, differentially supporting malignant stem or progenitor 
cells over that of normal blood cell development. In 2005, patients with 
myeloproliferative neoplasms were reported to harbor an acquired, activating, 
missense V617F mutation of the cytokine-signaling Janus kinase (JAK)-2, 
JAK2V617F , present in virtually all patients with polycythemia vera and half of 
patients with essential thrombocythemia and primary myelofibrosis. Using both in 
vitro and in vivo methods, several investigators have shown that in addition to 
driving cytokine-independent proliferation in HSCs, JAK2V617F contributes to 
these neoplasms by altering the hematopoietic niche. The role of both 
endothelial cells and megakaryocytes bearing JAK2V617F will be presented, which 
involves altering cytokine production within the niche, resulting in their 
differential support of mutant kinase-bearing stem cells over their normal 
counterparts, and imparting relative radiation resistance to stem cells. The 
clinical correlates of these findings will be discussed, as will their 
therapeutic implications.

Â© 2019 New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.14028
PMCID: PMC6814507
PMID: 30767234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.