1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Jan 31;10:36. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00036. eCollection
 2019.

Design and Assessment of Species-Level qPCR Primers Targeting Comammox.

Beach NK(1), Noguera DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States.

Published PCR primers targeting the ammonia monooxygenase gene (amoA) were 
applied to samples from activated sludge systems operated with low dissolved 
oxygen (DO) to quantify total and clade-level Nitrospira that perform complete 
ammonium oxidation (comammox); however, we found these existing primers resulted 
in significant artifact-associated non-target amplification. This not only 
overestimated comammox amoA copies but also resulted in numerous false positive 
detections in the environmental samples tested, as confirmed by gel 
electrophoresis. Therefore, instead of attempting to quantify comammox 
diversity, we focused on accurately quantifying the candidate comammox species. 
We designed specific and sensitive primers targeting 3 candidate species: 
Candidatus (Ca.) Nitrospira nitrosa, Ca. N. inopinata, and Ca. N. nitrificans. 
The primers were tested with amoA templates of these candidate species and used 
to quantify comammox at the species level in low DO activated sludge systems. We 
found that comammox related to Ca. N. nitrosa were present and abundant in the 
majority of samples from low DO bioreactors and were not detected in samples 
from a high DO system. In addition, the greatest abundance of Ca. N. nitrosa was 
found in bioreactors operated with a long solids retention time. Ca. N. 
inopinata and Ca. N. nitrificans were only detected sporadically in these 
samples, indicating a minor role of these comammox in nitrification under low DO 
conditions.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00036
PMCID: PMC6365651
PMID: 30766515