1. Eur J Immunol. 2019 May;49(5):782-789. doi: 10.1002/eji.201847962. Epub 2019
Mar  1.

Enhancing immunity prevents virus-induced T-cell-mediated immunopathology in B 
cell-deficient mice.

Straub T(1), Pircher H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Immunology, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany.

Hyper-activated or deviated immune responses can result in immunopathological 
diseases. Paradoxically, immunodeficiency represents a frequent cause of such 
immune-mediated pathologies. Immunopathological manifestations are commonly 
treated by immunosuppression, but in situations in which immunodeficiency is the 
basis of disease development, enhancing immunity may represent an alternative 
treatment option. Here, we tested this counterintuitive concept in a preclinical 
model using infection of mice with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). 
Firstly, we demonstrate that infection of B-cell-deficient (B-/- ) but not of 
wild-type (WT) mice with the LCMV strain Docile induced a rapid and fatal CD8+ 
T-cell-mediated immunopathological disease. Similar to WT mice, LCMV-infected 
B-/- mice generated a potent, functional LCMV-specific CD8+ T-cell response but 
exhibited prolonged viral antigen presentation and increased vascular leakage in 
liver and lungs. Secondly, we were able to prevent this virus-induced 
immunopathology in B-/- mice by active or passive T-cell immunizations or by 
treatment with LCMV-specific virus neutralizing or non-neutralizing monoclonal 
antibodies (mAb). Thus, boosting antiviral immunity did not aggravate 
immunopathology in this model, but prevented it by decreasing the formation of 
target structures for damage-causing CD8+ T cells.

© 2019 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201847962
PMCID: PMC6593698
PMID: 30793761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no financial or commercial 
conflict of interest.