1. Bone Res. 2019 Feb 20;7:5. doi: 10.1038/s41413-018-0041-8. eCollection 2019.

Activation of mTORC1 in subchondral bone preosteoblasts promotes osteoarthritis 
by stimulating bone sclerosis and secretion of CXCL12.

Lin C(#)(1)(2), Liu L(#)(1), Zeng C(#)(1), Cui ZK(3), Chen Y(1), Lai P(1)(3), 
Wang H(1), Shao Y(1), Zhang H(1), Zhang R(1), Zhao C(1), Fang H(1), Cai D(1), 
Bai X(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Orthopedics, Academy of Orthopedics-Guangdong Province, The 
Third Affiliated Hospital of Southern Medical University, 510630 Guangzhou, 
China.
(2)3Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shantou Central Hospital, Affiliated 
Shantou Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, 515041 Shantou, China.
(3)2Key Laboratory of Mental Health of the Ministry of Education, Department of 
Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, 
510515 Guangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Bone Res. 2019 Aug 28;7:26. doi: 10.1038/s41413-019-0065-8.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2019 Apr;15(4):190. doi: 10.1038/s41584-019-0200-3.

Increasing evidences show that aberrant subchondral bone remodeling plays an 
important role in the development of osteoarthritis (OA). However, how 
subchondral bone formation is activated and the mechanism by which increased 
subchondral bone turnover promotes cartilage degeneration during OA remains 
unclear. Here, we show that the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 
(mTORC1) pathway is activated in subchondral bone preosteoblasts (Osterix+) from 
OA patients and mice. Constitutive activation of mTORC1 in preosteoblasts by 
deletion of the mTORC1 upstream inhibitor, tuberous sclerosis 1, induced 
aberrant subchondral bone formation, and sclerosis with little-to-no effects on 
articular cartilage integrity, but accelerated post-traumatic OA development in 
mice. In contrast, inhibition of mTORC1 in preosteoblasts by disruption of 
Raptor (mTORC1-specific component) reduced subchondral bone formation and 
cartilage degeneration, and attenuated post-traumatic OA in mice. 
Mechanistically, mTORC1 activation promoted preosteoblast expansion and Cxcl12 
secretion, which induced subchondral bone remodeling and cartilage degeneration 
during OA. A Cxcl12-neutralizing antibody reduced cartilage degeneration and 
alleviated OA in mice. Altogether, these findings demonstrate that mTORC1 
activation in subchondral preosteoblasts is not sufficient to induce OA, but can 
induce aberrant subchondral bone formation and secrete of Cxcl12 to accelerate 
disease progression following surgical destabilization of the joint. 
Pharmaceutical inhibition of the pathway presents a promising therapeutic 
approach for OA treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/s41413-018-0041-8
PMCID: PMC6381187
PMID: 30792936

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.