1. PLoS One. 2019 Mar 21;14(3):e0211093. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211093. 
eCollection 2019.

Expanding the watch list for potential Ebola virus antibody escape mutations.

Patel JS(1)(2), Quates CJ(1), Johnson EL(1), Ytreberg FM(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Modeling Complex Interactions, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, United 
States of America.
(3)Department of Physics, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, United States of 
America.
(4)Institute for Bioinformatics and Evolutionary Biology, University of Idaho, 
Moscow, Idaho, United States of America.

The 2014 outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD) in Western Africa is the largest 
recorded filovirus disease outbreak and led to the death of over 11,000 people. 
The recent EVD outbreaks (since May 2018) in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo has already claimed the lives of over 250 people. Tackling Ebola virus 
(EBOV) outbreaks remains a challenge. Over the years, significant efforts have 
been put into developing vaccines or antibody therapies which rely on an 
envelope glycoprotein (GP) of Zaire ebolavirus (strain Mayinga-76). Therefore, 
one key approach for combating EVD epidemics is to predict mutations that may 
diminish the effectiveness of the treatment. In a previous study we generated a 
watch list of potential antibody escape mutations of EBOV GP against the 
monoclonal antibody KZ52. Molecular modeling methods were applied to the 
three-dimensional experimental structure of EBOV GP bound to KZ52 to predict the 
effect of every possible single mutation in EBOV GP. The final watch list 
contained 34 mutations that were predicted to destabilize binding of KZ52 to 
EBOV GP but did not affect EBOV GP folding and its ability to form trimers. In 
this study, we expand our watch list by including three more monoclonal 
antibodies with distinct epitopes on GP, namely Antibody 100 (Ab100), Antibody 
114 (Ab114) and 13F6-1-2. Our updated watch list contains 127 mutations, three 
of which have been seen in humans or are experimentally associated with reduced 
efficacy of antibody treatment. We believe mutations on this watch list require 
attention since they provide information about circumstances in which 
interventions could lose the effectiveness.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211093
PMCID: PMC6428255
PMID: 30897171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.