1. Exp Ther Med. 2019 Apr;17(4):2632-2640. doi: 10.3892/etm.2019.7272. Epub 2019 
Feb 13.

Sevoflurane exerts protective effects on liver ischemia/reperfusion injury by 
regulating NFKB3 expression via miR-9-5p.

Liao X(1)(2), Zhou S(3), Zong J(1), Wang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The Affiliated Wuxi People's Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214023, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, The 101st Hospital of Chinese People's 
Liberation Army, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214044, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Drum 
Tower Clinical Medical College, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 
210008, P.R. China.

Hepatic ischemia/reperfusion (IR) injury is a critical contraindication of 
hepatobiliary surgery and results in severe liver damage. It is imperative to 
identify underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. In the current study, a rat 
model of liver IR was established to explore the mechanisms of sevoflurane 
during surgical intervention on IR. The detection of cytokines was performed 
using ELISA and reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and 
western blot assays were used to detect mRNA and protein expression levels, 
respectively. The target protein of microRNA (miR)-9-5p was identified by in 
vitro luciferase reporter assay. Cell apoptosis was detected by 
Annexin-V/propidium iodide and TUNEL staining assays. The results demonstrated 
that sevoflurane exerted protective effect against liver IR. Sevoflurane 
administration ameliorated a cytokine storm by decreasing serum levels of 
interleukin (IL)-1 and -6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and improved liver 
function was determined. IR-induced damage was mediated by an increase in 
transcription factor p65 expression and activation of the nuclear factor (NF)-κB 
signaling pathway, which were suppressed by sevoflurane treatment. In situ 
analysis predicted that NFKB3, encoding for p65, may be targeted by miR-9-5p and 
the hypothesis was verified by in vitro reporter assays using wild type and 
mutant sequences of the NFKB3 3'-untranslated region. Furthermore, pretreatment 
of hepatic tissue with a miR-9-5p mimic inhibited IR-associated injury as 
suggested by the decrease in the Suzuki score and decreased serum levels of 
TNF-α, IL-1 and IL-6. The results indicated that sevoflurane protected the liver 
from IR injury by increasing miR-9-5p expression and miR-9-5p may be a potential 
treatment target in IR.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2019.7272
PMCID: PMC6425234
PMID: 30906455