1. Biochemistry. 2019 May 21;58(20):2509-2518. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00106. 
Epub 2019 Apr 12.

A Flow-Extension Tethered Particle Motion Assay for Single-Molecule Proteolysis.

Drabek AA(1), Loparo JJ(1), Blacklow SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology , Harvard 
Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 , United States.

Regulated proteolysis of signaling proteins under mechanical tension enables 
cells to communicate with their environment in a variety of developmental and 
physiologic contexts. The role of force in inducing proteolytic sensitivity has 
been explored using magnetic tweezers at the single-molecule level with 
bead-tethered assays, but such efforts have been limited by challenges in 
ensuring that beads not be restrained by multiple tethers. Here, we describe a 
multiplexed assay for single-molecule proteolysis that overcomes the 
multiple-tether problem using a flow-extension strategy on a microscope equipped 
with magnetic tweezers. Particle tracking and computational sorting of 
flow-induced displacements allow assignment of tethered substrates to singly 
captured and multiply tethered bins, with the fraction of fully mobile, 
single-tether substrates depending inversely on the concentration of substrate 
loaded on the coverslip. Computational exclusion of multiple-tether beads 
enables robust assessment of on-target proteolysis by the highly specific 
tobacco etch virus protease and the more promiscuous metalloprotease ADAM17. 
This method should be generally applicable to a wide range of proteases and 
readily extensible to robust evaluation of proteolytic sensitivity as a function 
of applied magnetic force.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00106
PMCID: PMC6607913
PMID: 30946563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]