1. FEBS Open Bio. 2019 May;9(5):986-995. doi: 10.1002/2211-5463.12633. Epub 2019 
Apr 9.

Axial bonds at the T1 Cu site of Thermus thermophilus SG0.5JP17-16 laccase 
influence enzymatic properties.

Zhu Y(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Zhan J(1)(2), Lin Y(1)(2), Yang X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fermentation and Enzyme Engineering, 
School of Biology and Biological Engineering, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Research Center of Industrial Enzyme and Green Manufacturing 
Technology, School of Biology and Biological Engineering, South China University 
of Technology, Guangzhou, China.

Laccase is a multi-copper oxidase which oxidizes substrate at the type 1 copper 
site, simultaneously coupling the reduction of dioxygen to water at the 
trinuclear copper center. In this study, we used site-directed mutagenesis to 
study the effect of axial bonds between the metal and amino acid residue side 
chains in lacTT. Our kinetic and spectral data showed that the replacement of 
the axial residue with non-coordinating residues resulted in higher efficiency 
(kcat /Km ) and a lower Cu2+ population at the type 1 copper site, while 
substitution with strongly coordinating residues resulted in lower efficiency 
and a higher Cu2+ population, as compared with the wild-type. The redox 
potentials of mutants with hydrophobic axial residues (Ala and Phe) were higher 
than that of the wild-type. In conclusion, these insights into the catalytic 
mechanism of laccase may be of use in protein engineering to fine-tune its 
enzymatic properties for industrial application.

© 2019 The Authors. Published by FEBS Press and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/2211-5463.12633
PMCID: PMC6487685
PMID: 30964606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.