1. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2019 Jul;30(7):1190-1198. doi: 
10.1007/s13361-019-02191-w. Epub 2019 Apr 8.

Standard Proteoforms and Their Complexes for Native Mass Spectrometry.

Schachner LF(1), Ives AN(1), McGee JP(1), Melani RD(1), Kafader JO(1), Compton 
PD(1), Patrie SM(1), Kelleher NL(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, the Chemistry of Life 
Processes Institute, and the Proteomics Center of Excellence, Northwestern 
University, 2170 Tech Dr., Silverman Hall, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA.
(2)Departments of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, the Chemistry of Life 
Processes Institute, and the Proteomics Center of Excellence, Northwestern 
University, 2170 Tech Dr., Silverman Hall, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA. 
n-kelleher@northwestern.edu.

Native mass spectrometry (nMS) is a technique growing at the interface of 
analytical chemistry, structural biology, and proteomics that enables the 
detection and partial characterization of non-covalent protein assemblies. 
Currently, the standardization and dissemination of nMS is hampered by technical 
challenges associated with instrument operation, benchmarking, and optimization 
over time. Here, we provide a standard operating procedure for acquiring 
high-quality native mass spectra of 30-300Â kDa proteins using an Orbitrap mass 
spectrometer. By describing reproducible sample preparation, loading, 
ionization, and nMS analysis, we forward two proteoforms and three complexes as 
possible standards to advance training and longitudinal assessment of instrument 
performance. Spectral data for five standards can guide assessment of instrument 
parameters, data production, and data analysis. By introducing this set of 
standards and protocols, we aim to help normalize native mass spectrometry 
practices across labs and provide benchmarks for reproducibility and 
high-quality data production in the years ahead. Graphical abstract.

DOI: 10.1007/s13361-019-02191-w
PMCID: PMC6592724
PMID: 30963455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]