1. PeerJ. 2019 Apr 2;7:e6683. doi: 10.7717/peerj.6683. eCollection 2019.

LncRNA MIR4435-2HG predicts poor prognosis in patients with colorectal cancer.

Ouyang W(1), Ren L(2), Liu G(2), Chi X(2), Wei H(2).

Author information:
(1)The Second Clinical Medical College, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, Shandong, China.

BACKGROUND: LncRNA MIR4435-2HG is observed in a variety of cancers, while its 
role in colorectal cancer is unknown. We aimed to demonstrate the relationship 
between MIR4435-2HG and colorectal cancer based on The Cancer Genome Atlas 
(TCGA) database.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients with colorectal cancer were collected from TCGA. 
We compared the expression of MIR4435-2HG in colorectal cancer and normal 
tissues with Wilcoxon rank sum test, and logistic regression was used to 
evaluate the relationship between MIR4435-2HG and clinicopathological 
characters. Moreover, Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression was performed to evaluate 
the correlation between MIR4435-2HG and survival rate. Gene set enrichment 
analysis (GSEA) was also conducted to annotate biological function of 
MIR4435-2HG.
RESULTS: MIR4435-2HG level was elevated in colorectal cancer tissues. Increased 
level of MIR4435-2HG was significantly correlated with TNM stage (OR = 1.66 for 
T1/T2 vs. T3/T4; OR = 1.68 for N0 vs. N1/N2), stage (OR = 1.66 for stage 1/2 vs. 
stage 3/4), and carcinoembryonic antigen level before treatment (OR = 1.70 for 
<5 vs. â‰¥5) (all P-value <0.05). High MIR4435-2HG expression had a poorer 
progression-free survival (p = 0.048), and overall survival (OS) (P = 0.028), 
which were validated in the GSE92921 and GSE29621 datasets. MIR4435-2HG 
expression (P = 0.040, HR = 1.955 (95% CI [1.031-3.710])) was independently 
correlated with OS. GSEA demonstrated that the P38/MAPK pathway, the VEGF 
pathway, the cell adhesion molecules cams, the NOD-like receptor signaling 
pathway, the cell surface interactions at the vascular wall, and integrin cell 
surface interactions were differentially enriched in MIR4435-2HG high expression 
phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased MIR4435-2HG might be a potential biomarker for the 
diagnosis and prognosis of colorectal cancer. Moreover, MIR4435-2HG might 
participate in the development of colorectal cancer via the P38/MAPK and VEGF 
pathway.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.6683
PMCID: PMC6450379
PMID: 30972258

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.