1. Pain. 2019 May;160(5):1103-1118. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001488.

Adenosine A3 receptor activation inhibits pronociceptive N-type Ca2+ currents 
and cell excitability in dorsal root ganglion neurons.

Coppi E(1), Cherchi F(1), Fusco I(1), Failli P(1), Vona A(1), Dettori I(1), 
Gaviano L(1), Lucarini E(1), Jacobson KA(2), Tosh DK(2), Salvemini D(3), 
Ghelardini C(1), Pedata F(1), Di Cesare Mannelli L(1), Pugliese AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of NEUROFARBA, University 
of Florence, Italy.
(2)Molecular Recognition Section, Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Saint Louis University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.

Recently, studies have focused on the antihyperalgesic activity of the A3 
adenosine receptor (A3AR) in several chronic pain models, but the cellular and 
molecular basis of this effect is still unknown. Here, we investigated the 
expression and functional effects of A3AR on the excitability of small- to 
medium-sized, capsaicin-sensitive, dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons isolated 
from 3- to 4-week-old rats. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
experiments and immunofluorescence analysis revealed A3AR expression in DRG 
neurons. Patch-clamp experiments demonstrated that 2 distinct A3AR agonists, 
Cl-IB-MECA and the highly selective MRS5980, inhibited Ca-activated K (KCa) 
currents evoked by a voltage-ramp protocol. This effect was dependent on a 
reduction in Ca influx via N-type voltage-dependent Ca channels, as 
Cl-IB-MECA-induced inhibition was sensitive to the N-type blocker PD173212 but 
not to the L-type blocker, lacidipine. The endogenous agonist adenosine also 
reduced N-type Ca currents, and its effect was inhibited by 56% in the presence 
of A3AR antagonist MRS1523, demonstrating that the majority of adenosine's 
effect is mediated by this receptor subtype. Current-clamp recordings 
demonstrated that neuronal firing of rat DRG neurons was also significantly 
reduced by A3AR activation in a MRS1523-sensitive but PD173212-insensitive 
manner. Intracellular Ca measurements confirmed the inhibitory role of A3AR on 
DRG neuronal firing. We conclude that pain-relieving effects observed on A3AR 
activation could be mediated through N-type Ca channel block and action 
potential inhibition as independent mechanisms in isolated rat DRG neurons. 
These findings support A3AR-based therapy as a viable approach to alleviate pain 
in different pathologies.

DOI: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001488
PMCID: PMC6669900
PMID: 31008816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement D.S. is a 
co-founder of BioIntervene, Inc, that licensed related intellectual property 
from Saint Louis University. The remaining authors have no conflicts of interest 
to declare.