1. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2019 Dec;34(1):853-862. doi: 
10.1080/14756366.2019.1576657.

Sesquiterpenoids and 2-(2-phenylethyl)chromones respectively acting as 
α-glucosidase and tyrosinase inhibitors from agarwood of an Aquilaria plant.

Yang L(1)(2), Yang YL(1)(2), Dong WH(1)(2)(3), Li W(1)(2)(3), Wang P(1)(2)(3), 
Cao X(1)(2), Yuan JZ(1)(2)(3), Chen HQ(1)(2)(3), Mei WL(1)(2)(3), Dai 
HF(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Resources of Tropical Crops, Ministry 
of Agriculture , Institute of Tropical Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chinese 
Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences , Haikou , People's Republic of China.
(2)b Hainan Key Laboratory for Research and Development of Natural Products from 
Li Folk Medicine , Haikou , People's Republic of China.
(3)c Hainan Engineering Research Center of Agarwood , Haikou , People's Republic 
of China.

The ethyl ether extract of agarwood from an Aquilaria plant afforded six new 
sesquiterpenoids, Agarozizanol A - F (1-6), together with four known 
sesquiterpenoids and six known 2-(2-phenylethyl)chromones. Their structures were 
elucidated via detailed spectroscopic analysis, X-ray diffraction, and 
comparisons with the published data. All the isolates were evaluated for the 
α-glucosidase and tyrosinase inhibitory activities in vitro. Compounds 5, 7, 8, 
and 10 showed significant inhibition of α-glucosidase with IC50 values ranging 
between 112.3 ± 4.5 and 524.5 ± 2.7 µM (acarbose, 743. 4 ± 3.3 µM). Compounds 13 
and 14 exhibited tyrosinase inhibitory effect with IC50 values of 89.0 ± 1.7 and 
51.5 ± 0.6 µM, respectively (kojic acid, 46.1 ± 1.3). In the kinetic studies, 
compounds 5 and 14 were found to be uncompetitive inhibitors for α-glucosidase 
and mixed type inhibitors for tyrosinase, respectively. Furthermore, molecular 
docking simulations revealed the binding sites and interactions of the most 
active compounds with α-glucosidase and tyrosinase.

DOI: 10.1080/14756366.2019.1576657
PMCID: PMC6495113
PMID: 31010356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]