1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2019 Apr 9;11:73. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00073. 
eCollection 2019.

ABCA7 Risk Genotype Diminishes the Neuroprotective Value of Aerobic Fitness in 
Healthy Older African Americans.

Berg CN(1), Sinha N(1), Gluck MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University-Newark, 
Newark, NJ, United States.

Although the association of ABCA7 risk variants with Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
has been established worldwide, its effect size on the relative odds of being 
diagnosed with AD is significantly higher in African Americans. Across 
ethnicities, two common ABCA7 loci (rs115550680 and rs3764650) have been 
confirmed to increase the risk of AD. While ABCA7 rs115550680 has been linked to 
the development of late-onset AD in African Americans, no association between 
ABCA7 variant rs3764650 and AD has been found in this population. In order to 
elucidate the influence of ABCA7 rs3764650 on AD risk in African Americans, we 
sought to investigate the relationship between this variant, aerobic fitness, 
and cognition. The present study tested the hypothesis that in African 
Americans, ABCA7 rs3764650 confers an indirect risk for AD via its interaction 
with aerobic fitness, a modifiable lifestyle factor known to attenuate 
AD-related neuropathology. In a case-control sample of 100 healthy African 
Americans, we observed that ABCA7 rs3764650 genotype modulates the association 
between aerobic fitness and a cognitive assessment of generalization following 
rule learning. For carriers of the non-risk genotype, higher levels of aerobic 
fitness were significantly associated with fewer generalization errors, while 
carriers of the risk genotype did not show any relationship between aerobic 
fitness and generalization. Our findings imply that ABCA7 rs3764650 risk 
genotype may diminish the neuroprotective effects of aerobic fitness, and, they 
suggest differing risk patterns between cognitive decline and fitness by ABCA7 
genotype. Thus, in African Americans the interactive effects of ABCA7 rs3764650 
and aerobic fitness likely compound overall ABCA7-related AD risk, and may 
contribute to health disparities whereby African Americans are at a higher risk 
for dementia, with double the prevalence of AD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00073
PMCID: PMC6466967
PMID: 31024289