1. Biomedica. 2019 Mar 31;39(1):205-211. doi: 10.7705/biomedica.v39i1.4091.

LEPR polymorphisms and haplotypes in Mexican patients with colorectal cancer.

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Partida M(1), Gutiérrez M, Ayala ML, Macías NM, Alvizo CR, Peregrina J.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Médicas, Centro Universitario de Ciencias de la 
Salud, Universidad de Guadalajara, Puerto Vallarta, Jalisco, México. 
partidamiriam@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Obesity and colorectal cancer could be linked by adipocytokines, 
which are proteins associated with cell proliferation. High levels of the 
adipocytokine leptin promote the development of colorectal cancer through its 
receptor.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the association between c.326A>G and c.668A>G LEPR gene 
polymorphisms and colorectal cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood of 147 
patients with sporadic colorectal cancer and 134 healthy people. Genotypes were 
obtained by PCRRFLP and the association was determined by the odds ratio (OR) 
test using the SPSS™, version 10.0, program. Haplotype frequencies and linkage 
disequilibrium were estimated by the Arlequin, version 3.5, software.
RESULTS: Both polymorphisms were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Only the 
c.326A>G heterozygous genotype revealed an increased risk for colorectal cancer 
development (OR=1.81, 95% CI=1.04-3.16, p=0.04). The AG haplotype showed a 
significant association with colorectal cancer (OR=0.58, 95% CI=0.35-0.96, 
p<0.03). Linkage disequilibrium between the variants was only evident for the 
patients group (r2=0.36).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that AG individuals heterozygous for the 
c.326A>G LEPR variant have a higher risk of colorectal cancer development 
whereas the AG haplotype (c.326A/c.668G) has a protective effect in the Mexican 
population.

Publisher: Introducción. La relación entre la obesidad y el cáncer colorrectal 
podría estar dada por las adipocitocinas, proteínas asociadas con la 
proliferación celular. Los niveles elevados de la adipocitocina leptina 
promueven el desarrollo del cáncer colorrectal a través de su receptor. 
Objetivo. Determinar la asociación de los polimorfismos c.326A>G y c.668A>G del 
gen LEPR con el cáncer colorrectal. Materiales y métodos. A partir de sangre 
periférica, se extrajo el ADN de 147 pacientes con cáncer colorrectal esporádico 
y de 134 personas sanas. La genotipificación se hizo mediante PCR-RFLP y la 
asociación se determinó por la odds ratio (OR) en el programa SPSS™, versión 
10.0. Las frecuencias haplotípicas y el desequilibrio de ligamiento se estimaron 
utilizando el programa Arlequin, versión 3.5. Resultados. Ambos polimorfismos 
estaban en equilibrio de Hardy-Weinberg. Solo el genotipo heterocigoto c.326A>G 
reveló un mayor riesgo de desarrollar cáncer colorrectal (OR=1,81; IC95% 
1,04-3,16; p=0,04). El haplotipo AG mostró una asociación significativa con este 
cáncer (OR=0,58; IC95% 0,35-0,96; p≤0,03) y el desequilibrio de ligamiento entre 
las variantes fue evidente únicamente en el grupo de pacientes (r2=0,36). 
Conclusión. Los resultados sugieren que los individuos heterocigotos con el 
haplotipo AG para la variante c.326A>G en el gen LEPR tenían un mayor riesgo de 
desarrollar cáncer colorrectal, en tanto que el haplotipo AG (c.326A/c.668G) 
tenía un efecto protector en la población mexicana.

DOI: 10.7705/biomedica.v39i1.4091
PMID: 31021558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]