1. BMC Microbiol. 2019 Apr 29;19(1):86. doi: 10.1186/s12866-019-1455-1.

Plasmids of Shigella flexneri serotype 1c strain Y394 provide advantages to 
bacteria in the host.

Parajuli P(1), Rajput MI(1), Verma NK(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Science and Biochemistry, Research School of Biology, 
The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(2)Division of Biomedical Science and Biochemistry, Research School of Biology, 
The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia. 
naresh.verma@anu.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Shigella flexneri has an extremely complex genome with a significant 
number of virulence traits acquired by mobile genetic elements including 
bacteriophages and plasmids. S. flexneri serotype 1c is an emerging etiological 
agent of bacillary dysentery in developing countries. In this study, the 
complete nucleotide sequence of two plasmids of S. flexneri serotype 1c strain 
Y394 was determined and analysed.
RESULTS: The plasmid pINV-Y394 is an invasive or virulence plasmid of size 
221,293 bp composed of a large number of insertion sequences (IS), virulence 
genes, regulatory and maintenance genes. Three hundred and twenty-eight open 
reading frames (ORFs) were identified in pINV-Y394, of which about a half (159 
ORFs) were identified as IS elements. Ninety-seven ORFs were related to 
characterized genes (majority of which are associated with virulence and their 
regulons), and 72 ORFs were uncharacterized or hypothetical genes. The second 
plasmid pNV-Y394 is of size 10,866 bp and encodes genes conferring resistance 
against multiple antibiotics of clinical importance. The multidrug resistance 
gene cassette consists of tetracycline resistance gene tetA, streptomycin 
resistance gene strA-strB and sulfonamide-resistant dihydropteroate synthase 
gene sul2.
CONCLUSIONS: These two plasmids together play a key role in the fitness of Y394 
in the host environment. The findings from this study indicate that the 
pathogenic S. flexneri is a highly niche adaptive pathogen which is able to 
co-evolve with its host and respond to the selection pressure in its 
environment.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-019-1455-1
PMCID: PMC6489325
PMID: 31035948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.