1. Cell Chem Biol. 2019 Jul 18;26(7):980-990.e8. doi: 
10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.03.012. Epub 2019 May 2.

Chemoproteomic Profiling Uncovers CDK4-Mediated Phosphorylation of the 
Translational Suppressor 4E-BP1.

Mitchell DC(1), Menon A(2), Garner AL(3).

Author information:
(1)Program in Chemical Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
USA.
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)Program in Chemical Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
USA; Department of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. Electronic address: algarner@umich.edu.

Recent estimates of the human proteome suggest there are ∼20,000 protein-coding 
genes, the protein products of which contain >145,000 phosphosites. 
Unfortunately, in-depth examination of the human phosphoproteome has outpaced 
the ability to annotate the kinases that mediate these post-translational 
modifications. To obtain actionable information about phosphorylation-driven 
signaling cascades, it is essential to identify the kinases responsible for 
phosphorylating sites that differ across disease states. To fill in these gaps 
we have developed an unbiased, chemoproteomic approach for identifying 
high-confidence kinase-substrate interactions with phosphosite specificity. 
Using this assay, we uncovered the role of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4), a 
clinically validated kinase important for cell-cycle progression, in regulating 
cap-dependent translation via phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor 4E-BP1. 
The discovery of this signaling axis sheds light on the mechanisms by which 
CDK4/6 inhibitors control cell proliferation and constitutes a successful 
example of kinase discovery using an activity-based, kinase-directed probe.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.03.012
PMCID: PMC6642002
PMID: 31056462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.