1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2019 Dec;27(12):1836-1844. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0414-5.
Epub  2019 May 3.

Splice-site variant in ACSL5: a marker promoting opposing effect on cell 
viability and protein expression.

Pérez-Núñez I(1), Karaky M(1), Fedetz M(1), Barrionuevo C(1), Izquierdo G(2), 
Matesanz F(3), Alcina A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Instituto de Parasitología y 
Biomedicina "López Neyra" (IPBLN), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), 18016, Granada, Spain.
(2)Unidad de Esclerosis Múltiple, Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, 41009, 
Sevilla, Spain.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Instituto de Parasitología y 
Biomedicina "López Neyra" (IPBLN), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), 18016, Granada, Spain. lindo@ipb.csic.es.
(4)Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Instituto de Parasitología y 
Biomedicina "López Neyra" (IPBLN), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), 18016, Granada, Spain. pulgoso@ipb.csic.es.

Long-chain Acyl-CoA synthetases (ACSLs) activate fatty acids (FAs) by 
thioesterification with Coenzyme A (CoA), generating FA-CoAs. These products are 
essential for lipid metabolism and carcinogenesis. In previous study, we 
identified an intronic variant rs2256368:A>G, whose G allele promotes exon 20 
skipping in up to 43% of ACSL5 transcripts but its functional relevance is 
unclear. Here, we compared the expression of splice (Spl) and nonsplice (NSpl) 
ACSL5 variants and the effect on cell viability under culture conditions that 
force cells to metabolize fatty acids. We found that lymphoblastoid cell lines 
from 1000 Genomes Project, bearing Spl genotypes, showed a reduced expression of 
total ACSL5 protein due to an inefficient translation of the Spl RNA. These 
cells impaired growth in cultures with phorbol myristate acetate-ionomycin 
(PMA-Io) or medium deprived of glucose, while production of reactive oxygen 
species increased in PMA-Io. Specific ACSL5-isoform transfection in HEK239T 
(kidney), U87 (astroglioma), and HOG (oligodendrocyte) cells showed the Spl 
protein to be the causal factor of cell-growth inhibition, despite its reduced 
protein expression. Our findings indicate that the variant rs2256368:A>G can 
predict a growth inhibitory activity, caused by the Spl isoform of ACSL5 
protein, opposed to the activity of the NSpl. Deep understanding of its 
functioning might have application in metabolic diseases and cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-019-0414-5
PMCID: PMC6871522
PMID: 31053784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.