1. Genes (Basel). 2019 Apr 30;10(5):331. doi: 10.3390/genes10050331.

Post-Translational Modifications of the Mini-Chromosome Maintenance Proteins in 
DNA Replication.

Li Z(1)(2), Xu X(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory for Genome Stability & Disease Control and Carson 
International Cancer Center, Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen 
518060, Guangdong, China. buctlz@hotmail.com.
(2)College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China. 
buctlz@hotmail.com.
(3)Guangdong Key Laboratory for Genome Stability & Disease Control and Carson 
International Cancer Center, Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen 
518060, Guangdong, China. Xingzhi.Xu@szu.edu.cn.

The eukaryotic mini-chromosome maintenance (MCM) complex, composed of MCM 
proteins 2-7, is the core component of the replisome that acts as the DNA 
replicative helicase to unwind duplex DNA and initiate DNA replication. MCM10 
tightly binds the cell division control protein 45 homolog (CDC45)/MCM2-7/ DNA 
replication complex Go-Ichi-Ni-San (GINS) (CMG) complex that stimulates CMG 
helicase activity. The MCM8-MCM9 complex may have a non-essential role in 
activating the pre-replicative complex in the gap 1 (G1) phase by recruiting 
cell division cycle 6 (CDC6) to the origin recognition complex (ORC). Each MCM 
subunit has a distinct function achieved by differential post-translational 
modifications (PTMs) in both DNA replication process and response to replication 
stress. Such PTMs include phosphorylation, ubiquitination, small ubiquitin-like 
modifier (SUMO)ylation, O-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (GlcNAc)ylation, and 
acetylation. These PTMs have an important role in controlling replication 
progress and genome stability. Because MCM proteins are associated with various 
human diseases, they are regarded as potential targets for therapeutic 
development. In this review, we summarize the different PTMs of the MCM 
proteins, their involvement in DNA replication and disease development, and the 
potential therapeutic implications.

DOI: 10.3390/genes10050331
PMCID: PMC6563057
PMID: 31052337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.