1. Haematologica. 2019 Dec;104(12):2400-2409. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2018.200220. 
Epub 2019 May 9.

Somatic variants in epigenetic modifiers can predict failure of response to 
imatinib but not to second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Nteliopoulos G(1), Bazeos A(2), Claudiani S(2)(3), Gerrard G(2)(4), Curry E(5), 
Szydlo R(2), Alikian M(2)(3), Foong HE(3), Nikolakopoulou Z(2)(6), Loaiza 
S(2)(3), Khorashad JS(2)(3), Milojkovic D(2)(3), Perrotti D(2)(7), Gale RP(2), 
Foroni L(2), Apperley JF(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Haematology, Department of Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK 
georgios.nteliopoulos04@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Haematology, Department of Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK.
(3)Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(4)Sarah Cannon Molecular Diagnostics, HCA Healthcare UK, London, UK.
(5)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Ovarian Cancer Action Research Centre, 
Imperial College, London, UK.
(6)Lungs for Living Research Centre, UCL Respiratory, University College London, 
London, UK.
(7)Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore MD, USA.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2019 Dec;104(12):2327-2329. doi: 
10.3324/haematol.2019.231753.

There are no validated molecular biomarkers to identify newly-diagnosed 
individuals with chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia likely to respond poorly 
to imatinib and who might benefit from first-line treatment with a more potent 
second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Our inability to predict these 
'high-risk' individuals reflects the poorly understood heterogeneity of the 
disease. To investigate the potential of genetic variants in epigenetic 
modifiers as biomarkers at diagnosis, we used Ion Torrent next-generation 
sequencing of 71 candidate genes for predicting response to tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors and probability of disease progression. A total of 124 subjects with 
newly-diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia began with imatinib 
(n=62) or second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors (n=62) and were 
classified as responders or non-responders based on the BCRABL1 transcript 
levels within the first year and the European LeukemiaNet criteria for failure. 
Somatic variants affecting 21 genes (e.g. ASXL1, IKZF1, DNMT3A, CREBBP) were 
detected in 30% of subjects, most of whom were non-responders (41% 
non-responders, 18% responders to imatinib, 38% non-responders, 25% responders 
to second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors). The presence of variants 
predicted the rate of achieving a major molecular response, event-free survival, 
progression-free survival and chronic myeloid leukemia-related survival in the 
imatinib but not the second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors cohort. Rare 
germline variants had no prognostic significance irrespective of treatment while 
some pre-leukemia variants suggest a multi-step development of chronic myeloid 
leukemia. Our data suggest that identification of somatic variants at diagnosis 
facilitates stratification into imatinib responders/non-responders, thereby 
allowing earlier use of second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors, which, in 
turn, may overcome the negative impact of such variants on disease progression.

CopyrightÂ© 2019 Ferrata Storti Foundation.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2018.200220
PMCID: PMC6959189
PMID: 31073075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]