1. BMC Infect Dis. 2019 May 22;19(1):458. doi: 10.1186/s12879-019-4079-z.

Genetic and biological characteristics of avian influenza virus subtype H1N8 in 
environments related to live poultry markets in China.

Zhang Y(1), Dong J(1), Bo H(1), Dong L(1), Zou S(1), Li X(1), Shu Y(1)(2), Wang 
D(3).

Author information:
(1)Chinese National Influenza Centre, National Institute for Viral Disease 
Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention; WHO 
Collaborating Center for Reference and Research on Influenza; Key Laboratory for 
Medical Virology, National Health and Family Planning Commission, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Present Address: Public Health School (Shenzhen), Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Chinese National Influenza Centre, National Institute for Viral Disease 
Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention; WHO 
Collaborating Center for Reference and Research on Influenza; Key Laboratory for 
Medical Virology, National Health and Family Planning Commission, Beijing, 
China. dayanwang@cnic.org.cn.

BACKGROUND: Since 2008, avian influenza surveillance in poultry-related 
environments has been conducted annually in China. Samples have been collected 
from environments including live poultry markets, wild bird habitats, 
slaughterhouses, and poultry farms. Multiple subtypes of avian influenza virus 
have been identified based on environmental surveillance, and an H1N8 virus was 
isolated from the drinking water of a live poultry market.
METHODS: Virus isolation was performed by inoculating influenza A-positive 
specimens into embryonated chicken eggs. Next-generation sequencing was used for 
whole-genome sequencing. A solid-phase binding assay was performed to test the 
virus receptor binding specificity. Trypsin dependence plaque formation assays 
and intravenous pathogenicity index tests were used to evaluate virus 
pathogenicity in vitro and in vivo, respectively. Different cell lines were 
chosen for comparison of virus replication capacity.
RESULTS: According to the phylogenetic trees, the whole gene segments of the 
virus named A/Environment/Fujian/85144/2014(H1N8) were of Eurasian lineage. The 
HA, NA, PB1, and M genes showed the highest homology with those of H1N8 or H1N2 
subtype viruses isolated from local domestic ducks, while the PB2, PA, NP and NS 
genes showed high similarity with the genes of H7N9 viruses detected in 2017 and 
2018 in the same province. This virus presented an avian receptor binding 
preference. The plaque formation assay showed that it was a trypsin-dependent 
virus. The intravenous pathogenicity index (IVPI) in chickens was 0.02. The 
growth kinetics of the A/Environment/Fujian/85144/2014(H1N8) virus in different 
cell lines were similar to those of a human-origin virus, 
A/Brisbane/59/2007(H1N1), but lower than those of the control avian-origin and 
swine-origin viruses.
CONCLUSIONS: The H1N8 virus was identified in avian influenza-related 
environments in China for the first time and may have served as a gene carrier 
involved in the evolution of the H7N9 virus in poultry. This work further 
emphasizes the importance of avian influenza virus surveillance, especially in 
live poultry markets (LPMs). Active surveillance of avian influenza in LPMs is a 
major pillar supporting avian influenza control and response.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-019-4079-z
PMCID: PMC6532177
PMID: 31117981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.