1. Harmful Algae. 2019 Apr;84:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.hal.2019.01.011. Epub 2019 Mar 
14.

Rapid and sensitive detection method for Karlodinium veneficum by recombinase 
polymerase amplification coupled with lateral flow dipstick.

Fu M(1), Chen G(2), Zhang C(3), Wang Y(1), Sun R(1), Zhou J(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Marine Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology 
(Weihai), Weihai 264209, PR China.
(2)School of Marine Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology 
(Weihai), Weihai 264209, PR China. Electronic address: chenguofu@hitwh.edu.cn.
(3)School of Marine Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology 
(Weihai), Weihai 264209, PR China; School of Marine Sciences, Ningbo University, 
Ningbo 315211, PR China. Electronic address: zhangchunyun@hitwh.edu.cn.
(4)The Division of Ocean Science and Technology, Graduate School at Shenzhen, 
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, PR China.

The dinoflagellate Karlodinium veneficum that is usually present at relatively 
low cell abundances is a globally-distributed harmful algal bloom-forming 
species, which negatively affects marine ecosystems, fisheries, and human 
health. Hence, an efficient detection platform for the rapid and sensitive 
identification of K. veneficum is highly demanded. In this study, a method 
referred to as recombinase polymerase amplification coupled with lateral flow 
dipstick (RPA-LFD) was developed for the rapid detection of K. veneficum. The 
primers for RPA and the detection probe for LFD were designed to specially 
target the internal transcribed spacer of K. veneficum by molecular cloning and 
multiple alignments of the related sequences. The developed RPA can gain an 
approximately 300 bp specific band from K. veneficum. Successful amplification 
for RPA could be achieved at a temperature range of 35 °C-45 °C. RPA for 30 min 
could produce enough products that could generate clearly visible 
electrophoresis bands and were adequate for subsequent LFD analysis. The RPA 
products can be visually detected by the naked eyes through an LFD after an 
automatic chromatography for 5 min at room temperature. The developed RPA-LFD 
was exclusively specific for K. veneficum and displayed no cross-reactivity with 
other algal species that are commonly distributed along the Chinese coast. In 
addition, the lowest detection limit of RPA-LFD was 10 ng μL-1 of genomic DNA 
and 0.1 cell mL-1, which was 100-fold sensitive than conventional PCR. In 
conclusion, the developed RPA-LFD assay in this study can be used as a rapid and 
sensitive method to monitor K. veneficum in the future.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hal.2019.01.011
PMID: 31128793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]