1. Dev Cell. 2019 Jul 22;50(2):247-255.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.04.034.
Epub  2019 May 23.

Paraxial Mesoderm Is the Major Source of Lymphatic Endothelium.

Stone OA(1), Stainier DYR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung 
Research, Ludwigstrasse 43, Bad Nauheim 61231, Germany; Department of 
Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, BHF Centre of Research Excellence, University 
of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PT, UK. Electronic address: oliver.stone@dpag.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung 
Research, Ludwigstrasse 43, Bad Nauheim 61231, Germany. Electronic address: 
didier.stainier@mpi-bn.mpg.de.

Endothelial cells (ECs), which line blood and lymphatic vessels, are generally 
described to come from the lateral plate mesoderm despite experimental evidence 
for a broader source of origin, including the paraxial mesoderm (PXM). Current 
dogma suggests that following specification from mesoderm, local environmental 
cues establish the distinct molecular and functional characteristics of ECs in 
different vascular beds. Here we present evidence to challenge this view, 
showing that lymphatic EC fate is imprinted during transition through the PXM 
lineage. We show that PXM-derived cells form the lymphatic endothelium of 
multiple organs and tissues, with a more restricted contribution to blood vessel 
endothelium. By deleting Prox1 specifically in PXM-derived cells, we show that 
this lineage is indispensable for lymphatic vessel development. Collectively, 
our data establish lineage history as a critical determinant of EC 
specialization, a finding with broad implications for our understanding of 
vascular development and heterogeneity.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.04.034
PMCID: PMC6658618
PMID: 31130354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.