1. Cell Discov. 2019 May 28;5:29. doi: 10.1038/s41421-019-0101-2. eCollection
2019.

Structural insights into DNA recognition by AimR of the arbitrium communication 
system in the SPbeta phage.

Guan Z(#)(1), Pei K(#)(1), Wang J(1), Cui Y(1), Zhu X(1), Su X(1), Zhou Y(1), 
Zhang D(1), Tang C(2), Yin P(1), Liu Z(1), Zou T(3).

Author information:
(1)1National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement and National Centre of 
Plant Gene Research, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070 Hubei 
China.
(2)2CAS Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance in Biological Systems, State Key 
Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance and Atomic Molecular Physics, and National 
Center for Magnetic Resonance at Wuhan, Wuhan Institute of Physics and 
Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 430071 Hubei Province China.
(3)3College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, 
Wuhan, 430070 Hubei China.
(#)Contributed equally

A newly identified arbitrium communication system regulates the 
lysis-to-lysogeny decision in a Bacillus bacteriophage. This system contains an 
arbitrium hexapeptide as a signal, the cellular receptor AimR, and the lysogenic 
negative regulator AimX. AimR specifically targets the downstream DNA to 
activate aimX gene expression. The arbitrium peptide binds to AimR, inhibiting 
its DNA-binding to promote phage lysogeny. Recently, we and other groups have 
elucidated how arbitrium peptide sensed by AimR. However, the molecular 
mechanisms of DNA recognition by AimR and the regulation of its DNA-binding 
activity by the peptide remain largely unknown. Here, we report the crystal 
structure of the AimR-DNA complex at 2.1 Å resolution. The N-terminal HTH motif 
recognizes the palindromic DNA sequence, buttressed by interactions between 
positively charged residues and the DNA phosphate groups. The DNA-bound AimR 
assembles a more closed dimer than the peptide-bound form. Single-molecule FRET 
and crosslinking assays revealed that the AimR protein samples both open and 
closed conformations in solution. Arbitrium peptide binding induces a 
closed-to-open conformational change of AimR, eliminating DNA targeting. Our 
structural and functional analysis provides new insights into the DNA 
recognition mechanism of AimR and its regulation by the arbitrium peptide in the 
context of phage lysis-lysogeny decisions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41421-019-0101-2
PMCID: PMC6536502
PMID: 31149347

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.