1. Sci Rep. 2019 May 31;9(1):8142. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-44654-w.

Differential binding cell-SELEX method to identify cell-specific aptamers using 
high-throughput sequencing.

Pleiko K(1), Saulite L(2), Parfejevs V(2), Miculis K(3), Vjaters E(3), Riekstina 
U(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Latvia, Riga, LV-1004, Latvia. 
karlis.pleiko@lu.lv.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Latvia, Riga, LV-1004, Latvia.
(3)Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, Riga, LV-1002, Latvia.

Aptamers have in recent years emerged as a viable alternative to antibodies. 
High-throughput sequencing (HTS) has revolutionized aptamer research by 
increasing the number of reads from a few (using Sanger sequencing) to millions 
(using an HTS approach). Despite the availability and advantages of HTS compared 
to Sanger sequencing, there are only 50 aptamer HTS sequencing samples available 
on public databases. HTS data in aptamer research are primarily used to compare 
sequence enrichment between subsequent selection cycles. This approach does not 
take full advantage of HTS because the enrichment of sequences during selection 
can be due to inefficient negative selection when using live cells. Here, we 
present a differential binding cell-SELEX (systematic evolution of ligands by 
exponential enrichment) workflow that adapts the FASTAptamer toolbox and 
bioinformatics tool edgeR, which are primarily used for functional genomics, to 
achieve more informative metrics about the selection process. We propose a fast 
and practical high-throughput aptamer identification method to be used with the 
cell-SELEX technique to increase the aptamer selection rate against live cells. 
The feasibility of our approach is demonstrated by performing aptamer selection 
against a clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) RCC-MF cell line using the 
RC-124 cell line from healthy kidney tissue for negative selection.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-44654-w
PMCID: PMC6544647
PMID: 31148584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.