1. iScience. 2019 Jun 28;16:31-49. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2019.05.014. Epub 2019 May
 15.

Plant Cytosolic Ascorbate Peroxidase with Dual Catalytic Activity Modulates 
Abiotic Stress Tolerances.

Chin DC(1), Senthil Kumar R(1), Suen CS(2), Chien CY(3), Hwang MJ(2), Hsu CH(3), 
Xuhan X(4), Lai ZX(4), Yeh KW(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, 
Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Horticultural Biotechnology, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry 
University, Fuzhou, China.
(5)Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan; 
Institute of Horticultural Biotechnology, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry 
University, Fuzhou, China. Electronic address: ykwbppp@ntu.edu.tw.

Ascorbic acid-glutathione (AsA-GSH) cycle represents important antioxidant 
defense system in planta. Here we utilized Oncidium cytosolic ascorbate 
peroxidase (OgCytAPX) as a model to demonstrate that CytAPX of several plants 
possess dual catalytic activity of both AsA and GSH, compared with the 
monocatalytic activity of Arabidopsis APX (AtCytAPX). Structural modeling and 
site-directed mutagenesis identified that three amino acid residues, Pro63, 
Asp75, and Tyr97, are required for oxidization of GSH in dual substrate 
catalytic type. Enzyme kinetic study suggested that AsA and GSH active sites are 
distinctly located in cytosolic APX structure. Isothermal titration calorimetric 
and UV-visible analysis confirmed that cytosolic APX is a heme-containing 
protein, which catalyzes glutathione in addition to ascorbate. Biochemical and 
physiological evidences of transgenic Arabidopsis overexpressing OgCytAPX1 
exhibits efficient reactive oxygen species-scavenging activity, salt and heat 
tolerances, and early flowering, compared with Arabidopsis overexpressing 
AtCytAPX. Thus results on dual activity CytAPX impose significant advantage on 
evolutionary adaptive mechanism in planta.

Copyright Â© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2019.05.014
PMCID: PMC6542772
PMID: 31146130