1. J Hematol Oncol. 2019 May 31;12(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s13045-019-0738-1.

Mismatch repair deficiency/microsatellite instability-high as a predictor for 
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 immunotherapy efficacy.

Zhao P(1), Li L(2), Jiang X(2), Li Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100050, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100050, China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100050, China. oncologistinbj@163.com.

Immunotherapies have led to substantial changes in cancer treatment and have 
been a persistently popular topic in cancer research because they tremendously 
improve the efficacy of treatment and survival of individuals with various 
cancer types. However, only a small proportion of patients are sensitive to 
immunotherapy, and specific biomarkers are urgently needed to separate 
responders from nonresponders. Mismatch repair pathways play a vital role in 
identifying and repairing mismatched bases during DNA replication and genetic 
recombination in normal and cancer cells. Defects in DNA mismatch repair 
proteins and subsequent microsatellite instability-high lead to the accumulation 
of mutation loads in cancer-related genes and the generation of neoantigens, 
which stimulate the anti-tumor immune response of the host. Mismatch repair 
deficiency/microsatellite instability-high represents a good prognosis in early 
colorectal cancer settings without adjuvant treatment and a poor prognosis in 
patients with metastasis. Several clinical trials have demonstrated that 
mismatch repair deficiency or microsatellite instability-high is significantly 
associated with long-term immunotherapy-related responses and better prognosis 
in colorectal and noncolorectal malignancies treated with immune checkpoint 
inhibitors. To date, the anti-programmed cell death-1 inhibitor pembrolizumab 
has been approved for mismatch repair deficiency/microsatellite instability-high 
refractory or metastatic solid tumors, and nivolumab has been approved for 
colorectal cancer patients with mismatch repair deficiency/microsatellite 
instability-high. This is the first time in the history of cancer therapy that 
the same biomarker has been used to guide immune therapy regardless of tumor 
type. This review summarizes the features of mismatch repair 
deficiency/microsatellite instability-high, its relationship with programmed 
death-ligand 1/programmed cell death-1, and the recent advances in predicting 
immunotherapy efficacy.

DOI: 10.1186/s13045-019-0738-1
PMCID: PMC6544911
PMID: 31151482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.