1. Front Immunol. 2019 May 17;10:989. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00989. eCollection 
2019.

Fluctuating and Geographically Specific Selection Characterize Rapid Evolution 
of the Human KIR Region.

Augusto DG(1), Norman PJ(2), Dandekar R(1), Hollenbach JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, United States.
(2)Division of Biomedical Informatics and Personalized Medicine, Department of 
Immunology, University of Colorado, Denver, CO, United States.

The killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) region comprises a 
fast-evolving family of genes that encode receptors for natural killer (NK) 
cells and have crucial role in host defense. Evolution of KIR was examined in 
the context of the human genome. Gene-content diversity and single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP) in the KIR genes and flanking regions were compared to 
>660,000 genome-wide SNPs in over 800 individuals from 52 populations of the 
human genome diversity panel (HGDP). KIR allelic diversity was further examined 
using next generation sequencing in a subset of 56 individuals. We identified 
the SNP rs587560 located in KIR3DL3 as a marker of KIR2DL2 and KIR2DL3 and, 
consequently, Cen A and Cen B haplotypes. We also show that combinations of two 
KIR2DL4 SNPs (rs35656676 and rs592645) distinguish KIR3DL1 from KIR3DS1 and also 
define the major KIR3DL1 high- and low-expressing alleles lineages. Comparing 
the diversity of the SNPs within the KIR region to remainder of the genome, we 
observed a high diversity for the centromeric KIR region consistent with 
balancing selection (p < 0.01); in contrast, centromeric KIR diversity is 
significantly reduced in East Asian populations (p < 0.01), indicating purifying 
selection. By analyzing SNP haplotypes in a region spanning ~500 kb that 
includes the KIR cluster, we observed evidence of strong positive selection in 
Africa for high-expressing KIR3DL1 alleles, favored over the low-expressing 
alleles (p < 0.01). In sharp contrast, the strong positive selection (p < 0.01) 
that we also observed in the telomeric KIR region in Oceanic populations tracked 
with a high frequency of KIR3DS1. In addition, we demonstrated that worldwide 
frequency of high-expression KIR3DL1 alleles was correlated with virus with 
virus (r = 0.64, p < 10-6) and protozoa (r = 0.69, p < 10-6) loads, which points 
to selection globally on KIR3DL1 high-expressing alleles attributable to 
pathogen exposure.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00989
PMCID: PMC6533848
PMID: 31156615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]