1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2019;17(10):974-989. doi: 
10.2174/1570159X17666190603171901.

Cannabidiol Adverse Effects and Toxicity.

Huestis MA(1), Solimini R(2), Pichini S(2), Pacifici R(2), Carlier J(3), Busardò 
FP(4).

Author information:
(1)Lambert Center for the Study of Medicinal Cannabis and Hemp, Institute of 
Emerging Health Professions, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, 
United States.
(2)National Centre on Addiction and Doping, Istituto Superiore di Sanita, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Unit of Forensic Toxicology (UoFT), Department of Anatomical, Histological, 
Forensic and Orthopedic Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Section of Legal Medicine, Universita Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Currently, there is a great interest in the potential medical use of 
cannabidiol (CBD), a non-intoxicating cannabinoid. Productive pharmacological 
research on CBD occurred in the 1970s and intensified recently with many 
discoveries about the endocannabinoid system. Multiple preclinical and clinical 
studies led to FDA-approval of Epidiolex®, a purified CBD medicine formulated 
for oral administration for the treatment of infantile refractory epileptic 
syndromes, by the US Food and Drug Administration in 2018. The World Health 
Organization considers rescheduling cannabis and cannabinoids. CBD use around 
the world is expanding for diseases that lack scientific evidence of the drug's 
efficacy. Preclinical and clinical studies also report adverse effects (AEs) and 
toxicity following CBD intake.
METHODS: Relevant studies reporting CBD's AEs or toxicity were identified from 
PubMed, Cochrane Central, and EMBASE through January 2019. Studies defining 
CBD's beneficial effects were included to provide balance in estimating 
risk/benefit.
RESULTS: CBD is not risk-free. In animals, CBD AEs included developmental 
toxicity, embryo-fetal mortality, central nervous system inhibition and 
neurotoxicity, hepatocellular injuries, spermatogenesis reduction, organ weight 
alterations, male reproductive system alterations, and hypotension, although at 
doses higher than recommended for human pharmacotherapies. Human CBD studies for 
epilepsy and psychiatric disorders reported CBD-induced drug-drug interactions, 
hepatic abnormalities, diarrhea, fatigue, vomiting, and somnolence.
CONCLUSION: CBD has proven therapeutic efficacy for serious conditions such as 
Dravet and Lennox-Gastaut syndromes and is likely to be recommended off label by 
physicians for other conditions. However, AEs and potential drug-drug 
interactions must be taken into consideration by clinicians prior to 
recommending off-label CBD.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1570159X17666190603171901
PMCID: PMC7052834
PMID: 31161980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]