1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2019 Jun 11;7(1):86. doi: 10.1186/s40478-019-0740-4.

In vivo real-time dynamics of ATP and ROS production in axonal mitochondria show 
decoupling in mouse models of peripheral neuropathies.

van Hameren G(1), Campbell G(2), Deck M(2), Berthelot J(2), Gautier B(2), 
Quintana P(2), Chrast R(3)(4), Tricaud N(5).

Author information:
(1)Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, INSERM U1051, Université de 
Montpellier, 34091, Montpellier, France. gerben.van-hameren@inserm.fr.
(2)Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, INSERM U1051, Université de 
Montpellier, 34091, Montpellier, France.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, INSERM U1051, Université de 
Montpellier, 34091, Montpellier, France. nicolas.tricaud@inserm.fr.

Erratum in
    Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2019 Aug 14;7(1):131. doi: 
10.1186/s40478-019-0784-5.

Mitochondria are critical for the function and maintenance of myelinated axons 
notably through Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production. A direct by-product of 
this ATP production is reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are highly 
deleterious for neurons. While ATP shortage and ROS levels increase are involved 
in several neurodegenerative diseases, it is still unclear whether the real-time 
dynamics of both ATP and ROS production in axonal mitochondria are altered by 
axonal or demyelinating neuropathies. To answer this question, we imaged and 
quantified mitochondrial ATP and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in resting or 
stimulated peripheral nerve myelinated axons in vivo, using genetically-encoded 
fluorescent probes, two-photon time-lapse and CARS imaging. We found that ATP 
and H2O2 productions are intrinsically higher in nodes of Ranvier even in 
resting conditions. Axonal firing increased both ATP and H2O2 productions but 
with different dynamics: ROS production peaked shortly and transiently after the 
stimulation while ATP production increased gradually for a longer period of 
time. In neuropathic MFN2R94Q mice, mimicking Charcot-Marie-Tooth 2A disease, 
defective mitochondria failed to upregulate ATP production following axonal 
activity. However, elevated H2O2 production was largely sustained. Finally, 
inducing demyelination with lysophosphatidylcholine resulted in a reduced level 
of ATP while H2O2 level soared. Taken together, our results suggest that ATP and 
ROS productions are decoupled under neuropathic conditions, which may compromise 
axonal function and integrity.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-019-0740-4
PMCID: PMC6558672
PMID: 31186069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.