1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2019 Aug;57:52-58. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2019.06.006.
Epub  2019 Jun 8.

Connections between metabolism and epigenetics in cancers.

Thakur C(1), Chen F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy 
and Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 259 Mack Avenue, Detroit, MI, 
48201, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy 
and Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 259 Mack Avenue, Detroit, MI, 
48201, USA. Electronic address: fchen@wayne.edu.

In the past half century, our version on cancer, from tumor initiation, growth, 
to metastasis, is dominated by genetic mutation. The importance of metabolism 
and epigenetics was not recognized until most recently. Extensive cell 
proliferation is one of the hallmarks of cancers. To support the energetic and 
anabolic demands of enhanced proliferation, tumors reprogram the pathways of 
nutrient procurement and metabolism. In this context, a new link between 
metabolic alterations and cancer progression has been unraveled over the last 
decade by the studies conducted in the area of cancer cell metabolism. Cancer 
cells are known to alter their metabolic profile during the course of 
tumorigenesis and metastasis thereby exhibiting a tightly regulated program of 
metabolic plasticity. Noteworthy, certain metabolic alteration are known to 
occur at the epigenetic level, thus making epigenetics and metabolism highly 
interwoven in a reciprocal manner. Metabolites that are generated during 
metabolic pathways, such as in glycolytic cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, 
serve as cofactors or substrates for the enzymatic reactions that catalyze the 
epigenetic modifications and transcriptional regulation. Several studies also 
indicate that the epigenome is sensitive to cellular metabolism. Since many of 
the metabolic alterations and consequently aberrated epigenetic regulation are 
common to a wide range of cancer types, they serve as promising targets for 
anti-cancer therapies. Here we discuss the latest findings in cancer cell 
metabolism, elucidating the major anabolic, catabolic and energetic demands 
required for sustaining cancer growth, and the influence of altered metabolism 
on epigenetics and vice versa. A comprehensive research pertaining to 
metabolomic profiling and epigenome interactors/mediators in malignant 
neoplasias is imperative in deciphering the potential targets that can be 
exploited for the development of robust anti-cancer therapies.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2019.06.006
PMCID: PMC6690786
PMID: 31185282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]