1. J Immunol Res. 2019 Apr 30;2019:8063983. doi: 10.1155/2019/8063983.
eCollection  2019.

Analysis of Genetic Variation in CD40 and CD40L: Relationship with mRNA Relative 
Expression and Soluble Proteins in Acute Coronary Syndrome.

Martínez-Fernández DE(1)(2), Padilla-Gutiérrez JR(1), Casillas-Muñoz F(1)(3), 
Valdés-Alvarado E(1), Parra-Reyna B(1)(3), Aceves-Ramírez M(1)(3), Muñoz-Valle 
JF(1), Zalapa Flores U(4), Chávez Herrera JC(4), Valle Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias Biomédicas (IICB), Centro 
Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud (CUCS), Universidad de Guadalajara (UdeG), 
Sierra Mojada #950, Colonia Independencia, C.P, 44340 Guadalajara, Jalisco, 
Mexico.
(2)Doctorado en Ciencias Biomédicas, Centro Universitario de Ciencias de la 
Salud (CUCS), Universidad de Guadalajara (UdeG), Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.
(3)Doctorado en Genética Humana, Centro Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud 
(CUCS), Universidad de Guadalajara (UdeG), Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.
(4)Especialidad en Cardiología, Unidad Médica de Alta Especialidad, Centro 
Médico Nacional de Occidente (CMNO), Departamento de Cardiología, Instituto 
Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMSS), Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.

Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) can be triggered by the presence of inflammatory 
factors which promote the activation of immune cells by costimulatory molecules 
such as CD40 and its ligand CD40L. Environmental and genetic factors are 
involved in the etiology of the ACS. The aim of this study was to explore the 
gene and protein expression associated with CD40 and CD40L genetic variants in 
ACS patients from the western Mexican population. A total of 620 individuals 
from western Mexico were recruited: 320 ACS patients and 300 individuals without 
a history of ischemic cardiopathy were evaluated. The genotype was determined 
using TaqMan SNP genotyping assays. CD40 and CD40L expressions at the mRNA level 
were quantified using TaqMan Gene Expression Assays. Soluble protein isoforms 
were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. We did not find evidence of 
association between CD40 (rs1883832, rs4810485, and rs11086998) and CD40L 
(rs3092952 and rs3092920) genetic variants and susceptibility to ACS, although 
rs1883832 and rs4810485 were significantly associated with high sCD40 plasma 
levels. Plasma levels of sCD40L can be affected by gender and the clinical 
spectrum of acute coronary syndrome. Our results do not suggest a functional 
role of CD40 and CD40L genetic variants in ACS. However, they could reflect the 
inflammatory process and platelet activation in ACS patients, even when they are 
under pharmacological therapy. Due to the important roles of the CD40-CD40L 
system in the pathogenesis of ACS, longitudinal studies are required to 
determine if soluble levels of CD40 and CD40L could be clinically useful markers 
of a recurrent cardiovascular event after an ACS.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/8063983
PMCID: PMC6515173
PMID: 31183392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]