1. FASEB J. 2019 Aug;33(8):9030-9043. doi: 10.1096/fj.201800263RR. Epub 2019 Jun 
14.

Liver disease-associated keratin 8 and 18 mutations modulate keratin acetylation 
and methylation.

Jang KH(1), Yoon HN(1), Lee J(1), Yi H(1), Park SY(2), Lee SY(1), Lim Y(1), Lee 
HJ(1), Cho JW(1), Paik YK(1), Hancock WS(3), Ku NO(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Program of Integrated OMICS for Biomedical Science, 
Graduate School, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Cell Biology and Metabolism Program, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Barnett Institute and Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, 
Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Bio-Convergence Integrated Science and Engineering Division, 
Underwood International College, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea.

Keratin 8 (K8) and keratin 18 (K18) are the intermediate filament proteins whose 
phosphorylation/transamidation associate with their aggregation in Mallory-Denk 
bodies found in patients with various liver diseases. However, the functions of 
other post-translational modifications in keratins related to liver diseases 
have not been fully elucidated. Here, using a site-specific mutation assay 
combined with nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, we identified 
K8-Lys108 and K18-Lys187/426 as acetylation sites, and K8-Arg47 and K18-Arg55 as 
methylation sites. Keratin mutation (Arg-to-Lys/Ala) at the methylation sites, 
but not the acetylation sites, led to decreased stability of the keratin 
protein. We compared keratin acetylation/methylation in liver disease-associated 
keratin variants. The acetylation of K8 variants increased or decreased to 
various extents, whereas the methylation of K18-del65-72 and K18-I150V variants 
increased. Notably, the highly acetylated/methylated K18-I150V variant was less 
soluble and exhibited unusually prolonged protein stability, which suggests that 
additional acetylation of highly methylated keratins has a synergistic effect on 
prolonged stability. Therefore, the different levels of acetylation/methylation 
of the liver disease-associated variants regulate keratin protein stability. 
These findings extend our understanding of how disease-associated mutations in 
keratins modulate keratin acetylation and methylation, which may contribute to 
disease pathogenesis.-Jang, K.-H., Yoon, H.-N., Lee, J., Yi, H., Park, S.-Y., 
Lee, S.-Y., Lim, Y., Lee, H.-J., Cho, J.-W., Paik, Y.-K., Hancock, W. S., Ku, 
N.-O. Liver disease-associated keratin 8 and 18 mutations modulate keratin 
acetylation and methylation.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201800263RR
PMCID: PMC6988862
PMID: 31199680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This work was supported by the Korean Ministry 
of Education, Science, and Technology Grants 2016R1A2B4012808 and 
2018R1D1A1A02086060, the Yonsei University Research Fund 2018-22-0072 (to 
N.-O.K.), and the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry 
of Science and Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Grant 
NRF-2016R1A5A1010764 (to J.-W.C.). The authors declare no conflicts of interest.