1. PLoS One. 2019 Jun 24;14(6):e0218474. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218474. 
eCollection 2019.

Biochemical characterization of the Helicobacter pylori bactofilin-homolog 
HP1542.

Holtrup S(1)(2), Heimerl T(1)(3), Linne U(2), Altegoer F(1)(2), Noll F(2), 
Waidner B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)LOEWE Center for Synthetic Microbiology, Philipps-Universität, Marburg, 
Germany.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry, Philipps-Universität, Marburg, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Biology, Philipps-Universität, Marburg, Germany.

The human pathogen Helicobacter pylori is known for its colonization of the 
upper digestive system, where it escapes the harsh acidic environment by hiding 
in the mucus layer. One factor promoting this colonization is the helical cell 
shape of H. pylori. Among shape determining proteins are cytoskeletal elements 
like the recently discovered bactofilins. Bactofilins constitute a widespread 
family of polymer-forming bacterial proteins whose biology is still poorly 
investigated. Here we describe the first biochemical analysis of the bactofilin 
HP1542 of H. pylori reference strain 26695. Purified HP1542 forms sheet-like 2D 
crystalline assemblies, which clearly depend on a natively structured 
C-terminus. Polymerization properties and protein stability were investigated. 
Additionally, we also could demarcate HP1542 from amyloid proteins that share 
similarities with the bactofilin DUF domain. By using zonal centrifugation of 
total H. pylori cell lysates and immunfluorescence analysis we revealed 
peripheral membrane association of HP1542 mostly pronounced near mid-cell. 
Interestingly our results indicate that H. pylori bactofilin does not contribute 
to cell wall stability. This study might act as a starting point for biophysical 
studies of the H. pylori bactofilin biology as well as for the investigation of 
bactofilin cell physiology in this organism. Importantly, this study is the 
first biochemical analysis of a bactofilin in a human pathogen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218474
PMCID: PMC6590870
PMID: 31233532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.