1. Front Genet. 2019 Jun 11;10:550. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00550. eCollection 
2019.

The Effect of Genetic Variation on the Placental Transcriptome in Humans.

Kikas T(1), Rull K(1)(2)(3), Beaumont RN(4), Freathy RM(4), Laan M(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Research Group, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational 
Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(2)Women's Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(4)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical 
School, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.

The knowledge of genetic variants shaping human placental transcriptome is 
limited and they are not cataloged in the Genotype-Tissue Expression project. So 
far, only one whole genome analysis of placental expression quantitative trait 
loci (eQTLs) has been published by Peng et al. (2017) with no external 
independent validation. We report the second study on the landscape of placental 
eQTLs. The study aimed to generate a high-confidence list of placental cis-eQTLs 
and to investigate their potential functional implications. Analysis of 
cis-eQTLs (±100 kbp from the gene) utilized 40 placental RNA sequencing and 
respective whole genome genotyping datasets. The identified 199 placental 
cis-eSNPs represented 88 independent eQTL signals (FDR < 5%). The most 
significant placental eQTLs (FDR < 10-5) modulated the expression of ribosomal 
protein RPL9, transcription factor ZSCAN9 and aminopeptidase ERAP2. The analysis 
confirmed 50 eSNP-eGenes pairs reported by Peng et al. (2017) and thus, can be 
claimed as robust placental eQTL signals. The study identified also 13 novel 
placental eGenes. Among these, ZSCAN9 is modulated by several eSNPs 
(experimentally validated: rs1150707) that have been also shown to affect the 
methylation level of genes variably escaping X-chromosomal inactivation. The 
identified 63 placental eGenes exhibited mostly mixed or ubiquitous expression. 
Functional enrichment analysis highlighted 35 Gene Ontology categories with the 
top ranking pathways "ruffle membrane" (FDR = 1.81 × 10-2) contributing to the 
formation of motile cell surface and "ATPase activity, coupled" (FDR = 2.88 × 
10-2), critical for the membrane transport. Placental eGenes were also 
significantly enriched in pathways implicated in development, signaling and 
immune function. However, this study was not able to confirm a significant 
overrepresentation of genome-wide association studies top hits among the 
placental eSNP and eGenes, reported by Peng et al. (2017). The identified eSNPs 
were further analyzed in association with newborn and pregnancy traits. In the 
discovery step, a suggestive association was detected between the eQTL of ALPG 
(rs11678251) and reduced placental, newborn's and infant's weight. Meta-analysis 
across REPROMETA, HAPPY PREGNANCY, ALSPAC cohorts (n = 6830) did not replicate 
these findings. In summary, the study emphasizes the role of genetic variation 
in driving the transcriptome profile of the human placenta and the importance to 
explore further its functional implications.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00550
PMCID: PMC6581026
PMID: 31244887