1. J Med Chem. 2019 Jul 25;62(14):6615-6629. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.9b00454. 
Epub 2019 Jul 12.

De-Novo Design of Cereblon (CRBN) Effectors Guided by Natural Hydrolysis 
Products of Thalidomide Derivatives.

Heim C(1), Pliatsika D(2), Mousavizadeh F(2), Bär K(1), Hernandez Alvarez B(1), 
Giannis A(2), Hartmann MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Protein Evolution , Max Planck Institute for Developmental 
Biology , Max-Planck-Ring 5 , 72076 Tübingen , Germany.
(2)Faculty for Chemistry und Mineralogy, Institute of Organic Chemistry , 
University of Leipzig , Johannisallee 29 , 04103 Leipzig , Germany.

Targeted protein degradation via cereblon (CRBN), a substrate receptor of an E3 
ubiquitin ligase complex, is an increasingly important strategy in various 
clinical settings, in which the substrate specificity of CRBN is altered via the 
binding of small-molecule effectors. To date, such effectors are derived from 
thalidomide and confer a broad substrate spectrum that is far from being fully 
characterized. Here, we employed a rational and modular approach to design novel 
and minimalistic CRBN effectors. In this approach, we took advantage of the 
binding modes of hydrolyzed metabolites of several thalidomide-derived 
effectors, which we elucidated via crystallography. These yielded key insights 
for the optimization of the minimal core binding moiety and its linkage to a 
chemical moiety that imparts substrate specificity. Based on this scaffold, we 
present a first active de-novo CRBN effector that is able to degrade the 
neo-substrate IKZF3 in the cell culture.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.9b00454
PMCID: PMC6750895
PMID: 31251063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.