1. Life Sci Alliance. 2019 Jul 2;2(4):e201900443. doi: 10.26508/lsa.201900443. 
Print 2019 Aug.

De novo prediction of cell-type complexity in single-cell RNA-seq and tumor 
microenvironments.

Woo J(1)(2), Winterhoff BJ(2)(3), Starr TK(2)(3), Aliferis C(1), Wang J(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 
USA.
(2)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's Health, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(4)Institute for Health Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 
USA wangjh@umn.edu.

Recent single-cell transcriptomic studies revealed new insights into cell-type 
heterogeneities in cellular microenvironments unavailable from bulk studies. A 
significant drawback of currently available algorithms is the need to use 
empirical parameters or rely on indirect quality measures to estimate the degree 
of complexity, i.e., the number of subgroups present in the sample. We fill this 
gap with a single-cell data analysis procedure allowing for unambiguous 
assessments of the depth of heterogeneity in subclonal compositions supported by 
data. Our approach combines nonnegative matrix factorization, which takes 
advantage of the sparse and nonnegative nature of single-cell RNA count data, 
with Bayesian model comparison enabling de novo prediction of the depth of 
heterogeneity. We show that the method predicts the correct number of subgroups 
using simulated data, primary blood mononuclear cell, and pancreatic cell data. 
We applied our approach to a collection of single-cell tumor samples and found 
two qualitatively distinct classes of cell-type heterogeneity in cancer 
microenvironments.

Â© 2019 Woo et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.201900443
PMCID: PMC6607449
PMID: 31266885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.