1. Hum Pathol. 2019 Oct;92:10-17. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2019.06.005. Epub 2019
Jun  30.

Clear cell carcinoma of the endometrium: an immunohistochemical and molecular 
analysis of 45 cases.

Zannoni GF(1), Santoro A(2), Angelico G(2), Spadola S(2), Arciuolo D(2), Valente 
M(2), Inzani F(2), Pettinato A(3), Vatrano S(3), Fanfani F(4), Scambia G(5), 
Fraggetta F(3).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento Scienze della Salute della Donna, del Bambino e di Sanità 
Pubblica, Unità di Gineco-patologia e Patologia Mammaria, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, 00168, Rome, Italy; Istituto di Anatomia 
Patologica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 00168, Rome, Italy. Electronic 
address: gianfranco.zannoni@unicatt.it.
(2)Dipartimento Scienze della Salute della Donna, del Bambino e di Sanità 
Pubblica, Unità di Gineco-patologia e Patologia Mammaria, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, 00168, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Pathology, Cannizzaro Hospital, 9510, Catania, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento Scienze della Salute della Donna, del Bambino e di Sanità 
Pubblica, Unità di Ginecologia Oncologica, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario 
A. Gemelli IRCCS, 00168, Rome, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento Scienze della Salute della Donna, del Bambino e di Sanità 
Pubblica, Unità di Ginecologia Oncologica, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario 
A. Gemelli IRCCS, 00168, Rome, Italy; Istituto di Clinica Ostetrica e 
Ginecologica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 00168 Rome, Italy.

The aim of the present paper is to study a cohort of pure selected endometrial 
clear cell carcinomas (ECCCs) from an immunohistochemical and molecular 
perspective to provide new data about the molecular profile of this disease. In 
detail, 45 consecutive patients with a proven diagnosis of pure ECCC, according 
to World Health Organization criteria, were included into the study. We 
determined the incidence of KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA mutations as well as the 
immunohistochemical expression of mismatch repair (MMR) proteins (MLH1, MSH2, 
MSH6, PMS2), estrogen, progesterone receptors, p16, and p53. Immunohistochemical 
analyses for α-methylacyl-coenzyme-A racemase and Napsin A were performed to 
support the diagnosis of ECC. All cases were positive for at least 1 of the 2 
markers. In detail, 34 of 45 (75.5%) cases were positive for 
α-methylacyl-coenzyme-A racemase, and 40 of 45 (88.8%) cases showed positive 
staining for Napsin A. All selected cases exhibited negative immunostain for 
estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor, a "patchy" immunostain for p16, and 
a "wild-type" staining pattern for p53. Fifteen patients (15/45; 33.3%) showed 
loss of 1 or more MMR proteins by immunohistochemistry. Seven patients showed 
dual loss of MSH2 and MSH6, 4 patients (8.8%) showed isolated loss of MSH6, and 
the remaining 4 patients showed isolated loss of PMS2, respectively. 
Pyrosequencing analysis revealed the presence of 5 of 45 mutations (11%) at 
codon 12 in exon 2 of KRAS (3/5 p.G12D, 60%; 2/5 p. G12V, 40%) and 5 of 45 (11%) 
mutations in PIK3CA gene, of which 3 of 5 (60%) were in exon 9 of PIK3CA (2 
p.E542K and 1 p.Q546K) and 2 of 5 (40%) were in exon 20 (p.H1047R). Two 
synchronous mutations affecting exon 9 of PIK3CA (p.Q546K) and exon 2, codon 12 
of KRAS (p.G12D) were found. No mutations were detected in the hot spot region 
of BRAF. In conclusion, we provided detailed immunohistochemical and molecular 
data in a series of ECC, demonstrating a high incidence (33%) of MMR 
deficiencies detected by immunohistochemistry as well as a synchronous mutation 
affecting PIK3CA and KRAS genes. A more extensive interrogation of the genomic 
features of a much larger series of clear cell carcinomas will be required to 
define the genomic landscape of this subtype and to determine whether there are 
molecular alterations that are unique to, or significantly enriched in, clear 
cell tumors compared to other subtypes.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2019.06.005
PMID: 31269413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]