1. Front Pediatr. 2019 Jun 19;7:253. doi: 10.3389/fped.2019.00253. eCollection 
2019.

Early Lung Function and Future Asthma.

Sánchez-Solís M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, 
Murcia, Spain.
(2)Biomedical Research Institute of Murcia (IMIB), Palmar, Spain.
(3)Department of Surgery, Pediatric, Obstetric and Gynaecology, University of 
Murcia, Murcia, Spain.

Asthmatic adults with lower lung function have been described as having had this 
worse condition early in life. Lung function is reduced in children with 
persistent asthma and continues low throughout adult life. The challenge is to 
know if impaired lung function is a risk factor of asthma, as a consequence of 
special congenital characteristics of the airways, or whether asthmatic patients 
suffer a loss in lung function as early as 9 years of age as a consequence of 
very precocious remodeling of the airways. The loss is so early in life that it 
is probably a congenital characteristic, however there is not a cut-off point 
with clinical interest to predict risk of asthma later in life. There are 
contradictory results regarding whether asthmatic children lose lung function as 
a consequence of the airway remodeling by the illness itself. This aspect seemed 
to be shown for children at risk-the offspring of asthmatic mothers. The early 
BHR seems to be very frequent even in healthy infants, but is probably not a 
risk factor for asthma years later; except in the offspring of asthmatic mothers 
in which it has been shown. There are still many uncertainties in this field; 
so, more research is needed in order to better understand the pathophysiology of 
asthma, the early risk factors and to design new therapeutic targets and early 
interventions to change the natural history of the disease.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2019.00253
PMCID: PMC6593473
PMID: 31275912