1. Front Immunol. 2019 Jun 18;10:1385. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01385. eCollection
 2019.

The Secreted Virulence Factor NADase of Group A Streptococcus Inhibits P2X7 
Receptor-Mediated Release of IL-1β.

Westerlund E(1), Valfridsson C(1), Yi DX(2), Persson JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Section, Department of Experimental Medical Sciences, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Division of Immunology and Pathogenesis, Department of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States.

The common human pathogen Group A Streptococcus (GAS) causes superficial as well 
as invasive, life-threatening diseases. An increase in the occurrence of 
invasive GAS infection by strains of the M1 and M89 serotypes has been 
correlated with increased expression of the genetically and functionally linked 
virulence factors streptolysin O (SLO) and β-NAD+-glycohydrolase (NADase). 
NADase affects host cells differently depending on its location: its 
SLO-dependent translocation into the cytosol can lead to cell death through 
β-NAD+ depletion, while extracellularly located NADase inhibits IL-1β release 
downstream of Nlrp3 inflammasome activation. In this study, we use a macrophage 
infection model to investigate the NADase-dependent inhibition of IL-1β release. 
We show that bacteria expressing a functional NADase evade P2X7 activation, 
while infection with a NADase-deficient GAS strain leads to a P2X7-mediated 
increase in IL-1β. Further, our data indicate that in the absence of NADase, 
IL-1β is released through both P2X7-dependent and -independent pathways, 
although the precise mechanisms of how this occur are still unclear. This study 
adds information about the mechanism by which NADase regulates 
inflammasome-dependent IL-1β release, which may in part explain why increased 
NADase expression correlates with bacterial virulence.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01385
PMCID: PMC6591467
PMID: 31275321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]