1. Front Plant Sci. 2019 Jun 26;10:807. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00807. eCollection
 2019.

BYPASS1-LIKE, A DUF793 Family Protein, Participates in Freezing Tolerance via 
the CBF Pathway in Arabidopsis.

Chen T(1), Chen JH(1), Zhang W(1), Yang G(1), Yu LJ(1), Li DM(2), Li B(1), Sheng 
HM(1), Zhang H(1), An LZ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, The Key Laboratory of Cell Activities and Stress 
Adaptations, Ministry of Education, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)School of Forestry, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, China.

The C-REPEAT BINDING FACTOR signaling pathway is strictly modulated by numerous 
factors and is essential in the cold response of plants. Here, we show that the 
DUF793 family gene BYPASS1-LIKE modulates freezing tolerance through the CBFs in 
Arabidopsis. The expression of B1L was rapidly induced under cold treatment. 
Comparing to wild type, B1L knockout mutants were more sensitive to freezing 
treatment, whereas B1L-overexpressing lines were more tolerant. The expression 
of CBFs and CBF target genes was significantly decreased in b1l mutant. Using 
yeast two-hybrid screening system, 14-3-3λ was identified as one of proteins 
interacting with B1L. The interaction was confirmed with bimolecular 
fluorescence complementation assay and co-immunoprecipitation assay. Biochemical 
assays revealed that b1l mutation promoted the degradation of CBF3 compared to 
wild type, whereas 14-3-3κλ mutant and b1l 14-3-3κλ mutant suppressed the 
degradation of CBF3. Consistently, 14-3-3κλ and b1l 14-3-3κλ mutants showed 
enhanced freezing tolerance compared to wild type. These results indicate that 
B1L enhances the freezing tolerance of plants, at least partly through 
stabilizing CBF. Our findings improve our understanding of the regulation of CBF 
in response to cold stress.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00807
PMCID: PMC6607965
PMID: 31297122