1. J Mol Biol. 2019 Sep 6;431(19):3753-3770. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.07.009. Epub
 2019 Jul 10.

Biologically Active Ultra-Simple Proteins Reveal Principles of Transmembrane 
Domain Interactions.

Federman RS(1), Boguraev AS(2), Heim EN(2), DiMaio D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, PO Box 208011, New 
Haven, CT 06520-8011, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, PO Box 208005, New Haven, CT 
06520-8005, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, PO Box 208005, New Haven, CT 
06520-8005, USA; Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale School of Medicine, 
PO Box 208040, New Haven, CT 06520-8040, USA; Department of Molecular Biophysics 
& Biochemistry, Yale School of Medicine, PO Box 208024, New Haven, CT 
06520-8024, USA; Yale Cancer Center, PO Box 208028, New Haven, CT 06520-8028, 
USA. Electronic address: daniel.dimaio@yale.edu.

Specific interactions between the helical membrane-spanning domains of 
transmembrane proteins play central roles in the proper folding and 
oligomerization of these proteins. However, the relationship between the 
hydrophobic amino acid sequences of transmembrane domains and their functional 
interactions is in most cases unknown. Here, we use ultra-simple artificial 
proteins to systematically study the sequence basis for transmembrane domain 
interactions. We show that most short homopolymeric polyleucine transmembrane 
proteins containing single amino acid substitutions can activate the 
platelet-derived growth factor β receptor or the erythropoietin receptor in 
cultured mouse cells, resulting in cell transformation or proliferation. These 
proteins displayed complex patterns of activity that were markedly affected by 
seemingly minor sequence differences in the ultra-simple protein itself or in 
the transmembrane domain of the target receptor, and the effects of these 
sequence differences are not additive. In addition, specific leucine residues 
along the length of these proteins are required for activity, and the positions 
of these required leucines differ based on the identity and position of the 
central substituted amino acid. Our results suggest that these ultra-simple 
proteins use a variety of molecular mechanisms to activate the same target and 
that diversification of transmembrane domain sequences over the course of 
evolution minimized off-target interactions.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.07.009
PMCID: PMC6733641
PMID: 31301406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]