1. J Leukoc Biol. 2019 Nov;106(5):1021-1034. doi: 10.1002/JLB.3RI0519-161R. Epub 
2019 Jul 14.

Secreted IgM: New tricks for an old molecule.

Blandino R(1)(2), Baumgarth N(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry, Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology Graduate Group, 
University of California, Davis, California, USA.
(2)Center for Comparative Medicine, University of California, Davis, California, 
USA.
(3)Department Pathology, Microbiology & Immunology, University of California, 
Davis, California, USA.

Secreted IgM (sIgM) is a multifunctional evolutionary conserved antibody that is 
critical for the maintenance of tissue homeostasis as well as the development of 
fully protective humoral responses to pathogens. Constitutive secretion of self- 
and polyreactive natural IgM, produced mainly by B-1 cells, provides a 
circulating antibody that engages with autoantigens as well as invading 
pathogens, removing apoptotic and other cell debris and initiating strong immune 
responses. Pathogen-induced IgM production by B-1 and conventional B-2 cells 
strengthens this early, passive layer of IgM-mediated immune defense and 
regulates subsequent IgG production. The varied effects of secreted IgM on 
immune homeostasis and immune defense are facilitated through its binding to 
numerous different cell types via different receptors. Recent studies identified 
a novel function for pentameric IgM, namely as a transporter for the effector 
protein ″apoptosis-inhibitor of macrophages″ (AIM/CD5L). This review aims to 
provide a summary of the known functions and effects of sIgM on immune 
homeostasis and immune defense, and its interaction with its various receptors, 
and to highlight the many critical immune regulatory functions of this ancient 
and fascinating immunoglobulin.

©2019 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/JLB.3RI0519-161R
PMCID: PMC6803036
PMID: 31302940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]