1. Cancer Manag Res. 2019 Jul 4;11:6139-6150. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S200126. 
eCollection 2019.

Prognostic analysis of patients with mutant and wild-type EGFR gene lung 
adenocarcinoma.

Zheng H(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhan Y(1), Liu S(1), Lu J(1), Feng J(1), Wu X(1), Wen 
Q(1), Fan S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutation and clinicopathological 
features of lung adenocarcinoma, and the prognostic and therapeutic value of 
EGFR.
METHODS: EGFR gene mutations were detected in 424 patients with lung 
adenocarcinoma by amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS).
RESULTS: The total EGFR gene mutation rate was 55.2% (234/424) and EGFR gene 
mutation rates were statistically different in gender, smoking status, and 
pathological degree (P<0.05). The overall survival (OS) time of lung 
adenocarcinoma patients with mutation of exon 18 was lower than those with 
mutation of exon 19 and exon 21 (both P<0.05), but no significant difference was 
seen between those with mutation of exon 19 and exon 21 (P>0.05). Among 424 
cases of lung adenocarcinoma, multivariate analysis showed that EGFR gene 
mutation, age, gender, clinical stages, and pathological degree (P<0.05) were 
statistically significant prognostic factors. In multivariate analysis, 
prognostic factors of patients with EGFR gene mutation were associated with 
EGFR-TKI treatment, surgery treatment, pathological degree, clinical stages, and 
age (P<0.05), whereas in patients without EGFR gene mutation, prognostic factors 
were related to surgery treatment, pathological degree, clinical stages, gender, 
age, and smoking status (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The OS time of patients with mutation of exon 18 was lower than 
those of exon 19 and exon 21. EGFR-TKI treatment was an independent positive 
predictor in patients with EGFR gene mutation. Surgery treatment, age, clinical 
stages, and pathological degree were independent prognostic factors in Chinese 
patients with lung adenocarcinoma no matter whether with EGFR gene mutation or 
not.

DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S200126
PMCID: PMC6613610
PMID: 31308750

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.