1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gene Regul Mech. 2019 Nov-Dec;1862(11-12):194403. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2019.07.004. Epub 2019 Jul 16.

How RNA structure dictates the usage of a critical exon of spinal muscular 
atrophy gene.

Singh NN(1), Singh RN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, 
United States of America. Electronic address: singhr@iastate.edu.

Role of RNA structure in pre-mRNA splicing has been implicated for several 
critical exons associated with genetic disorders. However, much of the 
structural studies linked to pre-mRNA splicing regulation are limited to 
terminal stem-loop structures (hairpins) sequestering splice sites. In few 
instances, role of long-distance interactions is implicated as the major 
determinant of splicing regulation. With the recent surge of reports of circular 
RNA (circRNAs) generated by backsplicing, role of Alu-associated RNA structures 
formed by long-range interactions are taking central stage. Humans contain two 
nearly identical copies of Survival Motor Neuron (SMN) genes, SMN1 and SMN2. 
Deletion or mutation of SMN1 coupled with the inability of SMN2 to compensate 
for the loss of SMN1 due to exon 7 skipping causes spinal muscular atrophy 
(SMA), one of the leading genetic diseases of children. In this review, we 
describe how structural elements formed by both local and long-distance 
interactions are being exploited to modulate SMN2 exon 7 splicing as a potential 
therapy for SMA. We also discuss how Alu-associated secondary structure 
modulates generation of a vast repertoire of SMN circRNAs. This article is part 
of a Special Issue entitled: RNA structure and splicing regulation edited by 
Francisco Baralle, Ravindra Singh and Stefan Stamm.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2019.07.004
PMCID: PMC6875630
PMID: 31323435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures and competing interests: ISS-N1 
target (US patent # 7,838,657) mentioned in this review was discovered in the 
Singh lab at UMASS Medical School (Worcester, MA, USA). Inventors, including 
RNS, NNS and UMASS Medical School, are currently benefiting from licensing of 
ISS-N1 target (US patent # 7,838,657) to IONIS Pharmaceuticals/Biogen, which is 
marketing SpinrazaTM (Nusinersen), the FDA-approved drug, based on ISS-N1 
target.