1. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 2019 Jul 25;5:14. doi: 10.1038/s41531-019-0086-4. 
eCollection 2019.

Parkinson's progression prediction using machine learning and serum cytokines.

Ahmadi Rastegar D(1), Ho N(1), Halliday GM(1), Dzamko N(1).

Author information:
(1)ForeFront Dementia and Movement Disorders Laboratory, Brain and Mind Centre, 
Central Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, 
Camperdown, NSW 2050 Australia.

The heterogeneous nature of Parkinson's disease (PD) symptoms and variability in 
their progression complicates patient treatment and interpretation of clinical 
trials. Consequently, there is much interest in developing models that can 
predict PD progression. In this study we have used serum samples from a 
clinically well characterized longitudinally followed Michael J Fox Foundation 
cohort of PD patients with and without the common leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 
(LRRK2) G2019S mutation. We have measured 27 inflammatory cytokines and 
chemokines in serum at baseline and after 1 year to investigate cytokine 
stability. We then used the baseline measurements in conjunction with machine 
learning models to predict longitudinal clinical outcomes after 2 years follow 
up. Using the normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) as a measure of 
performance, the best prediction models were for the motor symptom severity 
scales, with NRMSE of 0.1123 for the Hoehn and Yahr scale and 0.1193 for the 
unified Parkinson's disease rating scale part three (UPDRS III). For each model, 
the top variables contributing to prediction were identified, with the 
chemokines macrophage inflammatory protein one alpha (MIP1Î±), and monocyte 
chemoattractant protein one (MCP1) making the biggest peripheral contribution to 
prediction of Hoehn and Yahr and UPDRS III, respectively. These results provide 
information on the longitudinal assessment of peripheral inflammatory cytokines 
in PD and give evidence that peripheral cytokines may have utility for aiding 
prediction of PD progression using machine learning models.

DOI: 10.1038/s41531-019-0086-4
PMCID: PMC6658482
PMID: 31372494

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing interests.