1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2019 Sep 1;78(9):819-843. doi: 10.1093/jnen/nlz058.

Anti-Myelin Proteolipid Protein Peptide Monoclonal Antibodies Recognize Cell 
Surface Proteins on Developing Neurons and Inhibit Their Differentiation.

Sobel RA(1)(2), Eaton MJ(1)(2), Jaju PD(1)(2), Lowry E(1)(2), Hinojoza JR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Service, Veterans Affairs Health Care System, Palo Alto, 
California.
(2)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California.

Using a panel of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to myelin proteolipid protein 
(PLP) peptides, we found that in addition to CNS myelin, mAbs to external face 
but not cytoplasmic face epitopes immunostained neurons in immature human CNS 
tissues and in adult hippocampal dentate gyrus and olfactory bulbs, that is 
neural stem cell niches (NSCN). To explore the pathobiological significance of 
these observations, we assessed the mAb effects on neurodifferentiation in 
vitro. The mAbs to PLP 50-69 (IgG1κ and IgG2aκ), and 178-191 and 200-219 (both 
IgG1κ) immunostained live cell surfaces and inhibited neurite outgrowth of E18 
rat hippocampal precursor cells and of PC12 cells, which do not express PLP. 
Proteins immunoprecipitated from PC12 cell extracts and captured by mAb-coated 
magnetic beads were identified by GeLC-MS/MS. Each neurite outgrowth-inhibiting 
mAb captured a distinct set of neurodifferentiation molecules including 
sequence-similar M6 proteins and other unrelated membrane and extracellular 
matrix proteins, for example integrins, Eph receptors, NCAM-1, and 
protocadherins. These molecules are expressed in adult human NSCN and are 
implicated in the pathogenesis of many chronic CNS disease processes. Thus, 
diverse anti-PLP epitope autoantibodies may inhibit neuronal precursor cell 
differentiation via multispecific recognition of cell surface molecules thereby 
potentially impeding endogenous neuroregeneration in NSCN and in vivo 
differentiation of exogenous neural stem cells.

© 2019 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.1093/jnen/nlz058
PMCID: PMC6703999
PMID: 31400116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]