1. Front Nutr. 2019 Aug 13;6:118. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2019.00118. eCollection 2019.

Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells; New Tools for Investigating Molecular Mechanisms 
in Anorexia Nervosa.

Maussion G(1), Demirova I(1), Gorwood P(2)(3), Ramoz N(2).

Author information:
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, 
QC, Canada.
(2)INSERM U1266, Institute of Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris, Paris, 
France.
(3)HÃ´pital Sainte-Anne (CMME), University Paris-Descartes, Paris, France.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a dramatic psychiatric disorder characterized by 
dysregulations in food intake and reward processing, involving molecular and 
cellular changes in several peripheral cell types and central neuronal networks. 
Genomic and epigenomic analyses have allowed the identification of multiple 
genetic and epigenetic modifications highlighting the complex pathophysiology of 
AN. Behavioral and genetic rodent models have been used to recapitulate and 
investigate, with some limitations, the cellular and molecular changes that 
potentially underlie eating disorders. In the last 5 years, the use of induced 
pluripotent stem cells (IPSCs), combined with CRISPR-Cas9 technology, has led to 
the generation of specific neuronal cell subtypes engineered from human somatic 
samples, representing a powerful tool to complement observations made in human 
samples and data collected from animal models. Systems biology using IPSCs has 
indeed proved to be a valuable approach for the study of metabolic disorders, in 
addition to neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders. The manuscript, while 
reviewing the main findings related to the genetic, epigenetic, and cellular 
bases of AN, will present how new studies published, or to be performed, in the 
field of IPSC-derived cells should improve our current understanding of the 
pathophysiology of AN and provide potential therapeutic strategies addressing 
specific endophenotypes.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2019.00118
PMCID: PMC6700384
PMID: 31457016