1. Cells. 2019 Aug 25;8(9):973. doi: 10.3390/cells8090973.

Mechanisms and Pathophysiological Roles of the ATG8 Conjugation Machinery.

Lystad AH(1), Simonsen A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and 
Centre for Cancer Cell Reprogramming, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Oslo, 1112 Blindern, 0317 Oslo, Norway. 
a.h.lystad@medisin.uio.no.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and 
Centre for Cancer Cell Reprogramming, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Oslo, 1112 Blindern, 0317 Oslo, Norway. 
anne.simonsen@medisin.uio.no.

Since their initial discovery around two decades ago, the yeast 
autophagy-related (Atg)8 protein and its mammalian homologues of the light chain 
3 (LC3) and Î³-aminobutyric acid receptor associated proteins (GABARAP) families 
have been key for the tremendous expansion of our knowledge about autophagy, a 
process in which cytoplasmic material become targeted for lysosomal degradation. 
These proteins are ubiquitin-like proteins that become directly conjugated to a 
lipid in the autophagy membrane upon induction of autophagy, thus providing a 
marker of the pathway, allowing studies of autophagosome biogenesis and 
maturation. Moreover, the ATG8 proteins function to recruit components of the 
core autophagy machinery as well as cargo for selective degradation. 
Importantly, comprehensive structural and biochemical in vitro studies of the 
machinery required for ATG8 protein lipidation, as well as their genetic 
manipulation in various model organisms, have provided novel insight into the 
molecular mechanisms and pathophysiological roles of the mATG8 proteins. 
Recently, it has become evident that the ATG8 proteins and their conjugation 
machinery are also involved in intracellular pathways and processes not related 
to autophagy. This review focuses on the molecular functions of ATG8 proteins 
and their conjugation machinery in autophagy and other pathways, as well as 
their links to disease.

DOI: 10.3390/cells8090973
PMCID: PMC6769624
PMID: 31450711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict to declare.