1. Aging (Albany NY). 2019 Aug 28;11(16):6569-6583. doi: 10.18632/aging.102211. 
Epub 2019 Aug 28.

Genetic variants of ADAMTS7 confer risk for ischaemic stroke in the Chinese 
population.

Chen L(1)(2), Hu W(1)(2), Li S(1)(3), Yao S(4), Wang M(1)(2), Chen X(1)(2), Chen 
S(1)(2), Deng F(1)(2), Zhu P(1)(2), Li K(1)(3), Zhong W(2), Zhao B(1)(3), Ma 
G(1)(3), Li Y(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Age-Related Cardiac and Cerebral Diseases, 
Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University, Zhanjiang 524001, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University, 
Zhanjiang 524001, China.
(3)Institute of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University, 
Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524001,China.
(4)Department of Nursing, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University, 
Zhanjiang 524001, China.

Large-scale genome-wide association analyses show an association between ADAMTS7 
variations and coronary risk. However, the link between ADAMTS7 variability and 
ischaemic stroke (IS) has yet to be determined. This study evaluated ADAMTS7 
variants with respect to the risk of IS. Genetic association analyses were 
performed in two independent case-control cohorts with 1279 patients with IS and 
1268 age-matched healthy controls. Four variant genotypes of the ADAMTS7 gene 
were identified using the Multiplex SNaPshot assay. The rs3825807, rs11634042, 
and rs7173743 variants of ADAMTS7 were related to lower IS risk in both initial 
and replication cohort. The G-T-T-C and G-T-C-C haplotypes are significantly 
less prevalent in the IS group than in the control group. Further stratification 
according to IS subtypes indicated that carriers with the variant alleles of the 
rs3825807, rs11634042 and rs7173743 variants of ADAMTS7conferred a lower risk of 
developing large-artery atherosclerosis stroke subtype. Also, the mutated 
rs3825807 G allele, as well as the mutated rs11634042 T allele of ADAMTS7, are 
linked to a significant reduction of ADAMTS7 in patients with IS. Our findings 
confirm the role of ADAMTS7 in the pathophysiology of IS, with potentially 
significant implications for the prevention, treatment, and development of novel 
therapies for IS.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.102211
PMCID: PMC6738416
PMID: 31460868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
actual or potential conflicts of interest.