1. Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Dec;204:107403. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2019.107403.
Epub  2019 Aug 27.

Strategies to generate functionally normal neutrophils to reduce infection and 
infection-related mortality in cancer chemotherapy.

Abdel-Azim H(1), Sun W(2), Wu L(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Children's 
Hospital Los Angeles Saban Research Institute, University of Southern California 
Keck School of Medicine, 4650 Sunset Blvd, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.
(2)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, City of Hope National Medical Center, 1500 E. 
Duarte road, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.
(3)Research and Development, Therapeutic Approaches, 2712 San Gabriel Boulevard, 
Rosemead, CA 91770, USA. Electronic address: lwu@therapeuticapp.org.

Neutrophils form an essential part of innate immunity against infection. Cancer 
chemotherapy-induced neutropenia (CCIN) is a condition in which the number of 
neutrophils in a patient's bloodstream is decreased, leading to increased 
susceptibility to infection. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) has 
been the only approved treatment for CCIN over two decades. To date, 
CCIN-related infection and mortality remain a significant concern, as 
neutrophils generated in response to administered GCSF are functionally immature 
and cannot effectively fight infection. This review summarizes the molecular 
regulatory mechanisms of neutrophil granulocytic differentiation and innate 
immunity development, dissects the biology of GCSF in myeloid expansion, 
highlights the shortcomings of GCSF in CCIN treatment, updates the recent 
advance of a selective retinoid agonist that promotes neutrophil granulocytic 
differentiation, and evaluates the benefits of developing GCSF biosimilars to 
increase access to GCSF biologics versus seeking a new mode to fundamentally 
advance GCSF therapy for treatment of CCIN.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2019.107403
PMCID: PMC6881549
PMID: 31470030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest LW is a named inventor on 
patent applications and issued patents related to use of Am80 as well as 
Am80-GCSF combination for treatment of neutropenia, both of which are filed by 
and assigned to Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, University of Southern 
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. All other authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.