1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2019 Aug 21;7:172. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2019.00172. 
eCollection 2019.

The Mitochondria-Endoplasmic Reticulum Contacts and Their Critical Role in Aging 
and Age-Associated Diseases.

Moltedo O(1), Remondelli P(2), Amodio G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, Fisciano, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, "Scuola Medica Salernitana," 
University of Salerno, Baronissi, Italy.

The recent discovery of interconnections between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
membrane and those of almost all the cell compartments is providing novel 
perspectives for the understanding of the molecular events underlying cellular 
mechanisms in both physiological and pathological conditions. In particular, 
growing evidence strongly supports the idea that the molecular interactions 
occurring between ER and mitochondrial membranes, referred as the mitochondria 
(MT)-ER contacts (MERCs), may play a crucial role in aging and in the 
development of age-associated diseases. As emerged in the last decade, MERCs 
behave as signaling hubs composed by structural components that act as critical 
players in different age-associated disorders, such as neurodegenerative 
diseases and motor disorders, cancer, metabolic syndrome, as well as 
cardiovascular diseases. Age-associated disorders often derive from 
mitochondrial or ER dysfunction as consequences of oxidative stress, 
mitochondrial DNA mutations, accumulation of misfolded proteins, and defective 
organelle turnover. In this review, we discuss the recent advances associating 
MERCs to aging in the context of ER-MT crosstalk regulating redox signaling, 
ER-to MT lipid transfer, mitochondrial dynamics, and autophagy.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2019.00172
PMCID: PMC6712070
PMID: 31497601