1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Dec 27;294(52):19852-19861. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.009931. 
Epub 2019 Sep 16.

Phosphorylation of the multifunctional signal transducer B-cell adaptor protein 
(BCAP) promotes recruitment of multiple SH2/SH3 proteins including GRB2.

Lauenstein JU(1), Udgata A(1), Bartram A(1), De Sutter D(2), Fisher DI(3), 
Halabi S(1), Eyckerman S(2), Gay NJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1GA, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, VIB Center for Medical 
Biotechnology, VIB, A. Baertsoenkaai 3, Ghent B-9000, Belgium.
(3)Discovery Sciences, Discovery Biology, IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, 
Cambridge CB4 0WG, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1GA, 
United Kingdom njg11@cam.ac.uk.

B-cell adaptor protein (BCAP) is a multimodular, multifunctional signal 
transducer that regulates signal transduction pathways in leukocytes, including 
macrophages, B-cells, and T-cells. In particular, BCAP suppresses inflammatory 
signaling by Toll-like receptors (TLRs). However, how BCAP itself is regulated 
and what its interaction partners are is unclear. Here, using human immune cell 
lines, including THP-1 cells, we characterized the complex phosphorylation 
patterns of BCAP and used a novel protein complex trapping strategy, called 
virotrap, to identify its interaction partners. This analysis identified known 
interactions of BCAP with phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) p85 subunit and NCK 
adaptor protein (NCK), together with previously unknown interactions of BCAP 
with Src homology 2 (SH2) and SH3 domain-containing adaptor proteins, notably 
growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2) and CRK-like proto-oncogene, 
adaptor protein (CRKL). We show that the SH3 domain of GRB2 can bind to BCAP 
independently of BCAP phosphorylation status, suggesting that the SH2 domains 
mediate interactions with activated receptor tyrosine kinase complexes including 
the CD19 subunit of the B-cell receptor. Our results also suggested that the 
PI3K p85 subunit binds to BCAP via SH3 domains forming an inactive complex that 
is then activated by sequential binding with the SH2 domains. Taken together, 
our results indicate that BCAP is a complex hub that processes signals from 
multiple pathways in diverse cell types of the immune system.

Â© 2019 Lauenstein et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.009931
PMCID: PMC6937578
PMID: 31527084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article