1. Mol Cell. 2019 Sep 19;75(6):1092-1101. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.08.026.

Lysine Methylation Regulators Moonlighting outside the Epigenome.

Cornett EM(1), Ferry L(2), Defossez PA(2), Rothbart SB(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. Electronic address: evcorn@iu.edu.
(2)Université de Paris, Epigenetics and Cell Fate, CNRS, 75013 Paris, France.
(3)Center for Epigenetics, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI 49503, 
USA. Electronic address: scott.rothbart@vai.org.

Landmark discoveries made nearly two decades ago identified known 
transcriptional regulators as histone lysine methyltransferases. Since then, the 
field of lysine methylation signaling has been dominated by studies of how this 
small chemical posttranslational modification regulates gene expression and 
other chromatin-based processes. However, recent advances in 
mass-spectrometry-based proteomics have revealed that histones are just a subset 
of the thousands of eukaryotic proteins marked by lysine methylation. As the 
writers, erasers, and readers of histone lysine methylation are emerging as a 
promising therapeutic target class for cancer and other diseases, a key 
challenge for the field is to define the full spectrum of activities for these 
proteins. Here we summarize recent discoveries implicating non-histone lysine 
methylation as a major regulator of diverse cellular processes. We further 
discuss recent technological innovations that are enabling the expanded study of 
lysine methylation signaling. Collectively, these findings are shaping our 
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of non-histone protein regulation 
through this dynamic and multi-functional posttranslational modification.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.08.026
PMCID: PMC6756181
PMID: 31539507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]