1. Eur J Immunol. 2020 Jan;50(1):48-55. doi: 10.1002/eji.201948204. Epub 2019 Sep
 30.

TAM receptors attenuate murine NK-cell responses via E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b.

Chirino LM(1), Kumar S(2), Okumura M(1), Sterner DE(2), Mattern M(2), Butt 
TR(2), Kambayashi T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine 
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Progenra, Inc, Malvern, PA, USA.

TAM receptors (Tyro3, Axl, and Mer) are receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) that 
are expressed by multiple immune cells including NK cells. Although RTKs 
typically enhance cellular functions, TAM receptor ligation blocks NK-cell 
activation. The mechanisms by which RTKs block NK-cell signaling downstream of 
activating receptors are unknown. In this report, we demonstrate that TAM 
receptors attenuate NK cell responses via the activity of E3 ubiquitin ligase 
Casitas B lineage lymphoma b (Cbl-b). Specifically, we show that Tyro3, Axl, and 
Mer phosphorylate Cbl-b, and Tyro3 ligation activates Cbl-b by phosphorylating 
tyrosine residues 133 and 363. Ligation of TAM receptors by their ligand Gas6 
suppresses activating receptor-stimulated NK-cell functions such as IFN-γ 
production and degranulation, in a TAM receptor kinase- and Cbl-b-dependent 
manner. Moreover, Gas6 ligation induces the degradation of LAT1, a transmembrane 
adaptor protein required for NK cell activating receptor signaling, in WT but 
not in Cbl-b knock-out NK cells. Together, these results suggest that TAM 
receptors may attenuate NK-cell function by phosphorylating Cbl-b, which in turn 
dampens NK-cell activation signaling by promoting the degradation of LAT1. Our 
data therefore support a mechanism by which RTKs attenuate, rather than 
stimulate, signaling pathways via the activation of ubiquitin ligases.

© 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201948204
PMCID: PMC7769591
PMID: 31531847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
commercial or financial conflict of interest.