1. Mol Genet Metab. 2019 Dec;128(4):463-469. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.09.002.
Epub  2019 Sep 12.

Incidence of PKAN determined by bioinformatic and population-based analysis of 
~140,000 humans.

Brezavar D(1), Bonnen PE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: pbonnen@bcm.edu.

Panthothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN, OMIM 234200), is an 
inborn is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism caused by pathogenic 
variants in PANK2. PANK2 encodes the enzyme pantothenate kinase 2 (EC 2.7.1.33), 
an essential regulatory enzyme in CoA biosynthesis. Clinical presentation 
includes dystonia, rigidity, bradykinesia, dysarthria, pigmentary retinopathy 
and dementia with variable age of onset ranging from childhood to adulthood. In 
order to provide an accurate incidence estimate of PKAN, we conducted a 
systematic review of the literature and databases for pathogenic mutations and 
constructed a bioinformatic profile for pathogenic missense variants in PANK2. 
We then studied the gnomAD cohort of ~140,000 unrelated adults from global 
populations to determine the allele frequency of the variants in PANK2 reported 
pathogenic for PKAN and for those additional variants identified in gnomAD that 
met bioinformatics criteria for being potentially pathogenic. Incidence was 
estimated based on three different models using the allele frequencies of 
pathogenic PKAN variants with or without those bioinformatically determined to 
be potentially pathogenic. Disease incidence calculations showed PKAN incidence 
ranging from 1:396,006 in Europeans, 1:1,526,982 in Africans, 1:480,826 in 
Latino, 1:523,551 in East Asians and 1:531,118 in South Asians. These results 
indicate PKAN is expected to occur in approximately 2 of every 1 million live 
births globally outside of Africa, and has a much lower incidence 1 in 1.5 
million live births in the African population.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.09.002
PMCID: PMC8610229
PMID: 31540697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]