1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Oct 8;116(41):20505-20510. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1904774116. Epub 2019 Sep 23.

Phosphorylation of DEPDC5, a component of the GATOR1 complex, releases 
inhibition of mTORC1 and promotes tumor growth.

Padi SKR(1), Singh N(1), Bearss JJ(2), Olive V(2), Song JH(3), Card√≥-Vila M(4), 
Kraft AS(5)(2), Okumura K(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona Cancer Center, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 
85724.
(2)Department of Medicine, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, The University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ 85724.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724.
(5)University of Arizona Cancer Center, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 
85724; akraft@uacc.arizona.edu koichiok@email.arizona.edu.
(6)Department of Physiology, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724 
akraft@uacc.arizona.edu koichiok@email.arizona.edu.

The Pim and AKT serine/threonine protein kinases are implicated as drivers of 
cancer. Their regulation of tumor growth is closely tied to the ability of these 
enzymes to mainly stimulate protein synthesis by activating mTORC1 (mammalian 
target of rapamycin complex 1) signaling, although the exact mechanism is not 
completely understood. mTORC1 activity is normally suppressed by amino acid 
starvation through a cascade of multiple regulatory protein complexes, e.g., 
GATOR1, GATOR2, and KICSTOR, that reduce the activity of Rag GTPases. 
Bioinformatic analysis revealed that DEPDC5 (DEP domain containing protein 5), a 
component of GATOR1 complex, contains Pim and AKT protein kinase phosphorylation 
consensus sequences. DEPDC5 phosphorylation by Pim and AKT kinases was confirmed 
in cancer cells through the use of phospho-specific antibodies and transfection 
of phospho-inactive DEPDC5 mutants. Consistent with these findings, during amino 
acid starvation the elevated expression of Pim1 overcame the amino acid 
inhibitory protein cascade and activated mTORC1. In contrast, the knockout of 
DEPDC5 partially blocked the ability of small molecule inhibitors against Pim 
and AKT kinases both singly and in combination to suppress tumor growth and 
mTORC1 activity in vitro and in vivo. In animal experiments knocking in a 
glutamic acid (S1530E) in DEPDC5, a phospho mimic, in tumor cells induced a 
significant level of resistance to Pim and the combination of Pim and AKT 
inhibitors. Our results indicate a phosphorylation-dependent regulatory 
mechanism targeting DEPDC5 through which Pim1 and AKT act as upstream effectors 
of mTORC1 to facilitate proliferation and survival of cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1904774116
PMCID: PMC6789643
PMID: 31548394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.