1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2019;8(1):1428-1437. doi:
10.1080/22221751.2019.1665971.

MDCK-B4GalNT2 cells disclose a α2,3-sialic acid requirement for the 2009 
pandemic H1N1 A/California/04/2009 and NA aid entry of A/WSN/33.

Wong HH(1)(2), Fung K(1), Nicholls JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong.
(2)HKU-Pasteur Research Pole, University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong.

Switching of receptor binding preference has been widely considered as one of 
the necessary mutations for avian influenza viruses, enabling efficient 
transmissions between human hosts. By stably overexpressing B4GalNT2 gene in 
MDCK cells, surface α2,3-siallylactose receptors were modified without affecting 
α2,6-receptor expression. The cell line MDCK-B4GalNT2 was used as a tool to 
screen for α2,3-receptor requirements in a panel of influenza viruses with 
previously characterized glycan array data. Infection of viruses with 
α2,3-receptor binding capability was inhibited in MDCK-B4GalNT2 cells, with the 
exception of A/WSN/33 (WSN). Infection with the 2009 pandemic H1N1 strains, 
A/California/04/2009 (Cal04) and A/Hong Kong/415742/2009 (HK09), despite showing 
α2,6-receptor binding, was also found to be inhibited. Further investigation 
showed that viral inhibition was due to a reduction in viral entry rate and 
viral attachment. Recombinant WSN virus with the neuraminidase (NA) gene swapped 
to A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (PR8) and Cal04 resulted in a significant viral 
inhibition in MDCK-B4GalNT2 cells. With oseltamivir, the NA active site was 
found to be important for the replication results of WSN, but not Cal04.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2019.1665971
PMCID: PMC6781475
PMID: 31560252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.