1. Sci Rep. 2019 Oct 1;9(1):14292. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-50602-5.

Next-Generation Sequencing reveals relationship between the larval microbiome 
and food substrate in the polyphagous Queensland fruit fly.

Majumder R(1)(2), Sutcliffe B(3), Taylor PW(4), Chapman TA(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 
2109, Australia. rajib.majumder@mq.edu.au.
(2)Biosecurity and Food Safety, NSW Department of Primary Industries, Elizabeth 
Macarthur Agricultural Institute (EMAI), Menangle, NSW, 2567, Australia. 
rajib.majumder@mq.edu.au.
(3)Department of Environmental Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 
2109, Australia.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 
2109, Australia.
(5)Biosecurity and Food Safety, NSW Department of Primary Industries, Elizabeth 
Macarthur Agricultural Institute (EMAI), Menangle, NSW, 2567, Australia.

Insects typically host substantial microbial communities (the 'microbiome') that 
can serve as a vital source of nutrients and also acts as a modulator of immune 
function. While recent studies have shown that diet is an important influence on 
the gut microbiome, very little is known about the dynamics underpinning 
microbial acquisition from natural food sources. Here, we addressed this gap by 
comparing the microbiome of larvae of the polyphagous fruit fly Bactrocera 
tryoni ('Queensland fruit fly') that were collected from five different fruit 
types (sapodilla [from two different localities], hog plum, pomegranate, green 
apple, and quince) from North-east to South-east Australia. Using 
Next-Generation Sequencing on the Illumina MiSeq platform, we addressed two 
questions: (1) what bacterial communities are available to B. tryoni larvae from 
different host fruit; and (2) how does the microbiome vary between B. tryoni 
larvae and its host fruit? The abundant bacterial taxa were similar for B. 
tryoni larvae from different fruit despite significant differences in the 
overall microbial community compositions. Our study suggests that the bacterial 
community structure of B. tryoni larvae is related less to the host fruit (diet) 
microbiome and more to vertical transfer of the microbiome during egg laying. 
Our findings also suggest that geographic location may play a quite limited role 
in structuring of larval microbiomes. This is the first study to use 
Next-Generation Sequencing to analyze the microbiome of B. tryoni larvae 
together with the host fruit, an approach that has enabled greatly increased 
resolution of relationships between the insect's microbiome and that of the 
surrounding host tissues.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-50602-5
PMCID: PMC6773747
PMID: 31575966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.