1. Front Oncol. 2019 Sep 24;9:920. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00920. eCollection
2019.

The Emerging Role of Major Regulatory RNAs in Cancer Control.

Dai X(1), Kaushik AC(1)(2), Zhang J(3).

Author information:
(1)Wuxi School of Medicine, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Henan Key Laboratory of Tumor Epidemiology, Henan Institute of Medical and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

Alterations and personal variations of RNA interactions have been 
mechanistically coupled with disease etiology and phenotypical variations. RNA 
biomarkers, RNA mimics, and RNA antagonists have been developed for diagnostic, 
prognostic, and therapeutic uses. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and microRNAs 
(miRNAs) are two major types of RNA molecules with regulatory roles, 
deregulation of which has been implicated in the initiation and progression of 
many human malignancies. Accumulating evidence indicated the clinical roles of 
regulatory RNAs in cancer control, stimulating a surge in exploring the 
functionalities of regulatory RNAs for improved understanding on disease 
pathogenesis and management. In this review, we highlight the critical roles of 
lncRNAs and miRNAs played in tumorigenesis, scrutinize their potential 
functionalities as diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets 
in clinics, outline opportunities that ncRNAs may bring to complement current 
clinical practice for improved cancer management and identify challenges faced 
by translating frontier knowledge on non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) to bedside clinics 
as well as possible solutions.

Copyright Â© 2019 Dai, Kaushik and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00920
PMCID: PMC6771296
PMID: 31608229