1. Cancer Res. 2019 Dec 1;79(23):5920-5929. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-1405. 
Epub 2019 Oct 16.

BRCA1 Deficiency Upregulates NNMT, Which Reprograms Metabolism and Sensitizes 
Ovarian Cancer Cells to Mitochondrial Metabolic Targeting Agents.

Kanakkanthara A(1)(2), Kurmi K(2), Ekstrom TL(1), Hou X(1), Purfeerst ER(1), 
Heinzen EP(3), Correia C(1), Huntoon CJ(1), O'Brien D(3), Wahner Hendrickson 
AE(1), Dowdy SC(4), Li H(2), Oberg AL(3), Hitosugi T(1)(2), Kaufmann SH(1)(2), 
Weroha SJ(1), Karnitz LM(5)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.
(4)Division of Gynecologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(5)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. 
karnitz.larry@mayo.edu.

BRCA1 plays a key role in homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair. Accordingly, 
changes that downregulate BRCA1, including BRCA1 mutations and reduced BRCA1 
transcription, due to promoter hypermethylation or loss of the BRCA1 
transcriptional regulator CDK12, disrupt HR in multiple cancers. In addition, 
BRCA1 has also been implicated in the regulation of metabolism. Here, we show 
that reducing BRCA1 expression, either by CDK12 or BRCA1 depletion, led to 
metabolic reprogramming of ovarian cancer cells, causing decreased mitochondrial 
respiration and reduced ATP levels. BRCA1 depletion drove this reprogramming by 
upregulating nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT). Notably, the metabolic 
alterations caused by BRCA1 depletion and NNMT upregulation sensitized ovarian 
cancer cells to agents that inhibit mitochondrial metabolism (VLX600 and 
tigecycline) and to agents that inhibit glucose import (WZB117). These 
observations suggest that inhibition of energy metabolism may be a potential 
strategy to selectively target BRCA1-deficient high-grade serous ovarian cancer, 
which is characterized by frequent BRCA1 loss and NNMT overexpression. 
SIGNIFICANCE: Loss of BRCA1 reprograms metabolism, creating a therapeutically 
targetable vulnerability in ovarian cancer.

Â©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-1405
PMCID: PMC6891213
PMID: 31619387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: A. Kanakkanthara 
and L. M. Karnitz are co-inventors on a provisional patent application related 
to the findings in this manuscript. The other authors declare no potential 
conflicts of interest.