1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Oct 15;20(20):5107. doi: 10.3390/ijms20205107.

Prion Protein in Glioblastoma Multiforme.

Ryskalin L(1), Busceti CL(2), Biagioni F(3), Limanaqi F(4), Familiari P(5), 
Frati A(6), Fornai F(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Pisa, via Roma 55, 56126 Pisa, Italy. 
larisa.ryskalin@unipi.it.
(2)I.R.C.C.S. Neuromed, via Atinense 18, 86077 Pozzilli, Italy. 
carla.busceti@neuromed.it.
(3)I.R.C.C.S. Neuromed, via Atinense 18, 86077 Pozzilli, Italy. 
francesca.biagioni@neuromed.it.
(4)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Pisa, via Roma 55, 56126 Pisa, Italy. 
f.limanaqi@studenti.unipi.it.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Mental Health and Sense Organs NESMOS, Sapienza 
University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy. pietro.familiari@uniroma1.it.
(6)I.R.C.C.S. Neuromed, via Atinense 18, 86077 Pozzilli, Italy. 
alessandro.frati@uniroma1.it.
(7)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Pisa, via Roma 55, 56126 Pisa, Italy. 
francesco.fornai@neuromed.it.
(8)I.R.C.C.S. Neuromed, via Atinense 18, 86077 Pozzilli, Italy. 
francesco.fornai@neuromed.it.

The cellular prion protein (PrPc) is an evolutionarily conserved cell surface 
protein encoded by the PRNP gene. PrPc is ubiquitously expressed within nearly 
all mammalian cells, though most abundantly within the CNS. Besides being 
implicated in the pathogenesis and transmission of prion diseases, recent 
studies have demonstrated that PrPc contributes to tumorigenesis by regulating 
tumor growth, differentiation, and resistance to conventional therapies. In 
particular, PrPc over-expression has been related to the acquisition of a 
malignant phenotype of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in a variety of solid tumors, 
encompassing pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), osteosarcoma, breast 
cancer, gastric cancer, and primary brain tumors, mostly glioblastoma multiforme 
(GBM). Thus, PrPc is emerging as a key in maintaining glioblastoma cancer stem 
cells' (GSCs) phenotype, thereby strongly affecting GBM infiltration and 
relapse. In fact, PrPc contributes to GSCs niche's maintenance by modulating 
GSCs' stem cell-like properties while restraining them from differentiation. 
This is the first review that discusses the role of PrPc in GBM. The manuscript 
focuses on how PrPc may act on GSCs to modify their expression and translational 
profile while making the micro-environment surrounding the GSCs niche more 
favorable to GBM growth and infiltration.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20205107
PMCID: PMC6834196
PMID: 31618844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.