1. Plant Direct. 2019 Oct 21;3(10):e00173. doi: 10.1002/pld3.173. eCollection
2019  Oct.

Genomic analysis reveals rich genetic variation and potential targets of 
selection during domestication of castor bean from perennial woody tree to 
annual semi-woody crop.

Xu W(1), Yang T(2), Qiu L(1), Chapman MA(3), Li DZ(2), Liu A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Economic Plants and Biotechnology Yunnan Key Laboratory for 
Wild Plant Resources Kunming Institute of Botany Chinese Academy of Sciences 
Kunming China.
(2)Germplasm Bank of Wild Species Kunming Institute of Botany Chinese Academy of 
Sciences Kunming China.
(3)Biological Sciences and Centre for Underutilised Crops University of 
Southampton Southampton UK.
(4)Key Laboratory for Forest Resources Conservation and Utilization in the 
Southwest Mountains of China Ministry of Education Southwest Forestry University 
Kunming China.

Relatively, little is known about the genetic variation of woody trees during 
domestication. Castor bean (Ricinus communis L. Euphorbiaceae) is a commercially 
important nonedible annual oilseed crop and differs from its wild progenitors 
that have a perennial woody habit. Although castor bean is one of the oldest 
cultivated crops, its domestication origin, genomic variation, and potential 
targets of selection underlying domestication traits remain unknown. Here, we 
performed a phylogenetic analysis, which suggests that the wild accessions were 
distinctively separated from the cultivated accessions. Genome sequencing of 
three accessions (one each wild, landrace, and cultivar) showed a large number 
of genetic variants between wild and cultivated castor bean (ZB306 or Hale), and 
relatively few variants between cultivar ZB306 and Hale. Comparative genome 
analysis revealed many candidate genes of selection and key pathways potentially 
involved in the transition from a perennial woody tree to annual crop. 
Interestingly, among 16 oil-related genes only three showed evidence of 
selection and the remainder showed low genetic variation at the population 
level, suggesting strong purifying selection in both the wild and domesticated 
gene pools. These results extend our understanding of the origin, genomic 
variation, and domestication, and provide a valuable resource for future 
gene-trait associations and castor bean breeding.

Â© 2019 The Authors. Plant Direct published by American Society of Plant 
Biologists, Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pld3.173
PMCID: PMC6802463
PMID: 31641699

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest 
associated with the work described in this manuscript.