1. Aging (Albany NY). 2019 Oct 23;11(20):9111-9127. doi: 10.18632/aging.102378. 
Epub 2019 Oct 23.

Long noncoding RNA HULC promotes hepatocellular carcinoma progression.

Zhang H(1)(2), Liao Z(1)(2), Liu F(1)(2), Su C(1)(2), Zhu H(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), 
Tao R(1)(2), Liang H(1)(2), Zhang B(1)(2), Zhang X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Hepatic Surgery Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei, China.
(2)Clinical Medical Research Center of Hepatic Surgery at Hubei Province, Wuhan 
430030, Hubei, China.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are overexpressed in many types of cancers, 
suggesting they may promote tumorigenesis. The lncRNA "highly upregulated in 
liver cancer" (HULC) promotes hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by mechanisms that 
are not fully understood. In the present study, we showed that HULC is 
overexpressed in HCC tissues, which correlates with an unfavorable prognosis in 
HCC patients. We also found that HULC promotes the proliferation, migration, and 
invasion of HCC cells in vitro, and xenograft tumor growth in vivo. Our 
mechanistic studies showed that HULC works as a competing endogenous RNA for 
miR-2052, and that the MET receptor tyrosine kinase is a downstream target of 
miR-2052 in HCC. Furthermore, HULC inhibits miR-2052, thereby stimulating MET 
expression in HCC. Finally, MET overexpression reverses the effects of HULC 
depletion. In sum, our findings reveal a novel regulatory signaling cascade, the 
HULC/miR-2052/MET axis, which could potentially be exploited for therapeutic 
benefits in the treatment of HCC.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.102378
PMCID: PMC6834430
PMID: 31645479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.