1. BMC Health Serv Res. 2019 Oct 24;19(1):743. doi: 10.1186/s12913-019-4578-z.

Comparing methods to estimate incremental inpatient costs and length of stay due 
to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Alberta, Canada.

Kirwin E(1), Varughese M(2), Waldner D(3), Simmonds K(2)(4)(5), Joffe AM(3)(6), 
Smith S(3).

Author information:
(1)Alberta Ministry of Health, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. ekirwin8@gmail.com.
(2)Alberta Ministry of Health, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)School of Public Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(5)Department of Community Health Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.
(6)Alberta Health Services, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Erratum in
    BMC Health Serv Res. 2019 Dec 31;20(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s12913-019-4877-4.

BACKGROUND: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is an 
opportunistic bacterial organism resistant to first line antibiotics. 
Acquisition of MRSA is often classified as either healthcare-associated or 
community-acquired. It has been shown that both healthcare-associated and 
community-acquired infections contribute to the spread of MRSA within healthcare 
facilities. The objective of this study was to estimate the incremental 
inpatient cost and length of stay for individuals colonized or infected with 
MRSA. Common analytical methods were compared to ensure the quality of the 
estimate generated. This study was performed at Alberta Ministry of Health 
(Edmonton, Alberta), with access to clinical MRSA data collected at two Edmonton 
hospitals, and ministerial administrative data holdings.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study of patients with MRSA was identified using 
a provincial infection prevention and control database. A coarsened exact 
matching algorithm, and two regression models (semilogarithmic ordinary least 
squares model and log linked generalized linear model) were evaluated. A 
MRSA-free cohort from the same facilities and care units was identified for the 
matched method; all records were used for the regression models. Records span 
from January 1, 2011 to December 31, 2015, for individuals 18 or older at 
discharge.
RESULTS: Of the models evaluated, the generalized linear model was found to 
perform the best. Based on this model, the incremental inpatient costs 
associated with hospital-acquired cases were the most costly at $31,686 (14,169 
- 60,158) and $47,016 (23,125 - 86,332) for colonization and infection, 
respectively. Community-acquired MRSA cases also represent a significant burden, 
with incremental inpatient costs of $7397 (2924 - 13,180) and $14,847 (8445 - 
23,207) for colonization and infection, respectively. All costs are adjusted to 
2016 Canadian dollars. Incremental length of stay followed a similar pattern, 
where hospital-acquired infections had the longest incremental stays of 35.2 
(16.3-69.5) days and community-acquired colonization had the shortest 
incremental stays of 3.0 (0.6-6.3) days.
CONCLUSIONS: MRSA, and in particular, hospital-acquired MRSA, places a 
significant but preventable cost burden on the Alberta healthcare system. 
Estimates of cost and length of stay varied by the method of analysis and source 
of infection, highlighting the importance of selecting the most appropriate 
method.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-019-4578-z
PMCID: PMC6813095
PMID: 31651305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.