1. Biosci Rep. 2019 Nov 29;39(11):BSR20192453. doi: 10.1042/BSR20192453.

The molecular mechanisms of LncRNA-correlated PKM2 in cancer metabolism.

Tao T(1), Wu S(1), Sun Z(1), Ma W(1), Zhou S(2)(3), Deng J(2)(3), Su Q(4), Peng 
M(5), Xu G(1), Yang X(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, YueYang Maternal-Child Medicine Health Hospital, 
Yueyang 414000, Hunan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Study and Discovery of Small Targeted Molecules of Hunan 
Province, School of Medicine, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410013, Hunan, 
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Traditional Chinese Medicine Research 
(Ministry of Education of China), Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410013, 
Hunan, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Zhuzhou Central Hospital, Zhuzhou 412000, Hunan, 
China.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 
410008, Hunan, China.

Reprogrammed metabolism is an important hallmark of cancer cells. Pyruvate 
kinase (PK) is one of the major rate-limiting enzymes in glucose metabolism. The 
M2 isoform of PK (PKM2), is considered to be an important marker of metabolic 
reprogramming and one of the key enzymes. Recently, through the continuous 
development of genome-wide analysis and functional studies, accumulating 
evidence has demonstrated that long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) play vital 
regulatory roles in cancer progression by acting as either potential oncogenes 
or tumor suppressors. Furthermore, several studies have shown that up-regulation 
of PKM2 in cancer tissues is associated with LncRNAs expression and patient 
survival. Thus, scientists have begun to unveil the mechanism of 
LncRNA-associated PKM2 in cancer metabolic progression. Based on these novel 
findings, in this mini-review, we summarize the detailed molecular mechanisms of 
LncRNA related to PKM2 in cancer metabolism. We expect that this work will 
promote a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of PKM2, and provide 
a profound potential for targeting PKM2 to treat tumors.

Â© 2019 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20192453
PMCID: PMC6851521
PMID: 31654067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.