1. Adv Biol Regul. 2020 Jan;75:100668. doi: 10.1016/j.jbior.2019.100668. Epub
2019  Oct 7.

Illuminating insights into opsin 3 function in the skin.

Olinski LE(1), Lin EM(2), Oancea E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown 
University, Providence RI, 02912, USA. Electronic address: 
lauren_olinski@brown.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Physiology and Biotechnology, Brown 
University, Providence RI, 02912, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Physiology and Biotechnology, Brown 
University, Providence RI, 02912, USA. Electronic address: 
elena_oancea@brown.edu.

Because sunlight is essential for human survival, we have developed complex 
mechanisms for detecting and responding to light stimuli. The eyes and skin are 
major organs for sensing light and express several light-sensitive opsin 
receptors. These opsins mediate cellular responses to spectrally-distinct 
wavelengths of visible and ultraviolet light. How the eyes mediate visual 
phototransduction is well understood, but less is known about how the skin 
detects light. Both human and murine skin express a wide array of opsins, with 
one of the most highly expressed being the functionally elusive opsin 3 (OPN3). 
In this review we explore light reception, opsin expression and signaling in 
skin cells; we compile data elucidating potential functions for human OPN3 in 
skin, with emphasis on recent studies investigating OPN3 regulation of melanin 
within epidermal melanocytes.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbior.2019.100668
PMCID: PMC7059126
PMID: 31653550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.