1. Cell Rep. 2019 Oct 29;29(5):1369-1380.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.09.052.

Mapping Native R-Loops Genome-wide Using a Targeted Nuclease Approach.

Yan Q(1), Shields EJ(2), Bonasio R(3), Sarma K(4).

Author information:
(1)Gene Expression and Regulation Program, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA; Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Graduate Group in Genomics and Computational 
Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Epigenetics 
Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: roberto@bonasiolab.org.
(4)Gene Expression and Regulation Program, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA; Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: kavitha@sarmalab.com.

R-loops are three-stranded DNA:RNA hybrids that are implicated in many nuclear 
processes. While R-loops may have physiological roles, the formation of stable, 
aberrant R-loops has been observed in neurological disorders and cancers. 
Current methods to assess their genome-wide distribution rely on affinity 
purification, which is plagued by large input requirements, high noise, and poor 
sensitivity for dynamic R-loops. Here, we present MapR, a method that utilizes 
RNase H to guide micrococcal nuclease to R-loops, which are subsequently 
cleaved, released, and identified by sequencing. MapR detects R-loops formed at 
promoters and active enhancers that are likely to form transient R-loops due to 
the low transcriptional output of these regulatory elements and the short-lived 
nature of enhancer RNAs. MapR is as specific as existing techniques and more 
sensitive, allowing for genome-wide coverage with low input material in a 
fraction of the time.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.09.052
PMCID: PMC6870988
PMID: 31665646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.