1. Clin Transl Sci. 2020 Mar;13(2):293-300. doi: 10.1111/cts.12709. Epub 2019 Nov
 6.

Reduced Risk of Sinusoidal Obstruction Syndrome of the Liver after 
Busulfan-Cyclophosphamide Conditioning Prior to Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem 
Cell Transplantation.

El-Serafi I(1)(2)(3), Remberger M(4), Ringdèn O(5), Törlén J(1)(6), Sundin 
M(7)(8), Björklund A(6), Winiarski J(7)(8), Mattsson J(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, 
Linköping, Sweden.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Port-Said University, 
Port-Said, Egypt.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University and KFUE, Uppsala 
University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Cell Therapies and Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation (CAST), Karolinska 
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention, and 
Technology (CLINTEC), Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Hematology/Immunology Section, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)Gloria and Seymour Epstein Chair in Cell Therapy and Transplantation and 
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

The aim of this study is to evaluate the incidence of sinusoidal obstruction 
syndrome (SOS) of the liver and the clinical outcome after hematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation (HSCT) based on several modifications in our protocols. We 
retrospectively investigated 372 patients undergoing myeloablative conditioning 
with oral busulfan (Bu) and cyclophosphamide before allogeneic HSCT during 
1990-2015. Patients' supportive care was changed in order to reduce the 
regimen-related toxicities. Norethisterone use was terminated in 1998, 
therapeutic drug monitoring of Bu was initiated in 2000, and the use of liver 
supportive drugs, such as ursodeoxycholic acid and N-acetyl-L-cysteine, were 
started in 2002 and 2009, respectively. In total, 26 patients (7.0%) developed 
SOS at a median of 19 days after transplantation. Of these 26 patients, 20 died 
at a median of 119 days after HSCT and 102 days after the diagnosis of SOS. The 
incidence of SOS decreased over time in accordance with the improvements in 
supportive care. The highest incidence of SOS was during 1995-1999 (16.2%) 
compared with 2.3% during 2010-2015. Overall survival for patients with SOS was 
62%, 46%, and 27% at 100 days, 1 year, and 5 years after HSCT, respectively, 
compared with 92%, 77%, and 66% for those who did not develop SOS (P < 0.001). 
In conclusion, the incidence of SOS and related deaths were significantly 
decreased over the last years. Our institution pursues massive preventative and 
personalized measures for SOS. This strategy may also be applicable in other 
conditioning protocols in order to reduce the incidence of SOS and, hence, 
improve the clinical outcome.

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Science published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of the American Society for Clinical Pharmacology 
and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1111/cts.12709
PMCID: PMC7070785
PMID: 31675173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no competing interests for 
this work.