1. Front Pharmacol. 2019 Oct 15;10:1200. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.01200.
eCollection  2019.

Genotype-Phenotype Association Analysis Reveals New Pathogenic Factors for 
Osteogenesis Imperfecta Disease.

Shi J(1), Ren M(1), Jia J(1), Tang M(1), Guo Y(2)(3)(4), Ni X(2)(3)(4), Shi 
T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, and the Institute of 
Biomedical Sciences, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Big Data and Engineering Research Center, Beijing Key Laboratory for 
Pediatric Diseases of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, MOE Key Laboratory 
of Major Diseases in Children, Beijing Children's Hospital, National Center for 
Children's Health, Beijing Pediatric Research Institute, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Biobank for Clinical Data and Samples in Pediatrics, Beijing Children's 
Hospital, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing Pediatric Research 
Institute, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Children's 
Hospital, National Center for Children's Health, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.

Erratum in
    Front Pharmacol. 2020 Feb 05;10:1603. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.01603.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), mainly caused by structural abnormalities of type 
I collagen, is a hereditary rare disease characterized by increased bone 
fragility and reduced bone mass. Clinical manifestations of OI mostly include 
multiple repeated bone fractures, thin skin, blue sclera, hearing loss, 
cardiovascular and pulmonary system abnormalities, triangular face, 
dentinogenesis imperfecta (DI), and walking with assistance. Currently, 20 
causative genes with 18 subtypes have been identified for OI, of them, 
variations in COL1A1 and COL1A2 have been demonstrated to be major causative 
factors to OI. However, the complexity of the bone formation process indicates 
that there are potential new pathogenic genes associated with OI. To 
comprehensively explore the underlying mechanism of OI, we conducted association 
analysis between genotypes and phenotypes of OI diseases and found that 
mutations in COL1A1 and COL1A2 contributed to a large proportion of the disease 
phenotypes. We categorized the clinical phenotypes and the genotypes based on 
the variation types for those 155 OI patients collected from literature, and 
association study revealed that three phenotypes (bone deformity, DI, walking 
with assistance) were enriched in two variation types (the Gly-substitution 
missense and groups of frameshift, nonsense, and splicing variations). We also 
identified four novel variations (c.G3290A (p.G1097D), c.G3289C (p.G1097R), 
c.G3289A (p.G1097S), c.G3281A (p.G1094D)) in gene COL1A1 and two novel 
variations (c.G2332T (p.G778C), c.G2341T (p.G781C)) in gene COL1A2, which could 
potentially contribute to the disease. In addition, we identified several new 
potential pathogenic genes (ADAMTS2, COL5A2, COL8A1) based on the integration of 
protein-protein interaction and pathway enrichment analysis. Our study provides 
new insights into the association between genotypes and phenotypes of OI and 
novel information for dissecting the underlying mechanism of the disease.

Copyright Â© 2019 Shi, Ren, Jia, Tang, Guo, Ni and Shi.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2019.01200
PMCID: PMC6803541
PMID: 31680973