1. Sci Rep. 2019 Nov 6;9(1):16156. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-52614-7.

Empirical design of a variant quality control pipeline for whole genome 
sequencing data using replicate discordance.

Adelson RP(1), Renton AE(2), Li W(3), Barzilai N(3), Atzmon G(4)(5), Goate 
AM(6), Davies P(1), Freudenberg-Hua Y(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Litwin-Zucker Center for Alzheimer's Disease, The Feinstein Institute for 
Medical Research, Northwell Health, Manhasset, New York, 11030, USA.
(2)Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease and Department of Neuroscience, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, 10029, USA.
(3)Robert S. Boas Center for Genomics & Human Genetics, The Feinstein Institute 
for Medical Research, Northwell Health, Manhasset, New York, 11030, USA.
(4)Institute for Aging Research, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New 
York, 10461, USA.
(5)Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, 31905, Israel.
(6)Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease and Departments of 
Neuroscience, Genetics and Genomic Sciences, and Neurology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, 10029, USA.
(7)Litwin-Zucker Center for Alzheimer's Disease, The Feinstein Institute for 
Medical Research, Northwell Health, Manhasset, New York, 11030, USA. 
yfreuden@northwell.edu.
(8)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, Zucker Hillside Hospital, Northwell Health, 
Glen Oaks, New York, 11004, USA. yfreuden@northwell.edu.

The success of next-generation sequencing depends on the accuracy of variant 
calls. Few objective protocols exist for QC following variant calling from whole 
genome sequencing (WGS) data. After applying QC filtering based on Genome 
Analysis Tool Kit (GATK) best practices, we used genotype discordance of eight 
samples that were sequenced twice each to evaluate the proportion of potentially 
inaccurate variant calls. We designed a QC pipeline involving hard filters to 
improve replicate genotype concordance, which indicates improved accuracy of 
genotype calls. Our pipeline analyzes the efficacy of each filtering step. We 
initially applied this strategy to well-characterized variants from the ClinVar 
database, and subsequently to the full WGS dataset. The genome-wide biallelic 
pipeline removed 82.11% of discordant and 14.89% of concordant genotypes, and 
improved the concordance rate from 98.53% to 99.69%. The variant-level read 
depth filter most improved the genome-wide biallelic concordance rate. We also 
adapted this pipeline for triallelic sites, given the increasing proportion of 
multiallelic sites as sample sizes increase. For triallelic sites containing 
only SNVs, the concordance rate improved from 97.68% to 99.80%. Our QC pipeline 
removes many potentially false positive calls that pass in GATK, and may inform 
future WGS studies prior to variant effect analysis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-52614-7
PMCID: PMC6834861
PMID: 31695094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.