1. Infect Drug Resist. 2019 Aug 23;12:2613-2625. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S215070. 
eCollection 2019.

Therapeutic compounds targeting Lipid II for antibacterial purposes.

Malin JJ(1)(2), de Leeuw E(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Cologne, Department I of Internal Medicine, Division of 
Infectious Diseases, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Human Virology and Department of Molecular Biology & 
Biochemistry of the University of Maryland, Baltimore School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Resistance against commonly used antibiotics has emerged in all bacterial 
pathogens. In fact, there is no antibiotic currently in clinical use against 
which resistance has not been reported. In particular, rapidly increasing 
urbanization in developing nations are sites of major concern. Additionally, the 
widespread practice by physicians to prescribe antibiotics in cases of viral 
infections puts selective pressure on antibiotics that still remain effective 
and it will only be a matter of time before resistance develops on a large 
scale. The biosynthesis pathway of the bacterial cell wall is well studied and a 
validated target for the development of antibacterial agents. Cell wall 
biosynthesis involves two major processes; 1) the biosynthesis of cell wall 
teichoic acids and 2) the biosynthesis of peptidoglycan. Key molecules in these 
pathways, including enzymes and precursor molecules are attractive targets for 
the development of novel antibacterial agents. In this review, we will focus on 
the major class of natural antibacterial compounds that target the peptidoglycan 
precursor molecule Lipid II; namely the glycopeptides, including the novel 
generation of lipoglycopeptides. We will discuss their mechanism-of-action and 
clinical applications. Further, we will briefly discuss additional peptides that 
target Lipid II such as the lantibiotic nisin and defensins. We will highlight 
recent developments and future perspectives.

Â© 2019 Malin and de Leeuw.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S215070
PMCID: PMC6711568
PMID: 31692545

Conflict of interest statement: EdL is an inventor on US patents #8,796,323, 
#9,351,963 and PCT/US11/59432. The authors report no other conflicts of interest 
in this work.