1. Commun Biol. 2019 Nov 1;2:401. doi: 10.1038/s42003-019-0648-3. eCollection
2019.

In silico re-engineering of a neurotransmitter to activate KCNQ potassium 
channels in an isoform-specific manner.

Manville RW(1), Abbott GW(1).

Author information:
(1)Bioelectricity Laboratory, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of 
Medicine, University of California, Irvine, CA USA.

Voltage-gated potassium (Kv) channel dysfunction causes a variety of inherited 
disorders, but developing small molecules that activate Kv channels has proven 
challenging. We recently discovered that the inhibitory neurotransmitter 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) directly activates Kv channels KCNQ3 and KCNQ5. Here, 
finding that inhibitory neurotransmitter glycine does not activate KCNQs, we 
re-engineered it in silico to introduce predicted KCNQ-opening properties, 
screened by in silico docking, then validated the hits in vitro. Attaching a 
fluorophenyl ring to glycine optimized its electrostatic potential, converting 
it to a low-nM affinity KCNQ channel activator. Repositioning the phenyl ring 
fluorine and/or adding a methylsulfonyl group increased the efficacy of the 
re-engineered glycines and switched their target KCNQs. Combining KCNQ2- and 
KCNQ3-specific glycine derivatives synergistically potentiated KCNQ2/3 
activation by exploiting heteromeric channel composition. Thus, in silico 
optimization and docking, combined with functional screening of only three 
compounds, facilitated re-engineering of glycine to develop several potent KCNQ 
activators.

© The Author(s) 2019.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-019-0648-3
PMCID: PMC6825221
PMID: 31701029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing interests.