1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2019 Dec 6;18:708-726. doi:
10.1016/j.omtn.2019.10.006.  Epub 2019 Oct 17.

TraFo-CRISPR: Enhanced Genome Engineering by Transient Foamy Virus 
Vector-Mediated Delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 Components.

Lindel F(1), Dodt CR(1), Weidner N(1), Noll M(1), Bergemann F(1), Behrendt R(2), 
Fischer S(1), Dietrich J(3), Cartellieri M(3), Hamann MV(1), Lindemann D(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, Medical Faculty "Carl Gustav Carus," Technische 
Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany; CRTD/DFG-Center for Regenerative 
Therapies Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(2)Institute of Immunology, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, 
Germany.
(3)Cellex Patient Treatment GmbH, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(4)Institute of Virology, Medical Faculty "Carl Gustav Carus," Technische 
Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany; CRTD/DFG-Center for Regenerative 
Therapies Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany. 
Electronic address: dirk.lindemann@tu-dresden.de.

The adaptation of CRISPR/Cas technology for use in mammals has revolutionized 
genome engineering. In particular with regard to clinical application, efficient 
expression of Cas9 within a narrow time frame is highly desirable to minimize 
the accumulation of off-target editing. We developed an effective, 
aptamer-independent retroviral delivery system for Cas9 mRNAs that takes 
advantage of a unique foamy virus (FV) capability: the efficient encapsidation 
and transfer of non-viral RNAs. This enabled us to create a FV vector toolbox 
for efficient, transient delivery (TraFo) of CRISPR/Cas9 components into 
different target tissues. Co-delivery of Cas9 mRNA by TraFo-Cas9 vectors in 
combination with retroviral, integration-deficient single guide RNA (sgRNA) 
expression enhanced efficacy and specificity of gene-inactivation compared with 
CRISPR/Cas9 lentiviral vector systems. Furthermore, separate TraFo-Cas9 delivery 
allowed the optional inclusion of a repair matrix for efficient gene correction 
or tagging as well as the addition of fluorescent negative selection markers for 
easy identification of off-target editing or incorrect repair events. Thus, the 
TraFo CRISPR toolbox represents an interesting alternative technology for gene 
inactivation and gene editing.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2019.10.006
PMCID: PMC6859288
PMID: 31726388