1. Exp Ther Med. 2019 Dec;18(6):4653-4660. doi: 10.3892/etm.2019.8129. Epub 2019 
Oct 25.

Population pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus in pediatric patients with 
systemic-onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis: Initial dosage recommendations.

Wang D(1), Chen X(1), Xu H(2), Li Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 
201102, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Children's Hospital of Fudan 
University, Shanghai 201102, P.R. China.

Pediatric patients with systemic-onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis (SOJIA) may 
be treated with tacrolimus. However, the therapeutic range for tacrolimus is 
narrow with considerable inter- and intra-individual variability, making it 
difficult to formulate an ideal dosage regimen for personalized treatment. The 
purpose of the present study was to set up a population pharmacokinetics (PPK) 
model of tacrolimus treatment for SOJIA to determine the optimal initial dosage. 
Patients with SOJIA were analyzed using non-linear mixed-effects modeling. 
Different regimens were analyzed using Monte Carlo simulation with concentration 
profiles. A first-order absorption and elimination one-compartment model was 
selected as the most appropriate model for SOJIA. Based on initial dosage 
recommendations, the regimen of 0.5 mg every 24 h (q24h) appeared to be most 
suitable for subjects with a body weight of 5 kg, while the 0.5 mg q12h regimen 
was most suitable for subjects with a body weight of 15-25 kg, the 1/0.5 mg q24h 
regimen was appropriate for the 26-35 kg group and the 1 mg q12h regimen was 
suitable for the subjects with a body weight of 36-50 kg. To the best of our 
knowledge, the present study established the first PPK model of tacrolimus 
treatment that may be used for the selection of the initial dose based on body 
weight of pediatric patients with SOJIA.

Copyright: Â© Wang et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2019.8129
PMCID: PMC6861867
PMID: 31772640