1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2019 Dec 3;7(1):196. doi: 10.1186/s40478-019-0852-x.

KCC2 expression levels are reduced in post mortem brain tissue of Rett syndrome 
patients.

Hinz L(1), Torrella Barrufet J(1), Heine VM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Complex Trait Genetics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive 
Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Complex Trait Genetics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive 
Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. vm.heine@amsterdamumc.nl.
(3)Pediatric Neurology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije 
Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Boelelaan 1085, 1081HV, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. vm.heine@amsterdamumc.nl.

Rett Syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in the 
Methyl CpG binding proteinÂ 2 (MECP2) gene. Deficient K+-Cl-co-transporter 2 
(KCC2) expression is suggested to play a key role in the neurodevelopmental 
delay in RTT patients' neuronal networks. KCC2 is a major player in neuronal 
maturation by supporting the GABAergic switch, through the regulation of 
neuronal chlorine homeostasis. Previous studies suggest that MeCP2 mutations 
lead to changed KCC2 expression levels, thereby causing a disturbance in 
excitation/inhibition (E/I) balance. To investigate this, we performed protein 
and RNA expression analysis on post mortem brain tissue from RTT patients and 
healthy controls. We showed that KCC2 expression, in particular the KCC2a 
isoform, is relatively decreased in RTT patients. The expression of Na+-K+-Cl- 
co-transporter 1 (NKCC1), responsible for the inward transport of chlorine, is 
not affected, leading to a reduced KCC2/NKCC1 ratio in RTT brains. Our report 
confirms KCC2 expression alterations in RTT patients in human brain tissue, 
which is in line with other studies, suggesting affected E/I balance could 
underlie neurodevelopmental defects in RTT patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-019-0852-x
PMCID: PMC6892240
PMID: 31796123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.