1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2019 Dec;11:101-105. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2019.11.001. Epub 2019 Nov 26.

Mutations in the TaPIN1 peptidyl prolyl isomerase gene in Theileria annulata 
parasites isolated in Sudan.

Salim B(1), Chatanga E(2), Jannot G(3), Mossaad E(4), Nakao R(2), Weitzman 
JB(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Khartoum, P.O. Box 32, Khartoum North, Sudan. Electronic address: 
bashirsalim@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratory of Parasitology, Graduate School of Infectious Diseases, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, N18 W9, Sapporo, Hokkaido, 
060-0818, Japan.
(3)Université de Paris, Epigenetics and Cell Fate, CNRS, F-75013, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Pathology, Parasitology and Microbiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Sudan University of Science and Technology, P.O. Box 204, Khartoum, 
Sudan.
(5)Université de Paris, Epigenetics and Cell Fate, CNRS, F-75013, Paris, France. 
Electronic address: jonathan.weitzman@u-paris.fr.

The tick-borne parasite Theileria annulata is the causative agent of tropical 
theileriosis or Mediterranean theileriosis. Infection of bovine leukocytes by 
the obligate intracellular parasites induces proliferative and invasive 
phenotypes associated with activated signaling pathways. The transformed 
phenotypes of infected cells are reversible by treatment with the theilericidal 
drug buparvaquone. Recent reports of resistance to buparvaquone in Africa and 
Asia highlight the need to investigate the mechanisms and prevalence of drug 
resistance. We screened 67 T. annulata isolates from Sudan to investigate 
mutations in the T. annulata prolyl isomerase I gene (TaPIN1). The secreted 
TaPin1 interacts with host proteins to induce pathways driving oncogenic 
transformation and metabolic reprogramming. We found an Alanine-to-Proline 
mutation at position 53 (A53P) in the catalytic loop that was previously found 
in Tunisian drug-resistant samples. This is the first study reporting 
independent confirmation of the A53P mutation in geographically isolated 
samples. We found several additional mutations in the predicted N-terminal 
signal peptide that might affect TaPin1 processing or targeting. We found that 
many parasites also share mutations in both the TaPIN1 and the cytochrome b 
genes, suggesting that these two genes represent important biomarkers to follow 
the spread of resistance in Africa, the Middle East and Asia.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2019.11.001
PMCID: PMC6904843
PMID: 31794951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have no competing interests.