1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2019 Dec 5;7(1):200. doi: 10.1186/s40478-019-0857-5.

Kinesin light chain-1 serine-460 phosphorylation is altered in Alzheimer's 
disease and regulates axonal transport and processing of the amyloid precursor 
protein.

MÃ³rotz GM(1), Glennon EB(1), Greig J(1), Lau DHW(1), Bhembre N(1), Mattedi F(1), 
Muschalik N(2), Noble W(1), Vagnoni A(3), Miller CCJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 125 Coldharbour Lane 
Camberwell, London, SE5 9RX, UK.
(2)Division of Cell Biology, MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, CB2 
0QH, UK.
(3)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 125 Coldharbour Lane 
Camberwell, London, SE5 9RX, UK. alessio.vagnoni@kcl.ac.uk.
(4)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 125 Coldharbour Lane 
Camberwell, London, SE5 9RX, UK. chris.miller@kcl.ac.uk.

Damage to axonal transport is an early pathogenic event in Alzheimer's disease. 
The amyloid precursor protein (APP) is a key axonal transport cargo since 
disruption to APP transport promotes amyloidogenic processing of APP. Moreover, 
altered APP processing itself disrupts axonal transport. The mechanisms that 
regulate axonal transport of APP are therefore directly relevant to Alzheimer's 
disease pathogenesis. APP is transported anterogradely through axons on 
kinesin-1 motors and one route for this transport involves calsyntenin-1, a 
type-1 membrane spanning protein that acts as a direct ligand for kinesin-1 
light chains (KLCs). Thus, loss of calsyntenin-1 disrupts APP axonal transport 
and promotes amyloidogenic processing of APP. Phosphorylation of KLC1 on 
serine-460 has been shown to reduce anterograde axonal transport of 
calsyntenin-1 by inhibiting the KLC1-calsyntenin-1 interaction. Here we 
demonstrate that in Alzheimer's disease frontal cortex, KLC1 levels are reduced 
and the relative levels of KLC1 serine-460 phosphorylation are increased; these 
changes occur relatively early in the disease process. We also show that a KLC1 
serine-460 phosphomimetic mutant inhibits axonal transport of APP in both 
mammalian neurons in culture and in Drosophila neurons in vivo. Finally, we 
demonstrate that expression of the KLC1 serine-460 phosphomimetic mutant 
promotes amyloidogenic processing of APP. Together, these results suggest that 
increased KLC1 serine-460 phosphorylation contributes to Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-019-0857-5
PMCID: PMC6896704
PMID: 31806024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no competing 
interests.