1. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2019 Dec 10;14(1):373. doi: 10.1186/s11671-019-3217-2.

Preliminary Studies on Biodegradable Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles Doped with Fe as a 
Potential Form of Iron Delivery to the Living Organism.

Kielbik P(1)(2), Kaszewski J(3)(4)(5), Dominiak B(3)(4), Damentko M(3)(4), 
Serafińska I(4)(6), Rosowska J(5), Gralak MA(4), Krajewski M(7), Witkowski 
BS(5), Gajewski Z(4), Godlewski M(5), Godlewski MM(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw 
University of Life Sciences, Nowoursynowska 159, 02-776, Warsaw, Poland. 
pskielbik@op.pl.
(2)Veterinary Research Centre, Centre for Biomedical Research, Department of 
Large Animal Diseases with Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw 
University of Life Sciences, Nowoursynowska 100, 02-797, Warsaw, Poland. 
pskielbik@op.pl.
(3)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw 
University of Life Sciences, Nowoursynowska 159, 02-776, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Veterinary Research Centre, Centre for Biomedical Research, Department of 
Large Animal Diseases with Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw 
University of Life Sciences, Nowoursynowska 100, 02-797, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Institute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Al. Lotnikow 32/46, 02-668, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Department of Preclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw 
University of Life Sciences, Ciszewskiego 8, 02-786, Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Institute of Fundamental Technological Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Pawińskiego 5B, 02-106, Warsaw, Poland.

Iron is the crucial element for living organisms and its deficiency is described 
as the most common nutritional disorder all over the world. Nowadays, more 
effective and safe iron supplementation strategies for both humans and animals 
become one of the most important challenges in the therapy of nutritional 
deficiencies. Our previous in vivo studies confirmed safety and biodegradability 
of in-house manufactured zinc oxide-based nanoparticles and their rapid 
distribution to majority of organs and tissues in the body. In vitro 
examinations performed on Caco-2 cell line, a model of epithelial cells of the 
gastrointestinal tract, revealed a low toxicity of studied nanomaterials. In the 
current study, we investigated biodegradable zinc oxide nanoparticles doped with 
Fe(III) as a perspective supplementation strategy for iron deficiency. 
Biodegradable ZnO:Fe nanoparticles were intra-gastrically administered to adult 
mice and following 24 h, animals were sacrificed with collection of internal 
organs for further analyses. The iron concentration measured with atomic 
absorption spectrometry and histological staining (Perl's method) showed a rapid 
distribution of iron-doped nanoparticles to tissues specifically related with 
iron homeostasis. Accumulation of iron was also visible within hepatocytes and 
around blood vessels within the spleen, which might indicate the transfer of 
Fe-doped nanoparticles from the bloodstream into the tissue. Reassuming, 
preliminary results obtained in the current study suggest that biodegradable ZnO 
nanoparticles doped with Fe might be a good carriers of exogenous iron in the 
living body. Therefore, subsequent investigations focus on determination an 
exact mechanisms related with an iron deposition in the tissue and influence of 
nanoparticle carriers on iron metabolism are required.

DOI: 10.1186/s11671-019-3217-2
PMCID: PMC6904721
PMID: 31823131

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.