1. J Chem Inf Model. 2020 Feb 24;60(2):915-922. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00863.
Epub  2019 Dec 31.

Catalytic Role of Gln202 in the Carboligation Reaction Mechanism of Yeast AHAS: 
A QM/MM Study.

Mendoza F(1), Medina FE(1), Jiménez VA(1), Jaña GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Químicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas , Universidad 
Andres Bello , Autopista Concepción-Talcahuano , 7100 Talcahuano , Chile.

Acetohydroxyacid synthase (AHAS) is a thiamin diphosphate-dependent enzyme 
involved in the biosynthesis of valine, leucine, isoleucine, and lysine. 
Experimental evidence has shown that mutation of the Gln202 residue results in a 
decrease in the enzymatic activity, thus suggesting the main role of the 
carboligation catalyzed by AHAS. It has been postulated that this residue acts 
as an acid/base group, protonating the carbonyl oxygen from the 2-ketoacid 
substrate, during the carboligation reaction. However, previous studies have 
revealed that 2-ketoacid is not engaged in catalytically relevant interactions 
with ionizable groups that can act as an acid/base group during the catalysis. 
Therefore, it has been proposed that the carboligation reaction could occur 
through an intramolecular proton transfer without the assistance of an amino 
acid residue with acid-base properties. To decipher the role of Gln202, in this 
work, we studied the last two catalytic steps of the AHAS through quantum 
mechanics/molecular mechanics calculations using a full enzyme model of the 
wild-type AHAS and the Gln202Ala mutant. Our results indicate that the 
carboligation mechanism occurs through an intramolecular proton transfer that 
does not require the action of an additional acid-base group. The mechanism is 
composed of two steps in which the last one is rate-limiting. Our findings 
reveal that Gln202 stabilizes a catalytic water molecule in the reactive site 
through electrostatic contributions that are mostly relevant during the 
carboligation step, in agreement with experimental evidence. The catalytic water 
engages in intermolecular hydrogen bonds with the reacting species and makes a 
strong electronic contribution to the stabilization of the reaction intermediate 
(AL-ThDP).

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00863
PMID: 31841000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]