1. SLAS Discov. 2020 Mar;25(3):241-252. doi: 10.1177/2472555219883623. Epub 2019 
Dec 19.

Forced Self-Modification Assays as a Strategy to Screen MonoPARP Enzymes.

Wigle TJ(1), Church WD(1), Majer CR(1), Swinger KK(1), Aybar D(1), Schenkel 
LB(1), Vasbinder MM(1), Brendes A(2), Beck C(2), Prahm M(2), Wegener D(2), Chang 
P(1), Kuntz KW(1).

Author information:
(1)Ribon Therapeutics Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Evotec SE, Hamburg, Germany.

Mono(ADP-ribosylation) (MARylation) and poly(ADP-ribosylation) (PARylation) are 
posttranslational modifications found on multiple amino acids. There are 12 
enzymatically active mono(ADP-ribose) polymerase (monoPARP) enzymes and 4 
enzymatically active poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (polyPARP) enzymes that use 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) as the ADP-ribose donating substrate to 
generate these modifications. While there are approved drugs and clinical trials 
ongoing for the enzymes that perform PARylation, MARylation is gaining 
recognition for its role in immune function, inflammation, and cancer. However, 
there is a lack of chemical probes to study the function of monoPARPs in cells 
and in vivo. An important first step to generating chemical probes for monoPARPs 
is to develop biochemical assays to enable hit finding, and determination of the 
potency and selectivity of inhibitors. Complicating the development of enzymatic 
assays is that it is poorly understood how monoPARPs engage their substrates. To 
overcome this, we have developed a family-wide approach to developing robust 
high-throughput monoPARP assays where the enzymes are immobilized and forced to 
self-modify using biotinylated-NAD+, which is detected using a 
dissociation-enhanced lanthanide fluorescence immunoassay (DELFIA) readout. 
Herein we describe the development of assays for 12 monoPARPs and 3 polyPARPs 
and apply them to understand the potency and selectivity of a focused library of 
inhibitors across this family.

DOI: 10.1177/2472555219883623
PMCID: PMC7036481
PMID: 31855104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
authors declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: T.J.W., W.D.C., 
C.R.M., K.K.S., D.A., L.B.S., M.M.V., P.C., and K.W.K. are current or former 
employees and stockholders of Ribon Therapeutics Inc.; A.B., C.B., M.P., and 
D.W. are employees of Evotec SE.