1. Cell Chem Biol. 2020 Jan 16;27(1):66-73.e7. doi:
10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.11.014.  Epub 2019 Dec 16.

Discovery of an AKT Degrader with Prolonged Inhibition of Downstream Signaling.

You I(1), Erickson EC(2), Donovan KA(1), Eleuteri NA(3), Fischer ES(1), Gray 
NS(4), Toker A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA; Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Medicine and Cancer Center, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(3)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA; Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address: 
nathanael_gray@dfci.harvard.edu.
(5)Department of Pathology, Medicine and Cancer Center, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic 
address: atoker@bidmc.harvard.edu.

The PI3K/AKT signaling cascade is one of the most commonly dysregulated pathways 
in cancer, with over half of tumors exhibiting aberrant AKT activation. Although 
potent small-molecule AKT inhibitors have entered clinical trials, robust and 
durable therapeutic responses have not been observed. As an alternative strategy 
to target AKT, we report the development of INY-03-041, a pan-AKT degrader 
consisting of the ATP-competitive AKT inhibitor GDC-0068 conjugated to 
lenalidomide, a recruiter of the E3 ubiquitin ligase substrate adaptor Cereblon 
(CRBN). INY-03-041 induced potent degradation of all three AKT isoforms and 
displayed enhanced anti-proliferative effects relative to GDC-0068. Notably, 
INY-03-041 promoted sustained AKT degradation and inhibition of downstream 
signaling effects for up to 96 h, even after compound washout. Our findings 
suggest that AKT degradation may confer prolonged pharmacological effects 
compared with inhibition, and highlight the potential advantages of AKT-targeted 
degradation.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.11.014
PMCID: PMC6980747
PMID: 31859249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS A.T. is a consultant 
for Oncologie, Inc. N.S.G. is a Scientific Founder and member of the Scientific 
Advisory Board (SAB) of C4 Therapeutics, Syros, Soltego, B2S, Gatekeeper and 
Petra Pharmaceuticals and has received research funding from Novartis, Astellas, 
Taiho and Deerfield. E.S.F. is a founder and/or member of the scientific 
advisory board (SAB), and equity holder of C4 Therapeutics and Civetta 
Therapeutics and a consultant to Novartis, AbbVie and Pfizer. The Fischer lab 
receives research funding from Novartis, Deerfield and Astellas. I.Y., E.C.E., 
K.A.D., E.S.F., A.T., and N.S.G. are inventors on a patent application related 
to the AKT degraders described in this manuscript.