1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2019 Dec 20;20(Suppl 24):668. doi: 
10.1186/s12859-019-3252-0.

Investigating skewness to understand gene expression heterogeneity in large 
patient cohorts.

Church BV(1)(2), Williams HT(1)(2), Mar JC(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems and Computational Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, 10461, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Columbia University, 2990 Broadway, New York, 
10027, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Systems and Computational Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, 10461, NY, USA. j.mar@uq.edu.au.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, 10461, NY, USA. j.mar@uq.edu.au.
(5)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, 4072, QLD, Australia. j.mar@uq.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Skewness is an under-utilized statistical measure that captures the 
degree of asymmetry in the distribution of any dataset. This study applied a new 
metric based on skewness to identify regulators or genes that have outlier 
expression in large patient cohorts.
RESULTS: We investigated whether specific patterns of skewed expression were 
related to the enrichment of biological pathways or genomic properties like DNA 
methylation status. Our study used publicly available datasets that were 
generated using both RNA-sequencing and microarray technology platforms. For 
comparison, the datasets selected for this study also included different samples 
derived from control donors and cancer patients. When comparing the shift in 
expression skewness between cancer and control datasets, we observed an 
enrichment of pathways related to the immune function that reflects an increase 
towards positive skewness in the cancer relative to control datasets. A 
significant correlation was also detected between expression skewness and the 
top 500 genes corresponding to the most significant differential DNA methylation 
occurring in the promotor regions for four Cancer Genome Atlas cancer cohorts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that expression skewness can reveal new 
insights into transcription based on outlier and asymmetrical behaviour in large 
patient cohorts.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-019-3252-0
PMCID: PMC6923883
PMID: 31861976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.