1. Physiol Rep. 2019 Dec;7(24):e14296. doi: 10.14814/phy2.14296.

Delayed afterdepolarization-induced triggered activity in cardiac purkinje cells 
mediated through cytosolic calcium diffusion waves.

Shah C(1), Jiwani S(2), Limbu B(2), Weinberg S(3)(4), Deo M(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia.
(2)Department of Engineering, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, Virginia.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
Ohio.

Cardiac Purkinje cells (PCs) are more susceptible to action potential 
abnormalities as compared to ventricular myocytes (VMs), which could be 
associated with their distinct intracellular calcium handling. We developed a 
detailed biophysical model of a mouse cardiac PC, which importantly reproduces 
the experimentally observed biphasic cytosolic calcium waves. The model includes 
a stochastic gating formulation for the opening and closing of ryanodine 
receptor (RyR) channels, simulated with a Monte Carlo method, to accurately 
reproduce cytosolic calcium wave propagation and the effects of spontaneous 
calcium release events. Simulations predict that during an action potential, 
smaller cytosolic calcium wavelets propagated from the sarcolemma towards the 
center of the cell and initiated larger magnitude cell-wide calcium waves via a 
calcium-induced-calcium release mechanism. In the presence of RyR mutations, 
frequent spontaneous calcium leaks from sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) initiated 
calcium waves, which upon reaching the cell periphery produced delayed 
afterdepolarizations (DADs) via sodium-calcium exchanger (NCX) and T-type 
calcium (ICaT ) channel activation. In the presence of isoproterenol-mediated 
effects, DADs induced triggered activity by reactivation of fast sodium 
channels. Based on our model, we found that the activation of either L-type 
calcium channels (ICaL ), ICaT , sodium-potassium exchanger (INaK ) or NCX is 
sufficient for occurrence of triggered activity; however, a partial blockade of 
ICaT or INaK is essential for its successful termination. Our modeling study 
highlights valuable insights into the mechanisms of DAD-induced triggered 
activity mediated via cytosolic calcium waves in cardiac PCs and may elucidate 
the increased arrhythmogeneity in PCs.

Â© 2019 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 
on behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.14296
PMCID: PMC6928245
PMID: 31872561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests related 
to the study presented in this manuscript.