1. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2020 Mar;303(3):594-599. doi: 10.1002/ar.24330. Epub 2019 
Dec 26.

Congenital Middle Ear Malformation with Common Deafness Gene Mutation Analysis: 
A Review of 813 Profound Sensorineural Hearing Loss Child Patients.

Dong Y(1)(2), He X(1), Wu W(1), Yang S(1), Peng A(1), Xiao Z(1), Liu Y(1), Gao 
S(1), Tan D(3), Liu XZ(1)(2), Xie D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Institute of Otology, The 
Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of 
Xiangnan University, Chenzhou, Hunan, China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Leonard M. Miller School of 
Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.

Deafness gene variants play a key role in inner ear malformations. However, the 
relationship between congenital middle ear malformations and common deafness 
genes (GJB2, SLC26A4, and mtDNA) in profound sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) 
child patients remains poorly investigated. Here we showed that there was no 
statistical significance in the total mutation frequency of the three common 
deafness genes in the middle ear malformation group (21.2%, 41/193) in 
comparison with the normal middle ear and inner ear group (21.0%, 116/553) (χ2 = 
0.0061, p = 0.940). Moreover, the mutation ratio of GJB2 and SLC26A4 in the 
middle ear malformation group (18.7%, 36/193; 2.6%, 5/193) was not significantly 
different from that in the normal middle ear and inner ear group (17.7%, 98/553; 
2.4%, 13/553) (χ2 = 0.084, p = 0.772; χ2 = 0.0000, p = 1.000). The mutation 
ratio of GJB2 235delC and GJB2 79G>A in the middle ear malformation group (8.8%, 
17/193; 8.8%, 17/193) was almost the same to that in the normal middle ear and 
inner ear group (8.6%, 48/553; 6.7%, 37/553) (χ2 = 0.0030, p = 0.957; χ2 = 
0.9556, p = 0.328). The high jugular bulb subgroup analysis also showed the same 
results. Our findings suggested that GJB2, SLC26A4, and mtDNA mutations might 
not be related to the middle ear malformations in profound SNHL child patients. 
Anat Rec, 303:594-599, 2020. © 2019 American Association for Anatomy.

© 2019 American Association for Anatomy.

DOI: 10.1002/ar.24330
PMID: 31876389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]