1. Plants (Basel). 2019 Dec 24;9(1):27. doi: 10.3390/plants9010027.

Enzymatic Properties of Recombinant Phospho-Mimetic Photorespiratory Glycolate 
Oxidases from Arabidopsis thaliana and Zea mays.

Jossier M(1), Liu Y(1), Massot S(1), Hodges M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Sciences Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, INRA, 
Université d'Evry, Université Paris-Diderot, Université Paris-Saclay, 91405 
Orsay CEDEX, France.

In photosynthetic organisms, the photorespiratory cycle is an essential pathway 
leading to the recycling of 2-phosphoglycolate, produced by the oxygenase 
activity of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase, to 
3-phosphoglycerate. Although photorespiration is a widely studied process, its 
regulation remains poorly understood. In this context, phosphoproteomics studies 
have detected six phosphorylation sites associated with photorespiratory 
glycolate oxidases from Arabidopsis thaliana (AtGOX1 and AtGOX2). 
Phosphorylation sites at T4, T158, S212 and T265 were selected and studied using 
Arabidopsis and maize recombinant glycolate oxidase (GOX) proteins mutated to 
produce either phospho-dead or phospho-mimetic enzymes in order to compare their 
kinetic parameters. Phospho-mimetic mutations (T4D, T158D and T265D) led to a 
severe inhibition of GOX activity without altering the KM glycolate. In two 
cases (T4D and T158D), this was associated with the loss of the cofactor, flavin 
mononucleotide. Phospho-dead versions exhibited different modifications 
according to the phospho-site and/or the GOX mutated. Indeed, all T4V and T265A 
enzymes had kinetic parameters similar to wild-type GOX and all T158V proteins 
showed low activities while S212A and S212D mutations had no effect on AtGOX1 
activity and AtGOX2/ZmGO1 activities were 50% reduced. Taken together, our 
results suggest that GOX phosphorylation has the potential to modulate GOX 
activity.

DOI: 10.3390/plants9010027
PMCID: PMC7020226
PMID: 31878154

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.