1. Sci Rep. 2019 Dec 23;9(1):19655. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-56295-0.

Reduced TRPM8 expression underpins reduced migraine risk and attenuated cold 
pain sensation in humans.

Gavva NR(1), Sandrock R(2), Arnold GE(2), Davis M(2), Lamas E(2), Lindvay C(2), 
Li CM(2), Smith B(2), Backonja M(3), Gabriel K(2), Vargas G(2).

Author information:
(1)Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, California, USA. narender.gavva@takeda.com.
(2)Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, California, USA.
(3)Worldwide Clinical Trials, Morrisville, North Carolina, USA.

Multiple genome-wide association studies have identified non-coding 
single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) near (e.g., rs10166942[C]) or within 
(rs17862920[T]) the TRPM8 gene that encodes a cold thermosensor is associated 
with reduced migraine risk. Furthermore, rs10166942[C]) and rs10166942[T]) are 
more prevalent in populations that reside in hotter and colder climates, 
respectively. Here we assessed whether these alleles affect TRPM8 expression in 
humans and human physiologic responses to cold challenge. Here we show that 
TRPM8 expression is decreased from the chromosome harboring the rs10166942[C] 
allele in the human dorsal root ganglia. Moreover, carriers of rs10166942[C] 
required significantly lower temperatures and longer duration of exposure to 
reach a cold pain threshold (CPTh), which correlated with decreased TRPM8 
expression expected in the carriers. This study provides evidence for a 
genotype-dependent influence on cold pain sensation suggesting that carriers of 
the reduced migraine risk allele have reduced sensitivity to cold stimuli and 
that TRPM8 acts as a cold thermosensor and cold pain transducer in humans. 
Reduced TRPM8 expression and function underpins the migraine protection in 
carriers of rs10166942[C]; thus, the evaluation of TRPM8 antagonists as migraine 
therapeutics is warranted. Furthermore, these results provide mechanistic 
insights for evolutionary positive selection of rs10166942[T] allele in 
adaptation along latitudinal cline to colder climates.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-56295-0
PMCID: PMC6927963
PMID: 31873179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.R.G., R.S., G.E.A., M.D., E.L., C.L., C.M.L., 
K.G. and G.V. have been employees of and own stock in Amgen. M.B. was an 
employee of PRA Health Sciences, where the study was conducted. N.R.G., B.S., 
K.G., and G.V. are currently employees of, Takeda California, Novartis, EMD 
Serono, and CuraSen Therapeutics, respectively.