1. Pol J Microbiol. 2019 Dec;68(4):449-456. doi: 10.33073/pjm-2019-044. Epub 2019
 Oct 22.

Molecular Epidemiology of Hepatitis B Virus in Turkish Cypriot.

Sumer U(1), Sayan M(2).

Author information:
(1)Near East University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology 
, Nicosia , Northern Cyprus.
(2)Kocaeli University, Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Laboratory, PCR Unit , 
Kocaeli , Turkey ; Near East University, Research Centre of Experimental Health 
Sciences , Nicosia , Northern Cyprus.

There is an increased demand for molecular and epidemiological information 
regarding Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) infection as the disease severity depends on 
these specifications. We have aimed to analyze nucleos(t)ide analogues (NA) 
resistance and typical HBsAg escape mutations with the dispersion of HBV 
genotype/subgenotype/HBsAg serotypes on overlapping pol/S gene regions in the 
Turkish population. Samples were collected in Northern Cyprus. Reverse 
transcriptase (rt) region between 80-250 amino acids were amplified. Typical 
HBsAg escape mutations were determined as HBIg escape (6.48%), vaccine escape 
(8.34%), HBsAg misdiagnosis (9.25%), and immune escape mutations (8.34%). NAs 
resistances were determined as primary (2.78%), partial (2.78%), and 
compensatory mutations (26.85%) in overlapping pol/S gene region. The study 
patients were predominantly infected with HBV genotype D/D1 (98%). However, the 
predominant HBsAg serotype was ayw2 (99%). The most common NA resistance 
mutation was rtQ215H/P/S (16.67%), however, for S gene the misdiagnosis 
mutations were observed most frequently (9.25%). We can conclude that HBV D/D1 
is the dominant strain and ayw2 is the dominant serotype in the Turkish Cypriot. 
Cyprus is an island located in the Eastern Mediterranean region, and it is, 
therefore, a key location for human trafficking and immigration; as a result of 
this reputation, it is necessary to analyze HBV phylogenetically for local 
dynamics, and our results indicate that treatment naïve population is prone to 
these pol/S gene mutations. However, if HBV strains were also analyzed among 
Greek Cypriots too, this would enable a complete island survey. With this work, 
we believe that we have enlightened this subject for further research. There is 
an increased demand for molecular and epidemiological information regarding 
Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) infection as the disease severity depends on these 
specifications. We have aimed to analyze nucleos(t)ide analogues (NA) resistance 
and typical HBsAg escape mutations with the dispersion of HBV 
genotype/subgenotype/HBsAg serotypes on overlapping pol/S gene regions in the 
Turkish population. Samples were collected in Northern Cyprus. Reverse 
transcriptase (rt) region between 80–250 amino acids were amplified. Typical 
HBsAg escape mutations were determined as HBIg escape (6.48%), vaccine escape 
(8.34%), HBsAg misdiagnosis (9.25%), and immune escape mutations (8.34%). NAs 
resistances were determined as primary (2.78%), partial (2.78%), and 
compensatory mutations (26.85%) in overlapping pol/S gene region. The study 
patients were predominantly infected with HBV genotype D/D1 (98%). However, the 
predominant HBsAg serotype was ayw2 (99%). The most common NA resistance 
mutation was rtQ215H/P/S (16.67%), however, for S gene the misdiagnosis 
mutations were observed most frequently (9.25%). We can conclude that HBV D/D1 
is the dominant strain and ayw2 is the dominant serotype in the Turkish Cypriot. 
Cyprus is an island located in the Eastern Mediterranean region, and it is, 
therefore, a key location for human trafficking and immigration; as a result of 
this reputation, it is necessary to analyze HBV phylogenetically for local 
dynamics, and our results indicate that treatment naïve population is prone to 
these pol/S gene mutations. However, if HBV strains were also analyzed among 
Greek Cypriots too, this would enable a complete island survey. With this work, 
we believe that we have enlightened this subject for further research.

DOI: 10.33073/pjm-2019-044
PMCID: PMC7260636
PMID: 31880889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest This is a Ph.D. thesis 
project. The authors do not report any financial or personal connections with 
other persons or organizations, which might negatively affect the contents of 
this publication and/or claim authorship rights to this publication.