1. Chembiochem. 2020 May 15;21(10):1499-1504. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201900721. Epub 
2020 Feb 18.

Tuning Enzyme Activity for Nonaqueous Solvents: Engineering an Enantioselective 
"Michaelase" for Catalysis in High Concentrations of Ethanol.

Guo C(1), Biewenga L(1), Lubberink M(1)(2), van Merkerk R(1), Poelarends GJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Biology, Groningen Research 
Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, 
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Present address: School of Chemistry, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 
The University of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK.

Enzymes have evolved to function under aqueous conditions and may not exhibit 
features essential for biocatalytic application, such as the ability to function 
in high concentrations of an organic solvent. Consequently, protein engineering 
is often required to tune an enzyme for catalysis in non-aqueous solvents. In 
this study, we have used a collection of nearly all single mutants of 
4-oxalocrotonate tautomerase, which promiscuously catalyzes synthetically useful 
Michael-type additions of acetaldehyde to various nitroolefins, to investigate 
the effect of each mutation on the ability of this enzyme to retain its 
"Michaelase" activity in elevated concentrations of ethanol. Examination of this 
mutability landscape allowed the identification of two hotspot positions, Ser30 
and Ala33, at which mutations are beneficial for catalysis in high ethanol 
concentrations. The "hotspot" position Ala33 was then randomized in a highly 
enantioselective, but ethanol-sensitive 4-OT variant (L8F/M45Y/F50A) to generate 
an improved enzyme variant (L8F/A33I/M45Y/F50A) that showed great ethanol 
stability and efficiently catalyzes the enantioselective addition of 
acetaldehyde to nitrostyrene in 40 % ethanol (permitting high substrate loading) 
to give the desired γ-nitroaldehyde product in excellent isolated yield (89 %) 
and enantiopurity (ee=98 %). The presented work demonstrates the power of 
mutability-landscape-guided enzyme engineering for efficient biocatalysis in 
non-aqueous solvents.

© 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201900721
PMCID: PMC7317446
PMID: 31886617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.