1. Radiat Oncol. 2019 Dec 31;15(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s13014-019-1454-2.

Therapeutic effect of whole brain radiotherapy on advanced NSCLC between EGFR 
TKI-naïve and TKI-resistant.

Zhao L(1), Cai X(2), Chen D(1), Ye X(1), Gao M(1), Lu L(1), Su H(1), Su M(1), 
Hou M(1), Xie C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation and Medical Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital 
of Wenzhou Medical University, No.2 Fuxue Lane, Wenzhou, 325000, Zhejiang, 
China.
(2)Department of Ultrasonography, the First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou 
Medical University, Wenzhou, 325000, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Radiation and Medical Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital 
of Wenzhou Medical University, No.2 Fuxue Lane, Wenzhou, 325000, Zhejiang, 
China. wzxiecongying@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The development of epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) has dramatically improved the prognosis of patients with 
EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The purpose of this study is to 
investigate the clinical outcome with or without EGFR-TKI resistance before WBRT 
and the sequence between EGFT-TKIs and whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) of 
EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients who developed multiple brain metastases (BMs).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Three hundred forty-four EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients with 
multiple BMs were reviewed. Enrolled patients were divided into TKI-naïve group 
and TKI-resistant group. The intracranial progression-free survival (PFS) and 
overall survival (OS) were analyzed via the Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: For patients with multiple BMs treated by WBRT, the median intracranial 
PFS and OS were longer in the TKI-naïve group than those in the TKI-resistant 
group, but there were no statistically significant between two groups 
(Intracranial PFS: 7.7 vs. 5.4 months, p = 0.052; OS: 11.2 vs. 9.2 months, 
p = 0.106). For patients with Lung-molGPA 0-2, no significant differences in 
median intracranial PFS (6.2 vs. 5.2 months, p = 0.123) and OS (7.8 vs. 
6.7 months, p = 0.514) between TKI-naïve and TKI-resistant groups. For patients 
with Lung-molGPA 2.5-4, intracranial PFS: 12.8 vs. 10.1 months; OS: 23.3 vs. 
15.3 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study found that there were no difference in intracranial PFS 
and OS in all patients between the two groups of TKI-naïve and TKI-resistant. 
But for patients in subgroup of Lung-molGPA 2.5-4, there were a better 
intracranial PFS and OS in TKI-naïve group.

DOI: 10.1186/s13014-019-1454-2
PMCID: PMC6938625
PMID: 31892337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.