1. J Breast Cancer. 2019 Dec;22(4):661-666. doi: 10.4048/jbc.2019.22.e44.

Ribociclib-Related Stevens-Johnson Syndrome: Oncologic Awareness, Case Report, 
and Literature Review.

López-Gómez V(1), Yarza R(1), Muñoz-González H(2), Revilla E(3), Enrech S(4), 
González-Valle O(5), Tolosa P(1)(6), Ciruelos E(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, University Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Pathology, University Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Clinical Oncology, Getafe Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Getafe Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Division of Gyneco-Oncology, Breast Cancer Unit, University Hospital 12 de 
Octubre, Madrid, Spain.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis belong to a severe 
dermatopathic spectrum that includes frequently fatal mucocutaneous 
manifestations consisting of whole epidermal necrosis and sloughing with bullous 
transformation, blistering, and further skin detachment. Notably, cancer 
patients are at higher risk of developing SJS than the general population as a 
consequence of both the nature of neoplastic disease and frequent exposure to 
anticancer drugs. Ribociclib is a newly approved cycline-dependent kinase 
inhibitor that has been recently associated with a single case of SJS. We hereby 
present a case of ribociclib-related SJS. Early detection of threatening skin 
lesions is crucial to permit the immediate discontinuation of ribociclib given 
the predictable and unacceptable risk level. In cases of established SJS, early 
aggressive support should be initiated, ribociclib should be abruptly 
discontinued, and specific treatment based on actual evidence should be started.

© 2019 Korean Breast Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.4048/jbc.2019.22.e44
PMCID: PMC6933037
PMID: 31897340

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.