1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2019 Nov 27;17:122-132. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtm.2019.11.015. eCollection 2020 Jun 12.

Micro-dystrophin Gene Therapy Partially Enhances Exercise Capacity in Older 
Adult mdx Mice.

Rodgers BD(1), Bishaw Y(1), Kagel D(1), Ramos JN(2)(3), Maricelli JW(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington Center for Muscle Biology, 
Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Senator Paul D. Wellstone Muscular Dystrophy 
Specialized Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(3)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.

Micro-dystrophin (μDys) gene therapeutics can improve striated muscle structure 
and function in different animal models of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Most 
studies, however, used young mdx mice that lack a pronounced dystrophic 
phenotype, short treatment periods, and limited muscle function tests. We, 
therefore, determined the relative efficacy of two previously described μDys 
gene therapeutics (rAAV6:μDysH3 and rAAV6:μDys5) in 6-month-old mdx mice using a 
6-month treatment regimen and forced exercise. Forelimb and hindlimb grip 
strength, metabolic rate (VO2 max), running efficiency (energy expenditure), and 
serum creatine kinase levels similarly improved in mdx mice treated with either 
vector. Both vectors produced nearly identical dose-responses in all assays. 
They also partially prevented the degenerative effects of repeated 
high-intensity exercise on muscle histology, although none of the metrics 
examined was restored to normal wild-type levels. Moreover, neither vector had 
any consistent effect on respiration while exercising. These data together 
suggest that, although μDys gene therapy can improve isolated and systemic 
muscle function, it may be only partially effective when dystrophinopathies are 
advanced or when muscle structure is significantly challenged, as with 
high-intensity exercise. This further suggests that restoring muscle function to 
near-normal levels will likely require ancillary or combinatorial treatments 
capable of enhancing muscle strength.

© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2019.11.015
PMCID: PMC6939027
PMID: 31909085