1. Tuberc Respir Dis (Seoul). 2020 Jan;83(1):20-30. doi: 10.4046/trd.2019.0065.

Treatment of Isoniazid-Resistant Pulmonary Tuberculosis.

Jhun BW(1), Koh WJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea. wjkoh@skku.edu.

Tuberculosis (TB) remains a threat to public health and is the leading cause of 
death globally. Isoniazid (INH) is an important first-line agent for the 
treatment of TB considering its early bactericidal activity. Resistance to INH 
is now the most common type of resistance. Resistance to INH reduces the 
probability of treatment success and increases the risk of acquiring resistance 
to other first-line drugs such as rifampicin (RIF), thereby increasing the risk 
of multidrug-resistant-TB. Studies in the 1970s and 1980s showed high success 
rates for INH-resistant TB cases receiving regimens comprised of first-line 
drugs. However, recent data have indicated that INH-resistant TB patients 
treated with only first-line drugs have poor outcomes. Fortunately, based on 
recent systematic meta-analyses, the World Health Organization published 
consolidated guidelines on drug-resistant TB in 2019. Their key recommendations 
are treatment with RIF-ethambutol (EMB)-pyrazinamide (PZA)-levofloxacin (LFX) 
for 6 months and no addition of injectable agents to the treatment regimen. The 
guidelines also emphasize the importance of excluding resistance to RIF before 
starting RIF-EMB-PZA-LFX regimen. Additionally, when the diagnosis of 
INH-resistant TB is confirmed long after starting the first-line TB treatment, 
the clinician must decide whether to start a 6-month course of RIF-EMB-PZA-LFX 
based on the patient's condition. However, these recommendations are based on 
observational studies, not randomized controlled trials, and are thus 
conditional and based on low certainty of the effect estimates. Therefore, 
further work is needed to optimize the treatment of INH-resistant TB.

CopyrightÂ©2020. The Korean Academy of Tuberculosis and Respiratory Diseases.

DOI: 10.4046/trd.2019.0065
PMCID: PMC6953491
PMID: 31905429

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Won-Jung Koh served on Advisory Boards for 
Johnson and Johnson and Insmed, not associated with the submitted work. Dr. 
Byung Woo Jhun has no conflicts of interest.