1. Gene Ther. 2020 May;27(5):209-225. doi: 10.1038/s41434-019-0119-y. Epub 2020
Jan  3.

Integrating gene delivery and gene-editing technologies by adenoviral vector 
transfer of optimized CRISPR-Cas9 components.

Maggio I(1)(2), Zittersteijn HA(2), Wang Q(2), Liu J(2), Janssen JM(2), Ojeda 
IT(2), van der Maarel SM(3), Lankester AC(1), Hoeben RC(2), Gon√ßalves MAFV(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics/Willem-Alexander Kinderziekenhuis (WAKZ), Leiden 
University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cell and Chemical Biology (CCB), Leiden University Medical 
Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Einthovenweg 
20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Cell and Chemical Biology (CCB), Leiden University Medical 
Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
M.F.V.Goncalves@lumc.nl.

Enhancing the intracellular delivery and performance of RNA-guided CRISPR-Cas9 
nucleases (RGNs) remains in demand. Here, we show that nuclear translocation of 
commonly used Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 (SpCas9) proteins is suboptimal. 
Hence, we generated eCas9.4NLS by endowing the high-specificity eSpCas9(1.1) 
nuclease (eCas9.2NLS) with additional nuclear localization signals (NLSs). We 
demonstrate that eCas9.4NLS coupled to prototypic or optimized guide RNAs 
achieves efficient targeted DNA cleavage and probe the performance of SpCas9 
proteins with different NLS compositions at target sequences embedded in 
heterochromatin versus euchromatin. Moreover, after adenoviral vector 
(AdV)-mediated transfer of SpCas9 expression units, unbiased quantitative 
immunofluorescence microscopy revealed 2.3-fold higher eCas9.4NLS nuclear 
enrichment levels than those observed for high-specificity eCas9.2NLS. This 
improved nuclear translocation yielded in turn robust gene editing after 
nonhomologous end joining repair of targeted double-stranded DNA breaks. In 
particular, AdV delivery of eCas9.4NLS into muscle progenitor cells resulted in 
significantly higher editing frequencies at defective DMD alleles causing 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) than those achieved by AdVs encoding the 
parental, eCas9.2NLS, protein. In conclusion, this work provides a strong 
rationale for integrating viral vector and optimized gene-editing technologies 
to bring about enhanced RGN delivery and performance.

DOI: 10.1038/s41434-019-0119-y
PMCID: PMC7253353
PMID: 31900423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.