1. Aging (Albany NY). 2020 Jan 3;12(1):138-155. doi: 10.18632/aging.102606. Epub 
2020 Jan 3.

Lycorine Induces autophagy-associated apoptosis by targeting MEK2 and enhances 
vemurafenib activity in colorectal cancer.

Hu M(1), Yu Z(1), Mei P(2), Li J(1), Luo D(3), Zhang H(4), Zhou M(5), Liang 
F(5), Chen R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Union 
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Wuhan First Hospital, Wuhan, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, 
The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(5)Department of Acupuncture, Hubei Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Wuhan, China.

Erratum in
    Aging (Albany NY). 2020 Apr 2;12(7):6488-6489. doi: 10.18632/aging.103011.

Lycorine is a powerful anti-cancer agent against various cancer cell lines with 
minor side effects. However, the detailed mechanisms of its effects in 
colorectal cancer (CRC) remain unclear. In this study, we investigated the 
function and mechanism of lycorine against CRC both in vitro and in vivo. 
Molecular docking modeling was used to identify potential inhibitory targets of 
lycorine in CRC. Cell viability was measured using the Cell Counting Kit-8 
assay, and apoptosis was measured using flow cytometry. Autophagosomes were 
examined using transmission electron microscopy and confocal microscopy. 
HCT116-derived xenografts were constructed to analyze the effect of lycorine in 
CRC in vivo. Using the CDOCKER algorithm, we determined that lycorine has four 
interactions with the conserved domain of mitogen-activated protein kinase 
kinase 2 (MEK2). This prediction was further confirmed by the degradation of 
phosphorylated MEK2 and its downstream targets after lycorine treatment, and 
MEK2 overexpression abolished lycorine-induced autophagy-associated apoptosis. 
Additionally, we revealed that the combination of vemurafenib and lycorine had 
better effects in CRC models in vitro and in vivo than monotherapy. Our findings 
identified lycorine as an effective MEK2 inhibitor and suggested that the 
combination of lycorine and vemurafenib could be used to treat CRC.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.102606
PMCID: PMC6977686
PMID: 31901897

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors have declared 
that no conflicts of interest exists.