1. Korean J Parasitol. 2019 Dec;57(6):671-680. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2019.57.6.671.
Epub  2019 Dec 31.

Partial Characterization of Two Cathepsin D Family Aspartic Peptidases of 
Clonorchis sinensis.

Kang JM(1)(2), Yoo WG(3), Lê HG(1)(2), Thái TL(1)(2), Hong SJ(3), Sohn WM(1), Na 
BK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, and Institute of Health 
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University College of Medicine, Jinju 52727, 
Korea.
(2)BK21Plus Team for Anti-aging Biotechnology and Industry, Department of 
Convergence Medical Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 52727, Korea.
(3)Department of Medical Environmental Biology, Chung-Ang University College of 
Medicine, Seoul 06974, Korea.

Cathepsin D (CatD, EC 3.4.23.5) is a member belonging to the subfamily of 
aspartic endopeptidases, which are classified into the MEROPS clan AA, family 
A1. Helminth parasites express a large set of different peptidases that play 
pivotal roles in parasite biology and pathophysiology. However, CatD is less 
well known than the other classes of peptidases in terms of biochemical 
properties and biological functions. In this study, we identified 2 novel CatDs 
(CsCatD1 and CsCatD2) of Clonorchis sinensis and partially characterized their 
properties. Both CsCatDs represent typical enzymes sharing amino acid residues 
and motifs that are tightly conserved in the CatD superfamily of proteins. Both 
CsCatDs showed similar patterns of expression in different developmental stages 
of C. sinensis, but CsCatD2 was also expressed in metacercariae. CsCatD2 was 
mainly expressed in the intestines and eggs of C. sinensis. Sera obtained from 
rats experimentally infected with C. sinensis reacted with recombinant CsCatD2 
beginning 2 weeks after infection and the antibody titers were gradually 
increased by maturation of the parasite. Structural analysis of CsCatD2 revealed 
a bilobed enzyme structure consisting of 2 antiparallel β-sheet domains packed 
against each other forming a homodimeric structure. These results suggested a 
plausible biological role of CsCatD2 in the nutrition and reproduction of 
parasite and its potential utility as a serodiagnostic antigen in clonorchiasis.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2019.57.6.671
PMCID: PMC6960241
PMID: 31914521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.