1. Theranostics. 2020 Jan 1;10(3):1355-1372. doi: 10.7150/thno.38147. eCollection
 2020.

Nanocarrier-based drug combination therapy for glioblastoma.

Zhao M(1), van Straten D(2), Broekman MLD(3), Préat V(1), Schiffelers RM(2).

Author information:
(1)Université catholique de Louvain, Louvain Drug Research Institute, Advanced 
Drug Delivery and Biomaterials, Avenue Mounier, 73, B1 73.12, 1200 Brussels, 
Belgium.
(2)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Haematology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box 9600, 
2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The current achievements in treating glioblastoma (GBM) patients are not 
sufficient because many challenges exist, such as tumor heterogeneity, the blood 
brain barrier, glioma stem cells, drug efflux pumps and DNA damage repair 
mechanisms. Drug combination therapies have shown increasing benefits against 
those challenges. With the help of nanocarriers, enhancement of the efficacy and 
safety could be gained using synergistic combinations of different therapeutic 
agents. In this review, we will discuss the major issues for GBM treatment, the 
rationales of drug combinations with or without nanocarriers and the principle 
of enhanced permeability and retention effect involved in nanomedicine-based 
tumor targeting and promising nanodiagnostics or -therapeutics. We will also 
summarize the recent progress and discuss the clinical perspectives of 
nanocarrier-based combination therapies. The goal of this article was to provide 
better understanding and key considerations to develop new nanomedicine 
combinations and nanotheranostics options to fight against GBM.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.38147
PMCID: PMC6956816
PMID: 31938069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.