1. J Clin Immunol. 2020 Feb;40(2):350-358. doi: 10.1007/s10875-020-00741-6. Epub 
2020 Jan 14.

Juvenile Onset Splenomegaly and Oculopathy Due to Germline Mutation in ALPK1.

Zhong L(1), Wang J(2), Wang W(1), Wang L(1), Quan M(1), Tang X(1), Gou L(1), Wei 
M(1), Xiao J(1), Zhang T(1), Sui R(3), Zhou Q(2), Song H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, 
China.
(2)Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, Zhejiang, 
China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, 
China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, 
China. songhm1021@hotmail.com.

ROSAH syndrome was recently identified as an autosomal dominant systemic 
disorder due to mutations in ALPK1. It was characterized by retinal dystrophy, 
optic nerve edema, splenomegaly, anhidrosis, and migraine headache. We collected 
and summarized the clinical data of two patients with juvenile onset 
splenomegaly and oculopathy. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was adapted for 
genetic analysis. Mutations in ALPK1 were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. 
Besides juvenile oculopathy and splenomegaly, both patients had intermittent 
fever and anhidrosis. Patient 2 also experienced recurrent upper respiratory 
infections in her infancy and developed dental and nail problems in childhood. 
Elevated TNF-Î± was their prominent laboratory features. Both patients were found 
to have a previously reported mutation, c.710C>T, p. T237M (NM_001102406) in 
ALPK1. Anti-TNF treatment of adalimumab was applied to patient 1, after which 
her optic disc edema in the left eye continued and the visual acuity 
deteriorated further. Patient 1 underwent elective splenectomy due to concern 
for spontaneous rupture of the spleen. Up to date, 18 patients of ROSAH syndrome 
have been reported. The clinical manifestations were relatively homogeneous, 
prominently presenting with juvenile onset oculopathy and splenomegaly. As it 
mainly involves ocular fundus, severe oculopathy deeply affects the quality of 
life and prognosis of ROSAH patients. Now little has been known about its 
treatment. As a newly recognized inherited systemic disorder, ROSAH syndrome 
needs to be paid more attention to, especially for those with juvenile onset 
splenomegaly and oculopathy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-020-00741-6
PMID: 31939038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]