1. Bone Res. 2020 Jan 22;8:3. doi: 10.1038/s41413-019-0079-2. eCollection 2020.

L-Plastin deficiency produces increased trabecular bone due to attenuation of 
sealing ring formation and osteoclast dysfunction.

Chellaiah MA(#)(1), Moorer MC(#)(2), Majumdar S(1), Aljohani H(1), Morley SC(3), 
Yingling V(4), Stains JP(2).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Oncology and Diagnostic Sciences, School of Dentistry, 
University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD USA.
(2)2Department of Orthopedics, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD USA.
(3)3Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, and Department of 
Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO USA.
(4)4Department of Kinesiology, California State University, East Bay, Hayward, 
CA USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Bone resorption requires the formation of complex, actin-rich cytoskeletal 
structures. During the early phase of sealing ring formation by osteoclasts, 
L-plastin regulates actin-bundling to form the nascent sealing zones (NSZ). 
Here, we show that L-plastin knockout mice produce osteoclasts that are 
deficient in the formation of NSZs, are hyporesorptive, and make superficial 
resorption pits in vitro. Transduction of TAT-fused full-length L-plastin 
peptide into osteoclasts from L-plastin knockout mice rescued the formation of 
nascent sealing zones and sealing rings in a time-dependent manner. This 
response was not observed with mutated full-length L-plastin (Ser-5 and -7 to 
Ala-5 and -7) peptide. In contrast to the observed defect in the NSZ, L-plastin 
deficiency did not affect podosome formation or adhesion of osteoclasts in vitro 
or in vivo. Histomorphometry analyses in 8- and 12-week-old female L-plastin 
knockout mice demonstrated a decrease in eroded perimeters and an increase in 
trabecular bone density, without a change in bone formation by osteoblasts. This 
decrease in eroded perimeters supports that osteoclast function is attenuated in 
L-plastin knockouts. Micro-CT analyses confirmed a marked increase in trabecular 
bone mass. In conclusion, female L-plastin knockout mice had increased 
trabecular bone density due to impaired bone resorption by osteoclasts. 
L-plastin could be a potential target for therapeutic interventions to treat 
trabecular bone loss.

Â© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1038/s41413-019-0079-2
PMCID: PMC6976634
PMID: 31993243

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing interests.