1. Clin Genet. 2020 Apr;97(4):576-585. doi: 10.1111/cge.13710. Epub 2020 Feb 12.

Identification of FOXH1 mutations in patients with sporadic conotruncal heart 
defect.

Wei W(1), Li B(1), Li F(2), Sun K(1), Jiang X(3), Xu R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Children's Medical Center, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Scientific Research Center, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School, Shanghai, China.

Conotruncal heart defects (CTD) are an important subtype of congenital heart 
disease that occur due to abnormality in the development of the cardiac outflow 
tract (OFT). FOXH1 is a transcription factor that participates in the 
morphogenesis of the right ventricle and OFT. In this study, we confirmed the 
expression of FOXH1 in mouse and human embryos during OFT development. We also 
scanned the coding exons and splicing regions of the FOXH1 gene in 605 patients 
with sporadic CTD and 300 unaffected controls, from which we identified seven 
heterozygous FOXH1 gene mutations. According to bioinformatics analysis results, 
they were predicted potentially deleterious at conserved amino acid sites. 
Western blot was used to show that all the variants decreased the expression of 
FOXH1 protein, while dual-luciferase reporter assay showed that six of them, 
with an exception of p.P35R, had enhanced abilities to modulate the expression 
of MEF2C, which interacts with NKX2.5 and is involved in cardiac growth. The 
electrophoretic mobility shift assays result showed that two mutations altered 
DNA-binding abilities of mutant FOXH1 proteins. Phenotype heterogeneity was 
found in patients with the same mutation. These results indicate that FOXH1 
mutations lead to disease-causing functional changes that contribute to the 
occurrence of CTD.

Â© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13710
PMID: 32003456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]