1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jan 31;21(3):953. doi: 10.3390/ijms21030953.

Systematic Analysis of the DNA Methylase and Demethylase Gene Families in 
Rapeseed (Brassica napus L.) and Their Expression Variations After Salt and Heat 
stresses.

Fan S(1), Liu H(1), Liu J(1), Hua W(1), Xu S(2), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)Oil Crops Research Institute of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Oil Crops, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Wuhan 430062, China.
(2)Henan key laboratory of Plant Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, Henan 
University, Kaifeng 475004, China.

DNA methylation is a process through which methyl groups are added to the DNA 
molecule, thereby modifying the activity of a DNA segment without changing the 
sequence. Increasing evidence has shown that DNA methylation is involved in 
various aspects of plant growth and development via a number of key processes 
including genomic imprinting and repression of transposable elements. DNA 
methylase and demethylase are two crucial enzymes that play significant roles in 
dynamically maintaining genome DNA methylation status in plants. In this work, 
22 DNA methylase genes and six DNA demethylase genes were identified in rapeseed 
(Brassica napus L.) genome. These DNA methylase and DNA demethylase genes can be 
classified into four (BnaCMTs, BnaMET1s, BnaDRMs and BnaDNMT2s) and three 
(BnaDMEs, BnaDML3s and BnaROS1s) subfamilies, respectively. Further analysis of 
gene structure and conserved domains showed that each sub-class is highly 
conserved between rapeseed and Arabidopsis. Expression analysis conducted by 
RNA-seq as well as qRT-PCR suggested that these DNA 
methylation/demethylation-related genes may be involved in the heat/salt stress 
responses in rapeseed. Taken together, our findings may provide valuable 
information for future functional characterization of these two types of 
epigenetic regulatory enzymes in polyploid species such as rapeseed, as well as 
for analyzing their evolutionary relationships within the plant kingdom.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21030953
PMCID: PMC7036824
PMID: 32023925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.