1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jan 21;10:3110. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.03110. eCollection
 2019.

Tetramer-Based Enrichment of Preexisting Anti-AAV8 CD8(+) T Cells in Human 
Donors Allows the Detection of a T(EMRA) Subpopulation.

Vandamme C(1), Xicluna R(1), Hesnard L(2), Devaux M(1), Jaulin N(1), Guilbaud 
M(1), Le Duff J(1), Couzinié C(1), Moullier P(1), Saulquin X(2), Adjali O(1).

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR 1089, Université de Nantes, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France.
(2)CRCINA, INSERM, CNRS, Université d'Angers, Université de Nantes, Nantes, 
France.

Pre-existing immunity to AAV capsid may compromise the safety and efficiency of 
rAAV-mediated gene transfer in patients. Anti-capsid cytotoxic immune responses 
have proven to be a challenge to characterize because of the scarcity of 
circulating AAV-specific CD8+ T lymphocytes which can seldom be detected with 
conventional flow cytometry or ELISpot assays. Here, we used fluorescent MHC 
class I tetramers combined with magnetic enrichment to detect and phenotype 
AAV8-specific CD8+ T cells in human PBMCs without prior amplification. We showed 
that all healthy individuals tested carried a pool of AAV8-specific CD8+ T cells 
with a CD45RA+ CCR7- terminally-differentiated effector memory cell (TEMRA) 
fraction. Ex vivo frequencies of total AAV-specific CD8+ T cells were not 
predictive of IFNγ ELISpot responses but interestingly we evidenced a 
correlation between the proportion of TEMRA cells and IFNγ ELISpot positive 
responses. TEMRA cells may then play a role in recombinant AAV-mediated 
cytotoxicity in patients with preexisting immunity. Overall, our results 
encourage the development of new methods combining increased detection 
sensitivity of AAV-specific T cells and their poly-functional assessment to 
better characterize and monitor AAV capsid-specific cellular immune responses in 
the perspective of rAAV-mediated clinical trials.

Copyright © 2020 Vandamme, Xicluna, Hesnard, Devaux, Jaulin, Guilbaud, Le Duff, 
Couzinié, Moullier, Saulquin and Adjali.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.03110
PMCID: PMC6990124
PMID: 32038634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]