1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2020 Feb 7;61(2):11. doi: 10.1167/iovs.61.2.11.

Rescue of Defective Electroretinographic Responses in Dp71-Null Mice With 
AAV-Mediated Reexpression of Dp71.

Barboni MTS(1)(1), Vaillend C(1), Joachimsthaler A(1)(1), Liber AMP(1), Khabou 
H(1), Roux MJ(1), Vacca O(1)(1), Vignaud L(1), Dalkara D(1), Guillonneau X(1), 
Ventura DF(1), Rendon A(1), Kremers J(1)(1).

Author information:
(1),.

PURPOSE: To study the potential effect of a gene therapy, designed to rescue the 
expression of dystrophin Dp71 in the retinas of Dp71-null mice, on retinal 
physiology.
METHODS: We recorded electroretinograms (ERGs) in Dp71-null and wild-type 
littermate mice. In dark-adapted eyes, responses to flashes of several strengths 
were measured. In addition, flash responses on a 25-candela/square meters 
background were measured. On- and Off-mediated responses to sawtooth stimuli and 
responses to photopic sine-wave modulation (3-30 Hz) were also recorded. After 
establishing the ERG phenotype, the ShH10-GFP adeno-associated virus (AAV), 
which has been previously shown to target specifically MÃ¼ller glial cells 
(MGCs), was delivered intravitreously with or without (sham therapy) the Dp71 
coding sequence under control of a CBA promoter. ERG recordings were repeated 
three months after treatment. Real-time quantitative PCR and Western blotting 
analyses were performed in order to quantify Dp71 expression in the retinas.
RESULTS: Dp71-null mice displayed reduced b-waves in dark- and light-adapted 
flash ERGs and smaller response amplitudes to photopic rapid-on sawtooth 
modulation and to sine-wave stimuli. Three months after intravitreal injections 
of the ShH10-GFP-2A-Dp71 AAV vector, ERG responses were completely recovered in 
treated eyes of Dp71-null mice. The functional rescue was associated with an 
overexpression of Dp71 in treated retinas.
CONCLUSIONS: The present results show successful functional recovery 
accompanying the reexpression of Dp71. In addition, this experimental model 
sheds light on MGCs influencing ERG components, since previous reports showed 
that aquaporin 4 and Kir4.1 channels were mislocated in MGCs of Dp71-null mice, 
while their distribution could be normalized following intravitreal delivery of 
the same ShH10-GFP-2A-Dp71 vector.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.61.2.11
PMCID: PMC7326481
PMID: 32049345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: M.T.S. Barboni, None; C. Vaillend, 
None; A. Joachimsthaler, None; A.M.P. Liber, None; H. Khabou, None; M.J. Roux, 
None; O. Vacca, None; L. Vignaud, None; D. Dalkara, None; X. Guillonneau, None; 
D.F. Ventura, None; A. Rendon, None; J. Kremers, None