1. J Affect Disord. 2020 Mar 1;264:304-309. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2020.01.017. Epub 
2020 Jan 7.

Association between BDNF gene polymorphisms and attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder in school-aged children in Wuhan, China.

Luo L(1), Jiang X(1), Cao G(1), Xiong P(2), Yang R(2), Zhang J(1), Shen M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Maternal and Child Health and MOE (Ministry of Education) Key 
Laboratory of Environment and Health, School of Public Health, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.
(2)Wuhan Children's Hospital (Wuhan Maternal and Child Healthcare Hospital), 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan 
430015, China.
(3)Department of Maternal and Child Health and MOE (Ministry of Education) Key 
Laboratory of Environment and Health, School of Public Health, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. 
Electronic address: shenmin@hust.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is vital for neuronal 
survival and growth, regulation of synaptic plasticity, and cognitive function. 
Previous studies examined the role of BDNF in susceptibility to attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The current study examined the 
association between BDNF gene polymorphisms and ADHD in Chinese children.
METHODS: Participants were 195 medication-naive ADHD children and 263 unaffected 
healthy controls. ADHD symptoms were diagnosed using the Vanderbilt ADHD 
Diagnostic Parental Rating Scale according to the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders-5. Five BDNF single nucleotide polymorphisms were 
detected using improved multiplex ligation detection reaction. Alleles and 
genotype frequency were examined using Chi-square tests. Correlations were 
examined using multivariate logistic regression analysis in the ADHD and control 
groups.
RESULTS: The results revealed that rs12291186 with one or both mutated allele(s) 
was significantly associated with reduced likelihood of ADHD (OR = 0.13, 95% CI: 
0.02-0.77) and ADHD-Combined (OR = 0.10, 95% CI: 0.01-0.85). Children with 
genotype AA or CA in rs10835210 exhibited increased risk of ADHD (OR = 3.29, 95% 
CI: 1.03-10.55) and ADHD-Combined (OR = 4.45, 95% CI: 1.10-17.96) compared with 
genotype CC children. No significant associations were found between rs6265, 
rs7103411, rs7103873 polymorphisms and ADHD.
LIMITATIONS: Participants were recruited from urban areas. We were unable to 
examine all potential confounding factors.
CONCLUSIONS: BDNF gene polymorphisms of rs12291186 and rs10835210 were related 
to the occurrence of ADHD. These findings provide new insight on mechanisms 
underlying BDNF gene in ADHD.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2020.01.017
PMID: 32056765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None