1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2020 Feb 14;2020:19-0130. doi: 
10.1530/EDM-19-0130. Online ahead of print.

Malignant struma ovarii with a robust response to radioactive iodine.

Gild ML(1)(2)(3), Heath L(3), Paik JY(4), Clifton-Bligh RJ(1)(2)(3), Robinson 
BG(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Genetics, Kolling Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, 
New South Wales, Australia.
(4)Department of Pathology, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.

SUMMARY: Struma ovarii is a rare, usually benign ovarian tumour with malignancy 
occurring in <5% of cases. Metastases, particularly seeding to bone, are 
extremely rare. Presentation is variable but often features local pain and/or 
ascites and hyperthyroidism may occur. It is not established how to best treat 
and follow patients with extensive disease. Case reports of radioiodine (I131) 
ablative therapy following thyroidectomy have shown reduced recurrence. We 
describe the case of a 33-year-old woman who presented with bone pain and was 
diagnosed with skeletal metastases with features of follicular thyroid 
carcinoma. However, thyroid pathology was benign. She recalled that 5 years 
prior, an ovarian teratoma was excised, classified at that time as a dermoid 
cyst. Retrospective review of this pathology confirmed struma ovarii without 
obvious malignant features. The patient was found to have widespread metastases 
to bone and viscera and her thyroglobulin was >3000 Âµg/L following recombinant 
TSH administration prior to her first dose of I131. At 25 months following 
radioiodine treatment, she is in remission with an undetectable thyroglobulin 
and clear I131 surveillance scans. This case demonstrates an unusual 
presentation of malignant struma ovarii together with challenges of predicting 
metastatic disease, and demonstrates a successful radioiodine regimen inducing 
remission.
LEARNING POINTS: Malignant transformation of struma ovarii (MSO) is extremely 
rare and even rarer are metastatic deposits in bone and viscera. MSO can be 
difficult to predict by initial ovarian pathology, analogous to the difficulty 
in some cases of differentiating between follicular thyroid adenoma and 
carcinoma. No consensus exists on the management for post operative treatment of 
MSO; however, in this case, three doses of 6Gbq radioiodine therapy over a short 
time period eliminated metastases to viscera and bone. Patients should continue 
to have TSH suppression for ~5 years. Monitoring thyroglobulin levels can 
predict recurrence.

DOI: 10.1530/EDM-19-0130
PMCID: PMC7040530
PMID: 32061155