1. Brain Behav. 2020 Apr;10(4):e01573. doi: 10.1002/brb3.1573. Epub 2020 Feb 19.

A TREML2 missense variant influences specific hippocampal subfield volumes in 
cognitively normal elderly subjects.

Wang SY(1), Xue X(1), Duan R(2), Gong PY(1), E Y(1), Jiang T(1), Zhang YD(1)(2); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)School of Basic Medicine & Clinical Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing, China.

INTRODUCTION: Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-like transcript 2 
gene (TREML2) is a newly identified AD susceptibility gene. Its missense variant 
rs3747742-C substantially decreases AD risk in both Caucasians and Han Chinese, 
but the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. In the present study, to uncover 
the possible mechanisms by which TREML2 rs3747742-C reduces AD risk, we 
investigated the possible relation of this variant with AD-related brain 
structures using a cognitively normal elderly population from Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database.
METHODS: In total, 158 cognitively normal elders from ADNI database with 
complete data for brain structures and TREML2 rs3747742 genotype were included 
in this study. The association of TREML2 rs3747742 genotype with the structures 
of three cerebral cortices (entorhinal cortex, middle temporal gyrus, and 
parahippocampal gyrus), two subcortical regions (amygdala and hippocampus), and 
three subfields of hippocampus (CA1, CA2 + CA3, and CA4 + dentate gyrus) was 
investigated.
RESULTS: A significant difference was noted in the volume of right CA1 subfield 
among three genotypes of TREML2 rs3747742 (p = .0364). In the multivariate 
analysis, TREML2 rs3747742-C significantly increased right CA1 subfield volume 
after adjusting for age, gender, education years, APOE ε4 status, and 
intracranial volume under the recessive genetic model (Bonferroni corrected 
p = .003586).
CONCLUSION: The present study provides the first evidence that TREML2 
rs3747742-C carriers have larger volumes of hippocampal CA1 subfield in a 
cognitively normal elderly population. These findings imply that enhancement of 
brain reserve may contribute to the protection of TREML2 rs3747742-C in AD 
susceptibility.

© 2020 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.1573
PMCID: PMC7177563
PMID: 32073739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors confirm that this article has no 
conflict of interest.