1. Sci Rep. 2020 Feb 18;10(1):2815. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-59736-3.

Tissue factor as a new target for CAR-NK cell immunotherapy of triple-negative 
breast cancer.

Hu Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, The Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center and The OSU James Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. Zhiwei.Hu@osumc.edu.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), representing ~15% of globally diagnosed 
breast cancer, is typically an incurable malignancy due to the lack of 
targetable surface targets for development of effective therapy. To address the 
unmet need for TNBC treatment, we recently determined that tissue factor (TF) is 
a useful surface target in 50-85% of patients with TNBC and developed a 
second-generation TF-targeting antibody-like immunoconjugate (called L-ICON) for 
preclinical treatment of TNBC. Using the chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) 
approach, here we develop and test TF-targeting CAR-engineered natural killer 
(TF-CAR-NK) cells that co-express CD16, the Fc receptor (FcγIII) to mediate 
antibody-dependent cellular toxicity (ADCC), for a preclinical assessment of 
immunotherapy of TNBC using TF-CAR-NK cell as single agent therapy and in 
combination with L-ICON. Our preclinical results demonstrate that TF-CAR-NK 
cells alone could kill TNBC cells and its efficacy was enhanced with L-ICON ADCC 
in vitro. Moreover, TF-CAR-NK cells were effective in vivo for the treatment of 
TNBC in cell line- and patient's tumor-derived xenograft mouse models. Thus, 
this study established the proof of concept of targeting TF as a new target in 
CAR-NK immunotherapy for effective treatment of TNBC and may warrant further 
preclinical study and potentially future investigation in TNBC patients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-59736-3
PMCID: PMC7028910
PMID: 32071339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Z.H. is the inventor of a PCT/U.S. patent 
pending on “Tissue Factor-Targeting CAR-NK and CAR-T Cell Therapy”.