1. Methods Mol Biol. 2020;2105:261-281. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-0243-0_17.

Poly(Lactic-co-Glycolic Acid) Nanoparticle Delivery of Peptide Nucleic Acids In 
Vivo.

Oyaghire SN(1), Quijano E(2), Piotrowski-Daspit AS(3), Saltzman WM(3)(4), Glazer 
PM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Department of Chemical & Environmental Engineering, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(5)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA. peter.glazer@yale.edu.

Many important biological applications of peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) target 
nucleic acid binding in eukaryotic cells, which requires PNA translocation 
across at least one membrane barrier. The delivery challenge is further 
exacerbated for applications in whole organisms, where clearance mechanisms 
rapidly deplete and/or deactivate exogenous agents. We have demonstrated that 
nanoparticles (NPs) composed of biodegradable polymers can encapsulate and 
release PNAs (alone or with co-reagents) in amounts sufficient to mediate 
desired effects in vitro and in vivo without deleterious reactions in the 
recipient cell or organism. For example, poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) 
NPs can encapsulate and deliver PNAs and accompanying reagents to mediate gene 
editing outcomes in cells and animals, or PNAs alone to target oncogenic drivers 
in cells and correct cancer phenotypes in animal models. In this chapter, we 
provide a primer on PNA-induced gene editing and microRNA targeting-the two 
PNA-based biotechnological applications where NPs have enhanced and/or enabled 
in vivo demonstrations-as well as an introduction to the PLGA material and 
detailed protocols for formulation and robust characterization of PNA/DNA-laden 
PLGA NPs.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-0243-0_17
PMCID: PMC7199467
PMID: 32088877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES/COMPETING INTERESTS E.Q., A.S.P., 
W.M.S., and P.M.G. are consultants for Trucode Gene Repair, Inc. W.M.S. and 
P.M.G also have equity interests in Trucode Gene Repair, Inc.