1. Blood Cancer J. 2020 Feb 25;10(2):22. doi: 10.1038/s41408-020-0290-9.

The new WHO classification for essential thrombocythemia calls for revision of 
available evidences.

Barbui T(1), Thiele J(2), Ferrari A(3), Vannucchi AM(4), Tefferi A(5).

Author information:
(1)FROM Research Foundation, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy. 
tbarbui@fondazionefrom.it.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)FROM Research Foundation, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy.
(4)CRIMM-Center of Research and Innovation of Myeloproliferative Neoplasms, 
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Careggi, Department Experimental and Clinical 
medicine, and Denothe Center, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(5)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, USA.

In the 2016 revised classification of myeloproliferative neoplasms pre-fibrotic 
primary myelofibrosis (pre-PMF) was recognized as a separate entity, distinct 
from essential thrombocythemia (ET). Owing that the majority of cases falling in 
the pre-PMF category were previously diagnosed as ET, one may question about the 
need to re-evaluate the results of epidemiologic, clinical, and molecular 
studies, and the results of clinical trials in the two entities. Based on a 
critical review of recently published studies, pre-PMF usually presents with a 
distinct clinical and hematological presentation and higher frequency of 
constitutional symptoms. JAK2V617F and CALR mutations in pre-PMF patients are 
superimposable to ET, whereas non-driver high-risk mutations are enriched in 
pre-PMF compared with ET. Thrombosis is not significantly different, whereas 
bleeding is more frequent in pre-PMF. Median survival is significantly shorter 
in pre-PMF and 10-year cumulative rates progression to overt myelofibrosis is 
0-1% vs. 10-12%, and leukemic transformation is 1-2% vs. 2-6%, in ET and 
pre-fibrotic-PMF, respectively. Most patients fall in the lower prognostic IPSS 
group in which observation alone can be recommended. Patients at intermediate 
risk may require a symptom-driven treatment for anemia, splenomegaly or 
constitutional symptoms while cytoreductive drugs are indicated in the high-risk 
category.

DOI: 10.1038/s41408-020-0290-9
PMCID: PMC7042222
PMID: 32098949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.