1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Feb 24;12(2):516. doi: 10.3390/cancers12020516.

Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4 Targeting Glioma Stem-Like Cells for Malignant 
Glioma Treatment: Latest Advances and Implications for Clinical Application.

Nayak S(1), Mahenthiran A(1), Yang Y(2), McClendon M(3), Mania-Farnell B(4), 
James CD(5), Kessler JA(2), Tomita T(1)(5), Cheng SY(2), Stupp SI(3)(6)(7), Xi 
G(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital 
of Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 
60611, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(3)Simpson Querrey Institute, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Science, Purdue University Northwest, Hammond, IN 
46323, USA.
(5)Department of Neurological Surgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611; USA.
(6)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Department of Chemistry and 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 
60208, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Malignant gliomas are heterogeneous neoplasms. Glioma stem-like cells (GSCs) are 
undifferentiated and self-renewing cells that develop and maintain these tumors. 
These cells are the main population that resist current therapies. Genomic and 
epigenomic analyses has identified various molecular subtypes. Bone 
morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) reduces the number of GSCs through 
differentiation and induction of apoptosis, thus increasing therapeutic 
sensitivity. However, the short half-life of BMP4 impedes its clinical 
application. We previously reviewed BMP4 signaling in central nervous system 
development and glioma tumorigenesis and its potential as a treatment target in 
human gliomas. Recent advances in understanding both adult and pediatric 
malignant gliomas highlight critical roles of BMP4 signaling pathways in the 
regulation of tumor biology, and indicates its potential as a therapeutic 
molecule. Furthermore, significant progress has been made on synthesizing BMP4 
biocompatible delivery materials, which can bind to and markedly extend BMP4 
half-life. Here, we review current research associated with BMP4 in brain 
tumors, with an emphasis on pediatric malignant gliomas. We also summarize BMP4 
delivery strategies, highlighting biocompatible BMP4 binding peptide amphiphile 
nanostructures as promising novel delivery platforms for treatment of these 
devastating tumors.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12020516
PMCID: PMC7072475
PMID: 32102285

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.