1. Science. 2020 Feb 28;367(6481):1039-1042. doi: 10.1126/science.aay5359.

Polymerization in the actin ATPase clan regulates hexokinase activity in yeast.

Stoddard PR(1)(2), Lynch EM(3), Farrell DP(3)(4), Dosey AM(3), DiMaio F(3)(4), 
Williams TA(5), Kollman JM(3), Murray AW(6)(2), Garner EC(6)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138, USA.
(2)Center for Systems Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(4)Institute for Protein Design, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TQ, UK.
(6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138, USA. awm@mcb.harvard.edu egarner@g.harvard.edu.

The actin fold is found in cytoskeletal polymers, chaperones, and various 
metabolic enzymes. Many actin-fold proteins, such as the carbohydrate kinases, 
do not polymerize. We found that Glk1, a Saccharomyces cerevisiae glucokinase, 
forms two-stranded filaments with ultrastructure that is distinct from that of 
cytoskeletal polymers. In cells, Glk1 polymerized upon sugar addition and 
depolymerized upon sugar withdrawal. Polymerization inhibits enzymatic activity; 
the Glk1 monomer-polymer equilibrium sets a maximum rate of glucose 
phosphorylation regardless of Glk1 concentration. A mutation that eliminated 
Glk1 polymerization alleviated concentration-dependent enzyme inhibition. Yeast 
containing nonpolymerizing Glk1 were less fit when growing on sugars and more 
likely to die when refed glucose. Glk1 polymerization arose independently from 
other actin-related filaments and may allow yeast to rapidly modulate 
glucokinase activity as nutrient availability changes.

Copyright Â© 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aay5359
PMCID: PMC7846450
PMID: 32108112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors have no 
competing interests.