1. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 4;10(1):4053. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-61030-1.

Complete Profiling of Methyl-CpG-Binding Domains for Combinations of Cytosine 
Modifications at CpG Dinucleotides Reveals Differential Read-out in Normal and 
Rett-Associated States.

Buchmuller BC(1), Kosel B(1), Summerer D(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, TU Dortmund University, 
Otto-Hahn-Str. 6, 44227, Dortmund, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, TU Dortmund University, 
Otto-Hahn-Str. 6, 44227, Dortmund, Germany. daniel.summerer@tu-dortmund.de.

5-Methylcytosine (mC) exists in CpG dinucleotides of mammalian DNA and plays key 
roles in chromatin regulation during development and disease. As a main 
regulatory pathway, fully methylated CpG are recognized by methyl-CpG-binding 
domain (MBD) proteins that act in concert with chromatin remodelers, histone 
deacetylases and methyltransferases to trigger transcriptional downregulation. 
In turn, MBD mutations can alter CpG binding, and in case of the MBD protein 
MeCP2 can cause the neurological disorder Rett syndrome (RTT). An additional 
layer of complexity in CpG recognition is added by ten-eleven-translocation 
(TET) dioxygenases that oxidize mC to 5-hydroxymethyl-, 5-formyl- and 
5-carboxylcytosine, giving rise to fifteen possible combinations of cytosine 
modifications in the two CpG strands. We report a comprehensive, comparative 
interaction analysis of the human MBD proteins MeCP2, MBD1, MBD2, MBD3, and MBD4 
with all CpG combinations and observe individual preferences of each MBD for 
distinct combinations. In addition, we profile four MeCP2 RTT mutants and reveal 
that although interactions to methylated CpGs are similarly affected by the 
mutations, interactions to oxidized mC combinations are differentially affected. 
These findings argue for a complex interplay between local TET 
activity/processivity and CpG recognition by MBDs, with potential consequences 
for the transcriptional landscape in normal and RTT states.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-61030-1
PMCID: PMC7055227
PMID: 32132616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.