1. Hortic Res. 2020 Mar 1;7:24. doi: 10.1038/s41438-020-0247-y. eCollection 2020.

Identification and distribution of a single nucleotide polymorphism responsible 
for the catechin content in tea plants.

Jiang CK(1)(2), Ma JQ(1), Liu YF(1)(3), Chen JD(1), Ni DJ(2), Chen L(1).

Author information:
(1)1Key Laboratory of Tea Biology and Resources Utilization, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Tea Research Institute of the Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, 9 South Meiling Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310008 China.
(2)2College of Horticulture and Forestry Science, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, 1 Shizishan Street, Hongshan District, Wuhan, Hubei 430070 China.
(3)3Tea Research Institute, Yunnan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Menghai, 
Yunnan 666201 China.

Catechins are the predominant products in tea plants and have essential 
functions for both plants and humans. Several genes encoding the enzymes 
regulating catechin biosynthesis have been identified, and the identification of 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) resulting in nonsynonymous mutations 
within these genes can be used to establish a functional link to catechin 
content. Therefore, the transcriptomes of two parents and four filial offspring 
were sequenced using next-generation sequencing technology and aligned to the 
reference genome to enable SNP mining. Subsequently, 176 tea plant accessions 
were genotyped based on candidate SNPs using kompetitive allele-specific 
polymerase chain reaction (KASP). The catechin contents of these samples were 
characterized by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) was subsequently performed to determine the relationship 
between genotypes and catechin content. As a result of these efforts, a SNP 
within the chalcone synthase (CHS) gene was shown to be functionally associated 
with catechin content. Furthermore, the geographical and interspecific 
distribution of this SNP was investigated. Collectively, these results will 
contribute to the early evaluation of tea plants and serve as a rapid tool for 
accelerating targeted efforts in tea breeding.

Â© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1038/s41438-020-0247-y
PMCID: PMC7049304
PMID: 32140233

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.