1. ESC Heart Fail. 2020 Jun;7(3):1338-1343. doi: 10.1002/ehf2.12667. Epub 2020
Mar  6.

Desmin-related myopathy characterized by non-compaction cardiomyopathy, cardiac 
conduction defect, and coronary artery dissection.

Tamiya R(1), Saito Y(1), Fukamachi D(1), Nagashima K(1), Aizawa Y(1), Ohkubo 
K(1), Hatta T(1), Sezai A(2), Tanaka M(2), Ishikawa T(3), Makita N(3), Sumitomo 
N(4), Okumura Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Nihon University School of 
Medicine, 30-1 Ohyaguchi-kamicho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, 173-8610, Japan.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Nihon University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Omics Research Center, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Saitama Medical University International 
Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.

Desmin-related myopathy (DRM) is a rare heritable cardiac and skeletal muscle 
disease caused by mutations in the desmin gene (DES). DRM is generally 
characterized by skeletal muscle weakness, conduction disturbance, and dilated 
cardiomyopathy. However, the clinical cardiac phenotypes of DRM are not yet 
fully understood. Herein, we report the first case of DRM with the de novo 
missense DES mutation, R454W, that is characterized by left ventricular 
non-compaction cardiomyopathy, progressive cardiac conduction defect, 
spontaneous coronary artery dissection, and no skeletal muscle weakness. Our 
case findings suggest that clinicians should genetically test patients who have 
cardiomyopathy, progressive cardiac conduction defect, and coronary artery 
dissection, even if the patient has neither family history of DRM nor skeletal 
muscle symptoms.

Â© 2020 The Authors. ESC Heart Failure published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of the European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ehf2.12667
PMCID: PMC7261580
PMID: 32142595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.