1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2020 Apr;20(4):341-350. doi: 
10.1080/14737175.2020.1741350. Epub 2020 Mar 17.

Emerging treatments for progressive myoclonus epilepsies.

Riva A(1), Guglielmo A(1), Balagura G(1)(2), Marchese F(1), Amadori E(1), 
Iacomino M(3), Minassian BA(4), Zara F(2)(3), Striano P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, IRCCS 'G.Gaslini' Institute, 
Genoa, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, and 
Maternal and Child Health, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Unit of Medical Genetics, IRCCS 'G.Gaslini' Institute, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Pediatric Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern and Dallas Children's 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Introduction: Progressive myoclonus epilepsies (PMEs) are a group of 
neurodegenerative diseases, invariably leading to severe disability or fatal 
outcome in a few years or decades. Nowadays, PMEs treatment remains challenging 
with a significant burden of disability for patients. Pharmacotherapy is 
primarily used to treat seizures, which impact patients' quality of life. 
However, new approaches have emerged in the last few years, which try to curb 
the neurological deterioration of PMEs through a better knowledge of the 
pathogenetic process. This is a review on the newest therapeutic options for the 
treatment of PMEs.Areas covered: Experimental and clinical results on novel 
therapeutic approaches for the different forms of PME are reviewed and 
discussed. Special attention is primarily focused on the efficacy and 
tolerability outcomes, trying to infer the role novel approaches may have in the 
future.Expert opinion: The large heterogeneity of disease-causing mechanisms 
prevents researchers from identifying a single approach to treat PMEs. 
Understanding of pathophysiologic processes is leading the way to targeted 
therapies, which, through enzyme replacement or underlying gene defect 
correction have already proved to potentially strike on neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1080/14737175.2020.1741350
PMCID: PMC7288349
PMID: 32153206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]