1. Polymers (Basel). 2020 Mar 8;12(3):615. doi: 10.3390/polym12030615.

Structural Features of Three Hetero-Galacturonans from Passiflora foetida Fruits 
and Their in Vitro Immunomodulatory Effects.

Song Y(1), Wen P(1), Hao H(1), Zhu M(1), Sun Y(1), Zou Y(2), Requena T(3), Huang 
R(1), Wang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Food Quality and Safety, College of 
Food Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
(2)Sericultural & Agri-Food Research Institute, Guangdong Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences; Key Laboratory of Functional Foods, Ministry of 
Agriculture; Guangdong Key Laboratory of Agricultural Products Processing, 
Guangzhou 510610, China.
(3)Instituto de Investigacion en Ciencias de la Alimentacion CIAL (CSIC-UAM), 
Nicolas Cabrera, 9, Campus de Cantoblanco, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, 28049 
Madrid, Spain.

Passiflora foetida is a horticultural plant and vital traditional Chinese herbal 
medicine. In our previous study, the characterization and immuno-enhancing 
effect of fruits polysaccharide 1 (PFP1), a water-eluted hetero-mannan from wild 
Passiflora foetida fruits, were investigated. Herein, another three salt-eluted 
novel polysaccharides, namely PFP2, PFP3, and PFP4, were obtained and 
structurally characterized. The results showed that PFP2, PFP3, and PFP4 were 
three structurally similar hetero-galacturonans with different molecular weights 
of 6.11 × 104, 4.37 × 104, and 3.48 × 105 g/mol, respectively. All three of 
these hetero-galacturonans are mainly composed of galacturonic acid, galactose, 
arabinose (75.69%, 80.39%, and 74.30%, respectively), and other monosaccharides 
including mannose, fucose, glucose, ribose, xylose, and glucuronic acid (24.31%, 
19.61, and 25.70%, respectively), although differences in their backbone 
structure exist. Additionally, immunomodulatory assay indicated that the three 
hetero-galacturonans possess the ability to promote the production of nitric 
oxide (NO), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in 
RAW264.7 macrophages in a concentration-dependent manner (p < 0.05). Especially, 
PFP3 displayed a stronger enhancing effect than PFP2 and PFP4 at the minimum 
effective concentration. Therefore, the results suggested that the obtained 
three salt-eluted hetero-galacturonans, especially PFP3, could be utilized as 
immunomodulatory effectivity ingredients in nutritional/pharmaceutical 
industries.

DOI: 10.3390/polym12030615
PMCID: PMC7182839
PMID: 32182663

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.