1. Cells. 2020 Mar 31;9(4):839. doi: 10.3390/cells9040839.

Corticotropin-Releasing Factor Family: A Stress Hormone-Receptor System's 
Emerging Role in Mediating Sex-Specific Signaling.

Vuppaladhadiam L(1), Ehsan C(1), Akkati M(1), Bhargava A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0556, 
USA.
(2)The Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0556, USA.

No organ in the body is impervious to the effects of stress, and a coordinated 
response from all organs is essential to deal with stressors. A dysregulated 
stress response that fails to bring systems back to homeostasis leads to 
compromised function and ultimately a diseased state. The components of the 
corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) family, an ancient and evolutionarily 
conserved stress hormone-receptor system, helps both initiate stress responses 
and bring systems back to homeostasis once the stressors are removed. The 
mammalian CRF family comprises of four known agonists, CRF and urocortins 
(UCN1-3), and two known G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), CRF1 and CRF2. 
Evolutionarily, precursors of CRF- and urocortin-like peptides and their 
receptors were involved in osmoregulation/diuretic functions, in addition to 
nutrient sensing. Both CRF and UCN1 peptide hormones as well as their receptors 
appeared after a duplication event nearly 400 million years ago. All four 
agonists and both CRF receptors show sex-specific changes in expression and/or 
function, and single nucleotide polymorphisms are associated with a plethora of 
human diseases. CRF receptors harbor N-terminal cleavable peptide sequences, 
conferring biased ligand properties. CRF receptors have the ability to 
heteromerize with each other as well as with other GPCRs. Taken together, CRF 
receptors and their agonists due to their versatile functional adaptability 
mediate nuanced responses and are uniquely positioned to orchestrate 
sex-specific signaling and function in several tissues.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9040839
PMCID: PMC7226788
PMID: 32244319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision 
to publish the results.