1. Bioact Mater. 2020 Apr 1;5(2):428-434. doi: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2020.03.002. 
eCollection 2020 Jun.

Quasi-isothermal modulated DSC as a valuable characterisation method for soft 
tissue biomaterial crosslinking reactions.

Joyce K(1)(2), Rahmani S(2), Rochev Y(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Medical Devices (CÚRAM), Biomedical Sciences, National 
University of Ireland Galway (NUIG), Newcastle Road, Galway, Ireland.
(2)Boston Scientific Limited, Ballybrit Business Park, Galway, Ireland.
(3)National University of Ireland, Galway, University Road, Galway, Ireland.
(4)Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Sechenov University, 8-2 Trubetskaya 
St., Moscow, 119991, Russia.

Glutaraldehyde (Glut) is an extensively used sterilant and fixative for the 
crosslinking of natural soft tissue biomaterials like bovine pericardium (BP) to 
provide stability and is required for its application in vivo. There is plenty 
of debate around the reaction mechanism of Glut with natural biomaterials. 
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is a commonly used technique that is 
typically used to measure the thermal profile of polymers. However, a variation 
known as quasi-isothermal modulated differential scanning calorimetry (QiMDSC) 
has been utilised for the analysis of polymorphic transformations in both the 
pharmaceutical and food industries. This communication will address QiMDSC as a 
method for analysing soft tissue biomaterials and their crosslinking mechanisms 
and how it can be applied to other biomaterial applications.

© 2020 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications 
Co., Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2020.03.002
PMCID: PMC7125324
PMID: 32258832

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) confirm that this article content 
has no conflicts of interest.