1. Ann Appl Stat. 2018 Sep;12(3):1871-1893. doi: 10.1214/18-AOAS1135. Epub 2018
Sep  11.

FUNCTIONAL PRINCIPAL VARIANCE COMPONENT TESTING FOR A GENETIC ASSOCIATION STUDY 
OF HIV PROGRESSION.

Agniel D(1), Xie W(2), Essex M(2), Cai T(3).

Author information:
(1)RAND Corporation, 1776 Main St., Santa Monica, California 90401, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School 
of Public Health, 655 Huntington Ave, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, 655 
Huntington Ave, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

HIV-1C is the most prevalent subtype of HIV-1 and accounts for over half of 
HIV-1 infections worldwide. Host genetic influence of HIV infection has been 
previously studied in HIV-1B, but little attention has been paid to the more 
prevalent subtype C. To understand the role of host genetics in HIV-1C disease 
progression, we perform a study to assess the association between longitudinally 
collected measures of disease and more than 100,000 genetic markers located on 
chromosome 6. The most common approach to analyzing longitudinal data in this 
context is linear mixed effects models, which may be overly simplistic in this 
case. On the other hand, existing flexible and nonparametric methods either 
require densely sampled points, restrict attention to a single SNP, lack testing 
procedures, or are cumbersome to fit on the genome-wide scale. We propose a 
functional principal variance component (FPVC) testing framework which captures 
the nonlinearity in the CD4 and viral load with low degrees of freedom and is 
fast enough to carry out thousands or millions of times. The FPVC testing 
unfolds in two stages. In the first stage, we summarize the markers of disease 
progression according to their major patterns of variation via functional 
principal components analysis (FPCA). In the second stage, we employ a simple 
working model and variance component testing to examine the association between 
the summaries of disease progression and a set of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms. We supplement this analysis with simulation results which 
indicate that FPVC testing can offer large power gains over the standard linear 
mixed effects model.

DOI: 10.1214/18-AOAS1135
PMCID: PMC7111467
PMID: 32256927