1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2020 Apr 9;53(4):e9290. doi: 10.1590/1414-431X20209290. 
eCollection 2020.

Prognostic value of increased expression of RBM8A in gastric cancer.

Lv X(1), Cheng H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, The First People's Hospital of Yongkang, Zhejiang, 
China.
(2)Department of Radiotherapy, Lishui Municipal Central Hospital, Zhejiang, 
China.

This study was designed to investigate the expression of RBM8A protein in 
patients with gastric cancer (GC) and to explore its correlation with clinical 
pathological features as well as prognosis. One hundred pairs of gastric 
carcinoma tissues and adjacent tissues from patients undergoing gastrectomy for 
GC were included in this study. The protein expression level of RBM8A was 
determined by immunohistochemistry using tissue microarrays. We also detected 
the mRNA expression level of RBM8A in 16 pairs of gastric carcinoma tissues and 
adjacent tissues. Meanwhile, we predicted the potential correlation between 
RBM8A and tumor stages as well as survival condition in patents with GC based on 
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. The correlation of RBM8A with the 
clinical pathological features and prognosis of the 100 patients with GC was 
also elucidated. The expression level of RBM8A was significantly higher in 
gastric carcinoma tissues compared to the adjacent tissues. The protein level of 
RBM8A was correlated with tumor size (P=0.031), depth of invasion (P<0.001), 
lymph node metastasis (P<0.001), TNM stage (<0.001), and distant metastasis 
(P=0.001). Patients with increased RBM8A expression (P<0.0018, 
95%CI=0.322-0.871), higher TNM stage (P<0.001, 95%CI=4.990-11.283), and lymph 
node metastasis (P<0.001, 95%CI=2.873-4.002) had a lower overall survival. Taken 
together, our study demonstrated that RBM8A may act as a proto-oncogene, which 
could be a promising biomarker and therapeutic target in the diagnosis and 
treatment of GC.

DOI: 10.1590/1414-431X20209290
PMCID: PMC7164227
PMID: 32294703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]