1. J Hosp Infect. 2020 Jun;105(2):162-166. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2020.03.022. Epub 
2020 Apr 16.

RESIST-5 O.O.K.N.V. and NG-Test Carba 5 assays for the rapid detection of 
carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales from positive blood cultures: a 
comparative study.

Bianco G(1), Boattini M(2), van Asten SAV(3), Iannaccone M(2), Zanotto E(2), 
Zaccaria T(2), Bernards AT(3), Cavallo R(2), Costa C(2).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology and Virology Unit, University Hospital Città della Salute e 
della Scienza di Torino, Turin, Italy. Electronic address: 
gabrielebnc87@gmail.com.
(2)Microbiology and Virology Unit, University Hospital Città della Salute e 
della Scienza di Torino, Turin, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

We prospectively compared the performance of RESIST-5 O.O.K.N.V. and NG-Test 
Carba 5 assays directly from blood cultures spiked with 130 characterized 
Enterobacterales isolates. Overall, both assays yielded 100% sensitivity to 
detect KPC-type carbapenemases and OXA-48-like carbapenemases. Both assays 
failed to detect KPC-31 and KPC-33, D179Y point mutation variants of KPC-3 and 
KPC-2, that are deprived of carbapenemase activity and confer resistance to 
ceftazidime-avibactam. On blood culture bacterial pellets, NDM- and VIM-type 
carbapenemases were detected in 50.0% and 52.2%, respectively, by RESIST-5 
O.O.K.N.V. vs 100% by NG-Test Carba 5. The sensitivity of RESIST-5 O.O.K.N.V. 
improved to 100% and 95.6%, respectively, by performing the assay on 4-h early 
subculture.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2020.03.022
PMID: 32304724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]