1. J Med Chem. 2020 May 14;63(9):4528-4554. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.9b01573.
Epub  2020 Apr 17.

First Contact: 7-Phenyl-2-Aminoquinolines, Potent and Selective Neuronal Nitric 
Oxide Synthase Inhibitors That Target an Isoform-Specific Aspartate.

Cinelli MA(1), Reidl CT(1), Li H(2), Chreifi G(2), Poulos TL(3), Silverman 
RB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biosciences, Chemistry of 
Life Processes Institute, Center for Molecular Innovation and Drug Discovery, 
Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, Illinois 60208-3113, 
United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, California 92697-3900, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
and Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California 92697-3900, 
United States.

Inhibition of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS), an enzyme implicated in 
neurodegenerative disorders, is an attractive strategy for treating or 
preventing these diseases. We previously developed several classes of 
2-aminoquinoline-based nNOS inhibitors, but these compounds had drawbacks 
including off-target promiscuity, low activity against human nNOS, and only 
modest selectivity for nNOS over related enzymes. In this study, we synthesized 
new nNOS inhibitors based on 7-phenyl-2-aminoquinoline and assayed them against 
rat and human nNOS, human eNOS, and murine and (in some cases) human iNOS. 
Compounds with a meta-relationship between the aminoquinoline and a positively 
charged tail moiety were potent and had up to nearly 900-fold selectivity for 
human nNOS over human eNOS. X-ray crystallography indicates that the amino 
groups of some compounds occupy a water-filled pocket surrounding an 
nNOS-specific aspartate residue (absent in eNOS). This interaction was confirmed 
by mutagenesis studies, making 7-phenyl-2-aminoquinolines the first 
aminoquinolines to interact with this residue.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.9b01573
PMCID: PMC7429991
PMID: 32302123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]