1. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2020 Feb 20;38(2):128-132.
doi:  10.3760/cma.j.issn.1001-9391.2020.02.011.

[Association between PON2 gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to noise-induced 
hearing loss].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Wu SS(1), Yu JN(1), Jiao J(2), Chen GS(3), Zhang CY(1), Yu SF(4).

Author information:
(1)SINOPEC Research Institute of Safty Engineering, Qingdao 266000, China.
(2)Henan Provincial Institute of Occupational Health, Zhengzhou 450052, China.
(3)Institute of Occupational Medicine of Wugang, Wugang 462500, China.
(4)Henan Medical College, Zhengzhou 451191, China.

Objective: To investigate the relationship between SNP and noise-induced hearing 
loss (NIHL) susceptibility in occupational noise exposure population in China. 
Methods: From 6297 for a certain steel works in contact with noise, contact 
length of 3 years or more and workplace noise exposure intensity of 80 dB (A) , 
ears or high frequency (3 000, 4 000, 6 000 Hz) average of hearing acuity 40 dB 
(HL) , or high frequency loss in both ears, on the basis of single whisper 
frequency (500, 1, 000, 2 000 Hz) average threshold of 26 dB (HL) or object as 
case group. A case-control study was designed with 1:1 matching. Subjects with 
the same gender, the same type of work, age ±5 years old, and working age ±2 
years after noise exposure were selected as the control group. Subjects with any 
whisper frequency (500, 1, 000, 2, 000 Hz) whose hearing threshold in any 
frequency band was ≤25 dB (A) and whose average high-frequency hearing threshold 
in pure tone hearing test was <35 dB (A) were selected as the control group. 
Four sites of PON2 gene were genotyped by medium-and high-throughput SNP 
genotyping. Univariate logistic regression was used to analyze the relationship 
between single SNP polymorphism and NIHL. Results: A total of 286 case-control 
pairs were included. Smoking was statistically significant difference between 
cases and controls (P<0.001) . Conclusion: No statistical difference has been 
found between single SNP polymorphism and NIHL. At the level of greater than 92 
dB of high noise exposure, rs7785846 (CT+TT) genotype is a risk factor for 
occupational noise deafness, and its OR is 2.74 (95%CI: 1.09-6.89) compared with 
wild homozygous type (CC) . Conclusion. The rs7785846 (CT+TT) genotype carriers 
of PON2 gene are more susceptible to hearing impairment when exposed to high 
noise intensity.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨我国职业噪声暴露人群对氧磷酶（paraoxonase，PON）2基因4个位点的单核苷酸多态性（single 
nucleotide polymorphisms，SNP）与噪声性听力损失（noise-induced hearing loss，NIHL）易感性之间的关系。 
方法： 于2019年4月采用1∶1巢式病例-对照研究方法，在2006年~2015年间建立的河南省某钢铁厂6 
297名噪声暴露队列研究人群中筛选接触噪声工龄≥3年、双耳高频（3 000、4 000、6 000 Hz）平均听阈≥40 
dB者作为听力损失组；并按照同性别、同工种、年龄相差≤5岁，接触噪声工龄相差≤2年且任一耳语频（500、1 000、2 000 Hz）的任一频段听阈场≤25 
dB，且纯音听力测试高频平均听阈<35 
dB者作为对照组，听力损失组和对照组各286人。调查研究对象一般体格检查和基本信息进行纯音听力测试和作业现场噪声测量。采用高通量单核苷酸多态性分型检测技术（SNPscan(TM)）法检测PON2基因的4个SNP分型。采用单因素logistic回归统计分析单个SNP与NIHL之间的关系。 
结果： 听力损失组平均年龄（40.5±8.0）岁，平均工龄（18.9±9.1）年，双耳高频平均听阈位移（hearing threshold 
level，HTL）（51.9±9.0）dB，噪声暴露强度范围80.2~93.9 dB（A），累积噪声暴露量（cumulative noise 
exposure，CNE）范围86.7~108.4 
dB（A）·年；对照组平均年龄（39.8±8.1）岁，平均工龄（18.3±8.8）年，双耳HTL（11.7±10.7）dB，噪声暴露强度范围80.1~93.9 
dB（A），CNE范围87.9~107.9 dB（A）·年。吸烟在听力损失组和对照组中差异有统计学意义（P<0.01）。在>92 
dB的高噪声暴露强度下，rs7785846（CT+TT）基因型是发生职业性噪声聋的危险因素，是野生纯合型（CC）的2.74倍（95%CI: 
1.09~6.89，P<0.05）。 结论： PON2基因的rs7785846（CT+TT）基因型携带者在高噪声强度的暴露下听力更易受损伤。.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.1001-9391.2020.02.011
PMID: 32306677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]