1. Sci Rep. 2020 Apr 20;10(1):6573. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-63611-6.

Antibodies against a short region of PfRipr inhibit Plasmodium falciparum 
merozoite invasion and PfRipr interaction with Rh5 and SEMA7A.

Nagaoka H(1), Kanoi BN(1), Ntege EH(1)(2), Aoki M(3), Fukushima A(3), Tsuboi 
T(1), Takashima E(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University, 3 
Bunkyo-cho, Matsuyama, Japan.
(2)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University of the Ryukyus, 
School of Medicine and Hospital, Okinawa, Japan.
(3)Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Co., Ltd, 3-1-98, Kasugadenaka, Konohanaku, Osaka, 
554-0022, Japan.
(4)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University, 3 
Bunkyo-cho, Matsuyama, Japan. takashima.eizo.mz@ehime-u.ac.jp.

Plasmodium falciparum merozoite invasion into erythrocytes is an essential step 
of the blood-stage cycle, survival of parasites, and malaria pathogenesis. P. 
falciparum merozoite Rh5 interacting protein (PfRipr) forms a complex with Rh5 
and CyRPA in sequential molecular events leading to erythrocyte invasion. 
Recently we described PfRipr as a conserved protein that induces 
strain-transcending growth inhibitory antibodies in in vitro assays. However, 
being a large and complex protein of 1086 amino acids (aa) with 87 cysteine 
residues, PfRipr is difficult to express in conventional expression systems 
towards vaccine development. In this study we sought to identify the most potent 
region of PfRipr that could be developed to overcome difficulties related to 
protein expression, as well as to elucidate the invasion inhibitory mechanism of 
anti-PfRipr antibodies. Using the wheat germ cell-free system, Ecto- PfRipr and 
truncates of approximately 200 aa were expressed as soluble proteins. We 
demonstrate that antibodies against PfRipr truncate 5 (PfRipr_5: C720-D934), a 
region within the PfRipr C-terminal EGF-like domains, potently inhibit merozoite 
invasion. Furthermore, the antibodies strongly block PfRipr/Rh5 interaction, as 
well as that between PfRipr and its erythrocyte-surface receptor, SEMA7A. Taken 
together, PfRipr_5 is a potential candidate for further development as a 
blood-stage malaria vaccine.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-63611-6
PMCID: PMC7171142
PMID: 32313230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.F. and M.A. are employees of Sumitomo 
Dainippon Pharma Co., Ltd; and TT and ET are supported by a research fund from 
Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Co., Ltd. H.N., B.N.K., and E.H.N. declare no 
potential conflict of interest.