1. Appl Clin Genet. 2020 Apr 14;13:83-96. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S198178. eCollection 
2020.

Integrative and Analytical Review of the 5-Alpha-Reductase Type 2 Deficiency 
Worldwide.

Batista RL(1), Mendonca BB(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratório de Hormônios e 
Genética Molecular/LIM42, Hospital das Clínicas, Disciplina de Endocrinologia, 
do Departamento de Clínica Médica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: The conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone is 
catalyzed by the 5α-reductase type 2 enzyme which plays a crucial role in the 
external genitalia virilization. It is encoded by the SRD5A2 gene. Allelic 
variants in this gene cause a 46,XY DSD with no genotype-phenotype relationship. 
It was firstly reported in the early 70s from isolated clusters. Since then, 
several cases have been reported. Putting together, it will expand the knowledge 
on the molecular bases of androgen milieu.
METHODS: We searched for SRD5A2 allelic variants (AV) in the literature (PubMed, 
Embase, MEDLINE) and websites (ensembl, HGMD, ClinVar). Only cases with AV in 
both alleles, either in homozygous or compound heterozygous were included. The 
included cases were analyzed according to ethnicity, exon, domain, aminoacid 
(aa) conservation, age at diagnosis, sex assignment, gender reassignment, 
external genitalia virilization and functional studies. External genitalia 
virilization was scored using Sinnecker scale. Conservation analysis was carried 
out using the CONSURF platform. For categorical variables, we used X2 test and 
Cramer's V. Continuous variables were analyzed by t test or ANOVA. Concordance 
was estimated by Kappa.
RESULTS: We identified 434 cases of 5ARD2 deficiencies from 44 countries. Most 
came from Turkey (23%), China (17%), Italy (9%), and Brazil (7%). Sixty-nine 
percent were assigned as female. There were 70% of homozygous allelic variants 
and 30% compound heterozygous. Most were missense variants (76%). However, small 
indels (11%), splicing (5%) and large deletions (4%) were all reported. They 
were distributed along with all exons with exon 1 (33%) and exon 4 (25%) 
predominance. Allelic variants in the exon 4 (NADPH-binding domain) resulted in 
lower virilization (p<0.0001). The codons 55, 65, 196, 235 and 246 are hotspots 
making up 25% of all allelic variants. Most of them (76%) were located at 
conserved aa. However, allelic variants at non-conserved aa were more frequently 
indels (28% vs 6%; p<0.01). The overall rate of gender change from female to 
male ranged from 16% to 70%. The lowest rate of gender change from female to 
male occurred in Turkey and the highest in Brazil. External genitalia 
virilization was similar between those who changed and those who kept their 
assigned gender. The gender change rate was significantly different across the 
countries (V=0.44; p<0.001) even with similar virilization scores.
CONCLUSION: 5ARD2 deficiency has a worldwide distribution. Allelic variants at 
the NADPH-ligand region cause lower virilization. Genitalia virilization 
influenced sex assignment but not gender change which was influenced by cultural 
aspects across the countries. Molecular diagnosis influenced on sex assignment, 
favoring male sex assignment in newborns with 5α-reductase type 2 deficiency.

© 2020 Batista and Mendonca.

DOI: 10.2147/TACG.S198178
PMCID: PMC7167369
PMID: 32346305

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.