1. Mol Brain. 2020 Apr 29;13(1):64. doi: 10.1186/s13041-020-00607-3.

CCR2 is localized in microglia and neurons, as well as infiltrating monocytes, 
in the lumbar spinal cord of ALS mice.

Komiya H(1), Takeuchi H(2), Ogawa Y(1), Hatooka Y(1), Takahashi K(1), Katsumoto 
A(1), Kubota S(1), Nakamura H(1), Kunii M(1), Tada M(1), Doi H(1), Tanaka F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Stroke Medicine, Yokohama City University 
Graduate School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 236-0004, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology and Stroke Medicine, Yokohama City University 
Graduate School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 236-0004, Japan. 
htake@yokohama-cu.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Neurology and Stroke Medicine, Yokohama City University 
Graduate School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 236-0004, Japan. 
ftanaka@yokohama-cu.ac.jp.

It remains controversial whether circulating monocytes expressing CCR2 
infiltrate the central nervous system (CNS) and contribute to pathogenicity of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). A previous report used conventional 
immunohistochemistry to show that CCR2 is exclusively expressed by astrocytes, 
but not infiltrating monocytes/microglia or neurons, in the spinal cords of ALS 
model mice. In this study, we assessed the cellular distribution of CCR2 in the 
CNS of ALS mice using CCR2-reporter mice (Ccr2rfp/+-Cx3cr1gfp/+-SOD1G93A Tg 
mice), a more sophisticated method for directly detecting the distribution of 
CCR2 protein. We found that infiltration of CCR2+ monocytes in the lumbar spinal 
cord increased over the course of disease progression. Moreover, from the middle 
stage of disease, CCR2 was partially distributed in microglia and neurons, but 
not astrocytes, in striking contrast to the previous findings. These novel 
observations suggested that CCR2+ monocyte infiltration leads to CNS 
environmental deterioration due to toxic conversion of microglia and neurons, 
creating a vicious cycle of neuroinflammation and leading to acceleration of ALS 
pathology. Our findings also show that this reporter mouse is a useful and 
powerful tool for obtaining new insights into the pathomechanisms of ALS.

DOI: 10.1186/s13041-020-00607-3
PMCID: PMC7191738
PMID: 32349774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.