1. Cells. 2020 Apr 28;9(5):1088. doi: 10.3390/cells9051088.

Calcium-Free and Cytochalasin B Treatment Inhibits Blastomere Fusion in 2-Cell 
Stage Embryos for the Generation of Floxed Mice via Sequential Electroporation.

Horii T(1), Kobayashi R(1), Kimura M(1), Morita S(1), Hatada I(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genome Science, Biosignal Genome Resource Center, Institute for 
Molecular and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, 3-39-15 Showa-machi, 
Maebashi 371-8512, Japan.

The generation of conditional knockout mice using the Cre-loxP system is 
advantageous for the functional analysis of genes. Flanked by two loxP sites 
(floxed) mice can be directly obtained from fertilized eggs by the CRISPR/Cas9 
genome editing system. We previously reported that sequential knock-in (KI) of 
each loxP site by electroporation (EP) at the 1- and 2-cell embryonic stages 
increases the number of mice with floxed alleles compared with simultaneous KI. 
However, EP at the 2-cell stage frequently induced blastomere fusion. These 
fused embryos cannot develop to term because they are tetraploidized. In this 
study, we examined the following three conditions to inhibit blastomere fusion 
by EP at the 2-cell stage: (1) hypertonic treatment, (2) Calcium (Ca2+)-free 
treatment, and (3) actin polymerization inhibition. Hypertonic treatment of 
2-cell stage embryos prevented blastomere fusion and facilitated blastocyst 
development; however, KI efficiency was decreased. Ca2+-free treatment and actin 
polymerization inhibition by cytochalasin B (CB) reduced fusion rate, and did 
not have negative effects on development and KI efficiency. These results 
suggest that Ca2+-free and CB treatment at the 2-cell stage is effective to 
generate floxed mice in combination with a sequential EP method.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9051088
PMCID: PMC7290713
PMID: 32354036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.