1. BMC Neurol. 2020 May 1;20(1):167. doi: 10.1186/s12883-020-01748-7.

Neuroimaging pattern and pathophysiology of cerebellar stroke-like lesions in 
MELAS with m.3243A>G mutation: a case report.

Oyama M(1), Iizuka T(2), Nakahara J(1), Izawa Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, 
Shinjuku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, 
Shinjuku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan. y-izawa@a3.keio.jp.

BACKGROUND: Stroke-like episodes (SLEs) in mitochondrial myopathy, 
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) with 
m.3243A > G mutation usually develop in the cerebral cortex. Few reports have 
documented SLEs in the cerebellum. The clinical neuroimaging features of 
cerebellar SLEs have not been fully investigated. We report distinctive features 
of cerebellar stroke-like lesions (SLLs) in a case of MELAS with m.3243A > G 
mutation.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 47-year-old Japanese man with type-2 diabetes presented to 
our hospital with acute onset of aphasia. A brain MRI obtained on admission (day 
1) showed increased diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI)/fluid-attenuated inversion 
recovery (FLAIR) signal in the left anterolateral temporal lobe, which 
subsequently spread along the cortex posteriorly accompanied by a new lesion in 
the right anterior temporal lobe. The patient was initially treated with 
acyclovir and subsequently with immunotherapy. However, on day 45, cerebellar 
ataxia developed. The brain MRI showed extensive increased DWI/FLAIR signals in 
the cerebellum along the folia without involvement of deep cerebellar nucleus or 
cerebellar peduncle; SLLs were incongruent with a vascular territory, similarly 
to classic cerebral SLLs. Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map did not show 
reduction in ADC values in the affected folia. Genomic analysis revealed 
m.3243A > G mutation (heteroplasmy in leukocytes, 17%), confirming the diagnosis 
of MELAS. After the treatment with taurine (12,000 mg/day), L-arginine 
(12,000 mg/day), vitamin B1 (100 mg/day), and carnitine (3000 mg/day), the 
patient became able to follow simple commands, and he was transferred to a 
rehabilitation center on day 146. The follow-up MRI showed diffuse brain 
atrophy, including the cerebellum.
CONCLUSIONS: SLLs develop in the cerebellum in MELAS with m.3243A > G mutation. 
The neuroimaging similarities to cerebral SLLs suggest the presence of the 
common pathophysiological mechanisms underlying both SLEs, which include 
microangiopathy and increased susceptibility of the cortex to metabolic 
derangements.

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-020-01748-7
PMCID: PMC7195751
PMID: 32357846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JN is an Editorial Board Member of BMC 
Neurology. MO reports no disclosure. TI receives a grant from The Japan Epilepsy 
Research Foundation and research support from Astellas Pharma Inc. JN receives 
research grants from Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai, Böehringer-Ingelheim, and Pfizer. YI 
receives grants from Keio University Program for the Advancement of Next 
Generation Research Projects. The authors declare that this case report was not 
conducted in the commercial or financial relationships that could be constructed 
as a potential conflict of interest.