1. iScience. 2020 May 22;23(5):101063. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2020.101063. Epub 2020
 Apr 16.

Requirement of PP2A-B56(Par1) for the Stabilization of the CDK Inhibitor Rum1 
and Activation of APC/C(Ste9) during Pre-Start G1 in S. pombe.

Stonyte V(1), Martín R(2), Segura-Peña D(1), Sekulić N(3), Lopez-Aviles S(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM), Nordic EMBL Partnership, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM), Nordic EMBL Partnership, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: r.m.martin@ncmm.uio.no.
(3)Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM), Nordic EMBL Partnership, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Department of Chemistry, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.
(4)Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM), Nordic EMBL Partnership, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: sandra.lopez-aviles@ncmm.uio.no.

Exit from the cell cycle during the establishment of quiescence and upon cell 
differentiation requires the sustained inactivation of CDK complexes. Fission 
yeast cells deprived of nitrogen halt cell cycle progression in pre-Start G1, 
before becoming quiescent or undergoing sexual differentiation. The CDK 
inhibitor Rum1 and the APC/C activator Ste9 are fundamental for this arrest, but 
both are down-regulated by CDK complexes. Here, we show that PP2A-B56Par1 is 
instrumental for Rum1 stabilization and Ste9 activation. In the absence of 
PP2A-B56Par1, cells fail to accumulate Rum1, and this results in persistent CDK 
activity, Ste9 inactivation, retention of the mitotic cyclin Cdc13, and impaired 
withdrawal from the cell cycle during nitrogen starvation. Importantly, mutation 
of a putative B56 interacting motif in Rum1 recapitulates these defects. These 
results underscore the relevance of CDK-counteracting phosphatases in cell 
differentiation, establishment of the quiescent state, and escape from it in 
cancer cells.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2020.101063
PMCID: PMC7195536
PMID: 32361273

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest The authors declare no 
competing interests.