1. Hum Mutat. 2020 Jul;41(7):1187-1208. doi: 10.1002/humu.24030. Epub 2020 May
22.

An update on genetic variants of the NKX2-5.

Kolomenski JE(1)(2), Delea M(3), Simonetti L(4), Fabbro MC(5), Espeche LD(3), 
Taboas M(3), Nadra AD(1)(2), Bruque CD(3)(6), Dain L(2)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, 
Universidad de Buenos Aires, IQUIBICEN-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Departamento de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Instituto de Biociencias, Biotecnología y Biología 
Traslacional, iB3, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Centro Nacional de Genética Médica, ANLIS, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Department of Chemistry-Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(5)Laboratorio Novagen, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(6)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental, (IBYME-CONICET), Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

NKX2-5 is a homeodomain transcription factor that plays a crucial role in heart 
development. It is the first gene where a single genetic variant (GV) was found 
to be associated with congenital heart diseases in humans. In this study, we 
carried out a comprehensive survey of NKX2-5 GVs to build a unified, curated, 
and updated compilation of all available GVs. We retrieved a total of 1,380 
unique GVs. From these, 970 had information on their frequency in the general 
population and 143 have been linked to pathogenic phenotypes in humans. In vitro 
effect was ascertained for 38 GVs. The homeodomain had the biggest cluster of 
pathogenic variants in the protein: 49 GVs in 60 residues, 23 in its third 
α-helix, where 11 missense variants may affect protein-DNA interaction or the 
hydrophobic core. We also pinpointed the likely location of pathogenic GVs in 
four linear motifs. These analyses allowed us to assign a putative explanation 
for the effect of 90 GVs. This study pointed to reliable pathogenicity for GVs 
in helix 3 of the homeodomain and may broaden the scope of functional and 
structural studies that can be done to better understand the effect of GVs in 
NKX2-5 function.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24030
PMID: 32369864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]