1. Zookeys. 2020 Apr 8;925:73-88. doi: 10.3897/zookeys.925.47820. eCollection
2020.

The complete mitochondrial genome sequence of Scolopendra mutilans L. Koch, 1878 
(Scolopendromorpha, Scolopendridae), with a comparative analysis of other 
centipede genomes.

Hu C(1), Wang S(1), Huang B(1), Liu H(1), Xu L(1), Zhigang Hu(1)(2), Liu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy.
(2)Hubei University of Chinese Medicine, No. 1 Huangjiahu West Road, Hongshan 
District, Wuhan, China.

Scolopendra mutilans L. Koch, 1878 is an important Chinese animal with thousands 
of years of medicinal history. However, the genomic information of this species 
is limited, which hinders its further application. Here, the complete 
mitochondrial genome (mitogenome) of S. mutilans was sequenced and assembled by 
next-generation sequencing. The genome is 15,011 bp in length, consisting of 13 
protein-coding genes (PCGs), 14 tRNA genes, and two rRNA genes. Most PCGs start 
with the ATN initiation codon, and all PCGs have the conventional stop codons 
TAA and TAG. The S. mutilans mitogenome revealed nine simple sequence repeats 
(SSRs), and an obviously lower GC content compared with other seven centipede 
mitogenomes previously sequenced. After analysis of homologous regions between 
the eight centipede mitogenomes, the S. mutilans mitogenome further showed clear 
genomic rearrangements. The phylogenetic analysis of eight centipedes using 13 
conserved PCG genes was finally performed. The phylogenetic reconstructions 
showed Scutigeromorpha as a separate group, and Scolopendromorpha in a 
sister-group relationship with Lithobiomorpha and Geophilomorpha. Collectively, 
the S. mutilans mitogenome provided new genomic resources, which will improve 
its medicinal research and applications in the future.

Chaoyi Hu, Shuaibin Wang, Bisheng Huang, Hegang Liu, Lei Xu, Zhigang Hu, Yifei 
Liu.

DOI: 10.3897/zookeys.925.47820
PMCID: PMC7197263
PMID: 32390741