1. Biomedicines. 2020 May 12;8(5):118. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines8050118.

Scorpion Venom: Detriments and Benefits.

Ahmadi S(1)(2), Knerr JM(1), Argemi L(1), Bordon KCF(3), Pucca MB(1)(4), Cerni 
FA(1)(3), Arantes EC(3), Çalışkan F(2)(5), Laustsen AH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, 
DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Biosafety, Graduate School of Natural and 
Applied Sciences, Eşkisehir Osmangazi University, TR-26040 Eşkisehir, Turkey.
(3)Department of BioMolecular Sciences, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences of 
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto-São Paulo 14040-903, 
Brazil.
(4)Medical School, Federal University of Roraima, Boa Vista, Roraima 69310-000, 
Brazil.
(5)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science and Letters, Eskisehir Osmangazi 
University, TR-26040 Eskisehir, Turkey.

Scorpion venom may cause severe medical complications and untimely death if 
injected into the human body. Neurotoxins are the main components of scorpion 
venom that are known to be responsible for the pathological manifestations of 
envenoming. Besides neurotoxins, a wide range of other bioactive molecules can 
be found in scorpion venoms. Advances in separation, characterization, and 
biotechnological approaches have enabled not only the development of more 
effective treatments against scorpion envenomings, but have also led to the 
discovery of several scorpion venom peptides with interesting therapeutic 
properties. Thus, scorpion venom may not only be a medical threat to human 
health, but could prove to be a valuable source of bioactive molecules that may 
serve as leads for the development of new therapies against current and emerging 
diseases. This review presents both the detrimental and beneficial properties of 
scorpion venom toxins and discusses the newest advances within the development 
of novel therapies against scorpion envenoming and the therapeutic perspectives 
for scorpion toxins in drug discovery.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines8050118
PMCID: PMC7277529
PMID: 32408604

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.