1. J Clin Lab Anal. 2020 Sep;34(9):e23365. doi: 10.1002/jcla.23365. Epub 2020 May
 19.

Analysis of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene variant rs2075876 (G/A) 
association with breast cancer susceptibility.

Fawzy MS(1)(2), Toraih EA(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Northern Border University, 
Arar, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Suez Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt.
(3)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, USA.
(4)Genetics Unit, Department of Histology and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Suez Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Recently, unexpected autoimmune regulator (AIRE) implication in the 
scenario of several cancers, including breast cancer (BC), has emerged. This 
study aims to explore for the first time the possible association between AIRE 
gene rs2075876 G>A variant and BC risk in a sample of the Middle East 
population.
METHOD: In this case-control study, we genotyped AIRE rs2075876 G>A variant in 
200 unrelated patients with BC and 340 cancer-free controls using a real-time 
allelic discrimination polymerase chain reaction. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% 
confidence intervals (CIs) were applied to estimate the strength of association 
under several genetic models. In silico analysis of AIRE was also executed.
RESULTS: The minor allele (A) frequency of the specified variant accounted for 
0.28 in the controls. G/G homozygote was significantly more frequent among 
patients (94%) compared to controls (66%) (P < .001). After adjusting 
confounding variables, individuals with A allele conferred protection against 
developing BC under allelic model (OR = 0.33, 95% CI = 0.20-0.55), recessive 
model (OR = 0.25, 95% CI = 0.10-0.60), dominant model (OR = 0.12, 95% 
CI = 0.05-0.29), and homozygote comparison (OR = 0.20, 95% CI = 0.08-0.50). In 
silico analysis revealed AIRE enrichment in several cancer-related pathways. 
Kaplan-Meier plotter for the cancer databases showed association of AIRE 
expression with prognosis in triple-negative BC (HR = 2.44, 95% CI = 1.44-4.15, 
log-rank P-value < .001).
CONCLUSION: The AIRE rs2075876 G>A variant showed association with BC risk in 
the study population. Further large-scale replication studies in different 
ethnicity are warranted to confirm the findings.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Laboratory Analysis published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.23365
PMCID: PMC7521301
PMID: 32426878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.