1. mBio. 2020 May 19;11(3):e00911-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00911-20.

Lipoprotein Processing and Sorting in Helicobacter pylori.

McClain MS(1), Voss BJ(2), Cover TL(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA mark.s.mcclain@vumc.org timothy.l.cover@vumc.org.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee, 
USA.

Our current understanding of lipoprotein synthesis and localization in 
Gram-negative bacteria is based primarily on studies of Escherichia coli Newly 
synthesized E. coli prolipoproteins undergo posttranslational modifications 
catalyzed by three essential enzymes (Lgt, LspA, and Lnt). The mature 
lipoproteins are then sorted to the inner or outer membrane via the Lol system 
(LolABCDE). Recent studies suggested that this paradigm may not be universally 
applicable among different classes of proteobacteria. In this study, we 
conducted a systematic analysis of lipoprotein processing and sorting in 
Helicobacter pylori, a member of the Epsilonproteobacteria that colonizes the 
human stomach. We show that H. pylorilgt, lspA, and lnt homologs can complement 
conditionally lethal E. coli mutant strains in which expression of these genes 
is conditionally regulated. Mutagenesis studies and analyses of conditionally 
lethal H. pylori mutant strains indicate that lgt and lspA are essential for H. 
pylori growth but lnt is dispensable. H. pylorilolA and the single lolC (or 
lolE) homolog are also essential genes. We then explored the role of 
lipoproteins in H. pylori Cag type IV secretion system (Cag T4SS) activity. 
Comparative analysis of the putative VirB7 homolog CagT in wild-type and lnt 
mutant H. pylori strains indicates that CagT undergoes amino-terminal 
modifications consistent with lipidation, and we show that CagT lipidation is 
essential for CagT stability and Cag T4SS function. This work demonstrates that 
lipoprotein synthesis and localization in H. pylori diverge from the canonical 
pathways and that lipidation of a T4SS component is necessary for H. pylori Cag 
T4SS activity.IMPORTANCE Bacterial lipoproteins have diverse roles in multiple 
aspects of bacterial physiology, antimicrobial resistance, and pathogenesis. 
Dedicated pathways direct the posttranslational lipidation and localization of 
lipoproteins, but there is considerable variation in these pathways among the 
proteobacteria. In this study, we characterized the proteins responsible for 
lipoprotein synthesis and localization in Helicobacter pylori, a member of the 
Epsilonproteobacteria that contributes to stomach cancer pathogenesis. We also 
provide evidence suggesting that lipidation of CagT, a component of the H. 
pylori Cag T4SS, is required for delivery of the H. pylori CagA oncoprotein into 
human gastric cells. Overall, these results constitute the first systematic 
analysis of H. pylori lipoprotein production and localization pathways and 
reveal how these processes in H. pylori differ from corresponding pathways in 
model proteobacteria.

Copyright Â© 2020 McClain et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00911-20
PMCID: PMC7240156
PMID: 32430470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]