1. J Chemother. 2020 Sep;32(5):251-259. doi: 10.1080/1120009X.2020.1764280. Epub 
2020 May 20.

Influence of plasma methotrexate level and MTHFR genotype in Korean paediatric 
patients with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Chae H(1)(2), Kim M(1)(2), Choi SH(3), Kim SK(3), Lee JW(3), Chung NG(3), Cho 
B(3), Kim Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Catholic Genetic Laboratory Center, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of 
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Whether plasma MTX concentrations and MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms could 
be used as a predictor of occurrence of MTX-related toxicities in Korean 
paediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) were assessed. 
HD-MTX related toxicities, MTHFR polymorphisms and MTX plasma concentrations 
following 337 HD-MTX cycles to 117 children with ALL on maintenance therapy were 
analyzed. A significantly higher frequency of hyperbilirubinemia (P = 0.0443) 
and renal toxicity (P = 0.0107) were associated with high MTX concentrations by 
Fisher's exact test. Moreover, high MTX concentrations at 24 h, 48, and 72 h 
were significantly associated with increased frequency of vomiting (P < 0.05) 
and hyperbilirubinemia (P < 0.05) by Mann-Whitney U test. There was a 
significantly higher frequency of mucositis in patients with the MTHFR 677 TT 
genotype (P = 0.0273) and a significantly higher frequency of MTX dose reduction 
in patients with the 677 TT genotype (P = 0.0217), compared to the CC/CT 
genotype. Independently, plasma MTX concentrations and MTHFR C677T genotype 
could be useful markers for tailoring MTX dosing and monitoring adverse effects 
in childhood ALL HD-MTX therapy in Korean patients.

DOI: 10.1080/1120009X.2020.1764280
PMID: 32431230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]