1. Plants (Basel). 2020 May 20;9(5):648. doi: 10.3390/plants9050648.

Contributions and Limitations of Biophysical Approaches to Study of the 
Interactions between Amphiphilic Molecules and the Plant Plasma Membrane.

Furlan AL(1), Laurin Y(1)(2), Botcazon C(2)(3), Rodríguez-Moraga N(2), Rippa 
S(3), Deleu M(1), Lins L(1), Sarazin C(2), Buchoux S(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biophysique Moléculaire aux Interfaces, Gembloux Agro-Bio 
Tech, TERRA Research Center, Université de Liège, B5030 Gembloux, Belgium.
(2)Unité de Génie Enzymatique et Cellulaire, UMR 7025 CNRS/UPJV/UTC, Université 
de Picardie Jules Verne, 80039 Amiens, France.
(3)Unité de Génie Enzymatique et Cellulaire, UMR 7025 CNRS/UPJV/UTC, Université 
de Technologie de Compiègne, 60200 Compiègne, France.

Some amphiphilic molecules are able to interact with the lipid matrix of plant 
plasma membranes and trigger the immune response in plants. This original mode 
of perception is not yet fully understood and biophysical approaches could help 
to obtain molecular insights. In this review, we focus on such 
membrane-interacting molecules, and present biophysically grounded methods that 
are used and are particularly interesting in the investigation of this mode of 
perception. Rather than going into overly technical details, the aim of this 
review was to provide to readers with a plant biochemistry background a good 
overview of how biophysics can help to study molecular interactions between 
bioactive amphiphilic molecules and plant lipid membranes. In particular, we 
present the biomimetic membrane models typically used, solid-state nuclear 
magnetic resonance, molecular modeling, and fluorescence approaches, because 
they are especially suitable for this field of research. For each technique, we 
provide a brief description, a few case studies, and the inherent limitations, 
so non-specialists can gain a good grasp on how they could extend their toolbox 
and/or could apply new techniques to study amphiphilic bioactive compound and 
lipid interactions.

DOI: 10.3390/plants9050648
PMCID: PMC7285231
PMID: 32443858

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.