1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Aug 1;105(8):dgaa308. doi:
10.1210/clinem/dgaa308.

Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing for Congenital Hypothyroidism With Positive 
Neonatal TSH Screening.

Yamaguchi T(1), Nakamura A(1), Nakayama K(1), Hishimura N(1), Morikawa S(1), 
Ishizu K(2), Tajima T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Kid's Forest Pediatrics & Endocrinology, Sapporo, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Children's Medical Center Tochigi, 
Shimotsuke, Japan.

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Sep 1;105(9):dgaa454. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgaa454.

PURPOSE: Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is the most common neonatal endocrine 
disorder; however, its molecular etiology remains poorly understood.
METHODS: We performed genetic analysis of 24 causative genes using 
next-generation sequencing in 167 CH cases, comprising 57 dyshormonogenesis 
(DH), 32 dysgenesis (TD) and 78 undiagnosed. The pathogenicity of variants was 
assessed by the American College of Medical Genetics guidelines, inheritance 
pattern, and published evidence. Furthermore, we compared the oligogenic groups 
and monogenic groups to examine the correlation between variant dosage and 
severity.
RESULTS: We identified variants in 66.5% cases (111/167) and 15 genes, DUOX2, 
TSHR, PAX8, TG, TPO, DUOXA2, JAG1, GLIS3, DUOX1, IYD, SLC26A4, SLC5A5, SECISBP2, 
DIO1, and DIO3. Biallelic variants were identified in 12.6% (21/167), oligogenic 
in 18.0% (30/167), and monogenic in 35.9% (60/167); however, 68.5% of variants 
were classified as variant of unknown significance (VUS). Further examinations 
showed that 3 out of 32 cases with TD (9.4%) had pathogenic variants (2 of TSHR 
and 1 of TPO), and 8 out of 57 cases with DH (14.0%) (7 of DUOX2, 1 of TG) had 
pathogenic variants. In addition, TSH levels at the first visit were 
significantly higher in the oligogenic group than in the monogenic group.
CONCLUSIONS: The detection rate of pathogenic variants in Japanese CH was 
similar to that previously reported. Moreover, oligogenic cases were likely to 
be more severe than monogenic cases, suggesting that CH may exhibit a gene 
dosage effect. Further analysis of VUS pathogenicity is required to clarify the 
molecular basis of CH.

Â© Endocrine Society 2020. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgaa308
PMID: 32459320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]