1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2020 May 7;2020:2824984. doi: 
10.1155/2020/2824984. eCollection 2020.

Tenacissoside H Induces Apoptosis and Inhibits Migration of Colon Cancer Cells 
by Downregulating Expression of GOLPH3 Gene.

Hong ZS(1), Zhuang HB(1), Qiu CZ(1), Shi ZS(1), Wang CX(1), Chen ZC(1), Pan 
JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Fujian 
Medical University, Quanzhou 362000, Fujian Province, China.

OBJECTIVE: Tenacissoside H (TDH) is a Chinese medicine monomer extracted from 
Marsdenia tenacissima extract (MTE), which has been confirmed to have antitumor 
effects, but its mechanism is still unclear. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the effect and mechanism of TDH on human colon cancer LoVo cell 
proliferation and migration and explore the correlation of TDH treatment with 
the expression of GOLPH3 and cell signaling pathways in LoVo cells.
METHODS: LoVo cells were treated with TDH at 0.1, 1, 10, and 100 μg/mL for 24, 
48, and 72 h. The proliferation rate of LoVo cells was evaluated by MTT assay. 
Recombinant plasmid p-CMV-2-GOLPH3 was constructed, and p-CMV-2-GOLPH3 and 
p-CMV-2 empty plasmids were transfected into LoVo cells by lipofection. Western 
blotting was used to detect the transfection efficiency and the expression of 
p-p70S6K, p70S6K, β-catenin, and GOLPH3. The apoptosis rate was analyzed with 
Annexin V-FITC/PI double-staining method, and cell migration assessed by 
transwell assay.
RESULTS: TDH inhibited the proliferation of LoVo cells in a 
concentration-dependent manner. The IC50 of TDH treatment in LoVo cells at 24, 
48, and 72 h was 40.24, 13.00, and 5.73 μg/mL, respectively. TDH treatment 
significantly induced apoptosis and suppressed the viability and migration of 
human colon cancer LoVo cells. The effect of TDH on induction of apoptosis and 
inhibition of migration in LoVo cells decreased significantly after activating 
the PI3K/AKT/mTOR and Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathways with agonists. 
Additionally, the expression of GOLPH3 protein downregulated significantly in 
LoVo cells under TDH treatment. Overexpression of the GOLPH3 gene increased the 
expression of key proteins in PI3K/AKT/mTOR and Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathways 
and blocked the antitumor activity of TDH.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, the present results indicated that TDH can inhibit the 
proliferation vitality of colon cancer LoVo cells through downregulating GOLPH3 
expression and activity of PI3K/AKT/mTOR and Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2020 Zhong-Shi Hong et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/2824984
PMCID: PMC7229548
PMID: 32454851

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.