1. Haematologica. 2021 Jun 1;106(6):1624-1635. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2019.239202.

Deciphering the Ets-1/2-mediated transcriptional regulation of F8 gene 
identifies a minimal F8 promoter for hemophilia A gene therapy.

Famà R(1), Borroni E(1), Merlin S(1), Airoldi C(2), Pignani S(1), Cucci A(1), 
Corà D(3), Bruscaggin V(1), Scardellato S(1), Faletti S(4), Pelicci G(1), 
Pinotti M(5), Walker GE(1), Follenzi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Università del Piemonte Orientale, Novara, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Translational Medicine, Università del Piemonte Orientale, 
Novara, Italy.
(3)Department of Translational Medicine, Center for Translational Research on 
Autoimmune and Allergic Disease (CAAD), University of Piemonte Orientale, 
Novara, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology 
IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Universita' di Ferrara, Italy.

A major challenge in the development of a gene therapy for hemophilia A (HA) is 
the selection of cell type- or tissue-specific promoters to ensure factor VIII 
(FVIII) expression without eliciting an immune response. As liver sinusoidal 
endothelial cells (LSECs) are the major FVIII source, understanding the 
transcriptional F8 regulation in these cells would help optimize the minimal F8 
promoter (pF8) to efficiently drive FVIII expression. In silico analyses 
predicted several binding sites (BS) for the E26 transformation-specific (Ets) 
transcription factors Ets-1 and Ets-2 in the pF8. Reporter assays demonstrated a 
significant up-regulation of pF8 activity by Ets-1 or Ets-1/Est-2 combination, 
while Ets2 alone was ineffective. Moreover, Ets-1/Ets-2-DNA binding domain 
mutants (DBD) abolished promoter activation only when the Ets-1 DBD was removed, 
suggesting that pF8 up-regulation may occur through Ets-1/Ets-2 interaction with 
Ets-1 bound to DNA. pF8 carrying Ets-BS deletions unveiled two Ets-BS essential 
for pF8 activity and response to Ets overexpression. Lentivirus-mediated 
delivery of GFP or FVIII cassettes driven by the shortened promoters led to GFP 
expression mainly in endothelial cells in the liver and to long-term FVIII 
activity without inhibitor formation in HA mice. These data strongly support the 
potential application of these promoters in HA gene therapy.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2019.239202
PMCID: PMC8168518
PMID: 32467137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]