1. PLoS Genet. 2020 May 29;16(5):e1008816. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008816. 
eCollection 2020 May.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae Mus81-Mms4 prevents accelerated senescence in 
telomerase-deficient cells.

Schwartz EK(1), Hung SH(1), Meyer D(1), Piazza A(1), Yan K(1), Fu BXH(1), Heyer 
WD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, 
Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, 
Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.

Alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) in human cells is a conserved process 
that is often activated in telomerase-deficient human cancers. This process 
exploits components of the recombination machinery to extend telomere ends, thus 
allowing for increased proliferative potential. Human MUS81 (Mus81 in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae) is the catalytic subunit of structure-selective 
endonucleases involved in recombination and has been implicated in the ALT 
mechanism. However, it is unclear whether MUS81 activity at the telomere is 
specific to ALT cells or if it is required for more general aspects of telomere 
stability. In this study, we use S. cerevisiae to evaluate the contribution of 
the conserved Mus81-Mms4 endonuclease in telomerase-deficient yeast cells that 
maintain their telomeres by mechanisms akin to human ALT. Similar to human 
cells, we find that yeast Mus81 readily localizes to telomeres and its activity 
is important for viability after initial loss of telomerase. Interestingly, our 
analysis reveals that yeast Mus81 is not required for the survival of cells 
undergoing recombination-mediated telomere lengthening, i.e. for ALT itself. 
Rather we infer from genetic analysis that Mus81-Mms4 facilitates telomere 
replication during times of telomere instability. Furthermore, combining mus81 
mutants with mutants of a yeast telomere replication factor, Rrm3, reveals that 
the two proteins function in parallel to promote normal growth during times of 
telomere stress. Combined with previous reports, our data can be interpreted in 
a consistent model in which both yeast and human MUS81-dependent nucleases 
participate in the recovery of stalled replication forks within telomeric DNA. 
Furthermore, this process becomes crucial under conditions of additional 
replication stress, such as telomere replication in telomerase-deficient cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008816
PMCID: PMC7286520
PMID: 32469862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.