1. CJC Open. 2020 Jan 25;2(3):161-167. doi: 10.1016/j.cjco.2020.01.003.
eCollection  2020 May.

Familial Hypercholesterolemia and the Founder Effect Among Franco-Americans: A 
Brief History and Call to Action.

Mszar R(1), Buscher S(2), Taylor HL(3), Rice-DeFosse MT(4), McCann D(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public Health, New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(2)Division of General Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Sociology, Bates College, Lewiston, Maine, USA.
(4)Department of French and Francophone Studies, Bates College, Lewiston, Maine, 
USA.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Central Maine Medical Center, Lewiston, Maine, USA.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an inherited disorder characterized by 
chronically elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and an increased 
risk of premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. FH has been shown to 
disproportionately affect French Canadians and other ethnic populations due to 
the presence of a founder effect characterized by reduced genetic diversity 
resulting from relatively few individuals with FH-causing genetic mutations 
establishing self-contained populations. Beginning in the mid-1800s, 
approximately 1 million French Canadians immigrated to the Northeastern United 
States and largely remained in these small, tight-knit communities. Despite 
extensive genetic- and population-based research involving the French-Canadian 
founder population, primarily in the Province of Quebec, little is known 
regarding Franco-Americans in the United States. Concurrent with addressing the 
underdiagnosis rate of FH in the general population, we propose the following 
steps to leverage this founder effect and meet the cardiovascular needs of 
Franco-Americans: (1) increase cascade screening in regions of the United States 
with a high proportion of individuals of French-Canadian descent; (2) promote 
registry-based, epidemiological research to elucidate accurate prevalence 
estimates as well as diagnostic and treatment gaps in Franco-Americans; and 
(3) validate contemporary risk stratification strategies such as the 
Montreal-FH-SCORE to enable optimal lipid management and prevention of premature 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease among French-Canadian descendants.

Publisher: L’hypercholestérolémie familiale (HF) est un trouble génétique 
caractérisé sur un mode chronique par des taux élevés de cholestérol à 
lipoprotéines de faible densité et un risque accru de maladie cardiovasculaire 
athéroscléreuse prématurée. L'HF touche de façon disproportionnée les Canadiens 
français et d’autres groupes ethniques par suite d’un effet fondateur 
caractérisé par une faible diversité génétique résultant d’un nombre 
relativement peu élevé d’individus ayants des mutations génétiques responsables 
de l’HF établissant des populations isolées. À partir du milieu des années 1800, 
environ un million de Canadiens français ont émigré dans la région nord-est des 
États-Unis et y sont pour la plupart demeurés au sein de communautés 
relativement restreintes et fortement homogènes. En dépit d’une vaste recherche 
génétique et populationnelle visant la population fondatrice 
canadienne-française, principalement dans la province de Québec, on sait peu de 
choses sur les Franco-Américains aux États-Unis. Parallèlement à une démarche 
ciblant le sous-diagnostic de l’HF au sein de la population générale, nous 
proposons les mesures suivantes pour tirer parti de cet effet fondateur et 
répondre aux besoins cardiovasculaires des Franco-Américains: 1) augmenter le 
dépistage en cascade sur les régions des États-Unis comptant une forte 
proportion de personnes d’ascendance canadienne-française; 2) promouvoir la 
recherche épidémiologique fondée sur les registres pour obtenir des estimations 
précises de la prévalence et cerner les lacunes touchant le diagnostic et le 
traitement chez les Franco-Américains; 3) valider les stratégies contemporaines 
de stratification du risque comme celle fondée sur le Montreal-FH-SCORE pour 
permettre la prise en charge optimale de la lipidémie et la prévention des 
maladies cardiovasculaires athéroscléreuses prématurées chez les descendants 
canadiens-français.

© 2020 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cjco.2020.01.003
PMCID: PMC7242505
PMID: 32462130