1. PLoS One. 2020 Jun 1;15(6):e0233695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0233695. 
eCollection 2020.

Novel recombinant Mce-truncated protein based ELISA for the diagnosis of 
Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis infection in domestic livestock.

Hemati Z(1), Haghkhah M(1), Derakhshandeh A(1), Chaubey KK(2), Singh SV(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Shiraz University, 
Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Animal Health Division, Central Institute for Research on Goats, Makhdoom, 
Farah, Mathura Uttar Pradesh, India.

Johne's disease (JD) is an infectious wasting condition of ruminants caused by 
Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) in domestic livestock of every 
country that has been investigated. Controlling JD is problematic due to the 
lack of sensitive, specific, efficient, and cost-effective diagnostic tests. A 
major challenge in the development of diagnostics like ELISA is the selection of 
an ideal antigen/(s) that is pathogen-specific and allows sensitive recognition. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to identify and use Mce-truncated 
protein-based ELISA assay for the diagnosis of MAP infection with high 
sensitivity and specificity. In silico epitope prediction by epitope mapping 
throughout the whole length of MAP2191 protein revealed that C-terminal portion 
of this protein presented potential T- and B-cell epitopes. Therefore, a novel 
Mce-truncated protein encoded by the selected region of MAP2191 gene was 
expressed, purified with Ni-NTA gel matrix and confirmed by SDS PAGE and western 
blot. A profiling ELISA assay was developed to evaluate sera from MAP infected 
and non-infected ruminant species for antibodies against Mce-truncated protein 
to infer the immunogenicity of this protein in the host. Using this Mce 
protein-based ELISA, 251 goats, 53 sheep, 117 buffaloes, and 33 cattle serum 
samples were screened and 49.4, 51.0, 69.2, and 54.6% animals, respectively, 
were found positive. Comparing with i-ELISA, the new Mce-based ELISA kit showed 
a relatively higher specificity but suffered from slightly reduced sensitivity. 
Mce-based ELISA excluded apparently false positive results of i-ELISA. Mce 
protein was found to be antigenic and Mce-ELISA test could be employed as a 
diagnostic test for JD in domestic livestock in view of the a relatively higher 
specificity and accuracy. The antigenic potential of Mce antigen can also be 
exploited for the development of a new vaccine for the control of MAP infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0233695
PMCID: PMC7263793
PMID: 32479551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.