1. Genes (Basel). 2020 May 28;11(6):595. doi: 10.3390/genes11060595.

Epigenetic Factors That Control Pericentric Heterochromatin Organization in 
Mammals.

Fioriniello S(1), Marano D(1), Fiorillo F(1), D'Esposito M(1), Della Ragione 
F(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics 'A. Buzzati-Traverso', CNR, 80131 
Naples, Italy.

Pericentric heterochromatin (PCH) is a particular form of constitutive 
heterochromatin that is localized to both sides of centromeres and that forms 
silent compartments enriched in repressive marks. These genomic regions contain 
species-specific repetitive satellite DNA that differs in terms of nucleotide 
sequences and repeat lengths. In spite of this sequence diversity, PCH is 
involved in many biological phenomena that are conserved among species, 
including centromere function, the preservation of genome integrity, the 
suppression of spurious recombination during meiosis, and the organization of 
genomic silent compartments in the nucleus. PCH organization and maintenance of 
its repressive state is tightly regulated by a plethora of factors, including 
enzymes (e.g., DNA methyltransferases, histone deacetylases, and histone 
methyltransferases), DNA and histone methylation binding factors (e.g., MECP2 
and HP1), chromatin remodeling proteins (e.g., ATRX and DAXX), and non-coding 
RNAs. This evidence helps us to understand how PCH organization is crucial for 
genome integrity. It then follows that alterations to the molecular signature of 
PCH might contribute to the onset of many genetic pathologies and to cancer 
progression. Here, we describe the most recent updates on the molecular 
mechanisms known to underlie PCH organization and function.

DOI: 10.3390/genes11060595
PMCID: PMC7349813
PMID: 32481609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.