1. Front Neurosci. 2020 May 20;14:485. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00485. eCollection
 2020.

Guilt-by-Association - Functional Insights Gained From Studying the LRRK2 
Interactome.

Gloeckner CJ(1)(2)(3), Porras P(4).

Author information:
(1)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Center for Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Core Facility 
for Medical Bioanalytics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(4)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute 
(EMBL-EBI), Cherry Hinton, United Kingdom.

The Parkinson's disease-associated Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a 
complex multi-domain protein belonging to the Roco protein family, a unique 
group of G-proteins. Variants of this gene are associated with an increased risk 
of Parkinson's disease. Besides its well-characterized enzymatic activities, 
conferred by its GTPase and kinase domains, and a central dimerization domain, 
it contains four predicted repeat domains, which are, based on their structure, 
commonly involved in protein-protein interactions (PPIs). In the past decades, 
tremendous progress has been made in determining comprehensive interactome maps 
for the human proteome. Knowledge of PPIs has been instrumental in assigning 
functions to proteins involved in human disease and helped to understand the 
connectivity between different disease pathways and also significantly 
contributed to the functional understanding of LRRK2. In addition to an 
increased kinase activity observed for proteins containing PD-associated 
variants, various studies helped to establish LRRK2 as a large scaffold protein 
in the interface between cytoskeletal dynamics and the vesicular transport. This 
review first discusses a number of specific LRRK2-associated PPIs for which a 
functional consequence can at least be speculated upon, and then considers the 
representation of LRRK2 protein interactions in public repositories, providing 
an outlook on open research questions and challenges in this field.

Copyright © 2020 Gloeckner and Porras.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00485
PMCID: PMC7251075
PMID: 32508578