1. Front Immunol. 2020 May 20;11:997. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00997. eCollection 
2020.

CCL2 Overexpression in the Brain Promotes Glial Activation and Accelerates Tau 
Pathology in a Mouse Model of Tauopathy.

Joly-Amado A(1), Hunter J(2), Quadri Z(2), Zamudio F(2), Rocha-Rangel PV(3), 
Chan D(1), Kesarwani A(1), Nash K(1), Lee DC(2), Morgan D(3), Gordon MN(3), 
Selenica MB(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, FL, United States.
(2)Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of South Florida, 
Tampa, FL, United States.
(3)Michigan State University, Department of Translational Neuroscience, Grand 
Rapids, MI, United States.
(4)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, Department of Molecular and Cellular 
Biochemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States.

Innate immune activation is a major contributor to Alzheimer's Disease (AD) 
pathophysiology, although the mechanisms involved are poorly understood. 
Chemokine C-C motif ligand (CCL) 2 is produced by neurons and glial cells and is 
upregulated in the AD brain. Transgene expression of CCL2 in mouse models of 
amyloidosis produces microglia-induced amyloid β oligomerization, a strong 
indication of the role of these activation pathways in the amyloidogenic 
processes of AD. We have previously shown that CCL2 polarizes microglia in wild 
type mice. However, how CCL2 signaling contributes to tau pathogenesis remains 
unknown. To address this question, CCL2 was delivered via recombinant 
adeno-associated virus serotype 9 into both cortex and hippocampus of a mouse 
model with tau pathology (rTg4510). We report that CCL2 overexpression 
aggravated tau pathology in rTg4510 as shown by the increase in Gallyas stained 
neurofibrillary tangles as well as phosphorylated tau-positive inclusions. In 
addition, biochemical analysis showed a reduction in the levels of 
detergent-soluble tau species followed by increase in the insoluble fraction, 
indicating a shift toward larger tau aggregates. Indeed, increased levels of 
high molecular weight species of phosphorylated tau were found in the mice 
injected with CCL2. We also report that worsening of tau pathology following 
CCL2 overexpression was accompanied by a distinct inflammatory response. We 
report an increase in leukocyte common antigen (CD45) and Cluster of 
differentiation 68 (CD68) expression in the brain of rTg4510 mice without 
altering the expression levels of a cell-surface protein Transmembrane Protein 
119 (Tmem119) and ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba-1) in resident 
microglia. Furthermore, the analysis of cytokines in brain extract showed a 
significant increase in interleukin (IL)-6 and CCL3, while CCL5 levels were 
decreased in CCL2 mice. No changes were observed in IL-1α, IL-1β, TNF-α. IL-4, 
Vascular endothelial growth factor-VEGF, IL-13 and CCL11. Taken together our 
data report for the first time that overexpression of CCL2 promotes the increase 
of pathogenic tau species and is associated with glial neuroinflammatory changes 
that are deleterious. We propose that these events may contribute to the 
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathies.

Copyright © 2020 Joly-Amado, Hunter, Quadri, Zamudio, Rocha-Rangel, Chan, 
Kesarwani, Nash, Lee, Morgan, Gordon and Selenica.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00997
PMCID: PMC7251073
PMID: 32508844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]