1. J Interv Cardiol. 2020 May 14;2020:5894586. doi: 10.1155/2020/5894586. 
eCollection 2020.

Coronary Artery Spasm: New Insights.

Matta A(1)(2), Bouisset F(1), Lhermusier T(1), Campelo-Parada F(1), Elbaz M(1), 
Carrié D(1), Roncalli J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Institute CARDIOMET, CHU-Toulouse, Toulouse, 
France.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Holy Spirit University of Kaslik, Kaslik, Lebanon.

Coronary artery spasm (CAS) defined by a severe reversible diffuse or focal 
vasoconstriction is the most common diagnosis among INOCA (ischemia with no 
obstructive coronary artery disease) patients irrespective to racial, genetic, 
and geographic variations. However, the prevalence of CAS tends to decrease in 
correlation with the increasing use of medicines such as calcium channel 
blockers, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, and statins, the controlling 
management of atherosclerotic risk factors, and the decreased habitude to 
perform a functional reactivity test in highly active cardiac catheterization 
centers. A wide spectrum of clinical manifestations from silent disease to 
sudden cardiac death was attributed to this complex entity with unclear 
pathophysiology. Multiple mechanisms such as the autonomic nervous system, 
endothelial dysfunction, chronic inflammation, oxidative stress, and smooth 
muscle hypercontractility are involved. Regardless of the limited benefits 
proffered by the newly emerged cardiac imaging modalities, the provocative test 
remains the cornerstone diagnostic tool for CAS. It allows to reproduce CAS and 
to evaluate reactivity to nitrates. Different invasive and noninvasive 
therapeutic approaches are approved for the management of CAS. Long-acting 
nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers are recommended for first line 
therapy. Invasive strategies such as PCI (percutaneous coronary intervention) 
and CABG (coronary artery bypass graft) have shown benefits in CAS with 
significant atherosclerotic lesions. Combination therapies are proposed for 
refractory cases.

Copyright © 2020 Anthony Matta et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/5894586
PMCID: PMC7245659
PMID: 32508542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.