1. J Clin Med. 2020 Jun 3;9(6):1732. doi: 10.3390/jcm9061732.

Relationship between Insulin Resistance (HOMA-IR), Trabecular Bone Score (TBS), 
and Three-Dimensional Dual-Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (3D-DXA) in Non-Diabetic 
Postmenopausal Women.

Campillo-Sánchez F(1), Usategui-Martín R(2), Ruiz-de Temiño Á(3), Gil J(4), 
Ruiz-Mambrilla M(3), Fernández-Gómez JM(5), Dueñas-Laita A(3)(6), 
Pérez-Castrillón JL(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Gynaecology Department, Hospital Clínico Universitario Valladolid, 47003 
Valladolid, Spain.
(2)IOBA, University of Valladolid, 47011 Valladolid, Spain.
(3)Department Medicine, University of Valladolid, 47005 Valladolid, Spain.
(4)Hospital Nuestra Señora de Sonsoles, 05004 Avila, Spain.
(5)Biology Department, University of Valladolid, 47005 Valladolid, Spain.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Valladolid Service of Clinical 
Toxicology, Río Hortega University Hospital, 47012 Valladolid, Spain.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Valladolid, Río Hortega University Hospital, 47012 Valladolid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Insulin may play a key role in bone metabolism, where the anabolic 
effect predominates. This study aims to analyze the relationship between insulin 
resistance and bone quality using the trabecular bone score (TBS) and 
three-dimensional dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (3D-DXA) in non-diabetic 
postmenopausal women by determining cortical and trabecular compartments.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted in non-diabetic postmenopausal 
women with suspected or diagnosed osteoporosis. The inclusion criteria were no 
menstruation for more than 12 months and low bone mass or osteoporosis as 
defined by DXA. Glucose was calculated using a Hitachi 917 auto-analyzer. 
Insulin was determined using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (EIA). Insulin 
resistance was estimated using a homeostasis model assessment of insulin 
resistance (HOMA-IR). DXA, 3D-DXA, and TBS were thus collected. Moreover, we 
examined bone parameters according to quartile of insulin, hemoglobin A1C 
(HbA1c), and HOMA-IR.
RESULTS: In this study, we included 381 postmenopausal women. Women located in 
quartile 4 (Q4) of HOMA-IR had higher values of volumetric bone mineral density 
(vBMD) but not TBS. The increase was higher in the trabecular compartment 
(16.4%) than in the cortical compartment (6.4%). Similar results were obtained 
for insulin. Analysis of the quartiles by HbA1c showed no differences in 
densitometry values, however women in Q4 had lower levels of TBS. After 
adjusting for BMI, statistical significance was maintained for TBS, insulin, 
HOMA-IR, and HbA1c.
CONCLUSIONS: In non-diabetic postmenopausal women there was a direct 
relationship between insulin resistance and vBMD, whose effect is directly 
related to greater weight. TBS had an inverse relationship with HbA1c, insulin, 
and insulin resistance unrelated to weight. This might be explained by the 
formation of advanced glycosylation products (AGEs) in the bone matrix, which 
reduces bone deformation capacity and resistance, as well as increases 
fragility.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9061732
PMCID: PMC7355807
PMID: 32503328

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.