1. Transl Psychiatry. 2020 Jun 9;10(1):184. doi: 10.1038/s41398-020-00870-x.

D-Serine as the gatekeeper of NMDA receptor activity: implications for the 
pharmacologic management of anxiety disorders.

Wolosker H(1), Balu DT(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel 
Institute of Technology, Haifa, 31096, Israel.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. 
dbalu@mclean.harvard.edu.
(3)Translational Psychiatry Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, 02478, 
USA. dbalu@mclean.harvard.edu.

Fear, anxiety, and trauma-related disorders, including post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD), are quite common and debilitating, with an estimated lifetime 
prevalence of ~28% in Western populations. They are associated with excessive 
fear reactions, often including an inability to extinguish learned fear, 
increased avoidance behavior, as well as altered cognition and mood. There is an 
extensive literature demonstrating the importance of N-methyl-D-aspartate 
receptor (NMDAR) function in regulating these behaviors. NMDARs require the 
binding of a co-agonist, D-serine or glycine, at the glycine modulatory site 
(GMS) to function. D-serine is now garnering attention as the primary NMDAR 
co-agonist in limbic brain regions implicated in neuropsychiatric disorders. 
L-serine is synthesized by astrocytes, which is then transported to neurons for 
conversion to D-serine by serine racemase (SR), a model we term the 'serine 
shuttle.' The neuronally-released D-serine is what regulates NMDAR activity. Our 
review discusses how the systems that regulate the synaptic availability of 
D-serine, a critical gatekeeper of NMDAR-dependent activation, could be targeted 
to improve the pharmacologic management of anxiety-related disorders where the 
desired outcomes are the facilitation of fear extinction, as well as mood and 
cognitive enhancement.

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-020-00870-x
PMCID: PMC7283225
PMID: 32518273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.T.B. served as a consultant for LifeSci 
Capital and received research support from Takeda Pharmaceuticals. H.W. reports 
no biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.