1. Front Genet. 2020 May 26;11:536. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00536. eCollection 
2020.

Deep-Sequencing Identification of MicroRNA Biomarkers in Serum Exosomes for 
Early Pig Pregnancy.

Zhou C(1)(2)(3), Cai G(1)(2)(3), Meng F(4), Xu Z(1)(2)(3), He Y(1)(2)(3), Hu 
Q(1)(2)(3), Zheng E(1)(2)(3), Huang S(1)(2)(3), Xu Z(1)(2)(3), Gu T(1)(2)(3), Hu 
B(4), Wu Z(1)(2)(3), Hong L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Research Center for Breeding Swine Industry, College of 
Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Agro-Animal Genomics and Molecular 
Breeding, College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Lingnan Guangdong Laboratory of Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Institute of Animal Science, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Guangzhou, China.

Early pregnancy diagnosis in sows can significantly improve the efficiency of 
pig industry. Exosomes are membrane-covered nanovesicles that can transport 
microRNAs (miRNAs) and other molecular signals between cells. In other species, 
serum exosome-derived miRNAs can serve as good biomarkers of diseases and 
different physiological states, including pregnancy status. We hypothesized that 
circulating exosome-derived miRNAs might be used to differentiate the pregnancy 
status as early as several days after insemination in pigs. To test this 
hypothesis, we randomly assigned pigs for artificial insemination with fertile 
or dead semen (control group). Serum samples were obtained from pregnant pigs on 
days 9, 12, and 15 after insemination and from non-pregnant pigs on days 0, 9, 
12, and 15 after insemination. Exosomes were isolated for RNA extraction. The 
exosomal RNA samples from pigs on day 9 of the estrus cycle and pregnancy were 
used for small-RNA sequencing. A total 321 miRNAs were identified in all 
samples. Twenty eight differentially abundant miRNAs were identified between the 
pregnant and control groups. miRNAs with | log2 (fold change)| > 2 from 
sequencing results were selected for validation by quantitative 
reverse-transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) in larger samples. 
Finally two upregulated miRNAs (miR-92b-3p and miR-17-5p) in the pregnant groups 
(on days 9, 12, and 15 of pregnancy) were confirmed by RT-qPCR. In summary, we 
have successfully identified circulating exosomal miRNA profiles in the serum of 
pigs in early pregnancy. miR-92b-3p and miR-17-5p could be used as potential 
circulating biomarkers for early pregnancy diagnosis.

Copyright Â© 2020 Zhou, Cai, Meng, Xu, He, Hu, Zheng, Huang, Xu, Gu, Hu, Wu and 
Hong.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00536
PMCID: PMC7264423
PMID: 32528535