1. Methods. 2021 Sep;193:80-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2020.06.007. Epub 2020 Jun
13.

Amyloid-β oligomerization monitored by single-molecule stepwise photobleaching.

Dresser L(1), Hunter P(1), Yendybayeva F(2), Hargreaves AL(3), Howard JAL(3), 
Evans GJO(4), Leake MC(5), Quinn SD(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK.
(2)Department of Biology, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK.
(3)Department of Physics, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK; 
Department of Biology, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK.
(4)Department of Biology, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK; York 
Biomedical Research Institute, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK.
(5)Department of Physics, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK; 
Department of Biology, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK; York 
Biomedical Research Institute, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK.
(6)Department of Physics, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK; York 
Biomedical Research Institute, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, UK. 
Electronic address: steven.quinn@york.ac.uk.

A major hallmark of Alzheimer's disease is the misfolding and aggregation of the 
amyloid- β peptide (Aβ). While early research pointed towards large fibrillar- 
and plaque-like aggregates as being the most toxic species, recent evidence now 
implicates small soluble Aβ oligomers as being orders of magnitude more harmful. 
Techniques capable of characterizing oligomer stoichiometry and assembly are 
thus critical for a deeper understanding of the earliest stages of 
neurodegeneration and for rationally testing next-generation oligomer 
inhibitors. While the fluorescence response of extrinsic fluorescent probes such 
as Thioflavin-T have become workhorse tools for characterizing large Aβ 
aggregates in solution, it is widely accepted that these methods suffer from 
many important drawbacks, including an insensitivity to oligomeric species. 
Here, we integrate several biophysics techniques to gain new insight into 
oligomer formation at the single-molecule level. We showcase single-molecule 
stepwise photobleaching of fluorescent dye molecules as a powerful method to 
bypass many of the traditional limitations, and provide a step-by-step guide to 
implementing the technique in vitro. By collecting fluorescence emission from 
single Aβ(1-42) peptides labelled at the N-terminal position with HiLyte Fluor 
555 via wide-field total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) imaging, we 
demonstrate how to characterize the number of peptides per single immobile 
oligomer and reveal heterogeneity within sample populations. Importantly, 
fluorescence emerging from Aβ oligomers cannot be easily investigated using 
diffraction-limited optical microscopy tools. To assay oligomer activity, we 
also demonstrate the implementation of another biophysical method involving the 
ratiometric imaging of Fura-2-AM loaded cells which quantifies the rate of 
oligomer-induced dysregulation of intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis. We anticipate 
that the integrated single-molecule biophysics approaches highlighted here will 
develop further and in principle may be extended to the investigation of other 
protein aggregation systems under controlled experimental conditions.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2020.06.007
PMCID: PMC8336786
PMID: 32544592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]