1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Aug 20;48(14):7767-7785. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa531.

A unified view of the sequence and functional organization of the human RNA 
polymerase II promoter.

Luse DS(1), Parida M(2), Spector BM(2), Nilson KA(2), Price DH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Lerner Research 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

To better understand human RNA polymerase II (Pol II) promoters in the context 
of promoter-proximal pausing and local chromatin organization, 5' and 3' ends of 
nascent capped transcripts and the locations of nearby nucleosomes were 
accurately identified through sequencing at exceptional depth. High-quality 
visualization tools revealed a preferred sequence that defines over 177 000 core 
promoters with strengths varying by >10 000-fold. This sequence signature 
encompasses and better defines the binding site for TFIID and is surprisingly 
invariant over a wide range of promoter strength. We identified a sequence motif 
associated with promoter-proximal pausing and demonstrated that cap methylation 
only begins once transcripts are about 30 nt long. Mapping also revealed a ∼150 
bp periodic downstream sequence element (PDE) following the typical pause 
location, strongly suggestive of a +1 nucleosome positioning element. A nuclear 
run-off assay utilizing the unique properties of the DNA fragmentation factor 
(DFF) coupled with sequencing of DFF protected fragments demonstrated that a +1 
nucleosome is present downstream of paused Pol II. Our data more clearly define 
the human Pol II promoter: a TFIID binding site with built-in downstream 
information directing ubiquitous promoter-proximal pausing and downstream 
nucleosome location.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa531
PMCID: PMC7641323
PMID: 32597978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]