1. PLoS One. 2020 Jun 29;15(6):e0235198. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0235198. 
eCollection 2020.

Eye lens crystallin proteins inhibit the autocatalytic amyloid amplification 
nature of mature α-synuclein fibrils.

Gaspar R(1)(2), Garting T(1), Stradner A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Chemistry, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Biochemistry and Structural Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Parkinson´s disease is characterized by the accumulation of proteinaceous 
aggregates in Lewy bodies and Lewy Neurites. The main component found in such 
aggregates is α-synuclein. Here, we investigate how bovine eye lens crystallin 
proteins influence the aggregation kinetics of α-synuclein at mildly acidic pH 
(5.5) where the underlying aggregation mechanism of this protein is dominated by 
secondary nucleation of monomers on fibril surface providing an autocatalytic 
amyloid amplification process. Bovine α-, βH- and γB-crystallins were found to 
display chaperone-like activity inhibiting α-synuclein aggregation. This effect 
was shown to be time-dependent, with early additions of α-crystallin capable of 
retarding and even inhibiting aggregation during the time frame of the 
experiment. The inhibitory nature of crystallins was further investigated using 
trap and seed kinetic experiments. We propose crystallins interact with mature 
α-synuclein fibrils, possibly binding along the surfaces and at fibril free 
ends, inhibiting both elongation and monomer-dependent secondary nucleation 
processes in a mechanism that may be generic to some chaperones that prevent the 
onset of protein misfolding related pathologies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0235198
PMCID: PMC7323979
PMID: 32598365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.