1. J Clin Med. 2020 Jun 26;9(6):2003. doi: 10.3390/jcm9062003.

Pituitary Disease in AIP Mutation-Positive Familial Isolated Pituitary Adenoma 
(FIPA): A Kindred-Based Overview.

Bilbao Garay I(1), Daly AF(2), Egaña Zunzunegi N(1), Beckers A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario Donostia, 20014 Donostia, 
Euskadi, Spain.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Centre Hospitalaire Universitaire de Liège, 
Liège Université, 4000 Liège, Belgium.

Clinically-relevant pituitary adenomas occur in about 1:1000 of the general 
population, but only about 5% occur in a known genetic or familial setting. 
Familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA) are one of the most important 
inherited settings for pituitary adenomas and the most frequent genetic cause is 
a germline mutation in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) 
gene. AIP mutations lead to young-onset macroadenomas that are difficult to 
treat. Most are growth hormone secreting tumors, but all other secretory types 
can exist and the clinical profile of affected patients is variable. We present 
an overview of the current understanding of AIP mutation-related pituitary 
disease and illustrate various key clinical factors using examples from one of 
the largest AIP mutation-positive FIPA families identified to date, in which six 
mutation-affected members with pituitary disease have been diagnosed. We 
highlight various clinically significant features of FIPA and AIP mutations, 
including issues related to patients with acromegaly, prolactinoma, apoplexy and 
non-functioning pituitary adenomas. The challenges faced by these AIP 
mutation-positive patients due to their disease and the long-term outcomes in 
older patients are discussed. Similarly, the pitfalls encountered due to 
incomplete penetrance of pituitary adenomas in AIP-mutated kindreds are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9062003
PMCID: PMC7356765
PMID: 32604740

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.