1. Biomolecules. 2020 Jun 28;10(7):973. doi: 10.3390/biom10070973.

Mesothelin-Targeted Recombinant Immunotoxins for Solid Tumors.

Hagerty BL(1)(2), Pegna GJ(1)(3), Xu J(1), Tai CH(1), Alewine C(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Surgical Oncology Program, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.
(3)Medical Oncology Service, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.

Mesothelin (MSLN) is a cell surface glycoprotein normally expressed only on 
serosal surfaces, and not found in the parenchyma of vital organs. Many solid 
tumors also express MSLN, including mesothelioma and pancreatic adenocarcinoma. 
Due to this favorable expression profile, MSLN represents a viable target for 
directed anti-neoplastic therapies, such as recombinant immunotoxins (iToxs). 
Pre-clinical testing of MSLN-targeted iTox's has yielded a strong body of 
evidence for activity against a number of solid tumors. This has led to multiple 
clinical trials, testing the safety and efficacy of the clinical leads SS1P and 
LMB-100. While promising clinical results have been observed, neutralizing 
anti-drug antibody (ADA) formation presents a major challenge to overcome in the 
therapeutic development process. Additionally, on-target, off-tumor toxicity 
from serositis and non-specific capillary leak syndrome (CLS) also limits the 
dose, and therefore, impact anti-tumor activity. This review summarizes existing 
pre-clinical and clinical data on MSLN-targeted iTox's. In addition, we address 
the potential future directions of research to enhance the activity of these 
anti-tumor agents.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10070973
PMCID: PMC7408136
PMID: 32605175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.