1. Biophys J. 2020 Jul 21;119(2):300-313. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2020.06.009. Epub
2020  Jun 17.

The Glycosphingolipid GM3 Modulates Conformational Dynamics of the Glucagon 
Receptor.

Ansell TB(1), Song W(1), Sansom MSP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: mark.sansom@bioch.ox.ac.uk.

The extracellular domain (ECD) of class B1 G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) 
plays a central role in signal transduction and is uniquely positioned to sense 
both the extracellular and membrane environments. Although recent studies 
suggest a role for membrane lipids in the modulation of class A and class F GPCR 
signaling properties, little is known about the effect of lipids on class B1 
receptors. In this study, we employed multiscale molecular dynamics simulations 
to access the dynamics of the glucagon receptor (GCGR) ECD in the presence of 
native-like membrane bilayers. Simulations showed that the ECD could move about 
a hinge region formed by residues Q122-E126 to adopt both closed and open 
conformations relative to the transmembrane domain. ECD movements were modulated 
by binding of the glycosphingolipid GM3. These large-scale fluctuations in ECD 
conformation may affect the ligand binding and receptor activation properties. 
We also identify a unique phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate (PIP2) 
interaction profile near intracellular loop (ICL) 2/TM3 at the 
G-protein-coupling interface, suggesting a mechanism of engaging G-proteins that 
may have a distinct dependence on PIP2 compared with class A GPCRs. Given the 
structural conservation of class B1 GPCRs, the modulatory effects of GM3 and 
PIP2 on GCGR may be conserved across these receptors, offering new insights into 
potential therapeutic targeting.

Copyright Â© 2020 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2020.06.009
PMCID: PMC7376093
PMID: 32610088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]