1. J Cell Mol Med. 2020 Aug;24(15):8304-8314. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.15554. Epub 2020 
Jul 6.

Preclinical insights into the gut-skeletal muscle axis in chronic 
gastrointestinal diseases.

Ehlers L(1), Bannert K(1), Rohde S(1), Berlin P(1), Reiner J(1), Wiese M(2), 
Doller J(2), Lerch MM(2), Aghdassi AA(2), Meyer F(3), Valentini L(3), Agrifoglio 
O(4), Metges CC(4), Lamprecht G(1), Jaster R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine II, Division of Gastroenterology, Rostock University 
Medical Center, Rostock, Germany.
(2)Department of Medicine A, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Agriculture and Food Sciences, Neubrandenburg Institute of 
Evidence-Based Nutrition (NIED), University of Applied Sciences Neubrandenburg, 
Neubrandenburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Nutritional Physiology 'Oskar Kellner', Leibniz Institute for 
Farm Animal Biology (FBN), Dummerstorf, Germany.

Muscle wasting represents a constant pathological feature of common chronic 
gastrointestinal diseases, including liver cirrhosis (LC), inflammatory bowel 
diseases (IBD), chronic pancreatitis (CP) and pancreatic cancer (PC), and is 
associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Recent clinical and 
experimental studies point to the existence of a gut-skeletal muscle axis that 
is constituted by specific gut-derived mediators which activate pro- and 
anti-sarcopenic signalling pathways in skeletal muscle cells. A 
pathophysiological link between both organs is also provided by low-grade 
systemic inflammation. Animal models of LC, IBD, CP and PC represent an 
important resource for mechanistic and preclinical studies on disease-associated 
muscle wasting. They are also required to test and validate specific 
anti-sarcopenic therapies prior to clinical application. In this article, we 
review frequently used rodent models of muscle wasting in the context of chronic 
gastrointestinal diseases, survey their specific advantages and limitations and 
discuss possibilities for further research activities in the field. We conclude 
that animal models of LC-, IBD- and PC-associated sarcopenia are an essential 
supplement to clinical studies because they may provide additional mechanistic 
insights and help to identify molecular targets for therapeutic interventions in 
humans.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by 
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.15554
PMCID: PMC7412689
PMID: 32628812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None to declare.