1. Vaccines (Basel). 2020 Jun 30;8(3):349. doi: 10.3390/vaccines8030349.

Mutations at the Serine Hydroxymethyltransferase Impact its Interaction with a 
Soluble NSF Attachment Protein and a Pathogenesis-Related Protein in Soybean.

Lakhssassi N(1), Piya S(2), Knizia D(1), El Baze A(1), Cullen MA(1), Meksem 
J(3), Lakhssassi A(4), Hewezi T(2), Meksem K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant, Soil and Agricultural Systems, Southern Illinois 
University, Carbondale, IL 62901, USA.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, 
USA.
(3)Trinity College of Arts and Sciences, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.
(4)Faculty of Sciences and Technologies, University of Lorraine, 54000 Nancy, 
France.

Resistance to soybean cyst nematodes (SCN) in "Peking-type" resistance is 
bigenic, requiring Rhg4-a and rhg1-a. Rhg4-a encodes a serine 
hydroxymethyltransferase (GmSHMT08) and rhg1-a encodes a soluble NSF attachment 
protein (GmSNAP18). Recently, it has been shown that a pathogenesis-related 
protein, GmPR08-Bet VI, potentiates the interaction between GmSHMT08 and 
GmSNAP18. Mutational analysis using spontaneously occurring and ethyl 
methanesulfonate (EMS)-induced mutations was carried out to increase our 
knowledge of the interacting GmSHMT08/GmSNAP18/GmPR08-Bet VI multi-protein 
complex. Mutations affecting the GmSHMT08 protein structure (dimerization and 
tetramerization) and interaction sites with GmSNAP18 and GmPR08-Bet VI proteins 
were found to impact the multi-protein complex. Interestingly, mutations 
affecting the PLP/THF substrate binding and catalysis did not affect the 
multi-protein complex, although they resulted in increased susceptibility to 
SCN. Most importantly, GmSHMT08 and GmSNAP18 from PI88788 were shown to interact 
within the cell, being potentiated in the presence of GmPR08-Bet VI. In 
addition, we have shown the presence of incompatibility between the GmSNAP18 
(rhg1-b) of PI88788 and GmSHMT08 (Rhg4-a) from Peking. Components of the 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) pathway were shown to be induced in the SCN 
incompatible reaction and were mapped to QTLs for resistance to SCN using 
different mapping populations.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines8030349
PMCID: PMC7563484
PMID: 32629961

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.