1. RNA. 2020 Oct;26(10):1464-1480. doi: 10.1261/rna.075655.120. Epub 2020 Jul 6.

Origin, conservation, and loss of alternative splicing events that diversify the 
proteome in Saccharomycotina budding yeasts.

Hurtig JE(#)(1), Kim M(#)(1), Orlando-Coronel LJ(#)(1), Ewan J(#)(1), Foreman 
M(#)(1), Notice LA(#)(1), Steiger MA(#)(2), van Hoof A(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics Department, University of Texas Health 
Science Center-Houston, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of St. Thomas, Houston, 
Texas 77006, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Many eukaryotes use RNA processing, including alternative splicing, to express 
multiple gene products from the same gene. The budding yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae has been successfully used to study the mechanism of splicing and the 
splicing machinery, but alternative splicing in yeast is relatively rare and has 
not been extensively studied. Alternative splicing of SKI7/HBS1 is widely 
conserved, but yeast and a few other eukaryotes have replaced this one 
alternatively spliced gene with a pair of duplicated, unspliced genes as part of 
a whole genome doubling (WGD). We show that other examples of alternative 
splicing known to have functional consequences are widely conserved within 
Saccharomycotina. A common mechanism by which alternative splicing has 
disappeared is by replacement of an alternatively spliced gene with duplicate 
unspliced genes. This loss of alternative splicing does not always take place 
soon after duplication, but can take place after sufficient time has elapsed for 
speciation. Saccharomycetaceae that diverged before WGD use alternative splicing 
more frequently than S. cerevisiae, suggesting that WGD is a major reason for 
infrequent alternative splicing in yeast. We anticipate that WGDs in other 
lineages may have had the same effect. Having observed that two functionally 
distinct splice-isoforms are often replaced by duplicated genes allowed us to 
reverse the reasoning. We thereby identify several splice isoforms that are 
likely to produce two functionally distinct proteins because we find them 
replaced by duplicated genes in related species. We also identify some 
alternative splicing events that are not conserved in closely related species 
and unlikely to produce functionally distinct proteins.

Â© 2020 Hurtig et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the 
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.075655.120
PMCID: PMC7491326
PMID: 32631843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]