1. Biomolecules. 2020 Jul 2;10(7):996. doi: 10.3390/biom10070996.

SIRT1 Deficiency, Specifically in Fibroblasts, Decreases Apoptosis Resistance 
and Is Associated with Resolution of Lung-Fibrosis.

Bulvik R(1), Breuer R(1)(2), Dvir-Ginzberg M(3), Reich E(3), Berkman N(1), 
Wallach-Dayan SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Lung Cellular and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Institute of Pulmonary 
Medicine, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, POB 12000, Jerusalem 91120, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 670 Albany St, 4th Floor, 
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(3)Institute of Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dental Medicine, Hebrew 
University-Hadassah, POB 12065, Jerusalem 9112102, Israel.

In contrast to normal regenerating tissue, resistance to Fas- and FasL-positive 
T cell-induced apoptosis were detected in myofibroblasts from fibrotic-lungs of 
humans and mice following bleomycin (BLM) exposure. In this study we show, 
decreased FLIP expression in lung-tissues with resolution of BLM-induced 
fibrosis and in isolated-lung fibroblasts, with decreased resistance to 
apoptosis. Using a FLIP-expression vector or a shFLIP-RNA, we further confirmed 
the critical need for FLIP to regain/lose susceptibility of fibrotic-lung 
myofibroblast to Fas-induced apoptosis. Our study further show that FLIP is 
regulated by SIRT1 (Sirtuin 1) deacetylase. Chimeric mice, with SIRT1-deficiency 
in deacetylase domain (H355Y-Sirt1y/y), specifically in mesenchymal cells, were 
not only protected from BLM-induced lung fibrosis but, as assessed following 
Ku70 immunoprecipitation, had also decreased Ku70-deacetylation, 
decreasedKu70/FLIP complex, and decreased FLIP levels in their lung 
myofibroblasts. In addition, myofibroblasts isolated from lungs of BLM-treated 
miR34a-knockout mice, exposed to a miR34a mimic, which we found here to 
downregulate SIRT1 in the luciferase assay, had a decreased Ku70-deacetylation 
indicating decrease in SIRT1 activity. Thus, SIRT1 may mediate, 
miR34a-regulated, persistent FLIP levels by deacetylation of Ku70 in lung 
myofibroblasts, promoting resistance to cell-death and lung fibrosis.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10070996
PMCID: PMC7407379
PMID: 32630813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.