1. Res Nurs Health. 2020 Aug;43(4):317-328. doi: 10.1002/nur.22051. Epub 2020 Jul
 8.

Sleep, self-management, neurocognitive function, and glycemia in emerging adults 
with Type 1 diabetes mellitus: A research protocol.

Griggs S(1), Redeker NS(2), Crawford SL(3), Grey M(2).

Author information:
(1)Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)School of Nursing and School of Medicine, Yale University, West Haven, 
Connecticut.
(3)Graduate School of Nursing, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, Massachusetts.

Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) affects 1.6 million Americans, and only 14% of emerging 
adults ages 18-25 years achieve targets for glycemic control (A1C < 7.0%). Sleep 
deficiency, including habitual short sleep duration (<6.5 hr total sleep time 
and high within-person variability in total sleep time), is associated with 
poorer glycemic control. Emerging adults with T1D have a more pronounced sleep 
extension on weekends compared with matched controls, consistent with sleep 
deficiency; however, associations among sleep variability and glycemic control 
have not been explored in this population. Sleep deficiency may affect the 
complex higher-order neurocognitive functioning needed for successful diabetes 
self-management (DSM). We report the protocol for an ongoing study designed to 
characterize sleep and the associations among sleep deficiency, neurocognitive 
function, DSM, diabetes quality of life, and glycemia among a sample of 40 
emerging adults with T1D. We monitor sleep via wrist-worn actigraphy and glucose 
via continuous glucose monitoring concurrently over 14 days. We are collecting 
data on self-report and objective sleep, a 10-min psychomotor vigilance test on 
a PVT-192 device, a 3-min Trail Making Test on paper, and questionnaires, 
including twice-daily Pittsburgh sleep diaries using Research Electronic Data 
Capture (REDCap)TM . Results from this study will be used to support the 
development and testing of the efficacy of a tailored sleep self-management 
intervention that may improve total sleep time, sleep variability, 
neurocognitive function, DSM, glycemic control, and glucose variability among 
emerging adults with T1D.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/nur.22051
PMCID: PMC7382362
PMID: 32639059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.