1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jun 30;21(13):4678. doi: 10.3390/ijms21134678.

Deciphering the Binding of Salicylic Acid to Arabidopsis thaliana Chloroplastic 
GAPDH-A1.

Pokotylo I(1)(2), Hellal D(1), Bouceba T(3), Hernandez-Martinez M(1), Kravets 
V(2), Leitao L(1), Espinasse C(1), Kleiner I(4), Ruelland E(1).

Author information:
(1)IEES-Paris (UMR_7618) - Institut D'écologie et des Sciences de 
L'environnement de Paris, CNRS UMR 7583, Université Paris-Est Créteil, Sorbonne 
Université, F-94010 Paris, France.
(2)V.P. Kukhar Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry and Petrochemistry, National 
Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 02094 Kyiv, Ukraine.
(3)Plateforme D'interactions Moléculaires, CNRS-FR3631, Institut de Biologie 
Paris Seine (IBPS), Sorbonne Université, F-75252 Paris Cedex 05, France.
(4)LISA (UMR 7583) - Laboratoire Interuniversitaire des Systèmes Atmosphériques 
(LISA), CNRS UMR 7583, Université Paris-Est Créteil, Université de Paris, 
Institut Pierre Simon Laplace (IPSL), 61 avenue du Générale de Gaulle, F-94010 
Créteil, France.

Erratum in
    Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Oct 09;21(20):E7435. doi: 10.3390/ijms21207435.

Salicylic acid (SA) has an essential role in the responses of plants to 
pathogens. SA initiates defence signalling via binding to proteins. NPR1 is a 
transcriptional co-activator and a key target of SA binding. Many other proteins 
have recently been shown to bind SA. Amongst these proteins are important 
enzymes of primary metabolism. This fact could stand behind SA's ability to 
control energy fluxes in stressed plants. Nevertheless, only sparse information 
exists on the role and mechanisms of such binding. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was previously demonstrated to bind SA both in human and 
plants. Here, we detail that the A1 isomer of chloroplastic glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPA1) from Arabidopsis thaliana binds SA with a KD 
of 16.7 nM, as shown in surface plasmon resonance experiments. Besides, we show 
that SA inhibits its GAPDH activity in vitro. To gain some insight into the 
underlying molecular interactions and binding mechanism, we combined in silico 
molecular docking experiments and molecular dynamics simulations on the free 
protein and protein-ligand complex. The molecular docking analysis yielded to 
the identification of two putative binding pockets for SA. A simulation in water 
of the complex between SA and the protein allowed us to determine that only one 
pocket-a surface cavity around Asn35-would efficiently bind SA in the presence 
of solvent. In silico mutagenesis and simulations of the ligand/protein 
complexes pointed to the importance of Asn35 and Arg81 in the binding of SA to 
GAPA1. The importance of this is further supported through experimental 
biochemical assays. Indeed, mutating GAPA1 Asn35 into Gly or Arg81 into Leu 
strongly diminished the ability of the enzyme to bind SA. The very same cavity 
is responsible for the NADP+ binding to GAPA1. More precisely, modelling 
suggests that SA binds to the very site where the pyrimidine group of the 
cofactor fits. NADH inhibited in a dose-response manner the binding of SA to 
GAPA1, validating our data.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21134678
PMCID: PMC7370300
PMID: 32630078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.