1. Nat Commun. 2020 Jul 9;11(1):3523. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-17409-9.

Self-amplifying RNA SARS-CoV-2 lipid nanoparticle vaccine candidate induces high 
neutralizing antibody titers in mice.

McKay PF(1), Hu K(1), Blakney AK(1), Samnuan K(1), Brown JC(1), Penn R(1), Zhou 
J(1), Bouton CR(1), Rogers P(1), Polra K(1), Lin PJC(2), Barbosa C(2), Tam 
YK(2), Barclay WS(1), Shattock RJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, 
London, W2 1PG, UK.
(2)Acuitas Therapeutics, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, 
London, W2 1PG, UK. r.shattock@imperial.ac.uk.

The spread of the SARS-CoV-2 into a global pandemic within a few months of onset 
motivates the development of a rapidly scalable vaccine. Here, we present a 
self-amplifying RNA encoding the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein encapsulated within a 
lipid nanoparticle (LNP) as a vaccine. We observe remarkably high and 
dose-dependent SARS-CoV-2 specific antibody titers in mouse sera, as well as 
robust neutralization of both a pseudo-virus and wild-type virus. Upon further 
characterization we find that the neutralization is proportional to the quantity 
of specific IgG and of higher magnitude than recovered COVID-19 patients. saRNA 
LNP immunizations induce a Th1-biased response in mice, and there is no 
antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) observed. Finally, we observe high cellular 
responses, as characterized by IFN-γ production, upon re-stimulation with 
SARS-CoV-2 peptides. These data provide insight into the vaccine design and 
evaluation of immunogenicity to enable rapid translation to the clinic.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-17409-9
PMCID: PMC7347890
PMID: 32647131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.F.M. and R.J.S. are co-inventors on a patent 
resulting from this work. P.J.C.L., C.B. and Y.K.T. are employed by Acuitas 
Therapeutics.