1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2020 Dec 23;61(11):1832-1849. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcaa092.

The Current Status of Research on Gibberellin Biosynthesis.

Hedden P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Palacký University & Institute of 
Experimental Botany of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Šlechtitelů 27, 78371 
Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(2)Rothamsted Research, West Common, Harpenden, Hertfordshire AL5 2JQ, UK.

Gibberellins are produced by all vascular plants and several fungal and 
bacterial species that associate with plants as pathogens or symbionts. In the 
60 years since the first experiments on the biosynthesis of gibberellic acid in 
the fungus Fusarium fujikuroi, research on gibberellin biosynthesis has advanced 
to provide detailed information on the pathways, biosynthetic enzymes and their 
genes in all three kingdoms, in which the production of the hormones evolved 
independently. Gibberellins function as hormones in plants, affecting growth and 
differentiation in organs in which their concentration is very tightly 
regulated. Current research in plants is focused particularly on the regulation 
of gibberellin biosynthesis and inactivation by developmental and environmental 
cues, and there is now considerable information on the molecular mechanisms 
involved in these processes. There have also been recent advances in 
understanding gibberellin transport and distribution and their relevance to 
plant development. This review describes our current understanding of 
gibberellin metabolism and its regulation, highlighting the more recent advances 
in this field.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese 
Society of Plant Physiologists.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcaa092
PMCID: PMC7758035
PMID: 32652020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]