1. Channels (Austin). 2020 Dec;14(1):193-202. doi: 10.1080/19336950.2020.1788903.

Bibliometric analysis of calcium channel research (2010-2019).

Shi J(1), Wang H(1), Shi S(2), Yuan G(1), Jia Q(2), Shi S(1), Zhang X(1), Hu 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Guanganmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences , Beijing, 
China.
(2)Graduate School of Beijing University of Chinese Medicine , Beijing, China.

Calcium channels are involved in pathologies across all the major therapeutic 
areas involving the cardiac, neurological, metabolic, and respiratory systems. 
Although calcium channels have been the hotspot of multidisciplinary research 
for decades, the hotspots and frontier trends of calcium channel research have 
not been comprehensively analyzed by bibliometrics. Here, we collected 
scientific publications on calcium channel research in the past decade to 
explore the hotspots and frontier directions of calcium channel research by 
bibliometric analysis. Publications were retrieved from the Web of Science Core 
Collection (WOSCC) database from 2010 to 2019. Citespace5.6 R5 was used to 
perform bibliometric analysis on the countries, institutions, authors, and 
related research areas. In total, 26,664 articles were analyzed. The United 
States and the University of California are the most productive country and 
institution for calcium channel research. The most productive researchers were 
Lang, Florian, Zamponi, Gerald W, and Jan, Chung-Ren. PLoS One had the most 
significant number of publications (986). Research hotspots can be summarized as 
the regulation mechanism of calcium channels, calcium channel blockers, and 
ryanodine receptor. The research frontiers were the effect of calcium channel on 
cell proliferation, gene mutation, calcium channels in neuropathic pain, and 
calcium-signaling pathway. This is the first report to visualize and analyze 
hotspots and emerging trends in calcium channel research.

DOI: 10.1080/19336950.2020.1788903
PMCID: PMC7515533
PMID: 32654583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.