1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Sep 4;48(15):8431-8444. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa584.

Dnmt1 binds and represses genomic retroelements via DNA methylation in mouse 
early embryos.

Min B(1), Park JS(1), Jeong YS(1), Jeon K(1)(2), Kang YK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Development and Differentiation Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience Biotechnology (KRIBB), 125 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, 
South Korea.
(2)Department of Functional Genomics, Korea University of Science and 
Technology, Daejeon 34113, South Korea.

Genome-wide passive DNA demethylation in cleavage-stage mouse embryos is related 
to the cytoplasmic localization of the maintenance methyltransferase DNMT1. 
However, recent studies provided evidences of the nuclear localization of DNMT1 
and its contribution to the maintenance of methylation levels of imprinted 
regions and other genomic loci in early embryos. Using the DNA adenine methylase 
identification method, we identified Dnmt1-binding regions in four- and 
eight-cell embryos. The unbiased distribution of Dnmt1 peaks in the genic 
regions (promoters and CpG islands) as well as the absence of a correlation 
between the Dnmt1 peaks and the expression levels of the peak-associated genes 
refutes the active participation of Dnmt1 in the transcriptional regulation of 
genes in the early developmental period. Instead, Dnmt1 was found to associate 
with genomic retroelements in a greatly biased fashion, particularly with the 
LINE1 (long interspersed nuclear elements) and ERVK (endogenous retrovirus type 
K) sequences. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that the transcripts of the 
Dnmt1-enriched retroelements were overrepresented in Dnmt1 knockdown embryos. 
Finally, methyl-CpG-binding domain sequencing proved that the Dnmt1-enriched 
retroelements, which were densely methylated in wild-type embryos, became 
demethylated in the Dnmt1-depleted embryos. Our results indicate that Dnmt1 is 
involved in the repression of retroelements through DNA methylation in early 
mouse development.

Â© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa584
PMCID: PMC7470951
PMID: 32667642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]