1. Degener Neurol Neuromuscul Dis. 2014 Jan 22;4:1-19. doi: 10.2147/DNND.S41056. 
eCollection 2014.

Critical analysis of the use of β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 
1 inhibitors in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Evin G(1)(2), Barakat A(2).

Author information:
(1)Oxidation Biology Laboratory, Mental Health Research Institute, Florey 
Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the major cause of dementia in the elderly and an 
unmet clinical challenge. A variety of therapies that are currently under 
development are directed to the amyloid cascade. Indeed, the accumulation and 
toxicity of amyloid-β (Aβ) is believed to play a central role in the etiology of 
the disease, and thus rational interventions are aimed at reducing the levels of 
Aβ in the brain. Targeting β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 
(BACE)-1 represents an attractive strategy, as this enzyme catalyzes the initial 
and rate-limiting step in Aβ production. Observation of increased levels of 
BACE1 and enzymatic activity in the brain, cerebrospinal fluid, and platelets of 
patients with AD and mild cognitive impairment supports the potential benefits 
of BACE1 inhibition. Numerous potent inhibitors have been generated, and many of 
these have been proved to lower Aβ levels in the brain of animal models. Over 10 
years of intensive research on BACE1 inhibitors has now culminated in advancing 
half a dozen of these drugs into human trials, yet translating the in vitro and 
cellular efficacy of BACE1 inhibitors into preclinical and clinical trials 
represents a challenge. This review addresses the promises and also the 
potential problems associated with BACE1 inhibitors for AD therapy, as the 
complex biological function of BACE1 in the brain is becoming unraveled.

© 2014 Evin and Barakat.

DOI: 10.2147/DNND.S41056
PMCID: PMC7337240
PMID: 32669897

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest in 
this work.