1. J Cyst Fibros. 2020 Nov;19(6):942-948. doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2020.07.009. Epub
2020  Jul 12.

A four week trial of hypertonic saline in children with mild cystic fibrosis 
lung disease: Effect on mucociliary clearance and clinical outcomes.

Donaldson SH(1), Danielle Samulski T(2), LaFave C(3), Zeman K(4), Wu J(4), 
Trimble A(2), Ceppe A(2), Bennett WD(5), Davis SD(6).

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, NC, Pulmonary 
and Critical Care Medicine, Chapel Hill, USA. Electronic address: 
scott_donaldson@med.unc.edu.
(2)University of North Carolina School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, NC, Pulmonary 
and Critical Care Medicine, Chapel Hill, USA.
(3)University of North Carolina School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, NC, Pulmonary 
and Critical Care Medicine, Chapel Hill, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Chapel 
Hill, USA.
(4)Center for Environmental Medicine, Asthma and Lung Biology, Chapel Hill, USA.
(5)University of North Carolina School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, NC, Pulmonary 
and Critical Care Medicine, Chapel Hill, USA; Center for Environmental Medicine, 
Asthma and Lung Biology, Chapel Hill, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Chapel Hill, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hypertonic saline (HS) is commonly prescribed for children with 
cystic fibrosis (CF) despite the absence of strong data indicating clinical 
efficacy in a population with mild lung disease. We hypothesized that HS 
treatment would result in a sustained improvement in mucociliary clearance (MCC) 
in children with CF who had minimal lung disease, thus providing evidence for a 
biologically relevant effect that also may be associated with clinical 
improvements.
METHODS: We performed a randomized, placebo controlled, double blind study of 6% 
versus 0.12% sodium chloride, delivered three-times daily with an eFlow 
nebulizer for 4 weeks. MCC was measured using gamma scintigraphy at baseline, 
2-hours after the first study treatment, and ~12-hours after the final dose (at 
day 28). Spirometry, respiratory symptoms (CFQ-R), and safety were also 
assessed.
RESULTS: Study treatments were generally well tolerated and safe. HS (6% sodium 
chloride) resulted in a significant, sustained improvement from baseline in 
whole lung clearance after 4 weeks of therapy (p = 0.014), despite absence of a 
prolonged single-dose effect after the initial dose. This sustained change 
(12 hrs after prior dose) was significantly greater when compared to placebo 
(0.12% sodium chloride) treatment (p = 0.016). Improvements in spirometry with 
HS did not reach statistical significance but correlated with MCC changes.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed sustained improvement in MCC with HS suggests that 
this treatment may yield health benefits, even in relatively mildly affected 
children with CF. Highlighting this physiologic finding is important due to the 
lack of meaningful, validated endpoints in this population.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcf.2020.07.009
PMCID: PMC7736104
PMID: 32669217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declartion of Competing Interest The authors 
have no relevant conflicts of interest to disclose.