1. Cell Death Dis. 2020 Jul 18;11(7):546. doi: 10.1038/s41419-020-02754-w.

The longevity-associated variant of BPIFB4 improves a CXCR4-mediated 
striatum-microglia crosstalk preventing disease progression in a mouse model of 
Huntington's disease.

Di Pardo A(#)(1), Ciaglia E(#)(2), Cattaneo M(3), Maciag A(3), Montella F(2), 
Lopardo V(2), Ferrario A(3), Villa F(3)(4), Madonna M(1), Amico E(1), Carrizzo 
A(1)(2), Damato A(1), Pepe G(1), Marracino F(1), Auricchio A(5)(6), Vecchione 
C(1)(2), Maglione V(7), Puca AA(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Neuromed, 86077, Pozzilli, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry "Scuola Medica Salernitana", 
University of Salerno, 84081, Baronissi, Italy.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Unit, IRCCS MultiMedica, 20138, Milan, Italy.
(4)Neurodevelopmental Behavior Core, F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)TIGEM (Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine), 80078, Pozzuoli, Italy.
(6)Department of Translational Medicine, "Federico II" University, Naples, 
Italy.
(7)IRCCS Neuromed, 86077, Pozzilli, Italy. vittorio.maglione@neuromed.it.
(8)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry "Scuola Medica Salernitana", 
University of Salerno, 84081, Baronissi, Italy. apuca@unisa.it.
(9)Cardiovascular Research Unit, IRCCS MultiMedica, 20138, Milan, Italy. 
apuca@unisa.it.
(#)Contributed equally

The longevity-associated variant (LAV) of the 
bactericidal/permeability-increasing fold-containing family B member 4 (BPIFB4) 
has been found significantly enriched in long-living individuals. 
Neuroinflammation is a key player in Huntington's disease (HD), a 
neurodegenerative disorder caused by neural death due to expanded CAG repeats 
encoding a long polyglutamine tract in the huntingtin protein (Htt). Herein, we 
showed that striatal-derived cell lines with expanded Htt (STHdh Q111/111) 
expressed and secreted lower levels of BPIFB4, when compared with Htt expressing 
cells (STHdh Q7/7), which correlated with a defective stress response to 
proteasome inhibition. Overexpression of LAV-BPIFB4 in STHdh Q111/111 cells was 
able to rescue both the BPIFB4 secretory profile and the proliferative/survival 
response. According to a well-established immunomodulatory role of LAV-BPIFB4, 
conditioned media from LAV-BPIFB4-overexpressing STHdh Q111/111 cells were able 
to educate Immortalized Human Microglia-SV40 microglial cells. While STHdh 
Q111/111 dying cells were ineffective to induce a CD163 + IL-10high 
pro-resolving microglia compared to normal STHdh Q7/7, LAV-BPIFB4 transduction 
promptly restored the central immune control through a mechanism involving the 
stromal cell-derived factor-1. In line with the in vitro results, 
adeno-associated viral-mediated administration of LAV-BPIFB4 exerted a 
CXCR4-dependent neuroprotective action in vivo in the R6/2 HD mouse model by 
preventing important hallmarks of the disease including motor dysfunction, body 
weight loss, and mutant huntingtin protein aggregation. In this view, 
LAV-BPIFB4, due to its pleiotropic ability in both immune compartment and 
cellular homeostasis, may represent a candidate for developing new treatment for 
HD.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-020-02754-w
PMCID: PMC7368858
PMID: 32683420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.A.P. and C.V. hold shares of LGV1 start-up, a 
spin-off of University of Salerno that own patents on LAV-BPIFB4 use in therapy.