1. PLoS One. 2020 Jul 21;15(7):e0224952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224952. 
eCollection 2020.

Screening of tau protein kinase inhibitors in a tauopathy-relevant cell-based 
model of tau hyperphosphorylation and oligomerization.

Yadikar H(1)(2)(3), Torres I(1), Aiello G(1), Kurup M(1), Yang Z(1), Lin F(1), 
Kobeissy F(1)(4), Yost R(3), Wang KK(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Program for Neurotrauma, Neuroproteomics & Biomarkers Research, Departments 
of Emergency Medicine, Psychiatry, Neuroscience and Chemistry, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Kuwait University, 
Safat, Kuwait.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Chemistry Laboratory Building, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States of America.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, American University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, 
Lebanon.
(5)Brain Rehabilitation Research Center, Malcom Randall VA Medical Center, 
Gainesville, FL, United States of America.

Tauopathies are a class of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by abnormal 
deposition of post-translationally modified tau protein in the human brain. 
Tauopathies are associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD), chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy (CTE), and other diseases. Hyperphosphorylation increases tau 
tendency to aggregate and form neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), a pathological 
hallmark of AD. In this study, okadaic acid (OA, 100 nM), a protein phosphatase 
1/2A inhibitor, was treated for 24h in mouse neuroblastoma (N2a) and 
differentiated rat primary neuronal cortical cell cultures (CTX) to induce 
tau-hyperphosphorylation and oligomerization as a cell-based tauopathy model. 
Following the treatments, the effectiveness of different kinase inhibitors was 
assessed using the tauopathy-relevant tau antibodies through tau-immunoblotting, 
including the sites: pSer202/pThr205 (AT8), pThr181 (AT270), pSer202 (CP13), 
pSer396/pSer404 (PHF-1), and pThr231 (RZ3). OA-treated samples induced tau 
phosphorylation and oligomerization at all tested epitopes, forming a monomeric 
band (46-67 kDa) and oligomeric bands (170 kDa and 240 kDa). We found that TBB 
(a casein kinase II inhibitor), AR and LiCl (GSK-3 inhibitors), cyclosporin A 
(calcineurin inhibitor), and Saracatinib (Fyn kinase inhibitor) caused robust 
inhibition of OA-induced monomeric and oligomeric p-tau in both N2a and CTX 
culture. Additionally, a cyclin-dependent kinase 5 inhibitor (Roscovitine) and a 
calcium chelator (EGTA) showed contrasting results between the two neuronal 
cultures. This study provides a comprehensive view of potential drug candidates 
(TBB, CsA, AR, and Saracatinib), and their efficacy against tau 
hyperphosphorylation and oligomerization processes. These findings warrant 
further experimentation, possibly including animal models of tauopathies, which 
may provide a putative Neurotherapy for AD, CTE, and other forms of 
tauopathy-induced neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224952
PMCID: PMC7373298
PMID: 32692785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.