1. G3 (Bethesda). 2020 Sep 2;10(9):3387-3398. doi: 10.1534/g3.120.401470.

speck, First Identified in Drosophila melanogaster in 1910, Is Encoded by the 
Arylalkalamine N-Acetyltransferase (AANAT1) Gene.

Spana EP(1), Abrams AB(1), Ellis KT(1), Klein JC(1), Ruderman BT(1), Shi AH(1), 
Zhu D(1), Stewart A(1), May S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708 spana@duke.edu.

The pigmentation mutation speck is a commonly used recombination marker 
characterized by a darkly pigmented region at the wing hinge. Identified in 1910 
by Thomas Hunt Morgan, speck was characterized by Sturtevant as the most 
"workable" mutant in the rightmost region of the second chromosome and 
eventually localized to 2-107.0 and 60C1-2. Though the first speck mutation was 
isolated over 110 years ago, speck is still not associated with any gene. Here, 
as part of an undergraduate-led research effort, we show that speck is encoded 
by the Arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase 1 (AANAT1) gene. Both alleles from the 
Morgan lab contain a retrotransposon in exon 1 of the RB transcript of the 
AANAT1 gene. We have also identified a new insertion allele and generated 
multiple deletion alleles in AANAT1 that all give a strong speck phenotype. In 
addition, expression of AANAT1 RNAi constructs either ubiquitously or in the 
dorsal portion of the developing wing generates a similar speck phenotype. We 
find that speck alleles have additional phenotypes, including ectopic 
pigmentation in the posterior pupal case, leg joints, cuticular sutures and 
overall body color. We propose that the acetylated dopamine generated by AANAT1 
decreases the dopamine pool available for melanin production. When AANAT1 
function is decreased, the excess dopamine enters the melanin pathway to 
generate the speck phenotype.

Copyright Â© 2020 Spana et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.120.401470
PMCID: PMC7466976
PMID: 32709620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]