1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jul 3;11:1496. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01496.
eCollection  2020.

In vivo Characterization of Plasmodium berghei P47 (Pbs47) as a Malaria 
Transmission-Blocking Vaccine Target.

Yenkoidiok-Douti L(1)(2), Canepa GE(1), Barletta ABF(1), Barillas-Mury C(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, 
United States.
(2)Fischell Department of Bioengineering, University of Maryland, College Park, 
MD, United States.

An effective vaccine to reduce malaria transmission is central to control and 
ultimately achieve disease eradication. Recently, we demonstrated that 
antibodies targeting the Plasmodium falciparum surface protein P47 (Pfs47) 
reduce parasite transmission to Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes. Here, Plasmodium 
berghei (Pb) was used as a model to assess the in vivo efficacy of a 
P47-targeted transmission blocking vaccine (Pbs47). Mice were immunized 
following a prime/boost regimen and infected with P. berghei. The effect of 
immunization on infectivity to mosquitoes was evaluated by direct feeding on P. 
berghei-infected mice. The key region in Pbs47 where antibody binding confers 
protection was mapped, and the immunogenicity of this protective antigen was 
enhanced by conjugation to a virus-like particle. Passive immunization with 100 
and 50 μg/mL of anti-Pbs47 IgG reduced oocyst density by 77 and 67%, 
respectively. Furthermore, affinity purified Pbs47-specific IgG significantly 
reduced oocyst density by 88 and 77%, respectively at doses as low as 10 and 1 
μg/mL. These studies suggest that P47 is a promising transmission blocking 
target and show that antibodies to the same specific region in Pfs47 and Pbs47 
confer protection.

Copyright © 2020 Yenkoidiok-Douti, Canepa, Barletta and Barillas-Mury.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01496
PMCID: PMC7348136
PMID: 32719666