1. Oncol Lett. 2020 Aug;20(2):1015-1027. doi: 10.3892/ol.2020.11659. Epub 2020
May  21.

Telomeres and telomerase in oncogenesis.

Trybek T(1), Kowalik A(2), Góźdź S(3)(4), Kowalska A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Clinic, Holycross Cancer Center, 25-734 Kielce, Poland.
(2)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Holycross Cancer Center, 25-734 Kielce, 
Poland.
(3)The Faculty of Health Sciences, Jan Kochanowski University, 25-319 Kielce, 
Poland.
(4)Oncology Clinic, Holycross Cancer Center, 25-734 Kielce, Poland.

Telomeres are located at the ends of chromosomes and protect them from 
degradation. Suppressing the activity of telomerase, a telomere-synthesizing 
enzyme, and maintaining short telomeres is a protective mechanism against cancer 
in humans. In most human somatic cells, the expression of telomerase reverse 
transcriptase (TERT) is repressed and telomerase activity is inhibited. This 
leads to the progressive shortening of telomeres and inhibition of cell growth 
in a process called replicative senescence. Most types of primary cancer exhibit 
telomerase activation, which allows uncontrolled cell proliferation. Previous 
research indicates that TERT activation also affects cancer development through 
activities other than the canonical function of mediating telomere elongation. 
Recent studies have improved the understanding of the structure and function of 
telomeres and telomerase as well as key mechanisms underlying the activation of 
TERT and its role in oncogenesis. These advances led to a search for drugs that 
inhibit telomerase as a target for cancer therapy. The present review article 
summarizes the organization and function of telomeres, their role in 
carcinogenesis, and advances in telomerase-targeted therapy.

Copyright: © Trybek et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2020.11659
PMCID: PMC7377093
PMID: 32724340