1. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2020 Jan-Dec;19:1533033820940426. doi: 
10.1177/1533033820940426.

Efficacy of Next-Generation EGFR-TKIs in Patients With Non-Small Cell Lung 
Cancer: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.

Qi YT(1), Hou Y(2), Qi LC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, China-Japan Union Hospital, Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.
(2)Department of Tissue Engineering, School of Pharmacy, Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, China-Japan Union Hospital, Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy of next-generation epidermal growth factor 
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors in patients with advanced non-small cell 
lung cancer who have failed first-generation epidermal growth factor 
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors still remains under investigation.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this meta-analysis was to systematically assess the 
efficacy and safety profiles of next-generation epidermal growth factor 
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors in patients with advanced non-small cell 
lung cancer who failed first-generation epidermal growth factor 
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
METHODS: We performed a comprehensive search of several electronic databases up 
to September 2018 to identify clinical trials. The primary end point was overall 
survival, progression-free survival, disease controlled rate, objective response 
rate, and adverse events. Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor emergent severe adverse events (grade â‰¥ 3) were analyzed. Odds ratio 
along with 95% confidence interval were utilized for main outcome analysis.
RESULTS: In total, we had 3 randomized controlled trials in this analysis. The 
group of next-generation epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors had significantly improved progression-free survival (odds ratio = 
0.34, 95% confidence interval = 0.29-0.40, P < .00001), as well as objective 
response rate (odds ratio = 10.48, 95% confidence interval = 3.87-28.34, P < 
.00001) and disease controlled rate (odds ratio = 6.03, 95% confidence interval 
= 4.41-8.25, P < .00001). However, there was no significant difference in 
overall survival with next-generation epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (odds ratio = 1.05, 95% confidence interval = 0.85-1.31, P = 
.66). Meanwhile, the odds ratio for treatment-emergent severe adverse events 
(diarrhea, rash/acne, nausea, vomiting, anemia) between patients who received 
next-generation epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors and 
those who received first-generation epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors did not show safety benefit (P > .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Next-generation epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors were shown to be the better agent to achieve higher response rate and 
longer progression-free survival in patients with non-small cell lung cancer as 
the later-line therapy for previously treated patients with first-generation 
epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Meanwhile, they did 
not achieve benefit in overall survival and safety compared with the 
chemotherapy group. Further research is needed to develop a database of all EGFR 
mutations and their individual impacts on the various treatments.

DOI: 10.1177/1533033820940426
PMCID: PMC7391430
PMID: 32723164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.