1. Toxins (Basel). 2020 Jul 27;12(8):477. doi: 10.3390/toxins12080477.

Production of Paralytic Shellfish Toxins (PSTs) in Toxic Alexandrium catenella 
is Intertwined with Photosynthesis and Energy Production.

Tse SP(1), Lee FW(2), Mak DY(1), Kong HK(1), Chan KK(1), Lo PY(1), Lo SC(1).

Author information:
(1)The Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Science, School of Science and Technology, The Open University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

To investigate the mechanism for the production of paralytic shellfish toxins 
(PST) in toxic dinoflagellates, with a 2D-gel based approach, we had made two 
sets of proteomic comparisons: (a) between a toxic Alexandrium catenella (AC-T) 
and a phylogenetically closely related non-toxic strain (AC-N), (b) between 
toxic AC-T grown in a medium with 10% normal amount of phosphate (AC-T-10%P) 
known to induce higher toxicity and AC-T grown in normal medium. We found that 
photosynthesis and energy production related proteins were up-regulated in AC-T 
when compared to AC-N. However, the same group of proteins was down-regulated in 
AC-T-10%P when compared to normal AC-T. Examining the relationship of 
photosynthesis and toxin content of AC-T upon continuous photoperiod experiment 
revealed that while growth and associated toxin content increased after 8 days 
of continuous light, toxin content maintained constant when cells were shifted 
from continuous light to continuous dark for 3 days. This emphasized the 
cruciality of light availability on toxin biosynthesis in AC-T, while another 
light-independent mechanism may be responsible for higher toxicity in AC-T-10%P 
compared to normal AC-T. Taken all together, it is believed that the interplay 
between "illumination", "photosynthesis", "phosphate availability", and "toxin 
production" is much more complicated than what we had previously anticipated.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12080477
PMCID: PMC7472304
PMID: 32727048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.