1. mBio. 2020 Jul 28;11(4):e01017-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01017-20.

Polyphosphate Functions In Vivo as an Iron Chelator and Fenton Reaction 
Inhibitor.

Beaufay F(1), Quarles E(1), Franz A(1), Katamanin O(1), Wholey WY(1), Jakob 
U(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA ujakob@umich.edu.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.

Maintaining cellular iron homeostasis is critical for organismal survival. 
Whereas iron depletion negatively affects the many metabolic pathways that 
depend on the activity of iron-containing enzymes, any excess of iron can cause 
the rapid formation of highly toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS) through Fenton 
chemistry. Although several cellular iron chelators have been identified, little 
is known about if and how organisms can prevent the Fenton reaction. By studying 
the effects of cisplatin, a commonly used anticancer drug and effective 
antimicrobial, we discovered that cisplatin elicits severe iron stress and 
oxidative DNA damage in bacteria. We found that both of these effects are 
successfully prevented by polyphosphate (polyP), an abundant polymer consisting 
solely of covalently linked inorganic phosphates. Subsequent in vitro and in 
vivo studies revealed that polyP provides a crucial iron reservoir under 
nonstress conditions and effectively complexes free iron and blocks ROS 
formation during iron stress. These results demonstrate that polyP, a 
universally conserved biomolecule, plays a hitherto unrecognized role as an iron 
chelator and an inhibitor of the Fenton reaction.IMPORTANCE How do organisms 
deal with free iron? On the one hand, iron is an essential metal that plays 
crucial structural and functional roles in many organisms. On the other hand, 
free iron is extremely toxic, particularly under aerobic conditions, where iron 
rapidly undergoes the Fenton reaction and produces highly reactive hydroxyl 
radicals. Our study now demonstrates that we have discovered one of the first 
physiologically relevant nonproteinaceous iron chelators and Fenton inhibitors. 
We found that polyphosphate, a highly conserved and ubiquitous inorganic 
polyanion, chelates iron and, through its multivalency, prevents the interaction 
of iron with peroxide and therefore the formation of hydroxyl radicals. We show 
that polyP provides a crucial iron reservoir for metalloproteins under nonstress 
conditions and effectively chelates free iron during iron stress. Importantly, 
polyP is present in all cells and organisms and hence is likely to take on this 
crucial function in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.

Copyright Â© 2020 Beaufay et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01017-20
PMCID: PMC7387796
PMID: 32723918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]