1. Anim Genet. 2020 Oct;51(5):694-706. doi: 10.1111/age.12986. Epub 2020 Aug 1.

The Asp298Asn polymorphism of melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) in pigs: evidence 
for its potential effects on MC4R constitutive activity and cell surface 
expression.

Zhang J(1), Li J(1), Wu C(1), Hu Z(1), An L(1), Wan Y(1), Fang C(1), Zhang X(1), 
Li J(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-resources and Eco-environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China.

In humans and mice, melanocortin receptor 4 (MC4R) and melanocortin receptor 
accessory protein 2 (MRAP2) can form a complex and control energy balance, thus 
regulating body weight and obesity. In pigs, a missense variant (p.Asp298Asn) of 
MC4R has been suggested to be associated with growth and fatness; however, the 
effect of Asp298Asn substitution on MC4R function is controversial, limiting its 
application in animal breeding. Here we examined the effect of this polymorphism 
on MC4R constitutive activity, cell surface expression and signaling, and its 
interaction with MRAP2 in pigs. We found that: (i) both pig MC4RAsp and MC4RAsn 
can be activated by its ligands (α-MSH and ACTH) and stimulate cAMP/PKA 
signaling pathway, as detected by pGL3-CRE-luciferase reporter assay, indicating 
that, like pMC4RAsp , pMC4RAsn is coupled to the cAMP/PKA signaling pathway; 
(ii) compared with pMC4RAsp , pMC4RAsn loses the basal constitutive activity and 
shows a decreased surface expression, as detected by dual-luciferase reporter 
assay and Nano-HiBiT system; (iii) as in other vertebrates, both pMC4RAsp and 
pMC4RAsn can interact with pMRAP2, thus decreasing receptor surface expression 
and enhancing ligand sensitivity, although, in contrast to pMC4RAsp , the basal 
constitutive activity of pMC4RAsn cannot be affected by pMRAP2; and (iv) RNA-seq 
data analysis revealed a co-expression of MC4R and MRAP2 in pig hypothalamus. 
Taken together, our data provide convincing evidence that Asp298Asn substitution 
decreases the constitutive activity and cell surface expression of MC4R or 
MC4R-MRAP2 complex, which may affect energy balance and be a valuable selection 
marker for breeding programs in pigs.

© 2020 Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

DOI: 10.1111/age.12986
PMID: 32738077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]