1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2020 Dec;27(35):43786-43799. doi: 
10.1007/s11356-020-10270-9. Epub 2020 Aug 1.

Genetic polymorphisms in XRCC1, OGG1, and XRCC3 DNA repair genes and DNA damage 
in radiotherapy workers.

Soliman AHM(1), Zaki NN(1), Fathy HM(1), Mohamed AA(1), Ezzat MA(2), Rayan A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine and Clinical Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt.
(3)Clinical Oncology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut University, Assiut, 
Egypt. amal3774rayan@gmail.com.

DNA damage may develop at any dose of ionizing radiation. DNA damage activates 
pathways that regulate cell growth and division or coordinate its replication 
and repair. The repair pathways, base excision repair (BER) and single-strand 
break repair (SSBR), can repair such damages efficiently and maintain genome 
integrity. Loss of this repair process or alteration of its control will be 
associated with serious outcomes for cells and individuals. This study aimed to 
determine the relationship between XRCC1 (Arg194Trp, Arg280His, and Arg399Gln), 
OGG1 (Ser326Cys), and XRCC3 (Thr241Met) SNPs and DNA damage and to identify 
high-risk individuals with reduced DNA repair capacity. This case-control study 
was conducted on 80 subjects; 50 subjects working in Clinical Oncology and 
Nuclear Medicine Department in Assiut University Hospital along with 30 
controls. A total of 1 mL blood samples were collected for Single-Cell Gel 
Electrophoresis Technique (Comet Assay) for detection of DNA damage in those 
subjects. A total of 3 mL fresh blood samples were collected and analyzed by 
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(PCR-RFLP)-based technique. DNA damage detected by comet test was significantly 
high in IR-exposed workers than control. Statistically high significant 
difference was found in exposed subjects versus control subjects regarding the 
frequencies of the variant alleles of hOGG1326, XRCC1280 & 399, and XRCC3241. 
The level of DNA damage was not affected by OGG1326 SNPs when comparing subjects 
of wild genotype with those of (pooled) variants either in the exposed staff or 
in the control group while XRCC1280, 399 and XRCC3241 variant alleles had an 
influence on the studied DNA damage biomarker. Moreover, genotyping distribution 
pattern was highly variable in relation to gender. The present study indicated a 
relationship between DNA damage detected by comet test and single nucleotide 
polymorphisms in genes coding for DNA certain repair enzymes. Individuals 
occupationally exposed to low doses of ionizing radiation could be at great risk 
and more susceptible to the increased DNA damage if they have inherited genetic 
polymorphism.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-020-10270-9
PMID: 32740834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]