1. Onco Targets Ther. 2020 Jul 7;13:6675-6680. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S260993. 
eCollection 2020.

Coexistence of Low-Grade Fetal Adenocarcinoma and Adenocarcinoma in situ of the 
Lung Harboring Different Genetic Mutations: A Case Report and Review of 
Literature.

Liu S(1), Wang J(1), Luo X(1), Li X(2), Miao Y(1), Wang L(1), Li Q(1), Qiu X(1), 
Wang EH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Basic Medical Sciences and the First 
Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology, Ministry of Education, China Medical 
University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

Low-grade fetal lung adenocarcinoma (L-FLAC) is an exceptionally rare pulmonary 
tumor, presenting with unclear histological and molecular features. In 
particular, the potential driver genes of L-FLAC remain elusive. To date, only 
five reports have documented genetic aberrations in L-FLAC. In the current 
study, we describe an unusual case of L-FLAC coexisting with adenocarcinoma in 
situ (AIS) of the lung, harboring different genetic mutations. A 39-year-old 
non-smoker female patient was referred to our hospital with the chief complaint 
of dyspnea for 20 days. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a 2.5×1.5×1.5 cm 
nodule in the right middle lobe, with no mediastinal lymph node enlargement or 
distant metastases. Thoracoscopic surgery was performed to remove the nodules. 
Histopathological analysis of the tissue sections, based on findings from 
immunohistochemical staining, confirmed a diagnosis of L-FLAC coexisting with 
AIS of the lung. Next-generation sequencing revealed L-FLAC-based mutations in 
DICER1 and CTNNB1, and AIS harboring KRAS mutations. Currently, the patient 
remains recurrence-free 17 months after the initial diagnosis. This report 
presents the first case demonstrating the coexistence of L-FLAC and AIS in the 
same pulmonary nodule, harboring different genetic mutations. Based on the 
literature review, this is the second reported case of L-FLAC bearing DICER1 
mutations.

© 2020 Liu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S260993
PMCID: PMC7354012
PMID: 32753900

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.