1. Neurobiol Aging. 2020 Nov;95:81-93. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.07.005.
 Epub 2020 Jul 14.

Volumetric GWAS of medial temporal lobe structures identifies an ERC1 locus 
using ADNI high-resolution T2-weighted MRI data.

Cong S(1), Yao X(2), Huang Z(3), Risacher SL(4), Nho K(4), Saykin AJ(4), Shen 
L(5); UK Brain Expression Consortium; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; School of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
li.shen@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Medial temporal lobe (MTL) consists of hippocampal subfields and neighboring 
cortices. These heterogeneous structures are differentially involved in memory, 
cognitive and emotional functions, and present nonuniformly distributed atrophy 
contributing to cognitive disorders. This study aims to examine how genetics 
influences Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis via MTL substructures by 
analyzing high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data. We performed 
genome-wide association study to examine the associations between 565,373 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 14 MTL substructure volumes. A novel 
association with right Brodmann area 36 volume was discovered in an ERC1 SNP 
(i.e., rs2968869). Further analyses on larger samples found rs2968869 to be 
associated with gray matter density and glucose metabolism measures in the right 
hippocampus, and disease status. Tissue-specific transcriptomic analysis 
identified the minor allele of rs2968869 (rs2968869-C) to be associated with 
reduced ERC1 expression in the hippocampus. All the findings indicated a 
protective role of rs2968869-C in AD. We demonstrated the power of 
high-resolution MRI and the promise of fine-grained MTL substructures for 
revealing the genetic basis of AD biomarkers.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.07.005
PMCID: PMC7609616
PMID: 32768867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement The authors have no actual 
or potential conflicts of interest.