1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2021 Jan;46(1):122-129. doi: 10.1111/ced.14412. Epub 2020
Sep  14.

A phase I, randomized, double-blind study to assess the safety, tolerability and 
efficacy of the topical RORC2 inverse agonist PF-06763809 in participants with 
mild-to-moderate plaque psoriasis.

Berstein G(1), Zhang Y(1), Berger Z(1), Kieras E(1), Li G(2), Samuel A(3), Yeoh 
T(3), Dowty H(1), Beaumont K(1), Wigger-Alberti W(4), von Mackensen Y(4), 
Kroencke U(4), Hamscho R(5), Garcet S(6), Krueger JG(6), Banfield C(1), Oemar 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Inflammation and Immunology Research Unit, Pfizer Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Early Clinical Development, Pfizer Inc., Collegeville, PA, USA.
(3)Formulation and Process Design, Pfizer Inc., Groton, CT, USA.
(4)Bioskin GmbH, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Rothhaar Studien GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor retinoic acid-related orphan receptor 2 
(RORC2/RORγT) mediates interleukin (IL)-17A and IL-17F expression. IL-17A plays 
a central role in the pathogenesis of several inflammatory disorders, including 
psoriasis. The RORC2 inhibitor PF-06763809 has been hypothesized to inhibit 
IL-17A production in T-helper 17 (Th17) cells, thereby reducing psoriasis 
symptoms.
AIM: To assess the safety, tolerability and effect on skin infiltrate thickness 
of PF-06763809 in participants with mild/moderate chronic plaque psoriasis.
METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, first-in-human study (trial 
registration: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03469336). Participants received each of the 
following six treatments once daily for 18 days: three topical doses (2.3%, 
0.8%, 0.23%) of PF-06763809, a vehicle and two active comparators (betamethasone 
and calcipotriol). Primary endpoints included change from baseline in psoriatic 
skin infiltrate thickness [echo-poor band (EPB) on ultrasonography] at Day 19, 
and safety. Change in psoriasis-associated gene expression (Day 19), evaluated 
by real-time reverse transcription PCR of skin biopsies, was an exploratory 
endpoint.
RESULTS: In total, 17 participants completed the study. Change from baseline in 
the EPB on Day 19 for all three doses of PF-06763809 was not significantly 
different from that of vehicle (P > 0.05). A significant reduction in EPB from 
baseline was observed with betamethasone on Day 19 relative to all other 
treatments (P < 0.0001). Treatment-related adverse events were mild/moderate. 
There were no significant differences in gene expression on Day 19 between 
vehicle and PF-06763809-treated skin lesions.
CONCLUSION: Using a psoriasis plaque test design, PF-06763809 was found to be 
well tolerated with an acceptable safety profile in participants with psoriasis, 
but without reduction in skin infiltrate thickness or disease biomarkers.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Dermatology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.14412
PMCID: PMC7756278
PMID: 32767679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: GB, YS, EK, GL, AS, TY, HD, KB, CB and BO are 
employees of Pfizer Inc. and hold stock in the company. ZB was an employee of 
Pfizer Inc. and held Pfizer stock at the time the study was conducted and 
continues to hold stock in the company; ZB is currently an employee of Biogen 
and holds Biogen stock. WW‐A, YvM and UK are employees of Bioskin GmbH. RH is 
Medical Director of Rothhaar Studien GmbH. SG has no conflicts of interest to 
disclose. JGK declares grants/personal fees from AbbVie, Akros, Allergan, 
Almirall, Amgen, Arena Pharmaceuticals, Aristea Therapeutics, Asana BioSciences, 
Aurigene, Avillion, Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Botanix Pharmaceuticals, 
Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Celgene, Eli Lilly, Escalier Biosciences, Exicure, Incyte 
Corporation, Innovaderm, Janssen Pharmaceutica, Leo Pharma, Menlo Therapeutics, 
Nimbus Therapeutics, Novan, Novartis, Parexel, Pfizer Inc., Regeneron 
Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi, Sienna Biopharmaceuticals, Sun Pharmaceutical 
Industries, UCB, Valeant Pharmaceuticals and Vitae Pharmaceuticals.