1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Aug 5;21(16):5607. doi: 10.3390/ijms21165607.

Dietary Protein and Fat Intake Affects Diabetes Risk with CDKAL1 Genetic 
Variants in Korean Adults.

Choi WJ(1), Jin HS(2), Kim SS(2), Shin D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Inha University, 100 Inha-ro, Michuhol-gu, 
Incheon 22212, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Life and Health 
Sciences, Hoseo University, Asan, Chungnam 31499, Korea.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory subunit-associated protein 1-like 1 
(CDKAL1) is one of the strongest diabetes loci identified to date; evidence 
suggests that it plays an important role in insulin secretion. Dietary factors 
that affect insulin demand might enhance the risk of diabetes associated with 
CDKAL1 variants. Our aim was to examine the interactions between dietary protein 
and fat intake and CDKAL1 genetic variants in relation to the risk of diabetes 
in Korean adults. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were selected with a 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) for diabetes after adjustment for age, 
gender, and examination site. Using data from the Health Examinees (HEXA) Study 
of the Korean Genome and Epidemiology Study (KoGES), 3988 middle-aged Korean 
adults between 40-76 years of age (2034 men and 1954 women) were included in the 
study. Finally, rs7756992 located within the CDKAL1 gene region was selected 
from GWAS (p-value < 5 Ã— 10-8). Multivariable logistic regression models were 
used to evaluate the interactions between genotypes and dietary protein and fat 
intake in relation to diabetes risk after adjustment for age, gender, BMI, waist 
circumference, physical activity, smoking status, drinking habits, and 
examination site. Significant interactions between CDKAL1 rs7756992 and dietary 
protein and fat intake for the risk of diabetes were observed in men (p-value < 
0.05). In women, significant interactions between dietary protein and fat intake 
and CDKAL1 variants (rs7756992) were associated with increased risk of diabetes 
(p-value < 0.05). Dietary protein and fat intake interacted differently with 
CDKAL1 variants in relation to the risk of diabetes in Korean adults of both 
genders. These findings indicate that CDKAL1 variants play a significant role in 
diabetes and that dietary protein and fat intake could affect these 
associations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21165607
PMCID: PMC7460637
PMID: 32764395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.