1. J Ophthalmol. 2020 Jul 26;2020:5308597. doi: 10.1155/2020/5308597. eCollection
 2020.

Effect of the Duration of Intraretinal or Subretinal Fluid on the Response to 
Treatment in Undertreated Age-Related Macular Degeneration.

Yoshida I(1), Sakamoto M(1), Sakai A(1), Maeno T(1).

Author information:
(1)Sakura Medical Center, Toho University, Sakura-shi, Chiba, Japan.

We investigated the association between the duration of intraretinal fluid (IRF) 
or subretinal fluid (SRF) and the response to antivascular endothelial growth 
factor injection in patients with undertreated age-related macular degeneration 
(ARMD). The Ethics Committee of Toho University Sakura Medical Center approved 
this study (no. S18030). Eighty eyes of ARMD patients with VA ≤20/100 were 
retrospectively assessed. Each injection's efficacy was classified, and the 
fluid accumulation prior to each injection was evaluated. The effect changes 
following to accumulated IRF, SRF, the longest persistent IRF period (≥10 
months), and their determining factors were evaluated. Throughout observation, 
acquired refractoriness was rarely associated with increased accumulation of IRF 
or SRF. The injection span had a tendency to be short, and the polypoidal 
choroidal vasculopathy and occult choroidal neovasculopathy (CNV) proportions 
had a tendency to be higher among patients with diminished effects than among 
those with maintained effects. VA differed significantly with continuous IRF 
duration, but not with accumulated fluid. The diminishing effect of injections 
during long-standing IRF was rarely associated with undertreatment. The 
mechanism underlying acquired refractoriness remains unknown; the effect change 
demonstrated various patterns, including diminished and improved responses. The 
longest continuous IRF duration was associated with VA decline. Shortening the 
duration of continuous IRF may be necessary.

Copyright © 2020 Izumi Yoshida et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/5308597
PMCID: PMC7399753
PMID: 32774905

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.