1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2020 Oct 15;692:108545. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2020.108545. 
Epub 2020 Aug 15.

Mutational analysis confirms the presence of distal inhibitor-selectivity 
determining residues in B. stearothermophilus dihydrofolate reductase.

Eck T(1), Patel S(1), Candela T(1), Leon H K(1), Little M(1), Reis NE(1), 
Liyanagunawardana U(1), Gubler U(1), Janson CA(1), Catalano J(1), Goodey NM(2).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Montclair State University, Montclair, NJ, 
07043, USA.
(2)Dept. of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Montclair State University, Montclair, NJ, 
07043, USA. Electronic address: goodeyn@mail.montclair.edu.

Many antibacterial and antiparasitic drugs work by competitively inhibiting 
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), a vital enzyme in folate metabolism. The 
interactions between inhibitors and DHFR active site residues are known in many 
homologs but the contributions from distal residues are less understood. 
Identifying distal residues that aid in inhibitor binding can improve targeted 
drug development programs by accounting for distant influences that may be less 
conserved and subject to frequent resistance causing mutations. Previously, a 
novel, homology-based, computational approach that mines ligand inhibition data 
was used to predict residues involved in inhibitor selectivity in the DHFR 
family. Expectedly, some inhibitor selectivity determining residue positions 
were predicted to lie in the active site and coincide with experimentally known 
inhibitor selectivity determining positions. However, other residues that group 
spatially in clusters distal to the active site have not been previously 
investigated. In this study, the effect of introducing amino acid substitutions 
at one of these predicted clusters (His38-Ala39-Ile40) on the inhibitor 
selectivity profile in Bacillus stearothermophilus dihydrofolate reductase (Bs 
DHFR) was investigated. Mutations were introduced into these cluster positions 
to change sidechain chemistry and size. We determined kcat and KM values and 
measured KD values at equilibrium for two competitive DHFR inhibitors, 
trimethoprim (TMP) and pyrimethamine (PYR). Mutations in the His38-Ala39-Ile40 
cluster significantly impacted inhibitor binding and TMP/PYR selectivity - seven 
out of nine mutations resulted in tighter binding to PYR when compared to TMP. 
These data suggest that the His38-Ala39-Ile40 cluster is a distal inhibitor 
selectivity determining region that favors PYR binding in Bs DHFR and, possibly, 
throughout the DHFR family.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2020.108545
PMCID: PMC10727455
PMID: 32810476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]