1. Pathogens. 2020 Aug 15;9(8):660. doi: 10.3390/pathogens9080660.

Epidemiological Trends of Five Common Diarrhea-Associated Enteric Viruses Pre- 
and Post-Rotavirus Vaccine Introduction in Coastal Kenya.

Lambisia AW(1)(2), Onchaga S(1), Murunga N(1), Lewa CS(1), Nyanjom SG(2), Agoti 
CN(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, 
Centre for Geographic Medicine Research-Coast, Kilifi 230-80108, Kenya.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and 
Technology, Juja 62000-00200, Kenya.
(3)School of Health and Human Sciences, Pwani University, Kilifi 195-80108, 
Kenya.

Using real-time RT-PCR, we screened stool samples from children aged <5 years 
presenting with diarrhea and admitted to Kilifi County Hospital, coastal Kenya, 
pre- (2003 and 2013) and post-rotavirus vaccine introduction (2016 and 2019) for 
five viruses, namely rotavirus group A (RVA), norovirus GII, adenovirus, 
astrovirus and sapovirus. Of the 984 samples analyzed, at least one virus was 
detected in 401 (40.8%) patients. Post rotavirus vaccine introduction, the 
prevalence of RVA decreased (23.3% vs. 13.8%, p < 0.001) while that of norovirus 
GII increased (6.6% vs. 10.9%, p = 0.023). The prevalence of adenovirus, 
astrovirus and sapovirus remained statistically unchanged between the two 
periods: 9.9% vs. 14.2%, 2.4% vs. 3.2 %, 4.6% vs. 2.6%, (p = 0.053, 0.585 and 
0.133), respectively. The median age of diarrhea cases was higher post vaccine 
introduction (12.5 months, interquartile range (IQR): 7.9-21 vs. 11.2 months 
pre-introduction, IQR: 6.8-16.5, p < 0.001). In this setting, RVA and adenovirus 
cases peaked in the dry months while norovirus GII and sapovirus peaked in the 
rainy season. Astrovirus did not display clear seasonality. In conclusion, 
following rotavirus vaccine introduction, we found a significant reduction in 
the prevalence of RVA in coastal Kenya but an increase in norovirus GII 
prevalence in hospitalized children.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens9080660
PMCID: PMC7459961
PMID: 32824245

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.