1. Genes (Basel). 2020 Aug 13;11(8):934. doi: 10.3390/genes11080934.

Variation in the Caprine Keratin-Associated Protein 27-1 Gene is Associated with 
Cashmere Fiber Diameter.

Zhao M(1)(2), Zhou H(2)(3), Luo Y(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Hu J(1)(2), Liu X(1)(2), 
Li S(1)(2), Hao Z(1)(2), Jin X(1)(2), Song Y(1)(2), Wu X(1)(2), Hu L(1)(2), 
Hickford JGH(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Gansu Key Laboratory of Herbivorous Animal Biotechnology, College of Animal 
Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070, China.
(2)International Wool Research Institute, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070, China.
(3)Gene-Marker Laboratory, Faculty of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Lincoln 
University, Lincoln 7647, New Zealand.

Variation in some caprine keratin-associated protein (KAP) genes has been 
associated with cashmere fiber traits, but many KAP genes remain unidentified in 
goats. In this study, we confirm the identification of a KAP27-1 gene 
(KRTAP27-1) and describe its effect on cashmere traits in 248 Longdong cashmere 
goats. A polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism 
(PCR-SSCP) analysis was used to screen for sequence variation in this gene, and 
three sequence variants (named A to C) were found. These sequences have the 
highest similarity (77% identity) to a human KRTAP27-1 sequence, while sharing 
some homology with a predicted caprine KRTAP27-1 sequence ENSCHIG00000023347 in 
the goat genome construct (ARS1:CM004562.1) at chromosome 1 position 
3,966,193-3,973,677 in the forward strand. There were two single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) detected in the coding sequence, including one 
nonsynonymous SNP (c.413C/T; p.Ala138Val) and one synonymous SNP (c.495C/T). The 
C variant differed from A and B at c.413C/T, having cytosine in its nucleotide 
sequence, while the B variant differed from A and C at c.495C/T, having thymine 
in its nucleotide sequence. Goats of the genotypes AB and BB produced cashmere 
fibers of higher mean fiber diameter (MFD) than goats of genotype AA, but no 
difference in MFD was detected between the AB and BB goats. These results 
suggest that B is associated with increased MFD. Expression of the caprine 
KRTAP27-1 sequence was predominantly detected in the skin tissue of goats but 
not or only weakly detected in other tissues, including longissimus dorsi 
muscle, heart, kidney, liver, lung and spleen.

DOI: 10.3390/genes11080934
PMCID: PMC7463587
PMID: 32823629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.