1. Metabolites. 2020 Aug 19;10(9):337. doi: 10.3390/metabo10090337.

Delayed Motor Milestones Achievement in Infancy Associates with Perturbations of 
Amino Acids and Lipid Metabolic Pathways.

Vinding RK(1), Rago D(1), Kelly RS(2), Gürdeniz G(1), Rasmussen MA(1)(3), 
Stokholm J(1), Bønnelykke K(1), Litonjua AA(4), Weiss ST(2), Lasky-Su J(2), 
Bisgaard H(1), Chawes BL(1).

Author information:
(1)COPSAC, Copenhagen Prospective Studies on Asthma in Childhood, Herlev and 
Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen, 1017 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Food Science, University of Copenhagen, 1958 Frederiksberg, 
Denmark.
(4)Division of Pediatric Pulmonary Medicine, Golisano Children's Hospital, 
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The relationship between developmental milestone achievement in infancy and 
later cognitive function and mental health is well established, but underlying 
biochemical mechanisms are poorly described. Our study aims to discover pathways 
connected to motor milestone achievement during infancy by using untargeted 
plasma metabolomic profiles from 571 six-month-old children in connection with 
age of motor milestones achievement (Denver Developmental Index) in the 
Copenhagen Prospective Studies on Asthma in Childhood 2010 (COPSAC2010) 
mother-child cohort. We used univariate regression models and multivariate 
modelling (Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis: PLS-DA) to examine the 
associations and the VDAART (Vitamin D Antenatal Asthma Reduction Trial) cohort 
for validation. The univariate analyses showed 62 metabolites associated with 
gross-motor milestone achievement (p < 0.05) as well as the PLS-DA significantly 
differentiated between slow and fast milestone achievers (AUC = 0.87, p = 0.01). 
Higher levels of tyramine-O-sulfate in the tyrosine pathway were found in the 
late achievers in COPSAC (p = 0.0002) and in VDAART (p = 0.02). Furthermore, we 
observed that slow achievers were characterized by higher levels of fatty acids 
and products of fatty acids metabolism including acyl carnitines. Finally, we 
also observed changes in the lysine, histidine, glutamate, creatine and 
tryptophan pathways. Observing these metabolic changes in relation to 
gross-motor milestones in the first year of life, may be of importance for later 
cognitive function and mental health.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo10090337
PMCID: PMC7570268
PMID: 32824932

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no potential, perceived, or 
real conflict of interest regarding the content of this manuscript. The funding 
agencies did not have any role in design and conduct of the study; collection, 
management, and interpretation of the data; or preparation, review, or approval 
of the manuscript. No pharmaceutical company was involved in the study.