1. Elife. 2020 Aug 24;9:e55896. doi: 10.7554/eLife.55896.

The peroxisome counteracts oxidative stresses by suppressing catalase import via 
Pex14 phosphorylation.

Okumoto K(1)(2), El Shermely M(1), Natsui M(2), Kosako H(3), Natsuyama R(2), 
Marutani T(1), Fujiki Y(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 
Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Systems Life Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Division of Cell Signaling, Fujii Memorial Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Tokushima University, Tokushima, Japan.
(4)Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(5)Institute of Rheological Functions of Food, Hisayama-machi, Fukuoka, Japan.

Most of peroxisomal matrix proteins including a hydrogen peroxide 
(H2O2)-decomposing enzyme, catalase, are imported in a peroxisome-targeting 
signal type-1 (PTS1)-dependent manner. However, little is known about regulation 
of the membrane-bound protein import machinery. Here, we report that Pex14, a 
central component of the protein translocation complex in peroxisomal membrane, 
is phosphorylated in response to oxidative stresses such as H2O2 in mammalian 
cells. The H2O2-induced phosphorylation of Pex14 at Ser232 suppresses 
peroxisomal import of catalase in vivo and selectively impairs in vitro the 
interaction of catalase with the Pex14-Pex5 complex. A phosphomimetic mutant 
Pex14-S232D elevates the level of cytosolic catalase, but not canonical 
PTS1-proteins, conferring higher cell resistance to H2O2. We thus suggest that 
the H2O2-induced phosphorylation of Pex14 spatiotemporally regulates peroxisomal 
import of catalase, functioning in counteracting action against oxidative stress 
by the increase of cytosolic catalase.

Â© 2020, Okumoto et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.55896
PMCID: PMC7498260
PMID: 32831175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KO, MN, HK, RN, TM, YF No competing interests 
declared, ME Mahmoud El Shermely is affiliated with Basilea Pharmaceutica 
International Ltd. The author has no financial interests to declare.