1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Aug 21;99(34):e21541. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000021541.

Value of plasma homocysteine to predict stroke, cardiovascular diseases, and 
new-onset hypertension: A retrospective cohort study.

Feng Y(1), Kang K, Xue Q, Chen Y, Wang W, Cao J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

The influences of hyperhomocysteinemia on cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), stroke 
and new-onset hypertension are unclear. The aim of the study is to explore the 
associations of homocysteine levels with stroke, CVDs, and new-onset 
hypertension in Chinese individuals.This retrospective cohort study included 
outpatients and inpatients from the Department of Geriatrics at Ruijin Hospital 
affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine from January to 
December 2000. They were divided based on their homocysteine (Hcy) levels in 
2000: Q1 (<10 μmol/L), Q2 (10-15 μmol/L), and Q3 (>15 μmol/L) and according to 
whether they had hypertension at baseline. Information about stroke, mortality 
and major adverse cardiac events, and newly onset hypertension was gathered in 
December each year until 2017. The effects of Hcy levels on the risk for stroke 
and CVDs among all patients, and new-onset hypertension among patients without 
hypertension at baseline were evaluated.After adjustment for confounders, 
compared with the Q1 group (Hcy <10 μmol/L), when the Hcy increased to 10 to 
15 μmol/L, the risks for stroke, CVDs, and new-onset hypertension significantly 
increased, and the hazard ratio and 95% confidence interval were 2.02 
(1.35-3.05, P = .001), 2.22 (1.32-3.76, P = .003), and 7.20 (4.52-11.48, 
P < .001), respectively. Hcy improved the predictive capability of traditional 
risk factors for stroke. The optimal cut-off value of Hcy for predicting stroke 
was 13.4 μmol/L (sensitivity: 70.9%, specificity: 62.2%).Hcy 10 to 15 μmol/L is 
significantly associated with the risks for stroke, mortality and major adverse 
cardiac events, and hypertension. The best cut-off point of Hcy for predicting 
stroke is 13.4 μmol/L.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000021541
PMCID: PMC7447408
PMID: 32846763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interests to 
disclose.