1. J Virol. 2020 Oct 14;94(21):e01454-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01454-20. Print 2020
Oct  14.

Epstein-Barr Virus gH/gL and Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus gH/gL Bind 
to Different Sites on EphA2 To Trigger Fusion.

Chen J(1), Schaller S(1), Jardetzky TS(2), Longnecker R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA r-longnecker@northwestern.edu.

Both Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) 
are human gammaherpesviruses and are important in a variety of malignancies. Eph 
family receptor tyrosine kinase A2 (EphA2) is a cellular receptor for KSHV and 
EBV. Previous studies identified five conserved residues (ELEFN50-54) in the 
N-terminal domain of KSHV gH that are critical for Eph binding and KSHV 
infection. However, the specific domains of EBV gH/gL important for EphA2 
binding are not well described. We found that the KSHV gH (ELEFN50-54) motif is 
important for higher KSHV fusion and that EBV gH/gL does not utilize a similar 
motif for fusion activity. We previously identified that an EBV gL 
N-glycosylation mutant (gL-N69L/S71V) was hyperfusogenic in epithelial cells but 
not in B cells. To determine whether this glycosylation site may be the binding 
region for EphA2, we compared the EphA2 binding activity of EBV gH/gL and the 
EBV gH/gL-N69L/S71V mutant. We found that EBV gH/gL-N69L/S71V had higher binding 
affinity for EphA2, indicating that the EBV gL N-glycosylation site might be 
responsible for inhibiting the binding of gH/gL to EphA2. Loss of 
N-glycosylation at this site may remove steric hindrance that reduces EBV gH/gL 
binding to EphA2. In addition, the mutations located in the large groove of EBV 
gH/gL (R152A and G49C) also have decreased binding with EphA2. Taken together, 
our data indicate that the binding site of EphA2 on EBV gH/gL is at least in 
part proximal to the EBV gL glycosylation site, which in part accounts for 
differences in EphA2 binding affinity by KSHV.IMPORTANCE Virus entry into target 
cells is the first step for virus infection. Understanding the overall entry 
mechanism, including the binding mechanism of specific virus glycoproteins with 
cellular receptors, can be useful for the design of small molecule inhibitors 
and vaccine development. Recently, EphA2 was identified as an important entry 
receptor for both KSHV and EBV. In the present study, we investigated the 
required binding sites within EphA2 and EBV gH/gL that mediate the interaction 
of these two proteins allowing entry into epithelial cells and found that it 
differed in compared to the interaction of KSHV gH/gL with EphA2. Our 
discoveries may uncover new potential interventional strategies that block EBV 
and KSHV infection of target epithelial cells.

Copyright Â© 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01454-20
PMCID: PMC7565624
PMID: 32847853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]