1. Mol Clin Oncol. 2020 Nov;13(5):52. doi: 10.3892/mco.2020.2122. Epub 2020 Aug
20.

Expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and mucin 1 in colorectal cancer.

Szlendak M(1)(2), Sitarz R(1)(3)(4), Berbecka M(1), Mielko J(2), Morsink F(4), 
Maciejewski R(1), Offerhaus GJA(4), Polkowski WP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin 20-090, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Surgical Oncology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin 20-090, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Surgery, Center of Oncology of The Lublin Region St. Jana z 
Dukli, Lublin 20-090, Poland.
(4)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, Utrecht 3508 GA, The 
Netherlands.

In colorectal cancer (CRC), pathological factors that correlate with negative 
prognosis include, among others, overexpression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and 
abundant expression of mucin 1 (MUC1). COX-2 overexpression may therefore be 
associated with MUC1 overexpression. The aim of the present study was to 
investigate the possible correlation between COX-2 and MUC1 expression and to 
assess the correlation between their individual expression and the 
clinicopathological features of patients, paying particular attention to 
survival. The following data was collected from the 170 patients with CRC 
included in the present study: Age, sex, tumour localization, disease stage and 
survival. Tumour samples were immunostained with antibodies against COX-2 and 
MUC1. Protein expression was scored, relative to reference staining, and 
correlated with the clinicopathological data of patients. The results revealed 
no correlation between the expressions of COX-2 and MUC1, or with any of the 
studied clinicopathological variables. In addition, the expression of the two 
proteins were not associated. Neither of the proteins demonstrated prognostic 
value for survival. The present study did not confirm a direct relationship 
between the expressions of COX-2 and MUC1, or between the expression of either 
protein and the clinicopathological features of patients, including survival.

Copyright: Â© Szlendak et al.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2020.2122
PMCID: PMC7453394
PMID: 32874582