1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Sep 1;21(17):6344. doi: 10.3390/ijms21176344.

Insights into Disease-Associated Tau Impact on Mitochondria.

Szabo L(1)(2), Eckert A(1)(2), Grimm A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology Lab for Brain Aging and Mental Health, Transfaculty Research 
Platform, Molecular & Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Basel, 4002 Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)Psychiatric University Clinics Basel, 4002 Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Live Sciences Training Facility, Division of Molecular Psychology, University 
of Basel, 4055 Basel, Switzerland.

Abnormal tau protein aggregation in the brain is a hallmark of tauopathies, such 
as frontotemporal lobar degeneration and Alzheimer's disease. Substantial 
evidence has been linking tau to neurodegeneration, but the underlying 
mechanisms have yet to be clearly identified. Mitochondria are paramount 
organelles in neurons, as they provide the main source of energy (adenosine 
triphosphate) to these highly energetic cells. Mitochondrial dysfunction was 
identified as an early event of neurodegenerative diseases occurring even before 
the cognitive deficits. Tau protein was shown to interact with mitochondrial 
proteins and to impair mitochondrial bioenergetics and dynamics, leading to 
neurotoxicity. In this review, we discuss in detail the different impacts of 
disease-associated tau protein on mitochondrial functions, including 
mitochondrial transport, network dynamics, mitophagy and bioenergetics. We also 
give new insights about the effects of abnormal tau protein on mitochondrial 
neurosteroidogenesis, as well as on the endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondria 
coupling. A better understanding of the pathomechanisms of abnormal tau-induced 
mitochondrial failure may help to identify new targets for therapeutic 
interventions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21176344
PMCID: PMC7503371
PMID: 32882957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.