1. Neuron. 2020 Nov 25;108(4):676-690.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.08.011. Epub
 2020 Sep 4.

APP Family Regulates Neuronal Excitability and Synaptic Plasticity but Not 
Neuronal Survival.

Lee SH(1), Kang J(1), Ho A(1), Watanabe H(1), Bolshakov VY(2), Shen J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, USA; Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: jshen@bwh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2020 Nov 25;108(4):583-585. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.11.003.

Amyloid precursor protein (APP) is associated with both familial and sporadic 
forms of Alzheimer's disease. Despite its importance, the role of APP family in 
neuronal function and survival remains unclear because of perinatal lethality 
exhibited by knockout mice lacking all three APP family members. Here we report 
that selective inactivation of APP family members in excitatory neurons of the 
postnatal forebrain results in neither cortical neurodegeneration nor increases 
in apoptosis and gliosis up to ∼2 years of age. However, hippocampal synaptic 
plasticity, learning, and memory are impaired in these mutant mice. Furthermore, 
hippocampal neurons lacking APP family exhibit hyperexcitability, as evidenced 
by increased neuronal spiking in response to depolarizing current injections, 
whereas blockade of Kv7 channels mimics and largely occludes the effects of APP 
family inactivation. These findings demonstrate that APP family is not required 
for neuronal survival and suggest that APP family may regulate neuronal 
excitability through Kv7 channels.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.08.011
PMCID: PMC7704911
PMID: 32891188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests J.S. is a member of the 
Board of Directors and has a financial interest in iNeuro Therapeutics J.S. also 
has a financial interest in Apres Therapeutics. Both companies develop therapies 
for AD. J.S.’s interests were reviewed and are managed by Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital (BWH) and Partners HealthCare in accordance with their 
conflict-of-interest policies.