1. Elife. 2020 Sep 11;9:e57951. doi: 10.7554/eLife.57951.

Stress-activated MAPK signaling controls fission yeast actomyosin ring integrity 
by modulating formin For3 levels.

Gómez-Gil E(1), Martín-García R(2), Vicente-Soler J(1), Franco A(1), 
Vázquez-Marín B(1), Prieto-Ruiz F(1), Soto T(1), Pérez P(2), Madrid M(1), 
Cansado J(1).

Author information:
(1)Yeast Physiology Group, Departamento de Genética y Microbiología, Facultad de 
Biología. Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Biología Funcional y Genómica (IBFG), Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.

Cytokinesis, which enables the physical separation of daughter cells once 
mitosis has been completed, is executed in fungal and animal cells by a 
contractile actin- and myosin-based ring (CAR). In the fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, the formin For3 nucleates actin cables and also 
co-operates for CAR assembly during cytokinesis. Mitogen-activated protein 
kinases (MAPKs) regulate essential adaptive responses in eukaryotic organisms to 
environmental changes. We show that the stress-activated protein kinase pathway 
(SAPK) and its effector, MAPK Sty1, downregulates CAR assembly in S. pombe when 
its integrity becomes compromised during cytoskeletal damage and stress by 
reducing For3 levels. Accurate control of For3 levels by the SAPK pathway may 
thus represent a novel regulatory mechanism of cytokinesis outcome in response 
to environmental cues. Conversely, SAPK signaling favors CAR assembly and 
integrity in its close relative Schizosaccharomyces japonicus, revealing a 
remarkable evolutionary divergence of this response within the fission yeast 
clade.

© 2020, Gómez-Gil et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.57951
PMCID: PMC7511234
PMID: 32915139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EG, RM, JV, AF, BV, FP, TS, PP, MM, JC No 
competing interests declared