1. PLoS One. 2020 Sep 14;15(9):e0227397. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227397. 
eCollection 2020.

Ser-653-Asn substitution in the acetohydroxyacid synthase gene confers 
resistance in weedy rice to imidazolinone herbicides in Malaysia.

Ruzmi R(1), Ahmad-Hamdani MS(1)(2), Mazlan N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Crop Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Universiti Putra 
Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Laboratory of Climate-Smart Food Crop Production, Institute of Tropical 
Agriculture and Food Security, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Agriculture Technology, Faculty of Agriculture, Universiti 
Putra Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2020 Dec 22;15(12):e0244686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0244686.

The continuous and sole dependence on imidazolinone (IMI) herbicides for weedy 
rice control has led to the evolution of herbicide resistance in weedy rice 
populations across various countries growing IMI herbicide-resistant rice 
(IMI-rice), including Malaysia. A comprehensive study was conducted to elucidate 
occurrence, level, and mechanisms endowing resistance to IMI herbicides in 
putative resistant (R) weedy rice populations collected from three local 
Malaysian IMI-rice fields. Seed bioassay and whole-plant dose-response 
experiments were conducted using commercial IMI herbicides. Based on the 
resistance index (RI) quantification in both experiments, the cross-resistance 
pattern of R and susceptible (S) weedy rice populations and control rice 
varieties (IMI-rice variety MR220CL2 and non-IMI-rice variety MR219) to imazapic 
and imazapyr was determined. A molecular investigation was carried out by 
comparing the acetohydroxyacid synthase (AHAS) gene sequences of the R and S 
populations and the MR220CL2 and MR219 varieties. The AHAS gene sequences of R 
weedy rice were identical to those of MR220CL2, exhibiting a Ser-653-Asn 
substitution, which was absent in MR219 and S plants. In vitro assays were 
conducted using analytical grade IMI herbicides of imazapic (99.3%) and imazapyr 
(99.6%) at seven different concentrations. The results demonstrated that the 
AHAS enzyme extracted from the R populations and MR220CL2 was less sensitive to 
IMI herbicides than that from S and MR219, further supporting that IMI herbicide 
resistance was conferred by target-site mutation. In conclusion, IMI resistance 
in the selected populations of Malaysian weedy rice could be attributed to a 
Ser-653-Asn mutation that reduced the sensitivity of the target site to IMI 
herbicides. To our knowledge, this study is the first to show the resistance 
mechanism in weedy rice from Malaysian rice fields.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227397
PMCID: PMC7489537
PMID: 32925921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.