1. ACS Omega. 2020 Sep 1;5(36):22759-22771. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.0c01703. 
eCollection 2020 Sep 15.

Design and Development of Small-Molecule Arylaldoxime/5-Nitroimidazole Hybrids 
as Potent Inhibitors of MARK4: A Promising Approach for Target-Based Cancer 
Therapy.

Peerzada MN(1), Khan P(2), Khan NS(2)(3), Avecilla F(4), Siddiqui SM(1), Hassan 
MI(2), Azam A(1).

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Chemistry Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Jamia 
Millia Islamia, Jamia Nagar, New Delhi 110025, India.
(2)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences, Jamia Millia 
Islamia, Jamia Nagar, New Delhi 110025, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Jamia Millia Islamia, Jamia Nagar, New Delhi 
110025, India.
(4)Grupo Xenomar, Centro de Investigacións Científicas Avanzadas (CICA), 
Departamento de Química, Facultade de Ciencias, Universidade da Coruña, Campus A 
Coruña, 15071 A Coruña, Spain.

Microtubule affinity-regulating kinase 4 (MARK4), a member of the 
serine/threonine kinase family, is an emerging therapeutic target in anticancer 
drug discovery paradigm due to its involvement in regulation of microtubule 
dynamics, cell cycle regulation, and cancer progression. Therefore, to identify 
the novel chemical architecture for the design and development of novel MARK4 
inhibitors with concomitant radical scavenging property, a series of 
small-molecule arylaldoxime/5-nitroimidazole conjugates were designed and 
synthesized via multistep chemical reactions following the pharmacophoric 
hybridization approach. Compound 4h was identified as a promising MARK4 
inhibitor with high selectivity toward MARK4 inhibition as compared to the panel 
of screened 30 kinases pertaining to the serine/threonine family, which was 
validated by molecular docking and fluorescence binding studies. The 
comprehensive cell-based examination divulged the promising apoptotic, 
antiproliferative, and antioxidant potential for the chemotype 4h. The compound 
4h was endowed with the K a value of 3.6 × 103 M-1 for human serum albumin, 
which reflects its remarkable transportation and delivery properties to the 
target site via blood. The present study impedes that in the future, such 
compounds may stand as optimized pharmacological lead candidates in drug 
discovery for targeting cancer via MARK4 inhibition with a remarkable anticancer 
profile.

Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.0c01703
PMCID: PMC7495461
PMID: 32954123

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.