1. Exp Ther Med. 2020 Nov;20(5):60. doi: 10.3892/etm.2020.9188. Epub 2020 Sep 4.

In silico prediction and validation of potential therapeutic genes in pancreatic 
β-cells associated with type 2 diabetes.

Zhou DY(1), Mou X(1), Liu K(1), Liu WH(2), Xu YQ(1), Zhou D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Zhejiang Integrated Traditional and Western 
Medicine Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003, P.R. China.
(2)College of The Second Clinical Medicine, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310000, P.R. China.

Diabetes mellitus is becoming a major health burden worldwide. Pancreatic β-cell 
death is a characteristic of type 2 diabetes (T2D), but the underlying 
mechanisms of pancreatic β-cell death remain unknown. Therefore, the aim of the 
present study was to identify potential targets in the pancreatic islet of T2D. 
The GSE20966 dataset was obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) 
database, and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified by using the 
GEO2R tool. The Gene Ontology terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
Pathway enrichment analysis of DEGs were further assessed using the Database for 
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery. Furthermore, protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) networks were constructed for the up- and downregulated genes 
using STRING databases and were then visualized with Cytoscape. The body weight, 
fasting blood glucose (FBG), pancreatic index and biochemistry parameters were 
measured in db/db mice. Moreover, the morphology of the pancreas was detected by 
hematoxylin and eosin staining, and hub genes were assessed using reverse 
transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and western blot analysis. In total, 
570 DEGs were screened, including 376 upregulated and 194 downregulated genes, 
which were associated with 'complement activation, classical pathway', 
'proteolysis', 'complement activation' and 'pancreatic secretion pathway'. It 
was found that the body weight, FBG, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate 
aminotransferase, total cholesterol, triglycerides, blood urea nitrogen, 
creatinine, fasting serum insulin, glucagon and low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol levels were significantly higher in db/db mice, while high-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol levels and the pancreatic index were significantly 
decreased. Furthermore, albumin, interleukin-8, CD44, C-C motif chemokine ligand 
2, hepatocyte growth factor, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator, histone cluster 1 H2B family member n, mitogen-activated protein 
kinase 11 and neurotrophic receptor tyrosine kinase 2 were identified as hub 
genes in PPI network. RT-qPCR and western blotting results demonstrated the same 
expression trend in hub genes as found by the bioinformatics analysis. 
Therefore, the present study identified a series of hub genes involved in the 
progression of pancreatic β-cell, which may help to develop effective 
therapeutic strategy for T2D.

Copyright: © Zhou et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2020.9188
PMCID: PMC7485321
PMID: 32952650