1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2020 Oct;27(10):2809-2817. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2020.06.049. 
Epub 2020 Jul 3.

Evaluation of etiology and pregnancy outcome in recurrent miscarriage patients.

Ali S(1)(2), Majid S(2), Niamat Ali M(1), Taing S(3), El-Serehy HA(4), Al-Misned 
FA(4).

Author information:
(1)Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Centre of Research for 
Development, University of Kashmir, Srinagar, J&K 190006, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Government Medical College, Srinagar, J&K 190010, 
India.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Government Medical College 
Associated Lalla Ded Hospital, Srinagar, J&K 190012, India.
(4)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh 
11451, Saudi Arabia.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate etiology and pregnancy outcome of 
recurrent miscarriage women. The enrolled patients (280) were evaluated for 
Triiodothyronine, Thyroxine, Thyroid stimulating hormone, prolactin, chromosomal 
analysis, Haemoglobin A1C, blood sugar, Magnetic resonance imaging, 
3D-ultrasound, auto-antibodies profile (antiphospholipid antibodies, 
anticardiolipin antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, antinuclear antibodies, 
anti-thyroid antibodies and β2 glycoprotein1), torch profile (Toxoplasmo gondii, 
rubella, cytomegalo virus and herpes simplex virus), blood vitamin D3 levels, 
psychological factors, Body mass index and thrombotic factors (protein S and C 
deficiency, Prothrombin G20210A mutation, anti-thrombin III, Factor V Leiden and 
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase mutation), uterosalpingography 
(hysteronsalpingography) and hysteroscopy. The therapeutic regimens either 
singly or combined were employed for the treatment of recurrent miscarriage 
patients on the basis of etiology (single or multiple) and include intravenous 
immunoglobulin, low molecular weight heparin, low dose aspirin, levothyroxine, 
progesterone, folic acid, human chorionic gonadotrophin, vitamin D3, 
psychotherapy, genetic counselling. However, patients with idiopathic recurrent 
miscarriage were treated with progesterone supplementation, anticoagulation 
and/or immune modulatory agents. The incidence of primary recurrent miscarriage 
was highest and most of the women experienced recurrent miscarriage during first 
trimester. Endocrinological disorders (39%) were found as the major pathological 
factor for recurrent miscarriage. Other factors include uterine abnormalities 
(5.7%), vitamin D3 deficiency (3.5%), psychological factors (3.2%) infection 
(3.6%), autoimmune abnormalities (1.8%) and protein S deficiency (1.8%). 
However, 40% cases were idiopathic. The overall live birth rate achieved after 
the management of recurrent miscarriage patients was 75.7%. Enocrinopathy was 
the major cause of recurrent miscarriage. The overall live birth rate achieved 
was 75.7% with highest pregnancy outcome in secondary recurrent miscarriage 
patients after the management.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2020.06.049
PMCID: PMC7499272
PMID: 32994741