1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2021 Jan 21:2020.09.17.302232. doi: 
10.1101/2020.09.17.302232.

Fixed single-cell RNA sequencing for understanding virus infection and host 
response.

Van Phan H(1)(2), van Gent M(3)(4), Drayman N(1)(2), Basu A(5), Gack MU(3)(4), 
Tay S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, The University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL, USA.
(2)Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology, The University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Florida Research and Innovation Center, Cleveland Clinic, Port Saint Lucie, 
FL, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Update in
    Nat Commun. 2021 Sep 24;12(1):5636. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-25871-2.

Single-cell transcriptomic studies that require intracellular protein staining, 
rare cell sorting, or inactivation of infectious pathogens are severely limited 
because current high-throughput RNA sequencing methods are incompatible with 
paraformaldehyde treatment, a common tissue and cell fixation and preservation 
technique. Here we present FD-seq, a high-throughput method for droplet-based 
RNA sequencing of paraformaldehyde-fixed, stained and sorted single-cells. We 
show that FD-seq preserves the mRNA integrity and relative abundances during 
fixation and subsequent cell retrieval. Furthermore, FD-seq detects a higher 
number of genes and transcripts than methanol fixation. We applied FD-seq to 
investigate two important questions in Virology. First, by analyzing a rare 
population of cells supporting lytic reactivation of the human tumor virus KSHV, 
we identified TMEM119 as a host factor that mediates viral reactivation. Second, 
we found that upon infection with the betacoronavirus OC43, which causes the 
common cold and is a close relative of SARS-CoV-2, pro-inflammatory pathways are 
primarily upregulated in lowly-infected cells that are exposed to the virus but 
fail to express high levels of viral genes. FD-seq thus enables integrating 
phenotypic with transcriptomic information in rare cell populations, and 
preserving and inactivating pathogenic samples that cannot be handled under 
regular biosafety measures.

DOI: 10.1101/2020.09.17.302232
PMCID: PMC7523121
PMID: 32995793

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.