1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2021 Jan;246(2):197-206. doi:
10.1177/1535370220960388.  Epub 2020 Sep 30.

Whole exome sequencing identifies rare coding variants in novel human-mouse 
ortholog genes in African individuals diagnosed with non-syndromic hearing 
impairment.

Oluwole OG(1), Esoh KK(1), Wonkam-Tingang E(1), Manyisa N(1), Noubiap JJ(2), 
Chimusa ER(1), Wonkam A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town 7935, South Africa.
(2)Centre for Heart Rhythm Disorders, South Australian Health and Medical 
Research Institute (SAHMRI), University of Adelaide and Royal Adelaide Hospital, 
Adelaide 5000, Australia.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town 7925, South 
Africa.

Physiologically, the human and murine hearing systems are very similar, 
justifying the extensive use of mice in experimental models for hearing 
impairment (HI). About 340 murine HI genes have been reported; however, whether 
variants in all human-mouse ortholog genes contribute to HI has been rarely 
investigated. In humans, nearly 120 HI genes have been identified to date, with 
GJB2 and GJB6 variants accounting for half of congenital HI cases, of genetic 
origin, in populations of European and Asian ancestries, but not in most African 
populations. The contribution of variants in other known genes of HI among the 
populations of African ancestry is poorly studied and displays the lowest 
pick-up rate. We used whole exome sequencing (WES) to investigate pathogenic and 
likely pathogenic (PLP) variants in 34 novel human-mouse orthologs HI genes, in 
40 individuals from Cameroon and South Africa diagnosed with non-syndromic 
hearing impairment (NSHI), and compared the data to WES data of 129 ethnically 
matched controls. In addition, protein modeling for selected PLP gene variants, 
gene enrichment, and network analyses were performed. A total of 4/38 murine 
genes, d6wsu163e, zfp719, grp152 and minar2, had no human orthologs. WES 
identified three rare PLP variants in 3/34 human-mouse orthologs genes in three 
unrelated Cameroonian patients, namely: OCM2, c.227G>C p.(Arg76Thr) and LRGI1, 
c.1657G>A p.(Gly533Arg) in a heterozygous state, and a PLP variant MCPH1, 
c.2311C>G p.(Pro771Ala) in a homozygous state. In silico functional analyses 
suggest that these human-mouse ortholog genes functionally co-expressed 
interactions with well-established HI genes: GJB2 and GJB6. The study found one 
homozygous variant in MCPH1, likely to explain HI in one patient, and suggests 
that human-mouse ortholog variants could contribute to the understanding of the 
physiology of hearing in humans.

DOI: 10.1177/1535370220960388
PMCID: PMC7871117
PMID: 32996353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration OF CONFLICTING INTERESTS: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.