1. Expert Rev Precis Med Drug Dev. 2019;4(6):337-356. doi: 
10.1080/23808993.2019.1690396. Epub 2019 Nov 14.

How does race and ethnicity effect the precision treatment of asthma?

Zhang E(1), Levin AM(2), Williams LK(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Individualized and Genomic Medicine Research (CIGMA), Department 
of Internal Medicine, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, 
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Asthma is a common condition that affects large numbers of 
children and adults, yet the burden of disease is not equally distributed 
amongst groups. In the United States, African Americans and Puerto Ricans have 
higher rates of asthma and its complications when compared with European 
Americans. However, clinical trials and genetic studies have largely focused on 
the latter group.
AREAS COVERED: Here we examine what is known regarding differences in asthma 
treatment response by race-ethnicity. We also review existing genetic studies 
related to the use of asthma medications, paying special attention to studies 
that included substantial numbers of non-white population groups. Publicly 
accessible search engines of the medical literature were queried using 
combinations of the terms asthma, race, ethnicity, pharmacogenomics, and 
pharmacogenetics, as well as the names of individual asthma medication classes. 
The list of articles reviewed was supplemented by bibliographies and expert 
knowledge.
EXPERT OPINION: A substantial and coordinated effort is still needed to both 
identify and validate genetic biomarkers of asthma medication response, as 
currently there are no clinically actionable genetic markers available for this 
purpose. The path to identifying such markers in non-white populations is even 
more formidable, since these groups are underrepresented in existing data.

DOI: 10.1080/23808993.2019.1690396
PMCID: PMC7531627
PMID: 33015363