1. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2020 Sep;115(3):587-589. doi: 10.36660/abc.20190582.

Compound Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia Caused by LDLR Variants.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the 
publisher]

Pamplona-Cunha H(1), Medeiros MF(1), Sincero TCM(1), Back IC(1), Silva ELD(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina,Florianópolis, SC - Brasil.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a genetic disease caused by a primary 
defect in the LDL-receptor gene. Distinct variants in the same gene characterize 
a compound heterozygote, but little is known about the phenotypes of the 
carriers. Therefore, herein, we describe the cascade screening of a Brazilian 
family with this characteristic. The index case, a 36-year-old male, had a total 
cholesterol level of 360 mg/dL (9.3 mmol/L) and LDL-c value of 259 mg/dL (6.7 
mmol/L), in addition to Achilles tendon xanthomas, obesity and prehypertension. 
Genotyping identified the variants 661G>A, 670G>A, 682G>A in exon 4 and 919G>A 
in exon 6. The same variant in exon 4 was found in the index case's son (7-y), 
who also had hypercholesterolemia and xanthomas, while the index case's daughter 
(9-y) had the variant in exon 6 and hyperlipidemia, without xanthomas. In 
summary, this report allows for a better insight into the molecular basis of FH 
in Brazil, a multi-racial country where a heterogeneous population is expected.

Publisher: A hipercolesterolemia familiar (HF) é uma doença genética causada por 
um defeito primário no gene que codifica o receptor da LDL. Mutações diferentes 
no mesmo gene caracterizam um heterozigoto composto, mas pouco se sabe sobre o 
fenótipo dos portadores. Portanto, neste estudo, descrevemos o rastreamento em 
cascata de uma família brasileira com essa característica. O caso-índice é um 
homem de 36 anos, com colesterol total (CT) de 360 mg/dL (9,3 mmol/L) e 
concentração de LDL-c de 259 mg/dL (6,7 mmol/L), além de xantomas de tendão de 
Aquiles, obesidade e pré-hipertensão. A genotipagem identificou as mutações 
661G>A, 670G>A e 682G>A, no exon 4, e 919G>A, no exon 6. A mesma mutação no exon 
4 foi observada no filho do caso-índice (7 anos), que também tem 
hipercolesterolemia e xantomas tendinosos, ao passo que a filha do caso-índice 
(9 anos) apresenta mutação no exon 6 e hiperlipidemia, sem xantomas. Em suma, 
este relato permite uma melhor compreensão acerca da base molecular da HF no 
Brasil, um país multirracial, onde é esperada uma população heterogênea.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a genetic disease caused by a primary 
defect in the LDL-receptor gene. Distinct variants in the same gene characterize 
a compound heterozygote, but little is known about the phenotypes of the 
carriers. Therefore, herein, we describe the cascade screening of a Brazilian 
family with this characteristic. The index case, a 36-year-old male, had a total 
cholesterol level of 360 mg/dL (9.3 mmol/L) and LDL-c value of 259 mg/dL (6.7 
mmol/L), in addition to Achilles tendon xanthomas, obesity and prehypertension. 
Genotyping identified the variants 661G>A, 670G>A, 682G>A in exon 4 and 919G>A 
in exon 6. The same variant in exon 4 was found in the index case’s son (7-y), 
who also had hypercholesterolemia and xanthomas, while the index case’s daughter 
(9-y) had the variant in exon 6 and hyperlipidemia, without xanthomas. In 
summary, this report allows for a better insight into the molecular basis of FH 
in Brazil, a multi-racial country where a heterogeneous population is expected.

DOI: 10.36660/abc.20190582
PMCID: PMC9363081
PMID: 33027386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potencial Conflito de Interesses Declaro não 
haver conflito de interesses pertinentes.