1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Oct 5;21(19):7345. doi: 10.3390/ijms21197345.

Breast Cancer Cells in Microgravity: New Aspects for Cancer Research.

Nassef MZ(1), Melnik D(1), Kopp S(1)(2), Sahana J(3), Infanger M(1)(2), 
Lützenberg R(1), Relja B(4), Wehland M(1)(2), Grimm D(1)(2)(3), Krüger M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microgravity and Translational Regenerative Medicine, Clinic 
for Plastic, Aesthetic and Hand Surgery, Otto von Guericke University, 39106 
Magdeburg, Germany.
(2)Research Group "Magdeburger Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Forschung unter 
Raumfahrt- und Schwerelosigkeitsbedingungen" (MARS), Otto von Guericke 
University, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.
(4)Experimental Radiology, Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Otto 
von Guericke University, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany.

Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in females. The incidence has 
risen dramatically during recent decades. Dismissed as an "unsolved problem of 
the last century", breast cancer still represents a health burden with no 
effective solution identified so far. Microgravity (µg) research might be an 
unusual method to combat the disease, but cancer biologists decided to harness 
the power of µg as an exceptional method to increase efficacy and precision of 
future breast cancer therapies. Numerous studies have indicated that µg has a 
great impact on cancer cells; by influencing proliferation, survival, and 
migration, it shifts breast cancer cells toward a less aggressive phenotype. In 
addition, through the de novo generation of tumor spheroids, µg research 
provides a reliable in vitro 3D tumor model for preclinical cancer drug 
development and to study various processes of cancer progression. In summary, µg 
has become an important tool in understanding and influencing breast cancer 
biology.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21197345
PMCID: PMC7582256
PMID: 33027908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.