1. Sci Rep. 2020 Oct 14;10(1):17299. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-73475-5.

Seven novel genetic variants in a North Indian cohort with classical 
homocystinuria.

Kaur R(1), Attri SV(2), Saini AG(1), Sankhyan N(1), Singh S(1), Faruq M(3), 
Ramprasad VL(4), Sharda S(4), Murugan S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, 160012, India.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, 160012, India. attrisavi@yahoo.co.in.
(3)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (IGIB), New Delhi, India.
(4)MedGenome Labs Ltd., Bangalore, India.

Classical homocystinuria is the most common cause of isolated homocystinuria. 
The variants of the CBS gene remain unidentified in Indian children with this 
disorder. Based on the hallmark clinical features, family history, and/or 
biochemical clues for classical homocystinuria, 16 children below the age of 
18 years were evaluated by Sanger sequencing of the coding exons of CBS gene 
with flanking intronic regions. The common C677T variant of the MTHFR gene was 
also screened by restriction fragment length polymorphism. Fifteen children were 
clinically suspected of having classical homocystinuria and one asymptomatic 
child with positive family history. Only seven children had biochemical features 
of classical homocystinuria. Sanger sequencing of the CBS gene confirmed 15 
different pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 14 cases. Of these, seven 
variants were novel (three frameshift deletions, two nonsense, one missense, one 
splice site variant) and were predicted to be deleterious by Mutation Taster 
software. Seven cases were homozygous, another six were compound heterozygous, 
and one case was single heterozygous in the study. None of the three most 
frequent mutations reported worldwide viz., I278T, G307S, and IVS 11-2A>C were 
found in our cohort. No variants were detected in the exons 2, 8, 12, and 14 as 
compared to reported literature. Eleven out of 15 variants were associated with 
the conserved catalytic domain of the CBS polypeptide. The MTHFR polymorphism 
C677T was observed in heterozygous state in six cases. Our study reports the 
detailed genotype and seven novel variants in the CBS gene, causing classical 
homocystinuria in Indian children. The genetic analysis will help to offer 
accurate genetic counseling, prenatal diagnosis, and development of 
mutation-based novel therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-73475-5
PMCID: PMC7560719
PMID: 33057012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.