1. Sci Rep. 2020 Oct 15;10(1):17516. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-74480-4.

Generalized enzymatic mechanism of catalysis by tetrameric L-asparaginases from 
mesophilic bacteria.

Strzelczyk P(#)(1), Zhang D(#)(1), Dyba M(2), Wlodawer A(1), Lubkowski J(3).

Author information:
(1)Macromolecular Crystallography Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, 
Frederick, MD, USA.
(2)Basic Science Program, Structural Biophysics Laboratory, Frederick National 
Laboratory for Cancer Research Sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, 
Frederick, MD, USA.
(3)Macromolecular Crystallography Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, 
Frederick, MD, USA. lubkowsj@mail.nih.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

The mechanism of catalysis by the L-glutaminase-asparaginase from Pseudomonas 7A 
(PGA) was investigated using structural, mass spectrometry, and kinetic data. We 
had previously proposed mechanism of hydrolysis of L-Asn by the type II 
L-asparaginase from E. coli (EcAII), but that work was limited to just one 
enzyme. Based on results presented in this report, we postulate that all 
homotetrameric L-asparaginases from mesophilic bacteria utilize a common 
ping-pong mechanism of catalysis consisting of two subsequent nucleophilic 
substitutions. Several new structures of non-covalent complexes of PGA with 
different substrates, as well as structures of covalent acyl-enzyme 
intermediates of PGA with canonical substrates (L-Asp and L-Glu) and an 
opportunistic ligand, a citrate anion, were determined. The results of kinetic 
experiments monitored by high-resolution LC/MS, when combined with new 
structural data, clearly show that the reaction catalyzed by 
L-glutaminase-asparaginases proceeds through formation of a covalent 
intermediate, as observed previously for EcAII. Additionally, by showing that 
the same mechanism applies to L-Asn and L-Gln, we postulate that it is common 
for all these structurally related enzymes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-74480-4
PMCID: PMC7567106
PMID: 33060684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.