1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Oct 17;12(10):3023. doi: 10.3390/cancers12103023.

Dissecting the Crosstalk between NRF2 Signaling and Metabolic Processes in 
Cancer.

DeBlasi JM(1)(2), DeNicola GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Physiology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 
33612, USA.
(2)Cancer Biology PhD Program, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, 
USA.

The transcription factor NRF2 (nuclear factor-erythroid 2 p45-related factor 2 
or NFE2L2) plays a critical role in response to cellular stress. Following an 
oxidative insult, NRF2 orchestrates an antioxidant program, leading to increased 
glutathione levels and decreased reactive oxygen species (ROS). Mounting 
evidence now implicates the ability of NRF2 to modulate metabolic processes, 
particularly those at the interface between antioxidant processes and cellular 
proliferation. Notably, NRF2 regulates the pentose phosphate pathway, NADPH 
production, glutaminolysis, lipid and amino acid metabolism, many of which are 
hijacked by cancer cells to promote proliferation and survival. Moreover, 
deregulation of metabolic processes in both normal and cancer-based physiology 
can stabilize NRF2. We will discuss how perturbation of metabolic pathways, 
including the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, glycolysis, and autophagy can lead 
to NRF2 stabilization, and how NRF2-regulated metabolism helps cells deal with 
these metabolic stresses. Finally, we will discuss how the negative regulator of 
NRF2, Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1), may play a role in metabolism 
through NRF2 transcription-independent mechanisms. Collectively, this review 
will address the interplay between the NRF2/KEAP1 complex and metabolic 
processes.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12103023
PMCID: PMC7603127
PMID: 33080927

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.