1. J Biomed Sci. 2020 Oct 22;27(1):97. doi: 10.1186/s12929-020-00691-6.

Autophagosome formation in relation to the endoplasmic reticulum.

Yamamoto YH(1), Noda T(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Frontier Oral Sciences, Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka 
University Graduate School, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(2)Center for Frontier Oral Sciences, Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka 
University Graduate School, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. 
takenoda@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Autophagy is a process in which a myriad membrane structures called 
autophagosomes are formed de novo in a single cell, which deliver the engulfed 
substrates into lysosomes for degradation. The size of the autophagosomes is 
relatively uniform in non-selective autophagy and variable in selective 
autophagy. It has been recently established that autophagosome formation occurs 
near the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In this review, we have discussed recent 
advances in the relationship between autophagosome formation and endoplasmic 
reticulum. Autophagosome formation occurs near the ER subdomain enriched with 
phospholipid synthesizing enzymes like phosphatidylinositol synthase 
(PIS)/CDP-diacylglycerol-inositol 3-phosphatidyltransferase (CDIPT) and 
choline/ethanolamine phosphotransferase 1 (CEPT1). Autophagy-related protein 2 
(Atg2), which is involved in autophagosome formation has a lipid transfer 
capacity and is proposed to directly transfer the lipid molecules from the ER to 
form autophagosomes. Vacuole membrane protein 1 (VMP1) and transmembrane protein 
41b (TMEM41b) are ER membrane proteins that are associated with the formation of 
the subdomain. Recently, we have reported that an uncharacterized ER membrane 
protein possessing the DNAJ domain, called ERdj8/DNAJC16, is associated with the 
regulation of the size of autophagosomes. The localization of ERdj8/DNAJC16 
partially overlaps with the PIS-enriched ER subdomain, thereby implying its 
association with autophagosome size determination.

DOI: 10.1186/s12929-020-00691-6
PMCID: PMC7579975
PMID: 33087127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no competing interests to declare.