1. EMBO J. 2020 Dec 15;39(24):e104983. doi: 10.15252/embj.2020104983. Epub 2020
Oct  26.

Interactions between lineage-associated transcription factors govern 
haematopoietic progenitor states.

Kucinski I(1), Wilson NK(1), Hannah R(1), Kinston SJ(1), Cauchy P(2), Lenaerts 
A(2)(3), Grosschedl R(2), Göttgens B(1).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Department of Haematology, 
Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Max Planck Institute of 
Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)International Max Planck Research School for Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany.

Recent advances in molecular profiling provide descriptive datasets of complex 
differentiation landscapes including the haematopoietic system, but the 
molecular mechanisms defining progenitor states and lineage choice remain 
ill-defined. Here, we employed a cellular model of murine multipotent 
haematopoietic progenitors (Hoxb8-FL) to knock out 39 transcription factors 
(TFs) followed by RNA-Seq analysis, to functionally define a regulatory network 
of 16,992 regulator/target gene links. Focussed analysis of the subnetworks 
regulated by the B-lymphoid TF Ebf1 and T-lymphoid TF Gata3 revealed a 
surprising role in common activation of an early myeloid programme. Moreover, 
Gata3-mediated repression of Pax5 emerges as a mechanism to prevent precocious 
B-lymphoid differentiation, while Hox-mediated activation of Meis1 suppresses 
myeloid differentiation. To aid interpretation of large transcriptomics 
datasets, we also report a new method that visualises likely transitions that a 
progenitor will undergo following regulatory network perturbations. Taken 
together, this study reveals how molecular network wiring helps to establish a 
multipotent progenitor state, with experimental approaches and analysis tools 
applicable to dissecting a broad range of both normal and perturbed cellular 
differentiation landscapes.

© 2020 The Authors Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.2020104983
PMCID: PMC7737608
PMID: 33103827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.