1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2020 Oct 17;2020:8345246. doi: 10.1155/2020/8345246. 
eCollection 2020.

Upregulation of CFTR Protects against Palmitate-Induced Endothelial Dysfunction 
by Enhancing Autophagic Flux.

Chen H(1), Chen W(2), Yao Y(1), Ye N(1), Hou N(1), Luo J(1).

Author information:
(1)Fifth Affiliated Hospital, Key Laboratory of Molecular Target & Clinical 
Pharmacology and the State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 511436, China.
(2)Department of Biology, York University, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, ON, 
Canada M3J 1P3.

Saturated free fatty acids (FFAs) elevate in metabolic symptom leading to 
endothelial dysfunction. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) 
functionally expresses in endothelial cells. The role of CFTR in FFA-induced 
endothelial dysfunction remains unclear. This study is aimed at exploring the 
effects of CFTR on palmitate- (PA-) induced endothelial dysfunction and its 
underlying mechanisms. We found that PA-induced endothelial dysfunction is 
characterized by a decrease of cell viability, reduction of NO generation and 
mitochondrial membrane potential, impairment of the tube formation, but an 
increase of ROS generation and cell apoptosis. Simultaneously, PA decreased CFTR 
protein expression. CFTR agonist Forskolin upregulated CFTR protein expression 
and protected against PA-induced endothelial dysfunction, while CFTR knockdown 
exacerbated endothelial dysfunction induced by PA and blunted the protective 
effects of Forskolin. In addition, PA impaired autophagic flux, and autophagic 
flux inhibitors aggravated PA-induced endothelial apoptosis. CFTR upregulation 
significantly restored autophagic flux in PA-insulted endothelial cells, which 
was involved in increasing the protein expression of Atg16L, Atg12-Atg5 complex, 
cathepsin B, and cathepsin D. In contrast, CFTR knockdown significantly 
inhibited the effects of Forskolin on autophagic flux and the expression of the 
autophagy-regulated proteins. Our findings illustrate that CFTR upregulation 
protects against PA-induced endothelial dysfunction by improving autophagic flux 
and underlying mechanisms are involved in enhancing autophagic signaling 
mediated by the Atg16L-Atg12-Atg5 complex, cathepsin B, and cathepsin D. CFTR 
might serve as a novel drug target for endothelial protection in cardiovascular 
diseases with a characteristic of elevation of FFAs.

Copyright Â© 2020 Hongqi Chen et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/8345246
PMCID: PMC7586166
PMID: 33123317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest.