1. Metabolites. 2020 Oct 29;10(11):439. doi: 10.3390/metabo10110439.

Genetic Variability in Antioxidative and Inflammatory Pathways Modifies the Risk 
for PCOS and Influences Metabolic Profile of the Syndrome.

Herman R(1), Jensterle M(1)(2), Janež A(1)(2), Goričar K(3), Dolžan V(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Disease, University 
Medical Center Ljubljana, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ljubljana, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex endocrine and metabolic disorder 
of multifactorial etiopathology likely to involve the interactions between 
genetics and lifestyle. Chronic inflammation and oxidative stress (OS) may 
participate in the pathophysiology of the syndrome. The question of the extent 
to which OS and inflammation are causally related to the development of the 
syndrome and metabolic complications remains unanswered. By our knowledge, the 
role of the NLR family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome as an 
important trigger of inflammatory pathways and NLRP3 and CARD8 polymorphisms has 
never been addressed in PCOS yet. We conducted a case-control study conducting 
of total 169 Slovenian PCOS patients and 83 healthy blood donors. They were 
genotyped for polymorphisms in antioxidative (SOD2 rs4880, CAT rs1001179, PON1 
rs854560, and rs662) and inflammatory pathways genes (NLRP3 rs35829419, CARD8 
rs2043211, TNF rs1800629, IL1B rs1143623, and rs16944, IL6 rs1800795) using 
competitive allele-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Logistic regression 
and the Mann-Whitney test were used in the statistical analysis. SOD2 rs4880, 
CARD8 rs2043211, and IL1B rs16944 were associated with the risk of developing 
PCOS. Furthermore, the interactions between CARD8 rs2043211 and IL6 rs1800795 
and between IL1B rs1143623 and IL6 rs1800795 also significantly affected the 
risk for PCOS. With regard to glucose homeostasis, CAT rs1001179, SOD2 rs4880, 
PON1 rs854560, NLRP3 rs35829419, and TNF rs1800629 were significantly associated 
with response to the glycemic load. Our data indicate that the genetic 
variability in the antioxidative and inflammatory pathways influences the 
development of PCOS and glucose homeostasis in PCOS patients.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo10110439
PMCID: PMC7692942
PMID: 33138337

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.