1. Sci Rep. 2020 Nov 2;10(1):18849. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-76005-5.

Synthesis of two new lipid mediators from docosahexaenoic acid by combinatorial 
catalysis involving enzymatic and chemical reaction.

Yi JJ(1)(2), Heo SY(1), Ju JH(1), Oh BR(1), Son WS(3), Seo JW(4).

Author information:
(1)Microbial Biotechnology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Jeongeup-Si, 56212, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy and Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, CHA University, Pocheon-Si, Gyeonggi-do, 11160, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy and Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, CHA University, Pocheon-Si, Gyeonggi-do, 11160, Republic of Korea. 
wson@cha.ac.kr.
(4)Microbial Biotechnology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Jeongeup-Si, 56212, Republic of Korea. 
jwseo@kribb.re.kr.

Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) have been known to have beneficial 
effects in the prevention of various diseases. Recently, it was identified that 
the bioactivities of omega-3 are related to lipid mediators, called 
pro-resolving lipid mediators (SPMs), converted from PUFAs, so they have 
attracted much attention as potential pharmaceutical targets. Here, we aimed to 
build an efficient production system composed of enzymatic and chemical 
catalysis that converts docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) into lipid mediators. The 
cyanobacterial lipoxygenase, named Osc-LOX, was identified and characterized, 
and the binding poses of enzyme and substrates were predicted by ligand docking 
simulation. DHA was converted into three lipid mediators, a 17S-hydroxy-DHA, a 
7S,17S-dihydroxy-DHA (RvD5), and a 7S,15R-dihydroxy-16S,17S-epoxy-DPA (new 
type), by an enzymatic reaction and deoxygenation. Also, two lipid mediators, 
7S,15R,16S,17S-tetrahydroxy-DPA (new type) and 7S,16R,17S-trihydroxy-DHA (RvD2), 
were generated from 7S,15R-dihydroxy-16S,17S-epoxy-DPA by a chemical reaction. 
Our study suggests that discovering new enzymes that have not been functionally 
characterized would be a powerful strategy for producing various lipid 
mediators. Also, this combination catalysis approach including biological and 
chemical reactions could be an effective production system for the manufacturing 
lipid mediators.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-76005-5
PMCID: PMC7606508
PMID: 33139849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.