1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Nov 2;16(11):e1009013. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009013. 
eCollection 2020 Nov.

The role of cysteine peptidases in coronavirus cell entry and replication: The 
therapeutic potential of cathepsin inhibitors.

Pišlar A(1), Mitrović A(2), Sabotič J(2), Pečar Fonović U(1), Perišić Nanut 
M(2), Jakoš T(1), Senjor E(1)(2), Kos J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Over the last 2 decades, several coronaviruses (CoVs) have crossed the species 
barrier into humans, causing highly prevalent and severe respiratory diseases, 
often with fatal outcomes. CoVs are a large group of enveloped, single-stranded, 
positive-sense RNA viruses, which encode large replicase polyproteins that are 
processed by viral peptidases to generate the nonstructural proteins (Nsps) that 
mediate viral RNA synthesis. Papain-like peptidases (PLPs) and chymotrypsin-like 
cysteine 3C-like peptidase are essential for coronaviral replication and 
represent attractive antiviral drug targets. Furthermore, CoVs utilize the 
activation of their envelope spike glycoproteins by host cell peptidases to gain 
entry into cells. CoVs have evolved multiple strategies for spike protein 
activation, including the utilization of lysosomal cysteine cathepsins. In this 
review, viral and host peptidases involved in CoV cell entry and replication are 
discussed in depth, with an emphasis on papain-like cysteine cathepsins. 
Furthermore, important findings on cysteine peptidase inhibitors with regard to 
virus attenuation are highlighted as well as the potential of such inhibitors 
for future treatment strategies for CoV-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009013
PMCID: PMC7605623
PMID: 33137165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.