1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Nov 4;12(11):3249. doi: 10.3390/cancers12113249.

Poziotinib Inhibits the Efflux Activity of the ABCB1 and ABCG2 Transporters and 
the Expression of the ABCG2 Transporter Protein in Multidrug Resistant Colon 
Cancer Cells.

Zhang Y(1), Wu ZX(2), Yang Y(2), Wang JQ(2), Li J(3), Sun Z(2), Teng QX(2), 
Ashby CR Jr(2), Yang DH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University/Henan Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou 450003, China.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy and Health 
Sciences, St. John's University, Queens, NY 11439, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Zhongnan Hospital of 
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of cancer deaths in the United 
States. Currently, chemotherapy is a first-line treatment for CRC. However, one 
major drawback of chemotherapy is the emergence of multidrug resistance (MDR). 
It has been well-established that the overexpression of the ABCB1 and/or ABCG2 
transporters can produce MDR in cancer cells. In this study, we report that in 
vitro, poziotinib can antagonize both ABCB1- and ABCG2-mediated MDR at 0.1-0.6 
μM in the human colon cancer cell lines, SW620/Ad300 and S1-M1-80. Mechanistic 
studies indicated that poziotinib increases the intracellular accumulation of 
the ABCB1 transporter substrates, paclitaxel and doxorubicin, and the ABCG2 
transporter substrates, mitoxantrone and SN-38, by inhibiting their substrate 
efflux function. Accumulation assay results suggested that poziotinib binds 
reversibly to the ABCG2 and ABCB1 transporter. Furthermore, western blot 
experiments indicated that poziotinib, at 0.6 μM, significantly downregulates 
the expression of the ABCG2 but not the ABCB1 transporter protein, suggesting 
that the ABCG2 reversal effect produced by poziotinib is due to transporter 
downregulation and inhibition of substrate efflux. Poziotinib 
concentration-dependently stimulated the ATPase activity of both ABCB1 and 
ABCG2, with EC50 values of 0.02 μM and 0.21 μM, respectively, suggesting that it 
interacts with the drug-substrate binding site. Molecular docking analysis 
indicated that poziotinib binds to the ABCB1 (-6.6 kcal/mol) and ABCG2 (-10.1 
kcal/mol) drug-substrate binding site. In summary, our novel results show that 
poziotinib interacts with the ABCB1 and ABCG2 transporter, suggesting that 
poziotinib may increase the efficacy of certain chemotherapeutic drugs used in 
treating MDR CRC.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12113249
PMCID: PMC7694178
PMID: 33158067

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.