1. Ann Transl Med. 2020 Oct;8(19):1234. doi: 10.21037/atm-20-5880.

The Ras-ERK signaling pathway regulates acetylated activating transcription 
factor 2 via p300 in pancreatic cancer cells.

Li M(1), Song SW(2), Ge Y(1), Jin JY(1), Li XY(2), Tan XD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.

BACKGROUND: Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) regulates the expression of 
downstream target genes and is phosphorylated by the 
Ras-extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway. Acetylation of ATF2 is 
necessary for this type of regulation. However, the molecular mechanism by which 
the Ras-ERK pathway mediates the regulation of acetylated ATF2 is unknown. This 
study investigates the mechanism of Ras-ERK pathway-mediated regulation of 
acetylated ATF2 in maintaining the characteristic phenotype of pancreatic cancer 
cells.
METHODS: This study was carried out using ASPC-1 and BXPC-3 pancreatic cancer 
cell lines transfected with the double mutant RasG12V/T35S. The levels of 
phosphorylated ERK1/2 were measured to establish the activated Ras-ERK pathway. 
The regulation of acetylated ATF2 was examined by detecting the protein level 
using western blotting, and the effects on cancer cell phenotype were measured 
using cell viability, proliferation, migration, and apoptosis assays. Also, 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were used to measure the effect on 
respective downstream target genes.
RESULTS: The results showed that RasG12V/T35S reduced the level of acetylated 
ATF2 in ASPC-1 and BXPC-3 cells. Compared to wild-type ATF2, the mutant 
ATF2K357Q (which mimics the irreversible acetylated form of ATF2) reduced the 
cancer cell phenotype and showed decreased enrichment on target genes upon 
transfection with Ras. Moreover, the level of acetylated ATF2 was regulated by 
the degradation of p300 through E3 ubiquitin ligase mouse double minute 2 
homolog (MDM2).
CONCLUSIONS: Activation of the Ras-ERK pathway regulates acetylated ATF2 through 
degradation of p300 via a proteasome-dependent pathway, which alters the 
transcription of downstream target genes responsible for the cancer cell 
phenotype.

2020 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-20-5880
PMCID: PMC7607129
PMID: 33178766

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-20-5880). The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.