1. J Mol Cell Biol. 2021 Aug 18;13(5):347-360. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjaa063.

QKI-5 regulates the alternative splicing of cytoskeletal gene ADD3 in lung 
cancer.

Wang JZ(1), Fu X(2), Fang Z(3), Liu H(1), Zong FY(1), Zhu H(1), Yu YF(1), Zhang 
XY(1), Wang SF(1), Huang Y(4), Hui J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular 
Cell Science, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, 
China.
(2)Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai 201602, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell 
Science, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Biliary Tract 
Disease Research, State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Xinhua 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200092, China.

Accumulating evidence indicates that the alternative splicing program undergoes 
extensive changes during cancer development and progression. The RNA-binding 
protein QKI-5 is frequently downregulated and exhibits anti-tumor activity in 
lung cancer. Howeve-r, little is known about the functional targets and 
regulatory mechanism of QKI-5. Here, we report that upregulation of exon 14 
inclusion of cytoskeletal gene Adducin 3 (ADD3) significantly correlates with a 
poor prognosis in lung cancer. QKI-5 inhibits cell proliferation and migration 
in part through suppressing the splicing of ADD3 exon 14. Through genome-wide 
mapping of QKI-5 binding sites in vivo at nucleotide resolution by iCLIP-seq 
analysis, we found that QKI-5 regulates alternative splicing of its target mRNAs 
in a binding position-dependent manner. By binding to multiple sites in an 
upstream intron region, QKI-5 represses the splicing of ADD3 exon 14. We also 
identified several QKI mutations in tumors, which cause dysregulation of the 
splicing of QKI targets ADD3 and NUMB. Taken together, our results reveal that 
QKI-mediated alternative splicing of ADD3 is a key lung cancer-associated 
splicing event, which underlies in part the tumor suppressor function of QKI.

Â© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Journal of Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS.

DOI: 10.1093/jmcb/mjaa063
PMCID: PMC8373271
PMID: 33196842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]