1. Front Physiol. 2020 Oct 20;11:577540. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.577540. 
eCollection 2020.

Acute Exercise-Induced Oxidative Stress Does Not Affect Immediate or Delayed 
Precursor Cell Mobilization in Healthy Young Males.

Schmid M(1), Gruber HJ(2), Kröpfl JM(1), Spengler CM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Exercise Physiology Lab, Institute of Human Movement Sciences and Sport, ETH 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Clinical Institute of Medical and Chemical Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical 
University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(3)Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Front Physiol. 2021 Oct 14;12:775610. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.775610.

Exercise is known to acutely and transiently mobilize precursor cells to the 
peripheral blood. To date, the underlying mechanisms have not yet been fully 
elucidated and we hypothesized that exercise-induced oxidative stress could be a 
mobilizing agent, either directly or via circulating apoptotic cells as 
mediators. The aim of the study was to assess the effect of acute 
exercise-induced oxidative stress on numbers of circulating angiogenic precursor 
cells (CACs), circulating non-angiogenic precursor cells (nCACs), mesenchymal 
precursor cells (MPCs), mature endothelial cells (ECs), and mononuclear cells 
(MNCs), as well as their apoptotic subsets. Healthy, young males (n = 18, age: 
24.2 ± 3.5 years) completed two identical, standardized incremental cycling 
tests. The first, un-supplemented control test was followed by a 7-day-long 
supplementation of vitamin C (1,000 mg/day) and E (400 I.U./day), immediately 
preceding the second test. Blood samples were collected before, directly after, 
30, 90, 180, and 270 min after exercise, and aforementioned circulating cell 
numbers were determined by flow cytometry and a hematology analyzer. 
Additionally, total oxidative capacity (TOC) and total antioxidative capacity 
(TAC) were measured in serum at all timepoints. Antioxidative supplementation 
abolished the exercise-induced increase in the oxidative stress index (TOC/TAC), 
and reduced baseline concentrations of TOC and TOC/TAC. However, it did not have 
any effect on CACs, nCACs, and MPC numbers or the increase in apoptotic MNCs 
following exercise. Our results indicate that exercise-induced oxidative stress 
is neither a main driver of lymphocyte and monocyte apoptosis, nor one of the 
mechanisms involved in the immediate or delayed mobilization of precursor cells.

Copyright © 2020 Schmid, Gruber, Kröpfl and Spengler.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.577540
PMCID: PMC7606978
PMID: 33192581