1. Exp Ther Med. 2020 Dec;20(6):276. doi: 10.3892/etm.2020.9406. Epub 2020 Oct
27.

Effect of magnesium sulfate combined with labetalol on serum sFlt-1/PlGF ratio 
in patients with early-onset severe pre-eclampsia.

Wang Y(1), Bao J(1), Peng M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital of Hubei, 
Wuhan, Hubei 430000, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the therapeutic effect of 
magnesium sulfate combined with labetalol on the early-onset severe 
pre-eclampsia (ES-PE) and explore the role of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 
(sFlT-1), placental growth factor (PlGF), and sFlt-1/PlGF ratio in the 
treatment. A total of 164 ES-PE patients admitted to the Maternity and Child 
Health Care Hospital of Hubei (Wuhan, China) were assigned to this observational 
study. Among them, 83 patients were enrolled in group A and treated with 
magnesium sulfate combined with labetalol hydrochloride, and 81 patients were 
enrolled in group B and treated with magnesium sulfate. The therapeutic effect, 
adverse reactions and pregnancy outcomes in the two groups were analyzed. Serum 
sFlt-1 and PlGF concentrations, before and after treatment, were measured by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) curve analysis was performed to assess the predictive value of 
pre-treatment serum sFlt-1/PlGF ratio for the clinical outcome. The effective 
rate was significantly higher in group A than that in group B. Group A presented 
superior pregnancy outcomes over group B. The serum sFlt-1 concentration and 
sFlt-1/PlGF ratio after treatment were significantly lower than those before 
treatment in groups A and B, whereas PlGF concentration was significantly higher 
after treatment in both groups. After treatment, group A had markedly lower 
serum sFlt-1 concentration and sFlt-1/PlGF ratio than group B, and markedly 
higher PlGF concentration than group B. The area under curve (AUC) of serum 
sFlt-1/PlGF ratio before treatment for the prediction of the clinical efficacy 
was 0.737. In conclusion, magnesium sulfate combined with labetalol could be 
effectively used for the treatment of ES-PE. The results of ELISA revealed that 
the balance of sFlT-1 and PlGF was improved after treatment and the sFlT-1/PlGF 
ratio was decreased. The assessment of sFlt-1/PlGF ratio before treatment was 
shown to have a certain predictive value for the efficacy of ES-PE treatment.

Copyright: Â© Wang et al.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2020.9406
PMCID: PMC7664615
PMID: 33200001