1. Materials (Basel). 2020 Nov 16;13(22):5169. doi: 10.3390/ma13225169.

α-Amidoamids as New Replacements of Antibiotics-Research on the Chosen K12, 
R2-R4 E. coli Strains.

Kowalczyk P(1), Madej A(2), Szymczak M(3), Ostaszewski R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Nutrition, The Kielanowski Institute of Animal 
Physiology and Nutrition, Polish Academy of Sciences, Instytucka 3, 05-110 
Jabłonna, Poland.
(2)Institute of Organic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 
01-224 Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Molecular Virology, Institute of Microbiology, Faculty of 
Biology, University of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, 02-096 Warsaw, Poland.

A preliminary study of α-amidoamids as new potential antimicrobial drugs was 
performed. Special emphasis was placed on selection of structure of α-amidoamids 
with the highest biological activity against different types of Gram-stained 
bacteria by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Herein, Escherichia coli model strains K12 
(without LPS in its structure) and R1-R4 (with different length LPS in its 
structure) were used. The presented work showed that the antibacterial activity 
of α-amidoamids depends on their structure and affects the LPS of bacteria. 
Moreover, the influence of various newly synthesized α-amidoamids on bacteria 
possessing smooth and rought LPS and oxidative damage of plasmid DNA caused by 
all newly obtained compounds was indicated. The presented studies clearly 
explain that α-amidoamids can be used as substitutes for antibiotics. The 
chemical and biological activity of the analysed α-amidoamids was associated 
with short alkyl chain and different isocyanides molecules in their structure 
such as: tetr-butyl isocyanide or 2,5-dimethoxybenzyl isocyanide. The observed 
results are especially important in the case of the increasing resistance of 
bacteria to various drugs and antibiotics.

DOI: 10.3390/ma13225169
PMCID: PMC7697494
PMID: 33207799

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.