1. Mol Ther. 2021 Mar 3;29(3):973-988. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2020.11.016. Epub
2020  Nov 17.

Single and Dual Vector Gene Therapy with AAV9-PHP.B Rescues Hearing in Tmc1 
Mutant Mice.

Wu J(1), Solanes P(2), Nist-Lund C(1), Spataro S(2), Shubina-Oleinik O(1), 
Marcovich I(1), Goldberg H(1), Schneider BL(3), Holt JR(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Otolaryngology and Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Station 19, 
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Station 19, 
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; Bertarelli Foundation Gene Therapy Platform, Ecole 
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Ch. des Mines 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Departments of Otolaryngology and Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: 
jeffrey.holt@childrens.harvard.edu.

AAV-mediated gene therapy is a promising approach for treating genetic hearing 
loss. Replacement or editing of the Tmc1 gene, encoding hair cell mechanosensory 
ion channels, is effective for hearing restoration in mice with some 
limitations. Efficient rescue of outer hair cell function and lack of hearing 
recovery with later-stage treatment remain issues to be solved. Exogenous genes 
delivered with the adeno-associated virus (AAV)9-PHP.B capsid via the utricle 
transduce both inner and outer hair cells of the mouse cochlea with high 
efficacy. Here, we demonstrate that AAV9-PHP.B gene therapy can promote hair 
cell survival and successfully rescues hearing in three distinct mouse models of 
hearing loss. Tmc1 replacement with AAV9-PHP.B in a Tmc1 knockout mouse rescues 
hearing and promotes hair cell survival with equal efficacy in inner and outer 
hair cells. The same treatment in a recessive Tmc1 hearing-loss model, Baringo, 
partially recovers hearing even with later-stage treatment. Finally, dual 
delivery of Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 (SpCas9) and guide RNA (gRNA) in 
separate AAV9-PHP.B vectors selectively disrupts a dominant Tmc1 allele and 
preserves hearing in Beethoven mice, a model of dominant, progressive hearing 
loss. Tmc1-targeted gene therapies using single or dual AAV9-PHP.B vectors offer 
potent and versatile approaches for treating dominant and recessive deafness.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2020.11.016
PMCID: PMC7934577
PMID: 33212302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.R.H., P.S., and B.L.S. hold a patent on the 
use of AAV9-PHP.B for gene therapy in the inner ear. J.R.H. is a scientific 
founder of Audition Therapeutics and an advisor to several biotech companies 
focused on inner-ear therapeutics. The authors declare no other competing 
interests.