1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Dec 2;48(21):11994-12003. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1092.

VEZF1-guanine quadruplex DNA interaction regulates alternative polyadenylation 
and detyrosinase activity of VASH1.

Li L(1), Williams P(1), Gao Z(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

Vascular endothelial zinc finger 1 (VEZF1) plays important roles in endothelial 
lineage definition and angiogenesis. Vasohibins 1 and 2 (VASH1 and VASH2) can 
form heterodimers with small vasohibin-binding protein (SVBP) and were recently 
shown to regulate angiogenesis by acting as tubulin detyrosinases. Here, we 
showed that VEZF1 binds directly with DNA guanine quadruplex (G quadruplex, G4) 
structures in vitro and in cells, which modulates the levels of the two isoforms 
of VASH1 mRNA. Disruption of this interaction, through genetic depletion of 
VEZF1 or treatment of cells with G4-stabilizing small molecules, led to 
increased production of the long over short isoform of VASH1 (i.e. VASH1A and 
VASH1B, respectively) mRNA and elevated tubulin detyrosinase activity in cells. 
Moreover, disruption of VEZF1-G4 interactions in human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells resulted in diminished angiogenesis. These results suggest 
that the interaction between VEZF1 and G4 structures assumes a crucial role in 
angiogenesis, which occurs through regulating the relative levels of the two 
isoforms of VASH1 mRNA and the detyrosinase activity of the VASH1-SVBP complex. 
Together, our work revealed VEZF1 as a G4-binding protein, identified a novel 
regulatory mechanism for tubulin detyrosinase, and illustrated that the VEZF1- 
and VASH1-mediated angiogenesis pathways are functionally connected.

Â© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1092
PMCID: PMC7708047
PMID: 33231681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]