1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Nov 24;21(23):8909. doi: 10.3390/ijms21238909.

Lipid Rafts and Dopamine Receptor Signaling.

Martinez VJ(1), Asico LD(2), Jose PA(2)(3), Tiu AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Einstein Medical Center Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA 19141, USA.
(2)Division of Renal Diseases & Hypertension, Department of Medicine, The George 
Washington University School of Medicine & Health Sciences, Washington, DC 
20052, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology/Physiology, The George Washington University 
School of Medicine & Health Sciences, Washington, DC 20052, USA.

The renal dopaminergic system has been identified as a modulator of sodium 
balance and blood pressure. According to the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, in 2018 in the United States, almost half a million deaths included 
hypertension as a primary or contributing cause. Renal dopamine receptors, 
members of the G protein-coupled receptor family, are divided in two groups: 
D1-like receptors that act to keep the blood pressure in the normal range, and 
D2-like receptors with a variable effect on blood pressure, depending on volume 
status. The renal dopamine receptor function is regulated, in part, by its 
expression in microdomains in the plasma membrane. Lipid rafts form platforms 
within the plasma membrane for the organization and dynamic contact of molecules 
involved in numerous cellular processes such as ligand binding, membrane 
sorting, effector specificity, and signal transduction. Understanding all the 
components of lipid rafts, their interaction with renal dopamine receptors, and 
their signaling process offers an opportunity to unravel potential treatment 
targets that could halt the progression of hypertension, chronic kidney disease 
(CKD), and their complications.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21238909
PMCID: PMC7727868
PMID: 33255376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.