1. J Reprod Dev. 2021 Feb 15;67(1):25-34. doi: 10.1262/jrd.2020-096. Epub 2020
Nov  27.

Different response of embryos originating from control and obese mice to insulin 
in vitro.

KŠiŇanovÁ M(1), KovaŘÍkovÁ V(1), ŠefČÍkovÁ Z(1), ŠpirkovÁ A(1), ČikoŠ Š(1), 
Pisko J(1), Fabian D(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Physiology, Centre of Biosciences, Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, 040 01 Košice, Slovak Republic.

The aim of the present work was to investigate the impact of maternal obesity on 
DNA methylation in ovulated oocytes, and to compare the response of in 
vitro-developing preimplantation embryos originating from control and obese mice 
to insulin. An intergenerational, diet-induced obesity model was used to produce 
outbred mice with an increased body weight and body fat. Two-cell and eight-cell 
embryos recovered from obese and control mice were cultured in a medium 
supplemented with 1 or 10 ng/ml insulin until blastocyst formation. In the 
derived blastocysts, cell proliferation, differentiation, and death rates were 
determined. The results of immunochemical visualization of 5-methylcytosine 
indicated a slightly higher DNA methylation in ovulated metaphase II oocytes 
recovered from obese females; however, the difference between groups did not 
reach statistical significance. Expanded blastocysts developed from embryos 
provided by control dams showed increased mean cell numbers (two and eight-cell 
embryos exposed to 10 ng/ml), an increased inner-cell-mass/trophectoderm ratio 
(two-cell embryos exposed to 1 ng/ml and eight-cell embryos exposed to 10 
ng/ml), and a reduced level of apoptosis (two and eight-cell embryos exposed to 
10 ng/ml). In contrast, embryos originating from obese mice were significantly 
less sensitive to insulin; indeed, no difference was recorded in any tested 
variable between the embryos exposed to insulin and those cultured in 
insulin-free medium. Real-time RT-PCR analysis showed a significant increase in 
the amount of insulin receptor transcripts in blastocysts recovered from obese 
dams. These results suggest that maternal obesity might modulate the mitogenic 
and antiapoptotic responses of preimplantation embryos to insulin.

DOI: 10.1262/jrd.2020-096
PMCID: PMC7902211
PMID: 33250503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]