1. J Clin Lab Anal. 2021 Mar;35(3):e23665. doi: 10.1002/jcla.23665. Epub 2020 Dec
 3.

Practical application of Westgard Sigma rules with run size in analytical 
biochemistry processes in clinical settings.

Peng S(1), Zhang J(1), Zhou W(1), Mao W(1)(2), Han Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shengzhou People's Hospital, Shengzhou 
Branch of the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University, Shengzhou, 
China.
(2)Key laboratory of digestive system diseases of Shengzhou, Shengzhou People's 
Hospital, Shengzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: The performance of 18 routine chemical detection methods was 
evaluated by the sigma (σ) metric, and Westgard Sigma rules with run size were 
used to establish internal quality control (IQC) standards to reduce patient 
risks.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: External quality assessment (EQA) and internal quality 
control data from 18 assays in a biochemical laboratory were collected from 
January to June 2020. The sigma values of each assay were calculated, based on 
the bias, total error allowable, and coefficient of variation, appropriate 
quality control rules were selected. According to the quality goal index, the 
main causes of poor performance were determined to guide quality improvement.
RESULTS: At IQC material level 1, seven of the 18 assays achieved five sigma 
(excellent), and five assays (UA, Crea, AMY, TC and Na) showed world-class 
performance. At IQC material level 2, 14 of the 18 assays achieved 5 sigma 
(excellent), and thirteen assays (UA, ALT, CK, Crea, AMY, K, AST, ALP, Na, LDH, 
Mg, TC and GGT) showed world-class performance. The quality goal index (QGI) was 
calculated for items with analysis performance <5 sigma, and the main causes of 
poor performance were determined to guide quality improvement.
CONCLUSIONS: Westgard sigma rules with run size are an effective tool for 
evaluating the performance of biochemical assays. These rules can be used to 
more simply and intuitively select the quality control strategy of related items 
and reduce the risk to patients.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Laboratory Analysis published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.23665
PMCID: PMC7957980
PMID: 33270940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have any commercial or other 
associations that might pose a conflict of interest.