1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2021 Jan;17(1):37-50. doi: 
10.1080/1744666X.2020.1860757. Epub 2020 Dec 21.

Immunological mechanisms underlying sterile inflammation in the pathogenesis of 
atherosclerosis: potential sites for intervention.

Truong R(1), Thankam FG(1), Agrawal DK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Research, Western University of Health Sciences, 
Pomona, CA, USA.

Introduction: Innate and adaptive immunity play a critical role in the 
underlying pathological mechanisms of atherosclerosis and potential target sites 
of sterile inflammation open opportunities to develop novel therapeutics. In 
response to oxidized LDL in the intimal layer, T cell subsets are recruited and 
activated at the site of atheroma to upregulate pro-atherogenic cytokines which 
exacerbate plaque formation instability.Areas covered: A systematic search of 
PubMed and the Web of Science was performed between January 2001- September 2020 
and relevant articles in sterile inflammation and atherosclerosis were 
critically reviewed. The original information was collected on the 
interconnection between danger associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) as the 
mediators of sterile inflammation and the receptor complex of CD36-TLR4-TLR6 
that primes and activates inflammasomes in the pathophysiology of 
atherosclerosis. Mediators of sterile inflammation are identified to target 
therapeutic strategies in the management of atherosclerosis.Expert opinion: 
Sterile inflammation via NLRP3 inflammasome is perpetuated by the activation of 
IL-1Î² and IL-18 and induction of pyroptosis resulting in the release of 
additional inflammatory cytokines and DAMPs. Challenges with current inhibitors 
of the NLRP3 inflammasome lie in the specificity, stability, and efficacy in 
targeting the NLRP3 inflammasome constituents without ameliorating upstream or 
downstream responses necessary for survival.

DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2020.1860757
PMCID: PMC7906938
PMID: 33280442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest The authors have no 
relevant affiliations or financial or non-financial involvement with any 
organization or entity with financial or non-financial interest or conflict with 
the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those 
disclosed. No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this 
manuscript.