1. Toxins (Basel). 2020 Dec 4;12(12):767. doi: 10.3390/toxins12120767.

Effects of pH and Nutrients (Nitrogen) on Growth and Toxin Profile of the 
Ciguatera-Causing Dinoflagellate Gambierdiscus polynesiensis (Dinophyceae).

Longo S(1), Sibat M(2), Darius HT(1), Hess P(2), Chinain M(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Marine Biotoxins, Institut Louis Malard√©-UMR241 EIO (IFREMER, 
ILM, IRD, UPF), 98713 Papeete, Tahiti, French Polynesia.
(2)Phycotoxins Laboratory, IFREMER, Rue de I'lle d'Yeu, 44311 Nantes, France.

Ciguatera poisoning is a foodborne disease caused by the consumption of seafood 
contaminated with ciguatoxins (CTXs) produced by dinoflagellates in the genera 
Gambierdiscus and Fukuyoa. Ciguatera outbreaks are expected to increase 
worldwide with global change, in particular as a function of its main drivers, 
including changes in sea surface temperature, acidification, and coastal 
eutrophication. In French Polynesia, G. polynesiensis is regarded as the 
dominant source of CTXs entering the food web. The effects of pH (8.4, 8.2, and 
7.9), Nitrogen:Phosphorus ratios (24N:1P vs. 48N:1P), and nitrogen source 
(nitrates vs. urea) on growth rate, biomass, CTX levels, and profiles were 
examined in four clones of G. polynesiensis at different culture age (D10, D21, 
and D30). Results highlight a decrease in growth rate and cellular biomass at 
low pH when urea is used as a N source. No significant effect of pH, N:P ratio, 
and N source on the overall CTX content was observed. Up to ten distinct analogs 
of Pacific ciguatoxins (P-CTXs) could be detected by liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in clone NHA4 grown in urea, 
at D21. Amounts of more oxidized P-CTX analogs also increased under the lowest 
pH condition. These data provide interesting leads for the custom production of 
CTX standards.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12120767
PMCID: PMC7761829
PMID: 33291542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.