1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2020 Dec;14:264-273. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2020.11.005. Epub 2020 Dec 2.

Challenges and opportunities for the adoption of molecular diagnostics for 
anthelmintic resistance.

Kotze AC(1), Gilleard JS(2), Doyle SR(3), Prichard RK(4).

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Agriculture and Food, St. Lucia, Brisbane, 4072, QLD, Australia. 
Electronic address: andrew.kotze@csiro.au.
(2)Department of Comparative Biology and Experimental Medicine, Host-Parasite 
Interactions Program, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, T2N 4N1, Canada.
(3)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 
1SA, UK.
(4)Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, Sainte Anne-de-Bellevue, QC, 
H9X 3V9, Canada.

Anthelmintic resistance is a significant threat to livestock production systems 
worldwide and is emerging as an important issue in companion animal parasite 
management. It is also an emerging concern for the control of human 
soil-transmitted helminths and filaria. An important aspect of managing 
anthelmintic resistance is the ability to utilise diagnostic tests to detect its 
emergence at an early stage. In host-parasite systems where resistance is 
already widespread, diagnostics have a potentially important role in determining 
those drugs that remain the most effective. The development of molecular 
diagnostics for anthelmintic resistance is one focus of the Consortium for 
Anthelmintic Resistance and Susceptibility (CARS) group. The present paper 
reflects discussions of this issue that occurred at the most recent meeting of 
the group in Wisconsin, USA, in July 2019. We compare molecular resistance 
diagnostics with in vivo and in vitro phenotypic methods, and highlight the 
advantages and disadvantages of each. We assess whether our knowledge on the 
identity of molecular markers for resistance towards the different drug classes 
is sufficient to provide some expectation that molecular tests for field use may 
be available in the short-to-medium term. We describe some practical aspects of 
such tests and how our current capabilities compare to the requirements of an 
'ideal' test. Finally, we describe examples of drug class/parasite species 
interactions that provide the best opportunity for commercial use of molecular 
tests in the near future. We argue that while such prototype tests may not 
satisfy the requirements of an 'ideal' test, their potential to provide 
significant advances over currently-used phenotypic methods warrants their 
development as field diagnostics.

Copyright Â© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2020.11.005
PMCID: PMC7726450
PMID: 33307336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest with 
regard to the present manuscript.