1. Radiol Case Rep. 2020 Dec 5;16(2):348-352. doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2020.11.041. 
eCollection 2021 Feb.

A floating thrombus detected by CT in the descending aorta in an obese patient: 
A possible genetic-environmental interaction.

Brogna B(1), Amitrano M(2), Mangiacapra S(2), Gravino E(1), Capasso PMF(1), 
Gagliardi G(1), Musto LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology "San Giuseppe Moscati Hospital" Avellino, Amoretta 
Street, 83100 Avellino, Italy.
(2)Department of General Medicine "San Giuseppe Moscati Hospital" Avellino, 
Amoretta Street, 83100 Avellino, Italy.

A floating thrombus in a nonaneurysmal, nonatherosclerotic aorta is a rare 
finding and may represent an unusual source of systemic embolism. Less than 130 
cases have been reported in the literature. We describe a rare case of aortic 
floating thrombus in the descending aorta and the proximal portion of the 
suprarenal abdominal aorta detected by computed tomography angiography in a 
50-year-old woman who was admitted to our emergency room with epigastric 
abdominal pain. The computed tomography angiography also showed some defects in 
the subsegmentary pulmonary artery branches along with a splenic infarction with 
splenic artery and vein thrombi, and a left renal thrombus. On genetic testing 
the patient resulted heterozygous for the polymorphism for 
5,10-methylentetrahydrofolate reductase C677T polymorphism and also with 
homozygous deletion alleles of the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene. The 
aortic floating thrombus resolved during anticoagulant therapy after 4 weeks.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of University of 
Washington.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2020.11.041
PMCID: PMC7721593
PMID: 33312322