1. Biomark Res. 2020 Dec 14;8(1):73. doi: 10.1186/s40364-020-00254-9.

Ultradeep targeted sequencing reveals low allele frequencies of somatic JAK2 and 
MPL variants in patients with abdominal vein thromboses: results of an ongoing 
prospective prevalence study in Mecklenburg-West Pomerania.

Grunwald L(1), Grosse-Thie C(1), Sender S(1), Knuebel G(1), Krohn S(1), Roolf 
C(1), Junghanss C(1), Henze L(1), Murua Escobar H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Clinic III - Hematology, Oncology, Palliative 
Medicine, Rostock University Medical Center, University of Rostock, 
Ernst-Heydemann-Str. 6, D-18055, Rostock, Germany.
(2)Department of Medicine, Clinic III - Hematology, Oncology, Palliative 
Medicine, Rostock University Medical Center, University of Rostock, 
Ernst-Heydemann-Str. 6, D-18055, Rostock, Germany. 
hugo.murua.escobar@med.uni-rostock.de.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms are characterized by mutations in JAK2, MPL and 
CALR genes. Commonly in diagnostics and previous studies mainly sequencing and 
common PCR techniques under conventional detection limits are used.Splanchnic 
vein thromboses are rare, but often appear associated with myeloproliferative 
neoplasms and represent serious complications.Herein, blood from patients with 
abdominal vein thromboses in Mecklenburg-West Pomerania (federal district of 
northern Germany), included in an ongoing prospective prevalence study, was 
analyzed by next generation sequencing representing the complete protein coding 
regions of JAK2, MPL and CALR genes with a coverage of >â€‰2000 reads, therefore 
an ultradeep targeting approach.JAK2 V617F mutations were detected in 11/44 
patients. In four of these cases allele frequencies ranged below the 
conventional cut off of 2%. MPL W515R was detected in 3/44 cases in low 
frequencies.Very low allele frequencies of JAK2 and MPL variants in patients 
with abdominal vein thromboses may indicate early manifestations of 
myeloproliferative neoplasms.

DOI: 10.1186/s40364-020-00254-9
PMCID: PMC7737343
PMID: 33317584

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.