1. Hortic Res. 2020 Nov 1;7(1):187. doi: 10.1038/s41438-020-00411-z.

Genetic dissection of climacteric fruit ripening in a melon population 
segregating for ripening behavior.

Pereira L(1), Santo Domingo M(1), Ruggieri V(1)(2), Argyris J(1)(2), Phillips 
MA(3), Zhao G(4), Lian Q(5), Xu Y(4), He Y(4), Huang S(5), Pujol M(1)(2), 
Garcia-Mas J(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG) CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB, Edifici 
CRAG, Campus UAB, 08193, Cerdanyola, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)IRTA (Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentàries), Edifici CRAG, 
Campus UAB, 08193 Cerdanyola, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Toronto-Mississauga, Mississauga, ON, 
L5L 1C6, Canada.
(4)Zhengzhou Fruit Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(5)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural Genomics 
Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen, 
China.
(6)Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG) CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB, Edifici 
CRAG, Campus UAB, 08193, Cerdanyola, Barcelona, Spain. jordi.garcia@irta.cat.
(7)IRTA (Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentàries), Edifici CRAG, 
Campus UAB, 08193 Cerdanyola, Barcelona, Spain. jordi.garcia@irta.cat.

Melon is as an alternative model to understand fruit ripening due to the 
coexistence of climacteric and non-climacteric varieties within the same 
species, allowing the study of the processes that regulate this complex trait 
with genetic approaches. We phenotyped a population of recombinant inbred lines 
(RILs), obtained by crossing a climacteric (Védrantais, cantalupensis type) and 
a non-climcteric variety (Piel de Sapo T111, inodorus type), for traits related 
to climacteric maturation and ethylene production. Individuals in the RIL 
population exhibited various combinations of phenotypes that differed in the 
amount of ethylene produced, the early onset of ethylene production, and other 
phenotypes associated with ripening. We characterized a major QTL on chromosome 
8, ETHQV8.1, which is sufficient to activate climacteric ripening, and other 
minor QTLs that may modulate the climacteric response. The ETHQV8.1 allele was 
validated by using two reciprocal introgression line populations generated by 
crossing Védrantais and Piel de Sapo and analyzing the ETHQV8.1 region in each 
of the genetic backgrounds. A Genome-wide association study (GWAS) using 211 
accessions of the ssp. melo further identified two regions on chromosome 8 
associated with the production of aromas, one of these regions overlapping with 
the 154.1 kb interval containing ETHQV8.1. The ETHQV8.1 region contains several 
candidate genes that may be related to fruit ripening. This work sheds light 
into the regulation mechanisms of a complex trait such as fruit ripening.

DOI: 10.1038/s41438-020-00411-z
PMCID: PMC7603510
PMID: 33328460

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.