1. Onco Targets Ther. 2020 Dec 8;13:12637-12648. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S284032. 
eCollection 2020.

A Circular RNA Derived from Golgi Glycoprotein 1 mRNA Regulates KRAS Expression 
and Promotes Colorectal Cancer Progression by Targeting microRNA-622.

Hao S(1), Qu R(1), Hu C(1), Wang M(2), Li Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, The Second Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, Jilin, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, Jilin, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Circular RNAs (circRNAs) represent a distinct class of non-coding 
RNAs that have attracted substantial research attention in recent years. We 
identified a novel circRNA derived from golgi glycoprotein 1 mRNA (circ_GLG1), 
the role of which is unknown in colorectal cancer (CRC). The purpose of this 
study was to explore the potential roles and mechanisms of circ_GLG1 in CRC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction analysis was performed to quantify circ_GLG1 expression in 40 pairs of 
CRC tissues and adjacent normal tissues as well as CRC cell lines. DLD1 CRC 
cells were transfected with a small-interfering RNA against circ_GLG1, after 
which cell proliferation, viability, invasion, and migration were measured 
through cell counting kit-8 colony-formation, transwell, and wound-healing 
assays, respectively. Dual-luciferase reporter assays were performed to explore 
the binding sites among circ_GLG1, miR-622, and Kirsten rat sarcoma (KRAS) 
transcripts. KRAS protein expression was detected using Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Circ_GLG1 expression was significantly higher in CRC tissues than in 
adjacent normal tissues. Knocking down circ_GLG1 in DLD1 cells inhibited tumor 
cell viability, proliferation, invasion, and migration, and these effects were 
reversed by co-transfecting an miR-622 inhibitor. Circ_GLG1 promoted KRAS 
expression at both the mRNA and protein levels by acting as an miR-622 sponge. 
Dual-luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that miR-622 interacted with 
circ_GLG1 and KRAS mRNA.
CONCLUSION: Our study revealed the role of the circ_GLG1-miR-622-KRAS axis in 
CRC. Moreover, our findings provide insight into the molecular mechanism of 
circ_GLG1 in CRC and suggest potential new biomarkers for diagnosing this 
disease.

Â© 2020 Hao et al.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S284032
PMCID: PMC7737168
PMID: 33335404

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
and/or non-financial interests in relation to the work described.