1. Dev Psychopathol. 2022 Feb;34(1):171-182. doi: 10.1017/S0954579420001066. Epub
 2020 Dec 22.

Genotype-environment correlation by intervention effects underlying middle 
childhood peer rejection and associations with adolescent marijuana use.

Elam KK(1), Clifford S(2), Ruof A(3), Shaw DS(4), Wilson MN(5), Lemery-Chalfant 
K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Health Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.
(3)T. Denny Sanford School of Social and Family Dynamics, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, 
USA.

Aggressive behavior in middle childhood can contribute to peer rejection, 
subsequently increasing risk for substance use in adolescence. However, the 
quality of peer relationships a child experiences can be associated with his or 
her genetic predisposition, a genotype-environment correlation (rGE). In 
addition, recent evidence indicates that psychosocial preventive interventions 
can buffer genetic predispositions for negative behavior. The current study 
examined associations between polygenic risk for aggression, aggressive 
behavior, and peer rejection from 8.5 to 10.5 years, and the subsequent 
influence of peer rejection on marijuana use in adolescence (n = 515; 256 
control, 259 intervention). Associations were examined separately in control and 
intervention groups for children of families who participated in a randomized 
controlled trial of the family-based preventive intervention, the Family 
Check-Up . Using time-varying effect modeling (TVEM), polygenic risk for 
aggression was associated with peer rejection from approximately age 8.50 to 
9.50 in the control group but no associations were present in the intervention 
group. Subsequent analyses showed peer rejection mediated the association 
between polygenic risk for aggression and adolescent marijuana use in the 
control group. The role of rGEs in middle childhood peer processes and 
implications for preventive intervention programs for adolescent substance use 
are discussed.

DOI: 10.1017/S0954579420001066
PMCID: PMC8217405
PMID: 33349288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None.