1. Front Neurol. 2020 Dec 3;11:590573. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.590573.
eCollection  2020.

Imaging Neurochemistry and Brain Structure Tracks Clinical Decline and 
Mechanisms of ALS in Patients.

Andronesi OC(1), Nicholson K(2), Jafari-Khouzani K(1), Bogner W(3), Wang 
J(1)(4), Chan J(5), Macklin EA(5), Levine-Weinberg M(2), Breen C(2), 
Schwarzschild MA(6), Cudkowicz M(2), Rosen BR(1), Paganoni S(2)(7), Ratai EM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, A. A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 
Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(2)Neurological Clinical Research Institute (NCRI), Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)High Field MR Centre, Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-Guided 
Therapy, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Radiology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(5)Biostatistics Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(6)MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Charlestown, MA, United 
States.
(7)Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Boston, MA, United States.

Background: Oxidative stress and protein aggregation are key mechanisms in 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) disease. Reduced glutathione (GSH) is the 
most important intracellular antioxidant that protects neurons from reactive 
oxygen species. We hypothesized that levels of GSH measured by MR spectroscopic 
imaging (MRSI) in the motor cortex and corticospinal tract are linked to 
clinical trajectory of ALS patients. Objectives: Investigate the value of GSH 
imaging to probe clinical decline of ALS patients in combination with other 
neurochemical and structural parameters. Methods: Twenty-four ALS patients were 
imaged at 3 T with an advanced MR protocol. Mapping GSH levels in the brain is 
challenging, and for this purpose, we used an optimized spectral-edited 3D MRSI 
sequence with real-time motion and field correction to image glutathione and 
other brain metabolites. In addition, our imaging protocol included (i) an 
adiabatic T1ρ sequence to image macromolecular fraction of brain parenchyma, 
(ii) diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) for white matter tractography, and (iii) 
high-resolution anatomical imaging. Results: We found GSH in motor cortex (r = 
-0.431, p = 0.04) and corticospinal tract (r = -0.497, p = 0.016) inversely 
correlated with time between diagnosis and imaging. N-Acetyl-aspartate (NAA) in 
motor cortex inversely correlated (r = -0.416, p = 0.049), while mean water 
diffusivity (r = 0.437, p = 0.033) and T1ρ (r = 0.482, p = 0.019) positively 
correlated with disease progression measured by imputed change in revised ALS 
Functional Rating Scale. There is more decrease in the motor cortex than in the 
white matter for GSH compared to NAA, glutamate, and glutamine. Conclusions: Our 
study suggests that a panel of biochemical and structural imaging biomarkers 
defines a brain endophenotype, which can be used to time biological events and 
clinical progression in ALS patients. Such a quantitative brain endophenotype 
may stratify ALS patients into more homogeneous groups for therapeutic 
interventions compared to clinical criteria.

Copyright © 2020 Andronesi, Nicholson, Jafari-Khouzani, Bogner, Wang, Chan, 
Macklin, Levine-Weinberg, Breen, Schwarzschild, Cudkowicz, Rosen, Paganoni and 
Ratai.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2020.590573
PMCID: PMC7744722
PMID: 33343494

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.