1. Elife. 2020 Dec 21;9:e62390. doi: 10.7554/eLife.62390.

Distinct temporal difference error signals in dopamine axons in three regions of 
the striatum in a decision-making task.

Tsutsui-Kimura I(1), Matsumoto H(1)(2), Akiti K(1), Yamada MM(1), Uchida N(1), 
Watabe-Uchida M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Center for Brain Science, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, United States.
(2)Department of Physiology, Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan.

Different regions of the striatum regulate different types of behavior. However, 
how dopamine signals differ across striatal regions and how dopamine regulates 
different behaviors remain unclear. Here, we compared dopamine axon activity in 
the ventral, dorsomedial, and dorsolateral striatum, while mice performed a 
perceptual and value-based decision task. Surprisingly, dopamine axon activity 
was similar across all three areas. At a glance, the activity multiplexed 
different variables such as stimulus-associated values, confidence, and reward 
feedback at different phases of the task. Our modeling demonstrates, however, 
that these modulations can be inclusively explained by moment-by-moment changes 
in the expected reward, that is the temporal difference error. A major 
difference between areas was the overall activity level of reward responses: 
reward responses in dorsolateral striatum were positively shifted, lacking 
inhibitory responses to negative prediction errors. The differences in dopamine 
signals put specific constraints on the properties of behaviors controlled by 
dopamine in these regions.

Â© 2020, Tsutsui-Kimura et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.62390
PMCID: PMC7771962
PMID: 33345774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IT, HM, KA, MY, MW No competing interests 
declared, NU Reviewing editor, eLife