1. PeerJ. 2020 Dec 10;8:e10513. doi: 10.7717/peerj.10513. eCollection 2020.

Identification of biomarkers associated with clinical severity of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Zhang J(#)(1), Zhu C(#)(1), Gao H(1), Liang X(2), Fan X(3), Zheng Y(1), Chen 
S(4), Wan Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, The Affiliated Huai'an Hospital of Xuzhou 
Medical University, Huai'an, Jiangsu, China.
(2)College of Nursing and Midwifery, Jiangsu College of Nursing, Huai'an, 
Jiangsu, China.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Suqian First Hospital, Suqian, Jiangsu, 
China.
(4)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Jiangsu College of Nursing, Huai'an, 
Jiangsu, China.
(#)Contributed equally

We sought to identify the biomarkers related to the clinical severity of stage I 
to stage IV chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Gene expression 
profiles from the blood samples of COPD patients at each of the four stages were 
acquired from the Gene Expression Omnibus Database (GEO, accession number: 
GSE54837). Genes showing expression changes among the different stages were 
sorted by soft clustering. We performed functional enrichment, protein-protein 
interaction (PPI), and miRNA regulatory network analyses for the differentially 
expressed genes. The biomarkers associated with the clinical classification of 
COPD were selected from logistic regression models and the relationships between 
TLR2 and inflammatory factors were verified in clinical blood samples by qPCR 
and ELISA. Gene clusters demonstrating continuously rising or falling changes in 
expression (clusters 1, 2, and 7 and clusters 5, 6, and 8, respectively) from 
stage I to IV were defined as upregulated and downregulated genes, respectively, 
and further analyzed. The upregulated genes were enriched in functions 
associated with defense, inflammatory, or immune responses. The downregulated 
genes were associated with lymphocyte activation and cell activation. TLR2, 
HMOX1, and CD79A were hub proteins in the integrated network of PPI and miRNA 
regulatory networks. TLR2 and CD79A were significantly correlated with clinical 
classifications. TLR2 was closely associated with inflammatory responses during 
COPD progression. Functions associated with inflammatory and immune responses as 
well as lymphocyte activation may play important roles in the progression of 
COPD from stage I to IV. TLR2 and CD79A may serve as potential biomarkers for 
the clinical severity of COPD. TLR2 and CD79A may also serve as independent 
biomarkers in the clinical classification in COPD. TLR2 may play an important 
role in the inflammatory responses of COPD.

Â©2020 Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.10513
PMCID: PMC7733647
PMID: 33354437

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.