1. Infect Drug Resist. 2020 Dec 17;13:4519-4529. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S273704. 
eCollection 2020.

Prevalence of HIV-1 Integrase Strand Transfer Inhibitor Resistance in 
Treatment-Naïve Voluntary Counselling and Testing Clients by Population 
Sequencing and Illumina Next-Generation Sequencing in Taiwan.

Tsai HC(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen IT(1), Tsai KW(5), Lee SS(1)(2), Chen YS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Kaohsiung Veterans 
General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Research, Taipei Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical 
Foundation, New Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs) are used as first-line 
therapy for HIV-1-infected patients. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) can detect 
low-frequency mutants; however, the clinical value of NGS to detect resistance 
variants is unknown. This study aimed to evaluate the prevalence of INSTI 
resistance in southern Taiwan and determine the clinical implications of using 
NGS to detect integrase region low-level resistant variants.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective cohort study included antiretroviral 
therapy-naïve HIV-1-infected individuals at Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, 
Taiwan, from 2013 to 2017. Drug-resistance mutations were determined, and an 
in-house polymerase chain reaction was used for genotyping INSTI resistance. NGS 
was used to assess INSTI resistance (≧1%), and the results were compared with 
those from population sequencing. Drug resistance-associated mutations were 
defined according to the 2019 IAS-USA HIV drug resistance-associated mutations 
list, and accessory mutations by a Stanford HIVdb score ≥10 to at least one 
INSTI.
RESULTS: A total of 224 patients were included. Subtype B HIV-1 strains were 
found in 96% of the individuals and subtype CRF01_AE in 4%. The prevalence rates 
for nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, non-nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors, protease inhibitors and INSTI resistance were 4%, 
5.8%, 0.4% and 0.9%, respectively. The most common INSTI resistance-associated 
mutations were G163K (0.4%) and E138A (0.4%). Of the 38 patients diagnosed in 
2017 who had both NGS and population sequencing data, none had INSTI 
resistance-associated mutations by population sequencing; however, NGS detected 
four more INSTI resistance-associated mutations with low frequencies (G163R 
3.25%, S153F 3.21%, S153Y 1.36% and Y143H 2.06%). Two patients with S153F and 
S153Y low frequencies mutations started INSTI-based highly active antiretroviral 
therapy, and none had virological failure by week 48.
CONCLUSION: Our findings showed a low rate of HIV drug resistance to INSTIs 
(0.9%) in treatment-naïve patients. NGS detected more INSTI 
resistance-associated mutations at a low frequency. Low-level drug 
resistance-associated mutations to INSTIs identified by NGS did not have an 
impact on the treatment response to INSTI-based first-line therapy.

© 2020 Tsai et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S273704
PMCID: PMC7751586
PMID: 33364799

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.