1. World J Gastroenterol. 2020 Dec 7;26(45):7131-7152. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v26.i45.7131.

Nimbolide inhibits tumor growth by restoring hepatic tight junction protein 
expression and reduced inflammation in an experimental hepatocarcinogenesis.

Ram AK(1), Vairappan B(2), Srinivas BH(3).

Author information:
(1)Liver Diseases Research Lab,Department of Biochemistry, Jawaharlal Institute 
of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Dhanvantari Nagar, 
Puducherry 605006, India.
(2)Liver Diseases Research Lab,Department of Biochemistry, Jawaharlal Institute 
of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Dhanvantari Nagar, 
Puducherry 605006, India. balasubramaniyan.v@jipmer.edu.in.
(3)Department of Pathology, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical 
Education and Research (JIPMER), Dhanvantari Nagar, Puducherry 605006, India.

BACKGROUND: Altered tight junction (TJ) proteins are correlated with 
carcinogenesis and tumor development. Nimbolide is a tetranotriterpenoid that 
has been shown to have antioxidant and anti-proliferative properties; however, 
its anticancer effects and molecular mechanism in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
remains obscure.
AIM: To investigate the effect of nimbolide on TJ proteins, cell cycle 
progression, and hepatic inflammation in a mouse model of HCC.
METHODS: HCC was induced in male Swiss albino mice (CD-1 strain) by a single 
intraperitoneal injection of 100 mg/kg diethylnitrosamine (DEN) followed by 80 
ppm N-nitrosomorpholine (NMOR) in drinking water for 28 wk. After 28 wk, 
nimbolide (6 mg/kg) was given orally for four consecutive weeks in DEN/NMOR 
induced HCC mice. At the end of the 32nd week, all the mice were sacrificed and 
blood and liver samples were collected for various analyses. Macroscopic 
examinations of hepatic nodules were assessed. Liver histology and HCC tumor 
markers such as alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and glypican-3 were measured. Expression 
of TJ proteins, cell proliferation, and cell cycle markers, inflammatory 
markers, and oxidative stress markers were analyzed. In silico analysis was 
performed to confirm the binding and modulatory effect of nimbolide on zonula 
occludens 1 (ZO-1), nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in 
B-cells (NF-κB), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α).
RESULTS: We found nimbolide treatment at a concentration of 6 mg/kg to HCC mice 
reduced hepatic tumor size by 52.08% and tumor volume (P < 0.01), and delayed 
tumor growth in HCC mice with a concomitant reduction in tumor markers such as 
AFP levels (P < 0.01) and glypican-3 expression (P < 0.05). Furthermore, 
nimbolide treatment increased tight junction proteins such as ZO-1 and occludin 
expression (P < 0.05, respectively) and reduced ZO-1 associated nucleic acid 
binding protein expression (P < 0.001) in HCC mice liver. Nimbolide treatment to 
HCC mice also inhibited cell proliferation and suppressed cell cycle progression 
by attenuating proliferating cell nuclear antigen (P < 0.01), cyclin dependent 
kinase (P < 0.05), and CyclinD1 (P < 0.05) expression. In addition, nimbolide 
treatment to HCC mice ameliorated hepatic inflammation by reducing NF-κB, 
interleukin 1 beta and TNF-α expression (P < 0.05, respectively) and abrogated 
oxidative stress by attenuating 4-hydroxynonenal expression (P < 0.01). 
Molecular docking studies further confirmed that nimbolide interacts with ZO-1, 
NF-κB, and TNF-α.
CONCLUSION: Our current study showed for the first time that nimbolide exhibits 
anticancer effect by reducing tumor size, tumor burden and by suppressing cell 
cycle progression in HCC mice. Furthermore, nimbolide treatment to HCC mice 
ameliorated inflammation and oxidative stress, and improved TJ proteins 
expression. Consequently, nimbolide could be potentially used as a natural 
therapeutic agent for HCC treatment, however further human studies are 
warranted.

©The Author(s) 2020. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v26.i45.7131
PMCID: PMC7723674
PMID: 33362373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest related to this study.