1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Dec 17;11:602803. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.602803. 
eCollection 2020.

Targeting the Malaria Parasite cGMP-Dependent Protein Kinase to Develop New 
Drugs.

Baker DA(1), Matralis AN(2), Osborne SA(3), Large JM(3), Penzo M(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)"Alexander Fleming" Biomedical Sciences Research Center, Vari, Greece.
(3)LifeArc, Accelerator Building, Open Innovation Campus, Stevenage, United 
Kingdom.

The single-celled apicomplexan parasite Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for 
the majority of deaths due to malaria each year. The selection of drug 
resistance has been a recurring theme over the decades with each new drug that 
is developed. It is therefore crucial that future generations of drugs are 
explored to tackle this major public health problem. Cyclic GMP (cGMP) signaling 
is one of the biochemical pathways that is being explored as a potential target 
for new antimalarial drugs. It has been shown that this pathway is essential for 
all of the key developmental stages of the complex malaria parasite life cycle. 
This gives hope that targeting cGMP signaling might give rise to drugs that 
treat disease, block its transmission and even prevent the establishment of 
infection. Here we review previous work that has been carried out to develop and 
optimize inhibitors of the cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) which is a 
critical regulator of the malaria parasite life cycle.

Copyright Â© 2020 Baker, Matralis, Osborne, Large and Penzo.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.602803
PMCID: PMC7773720
PMID: 33391223

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.