1. Front Physiol. 2020 Dec 21;11:601090. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.601090. 
eCollection 2020.

The Role of Orai1 in Regulating Sarcoplasmic Calcium Release, Mitochondrial 
Morphology and Function in Myostatin Deficient Skeletal Muscle.

Sztretye M(1), Singlár Z(1), Balogh N(1), Kis G(2), Szentesi P(1), Angyal Á(1), 
Balatoni I(1), Csernoch L(1), Dienes B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 
Debrecen, Hungary.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.

In mice a naturally occurring 12-bp deletion in the myostatin gene is considered 
responsible for the compact phenotype (MstnCmpt-dl1Abc, Cmpt) labeled by a 
tremendous increase in body weight along with signs of muscle weakness, easier 
fatigability, decreased Orai1 expression and store operated calcium entry 
(SOCE). Here, on the one hand, Cmpt fibers were reconstructed with venus-Orai1 
but this failed to restore SOCE. On the other hand, the endogenous Orai1 was 
silenced in fibers from wild type C57Bl6 mice which resulted in ∼70% of Orai1 
being silenced in whole muscle homogenates as confirmed by Western blot, 
accompanied by an inhibitory effect on the voltage dependence of SR calcium 
release that manifested in a slight shift toward more positive potential values. 
This maneuver completely hampered SOCE. Our observations are consistent with the 
idea that Orai1 channels are present in distinct pools responsible for either a 
rapid refilling of the SR terminal cisternae connected to each voltage-activated 
calcium transient, or a slow SOCE associated with an overall depletion of 
calcium in the SR lumen. Furthermore, when Cmpt cells were loaded with the 
mitochondrial membrane potential sensitive dye TMRE, fiber segments with 
depolarized mitochondria were identified covering on average 26.5 ± 1.5% of the 
fiber area. These defective areas were located around the neuromuscular junction 
and displayed significantly smaller calcium transients. The ultrastructural 
analysis of the Cmpt fibers revealed changes in the mitochondrial morphology. In 
addition, the mitochondrial calcium uptake during repetitive stimulation was 
higher in the Cmpt fibers. Our results favor the idea that reduced function 
and/or expression of SOCE partners (in this study Orai1) and mitochondrial 
defects could play an important role in muscle weakness and degeneration 
associated with certain pathologies, perhaps including loss of function of the 
neuromuscular junction and aging.

Copyright © 2020 Sztretye, Singlár, Balogh, Kis, Szentesi, Angyal, Balatoni, 
Csernoch and Dienes.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.601090
PMCID: PMC7779810
PMID: 33408641

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.