1. Cell Death Dis. 2021 Jan 4;12(1):27. doi: 10.1038/s41419-020-03281-4.

Targeting sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1) enhances oncogene-induced senescence 
through ceramide synthase 2 (CerS2)-mediated generation of very-long-chain 
ceramides.

Trayssac M(1)(2), Clarke CJ(3)(4), Stith JL(1)(2), Snider JM(1)(2), Newen 
N(1)(2), Gault CR(5), Hannun YA(6)(7), Obeid LM(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(2)Stony Brook Cancer Center, Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA. 
christopher.clarke@stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(4)Stony Brook Cancer Center, Stony Brook, NY, USA. 
christopher.clarke@stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(5)Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA. 
yusuf.hannun@stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(7)Stony Brook Cancer Center, Stony Brook, NY, USA. 
yusuf.hannun@stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(8)Northport Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Northport, NY, USA.

Senescence is an antiproliferative mechanism that can suppress tumor development 
and can be induced by oncogenes such as genes of the Ras family. Although 
studies have implicated bioactive sphingolipids (SL) in senescence, the specific 
mechanisms remain unclear. Here, using MCF10A mammary epithelial cells, we 
demonstrate that oncogenic K-Ras (Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog) is 
sufficient to induce cell transformation as well as cell senescence-as revealed 
by increases in the percentage of cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle, 
p21WAF1/Cip1/CDKN1A (p21) expression, and senescence-associated β-galactosidase 
activity (SA-β-gal). Furthermore, oncogenic K-Ras altered SL metabolism, with an 
increase of long-chain (LC) C18, C20 ceramides (Cer), and very-long-chain (VLC) 
C22:1, C24 Cer, and an increase of sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1) expression. Since 
Cer and sphingosine-1-phosphate have been shown to exert opposite effects on 
cellular senescence, we hypothesized that targeting SK1 could enhance oncogenic 
K-Ras-induced senescence. Indeed, SK1 downregulation or inhibition enhanced p21 
expression and SA-β-gal in cells expressing oncogenic K-Ras and impeded cell 
growth. Moreover, SK1 knockdown further increased LC and VLC Cer species (C18, 
C20, C22:1, C24, C24:1, C26:1), especially the ones increased by oncogenic 
K-Ras. Fumonisin B1 (FB1), an inhibitor of ceramide synthases (CerS), reduced 
p21 expression induced by oncogenic K-Ras both with and without SK1 knockdown. 
Functionally, FB1 reversed the growth defect induced by oncogenic K-Ras, 
confirming the importance of Cer generation in the senescent phenotype. More 
specifically, downregulation of CerS2 by siRNA blocked the increase of VLC Cer 
(C24, C24:1, and C26:1) induced by SK1 knockdown and phenocopied the effects of 
FB1 on p21 expression. Taken together, these data show that targeting SK1 is a 
potential therapeutic strategy in cancer, enhancing oncogene-induced senescence 
through an increase of VLC Cer downstream of CerS2.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-020-03281-4
PMCID: PMC7790826
PMID: 33414460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.