1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2021 Jan 7;9(1):13. doi: 10.1186/s40478-020-01110-5.

14-3-3 mitigates alpha-synuclein aggregation and toxicity in the in vivo 
preformed fibril model.

Underwood R(1)(2), Gannon M(1), Pathak A(1), Kapa N(1), Chandra S(1)(3), Klop 
A(1), Yacoubian TA(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Neurodegeneration and Experimental 
Therapeutics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35294, USA.
(2)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Perelman School of Medicine at 
the University of Pennsylvania, Maloney Building, 3rd Floor, 3600 Spruce Street, 
Philadelphia, PA, 19104-2676, USA.
(3)Medical Scientist Training Program, Northwestern University Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Center for Neurodegeneration and Experimental 
Therapeutics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35294, USA. 
tyacoubian@uabmc.edu.
(5)Civitan International Research Center, Room 510A, 1719 Sixth Avenue South, 
Birmingham, AL, 35294, USA. tyacoubian@uabmc.edu.

Alpha-synuclein (αsyn) is the key component of proteinaceous aggregates termed 
Lewy Bodies that pathologically define a group of disorders known as 
synucleinopathies, including Parkinson's Disease (PD) and Dementia with Lewy 
Bodies. αSyn is hypothesized to misfold and spread throughout the brain in a 
prion-like fashion. Transmission of αsyn necessitates the release of misfolded 
αsyn from one cell and the uptake of that αsyn by another, in which it can 
template the misfolding of endogenous αsyn upon cell internalization. 14-3-3 
proteins are a family of highly expressed brain proteins that are 
neuroprotective in multiple PD models. We have previously shown that 14-3-3θ 
acts as a chaperone to reduce αsyn aggregation, cell-to-cell transmission, and 
neurotoxicity in the in vitro pre-formed fibril (PFF) model. In this study, we 
expanded our studies to test the impact of 14-3-3s on αsyn toxicity in the in 
vivo αsyn PFF model. We used both transgenic expression models and adenovirus 
associated virus (AAV)-mediated expression to examine whether 14-3-3 
manipulation impacts behavioral deficits, αsyn aggregation, and neuronal counts 
in the PFF model. 14-3-3θ transgene overexpression in cortical and amygdala 
regions rescued social dominance deficits induced by PFFs at 6 months post 
injection, whereas 14-3-3 inhibition by transgene expression of the competitive 
14-3-3 peptide inhibitor difopein in the cortex and amygdala accelerated social 
dominance deficits. The behavioral rescue by 14-3-3θ overexpression was 
associated with delayed αsyn aggregation induced by PFFs in these brain regions. 
Conversely, 14-3-3 inhibition by difopein in the cortex and amygdala accelerated 
αsyn aggregation and reduction in NECAB1-positive neuron counts induced by PFFs. 
14-3-3θ overexpression by AAV in the substantia nigra (SN) also delayed αsyn 
aggregation in the SN and partially rescued PFF-induced reduction in tyrosine 
hydroxylase (TH)-positive dopaminergic cells in the SN. 14-3-3 inhibition in the 
SN accelerated nigral αsyn aggregation and enhanced PFF-induced reduction in 
TH-positive dopaminergic cells. These data indicate a neuroprotective role for 
14-3-3θ against αsyn toxicity in vivo.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-020-01110-5
PMCID: PMC7792107
PMID: 33413679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Yacoubian has a U.S. Patent No. 7,919,262 on 
the use of 14-3-3s in neurodegeneration. The remaining authors have no competing 
interests to declare.