1. J Mol Model. 2021 Jan 7;27(2):28. doi: 10.1007/s00894-020-04617-9.

Microcanonical insights into the physicochemical stability of the coformulation 
of insulin with amylin analogues.

Frigori RB(1), Rodrigues F(2).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná, Rua Cristo Rei 19, 85902-490, 
Toledo, PR, Brazil. frigori@utfpr.edu.br.
(2)Universidade Tecnológica Federal do Paraná, Rua Cristo Rei 19, 85902-490, 
Toledo, PR, Brazil.

Injections of insulin are the main treatment for diabetes, but in the long run 
this therapy can induce serious drawbacks. This has inspired new drugs able to 
decrease insulin requirements. For instance, human amylin (hIAPP) is a small 
hormone cosecreted by pancreatic β-cells with insulin to which is a synergistic 
partner. However, the high amyloidogenicity of hIAPP precluded it as a 
therapeutics and led to the design of pramlintide (sIAPP), a chimeric analogue 
with substitutions (A25P, S28P, and S29P) inherited from the 
aggregation-resistant rat isoform (rIAPP). Despite sIAPP advantages, it still 
shares with hIAPP a poorly soluble profile at physiological pH that hampers its 
mixture with insulin. Recent improvements, as charge-enhanced mutants, have been 
proposed. For instance, sIAPP+ was screened in silico by purely microcanonical 
thermostatistical methods and adds to sIAPP an S20R mutation to uplift its 
solubility. This suggests that such physically inspired computational approach 
may also be auspicious on devising effective coformulations of insulin with 
amylin analogues. In this seminal attempt, we make comparative multicanonical 
simulations of regular acting human insulin coformulated with hIAPP, sIAPP, or 
sIAPP+. To assess the respective physicochemical stabilities against 
aggregation, we characterize the structural-phase transitions through the 
microcanonical thermodynamic formalism and evaluate their time lags using the 
classical nucleation theory. These results are then correlated with estimates of 
solvation free energies, modeled by the Poisson-Boltzmann equation, and 
structural propensities. Experimental essays are compared to our simulations and 
support our methodology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00894-020-04617-9
PMID: 33411018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]