1. Neurobiol Aging. 2021 Mar;99:19-27. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.12.003.
 Epub 2021 Jan 7.

Dystrophic microglia are associated with neurodegenerative disease and not 
healthy aging in the human brain.

Shahidehpour RK(1), Higdon RE(1), Crawford NG(1), Neltner JH(2), Ighodaro ET(3), 
Patel E(4), Price D(4), Nelson PT(5), Bachstetter AD(6).

Author information:
(1)Spinal Cord and Brain Injury Research Center, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, USA; Department of Neuroscience, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, USA.
(2)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA; 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Division of Neuropathology, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA; 
Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
(4)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA; 
Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA; 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Division of Neuropathology, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
(6)Spinal Cord and Brain Injury Research Center, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, USA; Department of Neuroscience, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, USA; Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, USA. Electronic address: adam.bachstetter@uky.edu.

Loss of physiological microglial function may increase the propagation of 
neurodegenerative diseases. Cellular senescence is a hallmark of aging; thus, we 
hypothesized age could be a cause of dystrophic microglia. Stereological counts 
were performed for total microglia, 2 microglia morphologies (hypertrophic and 
dystrophic) across the human lifespan. An age-associated increase in the number 
of dystrophic microglia was found in the hippocampus and frontal cortex. 
However, the increase in dystrophic microglia was proportional to the 
age-related increase in the total number of microglia. Thus, aging alone does 
not explain the presence of dystrophic microglia. We next tested if dystrophic 
microglia could be a disease-associated microglia morphology. Compared with 
controls, the number of dystrophic microglia was greater in cases with either 
Alzheimer's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, or limbic-predominant 
age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy. These results demonstrate that microglia 
dystrophy, and not hypertrophic microglia, are the disease-associated microglia 
morphology. Finally, we found strong evidence for iron homeostasis changes in 
dystrophic microglia, providing a possible molecular mechanism driving the 
degeneration of microglia in neurodegenerative disease.

Copyright Â© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.12.003
PMCID: PMC8293930
PMID: 33422891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement: No competing interests. 
Conflict of Interest: None