1. Front Physiol. 2020 Dec 23;11:614591. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.614591. 
eCollection 2020.

Experimental Acute Pancreatitis Models: History, Current Status, and Role in 
Translational Research.

Yang X(1), Yao L(1), Fu X(2), Mukherjee R(3), Xia Q(1), Jakubowska MA(4), Ferdek 
PE(5), Huang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese Medicine and Western Medicine, 
Sichuan Provincial Pancreatitis Center and West China-Liverpool Biomedical 
Research Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy 
and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University and Collaborative 
Innovation Center of Biotherapy, Chengdu, China.
(3)Liverpool Pancreatitis Research Group, Liverpool University Hospitals 
National Health Service Foundation Trust and Institute of Systems, Molecular and 
Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(4)Malopolska Center of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
(5)Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian 
University, Krakow, Poland.

Acute pancreatitis is a potentially severe inflammatory disease that may be 
associated with a substantial morbidity and mortality. Currently there is no 
specific treatment for the disease, which indicates an ongoing demand for 
research into its pathogenesis and development of new therapeutic strategies. 
Due to the unpredictable course of acute pancreatitis and relatively concealed 
anatomical site in the retro-peritoneum, research on the human pancreas remains 
challenging. As a result, for over the last 100 years studies on the 
pathogenesis of this disease have heavily relied on animal models. This review 
aims to summarize different animal models of acute pancreatitis from the past to 
present and discuss their main characteristics and applications. It identifies 
key studies that have enhanced our current understanding of the pathogenesis of 
acute pancreatitis and highlights the instrumental role of animal models in 
translational research for developing novel therapies.

Copyright Â© 2020 Yang, Yao, Fu, Mukherjee, Xia, Jakubowska, Ferdek and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.614591
PMCID: PMC7786374
PMID: 33424638

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.