1. Metabolites. 2021 Jan 9;11(1):44. doi: 10.3390/metabo11010044.

Comprehensive Meta-Analysis of COVID-19 Global Metabolomics Datasets.

Pang Z(1), Zhou G(1), Chong J(1), Xia J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, 21111 Lakeshore Road, Ste Anne 
de Bellevue, QC H9X 3V9, Canada.
(2)Department of Animal Science, McGill University, 21111 Lakeshore Road, Ste 
Anne de Bellevue, QC H9X 3V9, Canada.

The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has spread across the world since 2019, causing 
a global pandemic. The pathogenesis of the viral infection and the associated 
clinical presentations depend primarily on host factors such as age and 
immunity, rather than the viral load or its genetic variations. A growing number 
of omics studies have been conducted to characterize the host immune and 
metabolic responses underlying the disease progression. Meta-analyses of these 
datasets have great potential to identify robust molecular signatures to inform 
clinical care and to facilitate therapeutics development. In this study, we 
performed a comprehensive meta-analysis of publicly available global 
metabolomics datasets obtained from three countries (United States, China and 
Brazil). To overcome high heterogeneity inherent in these datasets, we have (a) 
implemented a computational pipeline to perform consistent raw spectra 
processing; (b) conducted meta-analyses at pathway levels instead of individual 
feature levels; and (c) performed visual data mining on consistent patterns of 
change between disease severities for individual studies. Our analyses have 
yielded several key metabolic signatures characterizing disease progression and 
clinical outcomes. Their biological interpretations were discussed within the 
context of the current literature. To the best of our knowledge, this is the 
first comprehensive meta-analysis of global metabolomics datasets of COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo11010044
PMCID: PMC7827862
PMID: 33435351

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.