1. BMC Med Genomics. 2021 Jan 11;14(1):18. doi: 10.1186/s12920-020-00860-4.

Novel susceptibility loci identified in a genome-wide association study of type 
2 diabetes complications in population of Latvia.

Ustinova M(1), Peculis R(1), Rescenko R(1), Rovite V(1), Zaharenko L(1), Elbere 
I(1), Silamikele L(1), Konrade I(1)(2), Sokolovska J(3), Pirags V(1)(3), Klovins 
J(4).

Author information:
(1)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Ratsupites iela 1, Riga, 1067, 
Latvia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Riga Stradins University, Dzirciema iela 16, Riga, 1007, 
Latvia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, University of Latvia, Jelgavas iela 3, Riga, 1004, 
Latvia.
(4)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Ratsupites iela 1, Riga, 1067, 
Latvia. klovins@biomed.lu.lv.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes complications cause a serious emotional and 
economical burden to patients and healthcare systems globally. Management of 
both acute and chronic complications of diabetes, which dramatically impair the 
quality of patients' life, is still an unsolved issue in diabetes care, 
suggesting a need for early identification of individuals with high risk for 
developing diabetes complications.
METHODS: We performed a genome-wide association study in 601 type 2 diabetes 
patients after stratifying them according to the presence or absence of four 
types of diabetes complications: diabetic neuropathy, diabetic nephropathy, 
macrovascular complications, and ophthalmic complications.
RESULTS: The analysis revealed ten novel associations showing genome-wide 
significance, including rs1132787 (GYPA, OR = 2.71; 95% CI = 2.02-3.64) and 
diabetic neuropathy, rs2477088 (PDE4DIP, OR = 2.50; 95% CI = 1.87-3.34), 
rs4852954 (NAT8, OR = 2.27; 95% CI = 2.71-3.01), rs6032 (F5, OR = 2.12; 95% 
CI = 1.63-2.77), rs6935464 (RPS6KA2, OR = 2.25; 95% CI = 6.69-3.01) and 
macrovascular complications, rs3095447 (CCDC146, OR = 2.18; 95% CI = 1.66-2.87) 
and ophthalmic complications. By applying the targeted approach of previously 
reported susceptibility loci we managed to replicate three associations: MAPK14 
(rs3761980, rs80028505) and diabetic neuropathy, APOL1 (rs136161) and diabetic 
nephropathy.
CONCLUSIONS: Together these results provide further evidence for the implication 
of genetic factors in the development of type 2 diabetes complications and 
highlight several potential key loci, able to modify the risk of developing 
these conditions. Moreover, the candidate variant approach proves a strong and 
consistent effect for multiple variants across different populations.

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-020-00860-4
PMCID: PMC7802349
PMID: 33430853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.