1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jan 7;22(2):519. doi: 10.3390/ijms22020519.

Inhibition of Stress-Induced Viral Promoters by a Bovine Herpesvirus 1 
Non-Coding RNA and the Cellular Transcription Factor, β-Catenin.

Zhao J(1), Wijesekera N(1), Jones C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078, USA.

The ability to establish, maintain, and reactivate from latency in sensory 
neurons within trigeminal ganglia (TG) is crucial for bovine herpesvirus 1 
(BoHV-1) transmission. In contrast to lytic infection, the only viral gene 
abundantly expressed during latency is the latency-related (LR) gene. The 
synthetic corticosteroid dexamethasone consistently induces reactivation from 
latency, in part because the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) transactivates viral 
promoters that drive expression of key viral transcriptional regulator proteins 
(bICP0 and bICP4). Within hours after dexamethasone treatment of latently 
infected calves, LR gene products and β-catenin are not readily detected in TG 
neurons. Hence, we hypothesized that LR gene products and/or β-catenin restrict 
GR-mediated transcriptional activation. A plasmid expressing LR RNA sequences 
that span open reading frame 2 (ORF2-Stop) inhibited GR-mediated transactivation 
of the BoHV-1 immediate early transcription unit 1 (IEtu1) and mouse mammary 
tumor virus (MMTV) promoter activity in mouse neuroblastoma cells (Neuro-2A). 
ORF2-Stop also reduced productive infection and GR steady-state protein levels 
in transfected Neuro-2A cells. Additional studies revealed that the 
constitutively active β-catenin mutant reduced the transactivation of the IEtu1 
promoter by GR and dexamethasone. Collectively, these studies suggest ORF2 RNA 
sequences and Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway actively promote maintenance of 
latency, in part, by impairing GR-mediated gene expression.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22020519
PMCID: PMC7825607
PMID: 33430186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.