1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Jan 9;13(2):221. doi: 10.3390/cancers13020221.

Current Melanoma Treatments: Where Do We Stand?

Moreira A(1)(2), Heinzerling L(3), Bhardwaj N(1)(2), Friedlander P(1).

Author information:
(1)The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)The Kimberly and Eric J. Waldman Department of Dermatology at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY 10029, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Ludwig-Maximilian University, 
Geschwister-Scholl-Platz 1, 80539 MÃ¼nchen, Germany.

Groundbreaking research in immunology and cancer biology in the last few decades 
has led to the discovery and development of novel therapeutics, such as immune 
checkpoint inhibitors and targeted therapies, which have revolutionized the 
clinical care of patients with metastatic melanoma. Updated data from the 
largest clinical trials continue to support the use of these treatment 
modalities, both in the metastatic and in adjuvant settings, with studies 
showing the predicted plateau effect on survival curves. However, with growing 
evidence that neoadjuvant therapy is also associated with high rates of 
recurrence-free survival, the question about whether patients should receive 
adjuvant or neoadjuvant treatment raises new questions about therapeutic 
options. Finally, management after resistance and intervention with novel 
immunotherapies are newer challenges, particularly in the field of non-cutaneous 
melanoma.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13020221
PMCID: PMC7827568
PMID: 33435389

Conflict of interest statement: A.M. has received speaker or consultant fees 
from AbbVie, Almirall, Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb, Pfizer, and Roche, 
outside of the submitted work. A.M. is employed by Novartis. The work described 
in this publication was completed prior to his employment at Novartis; L.H. 
receives consultancy, speaker fees, travel grants or research funding from 
Bristol Myers Squibb, MSD, Merck, Roche, Amgen, CureVac, Novartis, Sanofi and 
Pierre Fabre. L.H. serves as an investigator for trials sponsored by clinical 
studies: BMS, MSD, Merck, Roche, Amgen, GSK, Curevac and Novartis; P.F. receives 
consultancy fees from Aspyrian Therapeutics and has served on the advisory 
boards of Castle Biosciences, Sanofi, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Array 
Biopharma, and has stock ownership in Gilead, Clovis, Iovance, and Adverum 
Therapeutics; N.B. receives research support or reagents from Roche, Avidea, 
Genentech, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Dragonfly Therapeutics. N.B. receives 
grant support from the NIH, the NCI, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, 
Melanoma Research Alliance, Leukemia & Lymphoma Society, The Pershing Square 
Foundation, and the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy. NB serves on 
advisory boards for the Roswell Park Cancer Center, Rome Therapeutics, BreakBio, 
Carisma Therapeutisc and CureVac.