1. FEBS Open Bio. 2021 Mar;11(3):813-825. doi: 10.1002/2211-5463.13084. Epub 2021
 Feb 22.

Preclinical efficacy and toxicity studies of a highly specific chimeric 
anti-CD47 antibody.

Xu Z(1)(2), Gao J(2), Yao J(2), Yang T(2), Wang D(3), Dai C(3), Ding Y(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Biologics Discovery, Shanghai ChemPartner Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China.
(3)Biologics Discovery, Shanghai Hyamab Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China.

Cluster of differentiation 47 (CD47) is a widely expressed self-protection 
transmembrane protein that functions as a critical negative regulator to induce 
macrophage-mediated phagocytosis. Overexpression of CD47 enables cancer cells to 
escape immune surveillance and destruction by phagocytes both in solid tumours 
and leukaemia. The usefulness of anti-CD47 antibody has been demonstrated in 
multiple immunotherapies associated with macrophages. However, antigen sinks and 
toxicity induced by inadvertent binding to normal cells restrict its clinical 
applications. Here, a novel anti-human CD47 antibody, 4D10, was generated, and 
its variable regions were grafted onto a human IgG4 scaffold. Compared with the 
anti-CD47 antibody Hu5F9, the resulting chimeric antibody (c4D10) has 
consistently demonstrated good tolerance in in vitro and in vivo toxicity 
studies. Additionally, c4D10 showed effective therapeutic potential through 
inducing the eradication of human cancer cells. Thus, c4D10 is a promising 
candidate therapeutic antibody with higher efficacy and reduced side effects 
compared to earlier antibodies, and its use may reduce the dose-limiting 
toxicity of CD47 antagonists for immunotherapy.

© 2021 The Authors. FEBS Open Bio published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/2211-5463.13084
PMCID: PMC7931223
PMID: 33449453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial 
competing interests: ZX, JG, JY and TY are or were full‐time employees of 
ChemPartner. DW and CD are full‐time employees of Hyamab. Patents pertaining to 
the results presented in the paper have been filed under the Patent Cooperation 
Treaty (International Publication Number PCT/CN2019/122777). YD declares no 
conflict of interests.