1. Turk J Chem. 2020 Oct 26;44(5):1227-1243. doi: 10.3906/kim-2002-49.
eCollection  2020.

Water management improvement in PEM fuel cells via addition of PDMS or APTES 
polymers to the catalyst layer.

Ungan H(1), BayrakÇeken Yurtcan A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Engineering, Department of Chemical Engineering, Atatürk 
University, Erzurum Turkey.
(2)Graduate School of Science, Department of Nanoscience and Nanoengineering, 
Atatürk University, Erzurum Turkey.

Water management is one of the obstacles in the development and 
commercialization of proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). Sufficient 
humidification of the membrane directly affects the PEM fuel cell performance. 
Therefore, 2 different hydrophobic polymers, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and 
(3-Aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES), were tested at different percentages 
(5, 10, and 20 wt.%) in the catalyst layer. The solution was loaded onto the 
surface of a 25 BC gas diffusion layer (GDL) via the spraying method. The 
performance of the obtained fuel cells was compared with the performance of the 
commercial catalyst. Characterizations of each surface, including different 
amounts of PDMS and APTES, were performed via scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 
and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analyses. Molecular bond 
characterization was examined via Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) 
analysis and surface hydrophobicity was measured via contact angle measurements. 
The performance of the fuel cells was evaluated at the PEM fuel cell test 
station and the 2 hydrophobic polymers were compared. Surfaces containing APTES 
were found to be more hydrophobic. Fuel cells with PDMS performed better when 
compared to those with APTES. Fuel cells with 5wt.% APTES with a current density 
of 321.31 mA/cm 2 and power density of 0.191 W/cm 2 , and 10wt.% PDMS with a 
current density of 344.52 mA/cm 2 and power density of 0.205 W/cm 2 were the 
best performing fuel cells at 0.6V.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.3906/kim-2002-49
PMCID: PMC7751925
PMID: 33488224

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: none declared