1. Bosn J Basic Med Sci. 2021 Aug 1;21(4):495-500. doi: 10.17305/bjbms.2020.5288.

A novel homozygous exon2 deletion of TRIM32 gene in a Chinese patient with 
sarcotubular myopathy: A case report and literature review.

Wei XJ(1), Miao J(1), Kang ZX(2), Gao YL(3), Wang ZY(1), Yu XF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience Center, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Jilin University, Jilin, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Municipal People's Hospital of Yan'an, Yan'an, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical 
University, Binzhou, China.

Sarcotubular myopathy (STM) is a rare autosomal recessive myopathy caused by 
TRIM32 gene mutations. It is predominantly characterized by the weakness of the 
proximal limb and mild to moderate elevation of creatine kinase (CK) levels. In 
this study, we describe a 50-year-old Chinese man who exhibited a 
proximal-to-distal weakness in the muscles of the lower limbs and who had 
difficulty standing up from a squat position. The symptoms gradually became more 
severe. He denied a history of cognitive or cardiological problems. The 
patient's parents and children were healthy. Histopathological examination 
revealed dystrophic changes and irregular slit-shaped vacuoles containing 
amorphous materials. Whole-exome sequencing consisting of protein-encoding 
regions of 19,396 genes was performed, the results of which identified one novel 
homozygous 2kb deletion chr9.hg19: g.119460021_119461983del (exon2) in the 
TRIM32 gene. This was confirmed at the homozygous state with quantitative 
real-time PCR. Here, we present a Chinese case of STM with one novel mutation in 
TRIM32 and provide a brief summary of all known pathogenic mutations in TRIM32.

DOI: 10.17305/bjbms.2020.5288
PMCID: PMC8292861
PMID: 33485293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declare no conflict of interests.