1. R Soc Open Sci. 2020 Dec 1;7(12):201912. doi: 10.1098/rsos.201912. eCollection
 2020 Dec.

Vitamin D and COVID-19: evidence and recommendations for supplementation.

Griffin G(1), Hewison M(2), Hopkin J(3), Kenny R(4), Quinton R(5), Rhodes J(6), 
Subramanian S(7), Thickett D(8).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases and Medicine, St George's University of London, London, 
UK.
(2)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(3)Medical School, Swansea University, Swansea, West Glamorgan, UK.
(4)Medical Gerontology, Trinity College Dublin School of Medicine, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(5)Endocrinology, Newcastle University Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, UK.
(6)Institute of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(7)Gastroenterology, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool, UK.
(8)Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, University of Birmingham College of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, Birmingham, UK.

Vitamin D is a hormone that acts on many genes expressed by immune cells. 
Evidence linking vitamin D deficiency with COVID-19 severity is circumstantial 
but considerable-links with ethnicity, obesity, institutionalization; latitude 
and ultraviolet exposure; increased lung damage in experimental models; 
associations with COVID-19 severity in hospitalized patients. Vitamin D 
deficiency is common but readily preventable by supplementation that is very 
safe and cheap. A target blood level of at least 50 nmol l-1, as indicated by 
the US National Academy of Medicine and by the European Food Safety Authority, 
is supported by evidence. This would require supplementation with 800 IU/day 
(not 400 IU/day as currently recommended in UK) to bring most people up to 
target. Randomized placebo-controlled trials of vitamin D in the community are 
unlikely to complete until spring 2021-although we note the positive results 
from Spain of a randomized trial of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 (25(OH)D3 or 
calcifediol) in hospitalized patients. We urge UK and other governments to 
recommend vitamin D supplementation at 800-1000 IU/day for all, making it clear 
that this is to help optimize immune health and not solely for bone and muscle 
health. This should be mandated for prescription in care homes, prisons and 
other institutions where people are likely to have been indoors for much of the 
summer. Adults likely to be deficient should consider taking a higher dose, e.g. 
4000 IU/day for the first four weeks before reducing to 800 IU-1000 IU/day. 
People admitted to the hospital with COVID-19 should have their vitamin D status 
checked and/or supplemented and consideration should be given to testing 
high-dose calcifediol in the RECOVERY trial. We feel this should be pursued with 
great urgency. Vitamin D levels in the UK will be falling from October onwards 
as we head into winter. There seems nothing to lose and potentially much to 
gain.

Â© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rsos.201912
PMCID: PMC7813231
PMID: 33489300

Conflict of interest statement: M.H. and D.T. have received speaking honoraria 
from Thornton Ross. No other competing interests.