1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Jan 20;11(2):251. doi: 10.3390/ani11020251.

Convergent Evolution of Himalayan Marmot with Some High-Altitude Animals through 
ND3 Protein.

Bao Z(1), Li C(1), Guo C(1), Xiang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Science and Technology, Central South University of Forestry 
and Technology, Changsha 410004, China.

The Himalayan marmot (Marmota himalayana) mainly lives on the Qinghai-Tibet 
Plateau and it adopts multiple strategies to adapt to high-altitude 
environments. According to the principle of convergent evolution as expressed in 
genes and traits, the Himalayan marmot might display similar changes to other 
local species at the molecular level. In this study, we obtained high-quality 
sequences of the CYTB gene, CYTB protein, ND3 gene, and ND3 protein of 
representative species (n = 20) from NCBI, and divided them into the marmot 
group (n = 11), the plateau group (n = 8), and the Himalayan marmot (n = 1). To 
explore whether plateau species have convergent evolution on the microscale 
level, we built a phylogenetic tree, calculated genetic distance, and analyzed 
the conservation and space structure of Himalayan marmot ND3 protein. The marmot 
group and Himalayan marmots were in the same branch of the phylogenetic tree for 
the CYTB gene and CYTB protein, and mean genetic distance was 0.106 and 0.055, 
respectively, which was significantly lower than the plateau group. However, the 
plateau group and the Himalayan marmot were in the same branch of the 
phylogenetic tree, and the genetic distance was only 10% of the marmot group for 
the ND3 protein, except Marmota flaviventris. In addition, some sites of the ND3 
amino acid sequence of Himalayan marmots were conserved from the plateau group, 
but not the marmot group. This could lead to different structures and functional 
diversifications. These findings indicate that Himalayan marmots have adapted to 
the plateau environment partly through convergent evolution of the ND3 protein 
with other plateau animals, however, this protein is not the only strategy to 
adapt to high altitudes, as there may have other methods to adapt to this 
environment.

DOI: 10.3390/ani11020251
PMCID: PMC7909448
PMID: 33498455

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.