1. PeerJ. 2021 Jan 6;9:e10506. doi: 10.7717/peerj.10506. eCollection 2021.

Biochemical characterization and inhibition of thermolabile hemolysin from 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus by phenolic compounds.

Vazquez-Morado LE(1)(2), Robles-Zepeda RE(1), Ochoa-Leyva A(2), Arvizu-Flores 
AA(1), Garibay-Escobar A(1), Castillo-Yañez F(1), Lopez-Zavala AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Quimico Biologicas, Universidad de Sonora, 
Hermosillo, Sonora, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.

Vibrio parahaemolyticus (Vp), a typical microorganism inhabiting marine 
ecosystems, uses pathogenic virulence molecules such as hemolysins to cause 
bacterial infections of both human and marine animals. The thermolabile 
hemolysin VpTLH lyses human erythrocytes by a phospholipase B/A2 enzymatic 
activity in egg-yolk lecithin. However, few studies have been characterized the 
biochemical properties and the use of VpTLH as a molecular target for natural 
compounds as an alternative to control Vp infection. Here, we evaluated the 
biochemical and inhibition parameters of the recombinant VpTLH using enzymatic 
and hemolytic assays and determined the molecular interactions by in silico 
docking analysis. The highest enzymatic activity was at pH 8 and 50 °C, and it 
was inactivated by 20 min at 60 °C with Tm = 50.9 °C. Additionally, the 
flavonoids quercetin, epigallocatechin gallate, and morin inhibited the VpTLH 
activity with IC50 values of 4.5 µM, 6.3 µM, and 9.9 µM, respectively; while 
phenolics acids were not effective inhibitors for this enzyme. Boltzmann and 
Arrhenius equation analysis indicate that VpTLH is a thermolabile enzyme. The 
inhibition of both enzymatic and hemolytic activities by flavonoids agrees with 
molecular docking, suggesting that flavonoids could interact with the active 
site's amino acids. Future research is necessary to evaluate the antibacterial 
activity of flavonoids against Vp in vivo.

©2021 Vazquez-Morado et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.10506
PMCID: PMC7796666
PMID: 33505784

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.