1. J Mol Endocrinol. 2021 Mar;66(3):181-194. doi: 10.1530/JME-20-0160.

Differential activity and expression of human 5β-reductase (AKR1D1) splice 
variants.

Appanna N(1), Gibson H(2), Gangitano E(1)(3), Dempster NJ(1), Morris K(4), 
George S(4), Arvaniti A(1)(5), Gathercole LL(1)(5), Keevil B(4), Penning TM(6), 
Storbeck KH(2), Tomlinson JW(1), Nikolaou N(1).

Author information:
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, NIHR Oxford 
Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, 
Oxfordshire, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, Western 
Cape, South Africa.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, 
Lazio, Italy.
(4)Biochemistry Department, Manchester University NHS Trust, Manchester Academic 
Health Science Centre, Manchester, Greater Manchester, UK.
(5)Department of Biological and Medical Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, 
Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK.
(6)Center of Excellence in Environmental Toxicology and Department of Systems 
Pharmacology & Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Steroid hormones, including glucocorticoids and androgens, exert a wide variety 
of effects in the body across almost all tissues. The steroid A-ring 
5β-reductase (AKR1D1) is expressed in human liver and testes, and three splice 
variants have been identified (AKR1D1-001, AKR1D1-002, AKR1D1-006). Amongst 
these, AKR1D1-002 is the best described; it modulates steroid hormone 
availability and catalyses an important step in bile acid biosynthesis. However, 
specific activity and expression of AKR1D1-001 and AKR1D1-006 are unknown. 
Expression of AKR1D1 variants were measured in human liver biopsies and hepatoma 
cell lines by qPCR. Their three-dimensional (3D) structures were predicted using 
in silico approaches. AKR1D1 variants were overexpressed in HEK293 cells, and 
successful overexpression confirmed by qPCR and Western blotting. Cells were 
treated with either cortisol, dexamethasone, prednisolone, testosterone or 
androstenedione, and steroid hormone clearance was measured by mass 
spectrometry. Glucocorticoid and androgen receptor activation were determined by 
luciferase reporter assays. AKR1D1-002 and AKR1D1-001 are expressed in human 
liver, and only AKR1D1-006 is expressed in human testes. Following 
overexpression, AKR1D1-001 and AKR1D1-006 protein levels were lower than 
AKR1D1-002, but significantly increased following treatment with the proteasomal 
inhibitor, MG-132. AKR1D1-002 efficiently metabolised glucocorticoids and 
androgens and decreased receptor activation. AKR1D1-001 and AKR1D1-006 poorly 
metabolised dexamethasone, but neither protein metabolised cortisol, 
prednisolone, testosterone or androstenedione. We have demonstrated the 
differential expression and role of AKR1D1 variants in steroid hormone clearance 
and receptor activation in vitro. AKR1D1-002 is the predominant functional 
protein in steroidogenic and metabolic tissues. In addition, AKR1D1-001 and 
AKR1D1-006 may have a limited, steroid-specific role in the regulation of 
dexamethasone action.

DOI: 10.1530/JME-20-0160
PMCID: PMC7965358
PMID: 33502336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]