1. J Mol Struct. 2021 May 5;1231:129953. doi: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.129953.
Epub  2021 Jan 19.

Probing CAS database as prospective antiviral agents against SARS-CoV-2 main 
protease.

Zia K(1), Khan SA(1), Ashraf S(1), Nur-E-Alam M(2), Ahmed S(2), Ul-Haq Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Research, International 
Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences, University of Karachi, Karachi 
75270, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, P.O. 
Box. 2457, Riyadh 11451, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

The pandemic of COVID-19 has an unprecedented impact on global health and 
economy. The novel SARS-CoV-2 is recognized as the etiological agent of current 
outbreak. Because of its contagious human-to-human transmission, it is an utmost 
global health emergency at present. To mitigate this threat many scientists and 
researchers are racing to develop antiviral therapy against the virus. 
Unfortunately, to date no vaccine or antiviral therapeutic is approved thus 
there is an urgent need to discover antiviral agent to help the individual who 
are at high risk. Virus main protease or chymotrypsin-like protease plays a 
pivotal role in virus replication and transcription; thus, it is considered as 
an attractive drug target to combat the COVID-19. In this study, multistep 
structure based virtual screening of CAS antiviral database is performed for the 
identification of potent and effective small molecule inhibitors against 
chymotrypsin-like protease of SARS-CoV-2. Consensus scoring strategy combine 
with flexible docking is used to extract potential hits. As a result of 
extensive virtual screening, 4 hits were shortlisted for MD simulation to study 
their stability and dynamic behavior. Insight binding modes demonstrated that 
the selected hits stabilized inside the binding pocket of the target protein and 
exhibit complementarity with the active site residues. Our study provides 
compounds for further in vitro and in vivo studies against SARS-CoV-2.

Â© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.129953
PMCID: PMC7817485
PMID: 33500591

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.