1. Polymers (Basel). 2021 Jan 27;13(3):399. doi: 10.3390/polym13030399.

Fused Filament Deposition of PLA: The Role of Interlayer Adhesion in the 
Mechanical Performances.

Liparoti S(1), Sofia D(1), Romano A(1), Marra F(1), Pantani R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Salerno, Via Giovanni 
Paolo II, 132, 84084 Fiscian, SA, Italy.

A set of criteria to enhance mechanical performances of standard specimens (Type 
V, ANSI D368) made of polylactic acid (PLA) were proposed. Fused PLA deposition 
was conducted with nozzle temperature ranging from 180 to 230 °C and deposition 
plate temperature ranging from 70 to 110 °C. Optical microscopy, elastic modulus 
analysis and density measurement allowed emphasizing the effect of temperature 
field, also measured during the process, on the morphology and the mechanical 
characteristics of the specimen. Atomic force microscopy revealed a morphology 
typical of amorphous samples with globular structures. Poor interlayer adhesion 
was detected in the part of the specimen located at larger distance from the 
deposition plate, showing an elastic modulus lower than those measured in the 
central part (220 MPa vs. 500 MPa). The specimen crystallinity degree was below 
3%. The molecular weight between entanglements was adopted as a measure of the 
interlayer molecular diffusion. A successful diffusion and re-entanglement of 
the polymer melt at the interface was the key to improving mechanical 
performance. A mathematical model describing the transient heat transfer during 
the fused PLA deposition and accounting for solidification and the nonisothermal 
crystallization kinetics was introduced. Simulated temperature evolutions were 
consistent with the experimental ones. They were related to the mechanical 
performances, the morphology, and the molecular weight between entanglements of 
the parts.

DOI: 10.3390/polym13030399
PMCID: PMC7865617
PMID: 33513767

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.