1. PLoS One. 2021 Feb 2;16(2):e0242890. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0242890. 
eCollection 2021.

High-level expression of the monomeric SARS-CoV-2 S protein RBD 320-537 in 
stably transfected CHO cells by the EEF1A1-based plasmid vector.

Sinegubova MV(1), Orlova NA(1), Kovnir SV(1), Dayanova LK(2), Vorobiev II(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Bioengineering, Institute of Bioengineering, 
Research Center of Biotechnology of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
Russia.
(2)Laboratory of Glycoproteins Biotechnology, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.

The spike (S) protein is one of the three proteins forming the coronaviruses' 
viral envelope. The S protein of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 
Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has a spatial structure similar to the S proteins of 
other mammalian coronaviruses, except for a unique receptor-binding domain 
(RBD), which is a significant inducer of host immune response. Recombinant 
SARS-CoV-2 RBD is widely used as a highly specific minimal antigen for 
serological tests. Correct exposure of antigenic determinants has a significant 
impact on the accuracy of such tests-the antigen has to be correctly folded, 
contain no potentially antigenic non-vertebrate glycans, and, preferably, should 
have a glycosylation pattern similar to the native S protein. Based on the 
previously developed p1.1 vector, containing the regulatory sequences of the 
Eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1 alpha gene (EEF1A1) from Chinese 
hamster, we created two expression constructs encoding SARS-CoV-2 RBD with 
C-terminal c-myc and polyhistidine tags. RBDv1 contained a native viral signal 
peptide, RBDv2 -human tPA signal peptide. We transfected a CHO DG44 cell line, 
selected stably transfected cells, and performed a few rounds of 
methotrexate-driven amplification of the genetic cassette in the genome. For the 
RBDv2 variant, a high-yield clonal producer cell line was obtained. We developed 
a simple purification scheme that consistently yielded up to 30 mg of RBD 
protein per liter of the simple shake flask cell culture. Purified proteins were 
analyzed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in reducing and non-reducing 
conditions and gel filtration; for RBDv2 protein, the monomeric form content 
exceeded 90% for several series. Deglycosylation with PNGase F and mass 
spectrometry confirmed the presence of N-glycosylation. The antigen produced by 
the described technique is suitable for serological tests and subunit vaccine 
studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0242890
PMCID: PMC7853477
PMID: 33529230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MVS and LKD declare that they have no competing 
interests. SVK, NAO and IIV are inventors of the patent RU2488633, which covers 
the use of the p1.1 plasmid; a derivative of this plasmid is used in current 
research. The existence of the patent does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials.