1. BMC Cancer. 2021 Feb 4;21(1):114. doi: 10.1186/s12885-021-07814-8.

Targeted RNAseq assay incorporating unique molecular identifiers for improved 
quantification of gene expression signatures and transcribed mutation fraction 
in fixed tumor samples.

Fu C(1), Marczyk M(2)(3), Samuels M(4), Trevarton AJ(1), Qu J(5), Lau R(1), Du 
L(1), Pappas T(5), Sinn BV(6), Gould RE(1), Pusztai L(2), Hatzis C(2), Symmans 
WF(7).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pathology and Translational Molecular Pathology, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Yale Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Data Science and Engineering, Silesian University of 
Technology, Gliwice, Poland.
(4)The Jackson Laboratory, Farmington, CT, USA.
(5)Delphi Diagnostics, Austin, TX, USA.
(6)Institute of Pathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Departments of Pathology and Translational Molecular Pathology, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. 
fsymmans@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: Our objective was to assess whether modifications to a customized 
targeted RNA sequencing (RNAseq) assay to include unique molecular identifiers 
(UMIs) that collapse read counts to their source mRNA counts would improve 
quantification of transcripts from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor 
tissue samples. The assay (SET4) includes signatures that measure hormone 
receptor and PI3-kinase related transcriptional activity (SETER/PR and PI3Kges), 
and measures expression of selected activating point mutations and key breast 
cancer genes.
METHODS: Modifications included steps to introduce eight nucleotides-long UMIs 
during reverse transcription (RT) in bulk solution, followed by polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) of labeled cDNA in droplets, with optimization of the polymerase 
enzyme and reaction conditions. We used Lin's concordance correlation 
coefficient (CCC) to measure concordance, including precision (Rho) and accuracy 
(Bias), and nonparametric tests (Wilcoxon, Levene's) to compare the modified 
(NEW) SET4 assay to the original (OLD) SET4 assay and to whole transcriptome 
RNAseq using RNA from matched fresh frozen (FF) and FFPE samples from 12 primary 
breast cancers.
RESULTS: The modified (NEW) SET4 assay measured single transcripts (p< 0.001) 
and SETER/PR (p=0.002) more reproducibly in technical replicates from FFPE 
samples. The modified SET4 assay was more precise for measuring single 
transcripts (Rho 0.966 vs 0.888, p< 0.01) but not multigene expression 
signatures SETER/PR (Rho 0.985 vs 0.968) or PI3Kges (Rho 0.985 vs 0.946) in 
FFPE, compared to FF samples. It was also more precise than wtRNAseq of FFPE for 
measuring transcripts (Rho 0.986 vs 0.934, p< 0.001) and SETER/PR (Rho 0.993 vs 
0.915, p=0.004), but not PI3Kges (Rho 0.988 vs 0.945, p=0.051). Accuracy (Bias) 
was comparable between protocols. Two samples carried a PIK3CA mutation, and 
measurements of transcribed mutant allele fraction was similar in FF and FFPE 
samples and appeared more precise with the modified SET4 assay. Amplification 
efficiency (reads per UMI) was consistent in FF and FFPE samples, and close to 
the theoretically expected value, when the library size exceeded 400,000 aligned 
reads.
CONCLUSIONS: Modifications to the targeted RNAseq protocol for SET4 assay 
significantly increased the precision of UMI-based and reads-based measurements 
of individual transcripts, multi-gene signatures, and mutant transcript 
fraction, particularly with FFPE samples.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-021-07814-8
PMCID: PMC7860187
PMID: 33541297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures related to this study: WFS, BVS, CH, 
CF and RL are co-inventors on patent WO2017189976A1 “Targeted measure of 
transcriptional activity related to hormone receptors”. WFS, CF and RL own 
shares of Delphi Diagnostics, without employment or administrative position. 
Disclosures unrelated to this study: WFS owns shares of IONIS Pharmaceuticals. 
TP is a paid consultant and owns shares in Delphi Diagnostics. CH is currently 
an employee of Bristol-Myers Squibb. LP has received consulting fees and 
honoraria from Astra Zeneca, Merck, Novartis, Genentech, Eisai, Pieris, 
Immunomedics, Seattle Genetics, Almac, Biotheranostics and Syndax.