1. Sci Rep. 2021 Feb 5;11(1):3239. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-82649-8.

Targeting barrel field spiny stellate cells using a vesicular monoaminergic 
transporter 2-Cre mouse line.

Freitag FB(1), Ahemaiti A(#)(1), Weman HM(#)(1), Ambroz K(1), Lagerstr√∂m MC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala University, 751 24, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala University, 751 24, Uppsala, Sweden. 
Malin.Lagerstrom@neuro.uu.se.
(#)Contributed equally

Rodent primary somatosensory cortex (S1) is organized in defined layers, where 
layer IV serves as the main target for thalamocortical projections. 
Serotoninergic signaling is important for the organization of thalamocortical 
projections and consequently proper barrel field development in rodents, and the 
vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) can be detected locally in layer IV S1 
cortical neurons in mice as old as P10, but the identity of the Vmat2-expressing 
neurons is unknown. We here show that Vmat2 mRNA and also Vmat2-Cre recombinase 
are still expressed in adult mice in a sub-population of the S1 cortical neurons 
in the barrel field. The Vmat2-Cre cells showed a homogenous intrinsically 
bursting firing pattern determined by whole-cell patch-clamp, localized radial 
densely spinous basal dendritic trees and almost exclusively lack of apical 
dendrite, indicative of layer IV spiny stellate cells. Single cell mRNA 
sequencing analysis showed that S1 cortical Vmat2-Cre;tdTomato cells express the 
layer IV marker Rorb and mainly cluster with layer IV neurons, and RNAscope 
analysis revealed that adult Vmat2-Cre neurons express Vmat2 and vesicular 
glutamate transporter 1 (Vglut1) and Vglut2 mRNA to a high extent. In 
conclusion, our analysis shows that cortical Vmat2 expression is mainly confined 
to layer IV neurons with morphological, electrophysiological and transcriptional 
characteristics indicative of spiny stellate cells.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82649-8
PMCID: PMC7864935
PMID: 33547358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.