1. Front Physiol. 2021 Jan 20;11:609103. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.609103. 
eCollection 2020.

A Proposed Concept for Defective Mitophagy Leading to Late Stage Ineffective 
Erythropoiesis in Pyruvate Kinase Deficiency.

van Vuren AJ(1), van Beers EJ(1), van Wijk R(2).

Author information:
(1)Van Creveldkliniek, Division of Internal Medicine and Dermatology, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(2)Central Diagnostic Laboratory-Research, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Pyruvate kinase deficiency (PKD) is a rare congenital hemolytic anemia caused by 
mutations in the PKLR gene. Here, we review pathophysiological aspects of PKD, 
focusing on the interplay between pyruvate kinase (PK)-activity and reticulocyte 
maturation in the light of ferroptosis, an iron-dependent process of regulated 
cell death, and in particular its key player glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4). 
GPX4 plays an important role in mitophagy, the key step of peripheral 
reticulocyte maturation and GPX4 deficiency in reticulocytes results in a 
failure to fully mature. Mitophagy depends on lipid oxidation, which is under 
physiological conditions controlled by GPX4. Lack of GPX4 leads to uncontrolled 
auto-oxidation, which will disrupt autophagosome maturation and thereby perturb 
mitophagy. Based on our review, we propose a model for disturbed red cell 
maturation in PKD. A relative GPX4 deficiency occurs due to glutathione (GSH) 
depletion, as cytosolic L-glutamine is preferentially used in the form of 
α-ketoglutarate as fuel for the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle at the expense of 
GSH production. The relative GPX4 deficiency will perturb mitophagy and, 
subsequently, results in failure of reticulocyte maturation, which can be 
defined as late stage ineffective erythropoiesis. Our hypothesis provides a 
starting point for future research into new therapeutic possibilities, which 
have the ability to correct the oxidative imbalance due to lack of GPX4.

Copyright © 2021 van Vuren, van Beers and van Wijk.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.609103
PMCID: PMC7854701
PMID: 33551834

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.