1. Neurosci Lett. 2021 Mar 23;748:135677. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.135677. Epub
 2021 Feb 9.

Association study of Catechol-o-methyltransferase and Alpha-1-adrenergic 
receptor gene polymorphisms with multiple phenotypes of heroin use disorder.

Deji C(1), Li Y(2), Chen Y(1), Lai J(1), Wei S(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Forensic Science, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Shaanxi 710061, 
China.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Shanxi University of Chinese Medicine, Shaanxi 712046, 
China.
(3)College of Forensic Science, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Shaanxi 710061, 
China; Key Laboratory of Shaanxi Province for Forensic Science, China. 
Electronic address: weisg9676@163.com.

Heroin use disorder is a chronic relapsing brain disease containing multiple 
phenotypes. These phenotypes vary among heroin users and might be influenced by 
genetic factors. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and alpha-1-adrenergic receptor (ADRA1A) 
genes are associated with heroin use disorder. However, it has not been 
clarified which phenotypes of heroin use disorder are related to these genes. To 
address this question, we recruited 801 unrelated heroin users and divided them 
into different subgroups according to four important phenotypes of heroin use 
disorder. Then 7 SNPs in the functional region of these genes were 
systematically screened and genotyped using a SNaPshot assay. We found that the 
A allele of ADRA1A rs1048101 was associated with a shorter duration of 
transition from first use to addiction. Subjects with the C allele of ADRA1A 
rs3808585 were more susceptible to memory impairment after heroin use disorder. 
Subjects with the G allele of COMT rs769224 were more likely to take a higher 
dose of heroin every day. Our study confirmed the association between 
polymorphisms of COMT and ADRA1A with those specific phenotypes of heroin use 
disorder, which will be instructive for the precise treatment of the disease.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.135677
PMID: 33577997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]