1. World J Hepatol. 2021 Jan 27;13(1):6-65. doi: 10.4254/wjh.v13.i1.6.

Autophagy in liver diseases.

Kouroumalis E(1), Voumvouraki A(2), Augoustaki A(3), Samonakis DN(4).

Author information:
(1)Liver Research Laboratory, University of Crete Medical School, Heraklion 
71110, Greece.
(2)1 Department of Internal Medicine, AHEPA University Hospital, Thessaloniki 
54636, Greece.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital of Crete, 
Heraklion 71110, Greece.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital of Crete, 
Heraklion 71110, Greece. dsamonakis@gmail.com.

Autophagy is the liver cell energy recycling system regulating a variety of 
homeostatic mechanisms. Damaged organelles, lipids and proteins are degraded in 
the lysosomes and their elements are re-used by the cell. Investigations on 
autophagy have led to the award of two Nobel Prizes and a health of important 
reports. In this review we describe the fundamental functions of autophagy in 
the liver including new data on the regulation of autophagy. Moreover we 
emphasize the fact that autophagy acts like a two edge sword in many occasions 
with the most prominent paradigm being its involvement in the initiation and 
progress of hepatocellular carcinoma. We also focused to the implication of 
autophagy and its specialized forms of lipophagy and mitophagy in the 
pathogenesis of various liver diseases. We analyzed autophagy not only in well 
studied diseases, like alcoholic and nonalcoholic fatty liver and liver fibrosis 
but also in viral hepatitis, biliary diseases, autoimmune hepatitis and rare 
diseases including inherited metabolic diseases and also acetaminophene 
hepatotoxicity. We also stressed the different consequences that activation or 
impairment of autophagy may have in hepatocytes as opposed to Kupffer cells, 
sinusoidal endothelial cells or hepatic stellate cells. Finally, we analyzed the 
limited clinical data compared to the extensive experimental evidence and the 
possible future therapeutic interventions based on autophagy manipulation.

Â©The Author(s) 2020. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.4254/wjh.v13.i1.6
PMCID: PMC7856864
PMID: 33584986

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest relevant to this article and no 
financial support.