1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Jan 21;8:605120. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.605120. 
eCollection 2020.

From the Basis of Epimorphic Regeneration to Enhanced Regenerative Therapies.

Laplace-Builhé B(1), Bahraoui S(1), Jorgensen C(1)(2), Djouad F(1).

Author information:
(1)IRMB, Univ Montpellier, INSERM, Montpellier, France.
(2)CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Current cell-based therapies to treat degenerative diseases such as 
osteoarthritis (OA) fail to offer long-term beneficial effects. The therapeutic 
effects provided by mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) injection, characterized by 
reduced pain and an improved functional activity in patients with knee OA, are 
reported at short-term follow-up since the improved outcomes plateau or, even 
worse, decline several months after MSC administration. This review tackles the 
limitations of MSC-based therapy for degenerative diseases and highlights the 
lessons learned from regenerative species to comprehend the coordination of 
molecular and cellular events critical for complex regeneration processes. We 
discuss how MSC injection generates a positive cascade of events resulting in a 
long-lasting systemic immune regulation with limited beneficial effects on 
tissue regeneration while in regenerative species fine-tuned inflammation is 
required for progenitor cell proliferation, differentiation, and regeneration. 
Finally, we stress the direct or indirect involvement of neural crest derived 
cells (NCC) in most if not all adult regenerative models studied so far. This 
review underlines the regenerative potential of NCC and the limitations of 
MSC-based therapy to open new avenues for the treatment of degenerative diseases 
such as OA.

Copyright © 2021 Laplace-Builhé, Bahraoui, Jorgensen and Djouad.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2020.605120
PMCID: PMC7873919
PMID: 33585444

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.