1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Jan 28;12:622360. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.622360. 
eCollection 2020.

Microglial Hyperreactivity Evolved to Immunosuppression in the Hippocampus of a 
Mouse Model of Accelerated Aging and Alzheimer's Disease Traits.

Molina-Martínez P(1), Corpas R(1)(2), García-Lara E(1)(2), Cosín-Tomás M(1), 
Cristòfol R(1), Kaliman P(1)(3), Solà C(1)(2), Molinuevo JL(2)(4)(5)(6), 
Sánchez-Valle R(2)(4)(5), Antonell A(2)(4)(5), Lladó A(2)(4)(5), Sanfeliu 
C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona (IIBB), Consejo Superior 
de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(4)Alzheimer's Disease and Other Cognitive Disorders Unit, Department of 
Neurology, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomèdica, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Fragilidad y Envejecimiento 
Saludable (CIBERFES), Madrid, Spain.

Neuroinflammation is a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD). We sought to 
study the glial derangement in AD using diverse experimental models and human 
brain tissue. Besides classical pro-inflammatory cytokines, we analyzed 
chitinase 3 like 1 (CHI3L1 or YKL40) and triggering receptor expressed on 
myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) that are increasingly being associated with astrogliosis 
and microgliosis in AD, respectively. The SAMP8 mouse model of accelerated aging 
and AD traits showed elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines and activated microglia 
phenotype. Furthermore, 6-month-old SAMP8 showed an exacerbated inflammatory 
response to peripheral lipopolysaccharide in the hippocampus and null 
responsiveness at the advanced age (for this strain) of 12 months. Gene 
expression of TREM2 was increased in the hippocampus of transgenic 5XFAD mice 
and in the cingulate cortex of autosomal dominant AD patients, and to a lesser 
extent in aged SAMP8 mice and sporadic early-onset AD patients. However, gene 
expression of CHI3L1 was increased in mice but not in human AD brain samples. 
The results support the relevance of microglia activation in the pathways 
leading to neurodegeneration and suggest diverse neuroinflammatory responses 
according to the AD process. Therefore, the SAMP8 mouse model with marked 
alterations in the dynamics of microglia activation and senescence may provide a 
complementary approach to transgenic mouse models for the study of the 
neuroinflammatory mechanisms underlying AD risk and progression.

Copyright © 2021 Molina-Martínez, Corpas, García-Lara, Cosín-Tomás, Cristòfol, 
Kaliman, Solà, Molinuevo, Sánchez-Valle, Antonell, Lladó and Sanfeliu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.622360
PMCID: PMC7875867
PMID: 33584248

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.