1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2021 Sep 24;62(4):693-707. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcab027.

Phototropin Interactions with SUMO Proteins.

Łabuz J(1), Sztatelman O(2)(3), Jagiełło-Flasińska D(2), Hermanowicz P(1), 
Bażant A(2), Banaś AK(2), Bartnicki F(2), Giza A(2), Kozłowska A(1), Lasok H(1), 
Sitkiewicz E(3), Krzeszowiec W(2), Gabryś H(2), Strzałka W(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Photobiology, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian 
University, Gronostajowa 7A, Kraków 30-387, Poland.
(2)Department of Plant Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7, Kraków 30-387, Poland.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Pawińskiego 5a, Warszawa 02-106, Poland.

The disruption of the sumoylation pathway affects processes controlled by the 
two phototropins (phots) of Arabidopsis thaliana, phot1 and phot2. Phots, plant 
UVA/blue light photoreceptors, regulate growth responses and fast movements 
aimed at optimizing photosynthesis, such as phototropism, chloroplast 
relocations and stomatal opening. Sumoylation is a posttranslational 
modification, consisting of the addition of a SUMO (SMALL UBIQUITIN-RELATED 
MODIFIER) protein to a lysine residue in the target protein. In addition to 
affecting the stability of proteins, it regulates their activity, interactions 
and subcellular localization. We examined physiological responses controlled by 
phots, phototropism and chloroplast movements, in sumoylation pathway mutants. 
Chloroplast accumulation in response to both continuous and pulse light was 
enhanced in the E3 ligase siz1 mutant, in a manner dependent on phot2. A 
significant decrease in phot2 protein abundance was observed in this mutant 
after blue light treatment both in seedlings and mature leaves. Using plant 
transient expression and yeast two-hybrid assays, we found that phots interacted 
with SUMO proteins mainly through their N-terminal parts, which contain the 
photosensory LOV domains. The covalent modification in phots by SUMO was 
verified using an Arabidopsis sumoylation system reconstituted in bacteria 
followed by the mass spectrometry analysis. Lys 297 was identified as the main 
target of SUMO3 in the phot2 molecule. Finally, sumoylation of phot2 was 
detected in Arabidopsis mature leaves upon light or heat stress treatment.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese 
Society of Plant Physiologists.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcab027
PMCID: PMC8462379
PMID: 33594440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]