1. Biochem Genet. 2021 Aug;59(4):919-939. doi: 10.1007/s10528-021-10043-0. Epub 
2021 Feb 18.

The Role of Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) Gene Polymorphisms in Coronary Artery Disease: 
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Ashiq S(1), Ashiq K(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Applied Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, Lahore, 
53700, Pakistan. sanaashiq72@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Superior University, Lahore, Pakistan.

Although many studies have investigated the association of paraoxonase 1 (PON1) 
polymorphisms with coronary artery disease (CAD). However, the outcomes were not 
consistent and remain uncertain. Therefore, it is the need of the hour to 
analyze the available literature and evaluate the association of PON1 
polymorphisms with the CAD. All the relevant studies published in the English 
language from January 1, 2000, up to September 20, 2020, were identified by 
searching through various electronic databases. The two researchers 
independently extracted the information. The data were analyzed by using the 
MetaGenyo program. The pooled odds ratio was used to find the associations 
between CAD and PON1 polymorphisms. In the final analysis, we include 10 studies 
regarding the association of PON1 polymorphisms (rs662 and rs854560) with CAD. 
Overall, the Q192R polymorphism increased the risk of CAD in the tested genetic 
models including the homozygote model: OR 1.35, CI 1.02-1.79; allelic model: OR 
1.16, CI 1.00-1.33; dominant model: OR 1.25, CI 1.03-1.52. The L55M polymorphism 
does not significantly associated with CAD in all the tested genetic models 
including the homozygote model: OR 1.00 CI, 0.64-1.56; allelic model: OR 1.02, 
95% CI 0.84-1.23; dominant model: OR 1.08, CI 0.89-1.31. Further analysis showed 
no publication bias exists in meta-analysis. Our findings suggested that rs662 
in the coding region was significantly associated with the CAD however, rs854560 
has no significant association with the disease. Nevertheless, in future, there 
is a need for more studies with a larger sample size which may provide a more 
definite conclusion.Study Registration: PROSPERO registration number 
CRD42020202278.

DOI: 10.1007/s10528-021-10043-0
PMID: 33599870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]