1. Pflugers Arch. 2021 Sep;473(9):1361-1376. doi: 10.1007/s00424-021-02522-5.
Epub  2021 Feb 16.

Supramolecular organization of rhodopsin in rod photoreceptor cell membranes.

Park PS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA. paul.park@case.edu.

Rhodopsin is the light receptor in rod photoreceptor cells that initiates 
scotopic vision. Studies on the light receptor span well over a century, yet 
questions about the organization of rhodopsin within the photoreceptor cell 
membrane still persist and a consensus view on the topic is still elusive. 
Rhodopsin has been intensely studied for quite some time, and there is a wealth 
of information to draw from to formulate an organizational picture of the 
receptor in native membranes. Early experimental evidence in apparent support 
for a monomeric arrangement of rhodopsin in rod photoreceptor cell membranes is 
contrasted and reconciled with more recent visual evidence in support of a 
supramolecular organization of rhodopsin. What is known so far about the 
determinants of forming a supramolecular structure and possible functional roles 
for such an organization are also discussed. Many details are still missing on 
the structural and functional properties of the supramolecular organization of 
rhodopsin in rod photoreceptor cell membranes. The emerging picture presented 
here can serve as a springboard towards a more in-depth understanding of the 
topic.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH, DE part 
of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00424-021-02522-5
PMCID: PMC8364927
PMID: 33591421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The author declares that 
they have no conflicts of interest.