1. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2021 Mar;62(3):216-226. doi: 10.1002/em.22428. Epub 2021 
Mar 2.

Differences in cell death in methionine versus cysteine depletion.

Wallis KF(1), Morehead LC(1), Bird JT(2), Byrum SD(1)(2), Miousse IR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(2)Bioinformatics Core, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, Arkansas, USA.

Restriction of the sulfur amino acids methionine and cysteine has recently been 
proposed as potential adjuvant therapy in cancer. While cysteine depletion has 
been associated with ferroptotic cell death, methionine depletion has not. We 
hypothesized that comparing the response of melanoma cell lines to depletion of 
the amino acids methionine and cysteine would give us insight into the critical 
role in cancer of these two closely related amino acids. We analyzed the 
response to three conditions: methionine depletion, methionine replacement with 
homocysteine, and cysteine depletion. In cancer cells, the transcription factor 
ATF4 was induced by all three tested conditions. The replacement of methionine 
with homocysteine produced a strong ferroptotic gene signature. We also detected 
an activation of the NRF2 antioxidant pathway by both methionine and cysteine 
depletion. Total glutathione levels were decreased by 42% in melanoma cells 
grown without methionine, and by 95% in cells grown without cysteine. Lipid 
peroxidation was increased in cells grown without cysteine, but not in cells 
grown without methionine. Despite the large degree of overlap in gene expression 
between methionine and cysteine depletion, methionine depletion and replacement 
of methionine with homocysteine was associated with apoptosis while cysteine 
depletion was associated with ferroptosis. Glutamine depletion produced 
comparable gene expression patterns and was associated with a 28% decrease in 
glutathione. Apoptosis was detected in these cells. In this experiment, a strong 
ATF4-driven ferroptotic gene signature was insufficient to induce ferroptosis 
without a concomitant profound decrease in glutathione levels.

Â© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/em.22428
PMCID: PMC8130902
PMID: 33615565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]