1. mBio. 2021 Feb 23;12(1):e03695-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.03695-20.

Real-Time Imaging of Polioviral RNA Translocation across a Membrane.

Karunatilaka KS(1), Filman DJ(1), Strauss M(2), Loparo JJ(1), Hogle JM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA james_hogle@hms.harvard.edu.

Genome transfer from a virus into a cell is a critical early step in viral 
replication. Enveloped viruses achieve the delivery of their genomes into the 
cytoplasm by merging the viral membrane with the cellular membrane via a 
conceptually simple mechanism called membrane fusion. In contrast, genome 
translocation mechanisms in nonenveloped viruses, which lack viral membranes, 
remain poorly understood. Although cellular assays provide useful information 
about cell entry and genome release, it is difficult to obtain detailed 
mechanistic insights due both to the inherent technical difficulties associated 
with direct visualization of these processes and to the prevalence of 
nonproductive events in cellular assays performed at a very high multiplicity of 
infection. To overcome these issues, we developed an in vitro single-particle 
fluorescence assay to characterize genome release from a nonenveloped virus 
(poliovirus) in real time using a tethered receptor-decorated liposome system. 
Our results suggest that poliovirus genome release is a complex process that 
consists of multiple rate-limiting steps. Interestingly, we found that the 
addition of exogenous wild-type capsid protein VP4, but not mutant VP4, enhanced 
the efficiency of genome translocation. These results, together with prior 
structural analysis, suggest that VP4 interacts with RNA directly and forms a 
protective, membrane-spanning channel during genome translocation. Furthermore, 
our data indicate that VP4 dynamically interacts with RNA, rather than forming a 
static tube for RNA translocation. This study provides new insights into 
poliovirus genome translocation and offers a cell-free assay that can be 
utilized broadly to investigate genome release processes in other nonenveloped 
viruses.IMPORTANCE The initial transfer of genomic material from a virus into a 
host cell is a key step in any viral infection. Consequently, understanding how 
viruses deliver their genomes into cells could reveal attractive therapeutic 
targets. Although conventional biochemical and cellular assays have provided 
useful information about cell entry, the mechanism used to deliver the viral 
genomes across the cellular membrane into the cytoplasm is not well 
characterized for nonenveloped viruses such as poliovirus. In this study, we 
developed a fluorescence imaging assay to visualize poliovirus genome release 
using a synthetic vesicle system. Our results not only provide new mechanistic 
insights into poliovirus genome translocation but also offer a cell-free assay 
to bridge gaps in understanding of this process in other nonenveloped viruses.

Copyright Â© 2021 Karunatilaka et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.03695-20
PMCID: PMC8545138
PMID: 33622727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]