1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2021 Feb 10;2021:6611126. doi: 10.1155/2021/6611126. 
eCollection 2021.

Modulation of Autophagy: A Novel "Rejuvenation" Strategy for the Aging Liver.

Xu F(1), Tautenhahn HM(1), Dirsch O(2), Dahmen U(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Vascular Surgery, Jena University 
Hospital, Jena 07747, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Chemnitz gGmbH, Chemnitz 09111, Germany.

Aging is a natural life process which leads to a gradual decline of essential 
physiological processes. For the liver, it leads to alterations in 
histomorphology (steatosis and fibrosis) and function (protein synthesis and 
energy generation) and affects central hepatocellular processes (autophagy, 
mitochondrial respiration, and hepatocyte proliferation). These alterations do 
not only impair the metabolic capacity of the liver but also represent important 
factors in the pathogenesis of malignant liver disease. Autophagy is a recycling 
process for eukaryotic cells to degrade dysfunctional intracellular components 
and to reuse the basic substances. It plays a crucial role in maintaining cell 
homeostasis and in resisting environmental stress. Emerging evidence shows that 
modulating autophagy seems to be effective in improving the age-related 
alterations of the liver. However, autophagy is a double-edged sword for the 
aged liver. Upregulating autophagy alleviates hepatic steatosis and ROS-induced 
cellular stress and promotes hepatocyte proliferation but may aggravate hepatic 
fibrosis. Therefore, a well-balanced autophagy modulation strategy might be 
suitable to alleviate age-related liver dysfunction. Conclusion. Modulation of 
autophagy is a promising strategy for "rejuvenation" of the aged liver. Detailed 
knowledge regarding the most devastating processes in the individual patient is 
needed to effectively counteract aging of the liver without causing obvious 
harm.

Copyright Â© 2021 Fengming Xu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6611126
PMCID: PMC7889356
PMID: 33628363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.