1. PLoS One. 2021 Feb 24;16(2):e0247623. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0247623. 
eCollection 2021.

Functional vitamin K insufficiency, vascular calcification and mortality in 
advanced chronic kidney disease: A cohort study.

Dai L(1), Li L(1)(2), Erlandsson H(1), Jaminon AMG(3), Qureshi AR(1), Ripsweden 
J(4)(5), Brismar TB(4)(5), Witasp A(1), Heimbürger O(1), Jørgensen HS(6), Barany 
P(1), Lindholm B(1), Evenepoel P(6)(7), Schurgers LJ(3), Stenvinkel P(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Renal Medicine and Baxter Novum, Department of Clinical Science, 
Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Nephrology, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Division of Medical Imaging and Technology, Department of Clinical Science, 
Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Radiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(6)Department of Microbiology Immunology and Transplantation, Nephrology and 
Renal Transplantation Research Group, KU Leuven-University of Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(7)Department of Nephrology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) suffer from vitamin K deficiency and 
are at high risk of vascular calcification (VC) and premature death. We 
investigated the association of functional vitamin K deficiency with all-cause 
mortality and whether this association is modified by the presence of VC in CKD 
stage 5 (CKD G5). Plasma dephosphorylated-uncarboxylated matrix Gla-protein 
(dp-ucMGP), a circulating marker of functional vitamin K deficiency, and other 
laboratory and clinical data were determined in 493 CKD G5 patients. VC was 
assessed in subgroups by Agatston scoring of coronary artery calcium (CAC) and 
aortic valve calcium (AVC). Backward stepwise regression did not identify 
dp-ucMGP as an independent determinant of VC. During a median follow-up of 42 
months, 93 patients died. Each one standard deviation increment in dp-ucMGP was 
associated with increased risk of all-cause mortality (sub-hazard ratio (sHR) 
1.17; 95% confidence interval, 1.01-1.37) adjusted for age, sex, cardiovascular 
disease, diabetes, body mass index, inflammation, and dialysis treatment. The 
association remained significant when further adjusted for CAC and AVC in 
sub-analyses (sHR 1.22, 1.01-1.48 and 1.27, 1.01-1.60, respectively). In 
conclusion, functional vitamin K deficiency associates with increased mortality 
risk that is independent of the presence of VC in patients with CKD G5.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0247623
PMCID: PMC7904143
PMID: 33626087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PS is on scientific advisory boards of REATA, 
Baxter, Astra Zeneca and Vifor and educational advisory boards for Astellas and 
FMC. BL is employed by Baxter Healthcare Corporation. LS reports non-financial 
support from Immunodiagnostic systems (IDS), outside the submitted work. PE is 
on scientific advisory boards of Amgen, Vifor FMC, and Medice. OH has received 
consultancy fees from Astra Zenea, Vifor, Opterion, and Gilead. This does not 
alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. The 
other authors do not report any conflict of interests.