1. Mol Cell. 2021 Apr 15;81(8):1789-1801.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.01.040. 
Epub 2021 Feb 24.

Alternative RNA structures formed during transcription depend on elongation rate 
and modify RNA processing.

Saldi T(1), Riemondy K(1), Erickson B(1), Bentley DL(2).

Author information:
(1)RNA Bioscience Initiative, Department Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, 
University of Colorado School of Medicine, PO Box 6511, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(2)RNA Bioscience Initiative, Department Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, 
University of Colorado School of Medicine, PO Box 6511, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. 
Electronic address: david.bentley@cuanschutz.edu.

Most RNA processing occurs co-transcriptionally. We interrogated nascent pol II 
transcripts by chemical and enzymatic probing and determined how the "nascent 
RNA structureome" relates to splicing, A-I editing and transcription speed. RNA 
folding within introns and steep structural transitions at splice sites are 
associated with efficient co-transcriptional splicing. A slow pol II mutant 
elicits extensive remodeling into more folded conformations with increased A-I 
editing. Introns that become more structured at their 3' splice sites get 
co-transcriptionally excised more efficiently. Slow pol II altered folding of 
intronic Alu elements where cryptic splicing and intron retention are 
stimulated, an outcome mimicked by UV, which decelerates transcription. Slow 
transcription also remodeled RNA folding around alternative exons in distinct 
ways that predict whether skipping or inclusion is favored, even though it 
occurs post-transcriptionally. Hence, co-transcriptional RNA folding modulates 
post-transcriptional alternative splicing. In summary, the plasticity of nascent 
transcripts has widespread effects on RNA processing.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.01.040
PMCID: PMC8052309
PMID: 33631106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.