1. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs. 2021 Mar;26(1):53-62. doi: 
10.1080/14728214.2021.1896704. Epub 2021 Mar 10.

Emerging drugs for the treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

Pilco-Janeta DF(1), García-Valverde A(1), Gomez-Peregrina D(1), Serrano C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sarcoma Translational Research Laboratory, Vall d'Hebron Institute of 
Oncology (VHIO), Vall d'Hebron Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Oncogenic activation of KIT or PDGFRA receptor tyrosine kinases is 
the crucial event in gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) biology. Seminal 
works during the past two decades have underscored, first, the continuous 
relevance of KIT/PDGFRA oncogenic signaling after progression to targeted 
inhibition; second, the heterogeneity of KIT/PDGFRA acquired mutations, that 
cannot be efficiently suppressed by any given tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI); 
and third, the presence of specific mutants highly resistant to all approved 
therapies.
AREAS COVERED: This review discusses treatment options in advanced/metastatic 
GIST, including a detailed dissection of ripretinib and avapritinib, the two 
novel small molecule inhibitors approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 
2020.
EXPERT OPINION: The three only therapeutic options since 2012 for metastatic 
GIST patients were imatinib, sunitinib, and regorafenib. Although imatinib was 
highly effective in treatment-naïve GIST, the benefit of second- and third-line 
sunitinib and regorafenib was modest, thus emphasizing the medical need for new 
treatment options. Ripretinib, a switch control inhibitor with broad 
anti-KIT/PDGFRA activity, has been approved as ≥4th line in GIST after 
progression to all standard therapies. Avapritinib, a type I TKI highly specific 
against the multi-resistant PDGFRA D842V mutation, is approved in this specific 
subset of GIST patients.

DOI: 10.1080/14728214.2021.1896704
PMID: 33645383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]