1. Front Immunol. 2021 Feb 11;11:574457. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.574457. 
eCollection 2020.

Hepatitis B Virus Infection Among Leprosy Patients: A Case for Polymorphisms 
Compromising Activation of the Lectin Pathway and Complement Receptors.

Boldt ABW(1)(2), Oliveira-Toré CF(2), Kretzschmar GC(1), Weinschutz Mendes H(2), 
Stinghen ST(2), Andrade FA(2), Bumiller-Bini V(1), Gonçalves LB(2), Braga 
ACM(2), Stahlke EVRS(3), Velavan TP(4)(5)(6), Thiel S(7), de Messias-Reason 
IJT(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Postgraduate Program in Genetics, 
Department of Genetics, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Immunopathology, Postgraduate Program in Internal 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Department of Clinical Pathology, Hospital de 
Clínicas, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil.
(3)Health State Department of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil.
(4)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Universitätsklinikum Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(5)Vietnamese-German Center for Medical Research, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Duy Tan University, Da Nang, Vietnam.
(7)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

Thousands of leprosy patients not only suffer from physical deformities, but 
also either have or have had hepatitis B virus (HBV) coinfection. Polymorphisms 
of the complement system modulate susceptibility to leprosy, but genetic 
susceptibility to past or present HBV infection is unknown. We used sequencing 
and multiplex sequence-specific PCR to genotype 72 polymorphisms of seven genes 
(MBL2, FCN1, FCN2, FCN3, MASP1, MASP2, C3) encoding components of the lectin 
pathway, and two genes encoding complement receptors (CR1, VSIG4) in 190 
patients, of which 74 were positive for HBsAg and/or anti-HBc (HBV+, 93.2% with 
a resolved infection) and 116 lepromatous patients, and 408 HBV-blood donors. In 
addition, we tested for levels of proteins of the lectin pathway. We found no 
difference between serum concentrations of mannan-binding lectin (MBL), 
MBL-associated serine proteins (MASP-1, MASP-2, MASP-3, MAp44), ficolin-3 
(FCN-3), soluble complement receptor 1 (sCR1) and MBL mediated C4 activation, 
measured by ELISA or TRIFMA in up to 167 HBV+ and HBV- patients. Haplotypes 
lowering protein levels or encoding dysfunctional proteins increased 
susceptibility to HBV infection: MBL2*LYQC (OR = 3.4, p = 0.02), MASP1*AC_CC 
(OR = 4.0, p = 0.015) and MASP2*1C2-l (OR = 5.4, p = 0.03). Conversely, FCN1*3C2 
haplotype, associated with higher gene expression, was protective (OR = 0.56, P 
= 0.033). Other haplotypes associated with HBV susceptibility were: MASP2*2B1-i 
(OR = 19.25, P = 0.003), CR1*3A (OR = 2.65, P = 0.011) and VSIG4*TGGRCG (OR = 
12.55, P = 0.014). Some polymorphisms in ficolin genes associated with lower 
protein levels increased susceptibility to leprosy/HBV infection: FCN*1 (OR = 
1.66, P = 0.029), FCN2*GGGCAC (OR = 6.73, P = 0.008), and FCN3*del_del_C (OR = 
12.54, P = 0.037), and to lepromatous disease/HBV infection: FCN2*TA (OR = 2.5, 
P = 0.009), whereas FCN2*MAG was associated with increased FCN-2 expression and 
resistance against coinfection (OR = 0.29, P = 0.026). These associations were 
independent of demographic factors and did not increase susceptibility to 
leprosy per se, except MASP2*1C2-l. Associations for FCN2, FCN3, MASP1, MASP2, 
and VSIG4 variants were also independent of each other. In conclusion, 
polymorphisms compromising activation of the lectin pathway of complement 
increase susceptibility to HBV infection, with ficolin polymorphisms playing a 
major role in modulating the susceptibility among leprosy patients.

Copyright © 2021 Boldt, Oliveira-Toré, Kretzschmar, Weinschutz Mendes, Stinghen, 
Andrade, Bumiller-Bini, Gonçalves, Braga, Stahlke, Velavan, Thiel and de 
Messias-Reason.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.574457
PMCID: PMC7904891
PMID: 33643280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.