1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Feb 15;8:631790. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.631790. 
eCollection 2021.

Linking Aortic Mechanical Properties, Gene Expression and Microstructure: A New 
Perspective on Regional Weakening in Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms.

Forneris A(1)(2), Kennard J(1), Ismaguilova A(1), Shepherd RD(1), Studer D(1), 
Bromley A(3), Moore RD(4), Rinker KD(1)(5)(6), Di Martino ES(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Engineering, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Civil Engineering, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, AB, Canada.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(5)Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, AB, Canada.
(6)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
AB, Canada.

Background: Current clinical practice for the assessment of abdominal aortic 
aneurysms (AAA) is based on vessel diameter and does not account for the 
multifactorial, heterogeneous remodeling that results in the regional weakening 
of the aortic wall leading to aortic growth and rupture. The present study was 
conducted to determine correlations between a novel non-invasive surrogate 
measure of regional aortic weakening and the results from invasive analyses 
performed on corresponding ex vivo aortic samples. Tissue samples were evaluated 
to classify local wall weakening and the likelihood of further degeneration 
based on non-invasive indices. Methods: A combined, image-based fluid dynamic 
and in-vivo strain analysis approach was used to estimate the Regional Aortic 
Weakness (RAW) index and assess individual aortas of AAA patients prior to 
elective surgery. Nine patients were treated with complete aortic resection 
allowing the systematic collection of tissue samples that were used to determine 
regional aortic mechanics, microstructure and gene expression by means of 
mechanical testing, microscopy and transcriptomic analyses. Results: The RAW 
index was significantly higher for samples exhibiting lower mechanical strength 
(p = 0.035) and samples classified as low elastin content (p = 0.020). Samples 
with higher RAW index had the greatest number of genes differentially expressed 
compared to any constitutive metric. High RAW samples showed a decrease in gene 
expression for elastin and a down-regulation of pathways responsible for cell 
movement, reorganization of cytoskeleton, and angiogenesis. Conclusions: This 
work describes the first AAA index free of assumptions for material properties 
and accounting for patient-specific mechanical behavior in relation to aneurysm 
strength. Use of the RAW index captured biomechanical changes linked to the 
weakening of the aorta and revealed changes in microstructure and gene 
expression. This approach has the potential to provide an improved tool to aid 
clinical decision-making in the management of aortic pathology.

Copyright Â© 2021 Forneris, Kennard, Ismaguilova, Shepherd, Studer, Bromley, 
Moore, Rinker and Di Martino.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.631790
PMCID: PMC7917077
PMID: 33659281

Conflict of interest statement: ED, RM, and AF are cofounders and shareholders 
of the start-up company ViTAA. The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.