1. Biomedicines. 2021 Feb 26;9(3):234. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9030234.

Cannabis sativa: Interdisciplinary Strategies and Avenues for Medical and 
Commercial Progression Outside of CBD and THC.

Oultram JMJ(1), Pegler JL(1), Bowser TA(2), Ney LJ(3), Eamens AL(1), Grof 
CPL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Plant Science, University of Newcastle, University Drive, 
Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia.
(2)CannaPacific Pty Ltd., 109 Ocean Street, Dudley, NSW 2290, Australia.
(3)School of Psychological Sciences, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS 7005, 
Australia.

Cannabis sativa (Cannabis) is one of the world's most well-known, yet maligned 
plant species. However, significant recent research is starting to unveil the 
potential of Cannabis to produce secondary compounds that may offer a suite of 
medical benefits, elevating this unique plant species from its illicit narcotic 
status into a genuine biopharmaceutical. This review summarises the lengthy 
history of Cannabis and details the molecular pathways that underpin the 
production of key secondary metabolites that may confer medical efficacy. We 
also provide an up-to-date summary of the molecular targets and potential of the 
relatively unknown minor compounds offered by the Cannabis plant. Furthermore, 
we detail the recent advances in plant science, as well as synthetic biology, 
and the pharmacology surrounding Cannabis. Given the relative infancy of 
Cannabis research, we go on to highlight the parallels to previous research 
conducted in another medically relevant and versatile plant, Papaver somniferum 
(opium poppy), as an indicator of the possible future direction of Cannabis 
plant biology. Overall, this review highlights the future directions of cannabis 
research outside of the medical biology aspects of its well-characterised 
constituents and explores additional avenues for the potential improvement of 
the medical potential of the Cannabis plant.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9030234
PMCID: PMC7996784
PMID: 33652704

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.