1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Feb 23;10:619071. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2020.619071. eCollection 2020.

Development and Evaluation of Real-Time Reverse Transcription Recombinase 
Polymerase Amplification Assay for Rapid and Sensitive Detection of West Nile 
Virus in Human Clinical Samples.

Tomar PS(1), Kumar S(2), Patel S(3), Kumar JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Virology, Defence Research and Development Establishment, 
Gwalior, India.
(2)Division of BDTE, Defence Research and Development Establishment, Gwalior, 
India.
(3)School of Studies in Botany, Jiwaji University, Gwalior, India.

West Nile virus (WNV) causes West Nile fever and encephalitis worldwide. 
Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines available in the market to 
treat WNV infection in humans. Hence, it is of paramount importance to detect 
WNV early for the success of the disease control programs and timely clinical 
management in endemic areas. In the present paper, we report the development of 
real-time reverse transcription recombinase polymerase amplification (RT-RPA) 
assay for rapid and real-time detection of WNV targeting the envelope (env) gene 
of the virus. The RPA reaction was performed successfully at 39°C for 15 min in 
a real-time thermal cycler. The sensitivity of this assay was found similar to 
that of the quantitative real-time RT PCR (RT-qPCR) assay, which could detect 10 
copies of the gene. The efficacy of the assay was evaluated with a panel of 110 
WN suspected human samples showing the signs of retinitis, febrile illness and 
acute posterior uveitis. In comparison with RT-qPCR, RT-RPA showed a specificity 
of 100% (CI, 95.07-100%) and sensitivity of 96.15% (CI, 80.36-99.90%) with a 
negative (NPV) and positive predictive value (PPV) of 98.65 and 100%, 
respectively. The level of agreement between RT-RPA and reference RT-qPCR assay 
was shown to be very high. The turnaround time of real-time RPA assay is about 
10-20 times faster than the RT-qPCR, which confirms its utility in the rapid and 
sensitive diagnosis of WNV infection. To the best of our knowledge, this is the 
first report which deals with the development of real-time RT-RPA assay for 
simple, rapid, sensitive, and specific detection of WNV in human clinical 
samples. The present RT-RPA assay proves to be a powerful tool that can be used 
for the rapid diagnosis of a large number of patient samples in endemic 
settings.

Copyright © 2021 Tomar, Kumar, Patel and Kumar.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.619071
PMCID: PMC7940365
PMID: 33708642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.