1. J Phys Chem B. 2021 Apr 15;125(14):3452-3467. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.1c00206. 
Epub 2021 Mar 16.

Modern Kinetics and Mechanism of Protein Folding: A Retrospective.

Eaton WA(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892-0520, United States.

Modern experimental kinetics of protein folding began in the early 1990s with 
the introduction of nanosecond laser pulses to trigger the folding reaction, 
providing an almost 106-fold improvement in time resolution over the 
stopped-flow method being employed at the time. These experiments marked the 
beginning of the "fast-folding" subfield that enabled investigation of the 
kinetics of formation of secondary structural elements and disordered loops for 
the first time, as well as the fastest folding proteins. When I started to work 
on this subject, a fast folding protein was one that folded in milliseconds. 
There were, moreover, no analytical theoretical models and no atomistic or 
coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations to describe the mechanism. Two of 
the most important discoveries from my lab since then are a protein that folds 
in hundreds of nanoseconds, as determined from nanosecond laser temperature 
experiments, and the discovery that the theoretically predicted barrier crossing 
time is about the same for proteins that differ in folding rates by 104-fold, as 
determined from single molecule fluorescence measurements. We also developed 
what has been called the "HÃ¼ckel model" of protein folding, which quantitatively 
explains a wide range of equilibrium and kinetic measurements. This 
retrospective traces the history of contributions to the "fast folding" subfield 
from my lab until about 3 years ago, when I left protein folding to spend the 
rest of my research career trying to discover an inexpensive drug for treating 
sickle cell disease.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.1c00206
PMCID: PMC8054241
PMID: 33724035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no competing financial 
interest.