1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2021 Mar 1;62(3):22. doi: 10.1167/iovs.62.3.22.

Mitophagy: An Emerging Target in Ocular Pathology.

Skeie JM(1)(2), Nishimura DY(1)(2), Wang CL(1), Schmidt GA(2), Aldrich BT(1)(2), 
Greiner MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa Carver 
College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, United States.
(2)Iowa Lions Eye Bank, Coralville, Iowa, United States.

Mitochondrial function is essential for the viability of aerobic eukaryotic 
cells, as mitochondria provide energy through the generation of adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP), regulate cellular metabolism, provide redox balancing, 
participate in immune signaling, and can initiate apoptosis. Mitochondria are 
dynamic organelles that participate in a cyclical and ongoing process of 
regeneration and autophagy (clearance), termed mitophagy specifically for 
mitochondrial (macro)autophagy. An imbalance in mitochondrial function toward 
mitochondrial dysfunction can be catastrophic for cells and has been 
characterized in several common ophthalmic diseases. In this article, we review 
mitochondrial homeostasis in detail, focusing on the balance of mitochondrial 
dynamics including the processes of fission and fusion, and provide a 
description of the mechanisms involved in mitophagy. Furthermore, this article 
reviews investigations of ocular diseases with impaired mitophagy, including 
Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy, primary open-angle glaucoma, diabetic 
retinopathy, and age-related macular degeneration, as well as several primary 
mitochondrial diseases with ocular phenotypes that display impaired mitophagy, 
including mitochondrial encephalopathy lactic acidosis stroke, Leber hereditary 
optic neuropathy, and chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia. The results 
of various studies using cell culture, animal, and human tissue models are 
presented and reflect a growing awareness of mitophagy impairment as an 
important feature of ophthalmic disease pathology. As this review indicates, it 
is imperative that mitophagy be investigated as a targetable mechanism in 
developing therapies for ocular diseases characterized by oxidative stress and 
mitochondrial dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.62.3.22
PMCID: PMC7980050
PMID: 33724294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: J.M. Skeie, (N); D.Y. Nishimura, 
(N); C.L. Wang, (N); G.A. Schmidt, (N); B.T. Aldrich, (N); M.A. Greiner, (N)