1. Acta Histochem Cytochem. 2021 Feb 25;54(1):11-19. doi: 10.1267/ahc.20-00036. 
Epub 2021 Feb 16.

The Periodontium Damage Induces Neuronal Cell Death in the Trigeminal 
Mesencephalic Nucleus and Neurodegeneration in the Trigeminal Motor Nucleus in 
C57BL/6J Mice.

Dhar A(1), Kuramoto E(1), Fukushima M(1), Iwai H(1), Yamanaka A(1), Goto T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, 
Japan.

Proprioception from masticatory apparatus and periodontal ligaments comes 
through the trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus (Vmes). We evaluated the effects of 
tooth loss on neurodegeneration of the Vmes and trigeminal motor nucleus (Vmo). 
Bilateral maxillary molars of 2-month-old C57BL/6J mice were extracted under 
anesthesia. Neural projections of the Vmes to the periodontium were confirmed by 
injecting Fluoro-Gold (FG) retrogradely into the extraction sockets, and for the 
anterograde labeling adeno-associated virus encoding green fluorescent protein 
(AAV-GFP) was applied. For immunohistochemistry, Piezo2, ATF3, Caspase 3, ChAT 
and TDP-43 antibodies were used. At 1 month after tooth extraction, the number 
of Piezo2-immunoreactive (IR) Vmes neurons were decreased significantly. ATF3-IR 
neurons were detected on day 5 after tooth extraction. Dead cleaved caspase-3-IR 
neurons were found among Vmes neurons on days 7 and 12. In the Vmo, neuronal 
cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs) formation type of TDP-43 increased at 1 and 2 
months after extraction. These indicate the existence of neural projections from 
the Vmes to the periodontium in mice and that tooth loss induces the death of 
Vmes neurons followed by TDP-43 pathology in the Vmo. Therefore, tooth loss 
induces Vmes neuronal cell death, causing Vmo neurodegeneration and presumably 
affecting masticatory function.

2021 The Japan Society of Histochemistry and Cytochemistry.

DOI: 10.1267/ahc.20-00036
PMCID: PMC7947638
PMID: 33731966

Conflict of interest statement: VThe authors declare no conflicts of interest.