1. Stem Cell Res. 2021 May;53:102284. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2021.102284. Epub 2021
Mar  12.

Generation of three induced pluripotent stem cell lines, SCVIi003-A, SCVIi004-A, 
SCVIi005-A, from patients with ARVD/C caused by heterozygous mutations in the 
PKP2 gene.

Jahng JWS(1), Black KE(1), Liu L(1), Bae HR(1), Perez M(2), Ashley EA(3), Sallam 
K(2), Wu JC(4).

Author information:
(1)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University, School of Medicine, 
United States.
(2)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University, School of Medicine, 
United States; Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Depart of Medicine, Stanford 
University, School of Medicine, United States.
(3)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University, School of Medicine, 
United States; Department of Genetics, Stanford University, School of Medicine, 
United States.
(4)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University, School of Medicine, 
United States; Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Depart of Medicine, Stanford 
University, School of Medicine, United States; Department of Radiology, Stanford 
University, School of Medicine, United States. Electronic address: 
joewu@stanford.edu.

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy (ARVD/C) is an 
inherited heart disease which can cause life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias 
and cardiac dysfunction. The autosomal dominant form of ARVD/C is caused by 
mutations in the cardiac desmosome, such as those in the plakoglobin 
plakophilin-2 (PKP2) gene. Here, we generated three human induced pluripotent 
stem cell (iPSC) lines from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 
three ARVD/C patients carrying pathogenic variants in their PKP2 genes 
(c.2065_2070delinsG; c.235C>T; c.1725_1728dup). All lines show the typical 
morphology of pluripotent stem cells, demonstrate high expression of pluripotent 
markers, display normal karyotype, and differentiate into all three germ layers 
in vitro. These lines are valuable resources for studying the pathological 
mechanisms of ARVD/C caused by PKP2 mutation.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2021.102284
PMCID: PMC8457924
PMID: 33743362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.