1. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2021 Mar 22;20(1):67. doi: 10.1186/s12933-021-01258-x.

Cardiorenal and other diabetes related outcomes with SGLT-2 inhibitors compared 
to GLP-1 receptor agonists in type 2 diabetes: nationwide observational study.

Lugner M(1), Sattar N(2), Miftaraj M(3), Ekelund J(3), Franzén S(4)(3), Svensson 
AM(4)(3), Eliasson B(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. Moa.lugner@gu.se.
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK.
(3)National Diabetes Register, Centre of Registers, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Institute of Medicine, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Major prospective randomized clinical safety trials have 
demonstrated beneficial effects of treatment with glucagon-like peptide-1 
receptor agonists (GLP-1RA) and sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors 
(SGLT-2i) in people with type 2 diabetes and elevated cardiovascular risk, and 
recent clinical treatment guidelines therefore promote early use of these 
classes of pharmacological agents. In this Swedish nationwide observational 
study, we compared cardiorenal outcomes and safety of new treatment with GLP-1RA 
and SGLT-2i in people with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: We linked data from national Swedish databases to capture patient 
characteristics and outcomes and used propensity-score based matching to account 
for differences between the two groups. The treatments were compared using Cox 
regression models.
RESULTS: We identified 9648 participants starting GLP-1RA and 12,097 starting 
SGLT-2i with median follow-up times 1.7 and 1.1 years, respectively. The 
proportion of patients with a history of MACE were 15.8%, and 17.0% in patients 
treated with GLP-1RA and SGLT-2i, respectively. The mean age was 61 years with 
7.6 years duration of diabetes. Mean HbA1c were 8.3% (67.6 mmol/mol) and 8.3% 
(67.2 mmol/mol), and mean BMI 33.3 and 32.5 kg/m2 in patients treated with 
GLP-1RA or SGLT-2i, respectively. The cumulative mortality risk was 
non-significantly lower in the group treated with SGLT-2i, HR 0.78 (95% CI 
0.61-1.01), as were incident heart failure outcomes, but the risks of 
cardiovascular or renal outcomes did not differ. The risks of stroke and 
peripheral artery disease were higher in the SGLT-2i group relative to GLP-1RA, 
with HR 1.44 (95% CI 0.99-2.08) and 1.68 (95% CI 1.04-2.72), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This observational study suggests that treatment with GLP-1RA and 
SGLT-2i result in very similar cardiorenal outcomes. In the short term, 
treatment with GLP-1RA seem to be associated with lower risks of stroke and 
peripheral artery disease, whereas SGLT-2i seem to be nominally associated with 
lower risk of heart failure and total mortality.

DOI: 10.1186/s12933-021-01258-x
PMCID: PMC7983265
PMID: 33752680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Eliasson reports personal fees (expert 
panels, lectures) from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, 
Merck Sharp & Dohme, Mundipharma, Navamedic, NovoNordisk, RLS Global, grants and 
personal fees from Sanofi, all outside the submitted work. Naveed Sattar has 
received honoraria from Merck, GSK, MSD, and Novo Nordisk. Moa Lugner, Mervete 
Miftaraj, Jan Ekelund, Stefan Franzén and Ann-Marie Svensson declare that they 
have no competing interests.