1. Mol Med Rep. 2021 May;23(5):323. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2021.11962. Epub 2021 Mar
24.

lncRNA‑MIAT facilitates the differentiation of adipose‑derived mesenchymal stem 
cells into lymphatic endothelial cells via the miR‑495/Prox1 axis.

Dai XW(1), Luo W(2), Lv CL(3).

Author information:
(1)Intensive Care Unit, Hunan Cancer Hospital and The Affiliated Cancer Hospital 
of Xiangya Medical School, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, 
P.R. China.
(2)Nuclear Medicine Department, Hunan Cancer Hospital and The Affiliated Cancer 
Hospital of Xiangya Medical School, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 
410013, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Breast Tumor Plastic Surgery (Third Department of Head and Neck 
Surgery), Hunan Cancer Hospital and The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya 
Medical School, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. China.

The development of novel treatments for lymphedema is hindered by the poorly 
understood pathophysiology of the disease. To improve the therapeutic success of 
treating the disease, the present study aimed to investigate the effects and 
mechanism of long non‑coding RNA myocardial infarction‑associated transcript 
(MIAT) in terms of the differentiation of adipose‑derived mesenchymal stem 
cells (ADMSCs) into lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs). The expression levels of 
(MIAT), microRNA (miR)‑495 and Prospero‑related homeobox 1 (Prox1) were measured 
by reverse transcription‑quantitative PCR. The protein expression levels of 
Prox1, lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor 1 (LYVE‑1), vascular 
endothelial growth factor receptor‑3 (VEGFR‑3) and podoplanin (PDPL) were 
detected by western blotting and immunofluorescence. A dual‑luciferase reporter 
assay was also used to detect the interaction between MIAT, miR‑495 and Prox1. 
In addition, migration and tube‑formation capabilities were measured by 
Transwell assay and tube‑formation assay, respectively. The results obtained 
demonstrated that VEGF‑C156S (recombinant VEGF‑C in which Cys156 was replaced by 
Ser residue) treatment could efficiently induce the differentiation of ADMSCs 
into LECs. MIAT expression was upregulated and miR‑495 was downregulated during 
differentiation. Mechanistically, MIAT upregulated Prox1 expression possibly by 
acting as a molecular sponge for miR‑495. Functional analyses indicated that the 
expression levels of Prox1, LYVE‑1, VEGFR‑3 and PDPL, and the migration and 
tube‑formation capabilities of ADMSCs induced by VEGF‑C156S, were significantly 
inhibited by silencing MIAT and overexpressing miR‑495. Moreover, miR‑495 
inhibition and Prox1 overexpression reversed the effects of MIAT downregulation 
and miR‑495 upregulation, respectively, on the differentiation of ADMSCs into 
LECs. Taken together, these results suggested that MIAT may be involved in the 
differentiation of ADMSCs into LECs, and that the MIAT/miR‑495/Prox1 axis may be 
a novel regulatory mechanism and therapeutic target for the treatment of 
lymphedema.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2021.11962
PMID: 33760182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]