1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Apr 19;49(7):3692-3708. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab194.

Effect of small molecule eRF3 degraders on premature termination codon 
readthrough.

Baradaran-Heravi A(1), Balgi AD(1), Hosseini-Farahabadi S(1), Choi K(1), Has 
C(2), Roberge M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of 
Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.

Premature termination codon (PTC) readthrough is considered a potential 
treatment for genetic diseases caused by nonsense mutations. High concentrations 
of aminoglycosides induce low levels of PTC readthrough but also elicit severe 
toxicity. Identifying compounds that enhance PTC readthrough by aminoglycosides 
or reduce their toxicity is a continuing challenge. In humans, a binary complex 
of eukaryotic release factors 1 (eRF1) and 3 (eRF3a or eRF3b) mediates 
translation termination. They also participate in the SURF (SMG1-UPF1-eRF1-eRF3) 
complex assembly involved in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). We show that 
PTC readthrough by aminoglycoside G418 is considerably enhanced by eRF3a and 
eRF3b siRNAs and cereblon E3 ligase modulators CC-885 and CC-90009, which induce 
proteasomal degradation of eRF3a and eRF3b. eRF3 degradation also reduces eRF1 
levels and upregulates UPF1 and selectively stabilizes TP53 transcripts bearing 
a nonsense mutation over WT, indicating NMD suppression. CC-90009 is 
considerably less toxic than CC-885 and it enhances PTC readthrough in 
combination with aminoglycosides in mucopolysaccharidosis type I-Hurler, late 
infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, Duchenne muscular dystrophy and 
junctional epidermolysis bullosa patient-derived cells with nonsense mutations 
in the IDUA, TPP1, DMD and COL17A1 genes, respectively. Combination of CC-90009 
with aminoglycosides such as gentamicin or ELX-02 may have potential for PTC 
readthrough therapy.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab194
PMCID: PMC8053119
PMID: 33764477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]