1. PLoS One. 2021 Mar 24;16(3):e0247989. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0247989. 
eCollection 2021.

Polymorphisms of T- cell leukemia 1A gene loci are not related to the 
development of adjuvant letrozole-induced adverse events in breast cancer.

Umamaheswaran G(1), Kadambari D(2), Muthuvel SK(3), Kumar NAN(2), Dubashi B(4), 
Aibor Dkhar S(1), Adithan C(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Centre for Advanced Research in Pharmacogenomics, 
Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), 
Puducherry, India.
(2)Departments of Surgery and Medical Education, Jawaharlal Institute of 
Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Puducherry, India.
(3)Center for Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Pondicherry University, 
Puducherry, India.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Regional Cancer Center, Jawaharlal Institute 
of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Puducherry, India.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate 
Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Puducherry, India.

Letrozole, an aromatase inhibitor (AI), is the first-line adjuvant drug for 
treating hormone receptor-positive (HR+) breast cancer in postmenopausal women. 
However, harmful adverse events (AEs) and significant differences in drug 
response among individuals remain a significant problem in clinical application. 
Current evidence suggests that the observed individual variation in the 
treatment outcomes of AI is conferred by genetic variants. Hence, in this study, 
we examined the association of TCL1A gene polymorphisms with letrozole-induced 
AEs. The study subjects were postmenopausal HR+ breast cancer patients who were 
receiving adjuvant letrozole. Genomic DNA was isolated by a routine standard 
phenol-chloroform method. In total, 198 South Indian patients were genotyped for 
four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TCL1A gene loci by the TaqMan 
allelic discrimination assay using the RT-PCR system. We used the odds ratio and 
95% confidence interval to assess the genetic association. Musculoskeletal (MS) 
AEs and vasomotor symptoms (VMSs) are the most common side effects observed in 
the study cohort. Among 198 patients, 81 experienced musculoskeletal toxicity, 
reporting MS-AEs, 57 had VMSs, and 33 of them had both. The most frequently 
identified polymorphic variants in the patient series were rs11849538 (G), with 
an allele frequency of about 27.3%, followed by rs7158782-G (27.3%), rs7159713-G 
(25.8%), and rs2369049-G (22.5%). The genetic association analysis indicated no 
significant difference in the proportion of TCL1A gene variants between patients 
with and without AEs on either MS-AEs or VMSs. Though we observed high LD in all 
patient groups, the inferred haplotypes displayed a non-significant association 
with letrozole-induced specific AEs. However, the SNP functionality analysis by 
RegulomeDB provided a 2b rank score for rs7158782, suggesting a potential 
biological function. Our findings suggest that TCL1A gene polymorphisms may not 
play any role in the prediction of letrozole-induced AEs in South Indian HR+ 
breast cancer patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0247989
PMCID: PMC7990231
PMID: 33760860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.