1. Angiogenesis. 2021 Aug;24(3):677-693. doi: 10.1007/s10456-021-09781-x. Epub
2021  Mar 26.

Depletion of Arg/Abl2 improves endothelial cell adhesion and prevents vascular 
leak during inflammation.

Amado-Azevedo J(#)(1), van Stalborch AD(#)(2), Valent ET(1), Nawaz K(2), van 
Bezu J(1), Eringa EC(1), Hoevenaars FPM(1), De Cuyper IM(2), Hordijk PL(1), van 
Hinsbergh VWM(1), van Nieuw Amerongen GP(1), Aman J(#)(3)(4), Margadant C(#)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam 
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Physiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam 
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.aman@amsterdamumc.nl.
(4)Department of Pulmonology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam 
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.aman@amsterdamumc.nl.
(5)Angiogenesis Laboratory, Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Center 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Angiogenesis. 2022 Feb;25(1):145. doi: 10.1007/s10456-021-09808-3.

Endothelial barrier disruption and vascular leak importantly contribute to organ 
dysfunction and mortality during inflammatory conditions like sepsis and acute 
respiratory distress syndrome. We identified the kinase Arg/Abl2 as a mediator 
of endothelial barrier disruption, but the role of Arg in endothelial monolayer 
regulation and its relevance in vivo remain poorly understood. Here we show that 
depletion of Arg in endothelial cells results in the activation of both RhoA and 
Rac1, increased cell spreading and elongation, redistribution of 
integrin-dependent cell-matrix adhesions to the cell periphery, and improved 
adhesion to the extracellular matrix. We further show that Arg is activated in 
the endothelium during inflammation, both in murine lungs exposed to 
barrier-disruptive agents, and in pulmonary microvessels of septic patients. 
Importantly, Arg-depleted endothelial cells were less sensitive to 
barrier-disruptive agents. Despite the formation of F-actin stress fibers and 
myosin light chain phosphorylation, Arg depletion diminished adherens junction 
disruption and intercellular gap formation, by reducing the disassembly of 
cell-matrix adhesions and cell retraction. In vivo, genetic deletion of Arg 
diminished vascular leak in the skin and lungs, in the presence of a normal 
immune response. Together, our data indicate that Arg is a central and 
non-redundant regulator of endothelial barrier integrity, which contributes to 
cell retraction and gap formation by increasing the dynamics of adherens 
junctions and cell-matrix adhesions in a Rho GTPase-dependent fashion. 
Therapeutic inhibition of Arg may provide a suitable strategy for the treatment 
of a variety of clinical conditions characterized by vascular leak.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10456-021-09781-x
PMCID: PMC7996118
PMID: 33770321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.