1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Mar 6;22(5):2679. doi: 10.3390/ijms22052679.

Sperm Methylome Profiling Can Discern Fertility Levels in the Porcine Biomedical 
Model.

Pértille F(1), Alvarez-Rodriguez M(2), da Silva AN(1)(3), Barranco I(2)(4), Roca 
J(4), Guerrero-Bosagna C(1)(5), Rodriguez-Martinez H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Linköping University, SE-58183 
Linköping, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biomedical & Clinical Sciences (BKV), Linköping University, 
SE-58185 Linköping, Sweden.
(3)School of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine, University of Passo Fundo, Passo 
Fundo RS 99052-900, Brazil.
(4)Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, University of Murcia, 30100 
Murcia, Spain.
(5)Environmental Toxicology Program, Department of Organismal Biology, Uppsala 
University, 752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.

A combined Genotyping By Sequencing (GBS) and methylated DNA immunoprecipitation 
(MeDIP) protocol was used to identify-in parallel-genetic variation 
(Genomic-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) and epigenetic differences of 
Differentially Methylated Regions (DMR) in the genome of spermatozoa from the 
porcine animal model. Breeding boars with good semen quality (n = 11) and 
specific and well-documented differences in fertility (farrowing rate, FR) and 
prolificacy (litter size, LS) (n = 7) in artificial insemination programs, using 
combined FR and LS, were categorized as High Fertile (HF, n = 4) or Low Fertile 
(LF, n = 3), and boars with Unknown Fertility (UF, n = 4) were tested for 
eventual epigenetical similarity with those fertility-proven. We identified 
165,944 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) that explained 14-15% of variance 
among selection lines. Between HF and LF individuals (n = 7, 4 HF and 3 LF), we 
identified 169 SNPs with p ≤ 0.00015, which explained 58% of the variance. For 
the epigenetic analyses, we considered fertility and period of ejaculate 
collection (late-summer and mid-autumn). Approximately three times more DMRs 
were observed in HF than in LF boars across these periods. Interestingly, UF 
boars were clearly clustered with one of the other HF or LF groups. The highest 
differences in DMRs between HF and LF experimental groups across the pig genome 
were located in the chr 3, 9, 13, and 16, with most DMRs being hypermethylated 
in LF boars. In both HF and LF boars, DMRs were mostly hypermethylated in 
late-summer compared to mid-autumn. Three overlaps were detected between SNPs (p 
≤ 0.0005, n = 1318) and CpG sites within DMRs. In conclusion, fertility levels 
in breeding males including FR and LS can be discerned using methylome analyses. 
The findings in this biomedical animal model ought to be applied besides sire 
selection for andrological diagnosis of idiopathic sub/infertility.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22052679
PMCID: PMC7961483
PMID: 33800945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.