1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Mar 10;13(6):1205. doi: 10.3390/cancers13061205.

Dual Inhibition of AKT and MEK Pathways Potentiates the Anti-Cancer Effect of 
Gefitinib in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Cells.

You KS(1)(2), Yi YW(3), Cho J(3), Seong YS(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Convergence Medical Science, Dankook University, Cheonan 
31116, Korea.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Dankook University, Cheonan 
31116, Korea.
(3)Department of Nanobiomedical Science, Dankook University, Cheonan 31116, 
Korea.

There is an unmet medical need for the development of new targeted therapeutic 
strategies for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). With drug combination 
screenings, we found that the triple combination of the protein kinase 
inhibitors (PKIs) of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), v-akt murine 
thymoma viral oncogene homolog (AKT), and MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK) is effective in 
inducing apoptosis in TNBC cells. A set of PKIs were first screened in 
combination with gefitinib in the TNBC cell line, MDA-MB-231. The AKT inhibitor, 
AT7867, was identified and further analyzed in two mesenchymal stem-like (MSL) 
subtype TNBC cells, MDA-MB-231 and HS578T. A combination of gefitinib and AT7867 
reduced the proliferation and long-term survival of MSL TNBC cells. However, 
gefitinib and AT7867 induced the activation of the rat sarcoma (RAS)/ v-raf-1 
murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog (RAF)/MEK/ extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase (ERK) pathway. To inhibit this pathway, MEK/ERK inhibitors were further 
screened in MDA-MB-231 cells in the presence of gefitinib and AT7867. As a 
result, we identified that the MEK inhibitor, PD-0325901, further enhanced the 
anti-proliferative and anti-clonogenic effects of gefitinib and AT7867 by 
inducing apoptosis. Our results suggest that the dual inhibition of the AKT and 
MEK pathways is a novel potential therapeutic strategy for targeting EGFR in 
TNBC cells.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13061205
PMCID: PMC8000364
PMID: 33801977

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.