1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Mar 17;22(6):3052. doi: 10.3390/ijms22063052.

Transcriptional Repression of Raf Kinase Inhibitory Protein Gene by Metadherin 
during Cancer Progression.

Lai TH(1), Ahmed M(1), Hwang JS(1), Zada S(1), Pham TM(1), Elashkar O(1), Kim 
DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Convergence Medical Science and Biochemistry, Institute of 
Health Sciences, Gyeongsang National University School of Medicine, Jinju 
527-27, Korea.

Raf kinase inhibitory protein (RKIP), also known as a 
phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein 1 (PEBP1), functions as a tumor 
suppressor and regulates several signaling pathways, including ERK and NF-κκB. 
RKIP is severely downregulated in human malignant cancers, indicating a 
functional association with cancer metastasis and poor prognosis. The 
transcription regulation of RKIP gene in human cancers is not well understood. 
In this study, we suggested a possible transcription mechanism for the 
regulation of RKIP in human cancer cells. We found that Metadherin (MTDH) 
significantly repressed the transcriptional activity of RKIP gene. An analysis 
of publicly available datasets showed that the knockdown of MTDH in breast and 
endometrial cancer cell lines induced the expression RKIP. In addition, the 
results obtained from qRT-PCR and ChIP analyses showed that MTDH considerably 
inhibited RKIP expression. In addition, the RKIP transcript levels in 
MTDH-knockdown or MTDH-overexpressing MCF-7 cells were likely correlated to the 
protein levels, suggesting that MTDH regulates RKIP expression. In conclusion, 
we suggest that MTDH is a novel factor that controls the RKIP transcription, 
which is essential for cancer progression.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22063052
PMCID: PMC8002422
PMID: 33802672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.