1. Molecules. 2021 Mar 12;26(6):1556. doi: 10.3390/molecules26061556.

The Role of Single-Nucleotide Variants of NOS1, NOS2, and NOS3 Genes in the 
Comorbidity of Arterial Hypertension and Tension-Type Headache.

Shnayder NA(1)(2), Petrova MM(1), Moskaleva PV(1), Shesternya PA(1), 
Pozhilenkova EA(1), Nasyrova RF(2).

Author information:
(1)V. F. Voino-Yasenetsky Krasnoyarsk State Medical University, 660022 
Krasnoyarsk, Russia.
(2)V.M. Bekhterev National Research Medical Center for Psychiatry and Neurology, 
199034 Saint-Petersburg, Russia.

Patients with tension-type headache (TTH) have an increased risk of developing 
arterial hypertension (AH), while hypertensive subjects do seem to have an 
increased risk of TTH. We searched for full-text English publications in 
databases using keywords and combined word searches over the past 15 years. In 
addition, earlier publications of historical interest were included in the 
review. In our review, we summed up the single nucleotide variants (SNVs) of 
Nitric Oxide Synthases (NOSs) genes involved in the development of essential AH 
and TTH. The results of studies we discussed in this review are contradictory. 
This might be due to different designs of the studies, small sample sizes in 
some of them, as well as different social and geographical characteristics. 
However, the contribution of genetic and environmental factors remains 
understudied. This makes the issue interesting for researchers, as understanding 
these mechanisms can contribute to a search for new approaches to pathogenetic 
and disease-modifying treatment of the AH and TTH phenotype. New drugs against 
AH and TTH can be based on inhibition of nitric oxide (NO) production, blockade 
of steps in the NO-cGMP pathway, or NO scavenging. Indeed, selective neuronal 
NOS (n-NOS) and inducible NOS (i-NOS) inhibitors are already in early clinical 
development.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26061556
PMCID: PMC8002043
PMID: 33809023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.