1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Mar 9;22(5):2783. doi: 10.3390/ijms22052783.

TRP Channels as Cellular Targets of Particulate Matter.

Milici A(1), Talavera K(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Ion Channel Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, KU Leuven, VIB Center for Brain & Disease Research, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium.

Particulate matter (PM) is constituted by particles with sizes in the nanometer 
to micrometer scales. PM can be generated from natural sources such as 
sandstorms and wildfires, and from human activities, including combustion of 
fuels, manufacturing and construction or specially engineered for applications 
in biotechnology, food industry, cosmetics, electronics, etc. Due to their small 
size PM can penetrate biological tissues, interact with cellular components and 
induce noxious effects such as disruptions of the cytoskeleton and membranes and 
the generation of reactive oxygen species. Here, we provide an overview on the 
actions of PM on transient receptor potential (TRP) proteins, a superfamily of 
cation-permeable channels with crucial roles in cell signaling. Their expression 
in epithelial cells and sensory innervation and their high sensitivity to 
chemical, thermal and mechanical stimuli makes TRP channels prime targets in the 
major entry routes of noxious PM, which may result in respiratory, metabolic and 
cardiovascular disorders. On the other hand, the interactions between TRP 
channel and engineered nanoparticles may be used for targeted drug delivery. We 
emphasize in that much further research is required to fully characterize the 
mechanisms underlying PM-TRP channel interactions and their relevance for PM 
toxicology and biomedical applications.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22052783
PMCID: PMC7967245
PMID: 33803491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.