1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Mar 26;13(7):1536. doi: 10.3390/cancers13071536.

Mechanisms of Immune Evasion in Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia.

Pastorczak A(1), Domka K(2)(3), Fidyt K(2)(4), Poprzeczko M(2), Firczuk M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oncology and Hematology, Medical University of 
Lodz, 91-738 Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of Immunology, Medical University of Warsaw, 02-097 Warsaw, 
Poland.
(3)Doctoral School, Medical University of Warsaw, 02-091 Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, 
02-091 Warsaw, Poland.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) results from a clonal expansion of abnormal 
lymphoid progenitors of B cell (BCP-ALL) or T cell (T-ALL) origin that invade 
bone marrow, peripheral blood, and extramedullary sites. Leukemic cells, apart 
from their oncogene-driven ability to proliferate and avoid differentiation, 
also change the phenotype and function of innate and adaptive immune cells, 
leading to escape from the immune surveillance. In this review, we provide an 
overview of the genetic heterogeneity and treatment of BCP- and T-ALL. We 
outline the interactions of leukemic cells in the bone marrow microenvironment, 
mainly with mesenchymal stem cells and immune cells. We describe the mechanisms 
by which ALL cells escape from immune recognition and elimination by the immune 
system. We focus on the alterations in ALL cells, such as overexpression of 
ligands for various inhibitory receptors, including anti-phagocytic receptors on 
macrophages, NK cell inhibitory receptors, as well as T cell immune checkpoints. 
In addition, we describe how developing leukemia shapes the bone marrow 
microenvironment and alters the function of immune cells. Finally, we emphasize 
that an immunosuppressive microenvironment can reduce the efficacy of chemo- and 
immunotherapy and provide examples of preclinical studies showing strategies for 
improving ALL treatment by targeting these immunosuppressive interactions.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13071536
PMCID: PMC8037152
PMID: 33810515

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.