1. Sci Rep. 2021 Apr 7;11(1):7589. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-87211-0.

Interactions of genetic variants and prenatal stress in relation to the risk for 
recurrent respiratory infections in children.

Korhonen LS(1)(2), Lukkarinen M(3)(4), Kantojärvi K(5)(6), Räty P(3), Karlsson 
H(3)(7)(8), Paunio T(3)(5), Peltola V(4), Karlsson L(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, FinnBrain Birth Cohort Study, Turku Brain 
and Mind Center, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. lasula@utu.fi.
(2)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Turku University Hospital 
and University of Turku, P.O. Box 52, 20521, Turku, Finland. lasula@utu.fi.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, FinnBrain Birth Cohort Study, Turku Brain 
and Mind Center, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Turku University Hospital 
and University of Turku, P.O. Box 52, 20521, Turku, Finland.
(5)Genomics and Biobank Unit, Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and SleepWell Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, 
Turku, Finland.
(8)Centre for Population Health Research, University of Turku and Turku 
University Hospital, Turku, Finland.

Genetic variants may predispose children to recurrent respiratory infections 
(RRIs) but studies on genotype-environment interaction are rare. We hypothesized 
that the risk for RRIs is elevated in children with innate immune gene variants, 
and that prenatal exposure to maternal psychological distress further increases 
the risk. In a birth cohort, children with RRIs (n = 96) were identified by the 
age of 24 months and compared with the remaining cohort children (n = 894). The 
risk for RRIs in children with preselected genetic variants and the interaction 
between maternal distress during pregnancy and child genotype were assessed with 
logistic regression. The IL6 minor allele G was associated with elevated risk 
for RRIs (OR 1.55; 95% CI 1.14-2.12). Overall, there was no interaction between 
maternal psychological distress and child genotype. Exploratory analyses showed 
that, the association between the variant type of IL6 and the risk for RRIs was 
dependent on prenatal exposure to maternal psychological distress in males (OR 
1.96; 95% CI 1.04-3.67). Our study didn't find genotype-environment interaction 
between prenatal maternal distress and child genotype. Exploratory analyses 
suggest sex differences in gene-environment interaction related to 
susceptibility to RRIs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-87211-0
PMCID: PMC8027646
PMID: 33828172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.