1. Biomaterials. 2021 May;272:120786. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.120786.
Epub  2021 Mar 31.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor mRNA and Neuroprotective 
Immunity in Parkinson's disease.

Olson KE(1), Namminga KL(1), Lu Y(1), Thurston MJ(1), Schwab AD(1), de Picciotto 
S(2), Tse SW(2), Walker W(2), Iacovelli J(2), Small C(2), Wipke BT(2), Mosley 
RL(3), Huang E(2), Gendelman HE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, Center for 
Neurodegenerative Disorders, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 
68198, USA.
(2)Moderna, Inc., Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, Center for 
Neurodegenerative Disorders, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 
68198, USA. Electronic address: rlmosley@unmc.edu.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, Center for 
Neurodegenerative Disorders, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 
68198, USA. Electronic address: hegendel@unmc.edu.

Restoring numbers and function of regulatory T cells (Tregs) is a novel 
therapeutic strategy for neurodegenerative disorders. Whether Treg function is 
boosted by adoptive cell transfer, pharmaceuticals, or immune modulators, the 
final result is a robust anti-inflammatory and neuronal sparing response. 
Herein, a newly developed lipid nanoparticle (LNP) containing mRNA encoding 
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (Gm-csf mRNA) was developed to 
peripherally induce Tregs and used for treatment in preclinical Parkinson's 
disease (PD) models. Administration of Gm-csf mRNA to 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-treated mice and rats 
overexpressing alpha-synuclein produced dose-dependent increases in plasma 
GM-CSF levels and peripheral CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ Treg populations. This upregulation 
paralleled nigrostriatal neuroprotection, upregulated 
immunosuppression-associated mRNAs that led to the detection of a 
treatment-induced CD4+ T cell population, and decreased reactive microgliosis. 
The current findings strengthen prior works utilizing immune modulation by 
harnessing Gm-csf mRNA to augment adaptive immune function by employing a new 
delivery platform to treat PD and potentially other neurodegenerative disorders.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.120786
PMCID: PMC8382980
PMID: 33839625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interes t S tatement: S dP, S -WT, 
WW, J I, C S, BTW, and E Y H are employees of and hold s tock and/or s tock 
options in Moderna, Inc.