1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Jul;185(7):2271-2277. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62198. Epub 
2021 Apr 10.

Resolution of sclerotic lesions of dysosteosclerosis due to biallelic SLC29A3 
variant in a Turkish girl.

Uludağ Alkaya D(1), Akpınar E(2), Bilguvar K(3), Tüysüz B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul 
University-Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Baltalimani Bone Diseases Training and Research Center, Departments of 
Orthopedics and Traumatology, University of Health Sciences Istanbul, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Program on Neurogenetics, Yale Medical School, 
Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Dysosteosclerosis is a group of sclerosing bone dysplasia characterized by short 
stature, increased bone fragility, osteosclerosis, and platyspondyly. It is a 
genetically heterogeneous disorder caused by biallelic mutations in the SLC29A3, 
TNFRSF11A, TCIRG1, and CSF1R genes. To date, four dysosteosclerosis patients 
with SLC29A3 mutations have been reported. Here, we report biallelic SLC29A3 
(c.303_320dupCTACTTTGAGAGCTACCT) variant in a three-year-old girl. She had large 
anterior fontanelle, fracture history, short stature, camptodactyly, elbow 
contracture, and melanocytic nevus. Initial skeletal radiographs revealed 
platyspondyly, dense vertebral endplates (sandwich appearance of the vertebral 
bodies), diffuse sclerosis of the peripheral side of the pelvic bones, sclerosis 
of metaphysis and diaphysis of the long bones, metaphyseal widening, and 
diaphyseal cortical thickening. Mild sclerosis was also present in the skull 
base, maxilla, rib, scapula, and phalanges. Notably, we observed that sandwich 
vertebrae appearance significantly resolved and sclerosis of ribs, scapula, 
pelvis, and long bone metaphysis regressed over a 2.5-year period. However, 
platyspondyly, metaphyseal widening, and diaphyseal cortical thickening 
persisted. In conclusion, this study demonstrates spontaneous resolution of 
osteosclerosis, which was not described previously in patients with 
dysosteosclerosis.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62198
PMID: 33837634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]