1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Mar 24;12:642881. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.642881. 
eCollection 2021.

Identification of Critical Residues in the Carboxy Terminus of the Dopamine 
Transporter Involved in the G Protein βγ-Induced Dopamine Efflux.

Pino JA(1), Nuñez-Vivanco G(2), Hidalgo G(3), Reyes Parada M(4)(5), Khoshbouei 
H(6), Torres GE(7).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Medicina, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Atacama, 
Copiapó, Chile.
(2)Centro de Bioinformática, Simulación y Modelado, Facultad de Ingeniería, 
Universidad de Talca, Talca, Chile.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL, United States.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica y Aplicada (CIBAP), Escuela de Medicina, 
Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Autónoma de Chile, Talca, 
Chile.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, United States.
(7)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, CUNY School of 
Medicine at City College of New York, New York, NY, United States.

The dopamine transporter (DAT) plays a crucial role in the regulation of brain 
dopamine (DA) homeostasis through the re-uptake of DA back into the presynaptic 
terminal. In addition to re-uptake, DAT is also able to release DA through a 
process referred to as DAT-mediated DA efflux. This is the mechanism by which 
potent and highly addictive psychostimulants, such as amphetamine (AMPH) and its 
analogues, increase extracellular DA levels in motivational and reward areas of 
the brain. Recently, we discovered that G protein βγ subunits (Gβγ) binds to the 
DAT, and that activation of Gβγ results in DAT-mediated efflux - a similar 
mechanism as AMPH. Previously, we have shown that Gβγ binds directly to a 
stretch of 15 residues within the intracellular carboxy terminus of DAT 
(residues 582-596). Additionally, a TAT peptide containing residues 582 to 596 
of DAT was able to block the Gβγ-induced DA efflux through DAT. Here, we use a 
combination of computational biology, mutagenesis, biochemical, and functional 
assays to identify the amino acid residues within the 582-596 sequence of the 
DAT carboxy terminus involved in the DAT-Gβγ interaction and Gβγ-induced DA 
efflux. Our in-silico protein-protein docking analysis predicted the importance 
of F587 and R588 residues in a network of interactions with residues in Gβγ. In 
addition, we observed that mutating R588 to alanine residue resulted in a mutant 
DAT which exhibited attenuated DA efflux induced by Gβγ activation. We 
demonstrate that R588, and to a lesser extent F5837, located within the carboxy 
terminus of DAT play a critical role in the DAT-Gβγ physical interaction and 
promotion of DA efflux. These results identify a potential new pharmacological 
target for the treatment of neuropsychiatric conditions in which DAT 
functionality is implicated including ADHD and substance use disorder.

Copyright © 2021 Pino, Nuñez-Vivanco, Hidalgo, Reyes Parada, Khoshbouei and 
Torres.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.642881
PMCID: PMC8025876
PMID: 33841159

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.