1. NPJ Genom Med. 2021 Apr 14;6(1):28. doi: 10.1038/s41525-021-00190-z.

Genetic basis of hypercholesterolemia in adults.

Saadatagah S(#)(1), Jose M(#)(1), Dikilitas O(1), Alhalabi L(1), Miller AA(1), 
Fan X(1), Olson JE(2), Kochan DC(1), Safarova M(1), Kullo IJ(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
kullo.iftikhar@mayo.edu.
(4)Gonda Vascular Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
kullo.iftikhar@mayo.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    NPJ Genom Med. 2021 Jun 29;6(1):56. doi: 10.1038/s41525-021-00222-8.

We investigated monogenic and polygenic causes of hypercholesterolemia in a 
population-based cohort, excluding secondary hypercholesterolemia, and using an 
established framework to identify pathogenic variants. We studied 1682 
individuals (50.2 ± 8.6 years, 41.3% males) from southeast Minnesota with 
primary hypercholesterolemia (low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(LDL-C) ≥155 mg/dl in the absence of identifiable secondary causes). Familial 
hypercholesterolemia (FH) phenotype was defined as a Dutch Lipid Clinic Network 
(DLCN) score ≥6. Participants underwent sequencing of LDLR, APOB, and PCSK9, and 
genotyping of 12 LDL-C-associated single-nucleotide variants to construct a 
polygenic score (PGS) for LDL-C. The presence of a pathogenic/likely pathogenic 
variant was considered monogenic etiology and a PGS ≥90th percentile was 
considered polygenic etiology. The mean LDL-C level was 187.3 ± 32.3 mg/dl and 
phenotypic FH was present in 8.4% of the cohort. An identifiable genetic 
etiology was present in 17.1% individuals (monogenic in 1.5% and polygenic in 
15.6%). Phenotypic and genetic FH showed poor overlap. Only 26% of those who met 
the clinical criteria of FH had an identifiable genetic etiology and of those 
with an identifiable genetic etiology only 12.9% met clinical criteria for FH. 
Genetic factors explained 7.4% of the variance in LDL-C. In conclusion, in 
adults with primary hypercholesterolemia, 17.1% had an identifiable genetic 
etiology and the overlap between phenotypic and genetic FH was modest.

DOI: 10.1038/s41525-021-00190-z
PMCID: PMC8046820
PMID: 33854068

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.