1. MycoKeys. 2021 Apr 5;78:169-186. doi: 10.3897/mycokeys.78.57823. eCollection 
2021.

Multiple-marker phylogeny and morphological evidence reveal two new species in 
Steccherinaceae (Polyporales, Basidiomycota) from Asia.

Cao T(1)(2), Yu JR(1)(2), Nguyễn TTT(3), Yuan HS(1).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Forest Ecology and Management, Institute of Applied 
Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110164, China.
(2)University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, University 
of Science, Vietnam.

Two new wood-inhabiting fungi, Mycorrhaphium subadustum sp. nov. and Trullella 
conifericola sp. nov., are proposed and described from Asia based on ITS, nrLSU 
and tef1 molecular phylogeny and morphological characteristics. Mycorrhaphium 
subadustum is characterized by a stipitate basidiocarp, velutinate pileal 
surface concentrically zoned, hydnoid hymenophore, a dimitic hyphal system in 
spine trama and monomitic in context, absence of gloeocystidia, presence of 
cystidioles and the non-amyloid, cylindrical to ellipsoid basidiospores. 
Trullella conifericola is characterized by a laterally stipitate basidiocarp 
with flabelliform to semicircular pileus, hirtellous pileal surface with 
appressed coarse hair and concentrically zoned and sulcate, tiny pores (10-12 
per mm), a dimitic hyphal system, absence of any type of cystidia, short clavate 
basidia and thin-walled, smooth, cylindrical to allantoid basidiospores. 
Phylogenetic analyses based on a three-marker dataset were performed using 
maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference methods. The two new species formed 
isolated lineages with full support in Steccherinaceae. The distinguishing 
characters of the two new species as well as allied species are discussed, and a 
key to species of Mycorrhaphium is provided.

Ting Cao, Jia-Rui Yu, Trang Thị Thu Nguyễn, Hai-Sheng Yuan.

DOI: 10.3897/mycokeys.78.57823
PMCID: PMC8041734
PMID: 33883969