1. Elife. 2021 Apr 22;10:e63713. doi: 10.7554/eLife.63713.

The cis-regulatory effects of modern human-specific variants.

Weiss CV(#)(1), Harshman L(#)(2)(3), Inoue F(2)(3), Fraser HB(1), Petrov DA(1), 
Ahituv N(2)(3), Gokhman D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, Stanford, United 
States.
(2)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(3)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

The Neanderthal and Denisovan genomes enabled the discovery of sequences that 
differ between modern and archaic humans, the majority of which are noncoding. 
However, our understanding of the regulatory consequences of these differences 
remains limited, in part due to the decay of regulatory marks in ancient 
samples. Here, we used a massively parallel reporter assay in embryonic stem 
cells, neural progenitor cells, and bone osteoblasts to investigate the 
regulatory effects of the 14,042 single-nucleotide modern human-specific 
variants. Overall, 1791 (13%) of sequences containing these variants showed 
active regulatory activity, and 407 (23%) of these drove differential expression 
between human groups. Differentially active sequences were associated with 
divergent transcription factor binding motifs, and with genes enriched for vocal 
tract and brain anatomy and function. This work provides insight into the 
regulatory function of variants that emerged along the modern human lineage and 
the recent evolution of human gene expression.

Â© 2021, Weiss et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.63713
PMCID: PMC8062137
PMID: 33885362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CW, LH, FI, HF, DP, NA, DG No competing 
interests declared