1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Apr 7;9:653322. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.653322. 
eCollection 2021.

Mitochondria Donation by Mesenchymal Stem Cells: Current Understanding and 
Mitochondria Transplantation Strategies.

Gomzikova MO(1)(2), James V(3), Rizvanov AA(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Fundamental Medicine and Biology, Kazan Federal University, 
Kazan, Russia.
(2)M.M. Shemyakin-Yu.A. Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
(3)School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, United Kingdom.

The phenomenon of mitochondria donation is found in various tissues of humans 
and animals and is attracting increasing attention. To date, numerous studies 
have described the transfer of mitochondria from stem cells to injured cells, 
leading to increased ATP production, restoration of mitochondria function, and 
rescue of recipient cells from apoptosis. Mitochondria transplantation is 
considered as a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of mitochondrial 
diseases and mitochondrial function deficiency. Mitochondrial dysfunction 
affects cells with high energy needs such as neural, skeletal muscle, heart, and 
liver cells and plays a crucial role in type 2 diabetes, as well as Parkinson's, 
Alzheimer's diseases, ischemia, stroke, cancer, and age-related disorders. In 
this review, we summarize recent findings in the field of mitochondria donation 
and mechanism of mitochondria transfer between cells. We review the existing 
clinical trials and discuss advantages and disadvantages of mitochondrial 
transplantation strategies based on the injection of stem cells, isolated 
functional mitochondria, or EVs containing mitochondria.

Copyright Â© 2021 Gomzikova, James and Rizvanov.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.653322
PMCID: PMC8058353
PMID: 33898449

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.