1. Immunol Invest. 2022 Jul;51(5):1182-1197. doi: 10.1080/08820139.2021.1916524. 
Epub 2021 Apr 26.

Association between the Genetic Polymorphisms of CCL2, CCL5, CCL8, CCR2, and 
CCR5 with Chronic Hepatitis C Virus Infection in the Chinese Han Population.

Shao LN(1), Zhou SH(1), Wang N(1), Zhang ST(1), Liu M(2).

Author information:
(1)Blood Group Reference Laboratory, Dalian Blood Center, Dalian, Liaoning, 
China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning, 
China.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a global public health burden. Chronic HCV 
infection leads to the development of fibrosis, cirrhosis, liver cancer, and 
liver failure over time. A total of 250 patients with chronic HCV infection and 
299 healthy blood donors were recruited. Sixteen candidate single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2), CCL5, CCL8, C-C 
chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2), and CCR5 were genotyped in all participants. The 
rs1024610 AA genotype was significantly associated with decreased susceptibility 
to chronic HCV infection. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels, AST/platelet 
ratio index, and the fibrosis 4 score were significantly lower in the CCL2 
rs1024610 T allele and haplotype ATGC carriers. Moreover, expression levels of 
collagen IV (C-IV) and laminin (LN) were significantly higher in patients with 
the CCL5 rs2280788 C allele compared to the non-carriers. Similarly, the 
expression levels of C-IV, LN, and hyaluronic acid were significantly higher in 
patients with the CCL5 haplotype, TGCT. No significant differences were 
identified between the SNPs/haplotypes and plasma levels of CCL2, CCL5, CCL8, 
CCR2, and CCR5 in the healthy controls, and the rs1024610 allele alteration had 
no effect on CCL2 promoter activity. This is the first study to report an 
association between CCL2 rs1024610 and the risk of chronic HCV infection in the 
Chinese Han population. rs1024610 and ATGC haplotype in CCL2 were reasonable 
candidate markers of liver abnormalities. rs2280788 and TGCT haplotype in CCL5 
are likely to play a significant role in liver fibrosis during chronic HCV 
infection.

DOI: 10.1080/08820139.2021.1916524
PMID: 33902378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]