1. Cells. 2021 Apr 7;10(4):825. doi: 10.3390/cells10040825.

Phosphorylation of Kindlins and the Control of Integrin Function.

Bialkowska K(1), Qin J(1), Plow EF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Lerner Research 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Integrins serve as conduits for the transmission of information between cells 
and their extracellular environment. Signaling across integrins is 
bidirectional, transducing both inside-out and outside-signaling. Integrin 
activation, a transition from a low affinity/avidity state to a high 
affinity/avidity state for cognate ligands, is an outcome of inside-signaling. 
Such activation is particularly important for the recognition of soluble ligands 
by blood cells but also influences cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions. 
Integrin activation depends on a complex series of interactions, which both 
accelerate and inhibit their interconversion from the low to the high 
affinity/avidity state. There are three components regarded as being most 
proximately involved in integrin activation: the integrin cytoplasmic tails, 
talins and kindlins. The participation of each of these molecules in integrin 
activation is highly regulated by post-translation modifications. The importance 
of targeted phosphorylation of integrin cytoplasmic tails and talins in integrin 
activation is well-established, but much less is known about the role of 
post-translational modification of kindlins. The kindlins, a three-member family 
of 4.1-ezrin-radixin-moesin (FERM)-domain proteins in mammals, bind directly to 
the cytoplasmic tails of integrin beta subunits. This commentary provides a 
synopsis of the emerging evidence for the role of kindlin phosphorylation in 
integrin regulation.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10040825
PMCID: PMC8067640
PMID: 33916922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.