1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Apr 8;18(8):3936. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18083936.

Biocompatibility of a HA/β-TCP/C Scaffold as a Pulp-Capping Agent for Vital Pulp 
Treatment: An In Vivo Study in Rat Molars.

Guerrero-Gironés J(1), Alcaina-Lorente A(2), Ortiz-Ruiz C(3), Ortiz-Ruiz E(4), 
Pecci-Lloret MP(1), Ortiz-Ruiz AJ(2), Rodríguez-Lozano FJ(1), Pecci-Lloret 
MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Special Care and Gerodontology Unit, IMIB-Arrixaca, Campus Regional de 
Excelencia Internacional "Campus Mare Nostrum", University of Murcia, 30008 
Murcia, Spain.
(2)Department of Integral Pediatric Dentistry, University of Murcia, 30008 
Murcia, Spain.
(3)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine and Biosanitary Research Murcian 
Institute (IMIB), University of Murcia, 30120 Murcia, Spain.
(4)Department of Histopathology, University Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, 
30120 Murcia, Spain.

Bioceramic materials possess desirable biological properties, highlighting their 
non-reactivity and osteoconductivity. Their use has been extended in vital pulp 
treatment. The purpose of this study was to evaluate and compare the effects of 
beta-tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP), hydroxyapatite (HA), and collagen (C) 
scaffold with mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) on the vital pulp of rat molars. 
Thirty-two molars of Sprague-Dawley rats underwent direct pulp capping with 
β-TCP/HA/C (n = 16) and MTA (n = 16). After 30 days, the following parameters 
were evaluated in the tested samples: the degree of pulp inflammation and pulp 
vitality, the presence of reparative dentin, the homogeneity of the 
odontoblastic layer, and the presence of pulp fibrosis. No statistically 
significant differences were observed between HA/β-TCP/C and MTA in terms of the 
degree of inflammation (p = 0.124). Significant differences were found in 
reparative dentin formation between the treatment groups (p = 0.0005). Dentin 
bridge formation was observed in the MTA-treated group. The local action of 
HA/β-TCP/C is similar to that of MTA when used as an agent for pulp vital 
treatment in terms of absence of inflammation and maintenance of pulp vitality, 
although there are significant differences between both materials regarding the 
formation of dentin bridges.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18083936
PMCID: PMC8068992
PMID: 33918101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.