1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Apr 25;13(9):2084. doi: 10.3390/cancers13092084.

EBUS-TBNA Cytological Samples for Comprehensive Molecular Testing in Non-Small 
Cell Lung Cancer.

Martin-Deleon R(1), Teixido C(2)(3), Lucena CM(1), Martinez D(3), Fontana A(1), 
Reyes R(2)(4), García M(3), Viñolas N(2)(4), Vollmer I(5), Sanchez M(5), Jares 
P(3), Pérez FM(3), Vega N(3), Marin E(2), Marrades RM(1), Agustí C(1), Reguart 
N(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Thoracic Oncology Unit, Hospital Clínic 
of Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Translational Genomic and Targeted Therapeutics in Solid Tumors, August Pi i 
Sunyer Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBAPS), 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Pathology, Thoracic Oncology Unit, Hospital Clínic of 
Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Thoracic Oncology Unit, Hospital Clínic of 
Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Radiology, Thoracic Oncology Unit, Hospital Clínic of 
Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

Clinical guidelines promote the identification of several targetable biomarkers 
to drive treatment decisions in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but 
half of all patients do not have a viable biopsy. Specimens from 
endobronchial-ultrasound transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) are an 
alternative source of material for the initial diagnosis of NSCLC, however their 
usefulness for a complete molecular characterization remains controversial. 
EBUS-TBNA samples were prospectively tested for several biomarkers by 
next-generation sequencing (NGS), nCounter, and immunohistochemistry (PD-L1). 
The primary objectives were to assess the sensitivity of EBUS-TBNA samples for a 
comprehensive molecular characterization and to compare its performance to the 
reference standard of biopsy samples. Seventy-two EBUS-TBNA procedures were 
performed, and 42 NSCLC patients were diagnosed. Among all cytological samples, 
92.9% were successfully genotyped by NGS, 95.2% by nCounter, and 100% by 
immunohistochemistry. There were 29 paired biopsy samples; 79.3% samples had 
enough tumor material for genomic genotyping, and 96.6% for PD-L1 
immunohistochemistry. A good concordance was found between both sources of 
material: 88.9% for PD-L1, 100% for NGS and nCounter. EBUS-TBNA is a feasible 
alternative source of material for NSCLC genotyping and allows the 
identification of patient candidates for personalized therapies with high 
concordance when compared with biopsy.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13092084
PMCID: PMC8123471
PMID: 33923116

Conflict of interest statement: CT reports personal fees from Diaceutics, 
grants, personal fees and non-financial support from Pfizer, grants, personal 
fees and non-financial support from Novartis, personal fees from MSD, personal 
fees from Astrazeneca, personal fees and non-financial support from Takeda, 
personal fees from Roche, outside the submitted work. NR has received reports 
grants from Pfizer WI230526, grants from Novartis CINC280AES01T, grants from 
Ministry of Health, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain (FIS16/00890), during 
the conduct of the study; personal fees from MSD, personal fees from Amgem, 
personal fees from Takeda, personal fees from Astrazeneca, personal fees from 
Novartis, personal fees from Abbie, personal fees from Pfizer, personal fees 
from Guardant Health, personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, personal fees 
from Roche, personal fees from BMS, outside the submitted work. R.M.-D., C.M.L., 
D.M., A.F., R.R., M.G., N.V., I.V., M.S., P.J., F.M.P., N.V., E.M., R.M.M., and 
C.A. have declared no conflicts of interest.