1. Molecules. 2021 Apr 11;26(8):2196. doi: 10.3390/molecules26082196.

Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles Alleviate Chilling Stress in Rice (Oryza Sativa L.) by 
Regulating Antioxidative System and Chilling Response Transcription Factors.

Song Y(1)(2), Jiang M(2), Zhang H(3), Li R(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Agronomy, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei 230036, China.
(2)National Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, Institute of Crop Sciences, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou 310029, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, Chinese National Center for Rice 
Improvement, China National Rice Research Institute, Hangzhou 310029, China.

As one of the common abiotic stresses, chilling stress has negative effects on 
rice growth and development. Minimization of these adverse effects through 
various ways is vital for the productivity of rice. Nanoparticles (NPs) serve as 
one of the effective alleviation methods against abiotic stresses. In our 
research, zinc oxide (ZnO) NPs were utilized as foliar sprays on rice leaves to 
explore the mechanism underlying the effect of NPs against the negative impact 
of chilling stress on rice seedlings. We revealed that foliar application of ZnO 
NPs significantly alleviated chilling stress in hydroponically grown rice 
seedlings, including improved plant height, root length, and dry biomass. 
Besides, ZnO NPs also restored chlorophyll accumulation and significantly 
ameliorated chilling-induced oxidative stress with reduced levels of H2O2, MDA, 
proline, and increased activities of major antioxidative enzymes, superoxide 
dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), and peroxidase (POD). We further found that 
foliar application of ZnO NPs induced the chilling-induced gene expression of 
the antioxidative system (OsCu/ZnSOD1, OsCu/ZnSOD2, OsCu/ZnSOD3, OsPRX11, 
OsPRX65, OsPRX89, OsCATA, and OsCATB) and chilling response transcription 
factors (OsbZIP52, OsMYB4, OsMYB30, OsNAC5, OsWRKY76, and OsWRKY94) in leaves of 
chilling-treated seedlings. Taken together, our results suggest that foliar 
application of ZnO NPs could alleviate chilling stress in rice via the mediation 
of the antioxidative system and chilling response transcription factors.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26082196
PMCID: PMC8069548
PMID: 33920363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.