1. Viruses. 2021 Apr 20;13(4):714. doi: 10.3390/v13040714.

Impact of IL10, MTP, SOD2, and APOE Gene Polymorphisms on the Severity of Liver 
Fibrosis Induced by HCV Genotype 4.

Hemeda AA(1), Ahmad Mohamed A(2), Aziz RK(3), Abdel-Hakeem MS(3), Ali-Tammam 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
and Pharmaceutical Industries, Future University in Egypt, Cairo 11835, Egypt.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Hepatology and 
Tropical Medicine Research Institute, Cairo 11562, Egypt.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo 
University, Cairo 11562, Egypt.

Complications of hepatitis C virus (HCV) chronic infection cause ~400,000 deaths 
worldwide annually. One complication, liver fibrosis, is influenced by host 
genetic factors. Genes influencing fibrosis include immune, metabolic, oxidative 
stress, and viral entry genes, such as interleukin 10 (IL10), microsomal 
triglyceride-transfer protein (MTP), superoxide dismutase-2 (SOD2), and 
apolipoprotein E (APOE)-encoding genes, respectively. Thus, correlating 
variations in these genes with HCV-induced fibrosis represents an attractive 
biomarker for the prognosis of fibrosis severity in chronically infected 
patients. Here, we aimed to test whether polymorphisms in IL10, MTP, SOD2, and 
APOE genes correlated with the severity of fibrosis induced by HCV genotype 4 
(HCV-gt4) in a cohort of chronically infected Egyptian patients. Our results 
demonstrate a significant association between the severity of fibrosis and 
specific SNPs in IL-10, SOD2, and ApoE-encoding genes. Haplotype-combination 
analysis for IL10, MTP, SOD2, and APOE showed statistically significant 
associations between specific haplotype combinations and fibrosis severity. 
Identifying biomarkers correlating with the severity of HCV-gt4-induced fibrosis 
would significantly impact precision prophylaxis and treatment of patients at 
risk.

DOI: 10.3390/v13040714
PMCID: PMC8074775
PMID: 33924242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.