1. Biology (Basel). 2021 Apr 13;10(4):323. doi: 10.3390/biology10040323.

Tachyporinae Revisited: Phylogeny, Evolution, and Higher Classification Based on 
Morphology, with Recognition of a New Rove Beetle Subfamily (Coleoptera: 
Staphylinidae).

Yamamoto S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Research Center, Field Museum of Natural History, 1400 S Lake 
Shore Drive, Chicago, IL 60605, USA.
(2)The Hokkaido University Museum, Hokkaido University, Kita 8, Nishi 5, 
Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0808, Japan.

Erratum in
    Biology (Basel). 2022 Jul 27;11(8):1124. doi: 10.3390/biology11081124.

Tachyporinae are one of the most phylogenetically problematic subfamilies in the 
mega-diverse rove beetle family Staphylinidae. Despite its high diversity and 
abundance in forest micro-environments, with over 1600 species worldwide, 
several previous studies had refuted the monophyly of this subfamily and its 
largest tribe, Tachyporini. Based on the results of morphology-based 
phylogenetic analyses and direct examination of specimens encompassing two 
extinct and all forty extant genera, a new suprageneric classification of 
Tachyporinae is proposed here, with the removal of the tribe Mycetoporini into a 
newly recognized subfamily Mycetoporinae stat. nov. Four tribes with two 
subtribes are arranged within Tachyporinae sensu nov.: Tachyporini sensu nov. 
(Tachyporina stat. nov., sensu nov. and Euconosomatina stat. rev., sensu nov.), 
Vatesini sensu nov., Deropini, and Tachinusini stat. rev., sensu nov. (= 
Megarthropsini syn. nov.). Urolitus syn. nov. is placed as a junior synonym of 
Sepedophilus. Additionally, Palporus stat. nov. is raised to a distinct genus 
from a subgenus of Tachyporus sensu. nov., and â€ Mesotachyporus syn. nov. is 
synonymized with the latter. Mycetoporine Bobitobus stat. rev. is resurrected 
from synonymy with Lordithon sensu nov., and considered as a valid genus. My 
revised classification provides a novel framework for taxonomic inventories and 
ecological studies of these groups.

DOI: 10.3390/biology10040323
PMCID: PMC8069000
PMID: 33924435

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.