1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Jul;185(7):2094-2101. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62227. Epub 
2021 May 3.

Craniofacial features of 3q29 deletion syndrome: Application of next-generation 
phenotyping technology.

Mak BC(1), Sanchez Russo R(1), Gambello MJ(1)(2), Fleischer N(3), Black ED(1), 
Leslie E(1), Murphy MM(1); Emory 3q29 Project(1); Mulle JG(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School, of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(3)FDNA Inc, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

3q29 deletion syndrome (3q29del) is a recurrent deletion syndrome associated 
with neuropsychiatric disorders and congenital anomalies. Dysmorphic facial 
features have been described but not systematically characterized. This study 
aims to detail the 3q29del craniofacial phenotype and use a machine learning 
approach to categorize individuals with 3q29del through analysis of 2D photos. 
Detailed dysmorphology exam and 2D facial photos were ascertained from 31 
individuals with 3q29del. Photos were used to train the next-generation 
phenotyping algorithm DeepGestalt (Face2Gene by FDNA, Inc, Boston, MA) to 
distinguish 3q29del cases from controls and all other recognized syndromes. Area 
under the curve of receiver operating characteristic curves (AUC-ROC) was used 
to determine the capacity of Face2Gene to identify 3q29del cases against 
controls. In this cohort, the most common observed craniofacial features were 
prominent forehead (48.4%), prominent nose tip (35.5%), and thin upper lip 
vermillion (25.8%). The FDNA technology showed an ability to distinguish cases 
from controls with an AUC-ROC value of 0.873 (p = 0.006) and led to the 
inclusion of 3q29del as one of the supported syndromes. This study found a 
recognizable facial pattern in 3q29del, as observed by trained clinical 
geneticists and next-generation phenotyping technology. These results expand the 
potential application of automated technology such as FDNA in identifying rare 
genetic syndromes, even when facial dysmorphology is subtle.

© 2021 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62227
PMCID: PMC8250870
PMID: 33938623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NF is a full time employee of FDNA, Inc (Boston, 
MA). All other authors declare there are no conflicts of interest. The authors 
confirm that the data supporting the findings of this study are available within 
the article or its supplementary materials.