1. Front Immunol. 2021 Apr 16;12:673196. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.673196. 
eCollection 2021.

Adapting T Cell Receptor Ligand Discrimination Capability via LAT.

Lo WL(1), Weiss A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Rosalind Russell and Ephraim P. Engleman Arthritis 
Research Center, Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, United States.

Self- and non-self ligand discrimination is a core principle underlying T 
cell-mediated immunity. Mature αβ T cells can respond to a foreign peptide 
ligand presented by major histocompatibility complex molecules (pMHCs) on 
antigen presenting cells, on a background of continuously sensed self-pMHCs. How 
αβ T cells can properly balance high sensitivity and high specificity to foreign 
pMHCs, while surrounded by a sea of self-peptide ligands is not well understood. 
Such discrimination cannot be explained solely by the affinity parameters of T 
cell antigen receptor (TCR) and pMHC interaction. In this review, we will 
discuss how T cell ligand discrimination may be molecularly defined by events 
downstream of the TCR-pMHC interaction. We will discuss new evidence in support 
of the kinetic proofreading model of TCR ligand discrimination, and in 
particular how the kinetics of specific phosphorylation sites within the adaptor 
protein linker for activation of T cells (LAT) determine the outcome of TCR 
signaling. In addition, we will discuss emerging data regarding how some 
kinases, including ZAP-70 and LCK, may possess scaffolding functions to more 
efficiently direct their kinase activities.

Copyright © 2021 Lo and Weiss.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.673196
PMCID: PMC8085316
PMID: 33936119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.