1. Molecules. 2021 Apr 29;26(9):2607. doi: 10.3390/molecules26092607.

Evaluation of Small Molecule Combinations against Respiratory Syncytial Virus In 
Vitro.

Gao Y(1), Cao J(1), Xing P(1), Altmeyer R(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Microbial Technology Institute, 
Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a major pathogen that causes severe lower 
respiratory tract infection in infants, the elderly and the immunocompromised 
worldwide. At present no approved specific drugs or vaccines are available to 
treat this pathogen. Recently, several promising candidates targeting RSV entry 
and multiplication steps are under investigation. However, it is possible to 
lead to drug resistance under the long-term treatment. Therapeutic combinations 
constitute an alternative to prevent resistance and reduce antiviral doses. 
Therefore, we tested in vitro two-drug combinations of fusion inhibitors 
(GS5806, Ziresovir and BMS433771) and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase complex 
(RdRp) inhibitors (ALS8176, RSV604, and Cyclopamine). The statistical program 
MacSynergy II was employed to determine synergism, additivity or antagonism 
between drugs. From the result, we found that combinations of ALS8176 and 
Ziresovir or GS5806 exhibit additive effects against RSV in vitro, with 
interaction volume of 50 µM2% and 31 µM2% at 95% confidence interval, 
respectively. On the other hand, all combinations between fusion inhibitors 
showed antagonistic effects against RSV in vitro, with volume of antagonism 
ranging from -50 µM2 % to -176 µM2 % at 95% confidence interval. Over all, our 
results suggest the potentially therapeutic combinations in combating RSV in 
vitro could be considered for further animal and clinical evaluations.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26092607
PMCID: PMC8125180
PMID: 33946996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.