1. Front Oncol. 2021 Apr 20;11:551160. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.551160. eCollection
 2021.

Analysis of the EGFR Amplification and CDKN2A Deletion Regulated Transcriptomic 
Signatures Reveals the Prognostic Significance of SPATS2L in Patients With 
Glioma.

Wang H(1), Wang X(1), Xu L(1), Zhang J(2), Cao H(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Center, Fujian Maternity and Child Health Hospital, 
Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, 
Rui-Jin Hospital Affiliated to School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai, China.

Purpose: This study was conducted in order to analyze the prognostic effects of 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and CDKN2A alterations and determine the 
prognostic significance of EGFR and CDKN2A alterations on regulated genes in 
patients with glioblastoma (GBM) or lower grade glioma (LGG). Methods: The 
alteration frequencies of EGFR and CDKN2A across 32 tumor types were derived 
from cBioPortal based on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) datasets. The 
Kaplan-Meier analysis was used to determine the prognostic significance of EGFR 
and CDKN2A alterations. EGFR and CDKN2A alterations on regulated expression 
signatures were identified from RNA-seq data in the TCGA GBM datasets. The 
prognostic significance of EGFR and CDKN2A alterations on regulated genes in 
patients with glioma was determined using the TCGA and the Chinese Glioma Genome 
Atlas (CGGA) datasets. Results: Compared with the other 31 tumor types, EGFR 
amplification and CDKN2A deletion particularly occurred in patients with GBM. 
GBM patients with EGFR amplification or CDKN2A deletion demonstrated poor 
prognosis. Statistical analysis showed the coexistence of EGFR alteration and 
CDKN2A deletion in GBM patients. We identified 864 genes which were commonly 
regulated by EGFR amplification and CDKN2A deletion, and those genes were highly 
expressed in brain tissues and associated with the cell cycle, EBRR2, and MAPK 
signaling pathways. Spermatogenesis-associated serine-rich 2-like gene (SPATS2L) 
was upregulated in GBM patients with EGFR amplification or CDKN2A alteration. 
Higher expression levels of SPATS2L were associated with worse prognosis in 
patients with GBM in both TCGA and CGGA datasets. Moreover, the expression 
levels of SPATS2L were higher in patients with a mesenchymal subtype of GBM. 
Statistical analysis also showed that the coexistence of EGFR alteration and 
CDKN2A deletion was significant in patients with LGG. SPATS2L was upregulated in 
LGG patients with EGFR amplification or CDKN2A alteration. Furthermore, higher 
expression levels of SPATS2L were associated with worse prognosis in patients 
with LGG in both TCGA and CGGA datasets. The expression levels of SPATS2L were 
higher in patients with an astrocytoma subtype of LGG. Finally, the coexistence 
and unfavorable prognostic effects of EGFR amplification and CDKN2A alteration 
were validated using the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) glioma 
datasets. Conclusions: EGFR amplification and CDKN2A deletion of the regulated 
gene SPATS2L have significant prognostic effects in patients with GBM or LGG.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wang, Wang, Xu, Zhang and Cao.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.551160
PMCID: PMC8093400
PMID: 33959491

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.