1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Apr 23;9:634355. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.634355. 
eCollection 2021.

Recovery of Depleted miR-146a in ALS Cortical Astrocytes Reverts Cell 
Aberrancies and Prevents Paracrine Pathogenicity on Microglia and Motor Neurons.

Barbosa M(1), Gomes C(1), Sequeira C(1), Gonçalves-Ribeiro J(2)(3), Pina 
CC(2)(3), Carvalho LA(1), Moreira R(1)(4), Vaz SH(2)(3), Vaz AR(1)(4), Brites 
D(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigação do Medicamento (iMed.ULisboa), Faculdade de 
Farmácia, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Farmacologia e Neurociências, Faculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Departamento de Ciências Farmacêuticas e do Medicamento, Faculdade de 
Farmácia, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.

Reactive astrocytes in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) change their 
molecular expression pattern and release toxic factors that contribute to 
neurodegeneration and microglial activation. We and others identified a 
dysregulated inflammatory miRNA profile in ALS patients and in mice models 
suggesting that they represent potential targets for therapeutic intervention. 
Such cellular miRNAs are known to be released into the secretome and to be 
carried by small extracellular vesicles (sEVs), which may be harmful to 
recipient cells. Thus, ALS astrocyte secretome may disrupt cell homeostasis and 
impact on ALS pathogenesis. Previously, we identified a specific aberrant 
signature in the cortical brain of symptomatic SOD1-G93A (mSOD1) mice, as well 
as in astrocytes isolated from the same region of 7-day-old mSOD1 mice, with 
upregulated S100B/HMGB1/Cx43/vimentin and downregulated GFAP. The presence of 
downregulated miR-146a on both cases suggests that it can be a promising target 
for modulation in ALS. Here, we upregulated miR-146a with pre-miR-146a, and 
tested glycoursodeoxycholic acid (GUDCA) and dipeptidyl vinyl sulfone (VS) for 
their immunoregulatory properties. VS was more effective in restoring astrocytic 
miR-146a, GFAP, S100B, HMGB1, Cx43, and vimentin levels than GUDCA, which only 
recovered Cx43 and vimentin mRNA. The miR-146a inhibitor generated typical ALS 
aberrancies in wild type astrocytes that were abolished by VS. Similarly, 
pre-miR-146a transfection into the mSOD1 astrocytes abrogated aberrant markers 
and intracellular Ca2+ overload. Such treatment counteracted miR-146a depletion 
in sEVs and led to secretome-mediated miR-146a enhancement in NSC-34-motor 
neurons (MNs) and N9-microglia. Secretome from mSOD1 astrocytes increased 
early/late apoptosis and FGFR3 mRNA in MNs and microglia, but not when derived 
from pre-miR-146a or VS-treated cells. These last strategies prevented the 
impairment of axonal transport and synaptic dynamics by the pathological 
secretome, while also averted microglia activation through either secretome, or 
their isolated sEVs. Proteomic analysis of the target cells indicated that 
pre-miR-146a regulates mitochondria and inflammation via paracrine signaling. We 
demonstrate that replenishment of miR-146a in mSOD1 cortical astrocytes with 
pre-miR-146a or by VS abrogates their phenotypic aberrancies and paracrine 
deleterious consequences to MNs and microglia. These results propose miR-146a as 
a new causal and emerging therapeutic target for astrocyte pathogenic processes 
in ALS.

Copyright © 2021 Barbosa, Gomes, Sequeira, Gonçalves-Ribeiro, Pina, Carvalho, 
Moreira, Vaz, Vaz and Brites.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.634355
PMCID: PMC8103001
PMID: 33968923

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.