1. Infect Genet Evol. 2021 Sep;93:104897. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.104897. Epub
 2021 May 7.

Paired SARS-CoV-2 spike protein mutations observed during ongoing SARS-CoV-2 
viral transfer from humans to minks and back to humans.

Burkholz S(1), Pokhrel S(2), Kraemer BR(2), Mochly-Rosen D(2), Carback RT 
3rd(1), Hodge T(1), Harris P(3), Ciotlos S(1), Wang L(1), Herst CV(1), Rubsamen 
R(4).

Author information:
(1)Flow Pharma, Inc., 4829 Galaxy Parkway, Suite K, Warrensville Heights, OH 
44128, United States of America.
(2)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, 291 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, United States of America.
(3)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, 630 W 168th St, New York, NY 10032, United States of America.
(4)Flow Pharma, Inc., 4829 Galaxy Parkway, Suite K, Warrensville Heights, OH 
44128, United States of America; Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative 
Medicine, University Hospitals, Cleveland Medical Center, Case Western Reserve 
School of Medicine, 11100 Euclid Ave, Cleveland, OH 44106, United States of 
America; Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit St, Boston, MA 02114, United States of 
America. Electronic address: reid.rubsamen@uhhospitals.org.

A mutation analysis of SARS-CoV-2 genomes collected around the world sorted by 
sequence, date, geographic location, and species has revealed a large number of 
variants from the initial reference sequence in Wuhan. This analysis also 
reveals that humans infected with SARS-CoV-2 have infected mink populations in 
the Netherlands, Denmark, United States, and Canada. In these animals, a small 
set of mutations in the spike protein receptor binding domain (RBD), often 
occurring in specific combinations, has transferred back into humans. The viral 
genomic mutations in minks observed in the Netherlands and Denmark show the 
potential for new mutations on the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein RBD to be introduced 
into humans by zoonotic transfer. Our data suggests that close attention to 
viral transfer from humans to farm animals and pets will be required to prevent 
build-up of a viral reservoir for potential future zoonotic transfer.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2021.104897
PMCID: PMC8103774
PMID: 33971305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.