1. Ann Transl Med. 2021 Apr;9(8):719. doi: 10.21037/atm-21-1267.

A narrative review of changes in microvascular permeability after burn.

Chi Y(1), Liu X(1), Chai J(1).

Author information:
(1)Burn Institute, The Fourth Medical Center of the PLA General Hospital, 
Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to review and discuss some of the latest research results 
related to post-burn pathophysiological changes and provide some clues for 
future study.
BACKGROUND: Burns are one of the most common and serious traumas and consist of 
a series of pathophysiological changes of thermal injury. Accompanied by thermal 
damage to skin and soft tissues, inflammatory mediators are released in large 
quantities. Changes in histamine, bradykinin, and cytokines such as vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), metabolic factors such as adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP), and activated neutrophils all affect the body's vascular 
permeability.
METHODS: We searched articles with subject words "microvascular permeability", 
"burn" "endothelium", and "endothelial barrier" in PubMed in English published 
from the beginning of database to Dec, 2020.
CONCLUSIONS: The essence of burn shock is the rapid and extensive fluid transfer 
in burn and non-burn tissue. After severe burns, the local and systemic vascular 
permeability increase, causing intravascular fluid extravasation, leading to a 
progressive decrease in effective circulation volume, an increase in systemic 
vascular resistance, a decrease in cardiac output, peripheral tissue edema, 
multiple organ failure, and even death. There are many cells, tissues, mediators 
and structures involved in the pathophysiological process of the damage to 
vascular permeability. Ulinastatin is a promising agent for this problem.

2021 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-21-1267
PMCID: PMC8106041
PMID: 33987417

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-21-1267). The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.