1. Cell Rep. 2021 May 25;35(8):109181. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109181.

PD-L1 recruits phospholipase C and enhances tumorigenicity of lung tumors 
harboring mutant forms of EGFR.

Ghosh S(1), Nataraj NB(1), Noronha A(1), Patkar S(2), Sekar A(1), Mukherjee 
S(3), Winograd-Katz S(3), Kramarski L(1), Verma A(1), Lindzen M(1), Garcia 
DD(1), Green J(1), Eisenberg G(4), Gil-Henn H(5), Basu A(6), Lender Y(7), Weiss 
S(6), Oren M(3), Lotem M(4), Geiger B(3), Ruppin E(8), Yarden Y(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland College Park, College 
Park, MD, USA; Cancer Data Science Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
Rockville, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(4)Sharett Institute of Oncology, Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.
(5)The Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, Safed, Israel.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, 
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(8)Cancer Data Science Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Rockville, 
MD, USA.
(9)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel. Electronic address: yosef.yarden@weizmann.ac.il.

Cancer immunotherapy focuses on inhibitors of checkpoint proteins, such as 
programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1). Unlike RAS-mutated lung cancers, EGFR mutant 
tumors have a generally low response to immunotherapy. Because treatment 
outcomes vary by EGFR allele, intrinsic and microenvironmental factors may be 
involved. Among all non-immunological signaling pathways surveyed in patients' 
datasets, EGFR signaling is best associated with high PD-L1. Correspondingly, 
active EGFRs stabilize PD-L1 transcripts and depletion of PD-L1 severely 
inhibits EGFR-driven tumorigenicity and metastasis in mice. The underlying 
mechanisms involve the recruitment of phospholipase C-γ1 (PLC-γ1) to a 
cytoplasmic motif of PD-L1, which enhances PLC-γ1 activation by EGFR. Once 
stimulated, PLC-γ1 activates calcium flux, Rho GTPases, and protein kinase C, 
collectively promoting an aggressive phenotype. Anti-PD-L1 antibodies can 
inhibit these intrinsic functions of PD-L1. Our results portray PD-L1 as a 
molecular amplifier of EGFR signaling and improve the understanding of the 
resistance of EGFR+ tumors to immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109181
PMCID: PMC8170369
PMID: 34038737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.