1. Am J Mens Health. 2021 May-Jun;15(3):15579883211017033. doi: 
10.1177/15579883211017033.

The CYP19A1 (TTTA)n Repeat Polymorphism May Affect the Prostate Cancer Risk: 
Evidence from a Meta-Analysis.

Guo L(1), Liu Y(1), Liu L(2), Shao S(1), Cao Y(1), Guo J(1), Niu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, Shandong, China.

Abnormal aromatase (CYP19A1) expression may participate in prostate cancer (PCa) 
carcinogenesis. However, the results of studies on the CYP19A1 gene 
polymorphisms and PCa are conflicting. This meta-analysis aimed to 
systematically evaluate the associations between the CYP19A1 Arg264Cys 
polymorphism and the (TTTA)n repeat polymorphism and PCa. Electronic databases 
(PubMed, EmBase, ScienceDirect, and Cochrane Library) were comprehensively 
searched to identify eligible studies. The strength of the association between 
the Arg264Cys polymorphism and PCa was assessed by pooled odds ratios (ORs) and 
95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) in allelic, dominant, recessive, homozygous, 
and heterozygous genetic models. To analyze the impact of the (TTTA)n repeat 
polymorphism, we sequentially took the N-repeat allele (where N equals 
7,8,10,11,12, and 13) as the minor allele and the sum of all the other alleles 
as the major allele. The ORs and 95% CIs were calculated in the allelic model; 
this analysis was performed individually for each repeat number. Pooled 
estimates of nine studies addressing the Arg264Cys polymorphism indicated that 
this polymorphism was not associated with PCa risk in the overall population or 
in the Caucasian or Asian subgroups. The 8-repeat allele in the (TTTA)n repeat 
polymorphism increased PCa risk in the overall population (OR = 1.34, 95% CI = 
1.14-1.58, p = .001) and in the subgroup with population-based (PB) controls (OR 
= 1.41, 95% CI = 1.13-1.74, p = .002) as well as in the subgroup using capillary 
electrophoresis to identify this polymorphism (OR = 1.34, 95% CI = 1.09-1.65, p 
= .006).The meta-analysis indicated that the CYP19A1 (TTTA)n repeat 
polymorphism, but not the Arg264Cys polymorphism, may affect PCa risk.

DOI: 10.1177/15579883211017033
PMCID: PMC8161905
PMID: 34036824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.