1. Mol Cancer Res. 2021 Sep;19(9):1522-1533. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-20-0691. 
Epub 2021 May 27.

p53 Frameshift Mutations Couple Loss-of-Function with Unique Neomorphic 
Activities.

Tong DR(1), Zhou W(1), Katz C(1), Regunath K(1), Venkatesh D(1), Ihuegbu C(1), 
Manfredi JJ(2), Laptenko O(3), Prives C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Oncological Sciences, Tisch Cancer Institute, Graduate School 
of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New 
York.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York. 
clp3@columbia.edu olaptenkooa@gmail.com.

p53 mutations that result in loss of transcriptional activity are commonly found 
in numerous types of cancer. While the majority of these are missense mutations 
that map within the central DNA-binding domain, truncations and/or frameshift 
mutations can also occur due to various nucleotide substitutions, insertions, or 
deletions. These changes result in mRNAs containing premature stop codons that 
are translated into a diverse group of C-terminally truncated proteins. Here we 
characterized three p53 frameshift mutant proteins expressed from the endogenous 
TP53 locus in U2OS osteosarcoma and HCT116 colorectal cancer cell lines. These 
mutants retain intact DNA-binding domains but display altered oligomerization 
properties. Despite their abnormally high expression levels, they are mostly 
transcriptionally inactive and unable to initiate a stimuli-induced 
transcriptional program characteristic of wild-type p53. However, one of these 
variant p53 proteins, I332fs*14, which resembles naturally expressed TAp53 
isoforms β and γ, retains some residual antiproliferative activity and can 
induce cellular senescence in HCT116 cells. Cells expressing this mutant also 
display decreased motility in migration assays. Hence, this p53 variant exhibits 
a combination of loss-of-gain and gain-of-function characteristics, 
distinguishing it from both wild type p53 and p53 loss. IMPLICATIONS: p53 
frameshift mutants display a mixture of residual antiproliferative and 
neomorphic functions that may be differentially exploited for targeted therapy.

©2021 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-20-0691
PMCID: PMC8419077
PMID: 34045312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests. Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest No potential 
conflicts of interest were disclosed.