1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 May 12;13(10):2313. doi: 10.3390/cancers13102313.

Circulating Cell-Free DNA as a Prognostic Biomarker in Resectable Ampullary 
Cancer.

Shyr BU(1)(2), Shyr BS(1)(2), Chen SC(1)(2), Chang SC(1)(2), Shyr YM(1)(2), Wang 
SE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei 
11221, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Surgery, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei 11217, 
Taiwan.

Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) in ampullary cancer patients was measured to 
clarify the correlation between cfDNA and clinicopathological factors and the 
impact of cfDNA on survival outcomes. Patients with ampullary cancer undergoing 
pancreaticoduodenectomy were included. Correlations between cfDNA and 
clinicopathological and prognostic factors were determined. The cfDNA levels in 
patients ranged from 1282 to 21,674 copies/mL, with a median of 6687 copies/mL. 
The cfDNA level was significantly higher in patients with lymph node 
involvement, lymphovascular invasion, abnormal serum carcinoembryonic antigen 
(CEA) level, and stage II and III cancer. Poor prognostic factors for ampullary 
cancer included high cfDNA > 6687 copies/mL, lymph node involvement, abnormal 
serum CEA > 5 ng/mL, and advanced stage II and III cancer. The 1- and 5-year 
survival rates were 92.0% and 66.5%, respectively, for patients with low cfDNA < 
6687 copies/mL and 84.0% and 49.9%, respectively, for patients with high cfDNA > 
6687 copies/mL (p < 0.001). After multivariate analysis, only the cfDNA level 
and stage were independent prognostic factors of ampullary cancer. Thus, the 
cfDNA level could act as a surrogate marker of both disease extent and 
biological aggressiveness of ampullary cancer. Moreover, cfDNA plays a 
significant role in the prognosis of resectable ampullary cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13102313
PMCID: PMC8151754
PMID: 34065893

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.