1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 May 19;13(10):2470. doi: 10.3390/cancers13102470.

Clinical, Histological, and Molecular Features of Solitary Fibrous Tumor of 
Bone: A Single Institution Retrospective Review.

Bianchi G(1), Lana D(1), Gambarotti M(2), Ferrari C(3), Sbaraglia M(4), Pedrini 
E(5), Pazzaglia L(3), Sangiorgi L(5), Bartolotti I(5), Dei Tos AP(6), Scotlandi 
K(3), Righi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Oncology, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 
Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Pathology, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, 
Italy.
(3)Experimental Oncology Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 
Bologna, Italy.
(4)Department of Pathology, Azienda Ospedaliera di Padova, 35121 Padua, Italy.
(5)Department of Rare Skeletal Disorders, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 
40136 Bologna, Italy.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Padua School of Medicine, 35121 Padua, 
Italy.

Primary solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) of the bone is extremely rare, with only 
few cases reported in the literature. We retrieved all cases of primary SFT of 
the bone treated at our institution and we assessed the morphology and the 
immunohistochemical and molecular features to investigate the clinical outcome 
of primary SFT of the bone and any clinical relevance of clinical and 
histological criteria of aggressiveness currently adopted for the soft tissues 
counterpart. Morphologically, 15 cases evidenced high cellularity, cytologic 
atypia, and foci of necrosis and were associated with more than 4 mitotic 
figures/10 HPF. Immunohistochemical analysis showed an expression of CD34 and of 
STAT6 immunopositivity in 95% and in 100% of cases, respectively. The presence 
of NAB2-STAT6 chimeric transcripts was found in 10 out of 12 cases in which 
RT-PCR analysis was feasible, whereas TERT promoter mutations analysis was 
feasible in 16 cases and only a C-to-T substitution in a heterozygous state was 
found in one DNA sample for the C228T genetic variant. P53 variants were 
assessed in 12 cases: 11 (91.6%) cases showed a variation, while in one case, no 
alteration was found. Disease-specific survival was 64% at 5 years and 49% at 10 
years. Statistical analysis showed no correlation between survival and all the 
clinicopathological and molecular parameters evaluated. In conclusion, at 
difference to SFT of soft tissues, aggressive behavior of primary SFT of the 
bone seems to be independent from mitotic count or any other clinicopathological 
and molecular features.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13102470
PMCID: PMC8158730
PMID: 34069378

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.