1. Metabolites. 2021 May 13;11(5):312. doi: 10.3390/metabo11050312.

Selection of Potential Yeast Probiotics and a Cell Factory for Xylitol or Acid 
Production from Honeybee Samples.

Zahoor F(1), Sooklim C(1), Songdech P(1), Duangpakdee O(2), Soontorngun N(1).

Author information:
(1)Biochemical Technology Division, School of Bioresources and Technology, King 
Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Bangkok 10150, Thailand.
(2)Native Honeybee and Pollinator Research Center, Ratchaburi Campus, King 
Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Rang Bua, Chom Bueng, Ratchaburi 
70150, Thailand.

Excessive use of antibiotics has detrimental consequences, including antibiotic 
resistance and gut microbiome destruction. Probiotic-rich diets help to restore 
good microbes, keeping the body healthy and preventing the onset of chronic 
diseases. Honey contains not only prebiotic oligosaccharides but, like yogurt 
and fermented foods, is an innovative natural source for probiotic discovery. 
Here, a collection of three honeybee samples was screened for yeast strains, 
aiming to characterize their potential in vitro probiotic properties and the 
ability to produce valuable metabolites. Ninety-four isolates out of one-hundred 
and four were able to grow at temperatures of 30 째C and 37 째C, while twelve 
isolates could grow at 42 째C. Fifty-eight and four isolates displayed the 
ability to grow under stimulated gastrointestinal condition, at pH 2.0-2.5, 0.3% 
(w/v) bile salt, and 37 째C. Twenty-four isolates showed high autoaggregation of 
80-100% and could utilize various sugars, including galactose and xylose. The 
cell count of these isolates (7-9 log cfu/mL) was recorded and stable during 6 
months of storage. Genomic characterization based on the internal transcribed 
spacer region (ITS) also identified four isolates of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
displayed good ability to produce antimicrobial acids. These results provided 
the basis for selecting four natural yeast isolates as starter cultures for 
potential probiotic application in functional foods and animal feed. 
Additionally, these S. cerevisiae isolates also produced high levels of acids 
from fermented sugarcane molasses, an abundant agricultural waste product from 
the sugar industry. Furthermore, one of ten identified isolates of Meyerozyma 
guilliermondiii displayed an excellent ability to produce a pentose sugar 
xylitol at a yield of 0.490 g/g of consumed xylose. Potentially, yeast isolates 
of honeybee samples may offer various biotechnological advantages as probiotics 
or metabolite producers of multiproduct-based lignocellulosic biorefinery.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo11050312
PMCID: PMC8153147
PMID: 34068237

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.