1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 May 11;13(10):2292. doi: 10.3390/cancers13102292.

Recent Advances in Implantation-Based Genetic Modeling of Biliary Carcinogenesis 
in Mice.

Izumiya M(1), Kato S(2), Hippo Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo 
113-8655, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Cancer Genomics, Yokohama City University Hospital, 
Kanagawa 236-0004, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Chiba Cancer Center Research 
Institute, Chiba 260-8717, Japan.

Epithelial cells in the biliary system can develop refractory types of cancers, 
which are often associated with inflammation caused by viruses, parasites, 
stones, and chemicals. Genomic studies have revealed recurrent genetic changes 
and deregulated signaling pathways in biliary tract cancer (BTC). The causal 
roles have been at least partly clarified using various genetically engineered 
mice. Technical advances in Cre-LoxP technology, together with hydrodynamic tail 
injection, CRISPR/Cas9 technology, in vivo electroporation, and organoid culture 
have enabled more precise modeling of BTC. Organoid-based genetic modeling, 
combined with implantation in mice, has recently drawn attention as a means to 
accelerate the development of BTC models. Although each model may not perfectly 
mimic the disease, they can complement one another, or two different approaches 
can be integrated to establish a novel model. In addition, a comparison of the 
outcomes among these models with the same genotype provides mechanistic insights 
into the interplay between genetic alterations and the microenvironment in the 
pathogenesis of BTCs. Here, we review the current status of genetic models of 
BTCs in mice to provide information that facilitates the wise selection of 
models and to inform the future development of ideal disease models.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13102292
PMCID: PMC8151177
PMID: 34064809

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.