1. PLoS Biol. 2021 Jun 2;19(6):e3001281. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001281. 
eCollection 2021 Jun.

The nonreceptor tyrosine kinase SRMS inhibits autophagy and promotes tumor 
growth by phosphorylating the scaffolding protein FKBP51.

Park JM(1)(2), Yang SW(1), Zhuang W(1), Bera AK(3), Liu Y(3), Gurbani D(3), von 
Hoyningen-Huene SJ(1), Sakurada SM(1), Gan H(1), Pruett-Miller SM(1), Westover 
KD(3), Potts MB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America.
(2)Department of Oncology Research, Amgen Research, Thousand Oaks, California, 
United States of America.
(3)Departments of Biochemistry and Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.

Nutrient-responsive protein kinases control the balance between anabolic growth 
and catabolic processes such as autophagy. Aberrant regulation of these kinases 
is a major cause of human disease. We report here that the vertebrate 
nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Src-related kinase lacking C-terminal regulatory 
tyrosine and N-terminal myristylation sites (SRMS) inhibits autophagy and 
promotes growth in a nutrient-responsive manner. Under nutrient-replete 
conditions, SRMS phosphorylates the PHLPP scaffold FK506-binding protein 51 
(FKBP51), disrupts the FKBP51-PHLPP complex, and promotes FKBP51 degradation 
through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. This prevents PHLPP-mediated 
dephosphorylation of AKT, causing sustained AKT activation that promotes growth 
and inhibits autophagy. SRMS is amplified and overexpressed in human cancers 
where it drives unrestrained AKT signaling in a kinase-dependent manner. SRMS 
kinase inhibition activates autophagy, inhibits cancer growth, and can be 
accomplished using the FDA-approved tyrosine kinase inhibitor ibrutinib. This 
illuminates SRMS as a targetable vulnerability in human cancers and as a new 
target for pharmacological induction of autophagy in vertebrates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001281
PMCID: PMC8202955
PMID: 34077419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read he journalâ€™s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: J.M.P., S.W.Y., and 
M.B.P. are employees and shareholders of Amgen. Author Sergei von 
Hoyningen-Huene was unavailable to confirm their authorship contributions. On 
their behalf, the corresponding author has reported their contributions to the 
best of their knowledge.