1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 May 26;13(11):2622. doi: 10.3390/cancers13112622.

CDH1 Gene Mutation Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Outcomes: Analysis of a 
Large Cohort, Systematic Review of Endoscopic Surveillance, and Secondary Cancer 
Risk Postulation.

Benesch MGK(1), Bursey SR(2), O'Connell AC(1), Ryan MG(3), Howard CL(1), 
Stockley CC(1), Mathieson A(1).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of 
Newfoundland, St. John's, NL A1B 3V6, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL A1B 
3V6, Canada.
(3)Discipline of Family Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of 
Newfoundland, St. John's, NL A1B 3V6, Canada.

Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is a rare signet-ring cell 
adenocarcinoma (SRCC) linked to CDH1 (E-cadherin) inactivating germline 
mutations, and increasingly other gene mutations. Female CDH1 mutation carriers 
have additional risk of lobular breast cancer. Risk management includes 
prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG). The utility of endoscopic surveillance is 
unclear, as early disease lacks macroscopic lesions. The current systematic 
biopsy protocols have unknown efficacy, and other secondary cancer risks are 
postulated. We conducted a retrospective study of consecutive asymptomatic HDGC 
patients undergoing PTG, detailing endoscopic, pathologic, and outcome results. 
A systematic review compared endoscopic biopsy foci detection via random 
sampling versus Cambridge Protocol against PTG findings. A population-level 
secondary-cancer-risk postulation among sporadic gastric SRCC patients was 
completed using the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results database. Of 97 
patients, 67 underwent PTG, with 25% having foci detection on random endoscopic 
biopsy despite 75% having foci on final pathology. There was no improvement in 
the endoscopic detection rate by Cambridge Protocol. The postulated hazard ratio 
among sporadic gastric SRCC patients for a secondary colorectal SRCC was 
three-fold higher, relative to conventional adenocarcinoma patients. Overall, 
HDGC patients should not rely on endoscopic surveillance to delay PTG, and may 
have secondary SRCC risks. A definitive determination of actual risk requires 
collaborative patient outcome data banking.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13112622
PMCID: PMC8199234
PMID: 34073553

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.