1. Oncol Rep. 2021 Jul;46(1):151. doi: 10.3892/or.2021.8102. Epub 2021 Jun 3.

Binding between ROCK1 and DCTN2 triggers diabetes‑associated centrosome 
amplification in colon cancer cells.

Li YF(1), Shi LJ(1), Wang P(2), Wang JW(3), Shi GY(3), Lee SC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Hospital, Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, Shanxi 030001, P.R. China.
(2)Changzhi Medical University, Changzhi, Shanxi 030001, P.R. China.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Sciences of The School of Life Sciences, Jiangsu 
Normal University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221116, P.R. China.

Type 2 diabetes increases the risk various types of cancer and is associated 
with a poor prognosis therein. There is also evidence that the disease is 
associated with cancer metastasis. Centrosome amplification can initiate 
tumorigenesis with metastasis in vivo and increase the invasiveness of cancer 
cells in vitro. Our previous study reported that type 2 diabetes promotes 
centrosome amplification via the upregulation and centrosomal translocation of 
Rho‑associated protein kinase 1 (ROCK1), which suggests that centrosome 
amplification is a candidate biological link between type 2 diabetes and cancer 
development. In the present study, functional proteomics analysis was used to 
further investigate the molecular pathways underlying centrosome amplification 
by targeting ROCK1 binding partners. High glucose, insulin and palmitic acid 
were used to induce centrosome amplification, and immunofluorescent staining was 
employed to visualize centrosomal alterations. Combined with 
immunoprecipitation, mass spectrometry‑based proteomics analysis was used to 
identify ROCK1 binding proteins, and protein complex disruption was achieved by 
siRNA‑knockdown. In total, 1,148 ROCK1 binding proteins were identified, among 
which 106 proteins were exclusively associated with the treated samples, 193 
were only associated with the control samples, and 849 were found in both the 
control and treated samples. Of the proteins with evidence of centrosomal 
localization, Dynactin subunit 2 (DCTN2) was confirmed to be localized to the 
centrosomes. Treating the cells with high glucose, insulin and palmitic acid 
increased the protein levels of ROCK1 and DCTN2, promoted their binding with 
each other, and triggered centrosome amplification. Disruption of the protein 
complex by knocking down ROCK1 or DCTN2 expression partially attenuated 
centrosome amplification, while simultaneous knockdown of both proteins 
completely inhibited centrosome amplification. These results suggested 
ROCK1‑DCTN2 binding as a signal for the regulation of centrosome homeostasis, 
which is key for diabetes‑associated centrosome amplification, and enriches our 
knowledge of centrosome biology. Therefore, the ROCK1‑DCTN2 complex may serve as 
a target for inhibiting centrosome amplification both in research or future 
therapeutic development.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2021.8102
PMCID: PMC8185503
PMID: 34080666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.