1. Oncologist. 2021 Sep;26(9):e1644-e1651. doi: 10.1002/onco.13852. Epub 2021 Jun
 26.

Multidisciplinary Care of BRAF-Mutant Stage III Melanoma: A Physicians 
Perspective Review.

Cornelius LA(1), Fields RC(2), Tarhini A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Alvin J. Siteman Cancer 
Center, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Barnes-Jewish Hospital 
and Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Departments of Cutaneous Oncology and Immunology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer 
Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(4)University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Prognosis among patients with stage III melanoma can vary widely depending on 
the risk of disease relapse. Therefore, it is vital to optimize patient care 
through accurate diagnosis and staging as well as thoughtful treatment planning. 
A multidisciplinary team (MDT) approach, which involves active collaboration 
among physician specialists across a patient's disease journey, has been 
increasingly adopted as the standard of care for treatment of a variety of 
cancers, including melanoma. This review provides an overview of MDT care 
principles for patients with BRAF-mutant-positive, stage III cutaneous melanoma 
and summarizes current literature, clinical experiences, and institutional best 
practices. Therapeutic goals from dermatologic, surgical, and medical oncologist 
perspectives regarding MDT care throughout a patient's disease course are 
discussed. Additionally, the role of each specialty's involvement in testing for 
predictive biomarkers at relevant time points to facilitate informed treatment 
decisions is discussed. Last, instances of successful MDT treatment of other 
cancers and key lessons to optimize MDT patient care in cutaneous melanoma are 
provided. Several aspects of MDT patient care are considered vital, such as the 
importance of staging via pathological examination and imaging, biomarker 
testing, and interdisciplinary physician and patient engagement throughout the 
course of treatment. Use of MDTs has the potential to improve patient care in 
cutaneous melanoma by improving the speed and accuracy of diagnosis, 
implementing a personalized treatment plan early on, and being proactive in 
adverse event management. Physician perspectives described in this review may 
lead to better outcomes, quality of life, and overall patient satisfaction. 
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: As more cancer therapies emerge, it is critical to 
optimize patient care and treatment planning. The multidisciplinary team (MDT) 
approach, which involves active collaboration among specialists, has led to 
encouraging survival results in multiple cancer types. As MDT care becomes more 
widely adopted in the treatment of melanoma, accurate diagnosis and staging are 
important, as clinical outcomes for stage III disease vary widely by substage. 
Because ~50% of melanomas harbor BRAF mutations, testing is important for an 
informed treatment decision. Interdisciplinary physician-patient engagement 
throughout the course of treatment can improve comorbidity and adverse event 
management to optimize patients' treatment journeys.

Â© 2021 The Authors. The Oncologist published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/onco.13852
PMCID: PMC8417868
PMID: 34080754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures of potential conflicts of interest 
may be found at the end of this article.