1. Bioinformation. 2021 Mar 31;17(3):424-438. doi: 10.6026/97320630017424. 
eCollection 2021.

Structure analysis of deleterious nsSNPs in human PALB2 protein for functional 
inference.

Nawar N(1), Paul A(1), Mahmood HN(1), Faisal MI(1), Hosen MI(1), Shekhar HU(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Biochemistry and Translational Medicine Laboratory, Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Partner and Localizer of BRCA2 or PALB2 is a typical tumor suppressor protein, 
that responds to DNA double stranded breaks through homologous recombination 
repair. Heterozygous mutations in PALB2 are known to contribute to the 
susceptibility of breast and ovarian cancer. However, there is no comprehensive 
study characterizing the structural and functional impacts of SNPs located in 
the PALB2 gene. Therefore, it is of interest to document a comprehensive 
analysis of coding and non-coding SNPs located at the PALB2 loci using in silico 
tools. The data for 1455 non-synonymous SNPs (nsSNPs) located in the PALB2 loci 
were retrieved from the dbSNP database. Comprehensive characterization of the 
SNPs using a combination of in silico tools such as SIFT, PROVEAN, PolyPhen, 
PANTHER, PhD-SNP, Pmut, MutPred 2.0 and SNAP-2, identified 28 functionally 
important SNPs. Among these, 16 nsSNPs were further selected for structural 
analysis using conservation profile and protein stability. The most deleterious 
nsSNPs were documented within the WD40 domain of PALB2. A general outline of the 
structural consequences of each variant was developed using the HOPE project 
data. These 16 mutant structures were further modelled using SWISS Model and 
three most damaging mutant models (rs78179744, rs180177123 and rs45525135) were 
identified. The non-coding SNPs in the 3' UTR region of the PALB2 gene were 
analyzed for altered miRNA target sites. The comprehensive characterization of 
the coding and non-coding SNPs in the PALB2 locus has provided a list of 
damaging SNPs with potential disease association. Further validation through 
genetic association study will reveal their clinical significance.

Â© 2021 Biomedical Informatics.

DOI: 10.6026/97320630017424
PMCID: PMC8131579
PMID: 34092963