1. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2021;18(3):208-221. doi:
10.2174/1567205018666210608103831.

Codonopsis pilosula Polysaccharides Alleviate Aβ (1-40)-Induced PC12 Cells 
Energy Dysmetabolism via CD38/NAD+ Signaling Pathway.

Hu YR(1), Xing SL(1), Chen C(1), Shen DZ(1), Chen JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Geriatric Institute of Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 200031, China.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia and has 
a complex pathogenesis with no effective treatment. Energy metabolism disorders, 
as an early pathological event of AD,have attracted attention as a promising 
area of AD research. Codonopsis pilosula Polysaccharides are the main effective 
components of Codonopsis pilosula, which have been demonstrated to regulate 
energy metabolism.
METHODS: In order to further study the roles and mechanisms of Codonopsis 
pilosula polysaccharides in AD, this study used an Aβ1-40-induced PC12 cells 
model to study the protective effects of Codonopsis pilosula polysaccharides and 
their potential mechanisms in improving energy metabolism dysfunction.
RESULTS: The results showed that Aβ1-40 induced a decrease in PC12 cells 
viability, energy metabolism molecules (ATP, NAD+, and NAD+/NADH) and 
Mitochondrial Membrane Potential (MMP) and an increase in ROS. Additionally, it 
was found that Aβ1-40 increased CD38 expression related to NAD+ homeostasis, 
whereas Silent Information Regulation 2 homolog1 (SIRT1, SIRT3), Peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator 1-α (PGC-1α) and SIRT3 activity 
were decreased. Codonopsis pilosula polysaccharides increased NAD+, NAD+/NADH, 
SIRT3, SIRT1, and PGC-1α related to NAD+, thus partially recovering ATP.
CONCLUSION: Our findings reveal that Codonopsis pilosula polysaccharides 
protected PC12 cells from Aβ1-40-induced damage, suggesting that these 
components of the Codonopsis pilosula herb may represent an early treatment 
option for AD patients.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1567205018666210608103831
PMCID: PMC8506921
PMID: 34102973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]