1. BMC Genomics. 2021 Jun 9;22(1):431. doi: 10.1186/s12864-021-07740-w.

Transcriptome analysis of embryonic muscle development in Chengkou Mountain 
Chicken.

Ren L(#)(1), Liu A(#)(1), Wang Q(2), Wang H(1), Dong D(1), Liu L(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Southwest University, Beibei, 
400715, Chongqing, P. R. China.
(2)ChongQing Academy of Animal Sciences, Rongchang, 402460, Chongqing, P. R. 
China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Southwest University, Beibei, 
400715, Chongqing, P. R. China. liulb515@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Muscle is the predominant portion of any meat product, and growth 
performance and product quality are the core of modern breeding. The embryonic 
period is highly critical for muscle development, the number, shape and 
structure of muscle fibers are determined at the embryonic stage. Herein, we 
performed transcriptome analysis to reveal the law of muscle development in the 
embryonic stage of Chengkou Mountain Chicken at embryonic days (E) 12, 16, 19, 
21.
RESULTS: Diameter and area of muscle fibers exhibited significant difference at 
different embryonic times(P < 0.01). A total of 16,330 mRNAs transcripts were 
detected, including 109 novel mRNAs transcripts. By comparing different 
embryonic muscle development time points, 2,262 in E12vsE16, 5,058 in E12vsE19, 
6139 in E12vsE21, 1,282 in E16vsE19, 2,920 in E16vsE21, and 646 in 
E19vsE21differentially expressed mRNAs were identified. It is worth noting that 
7,572 mRNAs were differentially expressed. The time-series expression profile of 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) showed that the rising and falling 
expression trends were significantly enriched. The significant enrichment trends 
included 3,150 DEGs. GO enrichment analysis provided three significantly 
enriched categories of significantly enriched differential genes, including 65 
cellular components, 88 molecular functions, and 453 biological processes. 
Through KEGG analysis, we explored the biological metabolic pathways involved in 
differentially expressed genes. A total of 177 KEGG pathways were enriched, 
including 19 significant pathways, such as extracellular matrix-receptor 
interactions. Similarly, numerous pathways related to muscle development were 
found, including the Wnt signaling pathway (P < 0.05), MAPK signalingpathway, 
TGF-beta signaling pathway, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway and mTOR signaling 
pathway. Among the differentially expressed genes, we selected those involved in 
developing 4-time points; notably, up-regulated genes included MYH1F, SLC25A12, 
and HADHB, whereas the down-regulated genes included STMN1, VASH2, and TUBAL3.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study explored the embryonic muscle development of the Chengkou 
Mountain Chicken. A large number of DEGs related to muscle development have been 
identified ,and validation of key genes for embryonic development and 
preliminary explanation of their role in muscle development. Overall, this study 
broadened our current understanding of the phenotypic mechanism for myofiber 
formation and provides valuable information for improving chicken quality.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-021-07740-w
PMCID: PMC8191012
PMID: 34107874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.