1. J Diabetes Investig. 2021 Dec;12(12):2141-2148. doi: 10.1111/jdi.13610. Epub 
2021 Jul 4.

Epidemiology, genetic landscape and classification of childhood diabetes 
mellitus in the State of Qatar.

Haris B(1), Saraswathi S(1), Al-Khawaga S(1), Hasnah R(2), Saeed A(2), 
Mundekkadan S(1), Hamed N(1), Afyouni H(1), Abdel-Karim T(1), Mohammed S(1), 
Khalifa A(1), Al-Maadheed M(1), Al-Zyoud M(1), Shamekh A(1), Elawwa A(1), 
Al-Khalaf F(1), Boughorbel S(2), Petrovski G(1), Hussain K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Sidra Medicine, Doha, 
Qatar.
(2)Translational Research, Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar.

AIMS/INTRODUCTION: To study the epidemiology, genetic landscape and causes of 
childhood diabetes mellitus in the State of Qatar.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All patients (aged 0-18 years) with diabetes mellitus 
underwent biochemical, immunological and genetic testing. American Diabetes 
Association guidelines were used to classify types of diabetes mellitus. The 
incidence and prevalence of all the different types of diabetes mellitus were 
calculated.
RESULTS: Total number of children with diabetes mellitus was 1,325 (type 1 
n = 1,096, ≥1 antibody; type 2 n = 104, type 1B n = 53; maturity onset diabetes 
of the young n = 20; monogenic autoimmune n = 4; neonatal diabetes mellitus 
n = 10;, syndromic diabetes mellitus n = 23; and double diabetes mellitus 
n = 15). The incidence and prevalence of type 1 diabetes were 38.05 and 249.73 
per 100,000, respectively, and for type 2 were 2.51 and 23.7 per 100,000, 
respectively. The incidence of neonatal diabetes mellitus was 34.4 per 1,000,000 
live births, and in indigenous Qataris the incidence was 43.6 per 1,000,000 live 
births. The prevalence of type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes in Qatari children 
was double compared with other nationalities. The prevalence of maturity onset 
diabetes of the young in Qatar was 4.56 per 100,000.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first prospective and comprehensive study to document 
the epidemiology and genetic landscape of childhood diabetes mellitus in this 
region. Qatar has the fourth highest incidence of type 1 diabetes mellitus, with 
the incidence and prevalence being higher in Qatari compared with non-Qatari. 
The prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus is also higher in Qatar than in 
Western countries. The incidence of neonatal diabetes mellitus is the second 
highest in the world. GCK is the most common form of maturity onset diabetes of 
the young, and a large number of patients have type 1B diabetes mellitus.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by Asian 
Association for the Study of Diabetes (AASD) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jdi.13610
PMCID: PMC8668069
PMID: 34101350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.