1. Nat Commun. 2021 Jun 10;12(1):3528. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-23793-7.

Antibody-drug conjugates with dual payloads for combating breast tumor 
heterogeneity and drug resistance.

Yamazaki CM(#)(1), Yamaguchi A(#)(1), Anami Y(1), Xiong W(1), Otani Y(2), Lee 
J(3), Ueno NT(3), Zhang N(1), An Z(1), Tsuchikama K(4).

Author information:
(1)Texas Therapeutics Institute, The Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular 
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, 
USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Section of Translational Breast Cancer Research, Department of Breast Medical 
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Texas Therapeutics Institute, The Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular 
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, 
USA. Kyoji.Tsuchikama@uth.tmc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Breast tumors generally consist of a diverse population of cells with varying 
gene expression profiles. Breast tumor heterogeneity is a major factor 
contributing to drug resistance, recurrence, and metastasis after chemotherapy. 
Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) are emerging chemotherapeutic agents with 
striking clinical success, including T-DM1 for HER2-positive breast cancer. 
However, these ADCs often suffer from issues associated with intratumor 
heterogeneity. Here, we show that homogeneous ADCs containing two distinct 
payloads are a promising drug class for addressing this clinical challenge. Our 
conjugates show HER2-specific cell killing potency, desirable pharmacokinetic 
profiles, minimal inflammatory response, and marginal toxicity at therapeutic 
doses. Notably, a dual-drug ADC exerts greater treatment effect and survival 
benefit than does co-administration of two single-drug variants in xenograft 
mouse models representing intratumor HER2 heterogeneity and elevated drug 
resistance. Our findings highlight the therapeutic potential of the dual-drug 
ADC format for treating refractory breast cancer and perhaps other cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-23793-7
PMCID: PMC8192907
PMID: 34112795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.M.Y., Y.A., N.Z., Z.A. and K.T. are named 
inventors on a patent application relating to the work filed by the Board of 
Regents of the University of Texas System (PCT/US2018/034363; 
US-2020-0115326-A1; EU18804968.8-1109/3630189). The remaining authors declare no 
competing interests.