1. Bioanalysis. 2021 Aug;13(15):1183-1193. doi: 10.4155/bio-2021-0065. Epub 2021 
Jun 11.

Validation of high-throughput, semiquantitative solid-phase SARS coronavirus-2 
serology assays in serum and dried blood spot matrices.

Maritz L(1), Woudberg NJ(1), Bennett AC(1), Soares A(1), Lapierre F(2), Devine 
J(1), Kimberg M(1), Bouic PJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Synexa Life Sciences, 4 Kunene Circle, Montague Gardens, Cape Town, 7441, 
South Africa.
(2)Trajan Scientific & Medical, 7 Argent Place, Ringwood, Victoria, 3134, 
Australia.
(3)Division of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, 
University of Stellenbosch, Cape Town, 7505, South Africa.

Aim: Serological assays for the detection of anti-SARS coronavirus-2 
(SARS-CoV-2) antibodies are essential to the response to the global pandemic. A 
ligand binding-based serological assay was validated for the semiquantitative 
detection of IgG, IgM, IgA and neutralizing antibodies (nAb) against SARS-CoV-2 
in serum. Results: The assay demonstrated high levels of diagnostic specificity 
and sensitivity (85-99% for all analytes). Serum IgG, IgM, IgA and nAb 
correlated positively (R2 = 0.937, R2 = 0.839, R2 = 0.939 and R2 = 0.501, p < 
0.001, respectively) with those measured in dried blood spot samples collected 
using the hemaPEN® microsampling device (Trajan Scientific and Medical, 
Victoria, Australia). In vitro SARS-CoV-2 pseudotype neutralization correlated 
positively with the solid phase nAb signals in convalescent donors (R2 = 0.458, 
p < 0.05). Conclusion: The assay is applicable in efficacy studies, infection 
monitoring and postmarketing surveillance following vaccine rollout.

DOI: 10.4155/bio-2021-0065
PMCID: PMC8202508
PMID: 34114884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial & competing interests disclosure F 
Lapierre is subject to intellectual property rights over the hemaPEN® 
technology. The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial 
involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or 
financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the 
manuscript apart from those disclosed. No writing assistance was utilized in the 
production of this manuscript.