1. Toxicol Sci. 2021 Aug 30;183(1):154-169. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfab075.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-Dioxin (TCDD)-Inducible Poly-ADP-Ribose Polymerase 
(TIPARP/PARP7) Catalytic Mutant Mice (TiparpH532A) Exhibit Increased Sensitivity 
to TCDD-Induced Hepatotoxicity and Lethality.

Hutin D(1), Long AS(1), Sugamori K(1), Shao P(1), Singh SK(2), Rasmussen M(3), 
Olafsen NE(3), Pettersen S(3), Grimaldi G(3), Grant DM(1), Matthews J(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
M5S 1A8 Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital, 0372 Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of 
Oslo, 0372 Oslo, Norway.

2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-inducible poly-adenosine diphosphate 
(ADP)-ribose polymerase (TIPARP/PARP7), an aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) 
target gene and mono-ADP-ribosyltransferase, acts as part of a negative feedback 
loop to repress AHR signaling. This process is prevented by a single H532A 
mutation in TIPARP that destroys its catalytic activity. We hypothesized that 
the loss of TIPARP catalytic activity would increase sensitivity to TCDD-induced 
toxicity in vivo. To test this, we created a catalytically deficient mouse line 
(TiparpH532A) by introducing a single H532A mutation in TIPARP. Treatment of 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts or hepatocytes isolated from TiparpH532A mice 
confirmed the increased TCDD-induced expression of the AHR target genes Cyp1a1, 
Cyp1b1, and Tiparp. TiparpH532A mice given a single injection of 10 µg/kg TCDD, 
a nonlethal dose in Tiparp+/+ mice, did not survive beyond day 10. All Tiparp+/+ 
mice survived the 30-day treatment. TCDD-treated TiparpH532A mice displayed 
increased expression of AHR target genes, increased steatohepatitis and 
hepatotoxicity. Hepatic RNA-sequencing revealed 7-fold more differentially 
expressed genes in TiparpH532A mice than in Tiparp+/+ mice (4542 vs 647 genes) 
6 days after TCDD treatment. Differentially expressed genes included genes 
involved in xenobiotic metabolism, lipid homeostasis and inflammation. Taken 
together, these data further support TIPARP as a critical negative regulator of 
AHR activity and show that loss of its catalytic activity is sufficient to 
increase sensitivity to TCDD-induced steatohepatitis and lethality. Since TIPARP 
inhibition has recently emerged as a potential anticancer therapy, the impact on 
AHR signaling, TCDD and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon toxicity will need to be 
carefully considered under conditions of therapeutic TIPARP inhibition.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society of Toxicology.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfab075
PMCID: PMC8404992
PMID: 34129049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]