1. Learn Mem. 2021 Jun 15;28(7):218-227. doi: 10.1101/lm.053124.120. Print 2021 
Jul.

Possible novel features of synaptic regulation during long-term facilitation in 
Aplysia.

Jin I(1), Kassabov S(1), Kandel ER(1)(2)(3), Hawkins RD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, 
USA.
(2)New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York 10032, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Most studies of molecular mechanisms of synaptic plasticity have focused on the 
sequence of changes either at individual synapses or in the cell nucleus. 
However, studies of long-term facilitation at Aplysia sensory neuron-motor 
neuron synapses in isolated cell culture suggest two additional features of 
facilitation. First, that there is also regulation of the number of synaptic 
contacts between two neurons, which may occur at the level of cell pair-specific 
branch points in the neuronal arbor. Branch points contain many molecules that 
are involved in protein synthesis-dependent long-term facilitation including 
neurotrophins and the RNA binding protein CPEB. Second, the regulation involves 
homeostatic feedback and tends to keep the total number of contacts between two 
neurons at a fairly constant level both at rest and following facilitation. That 
raises the question of how facilitation and homeostasis can coexist. A possible 
answer is suggested by the findings that they both involve spontaneous 
transmission and postsynaptic Ca2+, which can have bidirectional effects similar 
to LTP and LTD in hippocampus. In addition, long-term facilitation can involve a 
change in the set point of homeostasis, which could be encoded by plasticity 
molecules such as CPEB and/or PKM. A computational model based on these ideas 
can qualitatively simulate the basic features of both facilitation and 
homeostasis of the number of contacts.

Â© 2021 Jin et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/lm.053124.120
PMCID: PMC8212780
PMID: 34131053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]