1. Futur J Pharm Sci. 2021;7(1):120. doi: 10.1186/s43094-021-00269-5. Epub 2021
Jun  12.

Substantial effect of phytochemical constituents against the pandemic disease 
influenza-a review.

Devi AB(1), Sarala R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, Periyar EVR College (Autonomous), (Affiliated to 
Bharathidasan University, Trichy-24), Trichy-620 023, Tamil Nadu, India.

BACKGROUND: Influenza is an acute respiratory tract infection caused by the 
influenza virus. Vaccination and antiviral drugs are the two methods opted to 
control the disease. Besides their efficiency, they also cause adverse side 
effects. Hence, scientists turned their attention to powerful herbal medicines. 
This review put focus on various proven, scientifically validated anti-influenza 
compounds produced by the plants suggested for the production of newer drugs for 
the better treatment of influenza and its related antiviral diseases too.
MAIN BODY: In this review, fifty medicinal herb phytochemical constituents and 
their anti-influenza activities have been documented. Specifically, this review 
brings out the accurate and substantiates mechanisms of action of these 
constituents. This study categorizes the phytochemical constituents into primary 
and secondary metabolites which provide a source for synthesizing and developing 
new drugs.
CONCLUSION: This article provides a summary of the actions of the herbal 
constituents. Since the mechanisms of action of the components are elucidated, 
the pandemic situation arising due to influenza and similar antiviral diseases 
can be handled promisingly with greater efficiency. However, clinical trials are 
in great demand. The formulation of usage may be a single drug compound or 
multi-herbal combination. These, in turn, open up a new arena for the 
pharmaceutical industries to develop innovative drugs.

Â© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1186/s43094-021-00269-5
PMCID: PMC8196934
PMID: 34150912

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.