1. Chem Sci. 2020 Oct 23;12(10):3437-3447. doi: 10.1039/d0sc04792a.

Near-infrared fluorescent probes: a next-generation tool for protein-labeling 
applications.

Reja SI(1), Minoshima M(1), Hori Y(1)(2), Kikuchi K(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University Suita Osaka 565-0871 Japan 
kkikuchi@mls.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University Osaka 565-0871 Japan.
(3)Quantum Information and Quantum Biology Division, Osaka University Suita 
Osaka 565-0871 Japan.

The development of near-infrared (NIR) fluorescent probes over the past few 
decades has changed the way that biomolecules are imaged, and thus represents 
one of the most rapidly progressing areas of research. Presently, NIR 
fluorescent probes are routinely used to visualize and understand intracellular 
activities. The ability to penetrate tissues deeply, reduced photodamage to 
living organisms, and a high signal-to-noise ratio characterize NIR fluorescent 
probes as efficient next-generation tools for elucidating various biological 
events. The coupling of self-labeling protein tags with synthetic fluorescent 
probes is one of the most promising research areas in chemical biology. Indeed, 
at present, protein-labeling techniques are not only used to monitor the 
dynamics and localization of proteins but also play a more diverse role in 
imaging applications. For instance, one of the dominant technologies employed in 
the visualization of protein activity and regulation is based on protein tags 
and their associated NIR fluorescent probes. In this mini-review, we will 
discuss the development of several NIR fluorescent probes used for various 
protein-tag systems.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d0sc04792a
PMCID: PMC8179524
PMID: 34163617

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts to declare.