1. Trop Parasitol. 2021 Jan-Jun;11(1):3-10. doi: 10.4103/tp.tp_12_21. Epub 2021
May  14.

Molecular diagnosis of infectious parasites in the post-COVID-19 era.

Parija SC(1), Poddar A(2).

Author information:
(1)Vice Chancellor, Sri Balaji Vidyapeeth University, Puducherry, India.
(2)Scientist, Sri Balaji Vidyapeeth University, Puducherry, India.

The endemicity of several parasitic diseases across the globe and recent 
evidence of distress among COVID-19 patients with preexisting parasitic 
infections requires strengthening One Health framework and advanced strategies 
for parasitic detection. Owing to the greater sensitivity and accuracy, 
molecular technologies such as conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 
reverse transcription (RT)-PCR, nested PCR, loop-mediated isothermal 
amplification (LAMP), and xMAP technology have been extensively studied for 
parasitic diagnosis. Varieties of genes have been targeted for primer 
development where 18S rRNA, internal transcribed spacer regions, and 
mitochondrial DNAs coding for cytochrome, and other enzymes have been widely 
used. More recent, low-cost sequencing and advances in big data management have 
resulted in a slow but steady rise of next-generation sequencing-based 
approaches for parasite diagnosis. However, except for few parasites of global 
concerns such as Plasmodium and Entamoeba, most of the molecular tools and 
technologies are yet to witness bench to bedside and field translations. This 
review looks into some of the advancements in the molecular diagnosis of 
parasites that have potential relevance to clinical purposes and may pave the 
way toward disease management in an efficient and timely manner.

Copyright: Â© 2021 Tropical Parasitology.

DOI: 10.4103/tp.tp_12_21
PMCID: PMC8213111
PMID: 34195053

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.