1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Jun 28;18(13):6930. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18136930.

An Assessment on Ethanol-Blended Gasoline/Diesel Fuels on Cancer Risk and 
Mortality.

Mueller S(1), Dennison G(2), Liu S(2).

Author information:
(1)Energy Resources Center, The University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60607, USA.
(2)The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN 55912, USA.

Although cancer is traditionally considered a genetic disease, the epigenetic 
abnormalities, including DNA hypermethylation, histone deacetylation, and/or 
microRNA dysregulation, have been demonstrated as a hallmark of cancer. Compared 
with gene mutations, aberrant epigenetic changes occur more frequently, and 
cellular epigenome is more susceptible to change by environmental factors. 
Excess cancer risks are positively associated with exposure to occupational and 
environmental chemical carcinogens, including those from gasoline combustion 
exhausted in vehicles. Of note, previous studies proposed particulate matter 
index (PMI) as a measure for gasoline sooting tendency, and showed that, 
compared with the other molecules in gasoline, 1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene, 
2-methylnaphthalene and toluene significantly contribute to PMI of the gasoline 
blends. Mechanistically, both epigenome and genome are important in 
carcinogenicity, and the genotoxicity of chemical agents has been thoroughly 
studied. However, less effort has been put into studying the epigenotoxicity. 
Moreover, as the blending of ethanol into gasoline substitutes for carcinogens, 
like benzene, toluene, xylene, butadiene, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, 
etc., a reduction of secondary aromatics has been achieved in the atmosphere. 
This may lead to diminished cancer initiation and progression through altered 
cellular epigenetic landscape. The present review summarizes the most important 
findings in the literature on the association between exposures to carcinogens 
from gasoline combustion, cancer epigenetics and the potential epigenetic 
impacts of biofuels.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18136930
PMCID: PMC8297295
PMID: 34203568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.