1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jun 25;22(13):6851. doi: 10.3390/ijms22136851.

Complement System and Potential Therapeutics in Age-Related Macular 
Degeneration.

Park YG(1), Park YS(2), Kim IB(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, 
College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 06591, Korea.
(2)Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, 
Seoul 06591, Korea.
(3)Catholic Neuroscience Institute, College of Medicine, The Catholic University 
of Korea, Seoul 06591, Korea.
(4)Catholic Institute for Applied Anatomy, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul 06591, Korea.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a complex multifactorial disease 
characterized in its late form by neovascularization (wet type) or geographic 
atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium cell layer (dry type). The complement 
system is an intrinsic component of innate immunity. There has been growing 
evidence that the complement system plays an integral role in maintaining immune 
surveillance and homeostasis in AMD. Based on the association between the 
genotypes of complement variants and AMD occurrence and the presence of 
complement in drusen from AMD patients, the complement system has become a 
therapeutic target for AMD. However, the mechanism of complement disease 
propagation in AMD has not been fully understood. This concise review focuses on 
an overall understanding of the role of the complement system in AMD and its 
ongoing clinical trials. It provides further insights into a strategy for the 
treatment of AMD targeting the complement system.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22136851
PMCID: PMC8269056
PMID: 34202223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.