1. Molecules. 2021 Jun 12;26(12):3610. doi: 10.3390/molecules26123610.

Polymeric Drug Delivery System Based on Pluronics for Cancer Treatment.

Yu J(1), Qiu H(1)(2), Yin S(1), Wang H(3), Li Y(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Material, Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hangzhou Normal 
University, Hangzhou 311121, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Organosilicon Chemistry and Materials Technology of 
Ministry of Education, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 311121, China.
(3)College of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianshui Normal University, 
Tianshui 741099, China.

Pluronic polymers (pluronics) are a unique class of synthetic triblock 
copolymers containing hydrophobic polypropylene oxide (PPO) and hydrophilic 
polyethylene oxide (PEO) arranged in the PEO-PPO-PEO manner. Due to their 
excellent biocompatibility and amphiphilic properties, pluronics are an ideal 
and promising biological material, which is widely used in drug delivery, 
disease diagnosis, and treatment, among other applications. Through 
self-assembly or in combination with other materials, pluronics can form nano 
carriers with different morphologies, representing a kind of multifunctional 
pharmaceutical excipients. In recent years, the utilization of pluronic-based 
multi-functional drug carriers in tumor treatment has become widespread, and 
various responsive drug carriers are designed according to the characteristics 
of the tumor microenvironment, resulting in major progress in tumor therapy. 
This review introduces the specific role of pluronic-based polymer drug delivery 
systems in tumor therapy, focusing on their physical and chemical properties as 
well as the design aspects of pluronic polymers. Finally, using newer literature 
reports, this review provides insights into the future potential and challenges 
posed by different pluronic-based polymer drug delivery systems in tumor 
therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26123610
PMCID: PMC8231161
PMID: 34204668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.