1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Jun 18;13(12):3043. doi: 10.3390/cancers13123043.

Mutant p53(L194F) Harboring Luminal-A Breast Cancer Cells Are Refractory to 
Apoptosis and Cell Cycle Arrest in Response to Mortaparib(Plus), a Multimodal 
Small Molecule Inhibitor.

Elwakeel A(1)(2), Sari AN(1)(2), Dhanjal JK(1)(3), Meidinna HN(1)(2), Sundar 
D(3), Kaul SC(1), Wadhwa R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)AIST-INDIA DAILAB, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science & 
Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8565, Japan.
(2)School of Integrative & Global Majors (SIGMA), University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 
305-8577, Japan.
(3)DAILAB, Department of Biochemical Engineering & Biotechnology, Indian 
Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110-016, India.

We previously performed a drug screening to identify a potential inhibitor of 
mortalin-p53 interaction. In four rounds of screenings based on the shift in 
mortalin immunostaining pattern from perinuclear to pan-cytoplasmic and nuclear 
enrichment of p53, we had identified MortaparibPlus 
(4-[(1E)-2-(2-phenylindol-3-yl)-1-azavinyl]-1,2,4-triazole) as a novel synthetic 
small molecule. In order to validate its activity and mechanism of action, we 
recruited Luminal-A breast cancer cells, MCF-7 (p53wild type) and T47D 
(p53L194F) and performed extensive biochemical and immunocytochemical analyses. 
Molecular analyses revealed that MortaparibPlus is capable of abrogating 
mortalin-p53 interaction in both MCF-7 and T47D cells. Intriguingly, 
upregulation of transcriptional activation function of p53 (as marked by 
upregulation of the p53 effector gene-p21WAF1-responsible for cell cycle arrest 
and apoptosis) was recorded only in MortaparibPlus-treated MCF-7 cells. On the 
other hand, MortaparibPlus-treated T47D cells exhibited hyperactivation of PARP1 
(accumulation of PAR polymer and decrease in ATP levels) as a possible non-p53 
tumor suppression program. However, these cells did not show full signs of 
either apoptosis or PAR-Thanatos. Molecular analyses attributed such a response 
to the inability of MortaparibPlus to disrupt the AIF-mortalin complexes; hence, 
AIF did not translocate to the nucleus to induce chromatinolysis and DNA 
degradation. These data suggested that the cancer cells possessing enriched 
levels of such complexes may not respond to MortaparibPlus. Taken together, we 
report the multimodal anticancer potential of MortaparibPlus that warrants 
further attention in laboratory and clinical studies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13123043
PMCID: PMC8234533
PMID: 34207240

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.