1. Am J Hum Genet. 2021 Jul 1;108(7):1283-1300. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.05.009.

Shifting landscapes of human MTHFR missense-variant effects.

Weile J(1), Kishore N(2), Sun S(1), Maaieh R(3), Verby M(2), Li R(1), Fotiadou 
I(2), Kitaygorodsky J(2), Wu Y(1), Holenstein A(4), Bürer C(4), Blomgren L(4), 
Yang S(5), Nussbaum R(5), Rozen R(6), Watkins D(6), Gebbia M(2), Kozich V(7), 
Garton M(3), Froese DS(4), Roth FP(8).

Author information:
(1)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X5, Canada; The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, 
Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 
3E1, Canada; Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON 
M5S 2E4, Canada.
(2)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X5, Canada; The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, 
Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 
3E1, Canada.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, ON M5S 3G9, 
Canada.
(4)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's 
Hospital Zürich, University of Zürich, CH-8032 Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Invitae Corp, San Francisco, CA 94103, USA.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 0C7, 
Canada.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles 
University, First Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital in Prague, 
Ke Karlovu 2, 12 08 Praha 2, Czech Republic.
(8)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X5, Canada; The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, 
Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 
3E1, Canada; Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON 
M5S 2E4, Canada. Electronic address: fritz.roth@utoronto.ca.

Most rare clinical missense variants cannot currently be classified as 
pathogenic or benign. Deficiency in human 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate 
reductase (MTHFR), the most common inherited disorder of folate metabolism, is 
caused primarily by rare missense variants. Further complicating variant 
interpretation, variant impacts often depend on environment. An important 
example of this phenomenon is the MTHFR variant p.Ala222Val (c.665C>T), which is 
carried by half of all humans and has a phenotypic impact that depends on 
dietary folate. Here we describe the results of 98,336 variant functional-impact 
assays, covering nearly all possible MTHFR amino acid substitutions in four 
folinate environments, each in the presence and absence of p.Ala222Val. The 
resulting atlas of MTHFR variant effects reveals many complex dependencies on 
both folinate and p.Ala222Val. MTHFR atlas scores can distinguish pathogenic 
from benign variants and, among individuals with severe MTHFR deficiency, 
correlate with age of disease onset. Providing a powerful tool for understanding 
structure-function relationships, the atlas suggests a role for a disordered 
loop in retaining cofactor at the active site and identifies variants that 
enable escape of inhibition by S-adenosylmethionine. Thus, a model based on 
eight MTHFR variant effect maps illustrates how shifting landscapes of 
environment- and genetic-background-dependent missense variation can inform our 
clinical, structural, and functional understanding of MTHFR deficiency.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.05.009
PMCID: PMC8322931
PMID: 34214447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: F.P.R. holds shares in Ranomics and is an 
investor and advisor for SeqWell (each of which offers services that are 
potentially useful for variant effect mapping) and has accepted conference 
travel support from Illumina. S.Y. and R.N. are employees of Invitae, and R.N. 
is a consultant for Pfizer, Maze Therapeutics, and Genome Medical and a 
stockholder in Maze Therapeutics and Genome Medical. The remaining authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.