1. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2021 Dec 23;48(9-10):kuab040. doi: 
10.1093/jimb/kuab040.

Rewiring the microbial metabolic network for efficient utilization of mixed 
carbon sources.

An N(1), Chen X(1), Sheng H(1), Wang J(1), Sun X(1), Yan Y(2), Shen X(1), Yuan 
Q(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of 
Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China.
(2)School of Chemical, Materials and Biomedical Engineering, College of 
Engineering, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Carbon sources represent the most dominant cost factor in the industrial 
biomanufacturing of products. Thus, it has attracted much attention to seek 
cheap and renewable feedstocks, such as lignocellulose, crude glycerol, 
methanol, and carbon dioxide, for biosynthesis of value-added compounds. 
Co-utilization of these carbon sources by microorganisms not only can reduce the 
production cost but also serves as a promising approach to improve the carbon 
yield. However, co-utilization of mixed carbon sources usually suffers from a 
low utilization rate. In the past few years, the development of metabolic 
engineering strategies to enhance carbon source co-utilization efficiency by 
inactivation of carbon catabolite repression has made significant progress. In 
this article, we provide informative and comprehensive insights into the 
co-utilization of two or more carbon sources including glucose, xylose, 
arabinose, glycerol, and C1 compounds, and we put our focus on parallel 
utilization, synergetic utilization, and complementary utilization of different 
carbon sources. Our goal is not only to summarize strategies of co-utilization 
of carbon sources, but also to discuss how to improve the carbon yield and the 
titer of target products.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology.

DOI: 10.1093/jimb/kuab040
PMCID: PMC8788776
PMID: 34215883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]