1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jun 29;22(13):7039. doi: 10.3390/ijms22137039.

Molecular and Circulating Biomarkers of Brain Tumors.

Jelski W(1), Mroczko B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Diagnostics, Medical University, 15-269 Bialystok, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Neurodegeneration Diagnostics, Medical University, 15-269 
Bialystok, Poland.

Brain tumors are the most common malignant primary intracranial tumors of the 
central nervous system. They are often recognized too late for successful 
therapy. Minimally invasive methods are needed to establish a diagnosis or 
monitor the response to treatment of CNS tumors. Brain tumors release molecular 
information into the circulation. Liquid biopsies collect and analyze tumor 
components in body fluids, and there is an increasing interest in the 
investigation of liquid biopsies as a substitute for tumor tissue. Tumor-derived 
biomarkers include nucleic acids, proteins, and tumor-derived extracellular 
vesicles that accumulate in blood or cerebrospinal fluid. In recent years, 
circulating tumor cells have also been identified in the blood of glioblastoma 
patients. In this review of the literature, the authors highlight the 
significance, regulation, and prevalence of molecular biomarkers such as 
O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, epidermal growth factor receptor, and 
isocitrate dehydrogenase. Herein, we critically review the available literature 
on plasma circulating tumor cells (CTCs), cell-free tumors (ctDNAs), circulating 
cell-free microRNAs (cfmiRNAs), and circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) for 
the diagnosis and monitoring of brain tumor. Currently available markers have 
significant limitations. While much research has been conductedon these markers, 
there is still a significant amount that we do not yet understand, which may 
account for some conflicting reports in the literature.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22137039
PMCID: PMC8268709
PMID: 34210107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.