1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2021 Nov;28(44):62549-62561. doi: 
10.1007/s11356-021-14922-2. Epub 2021 Jul 1.

Toxicity of chlortetracycline and oxytetracycline on Vallisneria natans (Lour.) 
Hare.

Li J(1), Yang L(1), Wu Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Water Pollution Ecology Laboratory, College of Life Science, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, 430072, Hubei, People's Republic of China.
(2)Water Pollution Ecology Laboratory, College of Life Science, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, 430072, Hubei, People's Republic of China. 
Wuzhonghua@whu.edu.cn.

Tetracyclines are frequently detected in water bodies due to their widespread 
use in aquaculture and animal husbandry. A hydroponic experiment was conducted 
to explore the phytotoxic effects of Vallisneria natans (Lour.) Hare exposed to 
various concentrations of chlortetracycline (CTC) and oxytetracycline (OTC) (0, 
0.1, 1, 10, 30, 50, and 100 mg/L) for 7 days (7 D) and 14 days (14 D), 
respectively. The results showed that similar to OTC treatment for 7 D, the 
relative growth rates (RGR) and catalase (CAT) activity of V. natans, after 7 D 
of CTC exposure, decreased significantly at 10 mg/L and 30 mg/L, respectively. 
The content of soluble protein notably decreased when CTC ≥ 10 mg/L and OTC ≥ 30 
mg/L. The hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) content was significantly stimulated when OTC 
≥ 10 mg/L, while it hardly changed when exposed to CTC. After 14 D, the 
malondialdehyde (MDA) and H2O2 contents of V. natans were significantly higher 
than those of the control group under a high concentration of OTC (≥ 30 mg/L), 
but they did not change significantly under a high concentration of CTC. The 
activity of polyphenol oxidase (PPO), under CTC treatment after 14 D, showed 
first a significant increase then decreases; the maximum value (125% of the 
control) was noticed at 10 mg/L CTC, while it remained unchanged when exposed to 
OTC. The soluble protein content significantly decreased at 10 mg/L CTC and 0.1 
mg/L OTC, respectively. The RGR, CAT, and peroxidase (POD) activities, similar 
to OTC treatment after 14 D, decreased evidently when CTC was 10 mg/L, 30 mg/L, 
and 0.1 mg/L, respectively. CTC and OTC harm the chlorophyll content of V. 
natans after 14 D, and the reductions of chlorophyll a and carotenoid were more 
pronounced than chlorophyll b. The results suggest that CTC and OTC both have a 
negative effect on the growth of V. natans, and OTC can cause oxidative damage 
in V. natans but CTC harms the metabolism process without inducing oxidative 
damage. Overall, the toxicity of OTC to V. natans is stronger than that of CTC.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-021-14922-2
PMID: 34212323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]