1. Iperception. 2021 Jun 26;12(3):20416695211020331. doi: 
10.1177/20416695211020331. eCollection 2021 May-Jun.

Olfaction and Aging: A Review of the Current State of Research and Future 
Directions.

Olofsson JK(1), Ekström I(2), Larsson M(1), Nordin S(3).

Author information:
(1)Gösta Ekman Laboratory, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden; Department 
of Psychology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Psychology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

Olfaction, the sense of smell, is characterized by a notable age-dependency such 
that aging individuals are more likely to have poor olfactory abilities. These 
impairments are considered to be mostly irreversible and as having potentially 
profound effects on quality of life and food behavior, as well as constituting 
warning signs of mortality, cognitive dysfunction, and dementia. Here, we review 
the current state of research on aging and olfaction, focusing on five topics 
which we regard to be of particular relevance for the field: nutrition and 
health, cognition and dementia, mortality, environment and genetics, and 
training-based enhancement. Under each of these headlines, we provide a 
state-of-the-art overview and discuss gaps in our knowledge which might be 
filled by further research. Understanding how olfactory abilities are diminished 
in aging, and how they may be alleviated or recovered, involves a set of 
challenging tasks for researchers in the years to come.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/20416695211020331
PMCID: PMC8239976
PMID: 34249327

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.