1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Jun 23;9:655489. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.655489. 
eCollection 2021.

Reining in BTK: Interdomain Interactions and Their Importance in the Regulatory 
Control of BTK.

Kueffer LE(1), Joseph RE(1), Andreotti AH(1).

Author information:
(1)Roy J. Carver Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 
Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States.

Since Dr. Ogden Bruton's 1952 paper describing the first human primary 
immunodeficiency disease, the peripheral membrane binding signaling protein, 
aptly named Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK), has been the target of intense 
study. Dr. Bruton's description of agammaglobulinemia set the stage for 
ultimately understanding key signaling steps emanating from the B cell receptor. 
BTK is a multidomain tyrosine kinase and in the decades since Dr. Bruton's 
discovery it has become clear that genetic defects in the regulatory domains or 
the catalytic domain can lead to immunodeficiency. This finding underscores the 
intricate regulatory mechanisms within the BTK protein that maintain appropriate 
levels of signaling both in the resting B cell and during an immune challenge. 
In recent decades, BTK has become a target for clinical intervention in treating 
B cell malignancies. The survival reliance of B cell malignancies on B cell 
receptor signaling has allowed small molecules that target BTK to become 
essential tools in treating patients with hematological malignancies. The 
first-in-class Ibrutinib and more selective second-generation inhibitors all 
target the active site of the multidomain BTK protein. Therapeutic interventions 
targeting BTK have been successful but are plagued by resistance mutations that 
render drug treatment ineffective for some patients. This review will examine 
the molecular mechanisms that drive drug resistance, the long-range 
conformational effects of active site inhibitors on the BTK regulatory 
apparatus, and emerging opportunities to allosterically target the BTK kinase to 
improve therapeutic interventions using combination therapies.

Copyright Â© 2021 Kueffer, Joseph and Andreotti.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.655489
PMCID: PMC8260988
PMID: 34249912

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as apotential conflict of interest.