1. Therap Adv Gastroenterol. 2021 Jun 28;14:17562848211024460. doi: 
10.1177/17562848211024460. eCollection 2021.

Update on the role of pembrolizumab in patients with unresectable or metastatic 
colorectal cancer.

Wookey V(1), Grothey A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University of Tennessee Health Science 
Center, Memphis, TN, USA.
(2)West Cancer Center and Research Institute, 7945 Wolf River Blvd, Germantown, 
TN 38138, USA.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer type in both men and 
women in the USA. Most patients with CRC are diagnosed as local or regional 
disease. However, the survival rate for those diagnosed with metastatic disease 
remains disappointing, despite multiple treatment options. Cancer therapies for 
patients with unresectable or metastatic CRC are increasingly being driven by 
particular biomarkers. The development of various immune checkpoint inhibitors 
has revolutionized cancer therapy over the last decade by harnessing the immune 
system in the treatment of cancer, and the role of immunotherapy continues to 
expand and evolve. Pembrolizumab is an anti-programmed cell death protein 1 
immune checkpoint inhibitor and has become an essential part of the standard of 
care in the treatment regimens for multiple cancer types. This paper reviews the 
increasing evidence supporting and defining the role of pembrolizumab in the 
treatment of patients with unresectable or metastatic CRC.

Â© The Author(s), 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/17562848211024460
PMCID: PMC8246487
PMID: 34262612

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: West Cancer 
Center has received honoraria and grants for activities conducted by AG from 
Merck, Bristol Myers Squibb, Amgen, Bayer, Roche/Genentech, Natera, Caris IM, 
Boston Biomedical, and AstraZeneca.