1. Front Immunol. 2021 Jun 29;12:669150. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.669150. 
eCollection 2021.

Modulation of Gut Microbiota to Enhance Effect of Checkpoint Inhibitor 
Immunotherapy.

Wu J(1), Wang S(2), Zheng B(3), Qiu X(2), Wang H(1)(3), Chen L(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Metabolism & Integrative Biology (IMIB), Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University Shanghai 
Cancer Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)The International Cooperation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern 
Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 
China.

Accumulating evidence demonstrated the crucial role of gut microbiota in many 
human diseases, including cancer. Checkpoint inhibitor therapy has emerged as a 
novel treatment and has been clinically accepted as a major therapeutic strategy 
for cancer. Gut microbiota is related to cancer and the effect of immune 
checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), and supplement with specific bacterial species can 
restore or enhance the responses to the ICIs. Namely, specified bacteria can 
serve as the biomarkers for distinguishing the patient who will respond to ICIs 
and determine the effectiveness of ICIs, as well as predicting the efficacy of 
checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy. Regardless of the significant findings, the 
relationship between gut microbiota and the effect of ICIs treatment needs a 
more thorough understanding to provide more effective therapeutic plans and 
reduce treatment complication. In this review, we summarized the role of gut 
microbiota played in immune system and cancer. We mainly focus on the 
relationship between gut microbiota and the checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wu, Wang, Zheng, Qiu, Wang and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.669150
PMCID: PMC8276067
PMID: 34267748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.