1. Front Immunol. 2021 Jul 1;12:614773. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.614773.
eCollection  2021.

Comprehensive Transcriptomic Analysis Reveals the Role of the Immune Checkpoint 
HLA-G Molecule in Cancers.

Xu HH(1)(2), Gan J(1), Xu DP(3), Li L(4), Yan WH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Center, Taizhou Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Wenzhou 
Medical University, Linhai, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Minimally Invasive Techniques & Rapid Rehabilitation of 
Digestive System Tumor of Zhejiang Province, Taizhou Hospital of Zhejiang 
Province, Linhai, China.
(3)Reproductive Center, Taizhou Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Wenzhou Medical 
University, Linhai, China.
(4)Pediatrics, Taizhou Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Wenzhou Medical 
University, Linhai, China.

Human leukocyte antigen G (HLA-G) is known as a novel immune checkpoint molecule 
in cancer; thus, HLA-G and its receptors might be targets for immune checkpoint 
blockade in cancer immunotherapy. The aim of this study was to systematically 
identify the roles of checkpoint HLA-G molecules across various types of cancer. 
ONCOMINE, GEPIA, CCLE, TRRUST, HAP, PrognoScan, Kaplan-Meier Plotter, 
cBioPortal, LinkedOmics, STRING, GeneMANIA, DAVID, TIMER, and CIBERSORT were 
utilized. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) 
enrichment analyses were performed. In this study, we comprehensively analysed 
the heterogeneous expression of HLA-G molecules in various types of cancer and 
focused on genetic alterations, coexpression patterns, gene interaction 
networks, HLA-G interactors, and the relationships between HLA-G and 
pathological stage, prognosis, and tumor-infiltrating immune cells. We first 
identified that the mRNA expression levels of HLA-G were significantly 
upregulated in both most tumor tissues and tumor cell lines on the basis of 
in-depth analysis of RNAseq data. The expression levels of HLA-G were positively 
associated with those of the other immune checkpoints PD-1 and CTLA-4. Abnormal 
expression of HLA-G was significantly correlated with the pathological stage of 
some but not all tumor types. There was a significant difference between the 
high and low HLA-G expression groups in terms of overall survival (OS) or 
disease-free survival (DFS). The results showed that HLA-G highly expressed have 
positive associations with tumor-infiltrating immune cells in the 
microenvironment in most types of tumors (P<0.05). Additionally, we identified 
the key transcription factor (TF) targets in the regulation of HLA-G expression, 
including HIVEP2, MYCN, CIITA, MYC, and IRF1. Multiple mutations (missense, 
truncating, etc.) and the methylation status of the HLA-G gene may explain the 
differential expression of HLA-G across different tumors. Functional enrichment 
analysis showed that HLA-G was primarily related to T cell activation, T cell 
regulation, and lymphocyte-mediated immunity. The data may provide novel 
insights for blockade of the HLA-G/ILT axis, which holds potential for the 
development of more effective antitumour treatments.

Copyright Â© 2021 Xu, Gan, Xu, Li and Yan.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.614773
PMCID: PMC8281136
PMID: 34276642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.