1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab. 2021 Jan 21;4(3):e00227. doi: 10.1002/edm2.227. 
eCollection 2021 Jul.

Hospitalization for hypoglycaemia in people with diabetes in Denmark, 1997-2017: 
Time trends in incidence and HbA(1c) and glucose-lowering drug use before and 
after hypoglycaemia.

Bengtsen MB(1)(2), Knudsen JS(3)(4), Bengtsen MB(3), Møller N(1), Thomsen RW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine Aarhus University Hospital 
Aarhus Denmark.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine Regional Hospital of Horsens Horsens Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Epidemiology Institute of Clinical Medicine Aarhus 
University Hospital Aarhus Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology Aarhus University Hospital Aarhus 
Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: To assess incidence trends of first hospitalization for hypoglycaemia 
in Denmark and to examine HbA1c levels and glucose-lowering drug use before and 
after hospitalization among individuals with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed a population-based study linking 
diagnosis, prescription and laboratory data. Standardized incidence of first 
hospitalization for hypoglycaemia in Denmark was assessed for each calendar year 
1997-2017. HbA1c and glucose-lowering drug use was compared with age- and 
sex-matched diabetes comparisons without hospitalization for hypoglycaemia.
RESULTS: The annual age- and sex-standardized incidence rate of first 
hospitalization for hypoglycaemia per 100,000 person-years increased during 
1997-2003 (from 17.7 to 30.3 per 100,000 person-years), remained stable until 
2010 (30.4) and gradually declined until 2017 (22.0). During this period, we 
identified 3,479 people with type 1 diabetes and 15,329 people with type 2 
diabetes experiencing first hospitalization for hypoglycaemia. Both diabetes 
groups experienced a mean HbA1c decrease of ~12%-15% in the months preceding 
first hospitalization, followed by a gradually increasing HbA1c afterwards. 
People with type 1 diabetes and hospitalization used similar insulin therapies 
as those without hospitalization. People with type 2 diabetes and 
hospitalization more often received insulin (55%) than comparisons (45%), and 
45% discontinued insulin or stopped all glucose-lowering therapy after first 
hospitalization.
CONCLUSIONS: Incidence of hospitalizations for hypoglycaemia has declined by one 
fourth the last decade in the Danish population. A HbA1c decrease precedes first 
hospitalization for hypoglycaemia in individuals with diabetes, and profound 
changes in glucose-lowering drug therapy for type 2 diabetes occur after 
hospitalization.

© 2021 The Authors. Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/edm2.227
PMCID: PMC8279622
PMID: 34277957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed the ICMJE Uniform 
Disclosure at http://www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available on request from 
the corresponding author) and declare that they received no support from any 
organization for the submitted work; no financial relationships in the previous 
three years with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted 
work; and no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work. The Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus 
University Hospital is a member of The Danish Centre for Strategic Research in 
Type 2 Diabetes (DD2), supported by the Danish Agency for Science (grant nos. 
09–067009 and 09–075724), the Danish Health and Medicines Authority, the Danish 
Diabetes Association and an unrestricted donation from Novo Nordisk A/S. Project 
partners are listed on the website www.DD2.nu. The Department of Clinical 
Epidemiology, Aarhus University Hospital participates in the International 
Diabetic Neuropathy Consortium (IDNC) research programme, which is supported by 
a Novo Nordisk Foundation Challenge programme grant (Grant number NNF14SA000 6). 
The Department of Clinical Epidemiology is involved in studies with funding from 
various companies as research grants to (and administered by) Aarhus University. 
None of these studies have relation to the present study.