1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jul 20;22(14):7749. doi: 10.3390/ijms22147749.

Actin Isovariant ACT7 Modulates Root Thermomorphogenesis by Altering 
Intracellular Auxin Homeostasis.

Parveen S(1), Rahman A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)United Graduate School of Agricultural Sciences, Iwate University, Morioka 
020-8550, Japan.
(2)Department of Plant Bio Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, 
Morioka 020-8550, Japan.
(3)Agri-Innovation Center, Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Morioka 
020-8550, Japan.

High temperature stress is one of the most threatening abiotic stresses for 
plants limiting the crop productivity world-wide. Altered developmental 
responses of plants to moderate-high temperature has been shown to be linked to 
the intracellular auxin homeostasis regulated by both auxin biosynthesis and 
transport. Trafficking of the auxin carrier proteins plays a major role in 
maintaining the cellular auxin homeostasis. The intracellular trafficking 
largely relies on the cytoskeletal component, actin, which provides track for 
vesicle movement. Different classes of actin and the isovariants function in 
regulating various stages of plant development. Although high temperature alters 
the intracellular trafficking, the role of actin in this process remains 
obscure. Using isovariant specific vegetative class actin mutants, here we 
demonstrate that ACTIN 7 (ACT7) isovariant plays an important role in regulating 
the moderate-high temperature response in Arabidopsis root. Loss of ACT7, but 
not ACT8 resulted in increased inhibition of root elongation under prolonged 
moderate-high temperature. Consistently, kinematic analysis revealed a drastic 
reduction in cell production rate and cell elongation in act7-4 mutant under 
high temperature. Quantification of actin dynamicity reveals that prolonged 
moderate-high temperature modulates bundling along with orientation and 
parallelness of filamentous actin in act7-4 mutant. The hypersensitive response 
of act7-4 mutant was found to be linked to the altered intracellular auxin 
distribution, resulted from the reduced abundance of PIN-FORMED PIN1 and PIN2 
efflux carriers. Collectively, these results suggest that vegetative class actin 
isovariant, ACT7 modulates the long-term moderate-high temperature response in 
Arabidopsis root.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22147749
PMCID: PMC8306570
PMID: 34299366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.