1. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2021 Oct;10(10):1406-1418. doi: 10.1002/sctm.21-0054. 
Epub 2021 Jul 22.

Human dystrophin expressing chimeric (DEC) cell therapy ameliorates cardiac, 
respiratory, and skeletal muscle's function in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

Siemionow M(1), Langa P(1), Harasymczuk M(1), Cwykiel J(1), Sielewicz M(1), 
Smieszek J(1), Heydemann A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Center for Cardiovascular Research, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a progressive and lethal disease, caused by 
X-linked mutations of the dystrophin encoding gene. The lack of dystrophin leads 
to muscle weakness, degeneration, fibrosis, and progressive loss of skeletal, 
cardiac, and respiratory muscle function resulting in premature death due to the 
cardiac and respiratory failure. There is no cure for DMD and current therapies 
neither cure nor arrest disease progression. Thus, there is an urgent need to 
develop new approaches and safer therapies for DMD patients. We have previously 
reported functional improvements which correlated with increased dystrophin 
expression following transplantation of dystrophin expressing chimeric (DEC) 
cells of myoblast origin to the mdx mouse models of DMD. In this study, we 
demonstrated that systemic-intraosseous transplantation of DEC human cells 
derived from myoblasts of normal and DMD-affected donors, increased dystrophin 
expression in cardiac, respiratory, and skeletal muscles of the mdx/scid mouse 
model of DMD. DEC transplant correlated with preservation of ejection fraction 
and fractional shortening on echocardiography, improved respiratory function on 
plethysmography, and improved strength and function of the limb skeletal 
muscles. Enhanced function was associated with improved muscle histopathology, 
revealing reduced mdx pathology, fibrosis, decreased inflammation, and preserved 
muscle morphology and architecture. Our findings confirm that DECs generate a 
systemic protective effect in DMD-affected target organs. Therefore, DECs 
represents a novel therapeutic approach with the potential to preserve or 
enhance multiorgan function of the skeletal, cardiac, and respiratory muscles 
critical for the well-being of DMD patients.

Â© 2021 The Authors. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/sctm.21-0054
PMCID: PMC8459641
PMID: 34291884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.S. is CMO and shareholder of Dystrogen 
Therapeutics SA, the company holds a license for DEC Therapy. M.S. received 
research from the University of Illinois Chancellor's Innovation Fund (CIF) 
Proof of Concept Award. M.S. is the inventor on the patent application filed by 
University of Illinois at Chicago related to chimeric cell therapy for Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy (WO/2016/201182). M.S. is also a consultant for Cleveland 
Clinic and received honoraria from MMI SpA, Axogen. A.H. is the advisor to the 
Dystrogen Therapeutics. The other authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest.