1. Sci Rep. 2021 Jul 22;11(1):15038. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-94518-5.

Lycopene suppresses palmitic acid-induced brain oxidative stress, hyperactivity 
of some neuro-signalling enzymes, and inflammation in female Wistar rat.

Ugbaja RN(1)(2), James AS(3), Ugwor EI(3), Akamo AJ(3), Thomas FC(4), Kosoko 
AM(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Biosciences, Federal University of 
Agriculture, P.M.B 2240, Abeokuta, Ogun State, Nigeria. ugbajarn@funaab.edu.ng.
(2)Department of Chemical Sciences (Biochemistry Program), Augustine University 
Ilara-Epe, Epe, Lagos State, Nigeria. ugbajarn@funaab.edu.ng.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, College of Biosciences, Federal University of 
Agriculture, P.M.B 2240, Abeokuta, Ogun State, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Federal University of Agriculture, P.M.B 2240, Abeokuta, Ogun State, 
Nigeria.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, School of Applied Sciences, University of 
Huddersfield, Queensgate, HD1 3DH, UK.

Neuroinflammation can be triggered by certain high caloric nutrients such as 
palmitic acid (PA). The effect of lycopene against PA-induced neuroinflammation 
in female rats has not been as explored. In the present study, thirty rats 
(weighing 150-200) g were randomly allotted into six groups (n = 5) comprising 
normal control, PA control, PA + lycopene (0.24 mg/kg), PA + lycopene 
(0.48 mg/kg), lycopene (0.24 mg/kg), and lycopene (0.48 mg/kg), respectively. 
After seven weeks of PA challenge (5 mM) including two weeks of lycopene 
treatment, the brain was excised for analyses. Palmitic acid overload caused 
significant (p < 0.05) increases in adenosine deaminase, monoamine oxidase-A, 
nucleotides tri-phosphatase, 5'-nucleotidase, acetylcholine esterase, and 
myeloperoxidase activities, and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels which were reduced 
significantly in the lycopene-treated groups. Conversely, catalase and 
glutathione peroxidase activities, and reduced glutathione levels concentration 
decreased by 43%, 34%, and 12%, respectively in the PA control groups compared 
with the Control. Also, PA triggered a decrease in the brain phospholipids 
(11.43%) and cholesterol (11.11%), but increased triacylglycerol level (50%). 
Furthermore, upregulated expressions of Interleukin-1β, Interleukin-6, and 
NF-ĸB-p65 in the PA control were attenuated, while decreased Interleukine-10 
expression was upregulated due to lycopene treatment. Severe brain vacuolation 
observed in the histology of the PA control rats was normalized by lycopene. 
This study concludes that lycopene ameliorated PA-induced neuroinflammation, 
probably via attenuation of oxidative stress, and downregulation of TLR4/ NF-κB 
-p65 axis.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-94518-5
PMCID: PMC8298469
PMID: 34294819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.