1. Proteomics. 2021 Dec;21(23-24):e2000143. doi: 10.1002/pmic.202000143. Epub
2021  Aug 9.

Know thy immune self and non-self: Proteomics informs on the expanse of self and 
non-self, and how and where they arise.

Joyce S(1), Ternette N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System and the 
Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Nuffield Department of 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

T cells play an important role in the adaptive immune response to a variety of 
infections and cancers. Initiation of a T cell mediated immune response requires 
antigen recognition in a process termed MHC (major histocompatibility complex) 
restri ction. A T cell antigen is a composite structure made up of a peptide 
fragment bound within the antigen-binding groove of an MHC-encoded class I or 
class II molecule. Insight into the precise composition and biology of self and 
non-self immunopeptidomes is essential to harness T cell mediated immunity to 
prevent, treat, or cure infectious diseases and cancers. T cell antigen 
discovery is an arduous task! The pioneering work in the early 1990s has made 
large-scale T cell antigen discovery possible. Thus, advancements in mass 
spectrometry coupled with proteomics and genomics technologies make possible T 
cell antigen discovery with ease, accuracy, and sensitivity. Yet we have only 
begun to understand the breadth and the depth of self and non-self 
immunopeptidomes because the molecular biology of the cell continues to surprise 
us with new secrets directly related to the source, and the processing and 
presentation of MHC ligands. Focused on MHC class I molecules, this review, 
therefore, provides a brief historic account of T cell antigen discovery and, 
against a backdrop of key advances in molecular cell biologic processes, 
elaborates on how proteogenomics approaches have revolutionised the field.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Proteomics published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.202000143
PMCID: PMC8865197
PMID: 34310018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.