1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Aug 3;10(15):e020754. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.020754.
Epub  2021 Jul 30.

Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cells Mediate Myocardial Ischemia/Reperfusion Injury by 
Secreting Type I Interferons.

Lai L(1)(2), Zhang A(1), Yang B(1), Charles EJ(1), Kron IL(1), Yang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery University of Virginia Charlottesville VA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology Changzhi Medical College Changzhi City Shanxi 
Province China.

Background We previously demonstrated that ischemically injured cardiomyocytes 
release cell-free DNA and HMGB1 (high mobility group box 1 protein) into 
circulation during reperfusion, activating proinflammatory responses and 
ultimately exacerbating reperfusion injury. We hypothesize that cell-free DNA 
and HMGB1 mediate myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury by stimulating 
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) to secrete type I interferon (IFN-I). 
Methods and Results C57BL/6 and interferon alpha receptor-1 knockout mice 
underwent 40 minutes of left coronary artery occlusion followed by 60 minutes of 
reperfusion (40'/60' IR) before infarct size was evaluated by 
2,3,5-Triphenyltetrazolium chloride-Blue staining. Cardiac perfusate was 
acquired in ischemic hearts without reperfusion by antegrade perfusion of the 
isolated heart. Flow cytometry in pDC-depleted mice treated with multiple doses 
of plasmacytoid dendritic cell antigen-1 antibody via intraperitoneal injection 
demonstrated plasmacytoid dendritic cell antigen-1 antibody treatment had no 
effect on conventional splenic dendritic cells but significantly reduced splenic 
pDCs by 60%. pDC-depleted mice had significantly smaller infarct size and 
decreased plasma interferon-α and interferon-β compared with control. Blockade 
of the type I interferon signaling pathway with cyclic GMP-AMP synthase 
inhibitor, stimulator of interferon genes antibody, or interferon regulatory 
factor 3 antibody upon reperfusion similarly significantly attenuated infarct 
size by 45%. Plasma levels of interferon-α and interferon-β were significantly 
reduced in cyclic GMP-AMP synthase inhibitor-treated mice. Infarct size was 
significantly reduced by >30% in type I interferon receptor monoclonal 
antibody-treated mice and interferon alpha receptor-1 knockout mice. In 
splenocyte culture, 40'/0' cardiac perfusate treatment stimulated interferon-α 
and interferon-β production; however, this effect disappeared in the presence of 
cyclic GMP-AMP synthase inhibitor. Conclusions Type I interferon production is 
stimulated following myocardial ischemia by cardiogenic cell-free DNA/HMGB1 in a 
pDC-dependent manner, and subsequently activates type I interferon receptors to 
exacerbate reperfusion injury. These results identify new potential therapeutic 
targets to attenuate myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.121.020754
PMCID: PMC8475660
PMID: 34325534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.