1. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2021 Dec;36(1):1760-1782. doi: 
10.1080/14756366.2021.1956488.

Design, synthesis, docking, ADMET studies, and anticancer evaluation of new 
3-methylquinoxaline derivatives as VEGFR-2 inhibitors and apoptosis inducers.

Alanazi MM(1), Eissa IH(2), Alsaif NA(1), Obaidullah AJ(1), Alanazi WA(3), 
Alasmari AF(3), Albassam H(3), Elkady H(2), Elwan A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Pharmaceutical Medicinal Chemistry & Drug Design Department, Faculty of 
Pharmacy (Boys), Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) plays a critical role in 
cancer angiogenesis. Inhibition of VEGFR-2 activity proved effective suppression 
of tumour propagation. Accordingly, two series of new 3-methylquinoxaline 
derivatives have been designed and synthesised as VEGFR-2 inhibitors. The 
synthesised derivatives were evaluated in vitro for their cytotoxic activities 
against MCF-7and HepG2 cell lines. In addition, the VEGFR-2 inhibitory 
activities of the target compounds were estimated to indicate the potential 
mechanism of their cytotoxicity. To a great extent, the results of VEGFR-2 
inhibition were highly correlated with that of cytotoxicity. Compound 27a was 
the most potent VEGFR-2 inhibitor with IC50 of 3.2 nM very close to positive 
control sorafenib (IC50 = 3.12 nM). Such compound exhibited a strong cytotoxic 
effect against MCF-7 and HepG2, respectively with IC50 of 7.7 and 4.5 µM in 
comparison to sorafenib (IC50 = 3.51 and 2.17 µM). In addition, compounds 28, 
30f, 30i, and 31b exhibited excellent VEGFR-2 inhibition activities (IC50 range 
from 4.2 to 6.1 nM) with promising cytotoxic activity. Cell cycle progression 
and apoptosis induction were investigated for the most active member 27a. Also, 
the effect of 27a on the level of caspase-3, caspase-9, and BAX/Bcl-2 ratio was 
determined. Molecular docking studies were implemented to interpret the binding 
mode of the target compounds with the VEGFR-2 pocket. Furthermore, toxicity and 
ADMET calculations were performed for the synthesised compounds to study their 
pharmacokinetic profiles.

DOI: 10.1080/14756366.2021.1956488
PMCID: PMC8344243
PMID: 34340610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no conflict of interest 
exists. The authors give valuable appreciation to Dr. Mohamed R. Elnagar, 
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Al-Azhar 
University, Cairo, Egypt for his valuable technical assistance.