1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Sep 3;9(1):e0026121. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.00261-21.
Epub  2021 Aug 4.

SARS-CoV-2 Quasispecies Provides an Advantage Mutation Pool for the Epidemic 
Variants.

Sun F(#)(1)(2), Wang X(#)(1)(2), Tan S(#)(3), Dan Y(1)(2), Lu Y(3), Zhang 
J(1)(2), Xu J(4), Tan Z(1), Xiang X(1), Zhou Y(1), He W(1), Wan X(1), Zhang 
W(1), Chen Y(3), Tan W(1)(2), Deng G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical 
Universitygrid.410570.7 (Army Medial University), Chongqing, China.
(2)Chongqing Key Laboratory for Research of Infectious Diseases, Chongqing, 
China.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Chongqing Public Health Medical Center, 
Chongqing, China.
(4)Beijing Novogene Company Limited, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The dynamics of quasispecies afford RNA viruses a great fitness on cell tropism 
and host range. To study the quasispecies features and the intra-host evolution 
of SARS-CoV-2, we collected nine confirmed patients and sequenced the haplotypes 
of spike gene using a single-molecule real-time platform. Fourteen samples were 
extracted from sputum, nasopharyngeal swabs, or stool, which in total produced 
283,655 high-quality circular consensus sequences. We observed a stable 
quasispecies structure that one master mutant (mean abundance ∼0.70), followed 
by numerous minor mutants (mean abundance ∼1.21 × 10-3). Under high selective 
pressure, minor mutants may obtain a fitness advantage and become the master 
ones. The later predominant substitution D614G existed in the minor mutants of 
more than one early patient. An epidemic variant had a possibility to be 
independently originated from multiple hosts. The mutant spectrums covered ∼85% 
amino acid variations of public genomes (GISAID; frequency ≥ 0.1) and likely 
provided an advantage mutation pool for the current/future epidemic variants. 
Notably, 32 of 35 collected antibody escape substitutions were preexistent in 
the early quasispecies. Virus populations in different tissues/organs revealed 
potentially independent replications. The quasispecies complexity of sputum 
samples was significantly lower than that of nasopharyngeal swabs (P = 0.02). 
Evolution analysis revealed that three continuous S2 domains (HR1, CH, and CD) 
had undergone a positive selection. Cell fusion-related domains may play a 
crucial role in adapting to the intrahost immune system. Our findings suggested 
that future epidemiologic investigations and clinical interventions should 
consider the quasispecies information that has missed by routine single 
consensus genome. IMPORTANCE RNA virus population in a host does not consist of 
a consensus single haplotype but rather an ensemble of related sequences termed 
quasispecies. The dynamics of quasispecies afford SARS-CoV-2 a great ability on 
genetic fitness during intrahost evolution. The process is likely achieved by 
changing the genetic characteristics of key functional genes, such as the spike 
glycoprotein. Previous studies have applied the next-generation sequencing (NGS) 
technology to evaluate the quasispecies of SARS-CoV-2, and results indicated a 
low genetic diversity of the spike gene. However, the NGS platform cannot 
directly obtain the full haplotypes without assembling, and it is also difficult 
to predict the extremely low-frequency variations. Therefore, we introduced a 
single-molecule real-time technology to directly obtain the haplotypes of the 
RNA population and further study the quasispecies features and intrahost 
evolution of the spike gene.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.00261-21
PMCID: PMC8552775
PMID: 34346744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]