1. Cell Rep. 2021 Aug 3;36(5):109461. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109461.

Repeated nuclear translocations underlie photoreceptor positioning and 
lamination of the outer nuclear layer in the mammalian retina.

Aghaizu ND(1), Warre-Cornish KM(2), Robinson MR(2), Waldron PV(2), Maswood 
RN(2), Smith AJ(3), Ali RR(3), Pearson RA(4).

Author information:
(1)University College London Institute of Ophthalmology, London EC1V 9EL, UK. 
Electronic address: nozie.aghaizu@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)University College London Institute of Ophthalmology, London EC1V 9EL, UK.
(3)University College London Institute of Ophthalmology, London EC1V 9EL, UK; 
Centre for Cell and Gene Therapy, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London 
SE1 9RT, UK.
(4)University College London Institute of Ophthalmology, London EC1V 9EL, UK; 
Centre for Cell and Gene Therapy, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London 
SE1 9RT, UK. Electronic address: rachael.pearson@kcl.ac.uk.

In development, almost all stratified neurons must migrate from their birthplace 
to the appropriate neural layer. Photoreceptors reside in the most apical layer 
of the retina, near their place of birth. Whether photoreceptors require 
migratory events for fine-positioning and/or retention within this layer is not 
well understood. Here, we show that photoreceptor nuclei of the developing mouse 
retina cyclically exhibit rapid, dynein-1-dependent translocation toward the 
apical surface, before moving more slowly in the basal direction, likely due to 
passive displacement by neighboring retinal nuclei. Attenuating dynein 1 
function in rod photoreceptors results in their ectopic basal displacement into 
the outer plexiform layer and inner nuclear layer. Synapse formation is also 
compromised in these displaced cells. We propose that repeated, apically 
directed nuclear translocation events are necessary to ensure retention of 
post-mitotic photoreceptors within the emerging outer nuclear layer during 
retinogenesis, which is critical for correct neuronal lamination.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109461
PMCID: PMC8356022
PMID: 34348137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests