1. Molecules. 2021 Jul 27;26(15):4520. doi: 10.3390/molecules26154520.

Vitamin E Can Ameliorate Oxidative Damage of Ovine Hepatocytes In Vitro by 
Regulating Genes Expression Associated with Apoptosis and Pyroptosis, but Not 
Ferroptosis.

Jian L(1), Xue Y(1), Gao Y(1), Wang B(1), Qu Y(1), Li S(1), Li H(1), Li Z(1), 
Wang B(1), Luo H(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.

(1) Background: the current research was conducted to investigate the potential 
non-antioxidant roles of vitamin E in the protection of hepatocysts from 
oxidative damage. (2) Methods: primary sheep hepatocytes were cultured and 
exposed to 200, 400, 600, or 800 μmol/L hydrogen peroxide, while their viability 
was assessed using a CCK-8 kit. Then, cells were treated with 400 μmol/L 
hydrogen peroxide following a pretreatment with 50, 100, 200, 400, and 800 
μmol/L vitamin E and their intracellular ROS levels were determined by means of 
the DCF-DA assay. RNA-seq, verified by qRT-PCR, was conducted thereafter: 
non-treated control (C1); cells treated with 400 μmol/L hydrogen peroxide (C2); 
and C2 plus a pretreatment with 100 μmol/L vitamin E (T1). (3) Results: the 
200-800 μmol/L hydrogen peroxide caused significant cell death, while 50, 100, 
and 200 μmol/L vitamin E pretreatment significantly improved the survival rate 
of hepatocytes. ROS content in the cells pretreated with vitamin E was 
significantly lower than that in the control group and hydrogen-peroxide-treated 
group, especially in those pretreated with 100 μmol/L vitamin E. The 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) concerning cell death involved in 
apoptosis (RIPK1, TLR7, CASP8, and CASP8AP2), pyroptosis (NLRP3, IL-1β, and 
IRAK2), and ferroptosis (TFRC and PTGS2). The abundances of IL-1β, IRAK2, NLRP3, 
CASP8, CASP8AP2, RIPK1, and TLR7 were significantly increased in the C1 group 
and decreased in T1 group, while TFRC and PTGS2 were increased in T1 group. (4) 
Conclusions: oxidative stress induced by hydrogen peroxide caused cellular 
damage and death in sheep hepatocytes. Pretreatment with vitamin E effectively 
reduced intracellular ROS levels and protected the hepatocytes from cell death 
by regulating gene expression associated with apoptosis (RIPK1, TLR7, CASP8, and 
CASP8AP2) and pyroptosis (NLRP3, IL-1β, and IRAK2), but not ferroptosis (TFRC 
and PTGS2).

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26154520
PMCID: PMC8348559
PMID: 34361674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.