1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jul 31;22(15):8246. doi: 10.3390/ijms22158246.

Comparison of Silks from Pseudoips prasinana and Bombyx mori Shows Molecular 
Convergence in Fibroin Heavy Chains but Large Differences in Other Silk 
Components.

Rindos M(1)(2), Kucerova L(1), Rouhova L(1)(2), Sehadova H(1)(2), Sery M(1), 
Hradilova M(3), Konik P(2), Zurovec M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Entomology, 
37005 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, 37005 Ceske Budejovice, 
Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
Videnska 1083, 142 20 Praha, Czech Republic.

Many lepidopteran larvae produce silk feeding shelters and cocoons to protect 
themselves and the developing pupa. As caterpillars evolved, the quality of the 
silk, shape of the cocoon, and techniques in forming and leaving the cocoon 
underwent a number of changes. The silk of Pseudoips prasinana has previously 
been studied using X-ray analysis and classified in the same category as that of 
Bombyx mori, suggesting that silks of both species have similar properties 
despite their considerable phylogenetic distance. In the present study, we 
examined P. prasinana silk using 'omics' technology, including silk gland RNA 
sequencing (RNA-seq) and a mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of cocoon 
proteins. We found that although the central repetitive amino acid sequences 
encoding crystalline domains of fibroin heavy chain molecules are almost 
identical in both species, the resulting fibers exhibit quite different 
mechanical properties. Our results suggest that these differences are most 
probably due to the higher content of fibrohexamerin and fibrohexamerin-like 
molecules in P. prasinana silk. Furthermore, we show that whilst P. prasinana 
cocoons are predominantly made of silk similar to that of other Lepidoptera, 
they also contain a second, minor silk type, which is present only at the escape 
valve.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22158246
PMCID: PMC8347419
PMID: 34361011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare that they have no competing 
interest.