1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jul 29;22(15):8133. doi: 10.3390/ijms22158133.

miR-129a-3p Inhibits PEDV Replication by Targeting the EDA-Mediated NF-κB 
Pathway in IPEC-J2 Cells.

Qi X(1), Cao Y(1), Wu S(1)(2), Wu Z(1), Bao W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 
225000, China.
(2)Joint International Research Laboratory of Agriculture and Agri-Product 
Safety, Yangzhou University, The Ministry of Education of China, Yangzhou 
225000, China.

Previous studies have shown that microRNAs (miRNAs) are closely related to many 
viral infections. However, the molecular mechanism of how miRNAs regulate 
porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) infection remains unclear. In this study, 
we first constructed a PEDV-infected IPEC-J2 cytopathic model to validate the 
relationship between miR-129a-3p expression levels and PEDV resistance. 
Secondly, we explored the effect of miR-129a-3p on PEDV infection by targeting 
the 3'UTR region of the ligand ectodysplasin (EDA) gene. Finally, transcriptome 
sequencing was used to analyze the downstream regulatory mechanism of EDA. The 
results showed that after 48 h of PEDV infection, IPEC-J2 cells showed obvious 
pathological changes, and miR-129a-3p expression was significantly downregulated 
(p < 0.01). Overexpression of miR-129a-3p mimics inhibited PEDV replication in 
IPEC-J2 cells; silencing endogenous miR-129a-3p can promote viral replication. A 
dual luciferase assay showed that miR-129a-3p could bind to the 3'UTR region of 
the EDA gene, which significantly reduced the expression level of EDA (p < 
0.01). Functional verification showed that upregulation of EDA gene expression 
significantly promoted PEDV replication in IPEC-J2 cells. Overexpression of 
miR-129a-3p can activate the caspase activation and recruitment domain 11 
(CARD11) mediated NF-κB pathway, thus inhibiting PEDV replication. The above 
results suggest that miR-129a-3p inhibits PEDV replication in IPEC-J2 cells by 
activating the NF-κB pathway by binding to the EDA 3'UTR region. Our results 
have laid the foundation for in-depth study of the mechanism of miR-129a-3p 
resistance and its application in porcine epidemic diarrhea disease-resistance 
breeding.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22158133
PMCID: PMC8347983
PMID: 34360898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript or in the decision to 
publish the results.