1. J Endocr Soc. 2021 Jun 15;5(10):bvab111. doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvab111. 
eCollection 2021 Oct 1.

SDHB-Associated Paraganglioma Syndrome in Africa-A Need for Greater Genetic 
Testing.

Siddiqui N(1), Seedat F(1)(2), Bulbulia S(1)(2), Mtshali NZ(3), Botha A(3), 
Krause A(4), Daya R(1)(2), Bayat Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Helen Joseph Hospital, Johannesburg, 2092, South Africa.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
School of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 2193, South Africa.
(3)Division of Anatomical Pathology, Department of Pathology, National Health 
Laboratory Services & University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 2193, South 
Africa.
(4)Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Services & School of 
Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, 2193, South Africa.

A germline mutation is identified in almost 40% of 
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma (PPGL) syndromes. Genetic testing and counseling 
are essential for the management of index cases as well as presymptomatic 
identification and preemptive management of affected family members. Mutations 
in the genes encoding the mitochondrial enzyme succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) are 
well described in patients with hereditary PPGL. Among patients of African 
ancestry, the prevalence, phenotype, germline mutation spectrum, and penetrance 
of SDH mutations is poorly characterized. We describe a multifocal paraganglioma 
in a young African male with an underlying missense succinate dehydrogenase 
subunit B (SDHB) mutation and a history of 3 first-degree relatives who died at 
young ages from suspected cardiovascular causes. The same SDHB mutation, Class V 
variant c.724C>A p.(Arg242Ser), was detected in one of his asymptomatic 
siblings. As there are limited data describing hereditary PPGL syndromes in 
Africa, this report of an SDHB-associated PPGL is a notable contribution to the 
literature in this growing field. Due to the noteworthy clinical implications of 
PPGL mutations, this work highlights the existing need for broader genetic 
screening among African patients with PPGL despite the limited healthcare 
resources available in this region.

Â© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jendso/bvab111
PMCID: PMC8348940
PMID: 34377882