1. J Virol. 2021 Oct 13;95(21):e0040621. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00406-21. Epub 2021 Aug
 11.

Lack of Interferon (IFN) Regulatory Factor 8 Associated with Restricted IFN-γ 
Response Augmented Japanese Encephalitis Virus Replication in the Mouse Brain.

Tripathi A(1), Singh Rawat B(2), Addya S(3), Surjit M(1), Tailor P(2), Vrati 
S(4), Banerjee A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Translational Health Science and Technology Institutegrid.464764.3 (THSTI), 
Faridabad, India.
(2)National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi, India.
(3)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson Universitygrid.265008.9, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Regional Center for Biotechnology (RCB), Faridabad, India.

Interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF8), a myeloid lineage transcription factor, 
emerges as an essential regulator for microglial activation. However, the 
precise role of IRF8 during Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) infection in the 
brain remains elusive. Here, we report that JEV infection enhances IRF8 
expression in the infected mouse brain. Comparative transcriptional profiling of 
whole-brain RNA analysis and validation by quantitative reverse 
transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) reveals an impaired interferon gamma (IFN-γ) and 
related gene expression in Irf8 knockout (Irf8-/-)-infected mice. Further, Ifnγ 
knockout (Ifnγ-/-) mice exhibit a reduced level of Irf8. Both Ifnγ-/- and 
Irf8-/- mice exhibit significantly reduced levels of activated (CD11b+ CD45hi, 
CD11b+ CD45lo, Cd68, and CD86) and infiltrating immune cells (Ly6C+, CD4, and 
CD8) in the infected brain compared to those of wild-type (WT) mice. However, a 
higher level of granulocyte cell (Ly6G+) infiltration is evident in Irf8-/- mice 
as well as the increased concentration of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), 
interleukin-6 (IL-6), monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP1) levels in the 
brain. Interestingly, neither the Irf8-/- nor the Ifnγ-/- conferred protection 
against lethal JEV challenge to mice and exhibit augmentation in JEV replication 
in the brain. The gain of function of Irf8 by overexpressing functional IRF8 in 
an IRF8-deficient cell line attenuates viral replication and enhances IFN-γ 
production. Overall, we summarize that in the murine model of JEV encephalitis, 
IRF8 modulation affects JEV replication. We also show that lack of Irf8 affects 
immune cell abundance in circulation and the infected brain, leading to a 
reduction in IFN-γ level and increased viral load in the brain. IMPORTANCE 
Microglial cells, the resident macrophages in the brain, play a vital role in 
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) pathogenesis. The deregulated activity of 
microglia can be lethal for the brain. Therefore, it is crucial to understand 
the regulators that drive microglia phenotype changes and induce inflammation in 
the brain. Interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF8) is a myeloid lineage 
transcription factor involved in microglial activation. However, the impact of 
IRF8 modulation on JEV replication remains elusive. Moreover, the pathways 
regulated by IRF8 to initiate and amplify pathological neuroinflammation are not 
well understood. Here, we demonstrated the effect of IRF8 modulation on JEV 
replication, microglial activation, and immune cells infiltration in the brain.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00406-21
PMCID: PMC8513486
PMID: 34379515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]