1. Genes Brain Behav. 2021 Nov;20(8):e12766. doi: 10.1111/gbb.12766. Epub 2021
Aug  23.

Chronic stress induces NPD-like behavior in APPPS1 and WT mice with subtle 
differences in gene expression.

Clement A(1)(2), Pedersen MM(3), Stensballe A(1), Wiborg O(1), Asuni AA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Science and Technology, Aalborg University, Aalborg, 
Denmark.
(2)Department of Pathology and Fluid Biomarkers, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Neuropsychiatric disturbances (NPDs) are considered hallmarks of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). Nevertheless, treatment of these symptoms has proven difficult and 
development of safe and effective treatment options is hampered by the limited 
understanding of the underlying pathophysiology. Thus, robust preclinical models 
are needed to increase knowledge of NPDs in AD and develop testable hypotheses 
and novel treatment options. Abnormal activity of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is implicated in many psychiatric 
symptoms and might contribute to both AD and NPDs development and progression. 
We aimed to establish a mechanistic preclinical model of NPD-like behavior in 
the APPPS1 mouse model of AD and wildtype (WT) littermates. In APPPS1 and WT 
mice, we found that chronic stress increased anxiety-like behavior and altered 
diurnal locomotor activity suggestive of sleep disturbances. Also, chronic 
stress activated the HPA axis, which, in WT mice, remained heightened for 
additional 3 weeks. Chronic stress caused irregular expression of circadian 
regulatory clock genes (BMAL1, PER2, CRY1 and CRY2) in both APPPS1 and WT mice. 
Interestingly, APPPS1 and WT mice responded differently to chronic stress in 
terms of expression of serotonergic markers (5-HT1A receptor and MAOA) and 
inflammatory genes (IL-6, STAT3 and ADMA17). These findings indicate that, 
although the behavioral response to chronic stress might be similar, the 
neurobiochemical response was different in APPPS1 mice, which is an important 
insight in the efforts to develop safe and effective treatments options for NPDs 
in AD patients. Further work is needed to substantiate these findings.

© 2021 Aalborg University & Lundbeck A/S. Genes, Brain and Behavior published by 
International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/gbb.12766
PMCID: PMC9285501
PMID: 34382343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]