1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Jul 29;9:704650. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.704650.
 eCollection 2021.

Improving the Production of Riboflavin by Introducing a Mutant Ribulose 
5-Phosphate 3-Epimerase Gene in Bacillus subtilis.

Yang B(1)(2), Sun Y(1)(2), Fu S(2)(3), Xia M(2)(4), Su Y(2)(3), Liu C(2)(4)(5), 
Zhang C(1), Zhang D(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Engineering, Dalian Polytechnic University, Dalian, 
China.
(2)Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Tianjin, China.
(3)College of Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, 
Tianjin, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Systems Microbial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Tianjin, China.
(5)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Ribulose 5-phosphate (Ru5P) and guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP) are two key 
precursors of riboflavin, whereby Ru5P is also a precursor of GTP. Ribulose 
5-phosphate 3-epimerase (Rpe) catalyzes the conversion of ribulose 5-phosphate 
into xylulose 5-phosphate. Inactivation of Rpe can reduce the consumption of 
Ru5P, enhancing the carbon flux toward riboflavin biosynthesis. Here we 
investigated the effect of mutation of rpe and other related genes on riboflavin 
production, physiological and metabolic phenotypes in Bacillus subtilis LY 
(BSLY). Introducing single nucleotide deletion (generated BSR) or nonsense 
mutation (generated BSRN) on the genomic copy of rpe, resulting in more than 
fivefold increase of riboflavin production over the parental strain. BSR process 
62% Rpe activity, while BSRN lost the entire Rpe activity and had a growth 
defect compared with the parent strain. BSR and BSRN exhibited increases of the 
inosine and guanine titers, in addition, BSRN exhibited an increase of inosine 
5'-monophosphate titer in fermentation. The transcription levels of most 
oxidative pentose phosphate pathway and purine synthesis genes were unchanged in 
BSR, except for the levels of zwf and ndk, which were higher than in BSLY. The 
production of riboflavin was increased to 479.90 ± 33.21 mg/L when ribA was 
overexpressed in BSR. The overexpression of zwf, gntZ, prs, and purF also 
enhanced the riboflavin production. Finally, overexpression of the rib operon by 
the pMX45 plasmid and mutant gnd by pHP03 plasmid in BSR led to a 3.05-fold 
increase of the riboflavin production (977.29 ± 63.44 mg/L), showing the 
potential for further engineering of this strain.

Copyright © 2021 Yang, Sun, Fu, Xia, Su, Liu, Zhang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.704650
PMCID: PMC8359813
PMID: 34395408

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.