1. Sci Rep. 2021 Aug 18;11(1):16768. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-96301-y.

Inverse association between use of broad spectrum penicllin with beta-lactamase 
inhibitors and prevalence of type 1 diabetes mellitus in Europe.

Ternák G(1), Berényi K(2), Kun S(3), Szigeti N(3), Decsi T(4), Sütő G(3), 
Wittmann I(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Operational Medicine, University of Pécs Medical School, Pécs, 
Hungary.
(2)Department of Public Health Medicine, University of Pécs Medical School, 
Pécs, Hungary.
(3)2Nd Department of Medicine and Nephrology-Diabetes Center, University of Pécs 
Medical School, Pacsirta u. 1, 7624, Pécs, Hungary.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, University of Pécs Medical School, Pécs, Hungary.
(5)2Nd Department of Medicine and Nephrology-Diabetes Center, University of Pécs 
Medical School, Pacsirta u. 1, 7624, Pécs, Hungary. wittmann.istvan@pte.hu.

Increasing incidence of type 1 diabetes is supposed to be induced by 
environmental factors. Microbiome modulated by antibiotics seems to serve as one 
of the environmental factors which could influence the development of T1DM. 
Mitochondria, as autochthonous environmental bacteria living in our cells, and 
other bacteria share many common enzymes including beta-lactamases and it is 
supported by evidence that some beta-lactamase inhibitors are able to interact 
with counterpart enzymes. Thus, antibiotics may utilize two different pathways 
influencing the development of T1DM; one through modulation of microbiome and a 
second one via the interaction of mitochondrial enzymes. Data of consumption of 
penicillin (both narrow and broad spectrum) and beta-lactamase inhibitors in 30 
European countries were collected from the database of the European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control. These data were correlated with the prevalence 
reported by the International Diabetes Federation (2019) referring to type 1 
diabetes in Europe. No correlation was found between total penicillin 
consumption or use of broad spectrum penicillin and the prevalence of type 1 
diabetes. Nevertheless, broad spectrum penicillin, in combination with 
beta-lactamase inhibitor, was in inverse correlation with the prevalence of type 
1 diabetes (r = - 0.573, p = 0.001). On the other hand, narrow spectrum 
penicillin was in positive correlation with type 1 diabetes (r = 0.523, 
p = 0.003). Prevalence of type 1 diabetes showed an inverse correlation with the 
use of beta-lactamase inhibitors and a positive one with that of narrow spectrum 
penicillin. Such a detailed analysis has not so far been provided referring to 
the penicillin group. In the background of this association either microbiomal 
or direct mitochondrial effects can be supposed.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-96301-y
PMCID: PMC8373876
PMID: 34408224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.