1. PLoS Biol. 2021 Aug 23;19(8):e3001136. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001136. 
eCollection 2021 Aug.

Plant pathogens convergently evolved to counteract redundant nodes of an NLR 
immune receptor network.

Derevnina L(1), Contreras MP(1), Adachi H(1), Upson J(1), Vergara Cruces 
A(1)(2), Xie R(1)(3), Skłenar J(1), Menke FLH(1), Mugford ST(4), MacLean D(1), 
Ma W(1)(5), Hogenhout SA(4), Goverse A(6), Maqbool A(1), Wu CH(1)(7), Kamoun 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)The Sainsbury Laboratory, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Joint Center for Single Cell Biology, School of Agriculture and Biology, 
Shanghai, Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Crop Genetics, John Innes Centre, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, University of California, 
Riverside, California, United States of America.
(6)Laboratory of Nematology, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, the 
Netherlands.
(7)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2021 Sep 17;19(9):e3001395. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001395.

In plants, nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeat (NLR)-containing 
proteins can form receptor networks to confer hypersensitive cell death and 
innate immunity. One class of NLRs, known as NLR required for cell death (NRCs), 
are central nodes in a complex network that protects against multiple pathogens 
and comprises up to half of the NLRome of solanaceous plants. Given the 
prevalence of this NLR network, we hypothesised that pathogens convergently 
evolved to secrete effectors that target NRC activities. To test this, we 
screened a library of 165 bacterial, oomycete, nematode, and aphid effectors for 
their capacity to suppress the cell death response triggered by the 
NRC-dependent disease resistance proteins Prf and Rpi-blb2. Among 5 of the 
identified suppressors, 1 cyst nematode protein and 1 oomycete protein suppress 
the activity of autoimmune mutants of NRC2 and NRC3, but not NRC4, indicating 
that they specifically counteract a subset of NRC proteins independently of 
their sensor NLR partners. Whereas the cyst nematode effector SPRYSEC15 binds 
the nucleotide-binding domain of NRC2 and NRC3, the oomycete effector AVRcap1b 
suppresses the response of these NRCs via the membrane trafficking-associated 
protein NbTOL9a (Target of Myb 1-like protein 9a). We conclude that plant 
pathogens have evolved to counteract central nodes of the NRC immune receptor 
network through different mechanisms. Coevolution with pathogen effectors may 
have driven NRC diversification into functionally redundant nodes in a massively 
expanded NLR network.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001136
PMCID: PMC8412950
PMID: 34424903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: S.K. receives funding 
from industry on NLR biology.