1. Metabolites. 2021 Aug 1;11(8):507. doi: 10.3390/metabo11080507.

Dysregulated Alanine as a Potential Predictive Marker of Glioma-An Insight from 
Untargeted HRMAS-NMR and Machine Learning Data.

Firdous S(1)(2), Abid R(1), Nawaz Z(3), Bukhari F(3), Anwer A(4), Cheng LL(5), 
Sadaf S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of the Punjab, Lahore 
54590, Pakistan.
(2)Riphah College of Rehabilitation and Allied Health Sciences, Riphah 
International University, Lahore 54770, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Data Science, Punjab University College of Information 
Technology, University of the Punjab, Lahore 54590, Pakistan.
(4)Punjab Institute of Neurosciences (PINS), Lahore General Hospital, Lahore 
54000, Pakistan.
(5)Departments of Radiology and Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02129, USA.

Metabolic alterations play a crucial role in glioma development and progression 
and can be detected even before the appearance of the fatal phenotype. We have 
compared the circulating metabolic fingerprints of glioma patients versus 
healthy controls, for the first time, in a quest to identify a panel of small, 
dysregulated metabolites with potential to serve as a predictive and/or 
diagnostic marker in the clinical settings. High-resolution magic angle spinning 
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (HRMAS-NMR) was used for untargeted 
metabolomics and data acquisition followed by a machine learning (ML) approach 
for the analyses of large metabolic datasets. Cross-validation of ML predicted 
NMR spectral features was done by statistical methods (Wilcoxon-test) using 
JMP-pro16 software. Alanine was identified as the most critical metabolite with 
potential to detect glioma with precision of 1.0, recall of 0.96, and F1 measure 
of 0.98. The top 10 metabolites identified for glioma detection included 
alanine, glutamine, valine, methionine, N-acetylaspartate (NAA), γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA), serine, α-glucose, lactate, and arginine. We achieved 100% accuracy 
for the detection of glioma using ML algorithms, extra tree classifier, and 
random forest, and 98% accuracy with logistic regression. Classification of 
glioma in low and high grades was done with 86% accuracy using logistic 
regression model, and with 83% and 79% accuracy using extra tree classifier and 
random forest, respectively. The predictive accuracy of our ML model is superior 
to any of the previously reported algorithms, used in tissue- or liquid 
biopsy-based metabolic studies. The identified top metabolites can be targeted 
to develop early diagnostic methods as well as to plan personalized treatment 
strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo11080507
PMCID: PMC8402070
PMID: 34436448

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of the manuscript declare no 
potential conflicts.