1. Cells. 2021 Aug 9;10(8):2034. doi: 10.3390/cells10082034.

NAFLD-Related Hepatocarcinoma: The Malignant Side of Metabolic Syndrome.

Michelotti A(1)(2), de Scordilli M(1)(2), Palmero L(1)(2), Guardascione M(3), 
Masala M(1)(2), Roncato R(3), Foltran L(1), Ongaro E(1), Puglisi F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro di Riferimento Oncologico di Aviano (CRO), Department of Medical 
Oncology, IRCCS, 33081 Aviano, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine (DAME), University of Udine, 33100 Udine, Italy.
(3)Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico 
di Aviano (CRO), IRCCS, 33081 Aviano, Italy.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the seventh most common cancer worldwide and 
the second leading cause of cancer-related mortality. HCC typically arises 
within a cirrhotic liver, but in about 20% of cases occurs in absence of 
cirrhosis. Among non-cirrhotic risk factors, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD) currently represents the most important emerging cause of HCC in 
developed countries. It has been estimated that annual incidence of HCC among 
patients with non-cirrhotic NAFLD is approximately 0.1-1.3 per 1000 
patients/year and ranges from 0.5% to 2.6% among patients with non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis (NASH) cirrhosis. However, only a few clinical trials enrolling 
HCC patients actually distinguished NAFLD/NASH-related cases from other 
non-cirrhotic causes and therefore evidence is still lacking in this subset of 
patients. This review aims to describe the biology underpinning NAFLD 
development, to investigate the main molecular pathways involved in its 
progression to NASH and HCC and to describe how different pathogenetic 
mechanisms underlying the onset of HCC can have an impact in clinical practice. 
We hereby also provide an overview of current HCC treatment options, with a 
particular focus on the available data on NAFLD-related cases in 
practice-changing clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10082034
PMCID: PMC8391372
PMID: 34440803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: F.P. reports grants from AstraZeneca, grants, 
personal fees and other from Roche, personal fees and other from Eli Lilly, 
personal fees from Amgen, personal fees from Ipsen, personal fees from MSD, 
personal fees from Takeda, grants and other from Eisai, others from Novartis and 
Pfizer, outside the submitted work.