1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Jul 22;12(8):1111. doi: 10.3390/genes12081111.

Molecular Characterization of Choroideremia-Associated Deletions Reveals an 
Unexpected Regulation of CHM Gene Transcription.

Fioretti T(1), Di Iorio V(2), Lombardo B(1)(3), De Falco F(1), Cevenini A(1)(3), 
Cattaneo F(3), Testa F(2), Pastore L(1)(3), Simonelli F(2), Esposito G(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate s.c. a r.l., Via G. Salvatore 486, 80145 
Naples, Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Via S. Pansini 5, 80131 
Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University of 
Naples Federico II, Via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Choroideremia (CHM) is a X-linked recessive chorioretinal dystrophy due to 
deficiency of the CHM gene product, i.e., Rab escort protein isoform 1 (REP1). 
To date, gene therapy for CHM has shown variable effectiveness, likely because 
the underlying pathogenic mechanisms as well as genotype-phenotype correlation 
are not yet fully known. Small nucleotide variants leading to premature 
termination codons (PTCs) are a major cause of CHM, but about 20% of patients 
has CHM gene deletions. To improve understanding of the disease mechanisms, we 
analyzed molecular features of seven deletions involving the CHM gene sequence. 
We mapped the deletion breakpoints by using polymerase chain reaction, 
sequencing and array comparative genomic hybridization; to identify 
rearrangement-promoting DNA sequences, we analyzed genomic architecture 
surrounding the breakpoint regions. Moreover, in some CHM patients with 
different mutation types, we measured transcript level of CHM and of CHML, 
encoding the REP2 isoform. Scattered along the whole CHM gene and in close 
proximity to the deletion breakpoints we found numerous repeat elements that 
generate a locus-specific rearrangement hot spot. Unexpectedly, patients with 
non-PTC variants had increased expression of the aberrant CHM mRNA; CHML 
expression was higher than normal in a patient lacking CHM and its putative 
regulatory sequences. This latest evidence suggests that mechanisms regulating 
CHM and CHML gene expression are worthy of further study, because their full 
knowledge could be also useful for developing effective therapies for this 
hitherto untreatable inherited retinal degeneration.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12081111
PMCID: PMC8392058
PMID: 34440285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.