1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Aug 5;12(8):1213. doi: 10.3390/genes12081213.

Identification of Copy Number Variants in a Southern Chinese Cohort of Patients 
with Congenital Scoliosis.

Lai W(1), Feng X(1), Yue M(1), Cheung PWH(2), Choi VNT(1), Song YQ(1), Luk 
KDK(2), Cheung JPY(2), Gao B(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China.

Congenital scoliosis (CS) is a lateral curvature of the spine resulting from 
congenital vertebral malformations (CVMs) and affects 0.5-1/1000 live births. 
The copy number variant (CNV) at chromosome 16p11.2 has been implicated in CVMs 
and recent studies identified a compound heterozygosity of 16p11.2 microdeletion 
and TBX6 variant/haplotype causing CS in multiple cohorts, which explains about 
5-10% of the affected cases. Here, we studied the genetic etiology of CS by 
analyzing CNVs in a cohort of 67 patients with congenital hemivertebrae and 125 
family controls. We employed both candidate gene and family-based approaches to 
filter CNVs called from whole exome sequencing data. This identified 12 CNVs in 
four scoliosis-associated genes (TBX6, NOTCH2, DSCAM, and SNTG1) as well as 
eight recessive and 64 novel rare CNVs in 15 additional genes. Some candidates, 
such as DHX40, NBPF20, RASA2, and MYSM1, have been found to be associated with 
syndromes with scoliosis or implicated in bone/spine development. In particular, 
the MYSM1 mutant mouse showed spinal deformities. Our findings suggest that, in 
addition to the 16p11.2 microdeletion, other CNVs are potentially important in 
predisposing to CS.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12081213
PMCID: PMC8391542
PMID: 34440387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.