1. Turk J Pediatr. 2021;63(4):691-696. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.04.017.

Clinical and molecular characteristics of carnitineacylcarnitine translocase 
deficiency with c.270delC and a novel c.408C>A variant.

Gürbüz BB(1), Yılmaz DY(2), Özgül RK(2), Koşukcu C(3), Dursun A(1), Sivri HS(1), 
Coşkun T(1), Tokatlı A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Metabolism, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, 
Ankara.
(2)Department of Pediatric Metabolism, Hacettepe University Institute of Child 
Health, Ankara.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, Hacettepe University Institute of Health 
Sciences, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency (CACTD) is a rare, 
autosomal recessive, and highly lethal fatty acid oxidation (FAO) disorder 
caused by defective acylcarnitine transport across the mitochondrial membrane. 
CACTD is characterized by severe episodes of hypoglycemia and hyperammonemia, 
seizures, cardiomyopathy, liver dysfunction, severe neurological damage, and 
muscle weakness. Herein, we described the clinical features, biochemical, and 
molecular findings of three patients with CACTD, presented with poor feeding, 
hypoglycemia, liver dysfunctions, and hyperammonemia, but died despite intensive 
treatment.
CASES: All cases had similar signs and symptoms like poor feeding and 
respiratory failure associated with liver dysfunction. Urinary organic acid 
profiles in the presence of hypoglycemia and hyperammonemia led us to the 
possible diagnosis of one of fatty acid β-oxidation defects. Results of the 
molecular analyses were compatible with CACTD. In addition to known mutation 
(c.270delC;p.Phe91Leufs*38) we detected a novel one (c.408C > A;p.Cys136*).
CONCLUSIONS: All three cases died despite a very intensive therapy. Based on our 
experience with these three cases, it can be said that CACTD has a relatively 
poor prognosis, molecular studies are of most importance in suspected cases for 
the final diagnosis and such studies might be of help while giving genetic 
counselling and guidance to parents for future pregnancies.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.04.017
PMID: 34449152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]