1. Front Nutr. 2021 Aug 12;8:667203. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2021.667203. eCollection 
2021.

The Induction of Alpha-1 Antitrypsin by Vitamin D in Human T Cells Is TGF-β 
Dependent: A Proposed Anti-inflammatory Role in Airway Disease.

Chen YH(1), Cheadle CE(1)(2), Rice LV(1)(2), Pfeffer PE(1)(2), Dimeloe S(1), 
Gupta A(1)(3), Bush A(4), Gooptu B(1)(5)(6), Hawrylowicz CM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Peter Gorer Department of Immunobiology (Formerly Asthma, Allergy and Lung 
Biology), School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Medical Research Council and Asthma UK Centre for Allergic Mechanisms of 
Asthma, Guy's Hospital, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)National Heart and Lung Institute, Royal Brompton & Harefield National Health 
Service Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Centre for Paediatrics and Child Health, National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(5)National Institute for Health Research Leicester Biomedical Research 
Centre-Respiratory and Leicester Institute of Structural & Chemical Biology, 
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
(6)London Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Service, Royal Free Hospital, London, 
United Kingdom.

Background: Vitamin D upregulates anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial pathways 
that promote respiratory health. Vitamin D synthesis is initiated following skin 
exposure to sunlight, however nutritional supplementation can be required to 
address deficiency, for example during the winter months or due to cultural 
constraints. We recently reported that 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) 
treatment induced alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) expression in CD4+, but not CD8+ T 
cells, with evidence supporting an immunoregulatory role. Research Question: To 
understand the relationship between vitamin D, lung AAT levels and T lymphocytes 
further we investigated whether TGF-β is required as a co-factor for 
1,25(OH)2D3-induced upregulation of AAT by vitamin D in CD8+ T cells in vitro 
and correlated circulating vitamin D levels with lung AAT levels in vivo. 
Results: 1,25(OH)2D3 in combination with TGF-β1 increased AAT expression by CD8+ 
T cells, as well as VDR and RXRα gene expression, which may partly explain the 
requirement for TGF-β. CD4+ T cells may also require autocrine stimulation with 
TGF-β as a co-factor since 1,25(OH)2D3 was associated with increased TGF-β 
bioactivity and neutralisation of TGF-β partially abrogated 1,25(OH)2D3-induced 
SERPINA1 gene expression. Neither CD4+ nor CD8+ T cells responded to the 
circulating vitamin D precursor, 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 for induction of SERPINA1, 
suggesting that local generation of 1,25(OH)2D3 is required. Transcriptional 
gene profiling studies previously demonstrated that human bronchial epithelial 
cells rapidly increased TGF-β2 gene expression in response to 1,25(OH)2D3. Here, 
human epithelial cells responded to precursor 25(OH)D3 to increase bioactive 
TGF-β synthesis. CD8+ T cells responded comparably to TGF-β1 and TGF-β2 to 
increase 1,25(OH)2D3-induced AAT. However, CD8+ T cells from adults with 
AAT-deficiency, homozygous for the Z allele of SERPINA1, were unable to mount 
this response. AAT levels in the airways of children with asthma and controls 
correlated with circulating 25(OH)D3. Conclusions: Vitamin D increases AAT 
expression in human T cells and this response is impaired in T cells from 
individuals homozygous for the Z allele of SERPINA1 in a clinic population. 
Furthermore, a correlation between circulating vitamin D and airway AAT is 
reported. We propose that vitamin D-induced AAT contributes to local 
immunomodulation and airway health effects previously attributed to vitamin D.

Copyright © 2021 Chen, Cheadle, Rice, Pfeffer, Dimeloe, Gupta, Bush, Gooptu and 
Hawrylowicz.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2021.667203
PMCID: PMC8397538
PMID: 34458299

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.