1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2022 Jul;37(7):1469-1478. doi: 10.1007/s00467-021-05250-1.
Epub  2021 Sep 1.

Differential diagnosis between syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone 
secretion and cerebral/renal salt wasting syndrome in children over 1 year: 
proposal for a simple algorithm.

Bardanzellu F(1), Marcialis MA(2), Frassetto R(2), Melis A(2), Fanos V(2).

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Department of Surgical Sciences, AOU and 
University of Cagliari, SS 554 km 4, 500, 09042, Monserrato, Italy. 
bardanzellu.flaminia@virgilio.it.
(2)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Department of Surgical Sciences, AOU and 
University of Cagliari, SS 554 km 4, 500, 09042, Monserrato, Italy.

Hyponatremia, especially if acute and severe, can be a life-threatening 
condition. Several conditions can trigger hyponatremia. In this review, we will 
discuss two conditions that can determine euvolemic hyponatremia: the 
cerebral/renal salt wasting (CRSW) syndrome and the syndrome of inappropriate 
secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), including the two subtypes: reset 
osmostat (RO) and nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (NSIAD) and 
their differential diagnoses. Despite the passage of over 70 years since its 
first description, to date, the true etiopathogenesis of CRSW syndrome, a rare 
cause of hypovolemic/euvolemic hyponatremia, is almost unknown. SIADH, including 
RO and NSIAD, is sometimes difficult to differentiate from CRSW syndrome; in its 
differential diagnosis, the clinical approach based on the evaluation of the 
extracellular volume (ECV) was proven insufficient. We therefore suggest a 
simple diagnostic algorithm based on the assessment of the degree of 
hyponatremia, urinary osmolality, and the assessment of the fraction of urate 
excretion (FEUa) in conditions of hyponatremia and after serum sodium 
correction, to be applied in children over 1 year of life.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-021-05250-1
PMCID: PMC9192468
PMID: 34468821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.