1. Poult Sci. 2021 Oct;100(10):101401. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101401. Epub 2021 
Jul 28.

Intestinal brush border assembly during the peri-hatch period and its 
contribution to surface area expansion.

Reicher N(1), Uni Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, The Robert H. Smith, Faculty of Agriculture, 
Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 76100, Israel.
(2)Department of Animal Science, The Robert H. Smith, Faculty of Agriculture, 
Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 76100, Israel. 
Electronic address: zehava.uni@mail.huji.ac.il.

Erratum in
    Poult Sci. 2023 Apr;102(4):102445. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2022.102445.

Microvilli generate the small intestinal brush border, the main site of nutrient 
digestion and absorption. Mucosal structuring of the small intestine of chicken 
during the perihatch period has been widely researched, yet the developmental 
dynamics of microvilli during this period have not been fully characterized. In 
this study, we examined the structural and molecular characteristics of 
microvilli assembly and maturation during the perihatch period. Small intestines 
of broiler embryos and chicks were sampled at prehatch ages 17 E and 19 E, at 
day of hatch (DOH) and at 1, 3, 7, and 10 d posthatch. Morphological evaluations 
and measurements were conducted by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and light 
microscopy (LM) (n = 3/timepoint), and expression of microvilli structural genes 
Plastin 1, Ezrin, and Myo1a was examined by Real-Time qPCR (n = 6/timepoint). 
Results revealed dissimilar patterns of microvilli and villi development during 
the perihatch period. From 19 E to 1 d, microvilli lengths increased 4.3-fold 
while villi lengths increased 2.8-fold (P < 0.0001). From 3 to 7 d, villi 
lengths increased by 20% (P < 0.005), while microvilli lengths decreased by 41% 
(P = 0.001). At 10 d, microvilli lengths stabilized, while villi continued to 
elongate by 26% (P < 0.0001). Estimations of the microvilli amplification factor 
(MAF) and total enterocyte surface area (TESA) revealed similar trends, with 
peak values of 78.53 and 1961.67 µm2, respectively, at 3 d. Microvilli 
structural gene expression portrayed diverse patterns. Expression of Plastin 1, 
which bundles and binds actin cores to the terminal web, increased 8.7-fold 
between 17 E and DOH (P = 0.005), and gradually increased up to 7 d (P = 0.045). 
Ezrin and Myo1a, both actin core-cell membrane cross-linkers, portrayed 
different expression patterns throughout the perihatch period, as Ezrin 
expression was relatively stable, while Myo1a expression increased 15.8-fold 
between 17 E and 10 d (P < 0.0001). We conclude that microvilli assembly during 
the perihatch period is a rapid, coordinated process, which dramatically expands 
the digestive and absorptive surface area of the small intestine before the 
completion of villi maturation.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101401
PMCID: PMC8408528
PMID: 34464930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]