1. Mol Immunol. 2021 Nov;139:97-105. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2021.08.017. Epub 2021
 Aug 28.

Access to ultra-long IgG CDRH3 bovine antibody sequences using short read 
sequencing technology.

Oyola SO(1), Henson SP(2), Nzau B(3), Kibwana E(3), Nene V(3).

Author information:
(1)International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), P.O. Box 30709 -00100, 
Nairobi, Kenya. Electronic address: s.oyola@cgiar.org.
(2)International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), P.O. Box 30709 -00100, 
Nairobi, Kenya. Electronic address: s.henson@cgiar.org.
(3)International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), P.O. Box 30709 -00100, 
Nairobi, Kenya.

The advances in high-throughput DNA sequencing and recombinant antibody 
technologies has presented new methods for characterizing antibody repertoires 
and significantly increased our understanding on the functional role of 
antibodies in immunity and their use in diagnostics, vaccine antigen design and 
as biological therapeutics. A subset of Bos taurus antibodies possesses unique 
ultra-long third complementary-determining region of the heavy chain (CDRH3) and 
are of special interest because they are thought to have unique functional 
abilities of broadly neutralizing properties - a functional role that has not 
been fully explored in vaccine development. Next generation sequencing 
technologies that are widely used to profile immunoglobulin (Ig) repertoires are 
based on short-read methods such as the Illumina technology. Although this 
technology has worked well in sequencing Ig V-D-J regions of most jawed 
vertebrates, it has faced serious technical challenges with sequencing regions 
in bovine Ig bearing ultra-long CDRH3 sequences, which are longer than 120 bp. 
To overcome this limitation, we have developed a sequencing strategy based on 
nested PCR products that allows sequence assembly of full-length bovine Ig 
heavy-chain (IgH) V-D-J regions. We have used this strategy to sequence IgH 
V-D-J regions of two Bos indicus breeds, Ankole and Boran. We confirm the 
presence of ultra-long CDRH3 sequences in IgG transcripts in both African cattle 
breeds, and provide preliminary evidence for differences and preferences in 
germline VH, DH and JH allele gene usage as well as differences in the length of 
the VH region in the two bovine breeds. Our method provides tools that should 
allow more robust analyses of ultra-long CDRH3 sequences aiding antibody and 
epitope discovery in different cattle breeds and their role in mediating 
immunity.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2021.08.017
PMCID: PMC8508064
PMID: 34464839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there is no conflict of 
interest.