1. FEBS J. 2022 Apr;289(8):2337-2361. doi: 10.1111/febs.16177. Epub 2021 Sep 15.

Myeloid cells in retinal and brain degeneration.

Guo M(1), Schwartz TD(1), Dunaief JL(1), Cui QN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.

Retinal inflammation underlies multiple prevalent ocular and neurological 
diseases. Similar inflammatory processes are observed in glaucomatous optic 
neuropathy, age-related macular degeneration, retinitis pigmentosa, posterior 
uveitis, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease. In particular, human and 
animal studies have demonstrated the important role microglia/macrophages play 
in initiating and maintaining a pro-inflammatory environment in degenerative 
processes impacting vision. On the other hand, microglia have also been shown to 
have a protective role in multiple central nervous system diseases. Identifying 
the mechanisms underlying cell dysfunction and death is the first step toward 
developing novel therapeutics for these diseases impacting the central nervous 
system. In addition to reviewing recent key studies defining important mediators 
of retinal inflammation, with an emphasis on translational studies that bridge 
this research from bench to bedside, we also highlight a promising therapeutic 
class of medications, the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists. Finally, we 
propose areas where additional research is necessary to identify mechanisms that 
can be modulated to shift the balance from a neurotoxic to a neuroprotective 
retinal environment.

© 2021 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.16177
PMCID: PMC8891394
PMID: 34478598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: Michelle Guo – no 
disclosures related to this work Turner D. Schwartz – no disclosures related to 
this work Joshua L. Dunaief – no disclosures related to this work Qi N. Cui – 
sponsored research agreement (Neuraly, Inc.)