1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021 Sep 3;100(35):e27130. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000027130.

Multiple genetic variants predict the progression-free survival of bevacizumab 
plus chemotherapy in advanced ovarian cancer: A retrospective study.

Gao J(1), Li F(2), Liu Z(1), Huang M(3), Chen H(4), Liao G(5), Meng J(6), Wang 
Q(3), Zhao H(1), Li C(1), Ji J(3), Cai S(3), Du N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of PLA General Hospital, 
China.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, China.
(3)The Medical Department, 3D Medicines Inc., Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Chinese PLA Rocket General Hospital, China.
(5)Department of Oncology, The 8th Medical Center of Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, China.
(6)Department of Oncology, Bethune International Peace Hospital, Shijiazhuang, 
Hebei, China.

Bevacizumab (BV) plus chemotherapy is broadly used in advanced ovarian cancer 
(OC). However, the efficacy of BV-based regimens for advanced OC patients is not 
satisfactory. Therefore, it is urgent to explore the predictive genetic 
biomarkers for BV.Tumor tissues from advanced OC patients receiving BV-based 
regimens were analyzed with a 150-gene targeted panel for next generation 
sequencing. The associations between gene alterations or clinicopathology 
features and progression-free survival (PFS) were analyzed by Kaplan-Meier 
curves or Cox regression. The association of the genetic alteration in potential 
predictive genes and expressions of 11 vascular endothelial growth 
factor-related genes were analyzed in The Cancer Genome Atlas cohort using 292 
OC cases.Sixty two Chinese advanced OC patients treated with BV-based therapy 
were included. The median PFS of was 6.9 months, and objective response rate was 
14.5%. In multivariate Cox regression analysis, the status of endothelial growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) (hazard ratio = 6.39, 95% confidence interval [CI] 
2.25-18.13, P < .001) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) 
(hazard ratio = 3.58, 95% CI 1.27-10.08, P = .016) were significantly correlated 
with PFS. MYC Proto-Oncogene amplification seemed to have a positive trend 
(hazard ratio = 0.21, 95% CI 0.05-1.02, P = .052). Moreover, EGFR and HER2 
alterations were not prognostic factors of overall survival for OC in The Cancer 
Genome Atlas OC cohort. The vascular endothelial growth factor-related signature 
analysis indicated vascular endothelial factor A expression was upregulated with 
EGFR alterations (P = .034) which may be involved in BV resistance, and HER2 
alterations were associated with hypoxia inducible factor 1 subunit alpha 
overexpression significantly (P = .029).EGFR or HER2 alterations are negative 
predictors of PFS for OC patient treated with BV plus chemotherapy. Therefore, 
the clinicians may consider to use alternative regimens such as anti-EGFR or 
anti-HER2 targeted therapy instead of BV-based regimens on these patients when 
standard care fail.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000027130
PMCID: PMC8415939
PMID: 34477158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.