1. Molecules. 2021 Sep 1;26(17):5319. doi: 10.3390/molecules26175319.

Imidazopyridazine Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors Display Potent 
Anti-Proliferative Effects in the Human Neuroblastoma Cell-Line, IMR-32.

Sharma RK(1), Singh M(1), Ghimeray K(1), Juneja P(1), Dev G(1), Pulavarthi S(2), 
Reddy SR(2), Akundi RS(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroinflammation Research Laboratory, Faculty of Life Sciences and 
Biotechnology, South Asian University, New Delhi 110021, India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT), School of 
Advanced Sciences, Vellore 632014, India.

Imidazo[1,2-b]pyridazine compounds are a new class of promising lead molecules 
to which we have incorporated polar nitro and amino moieties to increase the 
scope of their biological activity. Two of these substituted 
3-nitro-6-amino-imidazo[1,2-b]pyridazine compounds (5c and 5h) showed potent 
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitory activity (IC50 40-50 nM), which we have 
previously reported. In this study, we wanted to test the biological efficacy of 
these compounds. Cytotoxicity assays showed that compound 5h mediated greater 
cell death with over 43% of cells dead at 100 μM and activation of caspase 
3-mediated apoptosis. On the other hand, compound 5c mediated a dose-dependent 
decrease in cell proliferation. Both compounds showed cell cycle arrest in the 
G0/G1 phase and reduced cellular ATP levels leading to activation of adenosine 
monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and enhanced mitochondrial 
oxidative stress. It has to be noted that all these effects were observed at 
doses beyond 10 μM, 200-fold above the IC50 for AChE inhibition. Both compounds 
also inhibited bacterial lipopolysaccharide-mediated cyclooxygenase-2 and nitric 
oxide release in primary rat microglial cells. These results suggested that the 
substituted imidazo (1,2-b) pyridazine compounds, which have potent AChE 
inhibitory activity, were also capable of antiproliferative, anti-migratory, and 
anti-inflammatory effects at higher doses.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26175319
PMCID: PMC8434581
PMID: 34500749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.