1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Aug 26;12:730637. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.730637. 
eCollection 2021.

CYP450 Genotype-Phenotype Concordance Using the Geneva Micrococktail in a 
Clinical Setting.

Ing Lorenzini K(1), Desmeules J(1), Rollason V(1), Bertin S(1), Besson M(1), 
Daali Y(1), Samer CF(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of 
Anaesthesiology, Pharmacology, Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine, University 
Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Pharmacokinetic variability is a major source of differences in drug response 
and can be due to genetic variants and/or drug-drug interactions. Cytochromes 
P450 are among the most studied enzymes from a pharmacokinetic point of view. 
Their activity can be measured by phenotyping, and/or predicted by genotyping. 
Depending on the presence of drugs and/or diseases that can affect their in vivo 
activity, both approaches can be complementary. In 2014, the Geneva cocktail 
using dried blood spots was validated in healthy volunteers for CYP450 
phenotyping. Since its clinical implementation, it has been used in 
approximately 500 patients in various clinical situations. Our study aims to 
report the concordance between CYP450 genotype and phenotype in real-life 
patients. The prospectively collected data from patients who were genotyped 
and/or phenotyped between January 2014 and December 2020 were reviewed. A total 
of 537 patients were genotyped and/or phenotyped for CYP450 during this period, 
and 241 underwent simultaneous genotyping and phenotyping allowing for 
genotype/phenotype concordance assessment. Genotyping correctly predicted poor 
metabolizer phenotypes for most CYPs isoenzymes studied, whereas agreement was 
more variable for intermediate, normal, and ultrarapid metabolizers. 
Discrepancies between the phenotype predicted on the basis of genotyping and the 
measured phenotype were not always explained by concurrent medication 
(phenotypic switch). Therefore genotyping and phenotyping tests are 
complementary approaches when aiming to individualize drug therapy. In the 537 
patients, the majority of clinical situations were observed with 
analgesic/anesthetic drugs (n = 187), followed by antidepressants (n = 153), 
antineoplastics (n = 97), and immunosuppressants (n = 93). Inefficacy (or low 
drug levels) and adverse drug reaction (or high drug levels) were the main 
reasons for testing. Genotype and/or phenotype results explained or at least 
contributed to the clinical event in 44% of cases.

Copyright Â© 2021 Ing Lorenzini, Desmeules, Rollason, Bertin, Besson, Daali and 
Samer.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.730637
PMCID: PMC8427306
PMID: 34512355

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.