1. ACS Omega. 2021 Aug 25;6(35):22955-22968. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c03620. 
eCollection 2021 Sep 7.

Gemini Lipopeptide Bearing an Ultrashort Peptide for Enhanced Transfection 
Efficiency and Cancer-Cell-Specific Cytotoxicity.

Ravula V(1)(2), Lo YL(2), Wang LF(2)(3), Patri SV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology, Warangal 506004, 
India.
(2)Department of Medicinal and Applied Chemistry, Kaohsiung Medical University, 
Kaohsiung 80708, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medical Research, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, 
Kaohsiung 80708, Taiwan.

Cationic gemini lipopeptides are a relatively new class of amphiphilic compounds 
to be used for gene delivery. Through the possibility of incorporating short 
peptides with cell-penetrating functionalities, these lipopeptides may be 
advantageous over traditional cationic lipids. Herein, we report the design, 
synthesis, and application of a novel cationic gemini lipopeptide for gene 
delivery. An ultrashort peptide, containing four amino acids, 
arginine-cysteine-cysteine-arginine, serves as a cationic head group, and two 
α-tocopherol moieties act as hydrophobic anchoring groups. The new lipopeptide 
(ATTA) is incorporated into the conventional liposomes, containing 
1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane (DOTAP) and 
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphoethanolamine (DOPE), at different molar 
ratios. The formulated liposomes are characterized and screened for better 
transfection efficiency. Transfection activity in multiple human cell lines from 
cancerous and noncancerous origins indicates that the inclusion of an optimal 
ratio of ATTA in the liposomes substantially enhances the transfection 
efficiency, superior to that of a traditional liposome, DOTAP-DOPE. Cytotoxicity 
of ATTA-containing formulations against multiple cell lines indicates 
potentially distinct activity between cancer and noncancer cell lines. 
Furthermore, lipoplexes of the ATTA-containing formulations with anticancer 
therapeutic gene, plasmid encoding tumor necrosis factor-related 
apoptosis-inducing ligand (pTRAIL), induce obviously more cytotoxicity than 
conventional formulations. The results indicate that arginine-rich cationic 
lipopeptide appears to be a promising ingredient in gene delivery vector 
formulations to enhance transfection efficiency and cell-selective cytotoxicity.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c03620
PMCID: PMC8427783
PMID: 34514266

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.