1. Front Genet. 2021 Aug 25;12:734595. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.734595.
eCollection  2021.

Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs): A Unique Model of Cancer Metastases and 
Non-invasive Biomarkers of Therapeutic Response.

Liu J(1), Lian J(1), Chen Y(1), Zhao X(2), Du C(1), Xu Y(1), Hu H(1), Rao H(1), 
Hong X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Southern University of 
Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital and 
School of Medicine, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, 
China.

Late-stage cancer metastasis remains incurable in the clinic and is the major 
cause death in patients. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are thought to be 
metastatic precursors shed from the primary tumor or metastatic deposits and 
circulate in the blood. The molecular network regulating CTC survival, 
extravasation, and colonization in distant metastatic sites is poorly defined, 
largely due to challenges in isolating rare CTCs. Recent advances in CTC 
isolation and ex vivo culture techniques facilitates single-cell omics and the 
development of related animal models to study CTC-mediated metastatic 
progression. With these powerful tools, CTCs can potentially be used as 
non-invasive biomarkers predicting therapeutic response. These studies may open 
a new avenue for CTC-specific drug discoveries. In this short review, we aim to 
summarize recent progress in the characterization of CTCs and their clinical 
relevance in various cancers, setting the stage for realizing personalized 
therapies against metastases.

Copyright Â© 2021 Liu, Lian, Chen, Zhao, Du, Xu, Hu, Rao and Hong.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.734595
PMCID: PMC8424190
PMID: 34512735

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.