1. Cell Rep. 2021 Sep 14;36(11):109703. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109703.

Definitive hematopoietic stem cells minimally contribute to embryonic 
hematopoiesis.

Ulloa BA(1), Habbsa SS(1), Potts KS(1), Lewis A(1), McKinstry M(1), Payne SG(1), 
Flores JC(2), Nizhnik A(1), Feliz Norberto M(1), Mosimann C(3), Bowman TV(4).

Author information:
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Department of Developmental and 
Molecular Biology, Bronx, NY, USA; Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Gottesman Institute of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Bronx, NY, 
USA.
(2)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Gottesman Institute of Stem Cell Biology 
and Regenerative Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Developmental Biology, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine and Children's Hospital Colorado, Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Department of Developmental and 
Molecular Biology, Bronx, NY, USA; Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Gottesman Institute of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Bronx, NY, 
USA; Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center, 
Department of Medicine (Oncology), Bronx, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
teresa.bowman@einsteinmed.org.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are rare cells that arise in the embryo and 
sustain adult hematopoiesis. Although the functional potential of nascent HSCs 
is detectable by transplantation, their native contribution during development 
is unknown, in part due to the overlapping genesis and marker gene expression 
with other embryonic blood progenitors. Using single-cell transcriptomics, we 
define gene signatures that distinguish nascent HSCs from embryonic blood 
progenitors. Applying a lineage-tracing approach to selectively track HSC output 
in situ, we find significantly delayed lymphomyeloid contribution. An inducible 
HSC injury model demonstrates a negligible impact on larval lymphomyelopoiesis 
following HSC depletion. HSCs are not merely dormant at this developmental 
stage, as they showed robust regeneration after injury. Combined, our findings 
illuminate that nascent HSCs self-renew but display differentiation latency, 
while HSC-independent embryonic progenitors sustain developmental hematopoiesis. 
Understanding these differences could improve de novo generation and expansion 
of functional HSCs.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109703
PMCID: PMC8928453
PMID: 34525360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.