1. Arch Med Sci. 2019 May 17;17(5):1221-1231. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2019.85143. 
eCollection 2021.

Coordinated medical care for children with neurofibromatosis type 1 and related 
RASopathies in Poland.

Karwacki MW(1), Wysocki M(2), Perek-Polnik M(3), Jatczak-Gaca A(2).

Author information:
(1)Coordinated Care Center for Neurofibromatoses and related RASopathies, 
Department of Pediatrics, Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of Warsaw, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Haematology and Oncology, Collegium Medicum in 
Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, Poland.
(3)Neuro-oncology Division, Department of Oncology, The Children's Memorial 
Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.

Coordinated medical care offered in Poland for patients suffering from 
neurofibromatosis type 1 and related RASopathies combines complex multispecialty 
consultation with permanent supervision and the patient's oriented longitudinal 
care. Neurofibromatosis type 1 is one of the most common single gene disorders 
in the global population, observed in 1 out of 2500-3000 live births. It is a 
primary neoplasia disease with 100% penetration of the gene mutation but 
remarkable age-dependent onset of different disease signs and symptoms, 
outstanding clinical heterogeneity between patients even in one family and lack 
of genotype-phenotype correlation, a high rate of spontaneous mutation exceeding 
50%, and multiple comorbidities among which increased risk of malignancy is the 
most important. Medical practice proved that not only patient-oriented complex 
but also coordinated care provided in centers of competence is indispensable for 
patients and the families and provides a sense of medical security to them in 
conjunction with public health costs rationalization.

Copyright: Â© 2019 Termedia & Banach.

DOI: 10.5114/aoms.2019.85143
PMCID: PMC8425254
PMID: 34522251

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.