1. Mol Aspects Med. 2022 Apr;84:101024. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2021.101024. Epub 2021
 Sep 17.

Kinetic mechanisms for O(2) binding to myoglobins and hemoglobins.

Olson JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77005, USA. 
Electronic address: olson@rice.edu.

Antonini and Brunori's 1971 book "Hemoglobin and Myoglobin in Their Reactions 
with Ligands" was a truly remarkable publication that summarized almost 100 
years of research on O2 binding to these globins. Over the ensuing 50 years, 
ultra-fast laser photolysis techniques, high-resolution and time resolved X-ray 
crystallography, molecular dynamics simulations, and libraries of recombinant 
myoglobin (Mb) and hemoglobin (Hb) variants have provided structural 
interpretations of O2 binding to these proteins. The resultant mechanisms 
provide quantitative descriptions of the stereochemical factors that govern 
overall affinity, including proximal and distal steric restrictions that affect 
iron reactivity and favorable positive electrostatic interactions that 
preferentially stabilize bound O2. The pathway for O2 uptake and release by Mb 
and subunits of Hb has been mapped by screening libraries of site-directed 
mutants in laser photolysis experiments. O2 enters mammalian Mb and the α and β 
subunits of human HbA through a channel created by upward and outward rotation 
of the distal His at the E7 helical position, is non-covalently captured in the 
interior of the distal cavity, and then internally forms a bond with the heme 
Fe(II) atom. O2 dissociation is governed by disruption of hydrogen bonding 
interactions with His (E7), breakage of the Fe(II)-O2 bond, and then competition 
between rebinding and escape through the E7-gate. The structural features that 
govern the rates of both the individual steps and overall reactions have been 
determined and provide the framework for: (1) defining the physiological 
functions of specific globins and their evolution; (2) understanding the 
clinical features of hemoglobinopathies; and (3) designing safer and more 
efficient acellular hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOCs) for transfusion 
therapy, organ preservation, and other commercially relevant O2 transport and 
storage processes.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mam.2021.101024
PMCID: PMC8821315
PMID: 34544605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]