1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Sep 9;8:701279. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.701279. 
eCollection 2021.

Transcription Factor-7-Like-2 (TCF7L2) in Atherosclerosis: A Potential Biomarker 
and Therapeutic Target.

Li J(1), Zhou L(2), Ouyang X(3), He P(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, Hengyang Medical College, University of South China, 
Hengyang, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Chongqing Public Health Medical Center, Southwest 
University Public Health Hospital, Chongqing, China.
(3)Hengyang Key Laboratory of Neurodegeneration and Cognitive Impairment, 
Department of Physiology, Hunan Province Cooperative Innovation Center for 
Molecular Target New Drug Study, Hengyang Medical College, The Neuroscience 
Institute, University of South China, Hengyang, China.

Transcription factor-7-like-2 (TCF7L2), a vital member of the T-cell 
factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) family, plays an important role in 
normal human physiological and pathological processes. TCF7L2 exhibits multiple 
anti-atherosclerotic effects through the activation of specific molecular 
mechanisms, including regulation of metabolic homeostasis, macrophage 
polarization, and neointimal hyperplasia. A single-nucleotide substitution of 
TCF7L2, rs7903146, is a genetic high-risk factor for type 2 diabetes and 
indicates susceptibility to cardiovascular disease as a link between metabolic 
disorders and atherosclerosis. In this review, we summarize the 
anti-atherosclerosis effect and novel mechanisms underlying the function of 
TCF7L2 to elucidate its potential as an anti-atherosclerosis biomarker and 
provide a novel therapeutic target for cardiovascular diseases.

Copyright Â© 2021 Li, Zhou, Ouyang and He.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.701279
PMCID: PMC8459927
PMID: 34568447

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.