1. Biomolecules. 2021 Aug 31;11(9):1294. doi: 10.3390/biom11091294.

Subtype Differences in the Interaction of HIV-1 Matrix with Calmodulin: 
Implications for Biological Functions.

Dick A(1), Cocklin S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Drexel University College of 
Medicine, Rooms 10307, 10309, and 10315, 245 North 15th Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19102, USA.

The HIV-1 Gag polyprotein plays essential roles during the late stage of the 
HIV-1 replication cycle, and has recently been identified as a promising 
therapeutic target. The N-terminal portion of the HIV-1 Gag polyprotein encodes 
the myristoylated matrix (MA) protein, which functions in the trafficking of the 
structural proteins to the plasma membrane (PM) and facilitation of envelope 
incorporation into budding virus. Numerous host cell proteins interact with the 
MA portion of the Gag polyprotein during this process. One such factor is the 
ubiquitous calcium-binding protein calmodulin (CaM), which interacts 
preferentially with myristoylated proteins, thereby regulating cell physiology. 
The exact role of this interaction is poorly understood to date. Atomic 
resolution structures revealed the nature of the CaM-MA interaction for clade B 
isolates. In this study, we expanded our knowledge and characterized 
biophysically and computationally the CaM interaction with MA from other HIV-1 
clades and discovered differences in the CaM recognition as compared to the 
prototypical clade B MA, with significant alterations in the interaction with 
the MA protein from clade C. Structural investigation and in silico mutational 
analysis revealed that HIV-1 MA protein from clade C, which is responsible for 
the majority of global HIV-1 infections, interacts with lower affinity and 
altered kinetics as compared to the canonical clade B. This finding may have 
implications for additional altered interaction networks as compared to the 
well-studied clade B. Our analysis highlights the importance of expanding 
investigations of virus-host cell factor interaction networks to other HIV-1 
clades.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11091294
PMCID: PMC8464830
PMID: 34572507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.