1. Pathogens. 2021 Aug 31;10(9):1109. doi: 10.3390/pathogens10091109.

Clinico-Genomic Analysis Reveals Mutations Associated with COVID-19 Disease 
Severity: Possible Modulation by RNA Structure.

Mehta P(1), Alle S(2), Chaturvedi A(2), Swaminathan A(1), Saifi S(1), Maurya 
R(1)(3), Chattopadhyay P(1)(3), Devi P(1)(3), Chauhan R(2), Kanakan A(1), 
Vasudevan JS(1), Sethuraman R(4), Chidambaram S(4), Srivastava M(4), 
Chakravarthi A(4), Jacob J(4), Namagiri M(4), Konala V(4), Jha S(5), Priyakumar 
UD(2), Vinod PK(2), Pandey R(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)INtegrative GENomics of HOst-PathogEn (INGEN-HOPE) Laboratory, CSIR-Institute 
of Genomics and Integrative Biology (CSIR-IGIB), Mall Road, Delhi 110017, India.
(2)Center for Computational Natural Sciences and Bioinformatics, International 
Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad 500032, India.
(3)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad 201002, 
India.
(4)Intel Technology India Private Limited, Bangalore 530103, India.
(5)Max Super Speciality Hospital (A Unit of Devki Devi Foundation), Max 
Healthcare, Delhi 110017, India.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) manifests a broad 
spectrum of clinical presentations, varying in severity from asymptomatic to 
mortality. As the viral infection spread, it evolved and developed into many 
variants of concern. Understanding the impact of mutations in the SARS-CoV-2 
genome on the clinical phenotype and associated co-morbidities is important for 
treatment and preventionas the pandemic progresses. Based on the mild, moderate, 
and severe clinical phenotypes, we analyzed the possible association between 
both, the clinical sub-phenotypes and genomic mutations with respect to the 
severity and outcome of the patients. We found a significant association between 
the requirement of respiratory support and co-morbidities. We also identified 
six SARS-CoV-2 genome mutations that were significantly correlated with severity 
and mortality in our cohort. We examined structural alterations at the RNA and 
protein levels as a result of three of these mutations: A26194T, T28854T, and 
C25611A, present in the Orf3a and N protein. The RNA secondary structure change 
due to the above mutations can be one of the modulators of the disease outcome. 
Our findings highlight the importance of integrative analysis in which clinical 
and genetic components of the disease are co-analyzed. In combination with 
genomic surveillance, the clinical outcome-associated mutations could help 
identify individuals for priority medical support.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens10091109
PMCID: PMC8464923
PMID: 34578142

Conflict of interest statement: The authors wish to declare no conflict of 
interest and the funders did not have a role in the planning and execution of 
the study.