1. JAMA Netw Open. 2021 Oct 1;4(10):e2127243. doi: 
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.27243.

Development of a Molecular Assay for Detection and Quantification of the BRAF 
Variation in Residual Tissue From Thyroid Nodule Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy 
Specimens.

Fu G(1), Chazen RS(1), MacMillan C(1)(2), Witterick IJ(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Alex and Simona Shnaider Research Laboratory in Molecular Oncology, 
Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Mount Sinai 
Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Sinai Health System, Mount 
Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(3)Joseph and Mildred Sonshine Family Centre for Head and Neck Diseases, Sinai 
Health System, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Sinai Health System, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Erratum in
    JAMA Netw Open. 2022 Mar 1;5(3):e225698. doi: 
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.5698.

IMPORTANCE: Thyroid cancer, predominantly papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), is 
common, but an estimated 30% of ultrasonography-guided fine-needle aspiration 
(FNA) biopsies of thyroid nodules are indeterminate. BRAF variation, associated 
with poor clinicopathological characteristics, is a useful molecular marker for 
diagnostics.
OBJECTIVE: To develop a sensitive molecular assay for BRAF V600E detection in 
remaining tissue of thyroid FNA biopsies to identify patients with cancer 
carrying a BRAF variation.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This diagnostic study used tumor tissue from 
surgical formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens and residual tissue 
from thyroid FNA biopsies for genomic DNA extraction. FFPE specimens served as 
the validation set, and residual tissue from FNA biopsies served as the test 
set. A molecular assay was developed for accurate detection of BRAF V600E 
variation using locked nucleic acid (LNA) probe-based droplet digital polymerase 
chain reaction (dPCR), and the assay was validated by BRAF V600E 
immunohistochemical staining (IHC). The study was conducted between February 
2019 and May 2021.
RESULTS: A total of 271 specimens, including 77 FFPE specimens (with a follow-up 
of 48 matched surgical specimens) and 146 residual FNA samples, were collected 
from 223 patients (mean [SD] age, 53.8 [15.3] years; 174 [78.0%] women; 49 
[22.0%] men). The molecular assay by dPCR was first established to specifically 
and accurately detect and quantify wild-type BRAF and variant BRAF in DNA from 
human follicular thyroid carcinoma-derived FTC-133 and papillary thyroid 
carcinoma-derived BCPAP cells. The linearity of quantification of BRAF V600E was 
calculated (y = 0.7339x; R2 = 0.9996) with sensitivity at 0.02 copies/μL and 
reproducibility in detecting variant DNA at various dilutions(coefficient of 
variance in 0.3% DNA, 9.63%; coefficient of variance in 1.0% DNA, 7.41%). In 
validation testing, the dPCR assay and IHC staining exhibited 100% specificity 
in concordantly identifying BRAF V600E in PTCs (κ = 0.873; P < .001) and 
sensitivity of 32.0% (95% CI, 19.1% to 44.9%) in dPCR and 26.0% (95% CI, 13.1% 
to 38.9%) in IHC staining, with an improvement by 23.08% in dPCR compared with 
the IHC staining. The dPCR assay further detected BRAF V600E in 39 of 146 
residual FNA specimens (26.7%). At short-term follow-up, 48 patients, including 
14 of 39 patients with BRAF variation and 34 of 107 patients without BRAF 
variation on residual FNA specimens, underwent resection. The dPCR assay of BRAF 
status in the matched surgical specimens showed BRAF V600E variations in 12 
patients and wild-type BRAF in 36 patients, with a high agreement to that in 
residual tissue of FNA specimens (κ = 0.789; P < .001). Among 14 patients with 
BRAF variations on residual FNA, 13 were diagnosed with PTC and 1 was diagnosed 
with anaplastic thyroid cancer at the thyroidectomy.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This diagnostic study developed a sensitive molecular 
assay for detection and quantification of BRAF V600E variation in residual 
tissue from thyroid FNA biopsies to identify patients with cancer harboring BRAF 
V600E in a cost-effective manner, highlighting the clinical value of molecular 
assay of the remaining FNA tissue in the management of thyroid nodules.

DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.27243
PMCID: PMC8495535
PMID: 34613404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Fu reported 
having applied for a patent for a molecular assay for detection of the BRAF 
V600E variant in residual fine-needle aspiration biopsy tissue; the application 
is pending. Dr Witterick reported being a shareholder and advisory board member 
for Proteocyte Diagnostics, serving as a consultant for GlaxoSmithKline and 
Sanofi Genzyme, and receiving personal fees from Medtronic Canada outside the 
submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.