1. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2021 Jan-Dec;27:10760296211044212. doi: 
10.1177/10760296211044212.

Primary Thrombophilia XVI: A Look at the Genotype of the Sticky Platelet 
Syndrome Phenotype.

García-Villaseñor E(1)(2), Bojalil-Álvarez L(1)(3), Murrieta-Álvarez I(1)(3), 
Cantero-Fortiz Y(1)(4), Ruiz-Delgado GJ(1)(3)(5), Ruiz-Argüelles GJ(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Hematología y Medicina Interna de Puebla, Puebla, México.
(2)3972Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, Puebla, México.
(3)27861Universidad Popular Autónoma del Estado de Puebla, Puebla, México.
(4)27806Universidad de las Américas Puebla, Puebla, México.
(5)56079Laboratorios Clínicos de Puebla, Puebla, México.

The sticky platelet syndrome (SPS) was described by Mammen in 1983. Since then, 
scientists in several countries have identified the condition and published 
cases or series of patients, thus enabling the description of the prevalence of 
the inherited condition, its salient clinical features, and the treatment of the 
disease. The diagnosis of the SPS phenotype requires fresh blood samples and 
special equipment which is not available in all coagulation laboratories. In the 
era of molecular biology, up to now it has not been possible to define a clear 
association of the SPS phenotype with a specific molecular marker. Some 
molecular changes which have been described in platelet proteins in some persons 
with the phenotype of the SPS are here discussed. Nowadays, the SPS phenotype 
may be considered as a risk factor for thrombosis and most cases of the SPS 
developing vaso-occlussive episodes are the result of its coexistence with other 
thrombosis-prone conditions, some of the inherited and some of them acquired, 
thus leading to the concept of multifactorial thrombophilia. Ignoring all these 
evidence-based concepts is inappropriate, same as stating that the SPS is a 
nonentity simply because not all laboratories are endowed with adequate 
equipment to support the diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1177/10760296211044212
PMCID: PMC8674482
PMID: 34617458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.