1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Sep 20;9:712224. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.712224. 
eCollection 2021.

ESRRB Facilitates the Conversion of Trophoblast-Like Stem Cells From Induced 
Pluripotent Stem Cells by Directly Regulating CDX2.

Yu S(1), Zhang R(1), Shen Q(1), Zhu Z(1), Zhang J(1), Wu X(1), Zhao W(1), Li 
N(1), Yang F(1), Wei H(2), Hua J(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Centre of Stem Cells Engineering and 
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Gene Editing and Animal Cloning in Yunnan Province, 
Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming, China.

Porcine-induced pluripotent stem cells (piPSCs) could serve as a great model 
system for human stem cell preclinical research. However, the pluripotency gene 
network of piPSCs, especially the function for the core transcription factor 
estrogen-related receptor beta (ESRRB), was poorly understood. Here, we 
constructed ESRRB-overexpressing piPSCs (ESRRB-piPSCs). Compared with the 
control piPSCs (CON-piPSCs), the ESRRB-piPSCs showed flat, monolayered colony 
morphology. Moreover, the ESRRB-piPSCs showed greater chimeric capacity into 
trophectoderm than CON-piPSCs. We found that ESRRB could directly regulate the 
expressions of trophoblast stem cell (TSC)-specific markers, including KRT8, 
KRT18 and CDX2, through binding to their promoter regions. Mutational analysis 
proved that the N-terminus zinc finger domain is indispensable for ESRRB to 
regulate the TSC markers. Furthermore, this regulation needs the participation 
of OCT4. Accordingly, the cooperation between ESRRB and OCT4 facilitates the 
conversion from pluripotent state to the trophoblast-like state. Our results 
demonstrated a unique and crucial role of ESRRB in determining piPSCs fate, and 
shed new light on the molecular mechanism underlying the segregation of 
embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages.

Copyright Â© 2021 Yu, Zhang, Shen, Zhu, Zhang, Wu, Zhao, Li, Yang, Wei and Hua.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.712224
PMCID: PMC8488167
PMID: 34616727

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.