1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2021 Oct 10;38(10):977-980. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20200716-00517.

[A case of SIFD syndrome caused by novel compound heterozygous variants of TRNT1 
gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), He X, Chen D, Hang S, Gao Y, Li X, Hu K, Bai C, Chen Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Rheumatism and Immunology, Anhui Provincial 
Children's Hospital, Hefei, Anhui 230051, China. 894839405@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To detect variant of TRNT1 gene in a child featuring sideroblastic 
anemia with B-cell immunodeficiency, periodic fever and developmental delay 
(SIFD).
METHODS: The proband and his parents were analyzed through trio-whole exome 
sequencing. Sanger sequencing and bioinformatic analysis were carried out to 
verify the candidate variant sites associated with the clinical phenotype.
RESULTS: Genetic testing showed that the proband has carried compound 
heterozygous variants of the TRNT1 gene, namely c.88A>G(p.Met30Val) and 
c.363G>T(p.Glu121Asp). Sanger sequencing confirmed that the variants were 
respectively inherited from his father and mother. The variants were unreported 
previously. By bioinformatic analysis, both variants were predicted to affect 
the stability of binding of the TRNT1 protein with tRNA. Based on the American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics standards and guidelines, c.88A>G and 
c.363G>T variants of TRNT1 gene were predicted to be uncertain significance 
(PM2+PP3+PP4) and likely pathogenic (PM1+PM2+PP3+PP4), respectively.
CONCLUSION: The c.88A>G (p.Met30Val) and c.363G>T(p.Glu121Asp) compound 
heterozygous variants of the TRNT1 gene probably underlay the disease in this 
patient. Above finding has enriched the spectrum of TRNT1 gene variants.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20200716-00517
PMID: 34625936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]