1. Oncogene. 2021 Dec;40(49):6653-6665. doi: 10.1038/s41388-021-02057-0. Epub
2021  Oct 11.

Induction of SREBP1 degradation coupled with suppression of SREBP1-mediated 
lipogenesis impacts the response of EGFR mutant NSCLC cells to osimertinib.

Chen Z(1), Yu D(1), Owonikoko TK(2), Ramalingam SS(1), Sun SY(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of 
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh and Hillman Cancer Center, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of 
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA, USA. ssun@emory.edu.

Emergence of acquired resistance to osimertinib (AZD9291), the first-approved 
third-generation EGFR inhibitor that selectively and irreversibly inhibits the 
activating EGFR mutations and the resistant T790M mutation, is a giant and 
urgent clinical challenge. Fully understanding the biology underlying the 
response of EGFR mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) to osimertinib is the 
foundation for development of mechanism-driven strategies to overcome acquired 
resistance to osimertinib or other third-generation EGFR inhibitors. This study 
focused on tackling this important issue by elucidating the critical role of 
sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP1) degradation in conferring 
the response of EGFR mutant NSCLC cells to osimertinib and by validating the 
strategy via directly targeting SREBP1 for overcoming osimertinib acquired 
resistance. Osimertinib facilitated degradation of the mature form of SREBP1 
(mSREBP1) in a GSK3/FBXW7-dependent manner and reduced protein levels of its 
regulated genes in EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells/tumors accompanied with suppression 
of lipogenesis. Once resistant, EGFR-mutant NSCLC cell lines possessed elevated 
levels of mSREBP1, which were resistant to osimertinib modulation. Both genetic 
and pharmacological inhibition of SREBP1 sensitized osimertinib-resistant cells 
and tumors to osimertinib primarily through enhancing Bim-dependent induction of 
apoptosis, whereas enforced expression of ectopic SREBP1 in sensitive 
EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells compromised osimertinib's cell-killing effects. 
Collectively, we have demonstrated a novel connection between osimertinib and 
SREBP1 degradation and its impact on the response of EGFR mutant NSCLC cells to 
osimertinib and suggested an effective strategy for overcoming acquired 
resistance to osimertinib, and possibly other EGFR inhibitors, via targeting 
SREBP1.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-021-02057-0
PMCID: PMC8671366
PMID: 34635799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest statement S.S.R. is on 
consulting/advisory board for AstraZeneca, Amgen, BMS, Merck, Roche, Tesaro and 
Amgen. T.K.O. is on consulting/advisory board for Novartis, Celgene, Lilly, 
Sandoz, Abbvie, Eisai, Takeda, Bristol-Myers Squibb, MedImmune, Amgen, 
AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim. Other authors declare that they have no 
conflict of interest.