1. ACS Omega. 2021 Sep 28;6(40):25982-25995. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c02688. 
eCollection 2021 Oct 12.

Synthesis, Structural Characterizations, and Quantum Chemical Investigations on 
1-(3-Methoxy-phenyl)-3-naphthalen-1-yl-propenone.

Patil PG(1)(2), Melavanki R(3)(2), Radder SB(3)(2), Kusanur R(4), Hiremath 
CS(5), Patil NR(6)(2), Hiremath SM(7)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, J. T. College, Gadag 582102, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Physics, Visvesvaraya Technological University, Belgavi 590018, 
Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Physics, M S Ramaiah Institute of Technology, Bangalore 560054, 
Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Chemistry, RV College of Engineering, Bangalore 560059, 
Karnataka, India.
(5)Department of Physics, KLE S K Arts and H S K Science Institute, Hubballi 
580031, Karnataka, India.
(6)Department of Physics, B V B College of Engineering and Technology, Hubli 
580031, Karnataka, India.
(7)Department of P.G. Studies in Physics, J. T. College, Gadag 582102, 
Karnataka, India.

In the present study, 1-(3-methoxy-phenyl)-3-naphthalen-1-yl-propenone (MPNP) is 
synthesized and characterized by several experimental techniques such as Fourier 
transform-infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), FT-Raman, NMR and UV-vis spectral 
methods. The similar techniques are also investigated by the computational 
method using Gaussian software. The density functional theory (DFT) method is 
used to obtain the optimized structure using the B3LYP/6-311++G(d,p) basis set. 
This optimization procedure of the molecule gives the minimum energy 
confirmation of the structure. The computed geometrical parameters are compared 
with experimental data. The experimental FT-IR and FT-Raman spectra of MPNP are 
obtained in the regions 4000-400 and 4000-50 cm-1 respectively. The detailed 
vibrational assignments of the molecule are obtained with the support of 
potential energy distribution. The theoretical NMR (1H and 13C) analysis is 
conducted by the GIAO method for its structural characterization and compared 
with experimental chemical shifts. The experimental UV-vis spectrum is obtained 
in the dimethyl sulfoxide solvent and compared with the theoretically computed 
spectrum by the time-dependent DFT method. In addition to these studies, other 
analyses such as nonlinear optical, natural bonds orbital, frontier molecular 
orbital, molecular electrostatic potential, and NCI have been conducted to 
understand the nature of the molecule. The title molecule is docked and also the 
drug-likeness, ADMET studies were carried out. The RBD domain bound to the ACE2 
receptor during the fusion makes spike glycoprotein an elusive therapeutic 
target in SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c02688
PMCID: PMC8515393
PMID: 34660960

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.