1. J Cell Biol. 2021 Dec 6;220(12):e202108105. doi: 10.1083/jcb.202108105. Epub 
2021 Oct 18.

Programmed cortical ER collapse drives selective ER degradation and inheritance 
in yeast meiosis.

Otto GM(1), Cheunkarndee T(1), Leslie JM(1), Brar GA(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.
(2)California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
(3)Center for Computational Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.

Comment in
    Autophagy. 2022 Jul;18(7):1732-1733. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2022.2040315.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) carries out essential and conserved cellular 
functions, which depend on the maintenance of its structure and subcellular 
distribution. Here, we report developmentally regulated changes in ER morphology 
and composition during budding yeast meiosis, a conserved differentiation 
program that gives rise to gametes. A subset of the cortical ER collapses away 
from the plasma membrane at anaphase II, thus separating into a spatially 
distinct compartment. This programmed collapse depends on the transcription 
factor Ndt80, conserved ER membrane structuring proteins Lnp1 and reticulons, 
and the actin cytoskeleton. A subset of ER is retained at the mother cell plasma 
membrane and excluded from gamete cells via the action of ER-plasma membrane 
tethering proteins. ER remodeling is coupled to ER degradation by selective 
autophagy, which relies on ER collapse and is regulated by timed expression of 
the autophagy receptor Atg40. Thus, developmentally programmed changes in ER 
morphology determine the selective degradation or inheritance of ER subdomains 
by gametes.

Â© 2021 Otto et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.202108105
PMCID: PMC8562846
PMID: 34661602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]