1. J Inflamm Res. 2021 Oct 7;14:5131-5147. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S326716. eCollection 
2021.

Platelet Mediated Inflammation in Coronary Artery Disease with Type 2 Diabetes 
Patients.

Johny E(1), Bhaskar P(1), Alam MJ(2), Kuladhipati I(3), Das R(3), Adela R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, National Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (NIPER)-Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam, 781101, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education 
and Research (NIPER)-Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam, 781101, India.
(3)Down Town Hospital, Guwahati, Assam, 781006, India.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a well-established risk factor 
for the development of atherosclerotic coronary artery disease. Platelet 
hyperactivity and inflammation are associated with the development of coronary 
artery disease (CAD) in T2DM patients. We investigated the status of immune 
cells, platelet activation, and platelet-immune cell interactions in T2DM_CAD 
patients.
METHODOLOGY: The study population consisted of four groups of subjects, healthy 
control (CT, n = 20), T2DM (n = 44), CAD (n = 20) and T2DM_CAD (n = 38). 
Platelet activation, immunome profiling and platelet-immune cell interactions 
were analysed by flow cytometry. The circulatory levels of inflammatory 
cytokines/chemokines were assessed using multiplex assay.
RESULTS: Increased platelet activation and increased platelet-immune cell 
aggregate formation were observed in T2DM and T2DM_CAD groups compared to the 
control and CAD groups (p < 0.05). Our immunome profile analysis revealed, 
altered monocyte subpopulations and dendritic cell populations in T2DM, CAD and 
T2DM_CAD groups compared to the control group (p < 0.05). Furthermore, 
significantly increased IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL12p70, IL-13 IL-18, 
CCL2, and decreased CXCL1, CCL5 levels were observed in T2DM_CAD group compared 
to the control group. Our ex-vivo study increased platelet-monocyte aggregate 
formation was observed upon D-glucose exposure in a time and concentration 
dependent manner.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggests that T2DM, CAD and T2DM_CAD are associated with 
altered immune cell populations. Furthermore, it has been confirmed that 
hyperglycemia induces platelet activation and forms platelet-immune cell 
aggregation which may lead to the release of inflammatory cytokines and 
chemokines and contribute to the complexity of CAD and type 2 diabetes.

© 2021 Johny et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S326716
PMCID: PMC8504552
PMID: 34675593

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest for 
this work.