1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2021 Oct 6;10(10):1578. doi: 10.3390/antiox10101578.

p53 Forms Redox-Dependent Protein-Protein Interactions through Cysteine 277.

Shi T(1), Polderman PE(1), Pagès-Gallego M(1), van Es RM(1), Vos HR(1), 
Burgering BMT(1)(2), Dansen TB(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Molecular Cancer Research, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Oncode Institute, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 
3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Reversible cysteine oxidation plays an essential role in redox signaling by 
reversibly altering protein structure and function. Cysteine oxidation may lead 
to intra- and intermolecular disulfide formation, and the latter can drastically 
stabilize protein-protein interactions in a more oxidizing milieu. The activity 
of the tumor suppressor p53 is regulated at multiple levels, including various 
post-translational modification (PTM) and protein-protein interactions. In the 
past few decades, p53 has been shown to be a redox-sensitive protein, and 
undergoes reversible cysteine oxidation both in vitro and in vivo. It is not 
clear, however, whether p53 also forms intermolecular disulfides with 
interacting proteins and whether these redox-dependent interactions contribute 
to the regulation of p53. In the present study, by combining 
(co-)immunoprecipitation, quantitative mass spectrometry and Western blot we 
found that p53 forms disulfide-dependent interactions with several proteins 
under oxidizing conditions. Cysteine 277 is required for most of the 
disulfide-dependent interactions of p53, including those with 14-3-3θ and 53BP1. 
These interaction partners may play a role in fine-tuning p53 activity under 
oxidizing conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox10101578
PMCID: PMC8533633
PMID: 34679713

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.