1. Biomolecules. 2021 Oct 14;11(10):1512. doi: 10.3390/biom11101512.

A Promising Intracellular Protein-Degradation Strategy: TRIMbody-Away Technique 
Based on Nanobody Fragment.

Chen G(1), Kong Y(1), Li Y(1), Huang A(1), Wang C(1), Zhou S(1), Yang Z(2), Wu 
Y(1), Ren J(3), Ying T(1).

Author information:
(1)MOE/NHC/CAMS Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, School of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, 
China.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200032, China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Shanghai Institute of Nutrition 
and Health, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Most recently, a technology termed TRIM-Away has allowed acute and rapid 
destruction of endogenous target proteins in cultured cells using specific 
antibodies and endogenous/exogenous tripartite motif 21 (TRIM21). However, the 
relatively large size of the full-size mAbs (150 kDa) results in correspondingly 
low tissue penetration and inaccessibility of some sterically hindered epitopes, 
which limits the target protein degradation. In addition, exogenous introduction 
of TRIM21 may cause side effects for treated cells. To tackle these limitations, 
we sought to replace full-size mAbs with the smaller format of antibodies, a 
nanobody (VHH, 15 kDa), and construct a new type of fusion protein named 
TRIMbody by fusing the nanobody and RBCC motif of TRIM21. Next, we introduced 
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) as a model substrate and generated 
αEGFP TRIMbody using a bispecific anti-EGFP (αEGFP) nanobody. Remarkably, 
inducible expression of αEGFP TRIMbody could specifically degrade intracellular 
EGFP in HEK293T cells in a time-dependent manner. By treating cells with 
inhibitors, we found that intracellular EGFP degradation by αEGFP TRIMbody 
relies on both ubiquitin-proteasome and autophagy-lysosome pathways. Taken 
together, these results suggested that TRIMbody-Away technology could be 
utilized to specifically degrade intracellular protein and could expand the 
potential applications of degrader technologies.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11101512
PMCID: PMC8533776
PMID: 34680146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.