1. Biomolecules. 2021 Sep 30;11(10):1439. doi: 10.3390/biom11101439.

Lipid Profiles of RAS Nanoclusters Regulate RAS Function.

Zhou Y(1), Hancock JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas 
Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The lipid-anchored RAS (Rat sarcoma) small GTPases (guanosine triphosphate 
hydrolases) are highly prevalent in human cancer. Traditional strategies of 
targeting the enzymatic activities of RAS have been shown to be difficult. 
Alternatively, RAS function and pathology are mostly restricted to nanoclusters 
on the plasma membrane (PM). Lipids are important structural components of these 
signaling platforms on the PM. However, how RAS nanoclusters selectively enrich 
distinct lipids in the PM, how different lipids contribute to RAS signaling and 
oncogenesis and whether the selective lipid sorting of RAS nanoclusters can be 
targeted have not been well-understood. Latest advances in quantitative 
super-resolution imaging and molecular dynamic simulations have allowed detailed 
characterization RAS/lipid interactions. In this review, we discuss the latest 
findings on the select lipid composition (with headgroup and acyl chain 
specificities) within RAS nanoclusters, the specific mechanisms for the select 
lipid sorting of RAS nanoclusters on the PM and how perturbing lipid 
compositions within RAS nanoclusters impacts RAS function and pathology. We also 
describe different strategies of manipulating lipid composition within RAS 
nanoclusters on the PM.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11101439
PMCID: PMC8533076
PMID: 34680072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have read and agreed to the 
published version of the manuscript. The authors declare no conflict of 
interest.