1. Insects. 2021 Oct 14;12(10):938. doi: 10.3390/insects12100938.

Full-Length SMRT Transcriptome Sequencing and SSR Analysis of Bactrocera 
dorsalis (Hendel).

Ouyang H(1), Wang X(1), Zheng X(1), Lu W(1), Qin F(1), Chen C(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Agric-Environment and Agric-Products Safety, 
College of Agriculture, Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, China.

Bactrocera dorsalis (Hendel), as one of the most notorious and destructive 
invasive agricultural pests in the world, causes damage to over 250 different 
types of fruits and vegetables throughout tropical and subtropical areas. PacBio 
single-molecule real-time (SMRT) sequencing was used to generate the full-length 
transcriptome data of B. dorsalis. A total of 40,319,890 subreads (76.6 Gb, 
clean reads) were generated, including 535,241 circular consensus sequences 
(CCSs) and 386,916 full-length non-concatemer reads (FLNCs). Transcript cluster 
analysis of the FLNC reads revealed 22,780 high-quality reads (HQs). In total, 
12,274 transcripts were functionally annotated based on four different 
databases. A total of 1978 SSR loci were distributed throughout 1714 HQ 
transcripts, of which 1926 were complete SSRs and 52 were complex SSRs. Among 
the total SSR loci, 2-3 nucleotide repeats were dominant, occupying 83.62%, of 
which di- and tri- nucleotide repeats were 39.38% and 44.24%, respectively. We 
detected 105 repeat motifs, of which AT/AT (50.19%), AC/GT (39.15%), CAA/TTG 
(32.46%), and ACA/TGT (10.86%) were the most common in di- and tri-nucleotide 
repeats. The repeat SSR motifs were 12-190 bp in length, and 1638 (88.02%) were 
shorter than 20 bp. According to the randomly selected microsatellite sequence, 
80 pairs of primers were designed, and 174 individuals were randomly amplified 
by PCR using primers. The number of primers that had amplification products with 
clear bands and showed good polymorphism came to 41, indicating that this was a 
feasible way to explore SSR markers from the transcriptomic data of B. dorsalis. 
These results lay a foundation for developing highly polymorphic microsatellites 
for researching the functional genomics, population genetic structure, and 
genetic diversity of B. dorsalis.

DOI: 10.3390/insects12100938
PMCID: PMC8537375
PMID: 34680707

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.