1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 8;12:719807. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.719807.
eCollection  2021.

Targeting Microglial α-Synuclein/TLRs/NF-kappaB/NLRP3 Inflammasome Axis in 
Parkinson's Disease.

Li Y(1), Xia Y(1), Yin S(1), Wan F(1), Hu J(1), Kou L(1), Sun Y(1), Wu J(1), 
Zhou Q(1), Huang J(1), Xiong N(1), Wang T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

According to emerging studies, the excessive activation of microglia and the 
subsequent release of pro-inflammatory cytokines play important roles in the 
pathogenesis and progression of Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the exact 
mechanisms governing chronic neuroinflammation remain elusive. Findings 
demonstrate an elevated level of NLRP3 inflammasome in activated microglia in 
the substantia nigra of PD patients. Activated NLRP3 inflammasome aggravates the 
pathology and accelerates the progression of neurodegenerative diseases. 
Abnormal protein aggregation of α-synuclein (α-syn), a pathologically relevant 
protein of PD, were reported to activate the NLRP3 inflammasome of microglia 
through interaction with toll-like receptors (TLRs). This eventually releases 
pro-inflammatory cytokines through the translocation of nuclear factor kappa-B 
(NF-κB) and causes an impairment of mitochondria, thus damaging the dopaminergic 
neurons. Currently, therapeutic drugs for PD are primarily aimed at providing 
relief from its clinical symptoms, and there are no well-established strategies 
to halt or reverse this disease. In this review, we aimed to update existing 
knowledge on the role of the α-syn/TLRs/NF-κB/NLRP3 inflammasome axis and 
microglial activation in PD. In addition, this review summarizes recent progress 
on the α-syn/TLRs/NF-κB/NLRP3 inflammasome axis of microglia as a potential 
target for PD treatment by inhibiting microglial activation.

Copyright © 2021 Li, Xia, Yin, Wan, Hu, Kou, Sun, Wu, Zhou, Huang, Xiong and 
Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.719807
PMCID: PMC8531525
PMID: 34691027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.