1. J Cell Biol. 2021 Dec 6;220(12):e202012002. doi: 10.1083/jcb.202012002. Epub 
2021 Oct 27.

iASPP contributes to cell cortex rigidity, mitotic cell rounding, and spindle 
positioning.

Mangon A(1), Salaün D(1), Bouali ML(1), Kuzmić M(1), Quitard S(1), Thuault S(1), 
Isnardon D(1), Audebert S(1), Puech PH(2), Verdier-Pinard P(1), Badache A(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Institut National de la 
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille 
Université, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Marseille, France.
(2)Laboratoire Adhésion et Inflammation, Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Aix Marseille 
Université, Turing Center for Living Systems, Marseille, France.

iASPP is a protein mostly known as an inhibitor of p53 pro-apoptotic activity 
and a predicted regulatory subunit of the PP1 phosphatase, which is often 
overexpressed in tumors. We report that iASPP associates with the microtubule 
plus-end binding protein EB1, a central regulator of microtubule dynamics, via 
an SxIP motif. iASPP silencing or mutation of the SxIP motif led to defective 
microtubule capture at the cortex of mitotic cells, leading to abnormal 
positioning of the mitotic spindle. These effects were recapitulated by the 
knockdown of the membrane-to-cortex linker Myosin-Ic (Myo1c), which we 
identified as a novel partner of iASPP. Moreover, iASPP or Myo1c knockdown cells 
failed to round up upon mitosis because of defective cortical stiffness. We 
propose that by increasing cortical rigidity, iASPP helps cancer cells maintain 
a spherical geometry suitable for proper mitotic spindle positioning and 
chromosome partitioning.

© 2021 Mangon et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.202012002
PMCID: PMC8562848
PMID: 34705028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]