1. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2022 Jan;239:113868. doi:
10.1016/j.ijheh.2021.113868.  Epub 2021 Oct 23.

Stress hormone biosynthesis-based genes and lifestyle moderated the association 
of noise exposure with blood pressure in a cohort of Chinese tobacco factory 
workers: A cross-sectional analysis.

Yang L(1), Dai X(2), Wu L(2), Xu T(2), Chen Z(2), Min Z(2), Liao Y(2), Ni L(2), 
Yao Y(2), Yi G(2), Chen Z(2), Yin W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Public Health, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Hangkong 
Road 13, Wuhan, 430030, Hubei, PR China; Key Laboratory of Environment and 
Health, Ministry of Education & Ministry of Environmental Protection, and State 
Key Laboratory of Environmental Health (Incubating), School of Public Health, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Hangkong 
Road 13, Wuhan, 430030, Hubei, PR China.
(2)Wuhan Prevention and Treatment Center for Occupational Diseases, Jianghan Bei 
Lu 18, Wuhan, 430015, Hubei, PR China.
(3)Wuhan Prevention and Treatment Center for Occupational Diseases, Jianghan Bei 
Lu 18, Wuhan, 430015, Hubei, PR China; Hubei Province Key Laboratory of 
Occupational Hazard Identification and Control, Wuhan University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, 430065, Hubei, PR China. Electronic address: 
ywjyjs@foxmail.com.

When evaluating noise-related cardiovascular risk, noise is generally solely 
assessed as the major stressor. However, cardiovascular effect of other 
simultaneous exposure events, such as unhealthy lifestyle and genetic variation, 
is easily neglected. The aim of this study is to estimate the combined effect of 
noise and lifestyle on blood pressure alteration, particularly under different 
genetic background. This study included 536 workers from a tobacco factory in 
Wuhan, China, who were divided into high exposure group and low exposure group 
according to noise measurement in their working area. All participants took 
annual physical examination and questionnaire survey to provide information on 
individual systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP and DBP) and lifestyle 
(smoking, drinking and physical activity). Single nucleotide polymorphism at 
genes related to stress hormone production were determined. Moderated moderation 
models were constructed to investigate the interaction effect of noise exposure 
and lifestyle factors on blood pressure with regard to different genetic 
background. We identified an expected trend in association between noise 
exposure and SBP among active smokers (P = 0.086). The moderated moderation 
analysis showed significant three-way interaction effect (COMT rs4680 × smoking 
status × noise exposure levels) on SBP or DBP (both P < 0.05). For COMT rs4680 
GA+AA genotype carriers, active smoking significantly moderated the association 
between noise exposure and SBP or DBP (both P < 0.05). The results indicated 
that for COMT rs4680 A allele carriers, tobacco and noise exposure contribute 
collectively to blood pressure alteration, supporting that stress hormone 
production may play a certain role in the smoke-and-noise-induced cardiovascular 
effect.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2021.113868
PMID: 34700202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]