1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2021 Oct 18;2021:7807046. doi: 10.1155/2021/7807046. 
eCollection 2021.

Antioxidant, Anti-Inflammatory, and Antidiabetic Activities of Bioactive 
Compounds from the Fruits of Livistona chinensis Based on Network Pharmacology 
Prediction.

Wang Y(1), Zhai J(1), Yang D(1), Han N(1), Liu Z(1), Liu Z(1), Li S(1), Yin 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy and Utilization Key Laboratory of Northeast Plant 
Materials, School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shenyang Pharmaceutical 
University, Shenyang 110016, China.

In this study, a chemical investigation on the fruits of Livistona chinensis 
(FLC) led to the isolation and identification of 45 polyphenols and 5 alkaloids, 
including two new compounds (Livischinol (1) and Livischinine A (46)), an 
undescribed compound (47) and 47 known compounds. FLC was predicted with novel 
potential antidiabetic function by collecting and analyzing the potential 
targets of the ingredients. Compound 32 exhibited significant α-glucosidase 
inhibitory activity (IC50 = 5.71 μM) and 1, 6, and 44 showed the PTP1B 
inhibitory activity with IC50 values of 9.41-22.19 μM, while that of oleanolic 
acid was 28.58 μM. The competitive inhibitors of PTP1B (compounds 1 and 44) 
formed strong binding affinity, with catalytic active sites, proved by kinetic 
analysis, fluorescence spectra measurements, and computational simulations, and 
stimulated glucose uptake in the insulin-resistant HepG2 cells at the dose of 
50 μM. In addition, FLC was rich in antioxidant and anti-inflammatory bioactive 
compounds so that they could be developed as nutraceuticals against diabetes.

Copyright © 2021 Yuwei Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/7807046
PMCID: PMC8545574
PMID: 34707780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest, 
financial or otherwise.