1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 Jan;25(1):1. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12517. Epub 2021 Nov 2.

Role of microRNA‑218‑5p in sevoflurane‑induced protective effects in hepatic 
ischemia/reperfusion injury mice by regulating GAB2/PI3K/AKT pathway.

Ji H(1), Li H(1), Zhang H(1), Cheng Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Xinhua Hospital, Chongming Branch, Shanghai 
202150, P.R. China.

Hepatic ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury (HIRI) often occurs following tissue 
resection, hemorrhagic shock or transplantation surgery. Previous investigations 
showed that sevoflurane (Sevo), an inhalation anesthetic, had protective 
properties against different organ damage in animal models including HIRI. This 
study is aimed to investigate the underlying mechanisms involved in the 
protective effects of Sevo on HIRI. The present study results showed that 
treatment with Sevo improved histologic damage, inflammatory response, oxidative 
stress and apoptosis after hepatic I/R, indicating the protective role of Sevo 
against liver I/R injury. Importantly, in order to determine the molecular 
mechanism of Sevo in HIRI, the focus of the study was on microRNA (miR) 
regulation. By retrieving the microarray data in the Gene Expression Omnibus 
dataset (GSE72315), miR‑218‑5p was found to be significantly downregulated by 
Sevo. Moreover, miR‑218‑5p overexpression using agomiR‑218‑5p reversed the 
protective roles of Sevo against HIRI. Furthermore, GAB2, a positive regulator 
of PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, was found as a target gene of miR‑218‑5p. It was 
also found that the Sevo‑mediated protective effects may be dependent on the 
activation of GAB2/PI3K/AKT. Collectively, these data revealed that Sevo 
alleviated HIRI in mice by restraining apoptosis, relieving oxidative stress and 
inflammatory response through the miR‑218‑5p/GAB2/PI3K/AKT pathway, which helps 
in understanding the novel mechanism of the hepatic‑protection of Sevo.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2021.12517
PMCID: PMC8600399
PMID: 34726254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.