1. Int J Endocrinol. 2021 Oct 21;2021:7752526. doi: 10.1155/2021/7752526. 
eCollection 2021.

Discovery of a Novel Variant of SEMA3A in a Chinese Patient with Isolated 
Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism.

Dai W(1), Li JD(2)(3)(4), Wang X(2)(3)(4), Zeng W(2)(3)(4), Jiang F(2)(3)(4), 
Zheng R(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Affiliated Zhuzhou Hospital Xiangya 
Medical College, Central South University, Zhuzhou, Hunan 412007, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, 
China.
(3)Hunan Key Laboratory of Animal Models for Human Diseases, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, China.
(4)Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan 410078, China.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, The People's Hospital of Henan Province, 
Zhengzhou, Henan 450003, China.

Semaphorin (SEMA) has an important role in nerve development, organ formation, 
immune response, angiogenesis, and tumor growth. SEMA can regulate the growth 
and branching of axons, the morphology of dendrites, and the migration of 
neurons. The loss-of-function in SEMA and its receptors PLXNs and NRP affect the 
migration of GnRH neurons, leading to idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
(IHH). As a member of the SEMA family, SEMA3A has an important role in axonal 
rejection, dendritic branching, synaptic formation, and neuronal migration. 
There are more and more SEMA3A variants identified in IHH patients. In this 
study, we identified a novel SEMA3A variant (c.1369A > G (p.T457A)) in a male 
nIHH patient. Functional studies indicated that the T457A SEMA3A variant led to 
the defect of FAK phosphorylation and GN11 cell migration, which strongly argued 
in favor of its pathogenic effect in the nIHH patient. Our findings 
substantiated that the 435-457 position of SEMA3A might be very important for 
the secretion of SEMA3A. Haploin-sufficiency of SEMA3A in humans was sufficient 
to cause the IHH phenotype. SEMA3A variants might have a role in modifying the 
IHH phenotype, according to the variants at different positions of SEMA3A. SEMAs 
and its receptors formed a complex network, and other members of the 
SEMA-signaling pathway might also be involved in the pathogenesis of IHH.

Copyright © 2021 Wenting Dai et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/7752526
PMCID: PMC8553509
PMID: 34721574

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.