1. Comput Biol Med. 2021 Dec;139:104986. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104986. 
Epub 2021 Oct 30.

Integrative assessment of CIP2A overexpression and mutational effects in human 
malignancies identifies possible deleterious variants.

Tarek MM(1), Yahia A(2), El-Nakib MM(3), Elhefnawi M(4).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Department, Armed Forces College of Medicine (AFCM) Cairo, 
Egypt. Electronic address: motarek_022_3@afcm.edu.eg.
(2)Otolaryngology Department, Armed Forces College of Medicine (AFCM) Cairo, 
Egypt.
(3)Egypt Center for Research and Regenerative Medicine, Cairo, Egypt.
(4)Biomedical Informatics and Chemo-Informatics Group, Centre of Excellence for 
Medical Research, Informatics and Systems Department, National Research Centre, 
Cairo, Egypt.

KIAA1524 is the gene encoding the human cancerous inhibitor of PP2A (CIP2A) 
protein which is regarded as a novel target for cancer therapy. It is 
overexpressed in 65%-90% of tissues in almost all studied human cancers. CIP2A 
expression correlates with cancer progression, disease aggressivity in lung 
cancer besides poor survival and resistance to chemotherapy in breast cancer. 
Herein, a pan-cancer analysis of public gene expression datasets was conducted 
showing significant upregulation of CIP2A in cancerous and metastatic tissues. 
CIP2A overexpression also correlated with poor survival of cancer patients. To 
determine the non-coding variants associated with CIP2A overexpression, 5'UTR 
and 3'UTR variants were annotated and scored using RegulomeDB and Enformer deep 
learning model. The 5'UTR variants rs1239349555, rs1576326380, and rs1231839144 
were predicted to be potential regulators of CIP2A overexpression scoring best 
on RegulomeDB annotations with a high "2a" rank of supporting experimental data. 
These variants also scored the highest on Enformer predictions. Analysis of the 
3'UTR variants of CIP2A predicted rs56255137 and rs58758610 to alter binding 
sites of hsa-miR-500a-5 and (hsa-miR-3671, hsa-miR-5692a) respectively. Both 
variants were also found in linkage disequilibrium with rs11709183 and 
rs147863209 respectively at r2 ≥ 0.8. The aforementioned variants were found to 
be eQTL hits significantly associated with CIP2A overexpression. Further, 
analysis of rs11709183 and rs147863209 revealed a high "2b" rank on RegulomeDB 
annotations indicating a probable effect on DNAse transcription factors binding. 
The MuTarget analysis indicated that somatic mutations in TP53 are significantly 
associated with upregulated CIP2A in human cancers. Analysis of missense SNPs on 
CIP2A solved structure predicted seven deleterious effects. Four of these 
variants were also predicted as structurally and functionally destabilizing to 
CIP2A including; rs375108755, rs147942716, rs368722879, and rs367941403. Variant 
rs1193091427 was predicted as a potential intronic splicing mutation that might 
be responsible for the novel CIP2A variant (NOCIVA) in multiple myeloma. 
Finally, Enrichment of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway within the CIP2A regulatory 
gene network suggested potential of therapeutic combinations between FTY720 with 
Wnt/β-catenin, Plk1 and/or HDAC inhibitors to downregulate CIP2A which has been 
shown to be essential for the survival of different cancer cell lines.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104986
PMID: 34739970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]