1. Front Aging. 2021 May;2:655015. doi: 10.3389/fragi.2021.655015. Epub 2021 May 
19.

Tau Pathology Profile Across a Parietal-Hippocampal Brain Network Is Associated 
With Spatial Reorientation Learning and Memory Performance in the 3xTg-AD Mouse.

Stimmell AC(1), Xu Z(2), Moseley SC(1), Cushing SD(1), Fernandez DM(1), Dang 
JV(3), Santos-Molina LF(1), Anzalone RA(1), Garcia-Barbon CL(1), Rodriguez S(1), 
Dixon JR(1), Wu W(2), Wilber AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Program in Neuroscience, Florida State University, 
Tallahassee, FL, United States.
(2)Department of Statistics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, United 
States.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United 
States.

In early Alzheimer's disease (AD) spatial navigation is one of the first 
impairments to emerge; however, the precise cause of this impairment is unclear. 
Previously, we showed that, in a mouse model of tau and amyloid beta (AÎ²) 
aggregation, getting lost represents, at least in part, a failure to use distal 
cues to get oriented in space and that impaired parietal-hippocampal network 
level plasticity during sleep may underlie this spatial disorientation. However, 
the relationship between tau and amyloid beta aggregation in this brain network 
and impaired spatial orientation has not been assessed. Therefore, we used 
several approaches, including canonical correlation analysis and independent 
components analysis tools, to examine the relationship between pathology profile 
across the parietal-hippocampal brain network and spatial reorientation learning 
and memory performance. We found that consistent with the exclusive impairment 
in 3xTg-AD 6-month female mice, only 6-month female mice had an ICA identified 
pattern of tau pathology across the parietal-hippocampal network that were 
positively correlated with behavior. Specifically, a higher density of pTau 
positive cells predicted worse spatial learning and memory. Surprisingly, 
despite a lack of impairment relative to controls, 3-month female, as well as 6- 
and 12- month male mice all had patterns of tau pathology across the 
parietal-hippocampal brain network that are predictive of spatial learning and 
memory performance. However, the direction of the effect was opposite, a 
negative correlation, meaning that a higher density of pTau positive cells 
predicted better performance. Finally, there were not significant group or 
region differences in M78 density at any of the ages examined and ICA analyses 
were not able to identify any patterns of 6E10 staining across brain regions 
that were significant predictors of behavioral performance. Thus, the pattern of 
pTau staining across the parietal-hippocampal network is a strong predictor of 
spatial learning and memory performance, even for mice with low levels of tau 
accumulation and intact spatial re-orientation learning and memory. This 
suggests that AD may cause spatial disorientation as a result of early tau 
accumulation in the parietal-hippocampal network.

DOI: 10.3389/fragi.2021.655015
PMCID: PMC8570590
PMID: 34746919

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.