1. Front Immunol. 2021 Oct 22;12:735851. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.735851. 
eCollection 2021.

Case Report: Pyogenic Arthritis, Pyoderma Gangrenosum, and Acne: A Single-Center 
Experience and Literature Review.

Wang Y(1)(2), Wu N(1), Yu K(3), Shen M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, National Clinical Research 
Center for Dermatologic and Immunologic Diseases (NCRC-DID), Ministry of Science 
and Technology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH), Key Laboratory of Rheumatology and 
Clinical Immunology, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Aerospace Center Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and 
Rare Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVES: This study aims to describe the characteristics of patients 
diagnosed with pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne (PAPA) 
syndrome at a single center in China and provide an up-to-date literature 
review.
METHODS: The clinical data and genotype of three Chinese Han patients were 
carefully documented and studied. We also conducted a systematic literature 
review on PAPA syndrome.
RESULTS: A total of three patients were diagnosed with PAPA syndrome at our 
center from 2018 to 2020. Arthritis was observed in all three patients, while 
pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) was found in two patients and acne in one patient. 
Other manifestations included pathergy reaction, intermittent fever, oral ulcer, 
keratitis, proteinuria, and hematuria. The PSTPIP1 A230T mutation was identified 
in two patients, and a novel Y119C variation was revealed in a sporadic patient. 
A total of 76 patients with PAPA syndrome reported in 29 articles were included 
in our literature review. The classical triad of arthritis, PG, and acne was 
visible in only 16 (25.4%) patients, while 24 (38.1%) exhibited only one major 
symptom. Skin lesions were more commonly seen in patients with adult-onset 
disease than those with childhood-onset disease (100 vs. 83%), whereas arthritis 
was less common (50 vs. 98.1%). Steroid and/or biological agents were effective 
in most patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The rarity and phenotypic heterogeneity associated with PAPA 
syndrome make the diagnosis a huge challenge to physicians, especially in adult 
patients. A significant portion of patients did not exhibit the full spectrum of 
the classical triad. Accordingly, gene testing is critically helpful for 
diagnosis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Wang, Wu, Yu and Shen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.735851
PMCID: PMC8569796
PMID: 34745107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.