1. Mater Today Bio. 2021 Oct 1;12:100143. doi: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2021.100143. 
eCollection 2021 Sep.

Deliver protein across bio-barriers via hexa-histidine metal assemblies for 
therapy: a case in corneal neovascularization model.

Xu H(1)(2), Tang B(2), Huang W(2)(3), Luo S(2), Zhang T(4), Yuan J(1), Zheng 
Q(1)(2), Zan X(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Affiliated Ningbo Eye Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Ningbo, 
China.
(2)School of Ophthalmology and Optometry, Eye Hospital, School of Biomedical 
Engineering, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, 325035, PR 
China.
(3)Taizhou Hospital of Zhejiang Province Affiliated to Wenzhou Medical 
University, Linhai, Zhejiang Province, 317000, PR China.
(4)Oujiang Laboratory, Wenzhou Institute, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Wenzhou, 325001, China.

Because of their high specificity and low side effects, protein drugs possess a 
substantial global market. However, the low bioavailability of protein is still 
a major obstacle to their expanded applications, which is expected to be 
answered with proper protein formulations. Taking corneal neovascularization 
(CNV) as an example, we demonstrated a co-assembled system of hexa-histidine and 
Ava (Avastin) with metal ions (HmA@Ava) could cross the cornea, the most 
important bio-barrier during the treatment of most diseases of the anterior 
segment in clinics. We found that the nanosized HmA@Ava efficiently encapsulated 
Ava with impressive loading capacity without destroying the bioactivity of Ava 
and assisted Ava penetration through the corneal barriers to effectively inhibit 
CNV development in an alkali burn rat model with sustained and pH-dependent Ava 
release. Our results suggested that the co-assembled strategy of protein and HmA 
is a proper formulation to protein drugs, with promising penetration ability to 
deliver protein across bio-barriers, which could open a path for topical 
administration of protein drugs for treatment of various ocular diseases and 
hold enormous potential for delivery of therapeutic proteins not only for ocular 
diseases but also for other diseases that require protein treatment.

Â© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2021.100143
PMCID: PMC8569714
PMID: 34765961

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.