1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 25;22(21):11504. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111504.

Deciphering the Functional Role of RIPK4 in Melanoma.

Madej E(1), Ryszawy D(2), Brożyna AA(3), Czyz M(4), Czyz J(2), Wolnicka-Glubisz 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Department of 
Biophysics, Jagiellonian University, 7 Gronostajowa Street, 30-387 Krakow, 
Poland.
(2)Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Department of Cell 
Biology, Jagiellonian University, 7 Gronostajowa Street, 30-387 Krakow, Poland.
(3)Faculty of Biological and Veterinary Sciences, Institute of Biology, 
Department of Human Biology, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 1 Lwowska Street, 
87-100 Torun, Poland.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology of Cancer Lodz, Medical University of Lodz, 
6/8 Mazowiecka Street, 92-215 Lodz, Poland.

The receptor-interacting protein kinase 4 (RIPK4) plays an important role in the 
development and maintenance of various tissues including skin, but its role in 
melanoma has not been reported. Using patient-derived cell lines and clinical 
samples, we show that RIPK4 is expressed in melanomas at different levels. This 
heterogenous expression, together with very low level of RIPK4 in melanocytes, 
indicates that the role of this kinase in melanoma is context-dependent. While 
the analysis of microarray data has revealed no straightforward correlation 
between the stage of melanoma progression and RIPK4 expression in vivo, 
relatively high levels of RIPK4 are in metastatic melanoma cell lines. RIPK4 
down-regulation by siRNA resulted in the attenuation of invasive potential as 
assessed by time-lapse video microscopy, wound-healing and transmigration 
assays. These effects were accompanied by reduced level of pro-invasive proteins 
such as MMP9, MMP2, and N-cadherin. Incubation of melanoma cells with phorbol 
ester (PMA) increased PKC-1β level and hyperphosphorylation of RIPK4 resulting 
in degradation of RIPK4. Interestingly, incubation of cells with PMA for short 
and long durations revealed that cell migration is controlled by the NF-κB 
signaling in a RIPK4-dependent (RIPK4high) or independent (RIPK4low) manner 
depending on cell origin (distant or lymph node metastasis) or phenotype 
(mesenchymal or epithelial).

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111504
PMCID: PMC8583870
PMID: 34768934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.