1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Oct;84(19):6919-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.84.19.6919.

Familial defective apolipoprotein B-100: low density lipoproteins with abnormal 
receptor binding.

Innerarity TL(1), Weisgraber KH, Arnold KS, Mahley RW, Krauss RM, Vega GL, 
Grundy SM.

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Foundation Laboratories for Cardiovascular Disease, University of 
California, San Francisco 94140-0608.

Previous in vivo turnover studies suggested that retarded clearance of low 
density lipoproteins (LDL) from the plasma of some hypercholesterolemic patients 
is due to LDL with defective receptor binding. The present study examined this 
postulate directly by receptor binding experiments. The LDL from a 
hypercholesterolemic patient (G.R.) displayed a reduced ability to bind to the 
LDL receptors on normal human fibroblasts. The G.R. LDL possessed 32% of normal 
receptor binding activity (approximately equal to 9.3 micrograms of G.R. LDL per 
ml were required to displace 50% of 125I-labeled normal LDL, vs. approximately 
equal to 3.0 micrograms of normal LDL per ml). Likewise, the G.R. LDL were much 
less effective than normal LDL in competing with 125I-labeled normal LDL for 
cellular uptake and degradation and in stimulating intracellular cholesteryl 
ester synthesis. The defect in LDL binding appears to be due to a genetic 
abnormality of apolipoprotein B-100: two brothers of the proband possess LDL 
defective in receptor binding, whereas a third brother and the proband's son 
have normally binding LDL. Further, the defect in receptor binding does not 
appear to be associated with an abnormal lipid composition or structure of the 
LDL: the chemical and physical properties of the particles were normal, and 
partial delipidation of the LDL did not alter receptor binding activity. Normal 
and abnormal LDL subpopulations were partially separated from plasma of two 
subjects by density-gradient ultracentrifugation, a finding consistent with the 
presence of a normal and a mutant allele. The affected family members appear to 
be heterozygous for this disorder, which has been designated familial defective 
apolipoprotein B-100. These studies indicate that the defective receptor binding 
results in inefficient clearance of LDL and the hypercholesterolemia observed in 
these patients.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.84.19.6919
PMCID: PMC299196
PMID: 3477815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]