1. Dev Psychopathol. 2023 Aug;35(3):1147-1158. doi: 10.1017/S0954579421001061.
Epub  2021 Nov 15.

Exploring the interplay of dopaminergic genotype and parental behavior in 
relation to executive function in early childhood.

Vrantsidis DM(1), Clark CAC(2), Volk A(3), Wakschlag LS(4), Andrews Espy 
K(5)(6), Wiebe SA(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biobehavioral Health, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, 
OH, USA.
(2)Department of Educational Psychology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
Lincoln, NE, USA.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(4)Department of Medical Social Sciences, Feinberg School of Medicine and 
Institute for Innovations in Developmental Sciences, Northwestern University, 
Evanston, IL, USA.
(5)Departments of Psychology and Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, 
San Antonio, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, University of Texas Health 
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(7)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Child genotype is an important biologically based individual difference 
conferring differential sensitivity to the effect of parental behavior. This 
study explored dopaminergic polygenic composite Ã— parental behavior interactions 
in relation to young children's executive function. Participants were 135 
36-month-old children and their mothers drawn from a prospective cohort followed 
longitudinally from pregnancy. A polygenic composite was created based on the 
number of COMT, DAT1, DRD2, and DRD4 alleles associated with increased reward 
sensitivity children carried. Maternal negative reactivity and responsiveness 
were coded during a series of structured mother-child interactions. Executive 
function was operationalized as self-control and working memory/inhibitory 
control. Path analysis supported a polygenic composite by negative reactivity 
interaction for self-control. The nature of the interaction was one of 
diathesis-stress, such that higher negative reactivity was associated with 
poorer self-control for children with higher polygenic composite scores. This 
result suggests that children with a higher number of alleles may be more 
vulnerable to the negative effect of negative reactivity. Negative reactivity 
may increase the risk for developing behavior problems in this population via an 
association with poorer self-control. Due to the small sample size, these 
initial findings should be treated with caution until they are replicated in a 
larger independent sample.

DOI: 10.1017/S0954579421001061
PMCID: PMC9107528
PMID: 34779374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]