1. Front Psychiatry. 2021 Oct 29;12:746206. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.746206. 
eCollection 2021.

Inflamed Mind: Multiple Genetic Variants of IL6 Influence Suicide Risk 
Phenotypes in Interaction With Early and Recent Adversities in a Linkage 
Disequilibrium-Based Clumping Analysis.

Bokor J(1), Sutori S(2), Torok D(2), Gal Z(2), Eszlari N(2)(3), Gyorik D(2), 
Baksa D(2)(4), Petschner P(2)(5), Serafini G(6)(7), Pompili M(8), Anderson 
IM(9), Deakin B(9), Bagdy G(2)(3), Juhasz G(2)(4), Gonda X(3)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic and Insurance Medicine, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Pharmacodynamics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(3)NAP-2-SE New Antidepressant Target Research Group, Hungarian Brain Research 
Program, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)SE-NAP-2 Genetic Brain Imaging Migraine Research Group, Semmelweis 
University, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, 
Uji, Japan.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, 
Maternal, and Child Health, Section of Psychiatry, University of Genoa, Genoa, 
Italy.
(7)IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy.
(8)Department of Neurosciences Mental Health and Sensory Organs, Suicide 
Prevention Center, Sant'Andrea Hospital, University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(9)Neuroscience and Psychiatry Unit, Division of Neuroscience and Experimental 
Psychology, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biological, Medical, and 
Human Sciences, The University of Manchester and Manchester Academic Health 
Sciences Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(10)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Semmelweis University, Budapest, 
Hungary.

Background: Understanding and predicting suicide remains a challenge, and a 
recent paradigm shift regarding the complex relationship between the immune 
system and the brain brought attention to the involvement of inflammation in 
neuropsychiatric conditions including suicide. Among cytokines, IL-6 has been 
most frequently implicated in suicide, yet only a few candidate gene studies and 
without considering the effect of stress investigated the role of IL6 in 
suicidal behaviour. Our study aimed to investigate the association of IL6 
variation with a linkage disequilibrium-based clumping method in interaction 
with childhood adversities and recent stress on manifestations along the suicide 
spectrum. Methods: One thousand seven hundred and sixty-two participants 
provided information on previous suicide attempts, current suicidal ideation, 
thoughts of death, and hopelessness, and were genotyped for 186 variants in IL6. 
Early childhood adversities were recorded with an instrument adapted from the 
Childhood Trauma Questionnaire, recent life events were registered using the 
List of Threatening Life Events. Following a 3-step quality control, logistic 
and linear regression models were run to explore the effect of genotype and 
gene-environment interactions on suicide phenotypes. All regression models were 
followed by a clumping process based on empirical estimates of linkage 
disequilibrium between clumps of intercorrelated SNPs. Interaction effects of 
distinct types of recent life events were also analysed. Results: No clumps with 
significant main effects emerged, but we identified several clumps significantly 
interacting with childhood adversities on lifetime suicide attempts, current 
suicidal ideation, and current thoughts of death. We also identified clumps 
significantly interacting with recent negative life events on current suicidal 
ideation. We reported no clumps with significant effect on hopelessness either 
as a main effect or in interaction with childhood adversities or recent stress. 
Conclusion: We identified variant clumps in IL6 influencing suicidal behaviour, 
but only in interaction with childhood or recent adversities. Our results may 
bring us a step further in understanding the role of neuroinflammation and 
specifically of IL-6 in suicide, towards identifying novel biological markers of 
suicidal behaviour especially in those exposed to stressful experiences, and to 
fostering the adaptation of a new paradigm and identifying novel approaches and 
targets in the treatment of suicidal behaviour.

Copyright Â© 2021 Bokor, Sutori, Torok, Gal, Eszlari, Gyorik, Baksa, Petschner, 
Serafini, Pompili, Anderson, Deakin, Bagdy, Juhasz and Gonda.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.746206
PMCID: PMC8585756
PMID: 34777050

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.