1. Elife. 2021 Nov 19;10:e65910. doi: 10.7554/eLife.65910.

Capping protein regulates endosomal trafficking by controlling F-actin density 
around endocytic vesicles and recruiting RAB5 effectors.

Wang D(#)(1)(2), Ye Z(#)(1)(2), Wei W(#)(3), Yu J(#)(1), Huang L(1)(2), Zhang 
H(4), Yue J(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China.
(3)Core Research Facilities, Southern University of Science and Technology, 
Shenzhen, China.
(4)Department of Biology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cell 
Microenvironment and Disease Research and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Cell 
Microenvironment, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, 
China.
(5)City University of Hong Kong Chengdu Research Institute, Chengdu, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Actin filaments (F-actin) have been implicated in various steps of endosomal 
trafficking, and the length of F-actin is controlled by actin capping proteins, 
such as CapZ, which is a stable heterodimeric protein complex consisting of α 
and β subunits. However, the role of these capping proteins in endosomal 
trafficking remains elusive. Here, we found that CapZ docks to endocytic 
vesicles via its C-terminal actin-binding motif. CapZ knockout significantly 
increases the F-actin density around immature early endosomes, and this impedes 
fusion between these vesicles, manifested by the accumulation of small endocytic 
vesicles in CapZ-knockout cells. CapZ also recruits several RAB5 effectors, such 
as Rabaptin-5 and Rabex-5, to RAB5-positive early endosomes via its N-terminal 
domain, and this further activates RAB5. Collectively, our results indicate that 
CapZ regulates endosomal trafficking by controlling actin density around early 
endosomes and recruiting RAB5 effectors.

© 2021, Wang et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.65910
PMCID: PMC8654373
PMID: 34796874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DW, ZY, WW, JY, LH, HZ, JY No competing 
interests declared