1. Front Oncol. 2021 Nov 2;11:772789. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.772789. eCollection 
2021.

Modern Radiation Therapy for the Management of Brain Metastases From Non-Small 
Cell Lung Cancer: Current Approaches and Future Directions.

Mantovani C(1), Gastino A(1), Cerrato M(1), Badellino S(1), Ricardi U(1), Levis 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.

Brain metastases (BMs) represent the most frequent event during the course of 
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) disease. Recent advancements in the 
diagnostic and therapeutic procedures result in increased incidence and earlier 
diagnosis of BMs, with an emerging need to optimize the prognosis of these 
patients through the adoption of tailored treatment solutions. Nowadays a 
personalized and multidisciplinary approach should rely on several clinical and 
molecular factors like patient's performance status, extent and location of 
brain involvement, extracranial disease control and the presence of any 
"druggable" molecular target. Radiation therapy (RT), in all its focal 
(radiosurgery and fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy) or extended (whole 
brain radiotherapy) declinations, is a cornerstone of BMs management, either 
alone or combined with surgery and systemic therapies. Our review aims to 
provide an overview of the many modern RT solutions available for the treatment 
of BMs from NSCLC in the different clinical scenarios (single lesion, oligo and 
poly-metastasis, leptomeningeal carcinomatosis). This includes a detailed review 
of the current standard of care in each setting, with a presentation of the 
literature data and of the possible technical solutions to offer a 
"state-of-art" treatment to these patients. In addition to the validated 
treatment options, we will also discuss the future perspectives on emerging RT 
technical strategies (e.g., hippocampal avoidance whole brain RT, simultaneous 
integrated boost, radiosurgery for multiple lesions), and present the innovative 
and promising findings regarding the combination of novel targeted agents such 
as tyrosine kinase inhibitors and immune checkpoint inhibitors with brain 
irradiation.

Copyright Â© 2021 Mantovani, Gastino, Cerrato, Badellino, Ricardi and Levis.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.772789
PMCID: PMC8593461
PMID: 34796118

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.