1. J Mark Access Health Policy. 2021 Nov 11;9(1):2002008. doi: 
10.1080/20016689.2021.2002008. eCollection 2021.

On the association between SARS-COV-2 variants and COVID-19 mortality during the 
second wave of the pandemic in Europe.

Jabłońska K(1), Aballéa S(2), Auquier P(2), Toumi M(2).

Author information:
(1)Health Economics and Outcomes Research Department, Creativ-Ceutical, Kraków, 
Poland.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Public Health Department, Aix-Marseille University, 
Marseille, France.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims at investigating associations between COVID-19 
mortality and SARS-COV-2 variants spread during the second wave of COVID-19 
pandemic in Europe.
METHODS: For 38 European countries, data on numbers of COVID-19 deaths, 
SARS-COV-2 variants spread through time using Nextstrain classification, 
demographic and health characteristics were collected. Cumulative number of 
COVID-19 deaths and height of COVID-19 daily deaths peak during the second wave 
of the pandemic were considered as outcomes. Pearson correlations and 
multivariate generalized linear models with selection algorithms were used.
RESULTS: The average proportion of B.1.1.7 variant was found to be a significant 
predictor of cumulative COVID-19 deaths within two months before the peak and 
between 1 January-25 February 2021, as well as of the deaths peak height 
considering proportions during the second wave and the pre-peak period. The 
average proportion of EU2 variant (S:477 N) was a significant predictor of 
cumulative COVID-19 deaths in the pre-peak period.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that spread of a new variant of concern 
B.1.1.7 had a significant impact on mortality during the second wave of COVID-19 
pandemic in Europe and that proportions of EU2 and B.1.1.7 variants were 
associated with increased mortality in the initial phase of that wave.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & 
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/20016689.2021.2002008
PMCID: PMC8592610
PMID: 34790342

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).