1. Kobe J Med Sci. 2021 Nov 2;67(2):E71-E78.

Glycogen Storage Disease Type Ia Screening Using Dried Blood Spots on Filter 
Paper: Application of COP-PCR for Detection of the c.648G>T G6PC Gene Mutation.

Wijaya YOS(1), Niba ETE(1), Yabushita R(2), Bouike Y(2), Nishio H(3), Awano 
H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Medicine and Social Healthcare Science, Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 
650-0017, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Nutrition, Kobe Gakuin University, 518 Arise, Ikawadani-cho, 
Nishi-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 651-2180, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Medical Rehabilitation, Kobe Gakuin University, 518 Arise, 
Ikawadani-cho, Nishi-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 651-2180, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1 
Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Glycogen storage disease type Ia (GSDIa, OMIM #232200) is an autosomal recessive 
metabolic disease characterized by impaired glucose homeostasis and has a 
long-term complication of hepatocellular adenoma/carcinoma. GSDIa is caused by 
deleterious mutations in the glucose-6-phosphatase gene (G6PC). Recent studies 
have suggested that early treatment by gene replacement therapy may be a good 
solution to correct the glucose metabolism and prevent serious late 
complications. Early treatment of the disease needs an early disease detection 
system. Thus, we aimed to develop a screening system for GSDIa using dried blood 
spots (DBS) to detect the c.648G>T mutation in G6PC, which is a frequent 
mutation in the East Asian population. In this study, a total of 51 DBS samples 
(50 healthy controls and one patient with c.648G>T) were tested by modified 
competitive oligonucleotide priming PCR (mCOP-PCR). In control DBS samples, the 
c.648G allele was amplified at lower Cq (quantification cycle) values (<11), 
while the c.648T allele was amplified at higher Cq values (>14). In the patient 
DBS sample, the c.648T allele was amplified at a lower Cq value (<11), and the 
c.648G allele was amplified at a higher Cq value (>14). Based on these findings, 
we concluded that our mCOP-PCR system clearly differentiated the wild-type and 
mutant alleles, and may be applicable for screening for GSDIa with the c.648G>T 
mutation in G6PC.

PMCID: PMC8622217
PMID: 34795158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENTS The authors 
declare no competing interests.