1. Am J Hematol. 2022 Feb 1;97(2):216-225. doi: 10.1002/ajh.26413. Epub 2021 Nov 
24.

Molecular and clinical characterization of transient antithrombin deficiency: A 
new concept in congenital thrombophilia.

Bravo-Pérez C(1), de la Morena-Barrio ME(1), de la Morena-Barrio B(1), Miñano 
A(1), Padilla J(1), Cifuentes R(1), Garrido P(1), Vicente V(1), Corral J(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Hematología y Oncología Médica, Hospital Universitario Morales 
Meseguer, Centro Regional de Hemodonación, IMIB, CIBERER, Universidad de Murcia, 
Murcia, Spain.

Antithrombin deficiency, the most severe thrombophilia, might be underestimated, 
since it is only investigated in cases with consistent functional deficiency or 
family history. We have analyzed 444 consecutive, unrelated cases, from 1998 to 
2021, with functional results supporting antithrombin deficiency in at least one 
sample. Plasma antithrombin was evaluated by functional and biochemical methods 
in at least two samples. SERPINC1 gene was analyzed by sequencing and MPLA. 
Hypoglycosylation was studied by electrophoresis and high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC). In 260 of 305 cases (85.2%) with constitutive deficiency 
(activity < 80% in all samples), a SERPINC1 (N = 250), or N-glycosylation defect 
(N = 10) was observed, while 45 remained undetermined. The other 139 cases had 
normal antithrombin activity (≥ 80%) in at least one sample, what we called 
transient deficiency. Sixty-one of these cases (43.9%) had molecular defects: 48 
had SERPINC1 variants, with two recurrent mutations (p.Ala416Ser[Cambridge II], 
N = 15; p.Val30Glu[Dublin], N = 12), and 13 hypoglycosylation. Thrombotic 
complications occurred in transient deficiency, but were less frequent, 
latter-onset, and had a higher proportion of arterial events than in 
constitutive deficiency. Two mechanisms explained transient deficiency: The 
limitation of functional methods to detect some variants and the influence of 
external factors on the pathogenic consequences of these mutations. Our study 
reveals a molecular defect in a significant proportion of cases with transient 
antithrombin deficiency, and changes the paradigm of thrombophilia, as the 
pathogenic effect of some mutations might depend on external factors and be 
present only at certain timepoints. Antithrombin deficiency is underestimated, 
and molecular screening might be appropriate in cases with fluctuating 
laboratory findings.

© 2021 The Authors. American Journal of Hematology published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.26413
PMID: 34800304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]