1. Hum Mutat. 2022 Feb;43(2):143-157. doi: 10.1002/humu.24296. Epub 2021 Dec 5.

Novel PHEX gene locus-specific database: Comprehensive characterization of vast 
number of variants associated with X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH).

Sarafrazi S(1), Daugherty SC(1), Miller N(1), Boada P(1), Carpenter TO(2), Chunn 
L(3), Dill K(1), Econs MJ(4), Eisenbeis S(1), Imel EA(4), Johnson B(5), Kiel 
MJ(3), Krolczyk S(1), Ramesan P(1), Truty R(6), Sabbagh Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Medical Affairs, Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical, Inc., Novato, California, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics (Endocrinology), Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(3)Data Science, Genomenon Inc., Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(5)Medical Affairs, Invitae Corporation, San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)External Relations, Invitae Corporation, San Francisco, California, USA.
(7)Research and Development, Inozyme Pharma, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), the most common form of hereditary 
hypophosphatemia, is caused by disrupting variants in the PHEX gene, located on 
the X chromosome. XLH is inherited in an X-linked pattern with complete 
penetrance observed for both males and females. Patients experience lifelong 
symptoms resulting from chronic hypophosphatemia, including impaired bone 
mineralization, skeletal deformities, growth retardation, and diminished quality 
of life. This chronic condition requires life-long management with 
disease-specific therapies, which can improve patient outcomes especially when 
initiated early in life. To centralize and disseminate PHEX variant information, 
we have established a new PHEX gene locus-specific database, PHEX LSDB. As of 
April 30, 2021, 870 unique PHEX variants, compiled from an older database of 
PHEX variants, a comprehensive literature search, a sponsored genetic testing 
program, and XLH clinical trials, are represented in the PHEX LSDB. This 
resource is publicly available on an interactive, searchable website 
(https://www.rarediseasegenes.com/), which includes a table of variants and 
associated data, graphical/tabular outputs of genotype-phenotype analyses, and 
an online submission form for reporting new PHEX variants. The database will be 
updated regularly with new variants submitted on the website, identified in the 
published literature, or shared from genetic testing programs.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24296
PMCID: PMC9299612
PMID: 34806794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was sponsored and funded by 
Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc. (Ultragenyx) in partnership with Kyowa Kirin 
International. Y. Sabbagh is an employee of Inozyme Pharma. S. Daugherty, N. 
Miller, S. Krolczyk and P. Ramesan are employees and shareholders of Ultragenyx. 
S. Sarafrazi, P. Boada and S. Eisenbeis are former employees of Ultragenyx and 
S. Eisenbeis is also a shareholder. K. Dill is a 3rd party contractor for 
Ultragenyx. B. Johnson and R. Truty are employees and shareholders of Invitae 
Corporation. L. Chunn and M. J. Kiel are employees of Genomenon Inc. T. O. 
Carpenter and E. A. Imel have received research funding from Ultragenyx. M. J. 
Econs has received consultant fees from Ultragenyx and holds a patent that is 
licensed to Ultragenyx.