1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 16;13(10):e18823. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18823. eCollection 2021
 Oct.

Genetic Markers PLEKHA7, ABCC5, and KALRN Are Not Associated With the 
Progression of Primary Angle Closure Glaucoma (PACG) in Malays.

Thangavelu L(1), Che Mat Nor SM(1), Abd Aziz D(1), Sulong S(2), Tin A(3), Ahmad 
Tajudin LS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Science, School of Medical Sciences, 
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Health Campus, Kelantan, MYS.
(2)Human Genome Centre, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 
Health Campus, Kelantan, MYS.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, SGP.

Introduction PLEKHA7, ABCC5, and KALRN have been identified as susceptible 
genetic markers related to glaucoma. We aimed to investigate the association 
between the identified susceptible genetic markers PLEKHA7 rs11024102, ABCC5 
rs17217796, and KALRN rs1392912 in the progression of primary angle-closure 
glaucoma (PACG) in Malay patients. Methods For this study, 163 Malay patients 
with PACG were recruited from April 2015 to April 2017 at Hospital Universiti 
Sains Malaysia and Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II, Kota Bharu. Venesection 
was performed. DNA was extracted using a commercial DNA extraction kit. The 
primer was optimized for rs11024102, rs17217796, and rs1392912 of the PLEKHA7, 
ABCC5, and KALRN genes, respectively. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was 
performed, and PCR products were purified. A DNA sequencer was used to identify 
polymorphisms. Progression was based on the agreement between the Advanced 
Glaucoma Intervention Study scoring system and the Hodapp-Parrish and Anderson 
staging system. The scoring was conducted on two reliable consecutive Humphrey 
visual fields (HVFs) during the recruitment period and two baseline HVFs 
obtained when the diagnosis was made. Based on the scoring, patients were 
grouped into progressed and non-progressed. A chi-square test was used to 
analyze the association between the genetic markers and the progression of PACG. 
Results One hundred and sixty-three Malay patients with PACG (58 men and 105 
women) were recruited. Twenty-nine patients (18%) had visual field progression 
of PACG after a mean (SD) follow-up of 6.0 (1.0) years. The minor allele 
frequencies for PLEKHA7 rs11024102 (G/A), ABCC5 rs17217796 (C/G), and KALRN 
rs1392912 (A/G) were 0.44, 0.08, and 0.48, respectively. We found that 
rs11024102 (p=0.828), rs17217796 (p=0.865), and rs1392912 (p=0.684) were not 
associated with PACG progression in the Malay patients. Conclusion Although 
PLEKHA7 and ABCC5 were found to be genetic markers associated with the risk of 
PACG, they played no roles in PACG progression in the Malay population. 
Moreover, KALRN was not significantly associated with PACG progression. Other 
susceptible genetic markers may be responsible for PACG progression.

Copyright Â© 2021, Thangavelu et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18823
PMCID: PMC8592120
PMID: 34804680

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.