1. Biomolecules. 2021 Nov 17;11(11):1710. doi: 10.3390/biom11111710.

Engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for 24-Methylene-Cholesterol Production.

Yang J(1), Li C(2), Zhang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai University, 
Shanghai 200444, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China.

24-Methylene-cholesterol is a necessary substrate for the biosynthesis of 
physalin and withanolide, which show promising anticancer activities. It is 
difficult and costly to prepare 24-methylene-cholesterol via total chemical 
synthesis. In this study, we engineered the biosynthesis of 
24-methylene-cholesterol in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by disrupting the two 
enzymes (i.e., ERG4 and ERG5) in the yeast's native ergosterol pathway, with 
ERG5 being replaced with the DHCR7 (7-dehydrocholesterol reductase) enzyme. 
Three versions of DHCR7 originating from different organisms-including the DHCR7 
from Physalis angulata (PhDHCR7) newly discovered in this study, as well as the 
previously reported OsDHCR7 from Oryza sativa and XlDHCR7 from Xenopus 
laevis-were assessed for their ability to produce 24-methylene-cholesterol. 
XlDHCR7 showed the best performance, producing 178 mg/L of 
24-methylene-cholesterol via flask-shake cultivation. The yield could be 
increased up to 225 mg/L, when one additional copy of the XlDHCR7 expression 
cassette was integrated into the yeast genome. The 
24-methylene-cholesterol-producing strain obtained in this study could serve as 
a platform for characterizing the downstream enzymes involved in the 
biosynthesis of physalin or withanolide, given that 24-methylene-cholesterol is 
a common precursor of these chemicals.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11111710
PMCID: PMC8615579
PMID: 34827708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflict of interest and 
agreed to publish.