1. EMBO Mol Med. 2022 Jan 11;14(1):e14182. doi: 10.15252/emmm.202114182. Epub
2021  Nov 29.

Detection and functional resolution of soluble immune complexes by an FcγR 
reporter cell panel.

Chen H(1)(2), Maul-Pavicic A(3)(4), Holzer M(5), Huber M(1)(2), Salzer U(3), 
Chevalier N(3), Voll RE(3)(4), Hengel H(1)(2), Kolb P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, University Medical Center, Albert-Ludwigs-University 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Medical Center - 
University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(4)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency (CCI), Medical Center-University of 
Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.

Fc-gamma receptor (FcγR) activation by soluble IgG immune complexes (sICs) 
represents a major mechanism of inflammation in certain autoimmune diseases such 
as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). A robust and scalable test system 
allowing for the detection and quantification of sIC bioactivity is missing. We 
developed a comprehensive reporter cell panel detecting activation of FcγRs. The 
reporter cell lines were integrated into an assay that enables the 
quantification of sIC reactivity via ELISA or a faster detection using flow 
cytometry. This identified FcγRIIA(H) and FcγRIIIA as the most sIC-sensitive 
FcγRs in our test system. Reaching a detection limit in the very low nanomolar 
range, the assay proved also to be sensitive to sIC stoichiometry and size 
reproducing for the first time a complete Heidelberger-Kendall curve in terms of 
immune receptor activation. Analyzing sera from SLE patients and mouse models of 
lupus and arthritis proved that sIC-dependent FcγR activation has predictive 
capabilities regarding severity of SLE disease. The assay provides a sensitive 
and scalable tool to evaluate the size, amount, and bioactivity of sICs in all 
settings.

© 2021 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/emmm.202114182
PMCID: PMC8749491
PMID: 34842342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.