1. Mol Microbiol. 2022 Feb;117(2):353-374. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14853. Epub 2021 Dec 
18.

Contribution of a ZIP-family protein to manganese uptake and infective 
endocarditis virulence in Streptococcus sanguinis.

Puccio T(1), Kunka KS(1), An SS(1), Kitten T(1).

Author information:
(1)Philips Institute for Oral Health Research, Virginia Commonwealth University 
School of Dentistry, Richmond, Virginia, USA.

Streptococcus sanguinis is an important cause of infective endocarditis. In 
strain SK36, the ABC-family manganese transporter, SsaACB, is essential for 
virulence. We have now identified a ZIP-family protein, TmpA, as a secondary 
manganese transporter. A tmpA mutant had no phenotype, but a ΔssaACB ΔtmpA 
mutant was more attenuated for serum growth and for virulence in a rabbit model 
than its ΔssaACB parent. The growth of both mutants was restored by supplemental 
manganese, but the ΔssaACB ΔtmpA mutant required twenty-fold more and 
accumulated less. Although ZIP-family proteins are known for zinc and iron 
transport, TmpA-mediated transport of either metal was minimal. While ssaACB 
appears ubiquitous in St. sanguinis, tmpA was present in a majority of strains 
and a mntH gene encoding an NRAMP-family transporter was identified in 
relatively few, including VMC66. As in SK36, deletion of ssaACB greatly 
diminished VMC66 endocarditis virulence and serum growth, and deletion of tmpA 
from this mutant diminished virulence further. Virulence was not significantly 
altered by deletion of mntH from either VMC66 or its ΔssaACB mutant. This and 
the accompanying paper together suggest that SsaACB is of primary importance for 
endocarditis virulence while secondary transporters TmpA and MntH contribute to 
growth under differing conditions.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14853
PMCID: PMC8844249
PMID: 34855265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors have no conflicts to disclose.