1. Sci Rep. 2021 Dec 1;11(1):23227. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-02712-2.

Phytosulfokine α (PSKα) delays senescence and reinforces SUMO1/SUMO E3 ligase 
SIZ1 signaling pathway in cut rose flowers (Rosa hybrida cv. Angelina).

Aghdam MS(1), Ebrahimi A(2), Sheikh-Assadi M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Horticultural Science, Imam Khomeini International University, 
34148-96818, Qazvin, Iran. soleimaniaghdam@eng.ikiu.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Agriculture and Plant Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, 
Shahrood University of Technology, Semnan, Iran.
(3)Department of Horticultural Science, University College of Agriculture and 
Natural Resources, University of Tehran, Karaj, Iran.

Roses are widely used as cut flowers worldwide. Petal senescence confines the 
decorative quality of cut rose flowers, an impressively considerable economic 
loss. Herein, we investigated the SUMO1/SUMO E3 ligase SIZ1 signaling pathway 
during bud opening, and petal senescence of cut rose flowers. Our results 
exhibited that the higher expression of SUMO1 and SUMO E3 ligase SIZ1 during bud 
opening was accompanied by lower endogenous H2O2 accumulation arising from 
higher expression and activities of SOD, CAT, APX, and GR, promoting proline 
accumulation by increasing P5CS expression and activity and enhancing GABA 
accumulation by increasing GAD expression and activity. In harvested flowers, 
lower expressions of SUMO1 and SUMO E3 ligase SIZ1 during petal senescence were 
associated with higher endogenous H2O2 accumulation due to lower expression and 
activities of SOD, CAT, APX, and GR. Therefore, promoting the activity of the 
GABA shunt pathway as realized by higher expression and activities of GABA-T and 
SSADH accompanied by increasing OAT expression and activity for sufficiently 
supply proline in rose flowers during petal senescence might serve as an 
endogenous antisenescence mechanism for slowing down petals senescence by 
avoiding endogenous H2O2 accumulation. Following phytosulfokine α (PSKα) 
application, postponing petal senescence in cut rose flowers could be ascribed 
to higher expression of SUMO1 and SUMO E3 ligase SIZ1 accompanied by higher 
expression and activities of SOD, CAT, APX, and GR, higher activity of GABA 
shunt pathway as realized by higher expression and activities of GAD, GABA-T, 
and SSADH, higher expression and activities of P5CS and OAT for supplying 
proline and higher expression of HSP70 and HSP90. Therefore, our results 
highlight the potential of the PSKα as a promising antisenescence signaling 
peptide in the floriculture industry for postponing senescence and extending the 
vase life of cut rose flowers.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-02712-2
PMCID: PMC8636500
PMID: 34853400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.