1. Clin Transl Sci. 2022 Mar;15(3):626-637. doi: 10.1111/cts.13180. Epub 2021 Dec
 3.

A phase I, first-in-human, randomized dose-escalation study of anti-activated 
factor XII monoclonal antibody garadacimab.

McKenzie A(1), Roberts A(1), Malandkar S(1), Feuersenger H(2), Panousis C(1), 
Pawaskar D(3).

Author information:
(1)CSL Limited, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(2)CSL Behring Innovation GmbH, Marburg, Germany.
(3)CSL Behring, King of Prussia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Factor XII (FXII) is the principal initiator of the plasma contact system and 
has proinflammatory and prothrombotic activities. This single-center, 
first-in-human phase I study aimed to assess the safety and tolerability of 
single escalating doses of garadacimab, a monoclonal antibody that specifically 
inhibits activated FXII (FXIIa), in healthy male volunteers. Volunteers were 
randomized to eight cohorts, with intravenous (i.v.) doses of 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 
and 10 mg/kg and subcutaneous (s.c.) doses of 1, 3, and 10 mg/kg. Six volunteers 
in each cohort received garadacimab or placebo in a ratio of 2:1. Follow-up for 
safety lasted 85 days after dosing. Blood samples were collected throughout for 
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic analysis. Forty-eight volunteers were enrolled: 
32 received garadacimab and 16 received placebo. Most volunteers experienced at 
least one treatment-emergent adverse event (TEAE), predominantly grade 1. No 
serious TEAEs, deaths, or TEAEs leading to discontinuation were reported. No 
volunteers tested positive for garadacimab antidrug antibodies. Garadacimab 
plasma concentrations increased in a dose-dependent manner. Sustained inhibition 
of FXIIa-mediated kallikrein activity beyond day 28 resulted from 3 and 10 mg/kg 
garadacimab (i.v. and s.c.). A dose-dependent increase in activated partial 
thromboplastin time with no change in prothrombin time was demonstrated. 
Garadacimab (single-dose i.v. and s.c.) was well-tolerated in healthy 
volunteers. Dose-dependent increases in plasma concentration and pharmacodynamic 
effects in relevant kinin and coagulation pathways were observed. These results 
support the clinical development of garadacimab, including in phase II studies 
in hereditary angioedema and coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).

© 2021 CSL Behring LLC. Clinical and Translational Science published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1111/cts.13180
PMCID: PMC8932690
PMID: 34859955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.M., S.M., D.P., and C.P. are employees and 
shareholders of CSL Limited. A.R. is an employee of CSL Limited. H.F. is an 
employee of CSL Behring Innovation GmbH and shareholder of CSL Limited.