1. Hypertension. 2022 Jan;79(1):60-75. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.121.17624.
Epub  2021 Dec 2.

Novel CUL3 Variant Causing Familial Hyperkalemic Hypertension Impairs Regulation 
and Function of Ubiquitin Ligase Activity.

Chatrathi HE(1), Collins JC(2), Wolfe LA(1), Markello TC(1)(2), Adams DR(1)(2), 
Gahl WA(1)(3), Werner A(2), Sharma P(1).

Author information:
(1)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Office of the Director 
(H.E.C., L.A.W., T.C.M., D.R.A., W.A.G., P.S.), National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD.
(2)Stem Cell Biochemistry Unit, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial 
Research (J.C.C., A.W.), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(3)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute (T.C.M., 
D.R.A., W.A.G.), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Comment in
    Hypertension. 2022 Jan;79(1):76-78. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.121.18430.

Familial hyperkalemic hypertension is caused by pathogenic variants in genes of 
the CUL3 (cullin-3)-KLHL3 (kelch-like-family-member-3)-WNK (with no-lysine [K] 
kinase) pathway, manifesting clinically as hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and 
high systolic blood pressure. The ubiquitin E3 ligase CUL3-KLHL3 targets WNK 
kinases for degradation to limit activation of the thiazide-sensitive NCC (Na-Cl 
cotransporter). All known variants in CUL3 lead to exon 9 skipping (CUL3Δ9) and 
typically result in severe familial hyperkalemic hypertension and growth 
disturbances in patients. Whether other variants in CUL3 cause familial 
hyperkalemic hypertension is unknown. Here, we identify a novel de novo 
heterozygous CUL3 variant (CUL3Δ474-477) in a pediatric familial hyperkalemic 
hypertension patient with multiple congenital anomalies and reveal molecular 
mechanisms by which CUL3Δ474-477 leads to dysregulation of the CUL3-KLHL3-WNK 
signaling axis. Using patient-derived urinary extracellular vesicles and dermal 
fibroblasts, in vitro assays, and cultured kidney cells, we demonstrate that 
CUL3Δ474-477 causes reduced total CUL3 levels due to increased 
autoubiquitination. The CUL3Δ474-477 that escapes autodegradation shows enhanced 
modification with NEDD8 (neural precursor cell expressed developmentally 
down-regulated protein 8) and increased formation of CUL3-KLHL3 complexes that 
are impaired in ubiquitinating WNK4. Proteomic analysis of CUL3 complexes 
revealed that, in addition to increased KLHL3 binding, the CUL3Δ474-477 variant 
also exhibits increased interactions with other BTB (Bric-a-brac, Tramtrack, and 
Broad complex) substrate adaptors, providing a rationale for the patient's 
diverse phenotypes. We conclude that the pathophysiological effects of 
CUL3Δ474-477 are caused by reduced CUL3 levels and formation of catalytically 
impaired CUL3 ligase complexes.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.121.17624
PMCID: PMC8667186
PMID: 34878901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]