1. Sci Adv. 2021 Dec 10;7(50):eabl3594. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abl3594. Epub 2021
Dec  8.

A unique flavoenzyme operates in ubiquinone biosynthesis in 
photosynthesis-related eukaryotes.

Xu JJ(1), Zhang XF(2), Jiang Y(1)(3), Fan H(1), Li JX(4), Li CY(4), Zhao Q(1), 
Yang L(1), Hu YH(1), Martin C(5), Chen XY(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics and Resources, Plant 
Science Research Center, Shanghai Chenshan Botanical Garden, Shanghai 201602, 
China.
(2)Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, 
Beijing, China.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai 200234, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, CAS Center for Excellence 
in Molecular Plant Sciences/Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, 
University of CAS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, China.
(5)John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK.

Coenzyme Q (CoQ) is an electron transporter in the mitochondrial respiratory 
chain, yet the biosynthetic pathway in eukaryotes remains only partially 
resolved. C6-hydroxylation completes the benzoquinone ring full substitution, a 
hallmark of CoQ. Here, we show that plants use a unique flavin-dependent 
monooxygenase (CoqF), instead of di-iron enzyme (Coq7) operating in animals and 
fungi, as a C6-hydroxylase. CoqF evolved early in eukaryotes and became widely 
distributed in photosynthetic and related organisms ranging from plants, algae, 
apicomplexans, and euglenids. Independent alternative gene losses in different 
groups and lateral gene transfer have ramified CoqF across the eukaryotic tree 
with predominance in green lineages. The exclusive presence of CoqF in 
Streptophyta hints at an association of the flavoenzyme with photoautotrophy in 
terrestrial environments. CoqF provides a phylogenetic marker distinguishing 
eukaryotes and represents a previously unknown target for drug design against 
parasitic protists.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abl3594
PMCID: PMC8654299
PMID: 34878842