1. Thorac Cancer. 2022 Feb;13(3):277-283. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.14277. Epub 2021
 Dec 12.

Update on adjuvant therapy in completely resected NSCLC patients.

Lim JU(1), Yeo CD(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Yeouido St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Eunpyeong St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

In patients with completely resected non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), 
postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy has been associated with improvement in 
survival by minimizing the risk of recurrence. For years, systemic chemotherapy 
including platinum based regimen has been a mainstay treatment modality of 
adjuvant treatment after complete resection. ADAURA study showed that among 
completely resected IB to IIIA NSCLC, disease-free survival was significantly 
better in patients under adjuvant osimertinib than a placebo group. After the 
advent of a variety of new treatment regimens, such as third generation TKI and 
immunotherapy, the landscape of postoperative adjuvant treatment has been 
changing. In this review, we discuss some key issues regarding choice of 
adjuvant treatment after complete resection in NSCLC, and provide further 
updates on recent advances in treatment modalities.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and 
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.14277
PMCID: PMC8807337
PMID: 34898012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this article. The authors have stated that 
they have no conflicts of interest.