1. Case Rep Oncol. 2021 Oct 19;14(3):1497-1504. doi: 10.1159/000519470.
eCollection  2021 Sep-Dec.

Pathological Complete Response of Clinical T4b Ascending Colon Cancer after 
Preoperative Chemotherapy Using Pembrolizumab.

Yoshida T(1), Miki H(1), Satake H(2), Kobayashi T(1), Matsumi Y(1), Hamada M(1), 
Boku S(2), Shibata N(2), Ishida M(3), Sekimoto M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Kansai Medical University Hospital, Hirakata, Japan.
(2)Cancer Treatment Center, Kansai Medical University Hospital, Hirakata, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology and Diagnostics, Kansai Medical University Hospital, 
Hirakata, Japan.

Preoperative chemotherapy is efficacious in several cancers. However, it is not 
an established treatment for locally advanced colon cancer, particularly cases 
with microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H)/deficient mismatch repair. Herein, 
we report a case of pathological complete response of MSI-H clinical T4b 
ascending colon cancer to preoperative treatment with pembrolizumab. A 
78-year-old man was diagnosed with ascending colon cancer that invaded into the 
iliacus muscle and enlarged regional lymph nodes. The tumor was classified as 
T4bN1bM0 stage IIIC according to the 8th Union for International Cancer Control 
guidelines, with MSI-H status. Based on our initial diagnosis, this tumor could 
not be resected completely. Thus, the patient underwent preoperative therapy 
with CAPOX (capecitabine and oxaliplatin combination) plus bevacizumab. After 4 
cycles of preoperative CAPOX/bevacizumab, we observed tumor reduction 
corresponding to a partial response based on the Response Evaluation Criteria in 
Solid Tumors criteria. Nevertheless, tumor invasion of the iliacus muscle 
persisted. Since oxaliplatin-induced peripheral sensory neuropathy was observed, 
we discontinued treatment with oxaliplatin and changed the regimen to 
pembrolizumab in anticipation of the therapeutic effect of this immune 
checkpoint inhibitor against MSI-H tumors. After 2 cycles of therapy with 
pembrolizumab (200 mg/body on day 1 every 3 weeks), there was drastic tumor 
regression. In addition, computed tomography indicated that all lymph node 
metastases had disappeared. Therefore, the patient underwent laparoscopic right 
hemicolectomy with D3 lymph node dissection. Analysis of the resected specimen 
showed pathological complete response.

Copyright Â© 2021 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000519470
PMCID: PMC8613574
PMID: 34899242

Conflict of interest statement: Hironaga Satake has received research funding 
from Ono Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Daiichi Sankyo, Taiho Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd., Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., and Sanofi, honoraria from Bayer Co., 
Ltd., Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Ltd., Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Daiichi 
Sankyo Co., Ltd., Eli Lilly Japan Co., Ltd., Merck Bio Pharma Co., Ltd., MSD 
Co., Ltd., Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Sanofi Co., Ltd., Taiho Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd., Takeda Co., Ltd., and Yakult Honsha Co., Ltd. The other authors have 
no conflicts of interest to declare.