1. Malar J. 2021 Dec 14;20(1):463. doi: 10.1186/s12936-021-04000-w.

Temporal evolution of the resistance genotypes of Plasmodium falciparum in 
isolates from Equatorial Guinea during 20 years (1999 to 2019).

Berzosa P(1), Molina de la Fuente I(2), Ta-Tang TH(3), González V(3), García 
L(3), Rodríguez-Galet A(3)(4), Díaz-Regañón R(3), Galán R(3), Cerrada-Gálvez 
L(3), Ncogo P(5), Riloha M(6), Benito A(3).

Author information:
(1)National Centre of Tropical Medicine-Institute of Health Carlos III, Madrid, 
Spain. pberzosa@isciii.es.
(2)Department of Biomedicine and Biotechnology, University of Alcalá and 
National Centre of Tropical Medicine-Institute of Health Carlos III, Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)National Centre of Tropical Medicine-Institute of Health Carlos III, Madrid, 
Spain.
(4)HIV Molecular Epidemiology Laboratory, Ramón y Cajal-IRyCIS Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.
(5)State Foundation, Health, Childhood and Social Welfare FSP, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Ministry of Health and Social Welfare-Malaria National Programme of 
Equatorial Guinea, Malabo, Equatorial Guinea.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is one of the deadliest diseases in the world, particularly 
in Africa. As such, resistance to anti-malarial drugs is one of the most 
important problems in terms of global malaria control. This study assesses the 
evolution of the different resistance markers over time and the possible 
influence of interventions and treatment changes that have been made in 
Equatorial Guinea.
METHODS: A total of 1223 biological samples obtained in the period 1999 to 2019 
were included in the study. Screening for mutations in the pfdhfr, pfdhps, 
pfmdr1, and pfcrt genes was carried out by nested PCR and restriction-fragment 
length polymorphisms (RFLPs), and the study of pfk13 genes was carried out by 
nested PCR, followed by sequencing to determine the presence of mutations.
RESULTS: The partially and fully resistant haplotypes (pfdhfr + pfdhps) were 
found to increase over time. Moreover, in 2019, the fully resistant haplotype 
was found to be increasing, although its super-resistant counterpart remains 
much less prevalent. A continued decline in pfmdr1 and pfcrt gene mutations over 
time was also found. The number of mutations detected in pfk13 has increased 
since 2008, when artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) were first 
introduced, with more mutations being observed in 2019, with two synonymous and 
five non-synonymous mutations being detected, although these are not related to 
resistance to ACT. In addition, the non-synonymous A578S mutation, which is the 
most frequent on the African continent, was detected in 2013, although not in 
the following years.
CONCLUSIONS: Withdrawal of the use of chloroquine (CQ) as a treatment in 
Equatorial Guinea has been shown to be effective over time, as wild-type 
parasite populations outnumber mutant populations. The upward trend observed in 
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) resistance markers suggest its misuse, either 
alone or in combination with artesunate (AS) or amodiaquine (AQ), in some areas 
of the country, as was found in a previous study conducted by this group, which 
allows selective pressure from SP to continue. Single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) 540E and 581G do not exceed the limit of 50 and 10%, respectively, thus 
meaning that SP is still effective as an intermittent preventive treatment (IPT) 
in this country. As for the pfk13 gene, no mutations have been detected in 
relation to resistance to ACT. However, in 2019 there is a greater accumulation 
of non-synonymous mutations compared to years prior to 2008.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-021-04000-w
PMCID: PMC8670137
PMID: 34906159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors agree to the publication of the 
manuscript, and there are not any competing interests. All authors read and 
approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.