1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Nov 25;9:760980. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.760980. 
eCollection 2021.

Therapeutic Effect of Schistosoma japonicum Cystatin on Atherosclerotic Renal 
Damage.

Yang H(1)(2), Li H(3), Chen W(1), Mei Z(4), Yuan Y(2)(5), Wang X(2)(5), Chu 
L(6), Xu Y(2)(5), Sun Y(2)(5), Li D(2)(5), Gao H(2)(5), Zhan B(7), Li H(2)(5), 
Yang X(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical 
College, Bengbu, China.
(2)Anhui Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity of Bengbu Medical College, 
Bengbu, China.
(3)Department of Gerontology, Anhui Provincial Hospital, First Affiliated 
Hospital of University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
(4)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical College, 
Bengbu, China.
(5)Basic Medical College of Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu, China.
(6)Second Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu, China.
(7)National School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX, United States.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammation of the arterial vessel wall driven by 
lipid metabolism disorders. Although helminthic infection and their derivatives 
have been identified to attenuate the chronic inflammatory diseases, the 
immunomodulatory effect of recombinant Schistosoma japonicum cystatin (rSj-Cys) 
on metabolic diseases and atherosclerosis has not been reported. In this study, 
we investigated the therapeutic efficacy of rSj-Cys on atherosclerotic renal 
damage and explored the related immunological mechanism. The results 
demonstrated that treatment with rSj-Cys significantly reduced body weight gain, 
hyperlipidemia, and atherosclerosis induced by the high-fat diet in apoE-/- 
mice. The treatment of rSj-Cys also significantly improved kidney functions 
through promoting macrophage polarization from M1 to M2, therefore inhibiting M1 
macrophage-induced inflammation. The possible mechanism underlying the 
regulatory effect of rSj-Cys on reducing atherosclerosis and atherosclerotic 
renal damage is that rSj-Cys stimulates regulatory T cell and M2 macrophage 
polarization that produce regulatory cytokines, such as interleukin 10 and 
transforming growth factor β. The therapeutic effect of rSj-Cys on 
atherosclerotic renal damage is possibly through inhibiting the activation of 
TLR2/Myd88 signaling pathway. The results in this study provide evidence for the 
first time that Schistosoma-derived cystatin could be developed as a therapeutic 
agent to treat lipid metabolism disorder and atherosclerosis that threats 
million lives around the world.

Copyright © 2021 Yang, Li, Chen, Mei, Yuan, Wang, Chu, Xu, Sun, Li, Gao, Zhan, 
Li and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.760980
PMCID: PMC8656285
PMID: 34901005

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.