1. J Cell Biol. 2022 Feb 7;221(2):e202109111. doi: 10.1083/jcb.202109111. Epub
2021  Dec 16.

Engineered synaptic tools reveal localized cAMP signaling in synapse assembly.

Sando R(1)(2)(3), Ho ML(1)(2), Liu X(4), Südhof TC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT.

The physiological mechanisms driving synapse formation are elusive. Although 
numerous signals are known to regulate synapses, it remains unclear which 
signaling mechanisms organize initial synapse assembly. Here, we describe new 
tools, referred to as "SynTAMs" for synaptic targeting molecules, that enable 
localized perturbations of cAMP signaling in developing postsynaptic 
specializations. We show that locally restricted suppression of postsynaptic 
cAMP levels or of cAMP-dependent protein-kinase activity severely impairs 
excitatory synapse formation without affecting neuronal maturation, dendritic 
arborization, or inhibitory synapse formation. In vivo, suppression of 
postsynaptic cAMP signaling in CA1 neurons prevented formation of both 
Schaffer-collateral and entorhinal-CA1/temporoammonic-path synapses, suggesting 
a general principle. Retrograde trans-synaptic rabies virus tracing revealed 
that postsynaptic cAMP signaling is required for continuous replacement of 
synapses throughout life. Given that postsynaptic latrophilin adhesion-GPCRs 
drive synapse formation and produce cAMP, we suggest that spatially restricted 
postsynaptic cAMP signals organize assembly of postsynaptic specializations 
during synapse formation.

© 2021 Sando et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.202109111
PMCID: PMC8685283
PMID: 34913963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]