1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Nov 29;9:784367. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.784367. 
eCollection 2021.

Mechanisms of Non-Vesicular Exchange of Lipids at Membrane Contact Sites: Of 
Shuttles, Tunnels and, Funnels.

Egea PF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, 
Los Angeles, CA, United States.

Eukaryotic cells are characterized by their exquisite compartmentalization 
resulting from a cornucopia of membrane-bound organelles. Each of these 
compartments hosts a flurry of biochemical reactions and supports biological 
functions such as genome storage, membrane protein and lipid 
biosynthesis/degradation and ATP synthesis, all essential to cellular life. 
Acting as hubs for the transfer of matter and signals between organelles and 
throughout the cell, membrane contacts sites (MCSs), sites of close apposition 
between membranes from different organelles, are essential to cellular 
homeostasis. One of the now well-acknowledged function of MCSs involves the 
non-vesicular trafficking of lipids; its characterization answered one 
long-standing question of eukaryotic cell biology revealing how some organelles 
receive and distribute their membrane lipids in absence of vesicular 
trafficking. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in synergy with the mitochondria, 
stands as the nexus for the biosynthesis and distribution of phospholipids (PLs) 
throughout the cell by contacting nearly all other organelle types. MCSs create 
and maintain lipid fluxes and gradients essential to the functional asymmetry 
and polarity of biological membranes throughout the cell. Membrane apposition is 
mediated by proteinaceous tethers some of which function as lipid transfer 
proteins (LTPs). We summarize here the current state of mechanistic knowledge of 
some of the major classes of LTPs and tethers based on the available atomic to 
near-atomic resolution structures of several "model" MCSs from yeast but also in 
Metazoans; we describe different models of lipid transfer at MCSs and analyze 
the determinants of their specificity and directionality. Each of these systems 
illustrate fundamental principles and mechanisms for the non-vesicular exchange 
of lipids between eukaryotic membrane-bound organelles essential to a wide range 
of cellular processes such as at PL biosynthesis and distribution, lipid 
storage, autophagy and organelle biogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Egea.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.784367
PMCID: PMC8667587
PMID: 34912813

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.