1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2021 Dec 13:2021.12.08.471707. doi: 
10.1101/2021.12.08.471707.

Delta breakthrough infections elicit potent, broad and durable neutralizing 
antibody responses.

Walls AC(1)(2), Sprouse KR(1), Joshi A(1), Bowen JE(1), Franko N(3), Navarro 
MJ(1), Stewart C(1), McCallum M(1), Goecker EA(4), Degli-Angeli EJ(4), Logue 
J(3), Greninger A(4), Chu H(3), Veesler D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA.
(3)Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.

Update in
    Cell. 2022 Mar 3;185(5):872-880.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.01.011.

The SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant is currently responsible for most infections 
worldwide, including among fully vaccinated individuals. Although these latter 
infections are associated with milder COVID-19 disease relative to unvaccinated 
subjects, the specificity and durability of antibody responses elicited by Delta 
breakthrough cases remain unknown. Here, we demonstrate that breakthrough 
infections induce serum binding and neutralizing antibody responses that are 
markedly more potent, durable and resilient to spike mutations observed in 
variants of concern than those observed in subjects who were infected only or 
received only two doses of COVID-19 vaccine. However, wee show that Delta 
breakthrough cases, subjects who were vaccinated after SARS-CoV-2 infection and 
individuals vaccinated three times (without infection) have serum neutralizing 
activity of comparable magnitude and breadth indicate that multiple types of 
exposure or increased number of exposures to SARS-CoV-2 antigen(s) enhance 
spike-specific antibody responses. Neutralization of the genetically divergent 
SARS-CoV, however, was moderate with all four cohorts examined, except after 
four exposures to the SARS-CoV-2 spike, underscoring the importance of 
developing vaccines eliciting broad sarbecovirus immunity for pandemic 
preparedness.

DOI: 10.1101/2021.12.08.471707
PMCID: PMC8687475
PMID: 34931192