1. J Dev Biol. 2021 Dec 15;9(4):58. doi: 10.3390/jdb9040058.

The Development of SARS-CoV-2 Variants: The Gene Makes the Disease.

Perez-Gomez R(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Genomics Group, Institut Universitari de Biotecnologia y 
Biomedicina BIOTECMED, Universitat de Valencia, 46100 Valencia, Spain.

A novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) emerged towards the end of 2019 that caused a 
severe respiratory disease in humans called COVID-19. It led to a pandemic with 
a high rate of morbidity and mortality that is ongoing and threatening 
humankind. Most of the mutations occurring in SARS-CoV-2 are synonymous or 
deleterious, but a few of them produce improved viral functions. The first known 
mutation associated with higher transmissibility, D614G, was detected in early 
2020. Since then, the virus has evolved; new mutations have occurred, and many 
variants have been described. Depending on the genes affected and the location 
of the mutations, they could provide altered infectivity, transmissibility, or 
immune escape. To date, mutations that cause variations in the SARS-CoV-2 spike 
protein have been among the most studied because of the protein's role in the 
initial virus-cell contact and because it is the most variable region in the 
virus genome. Some concerning mutations associated with an impact on viral 
fitness have been described in the Spike protein, such as D614G, N501Y, E484K, 
K417N/T, L452R, and P681R, among others. To understand the impact of the 
infectivity and antigenicity of the virus, the mutation landscape of SARS-CoV-2 
has been under constant global scrutiny. The virus variants are defined 
according to their origin, their genetic profile (some characteristic mutations 
prevalent in the lineage), and the severity of the disease they produce, which 
determines the level of concern. If they increase fitness, new variants can 
outcompete others in the population. The Alpha variant was more transmissible 
than previous versions and quickly spread globally. The Beta and Gamma variants 
accumulated mutations that partially escape the immune defenses and affect the 
effectiveness of vaccines. Nowadays, the Delta variant, identified around March 
2021, has spread and displaced the other variants, becoming the most concerning 
of all lineages that have emerged. The Delta variant has a particular genetic 
profile, bearing unique mutations, such as T478K in the spike protein and M203R 
in the nucleocapsid. This review summarizes the current knowledge of the 
different mutations that have appeared in SARS-CoV-2, mainly on the spike 
protein. It analyzes their impact on the protein function and, subsequently, on 
the level of concern of different variants and their importance in the ongoing 
pandemic.

DOI: 10.3390/jdb9040058
PMCID: PMC8705434
PMID: 34940505

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.