1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Dec 20;11(12):2397. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics11122397.

State-of-Art in the Age Determination of Venous Thromboembolism: A Systematic 
Review.

Di Fazio N(1), Delogu G(1), Ciallella C(1), Padovano M(1), Spadazzi F(1), Frati 
P(1)(2), Fineschi V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Forensic and Orthopedic Science, 
Sapienza University of Rome, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(2)Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Neuromed, Via 
Atinense 18, 86077 Pozzilli, Italy.

Venous thromboembolism (VTE), consisting of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and 
pulmonary embolism (PE), requires a forensic age determination to ascertain 
their causal relationship with recent events, such as trauma or medical 
treatment. The main objective of this systematic review is to identify the 
current state-of-the-art immunohistochemical methods for age determination of 
fatal VTE. A literature search was performed through different databases, 
according to Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 
(PRISMA) guidelines. Within the study, we have selected only cases represented 
by deceased patients for DVT and/or PTE in which thromboembolic material was 
collected during an autoptic examination and then subjected to a histological 
and an immunohistochemical investigation. Studies based on animal models were 
not included. We assessed bias risk. A database-based search produced a total of 
19 articles. After excluding duplicate items from the selection, 14 articles 
were reviewed. Ten articles were excluded because they did not meet the 
inclusion criteria. The results have pointed out 4 studies that were included in 
the present analysis for a total of 157 samples of DVT and 171 PTE samples. 
These were analyzed using traditional histological and immunohistochemical 
techniques. The results must be interpreted with a critical eye because of their 
heterogeneity in terms of time, geography, and study design. The present review 
highlights the importance of associating specific immunohistochemical markers 
with a histological analysis for the timing of DVT/PTE fatal events. Further 
future experiences will hopefully endorse actual knowledge on the subject to 
increase the accuracy in the assessment of thrombus-embolus age.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11122397
PMCID: PMC8700147
PMID: 34943633

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.