1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 Dec 3;57(12):1326. doi: 10.3390/medicina57121326.

Chronic Myeloid Leukemia in a Patient with Previous Idiopathic Thrombocytopenic 
Purpura: How to Manage Imatinib Together with Eltrombopag.

Autore F(1), Sora' F(1)(2), Chiusolo P(1)(2), Minnella G(1), Colangelo M(3), 
Rossi E(1)(2), Sica S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Diagnostica per Immagini, Radioterapia Oncologica ed 
Ematologia, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, 00168 Roma, 
Italy.
(2)Sezione di Ematologia, Dipartimento di Scienze Radiologiche ed Ematologiche, 
Universit√† Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 00168 Roma, Italy.
(3)UOC Genetica Medica, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, 
00168 Roma, Italy.

The occurrence of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), or other myeloproliferative 
diseases, after the development of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is 
very rare in the current medical literature. Considering the advances in ITP 
management, and the wide use of new drugs for ITP and CML, we report an unusual 
case with this association. Our case report focused on a 64-year-old man with 
long-standing ITP treated with eltrombopag, who developed hyperleukocytosis 
during follow-up; after specific laboratory exams, it was diagnosed as CML and 
he began treatment with imatinib. The treatment with eltrombopag was balanced 
with imatinib to stabilize his platelet count. Data on bcr-abl and JAK2 
transcripts were collected and revealed an optimal response with the achievement 
of negativization of both molecular signatures. We could demonstrate that 
treatment with imatinib and eltrombopag was well tolerated and allowed complete 
molecular remission of CML to be achieved, as well as of ITP.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57121326
PMCID: PMC8708281
PMID: 34946271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.