1. Molecules. 2021 Dec 17;26(24):7653. doi: 10.3390/molecules26247653.

Solid Dosage Forms of Biopharmaceuticals in Drug Delivery Systems Using 
Sustainable Strategies.

Costa C(1)(2), Casimiro T(1), Corvo ML(2), Aguiar-Ricardo A(1).

Author information:
(1)LAQV-REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, NOVA School of Science and 
Technology, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.
(2)Instituto de Investigação do Medicamento (iMed.ULisboa), Faculdade de 
Farmácia, Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida Professor Gama Pinto, 1649-003 Lisboa, 
Portugal.

Drug delivery systems (DDS) often comprise biopharmaceuticals in aqueous form, 
making them susceptible to physical and chemical degradation, and therefore 
requiring low temperature storage in cold supply and distribution chains. 
Freeze-drying, spray-drying, and spray-freeze-drying are some of the techniques 
used to convert biopharmaceuticals-loaded DDS from aqueous to solid dosage 
forms. However, the risk exists that shear and heat stress during processing may 
provoke DDS damage and efficacy loss. Supercritical fluids (SCF), specifically, 
supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2), is a sustainable alternative to common 
techniques. Due to its moderately critical and tunable properties and 
thermodynamic behavior, scCO2 has aroused scientific and industrial interest. 
Therefore, this article reviews scCO2-based techniques used over the year in the 
production of solid biopharmaceutical dosage forms. Looking particularly at the 
use of scCO2 in each of its potential roles-as a solvent, co-solvent, 
anti-solvent, or co-solute. It ends with a comparison between the compound's 
stability using supercritical CO2-assisted atomization/spray-drying and 
conventional drying.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26247653
PMCID: PMC8708471
PMID: 34946733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the decision to 
publish the results.