1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Dec 9;22(24):13253. doi: 10.3390/ijms222413253.

The Stimulatory Effects of Intracellular α-Synuclein on Synaptic Transmission 
Are Attenuated by 2-Octahydroisoquinolin-2(1H)-ylethanamine.

Ramirez AE(1), Fernández-Pérez EJ(1), Olivos N(1), Burgos CF(1), Boopathi 
S(2)(3), Armijo-Weingart L(1), Pacheco CR(1), González W(3)(4), Aguayo LG(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurophysiology, Department of Physiology, Faculty of 
Biological Sciences, Universidad de Concepción, 160-C, Concepción 4030000, 
Chile.
(2)Instituto de Ciencias Físicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 
Cuernavaca 62210, Mexico.
(3)Center for Bioinformatics, Simulations and Modeling, The Center for 
Bioinformatics and Molecular Simulations (CBSM), University of Talca, Talca 
3530000, Chile.
(4)Millennium Nucleus of Ion Channels-Associated Diseases, The Center for 
Bioinformatics and Molecular Simulations (CBSM), University of Talca, Talca 
3530000, Chile.
(5)Programa de Neurociencia, Psiquiatría y Salud Mental, Anatomy 
Building,Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción 4030000, 
Chile.

α-Synuclein (αSyn) species can be detected in synaptic boutons, where they play 
a crucial role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's Disease (PD). However, the 
effects of intracellular αSyn species on synaptic transmission have not been 
thoroughly studied. Here, using patch-clamp recordings in hippocampal neurons, 
we report that αSyn oligomers (αSynO), intracellularly delivered through the 
patch electrode, produced a fast and potent effect on synaptic transmission, 
causing a substantial increase in the frequency, amplitude and transferred 
charge of spontaneous synaptic currents. We also found an increase in the 
frequency of miniature synaptic currents, suggesting an effect located at the 
presynaptic site of the synapsis. Furthermore, our in silico approximation using 
docking analysis and molecular dynamics simulations showed an interaction 
between a previously described small anti-amyloid beta (Aβ) molecule, termed M30 
(2-octahydroisoquinolin-2(1H)-ylethanamine), with a central hydrophobic region 
of αSyn. In line with this finding, our empirical data aimed to obtain 
oligomerization states with thioflavin T (ThT) and Western blot (WB) indicated 
that M30 interfered with αSyn aggregation and decreased the formation of 
higher-molecular-weight species. Furthermore, the effect of αSynO on synaptic 
physiology was also antagonized by M30, resulting in a decrease in the 
frequency, amplitude, and charge transferred of synaptic currents. Overall, the 
present results show an excitatory effect of intracellular αSyn low 
molecular-weight species, not previously described, that are able to affect 
synaptic transmission, and the potential of a small neuroactive molecule to 
interfere with the aggregation process and the synaptic effect of αSyn, 
suggesting that M30 could be a potential therapeutic strategy for 
synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222413253
PMCID: PMC8705949
PMID: 34948050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.