1. Interface Focus. 2021 Oct 12;11(6):20210019. doi: 10.1098/rsfs.2021.0019. 
eCollection 2021 Dec 6.

Imaging and visualizing SARS-CoV-2 in a new era for structural biology.

Leigh KE(1)(2), Modis Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Immunity Unit, Department of Medicine, MRC Laboratory of Molecular 
Biology, University of Cambridge, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.
(2)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease 
(CITIID), University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge CB2 
0AW, UK.

The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has had a global impact and has put scientific endeavour 
in the spotlight, perhaps more than any previous viral outbreak. Fortuitously, 
the pandemic came at a time when decades of research in multiple scientific 
fields could be rapidly brought to bear, and a new generation of vaccine 
platforms was on the cusp of clinical maturity. SARS-CoV-2 also emerged at the 
inflection point of a technological revolution in macromolecular imaging by 
cryo-electron microscopy, fuelled by a confluence of major technological 
advances in sample preparation, optics, detectors and image processing software, 
that complemented pre-existing techniques. Together, these advances enabled us 
to visualize SARS-CoV-2 and its components more rapidly, in greater detail, and 
in a wider variety of biologically relevant contexts than would have been 
possible even a few years earlier. The resulting ultrastructural information on 
SARS-CoV-2 and how it interacts with the host cell has played a critical role in 
the much-needed accelerated development of COVID-19 vaccines and therapeutics. 
Here, we review key imaging modalities used to visualize SARS-CoV-2 and present 
select example data, which have provided us with an exceptionally detailed 
picture of this virus.

Â© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rsfs.2021.0019
PMCID: PMC8504884
PMID: 34956593