1. Front Genet. 2021 Dec 7;12:758665. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.758665. eCollection
 2021.

Genetic Factors Underlying Single Fiber Quality in A-Genome Donor Asian Cotton 
(Gossypium arboreum).

Iqbal MS(1)(2), Tang S(1), Sarfraz Z(1), Iqbal MS(1)(3), Li H(1), He S(1), Jia 
Y(1), Sun G(4), Pan Z(1), Xiaoli G(1), Mahmood A(2), Ahmad S(2), Nazir MF(1), 
Chen B(1), Wang L(1), Pang B(1), Wei S(1), Du X(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology/Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences (ICR, CAAS), Anyang, China.
(2)Ayub Agricultural Research Institute Faisalabad, Cotton Research Institute, 
Multan, Pakistan.
(3)Khwaja Fareed University of Engineering and Information Technology, Rahim Yar 
Khan, Pakistan.
(4)Anyang Institute of Technology, Anyang, China.

The study of A-genome Asian cotton as a potential fiber donor in Gossypium 
species may offer an enhanced understanding of complex genetics and novel 
players related to fiber quality traits. Assessment of individual fibers 
providing classified fiber quality information to the textile industry is 
Advanced Fiber Information System (AFIS) in the recent technological era. 
Keeping the scenario, a diverse collection of 215 Asiatic cotton accessions were 
evaluated across three agro-ecological zones of China. Genome-Wide Association 
Studies (GWAS) was performed to detect association signals related to 17 AFIS 
fiber quality traits grouped into four categories viz: NEPs, fiber length, 
maturity, and fineness. Significant correlations were found within as well as 
among different categories of various traits related to fiber quality. Fiber 
fineness has shown a strong correlation to all other categories, whereas these 
categories are shown interrelationships via fiber-fineness. A total of 7,429 
SNPs were found in association with 17 investigated traits, of which 177 were 
selected as lead SNPs. In the vicinity of these lead SNPs, 56 differentially 
expressed genes in various tissues/development stages were identified as 
candidate genes. This compendium connecting trait-SNP-genes may allow further 
prioritization of genes in GWAS loci to enable mechanistic studies. These 
identified quantitative trait nucleotides (QTNs) may prove helpful in fiber 
quality improvement in Asian cotton through marker-assisted breeding as well as 
in reviving eroded genetic factors of G. hirsutum via introgression breeding.

Copyright Â© 2021 Iqbal, Tang, Sarfraz, Iqbal, Li, He, Jia, Sun, Pan, Xiaoli, 
Mahmood, Ahmad, Nazir, Chen, Wang, Pang, Wei and Du.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.758665
PMCID: PMC8689003
PMID: 34950189

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.