1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Dec 7;9:752773. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.752773. 
eCollection 2021.

YKL-40 Aggravates Early-Stage Atherosclerosis by Inhibiting Macrophage Apoptosis 
in an Aven-dependent Way.

Huan W(1), Yandong L(1), Chao W(1), Sili Z(1), Jun B(1), Mingfang L(1), Yu C(2), 
Lefeng Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital 
of Naval Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Yueyang Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese Medicine & Clinical 
Research Institute of Integrative Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Objective: programmed cell removal in atherosclerotic plaques plays a crucial 
role in retarding lesion progression. Macrophage apoptosis has a critical role 
in PrCR, especially in early-stage lesions. YKL-40 has been shown to be elevated 
as lesions develop and is closely related to macrophages. This study aimed to 
determine the effect of YKL-40 on regulating macrophage apoptosis and 
early-stage atherosclerosis progression. Research design and Methods: The 
correlations among the expression level of YKL-40, the area of early-stage 
plaque, and the macrophage apoptosis rate in plaques have been shown in human 
carotid atherosclerotic plaques through pathological and molecular biological 
detection. These results were successively confirmed in vivo (Ldlr -/- mice 
treated by YKL-40 recombinant protein/neutralizing antibody) and in vitro 
(macrophages that Ykl40 up-/down-expressed) experiments. The downstream targets 
were predicted by iTRAQ analysis. Results: In early-stage human carotid plaques 
and murine plaques, the YKL-40 expression level had a significant positive 
correlation with the area of the lesion and a significant negative correlation 
with the macrophage apoptosis rate. In vivo, the plaque area of aortic roots was 
significantly larger in the recomb-YKL-40 group than that in IgG group (p = 
0.0247) and was significantly smaller in the anti-YKL-40 group than in the IgG 
group (p = 0.0067); the macrophage apoptosis rate of the plaque in aortic roots 
was significantly lower in the recomb-YKL-40 group than that in IgG group (p = 
0.0018) and was higher in anti-YKL-40 group than that in VC group. In vitro, the 
activation level of caspase-9 was significantly lower in RAW264.7 with Ykl40 
overexpressed than that in controls (p = 0.0054), while the expression level of 
Aven was significantly higher than that in controls (p = 0.0031). The apoptosis 
rate of RAW264.7 treated by recomb-YKL40 was significantly higher in the Aven 
down-regulated group than that in the control group (p < 0.001). The apoptosis 
inhibitor Aven was confirmed as the target molecule of YKL-40. Mechanistically, 
YKL-40 could inhibit macrophage apoptosis by upregulating Aven to suppress the 
activation of caspase-9. Conclusion: YKL-40 inhibits macrophage apoptosis by 
upregulating the apoptosis inhibitor Aven to suppress the activation of 
caspase-9, which may impede normal PrCR and promote substantial accumulation in 
early-stage plaques, thereby leading to the progression of atherosclerosis.

Copyright Â© 2021 Huan, Yandong, Chao, Sili, Jun, Mingfang, Yu and Lefeng.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.752773
PMCID: PMC8688858
PMID: 34950656

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.