1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Dec 8;12:769748. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.769748. 
eCollection 2021.

Metabolomics and Transcriptomics Integration of Early Response of Populus 
tomentosa to Reduced Nitrogen Availability.

Chen M(1)(2), Yin Y(1), Zhang L(1), Yang X(1), Fu T(1), Huo X(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Tree Breeding, Key Laboratory of Genetics 
and Breeding in Forest Trees and Ornamental Plants, Ministry of Education, The 
Tree and Ornamental Plant Breeding and Biotechnology Laboratory of National 
Forestry and Grassland Administration, College of Biological Sciences and 
Biotechnology, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Tree Breeding by Molecular 
Design, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

Nitrogen (N) is one of the most crucial elements for plant growth and 
development. However, little is known about the metabolic regulation of trees 
under conditions of N deficiency. In this investigation, gas chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (GC-MS) was used to determine global changes in metabolites and 
regulatory pathways in Populus tomentosa. Thirty metabolites were found to be 
changed significantly under conditions of low-N stress. N deficiency resulted in 
increased levels of carbohydrates and decreases in amino acids and some 
alcohols, as well as some secondary metabolites. Furthermore, an RNA-sequencing 
(RNA-Seq) analysis was performed to characterize the transcriptomic profiles, 
and 1,662 differentially expressed genes were identified in P. tomentosa. 
Intriguingly, four pathways related to carbohydrate metabolism were enriched. 
Genes involved in the gibberellic acid and indole-3-acetic acid pathways were 
found to be responsive to low-N stress, and the contents of hormones were then 
validated by high-performance liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization 
tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS). Coordinated metabolomics and 
transcriptomics analysis revealed a pattern of co-expression of five pairs of 
metabolites and unigenes. Overall, our investigation showed that metabolism 
directly related to N deficiency was depressed, while some components of energy 
metabolism were increased. These observations provided insights into the 
metabolic and molecular mechanisms underlying the interactions of N and carbon 
in poplar.

Copyright Â© 2021 Chen, Yin, Zhang, Yang, Fu, Huo and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.769748
PMCID: PMC8692568
PMID: 34956269

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.