1. Bioengineered. 2022 Jan;13(1):941-949. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.2015528.

Relationships between plasma expression levels of microRNA-146a and microRNA-132 
in epileptic patients and their cognitive, mental and psychological disorders.

Huang H(1), Cui G(2), Tang H(2), Kong L(2), Wang X(2), Cui C(2), Xiao Q(2), Ji 
H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Huaibei People's Hospital, Huaibei, P. R. China.
(2)Epilepsy Center, Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, P. 
R. China.
(3)Medical Laboratory, Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, 
P. R. China.

We aimed to explore the relationships between the plasma expression levels of 
microRNA (miR)-146a and miR-132 in epileptic patients and cognitive, mental and 
psychological disorders. Eighty epileptic patients and seventy healthy subjects 
as controls were evaluated with Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Hamilton 
Anxiety Rating (HAMA) and Hamilton Depression Rating (HAMD) scales, and plasma 
samples were collected. MiR-146a and miR-132 levels were detected by real-time 
quantitative PCR. The total incidence rate of cognitive dysfunction, anxiety and 
depression in epilepsy group was 62.5%. Cognitive dysfunction was correlated 
positively with educational level, but negatively with disease course, duration 
and type of administration. The frequency and duration of seizures were 
positively correlated with anxiety. Depression was correlated negatively with 
educational level, whereas positively with course of disease and number of used 
drugs. Epileptic patients had significantly higher miR-146a and miR-132 levels 
than those of healthy controls. The miR-146a and miR-132 levels of patients with 
complications were significantly higher than those of cases without 
complications. Their expressions were correlated negatively with total MoCA 
scale score, but positively with type of complications. MiR-132 expression was 
positively correlated with the total scores of HAMA and HAMD scales. Plasma 
miR-146a and miR-132 expressions increased in epileptic patients, and miR-132 
expression reflected the severity of epilepsy and predicted the risks of 
complications.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.2015528
PMCID: PMC8805917
PMID: 34969353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).