1. Elife. 2021 Dec 29;10:e70833. doi: 10.7554/eLife.70833.

Delilah, prospero, and D-Pax2 constitute a gene regulatory network essential for 
the development of functional proprioceptors.

Avetisyan A(1), Glatt Y(1), Cohen M(1), Timerman Y(1), Aspis N(1), Nachman A(1), 
Halachmi N(1), Preger-Ben Noon E(1), Salzberg A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, The Rappaport Faculty of 
Medicine and Research Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 
Israel.

Coordinated animal locomotion depends on the development of functional 
proprioceptors. While early cell-fate determination processes are well 
characterized, little is known about the terminal differentiation of cells 
within the proprioceptive lineage and the genetic networks that control them. In 
this work we describe a gene regulatory network consisting of three 
transcription factors-Prospero (Pros), D-Pax2, and Delilah (Dei)-that dictates 
two alternative differentiation programs within the proprioceptive lineage in 
Drosophila. We show that D-Pax2 and Pros control the differentiation of cap 
versus scolopale cells in the chordotonal organ lineage by, respectively, 
activating and repressing the transcription of dei. Normally, D-Pax2 activates 
the expression of dei in the cap cell but is unable to do so in the scolopale 
cell where Pros is co-expressed. We further show that D-Pax2 and Pros exert 
their effects on dei transcription via a 262 bp chordotonal-specific enhancer in 
which two D-Pax2- and three Pros-binding sites were identified experimentally. 
When this enhancer was removed from the fly genome, the cap- and 
ligament-specific expression of dei was lost, resulting in loss of chordotonal 
organ functionality and defective larval locomotion. Thus, coordinated larval 
locomotion depends on the activity of a dei enhancer that integrates both 
activating and repressive inputs for the generation of a functional 
proprioceptive organ.

Â© 2021, Avetisyan et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.70833
PMCID: PMC8716109
PMID: 34964712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AA, YG, MC, YT, NA, AN, NH, EP, AS No competing 
interests declared