1. Front Vet Sci. 2021 Dec 16;8:788316. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2021.788316.
eCollection  2021.

Interference With ACSL1 Gene in Bovine Adipocytes: Transcriptome Profiling of 
mRNA and lncRNA Related to Unsaturated Fatty Acid Synthesis.

Bai Y(1), Li X(1), Chen Z(1), Li J(1), Tian H(1), Ma Y(1), Raza SHA(2), Shi 
B(1), Han X(1), Luo Y(1), Hu J(1), Wang J(1), Liu X(1), Li S(1), Zhao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology & Gansu Key Laboratory of 
Herbivorous Animal Biotechnology, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Xianyang, 
China.

The enzyme long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase 1 (ACSL1) is essential for lipid 
metabolism. The ACSL1 gene controls unsaturated fatty acid (UFA) synthesis as 
well as the formation of lipid droplets in bovine adipocytes. Here, we used 
RNA-Seq to determine lncRNA and mRNA that regulate UFA synthesis in bovine 
adipocytes using RNA interference and non-interference with ACSL1. The 
corresponding target genes of differentially expressed (DE) lncRNAs and the DE 
mRNAs were found to be enriched in lipid and FA metabolism-related pathways, 
according to GO and KEGG analyses. The differentially expressed lncRNA- 
differentially expressed mRNA (DEL-DEM) interaction network indicated that some 
DELs, such as TCONS_00069661, TCONS_00040771, TCONS_ 00035606, TCONS_00048301, 
TCONS_001309018, and TCONS_00122946, were critical for UFA synthesis. These 
findings assist our understanding of the regulation of UFA synthesis by lncRNAs 
and mRNAs in bovine adipocytes.

Copyright Â© 2021 Bai, Li, Chen, Li, Tian, Ma, Raza, Shi, Han, Luo, Hu, Wang, 
Liu, Li and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2021.788316
PMCID: PMC8716587
PMID: 34977220

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.