1. Stem Cell Res. 2022 Mar;59:102624. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2021.102624. Epub 2021
Dec  18.

Generation of a non-integrated induced pluripotent stem cell line (SMBCi009-A) 
from urine-derived cells of a Chinese Familial hypercholesterolemia patient.

Qi Z(1), Cui Y(1), Shi L(1), Wang J(1), Zhao Q(1), Luan J(1), Han J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong 
First Medical University, Ji'nan, Shandong, China; Biomedical Sciences College & 
Shandong Medicinal Biotechnology Centre, Shandong First Medical University & 
Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Ji'nan, Shandong, China; Key Lab for 
Biotech-Drugs of National Health Commission, China; Key Lab for Rare & Uncommon 
Diseases of Shandong Province, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong 
First Medical University, Ji'nan, Shandong, China; Biomedical Sciences College & 
Shandong Medicinal Biotechnology Centre, Shandong First Medical University & 
Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Ji'nan, Shandong, China; Key Lab for 
Biotech-Drugs of National Health Commission, China; Key Lab for Rare & Uncommon 
Diseases of Shandong Province, China. Electronic address: jxhan9888@aliyun.com.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH; OMIM: # 143890) is a common inherited 
autosomal dominant disease, characterized by high-level low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (LDL-C) in plasma. Elevated LDL-C levels is closely related with 
atherosclerotic plaques and premature cardiovascular disease if not treated in 
time. Here we generated an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line using urine 
cells (UCs) derived from an 8-year-old male FH patient who carrying two coding 
and pathogenic mutations of low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene 
(exon12:c.C1747T and exon13: c. 1948 del G). This induced pluripotent stem cell 
line named SMBCi009-A can be used to understand more cellular details about FH.

Copyright Â© 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2021.102624
PMID: 34974203

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.