1. Neurol Sci. 2022 Feb;43(2):1441-1445. doi: 10.1007/s10072-021-05793-z. Epub
2022  Jan 7.

"Cock-walk" gait and "horseshoe moustache" sign on MRI in inherited 
hypermanganesemia.

Cherian A(1), Priya L(1), Divya KP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences 
and Technology, Trivandrum, Kerala, PIN-695011, India.
(2)Department of Neurology, Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences 
and Technology, Trivandrum, Kerala, PIN-695011, India. drdivyakp01@gmail.com.

Exogenous manganese (Mn) intoxication leads only to neurotoxicity, whereas 
inherited hypermanganesemia additionally can cause cirrhosis and polycythemia. 
We report two affected siblings in a family from South India with severe 
dysarthria, without dysphagia, generalized dystonia, and characteristic 
"cock-walk" gait which are clinical clues. Genetic study showed homozygous 
mutation in the first exon of solute carrier family 30 member 10 (SLC30A10) gene 
(c.134T>C) confirming the diagnosis of inherited hypermanganesaemia with 
dystonia 1 (HMNDYT1). Characteristic brain MRI finding is involvement of pontine 
tegmentum on T1 axial images (due to affliction of central tegmental tract 
[CTT]) with sparing of ventral pons giving rise to "horseshoe moustache" sign. 
Symmetric hyperintensities in dentate nucleus, globus pallidus, and putamen 
while relatively sparing caudate nucleus on T1 without signal intensity 
abnormalities on T2 images are highly suggestive of hypermanganesaemia. Axial 
diffusion tensor imaging confirmed the "horseshoe moustache" sign to be 
constituted by the affected CTT. Hypermanganesaemia-induced CTT involvement in 
T1 needs to be differentiated from the other more common pediatric causes of CTT 
affliction which are evident on T2 or diffusion weighted images. Identification 
is crucial as it is a treatable disorder of metal deposition amenable to 
chelation.

© 2021. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-021-05793-z
PMID: 34993656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]