1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Bioengineered. 2022 Jan;13(1):1530-1540. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.2021701.

Dihydroartemisinin targets fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) to 
inhibit interleukin 17A (IL-17A)-induced hyperproliferation and inflammation of 
keratinocytes.

Chen B(1), Li C(2), Chang G(1), Wang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Tianjin TEDA Hospital, Tianjin, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Tianjin Beichen Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Hospital, Tianjin, P.R. China.

Retraction in
    Bioengineered. 2024 Dec;15(1):2299613. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2024.2299613.

Psoriasis is a common chronic immune-mediated disease that often has a serious 
negative impact on the physical and mental health of patients. 
Dihydroartemisinin (DHA) is a drug with anti-fibrotic and anti-inflammatory 
effects that may be involved in the autoimmune regulation of immune diseases. 
However, the effects of DHA on psoriasis have not been reported comprehensively. 
Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the effect of DHA on 
abnormal proliferation and inflammation of epidermal keratinocyte cells in 
psoriasis and its mechanism of action. IL-17A-induced human epidermal 
keratin-forming cells (HaCaT) were used as a model. And after induction exposure 
to different concentrations of DHA, CCK-8, EDU staining, wound healing and 
Western blotting were performed to assess cell viability, proliferation, 
migration, differentiation and inflammatory factors, respectively. Subsequently, 
agonists of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) were added and the above 
experiments were repeated. The results showed that DHA obviously inhibited 
IL-17A-induced hyperproliferation, migration and expression of inflammatory 
factors in HaCaT cells. Furthermore, FGFR1 was highly expressed in 
IL-17A-induced HaCaT cells, and DHA inhibited its expression. However, the 
inhibitory effect of DHA on IL-17A-induced HaCaT cells was reversed after the 
addition of FGFR1 agonist. In conclusion, DHA could inhibit IL-17A-induced 
hyperproliferation and inflammation of keratinocytes by targeting FGFR1, which 
also provided a new target for the treatment of psoriasis.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.2021701
PMCID: PMC8805964
PMID: 35006038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).