1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Dec 21;22(1):9. doi: 10.3390/s22010009.

Multi-Layer Attack Graph Analysis in the 5G Edge Network Using a Dynamic 
Hexagonal Fuzzy Method.

Kholidy HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Networks and Computer Security, College of Engineering, State 
University of New York (SUNY) Polytechnic Institute, Utica, NY 13502, USA.

Overall, 5G networks are expected to become the backbone of many critical IT 
applications. With 5G, new tech advancements and innovation are expected; 5G 
currently operates on software-defined networking. This enables 5G to implement 
network slicing to meet the unique requirements of every application. As a 
result, 5G is more flexible and scalable than 4G LTE and previous generations. 
To avoid the growing risks of hacking, 5G cybersecurity needs some significant 
improvements. Some security concerns involve the network itself, while others 
focus on the devices connected to 5G. Both aspects present a risk to consumers, 
governments, and businesses alike. There is currently no real-time vulnerability 
assessment framework that specifically addresses 5G Edge networks, with regard 
to their real-time scalability and dynamic nature. This paper studies the 
vulnerability assessment in the 5G networks and develops an optimized dynamic 
method that integrates the Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to 
Ideal Solution (TOPSIS) with the hexagonal fuzzy numbers to accurately analyze 
the vulnerabilities in 5G networks. The proposed method considers both the 
vulnerability and 5G network dynamic factors such as latency and accessibility 
to find the potential attack graph paths where the attack might propagate in the 
network and quantifies the attack cost and security level of the network. We 
test and validate the proposed method using our 5G testbed and we compare the 
optimized method to the classical TOPSIS and the known vulnerability scanner 
tool, Nessus.

DOI: 10.3390/s22010009
PMCID: PMC8747503
PMID: 35009551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.