1. Animals (Basel). 2021 Dec 31;12(1):84. doi: 10.3390/ani12010084.

Identification of Monoallelically Expressed Genes Associated with Economic 
Traits in Hanwoo (Korean Native Cattle).

Lim KS(1)(2), Kim HC(2), Choi BH(2), Son JW(2), Lee KT(2), Choi TJ(2), Cho 
YM(2), Chai HH(2), Park JE(2), Park W(2), Lim C(3), Kim JM(3), Lim D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
(2)Animal Genomics and Bioinformatics Division, National Institute of Animal 
Science, RDA, Wanju 55365, Jeollabuk-do, Korea.
(3)Department of Animal Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong 
17546, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

Hanwoo, an indigenous Korean cattle breed, has been genetically improved by 
selecting superior sires called Korean-proven bulls. However, cows still 
contribute half of the genetic stock of their offspring, and allelic-specific 
expressed genes have potential, as selective targets of cows, to enhance genetic 
gain. The aim of this study is to identify genes that have MAEs based on both 
the genome and transcriptome and to estimate their effects on breeding values 
(BVs) for economically important traits in Hanwoo. We generated resequencing 
data for the parents and RNA-sequencing data for the muscle, fat, and brain 
tissues of the offspring. A total of 3801 heterozygous single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in offspring were identified and they were located in 1569 
genes. Only 14 genes showed MAE (seven expressing maternal alleles and seven 
expressing paternal alleles). Tissue-specific MAE was observed, and LANCL1 
showed maternal allele expression across all tissues. MAE genes were enriched 
for the biological process of cell death and angiogenesis, which included ACKR3 
and PDCL3 genes, whose SNPs were significantly associated with BVs of lean meat 
production-related traits, such as weight at 12 months of age, carcass weight, 
and loin eye area. In the current study, monoallelically expressed genes were 
identified in various adult tissues and these genes were associated with genetic 
capacity in Hanwoo.

DOI: 10.3390/ani12010084
PMCID: PMC8749587
PMID: 35011190

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.