1. Curr Oncol. 2021 Dec 24;29(1):77-93. doi: 10.3390/curroncol29010007.

Clinicopathologic Features and Molecular Biomarkers as Predictors of Epidermal 
Growth Factor Receptor Gene Mutation in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients.

Liu L(1), Xiong X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, NHC Key Laboratory of 
Pulmonary Diseases, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology, 1277 Jiefang Rd, Wuhan 430022, China.

Lung cancer ranks first in the incidence and mortality of cancer in the world, 
of which more than 80% are non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The majority of 
NSCLC patients are in stage IIIB~IV when they are admitted to hospital and have 
no opportunity for surgery. Compared with traditional chemotherapy, specific 
targeted therapy has a higher selectivity and fewer adverse reactions, providing 
a new treatment direction for advanced NSCLC patients. Tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR-TKIs) are the widely used 
targeted therapy for NSCLC patients. Their efficacy and prognosis are closely 
related to the mutation status of the EGFR gene. Clinically, detecting EGFR gene 
mutation is often limited by difficulty obtaining tissue specimens, limited 
detecting technology, and economic conditions, so it is of great clinical 
significance to find indicators to predict EGFR gene mutation status. 
Clinicopathological characteristics, tumor markers, liquid biopsy, and other 
predictors are less invasive, economical, and easier to obtain. They can be 
monitored in real-time, which is supposed to predict EGFR mutation status and 
provide guidance for the accurate, individualized diagnosis and therapy of NSCLC 
patients. This article reviewed the correlation between the clinical indicators 
and EGFR gene mutation status in NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.3390/curroncol29010007
PMCID: PMC8774362
PMID: 35049681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.