1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 8;23(2):692. doi: 10.3390/ijms23020692.

De Novo ACTG1 Variant Expands the Phenotype and Genotype of Partial Deafness and 
Baraitser-Winter Syndrome.

Dawidziuk M(1), Kutkowska-Kazmierczak A(1), Bukowska-Olech E(2), Jurek M(1), 
Kalka E(3), Guilbride DL(4), Furmanek MI(5), Bekiesinska-Figatowska M(6), Bal 
J(1), Gawlinski P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, 01-211 Warsaw, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 60-806 
Poznan, Poland.
(3)Unit of Anthropology, Institute of Mother and Child, 01-211 Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Independent Researcher, Manhiça MPT 1122, Mozambique.
(5)Department of Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging, Centre for Postgraduate 
Medical Education, 02-507 Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Institute of Mother and Child, 01-211 
Warsaw, Poland.

Actin molecules are fundamental for embryonic structural and functional 
differentiation; γ-actin is specifically required for the maintenance and 
function of cytoskeletal structures in the ear, resulting in hearing. 
Baraitser-Winter Syndrome (B-WS, OMIM #243310, #614583) is a rare, 
multiple-anomaly genetic disorder caused by mutations in either cytoplasmically 
expressed actin gene, ACTB (β-actin) or ACTG1 (γ-actin). The resulting 
actinopathies cause characteristic cerebrofrontofacial and developmental traits, 
including progressive sensorineural deafness. Both ACTG1-related non-syndromic 
A20/A26 deafness and B-WS diagnoses are characterized by hypervariable 
penetrance in phenotype. Here, we identify a 28th patient worldwide carrying a 
mutated γ-actin ACTG1 allele, with mildly manifested cerebrofrontofacial B-WS 
traits, hypervariable penetrance of developmental traits and sensorineural 
hearing loss. This patient also displays brachycephaly and a complete absence of 
speech faculty, previously unreported for ACTG1-related B-WS or DFNA20/26 
deafness, representing phenotypic expansion. The patient's exome sequence 
analyses (ES) confirms a de novo ACTG1 variant previously unlinked to the 
pathology. Additional microarray analysis uncover no further mutational basis 
for dual molecular diagnosis in our patient. We conclude that γ-actin c.542C > 
T, p.Ala181Val is a dominant pathogenic variant, associated with mildly 
manifested facial and cerebral traits typical of B-WS, hypervariable penetrance 
of developmental traits and sensorineural deafness. We further posit and present 
argument and evidence suggesting ACTG1-related non-syndromic DFNA20/A26 deafness 
is a manifestation of undiagnosed ACTG1-related B-WS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23020692
PMCID: PMC8776155
PMID: 35054877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.