1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 6;23(2):617. doi: 10.3390/ijms23020617.

Radiolabeled Gold Nanoseeds Decorated with Substance P Peptides: Synthesis, 
Characterization and In Vitro Evaluation in Glioblastoma Cellular Models.

Silva F(1), D'Onofrio A(1), Mendes C(1), Pinto C(1), Marques A(1), Campello 
MPC(1)(2), Oliveira MC(1)(2), Raposinho P(1)(2), Belchior A(1), Di Maria S(1), 
Marques F(1)(2), Cruz C(3), Carvalho J(3), Paulo A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Ciências e Tecnologias Nucleares, Instituto Superior Técnico, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Campus Tecnológico e Nuclear, Estrada Nacional 10, Km 
139.7, 2695-066 Bobadela LRS, Portugal.
(2)Departamento de Engenharia e Ciências Nucleares, Instituto Superior Técnico, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Estrada Nacional 10, Km 139.7, 2695-066 Bobadela LRS, 
Portugal.
(3)CICS-UBI-Centro de Investigação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade da Beira 
Interior, Av. Infante D. Henrique, 6200-506 Covilhã, Portugal.

Despite some progress, the overall survival of patients with glioblastoma (GBM) 
remains extremely poor. In this context, there is a pressing need to develop 
innovative therapy strategies for GBM, namely those based on nanomedicine 
approaches. Towards this goal, we have focused on nanoparticles (AuNP-SP and 
AuNP-SPTyr8) with a small gold core (ca. 4 nm), carrying DOTA chelators and 
substance P (SP) peptides. These new SP-containing AuNPs were characterized by a 
variety of analytical techniques, including TEM and DLS measurements and UV-vis 
and CD spectroscopy, which proved their high in vitro stability and poor 
tendency to interact with plasma proteins. Their labeling with diagnostic and 
therapeutic radionuclides was efficiently performed by DOTA complexation with 
the trivalent radiometals 67Ga and 177Lu or by electrophilic radioiodination 
with 125I of the tyrosyl residue in AuNP-SPTyr8. Cellular studies of the 
resulting radiolabeled AuNPs in NKR1-positive GBM cells (U87, T98G and U373) 
have shown that the presence of the SP peptides has a crucial and positive 
impact on their internalization by the tumor cells. Consistently, 
177Lu-AuNP-SPTyr8 showed more pronounced radiobiological effects in U373 cells 
when compared with the non-targeted congener 177Lu-AuNP-TDOTA, as assessed by 
cell viability and clonogenic assays and corroborated by Monte Carlo 
microdosimetry simulations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23020617
PMCID: PMC8775581
PMID: 35054798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.