1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 13;23(2):858. doi: 10.3390/ijms23020858.

Analysis of Integrin α(IIb) Subunit Dynamics Reveals Long-Range Effects of 
Missense Mutations on Calf Domains.

Anies S(1), Jallu V(2), Diharce J(1), Narwani TJ(1), de Brevern AG(1).

Author information:
(1)INSERM, BIGR, Université de Paris and Université de la Réunion et Université 
des Antilles, F-75015 Paris, France.
(2)Centre National de Référence en Hémobiologie Périnatale (CNRHP), Site St 
Antoine, DMU Biologie et Génomique Médicales, AP-HP, Sorbonne Université, 
F-75012 Paris, France.

Integrin αIIbβ3, a glycoprotein complex expressed at the platelet surface, is 
involved in platelet aggregation and contributes to primary haemostasis. Several 
integrin αIIbβ3 polymorphisms prevent the aggregation that causes haemorrhagic 
syndromes, such as Glanzmann thrombasthenia (GT). Access to 3D structure allows 
understanding the structural effects of polymorphisms related to GT. In a 
previous analysis using Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations of αIIbCalf-1 domain 
structure, it was observed that GT associated with single amino acid variation 
affects distant loops, but not the mutated position. In this study, experiments 
are extended to Calf-1, Thigh, and Calf-2 domains. Two loops in Calf-2 are 
unstructured and therefore are modelled expertly using biophysical restraints. 
Surprisingly, MD revealed the presence of rigid zones in these loops. Detailed 
analysis with structural alphabet, the Proteins Blocks (PBs), allowed observing 
local changes in highly flexible regions. The variant P741R located at 
C-terminal of Calf-1 revealed that the Calf-2 presence did not affect the 
results obtained with isolated Calf-1 domain. Simulations for Calf-1 + Calf-2, 
and Thigh + Calf-1 variant systems are designed to comprehend the impact of five 
single amino acid variations in these domains. Distant conformational changes 
are observed, thus highlighting the potential role of allostery in the 
structural basis of GT.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23020858
PMCID: PMC8776176
PMID: 35055046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.