1. Int J Surg. 2022 Feb;98:106233. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2022.106233. Epub 2022 Jan
 19.

Bovine-derived antibodies and camelid-derived nanobodies as biotherapeutic 
weapons against SARS-CoV-2 and its variants: A review article.

Saied AA(1), Metwally AA, Alobo M, Shah J, Sharun K, Dhama K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Establishments Licensing (Aswan Branch), National Food 
Safety Authority (NFSA), Aswan, 81511, Egypt Touristic Activities and Interior 
Offices Sector (Aswan Office), Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, Aswan, 
81511, Egypt Department of Surgery, Anesthesiology, and Radiology, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Aswan University, Aswan, 81511, Egypt Grand Challenges 
Africa, Science for Africa Foundation, Nairobi, Kenya Medical Research Center, 
Kateb University, Kabul, Afghanistan Division of Surgery, ICAR-Indian Veterinary 
Research Institute, Izatnagar, Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, India Division of 
Pathology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Bareilly, Uttar 
Pradesh, India.

The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has infected 305 million 
individuals worldwide and killed about 5.5 million people as of January 10, 
2022. SARS-CoV-2 is the third major outbreak caused by a new coronavirus in the 
previous two decades, following SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. Even though vaccination 
against SARS-CoV-2 is considered a critical strategy for preventing virus spread 
in the population and limiting COVID-19 clinical manifestations, new therapeutic 
drugs, and management strategies are urgently needed, particularly in light of 
the growing number of SARS-CoV-2 variants (such as Delta and Omicron variants). 
However, the use of conventional antibodies has faced many challenges, such as 
viral escape mutants, increased instability, weak binding, large sizes, the need 
for large amounts of plasma, and high-cost manufacturing. Furthermore, the 
emergence of new SARS-CoV-2 variants in the human population and recurrent 
coronavirus spillovers highlight the need for broadly neutralizing antibodies 
that are not affected by an antigenic drift that could limit future zoonotic 
infection. Bovine-derived antibodies and camelid-derived nanobodies are more 
potent and protective than conventional human antibodies, thanks to their 
inbuilt characteristics, and can be produced in large quantities. In addition, 
it was reported that these biotherapeutics are effective against a broad 
spectrum of epitopes, reducing the opportunity of viral pathogens to develop 
mutational escape. In this review, we focus on the potential benefits behind our 
rationale for using bovine-derived antibodies and camelid-derived nanobodies in 
countering SARS-CoV-2 and its emerging variants and mutants.

Copyright © 2022 IJS Publishing Group Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2022.106233
PMCID: PMC8768012
PMID: 35065260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]