1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 May 6;50(8):e46. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac014.

A Cas6-based RNA tracking platform functioning in a fluorescence-activation 
mode.

Gao F(1), Zheng K(1), Li YB(2), Jiang F(1), Han CY(1).

Author information:
(1)Gene Editing Research Center, Hebei University of Science and Technology, 
Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050018, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Hebei University, Baoding, Hebei 071000, 
China.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Mar 21;50(5):2987-2989. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac111.

Given the fact that the localization of RNAs is closely associated with their 
functions, techniques developed for tracking the distribution of RNAs in live 
cells have greatly advanced the study of RNA biology. Recently, innovative 
application of fluorescent protein-labelled Cas9 and Cas13 into live-cell RNA 
tracking further enriches the toolbox. However, the Cas9/Cas13 platform, as well 
as the widely-used MS2-MCP technique, failed to solve the problem of high 
background noise. It was recently reported that CRISPR/Cas6 would exhibit 
allosteric alteration after interacting with the Cas6 binding site (CBS) on 
RNAs. Here, we exploited this feature and designed a Cas6-based switch platform 
for detecting target RNAs in vivo. Conjugating split-Venus fragments to both 
ends of the endoribonuclease-mutated Escherichia coli Cas6(dEcCas6) allowed 
ligand (CBS)-activated split-Venus complementation. We name this platform as 
Cas6 based Fluorescence Complementation (Cas6FC). In living cells, Cas6FC could 
detect target RNAs with nearly free background noise. Moreover, as minimal as 
one copy of CBS (29nt) tagged in an RNA of interest was able to turn on Cas6FC 
fluorescence, which greatly reduced the odds of potential alteration of 
conformation and localization of target RNAs. Thus, we developed a new RNA 
tracking platform inherently with high sensitivity and specificity.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac014
PMCID: PMC9071499
PMID: 35061906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]