1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2022 Jan;23(Suppl 1):21-29. doi:
10.1007/s40257-021-00654-z.  Epub 2022 Jan 21.

Clinical Course and Characteristics of Generalized Pustular Psoriasis.

Choon SE(1), Navarini AA(2), Pinter A(3).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Sultanah Aminah Johor Bahru, Clinical School Johor Bahru, Monash 
University Malaysia, Johor Bahru, Malaysia. choonse@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt 
am Main, Germany.

Generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) is a rare, potentially life-threatening 
disease characterized by episodes of widespread sterile macroscopic pustules, 
with or without systemic inflammation and/or plaque psoriasis. Multiple GPP 
subtypes have been described, from acute GPP of von Zumbusch to milder, annular 
pustular psoriasis. Generalized pustular psoriasis mainly affects adults, with a 
female preponderance, but juvenile GPP also occurs. Flares are a hallmark of GPP 
and may occur de novo or be provoked by triggers, including withdrawal of 
systemic corticosteroids, infections, stress, pregnancy, and menstruation. 
Severity of flares varies widely between patients, and between flares in an 
individual patient. Significant flares are often accompanied by systemic 
symptoms, notably fever, general malaise, and extracutaneous manifestations such 
as arthritis, uveitis, and neutrophilic cholangitis. Common laboratory 
abnormalities include neutrophilia, elevated C-reactive protein levels, 
hypocalcemia, and abnormal liver function tests. The clinical course of GPP is 
highly variable; it can be a relapsing disease with recurrent flares and no 
pustulation between flares or a persistent disease with perpetual mild 
pustulation punctuated with flares of greater severity. Patients may have 
multiple flares per year or a flare every few years. Most flares last 2-5 weeks 
and approximately 50% require hospitalization. Life-threatening complications 
include sepsis and renal, hepatic, respiratory, and heart failure. Reported 
mortality rates are 2-16%.

Â© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-021-00654-z
PMCID: PMC8801409
PMID: 35061227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Siew Eng Choon has received consulting fees from 
AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Janssen, LEO Pharma, MSD, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Sanofi, and UCB. Alexander Navarini has served as a consultant and 
advisor and/or received speaking fees and/or grants and/or served as an 
investigator in clinical trials for AbbVie, Almirall, Amgen, Biomed, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, Eli Lilly, Galderma, 
GlaxoSmithKline, LEO Pharma, Janssen-Cilag, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre 
Pharma, Regeneron, Sandoz, Sanofi, and UCB. Andreas Pinter has served as an 
advisor and/or speaker and/or received grants and/or served as an investigator 
for AbbVie, Almirall Hermal, Amgen, Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Eli Lilly, Galderma, Hexal, Janssen, LEO Pharma, MC2, Medac, 
Merck Serono, Mitsubishi, MSD, Novartis, Pascoe, Pfizer, Tigercat Pharma, 
Regeneron, Roche, Sandoz Biopharmaceuticals, Sanofi Genzyme, Schering-Plough, 
and UCB.