1. Cell Rep Phys Sci. 2022 Feb 16;3(2):100740. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrp.2022.100740. 
Epub 2022 Jan 17.

A wearable AIEgen-based lateral flow test strip for rapid detection of 
SARS-CoV-2 RBD protein and N protein.

Zhang GQ(1), Gao Z(1), Zhang J(1), Ou H(1), Gao H(1), Kwok RTK(2), Ding D(1), 
Tang BZ(3).

Author information:
(1)Frontiers Science Center for Cell Responses, State Key Laboratory of 
Medicinal Chemical Biology, Key Laboratory of Bioactive Materials, Ministry of 
Education, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National Engineering 
Research Center for Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction, Institute for 
Advanced Study, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, 
China.
(3)Shenzhen Institute of Molecular Aggregate Science and Engineering, School of 
Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, 2001 
Longxiang Boulevard, Longgang District, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518172, China.

Accurate and rapid detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) is significant for early tracing, isolation, and treatment of 
infected individuals, which will efficiently prevent large-scale transmission of 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Here, two kinds of test strips for receptor 
binding domain (RBD) and N antigens of SARS-CoV-2 are established with high 
sensitivity and specificity, in which AIE luminogens (AIEgens) are utilized as 
reporters. Because of the high brightness and resistance to quenching in aqueous 
solution, the limit of detection can be as low as 6.9 ng/mL for RBD protein and 
7.2 ng/mL for N protein. As an antigen collector, an N95 mask equipped with a 
test strip with an excellent enrichment effect would efficiently simplify the 
sampling procedures. Compared with a test strip based on Au nanoparticles or 
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), the AIEgen-based test strip shows high 
anti-interference capacity in complex biosamples. Therefore, an AIEgen-based 
test strip assay could be built as a promising platform for emergency use during 
the pandemic.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrp.2022.100740
PMCID: PMC8761541
PMID: 35072123

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.