1. Front Mol Biosci. 2022 Jan 11;8:787664. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.787664. 
eCollection 2021.

eIF3 and Its mRNA-Entry-Channel Arm Contribute to the Recruitment of mRNAs With 
Long 5'-Untranslated Regions.

Stanciu A(1), Luo J(2), Funes L(3), Galbokke Hewage S(3), Aitken CE(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science Department, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, NY, United States.
(2)Biochemistry Program, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, NY, United States.
(3)Biology Department, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, NY, United States.

Erratum in
    Front Mol Biosci. 2022 Apr 20;9:896119. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.896119.

Translation initiation in eukaryotes is a multi-step pathway and the most 
regulated phase of translation. Eukaryotic initiation factor 3 (eIF3) is the 
largest and most complex of the translation initiation factors, and it 
contributes to events throughout the initiation pathway. In particular, eIF3 
appears to play critical roles in mRNA recruitment. More recently, eIF3 has been 
implicated in driving the selective translation of specific classes of mRNAs. 
However, unraveling the mechanism of these diverse contributions-and 
disentangling the roles of the individual subunits of the eIF3 complex-remains 
challenging. We employed ribosome profiling of budding yeast cells expressing 
two distinct mutations targeting the eIF3 complex. These mutations either 
disrupt the entire complex or subunits positioned near the mRNA-entry channel of 
the ribosome and which appear to relocate during or in response to mRNA binding 
and start-codon recognition. Disruption of either the entire eIF3 complex or 
specific targeting of these subunits affects mRNAs with long 5'-untranslated 
regions and whose translation is more dependent on eIF4A, eIF4B, and Ded1 but 
less dependent on eIF4G, eIF4E, and PABP. Disruption of the entire eIF3 complex 
further affects mRNAs involved in mitochondrial processes and with structured 
5'-untranslated regions. Comparison of the suite of mRNAs most sensitive to both 
mutations with those uniquely sensitive to disruption of the entire complex 
sheds new light on the specific roles of individual subunits of the eIF3 
complex.

Copyright Â© 2022 Stanciu, Luo, Funes, Galbokke Hewage and Aitken.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.787664
PMCID: PMC8787345
PMID: 35087868

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.