1. Elife. 2022 Feb 1;11:e74363. doi: 10.7554/eLife.74363.

Reciprocally inhibitory circuits operating with distinct mechanisms are 
differently robust to perturbation and modulation.

Morozova E(1), Newstein P(1)(2), Marder E(1).

Author information:
(1)Volen Center and Department of Biology, Brandeis University, Waltham, United 
States.
(2)Biology Department, University of Oregon, Eugene, United States.

Reciprocal inhibition is a building block in many sensory and motor circuits. We 
studied the features that underly robustness in reciprocally inhibitory two 
neuron circuits. We used the dynamic clamp to create reciprocally inhibitory 
circuits from pharmacologically isolated neurons of the crab stomatogastric 
ganglion by injecting artificial graded synaptic (ISyn) and 
hyperpolarization-activated inward (IH) currents. There is a continuum of 
mechanisms in circuits that generate antiphase oscillations, with 'release' and 
'escape' mechanisms at the extremes, and mixed mode oscillations between these 
extremes. In release, the active neuron primarily controls the off/on 
transitions. In escape, the inhibited neuron controls the transitions. We 
characterized the robustness of escape and release circuits to alterations in 
circuit parameters, temperature, and neuromodulation. We found that escape 
circuits rely on tight correlations between synaptic and H conductances to 
generate bursting but are resilient to temperature increase. Release circuits 
are robust to variations in synaptic and H conductances but fragile to 
temperature increase. The modulatory current (IMI) restores oscillations in 
release circuits but has little effect in escape circuits. Perturbations can 
alter the balance of escape and release mechanisms and can create mixed mode 
oscillations. We conclude that the same perturbation can have dramatically 
different effects depending on the circuits' mechanism of operation that may not 
be observable from basal circuit activity.

Â© 2022, Morozova et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.74363
PMCID: PMC8884723
PMID: 35103594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EM, PN, EM No competing interests declared