1. Transl Cancer Res. 2021 Mar;10(3):1549-1558. doi: 10.21037/tcr-21-402.

Prognostic role of epidermal growth factor receptor mutation status in patients 
with de novo lung adenocarcinoma.

Li B(#)(1), Ren X(#)(1), Guo H(2), Guo Y(3), Han F(4), Wen X(5), Wu J(1), Li 
X(1), Ren Y(1), Hu X(6), Liu Z(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Shanxi Cancer Hospital, Taiyuan, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Shanxi Bethune Hospital, Taiyuan, China.
(3)Department of Respiration, Shanxi Cancer Hospital, Taiyuan, China.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanxi Cancer Hospital, Taiyuan, China.
(5)Department of Hematology, Shanxi Cancer Hospital, Taiyuan, China.
(6)Department of Respiration, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, China.
(7)Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: To explore the relationship between the status of epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) and overall survival (OS) in de novo lung adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 291 lung adenocarcinoma subjects with exact 
EGFR status. The cases were divided into a mutant-type group (124 patients) and 
wild-type group (167 patients) according to the status of EGFR. The general 
information, OS, and possible risk factors influencing the OS were also 
evaluated.
RESULTS: The EGFR mutation rate was 42.6% (124/291 patients), and there were 
statistically significant differences in gender, smoking history, and OS 
(P<0.05), but no signiﬁcant difference in diagnosed age, alcohol history, TNM 
stage, clinical stage, and immunohistochemistry between the two groups (P>0.05). 
The most common subtypes of EGFR mutations were exon 19 and exon 21. The median 
OS of the total population was 30.20 months [95% confidence interval (CI): 
25.94-34.46 months] and the OS in the mutant-type group was better than in the 
wild-type group (P<0.001). Cox regression demonstrated that N stage, M stage, 
and EGFR status were the risk factors for OS in de novo lung adenocarcinoma 
patients (P<0.001), and the relative risk were 1.398 (95% CI: 1.214-1.609), 
2.427 (95% CI: 1.780-3.310), and 2.030 (95% CI: 1.528-2.699), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The OS of EGFR mutant individuals was better than that of wild-type 
patients in de novo lung adenocarcinoma patients. EGFR mutation may be a useful 
prognostic indicator in lung adenocarcinoma.

2021 Translational Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tcr-21-402
PMCID: PMC8798523
PMID: 35116479

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tcr-21-402). The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.