1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jan 20;13:818023. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.818023. 
eCollection 2022.

Alu RNA Structural Features Modulate Immune Cell Activation and A-to-I Editing 
of Alu RNAs Is Diminished in Human Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Aune TM(1)(2), Tossberg JT(1), Heinrich RM(1), Porter KP(1), Crooke PS 3rd(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 
United States.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United 
States.

Alu retrotransposons belong to the class of short interspersed nuclear elements 
(SINEs). Alu RNA is abundant in cells and its repetitive structure forms 
double-stranded RNAs (dsRNA) that activate dsRNA sensors and trigger innate 
immune responses with significant pathological consequences. Mechanisms to 
prevent innate immune activation include deamination of adenosines to inosines 
in dsRNAs, referred to as A-to-I editing, degradation of Alu RNAs by 
endoribonucleases, and sequestration of Alu RNAs by RNA binding proteins. We 
have previously demonstrated that widespread loss of Alu RNA A-to-I editing is 
associated with diverse human diseases including viral (COVID-19, influenza) and 
autoimmune diseases (multiple sclerosis). Here we demonstrate loss of A-to-I 
editing in leukocytes is also associated with inflammatory bowel diseases. Our 
structure-function analysis demonstrates that ability to activate innate immune 
responses resides in the left arm of Alu RNA, requires a 5'-PPP, RIG-I is the 
major Alu dsRNA sensor, and A-to-I editing disrupts both structure and function. 
Further, edited Alu RNAs inhibit activity of unedited Alu RNAs. Altering Alu RNA 
nucleotide sequence increases biological activity. Two classes of Alu RNAs 
exist, one class stimulates both IRF and NF-kB transcriptional activity and a 
second class only stimulates IRF transcriptional activity. Thus, Alu RNAs play 
important roles in human disease but may also have therapeutic potential.

Copyright Â© 2022 Aune, Tossberg, Heinrich, Porter and Crooke.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.818023
PMCID: PMC8813004
PMID: 35126398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.