1. Poult Sci. 2022 Apr;101(4):101687. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101687. Epub 2021
Dec  30.

Effect of anhydrous betaine and hydrochloride betaine on growth performance, 
meat quality, postmortem glycolysis, and antioxidant capacity of broilers.

Chen R(1), Yang M(1), Song YD(1), Wang RX(1), Wen C(1), Liu Q(1), Zhou YM(1), 
Zhuang S(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, National Experimental Teaching 
Demonstration Center of Animal Science, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing, 210095, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, National Experimental Teaching 
Demonstration Center of Animal Science, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing, 210095, China. Electronic address: zhuangsu@njau.edu.cn.

This study was conducted to investigate the effect of anhydrous betaine and 
hydrochloride betaine on growth performance, meat quality, relaxometry, 
postmortem glycolysis, and antioxidant capacity of partridge shank broiler 
chickens. A total of 400 one-day-old male broilers were randomly divided into 5 
treatments and fed basal diets supplemented with 0 (control), 500 (L-AB) or 
1,000 (H-AB) mg/kg anhydrous betaine, and 642.23 (L-HB) or 1,284.46 (H-HB) mg/kg 
hydrochloride betaine, respectively. Compared with the control group, anhydrous 
betaine supplementation significantly increased (P < 0.05) average daily gain 
and decreased (P < 0.05) drip loss24h in breast and thigh muscles of broilers. 
The H-AB group further increased (P < 0.05) breast muscle yield, pH24h, immobile 
water proportion (P21), the contents of crude protein and glutathione (GSH), the 
activities of creatine kinase (CK) and glutathione peroxidase (GPX), the mRNA 
expressions of glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4), protein kinase AMP-activated 
non-catalytic subunit gamma 3 (PRKAG3), nuclear factor erythroid 2-related 
factor 2 (Nrf2) and heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) in breast muscle, and a*45min, GLUT4 
mRNA expression in thigh muscle, and decreased (P < 0.05) drip loss48h, free 
water proportion (P22), the contents of lactate and malondialdehyde (MDA) in 
breast muscle. Moreover, the H-HB group significantly increased (P < 0.05) 
pH24h, P21 proportion, the activities of CK, total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC), 
total superoxide dismutase (T-SOD), and GPX, the content of GSH, the mRNA levels 
of Nrf2, HO-1, GPX, and γ-glutamate-cysteine ligase catalytic subunit (γ-GCLc) 
in breast muscle, and the activity and mRNA expression of GPX in thigh muscle, 
and decreased (P < 0.05) drip loss24h, P22 proportion in breast muscle, and MDA 
content in breast and thigh muscles. In conclusion, anhydrous betaine showed 
better effects than hydrochloride betaine in improving growth performance and 
breast muscle yield of broilers. Moreover, anhydrous betaine (1,000 mg/kg) or 
equimolar hydrochloride betaine supplementation could improve meat quality by 
decreasing drip loss, free water proportion, and lactate content, and enhancing 
muscle antioxidant capacity.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101687
PMCID: PMC8844660
PMID: 35139439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]