1. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2022 Apr;135:104573. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104573. Epub 2022 Feb 9.

Oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) polymorphisms and social, emotional and behavioral 
functioning in children and adolescents: A systematic narrative review.

Kohlhoff J(1), Cibralic S(2), Hawes DJ(3), Eapen V(4).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Psychiatry and Mental Health, UNSW Medicine and Health, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia; Karitane, P.O. Box 
241, Villawood, NSW 2163, Australia. Electronic address: 
Jane.Kohlhoff@unsw.edu.au.
(2)Discipline of Psychiatry and Mental Health, UNSW Medicine and Health, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. Electronic address: 
s.cibralic@unsw.edu.au.
(3)School of Psychology, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW 2006, Australia. 
Electronic address: david.hawes@sydney.edu.au.
(4)Discipline of Psychiatry and Mental Health, UNSW Medicine and Health, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia; Academic Unit of 
Child Psychiatry and Clinical Academic, South West Sydney Local Health District, 
Liverpool Hospital, Elizabeth Street, Liverpool, NSW 2170, Australia. Electronic 
address: v.eapen@unsw.edu.au.

This study systematically reviewed available evidence regarding associations 
between polymorphisms of the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) gene and socio-emotional 
and behavioral functioning in children and adolescents. The search yielded 69 
articles, which were grouped into nine categories: depression, anxiety, and 
internalizing symptoms, alcohol abuse, borderline personality disorder, conduct 
disorder symptoms or diagnosis, autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder, early childhood attachment and behavior, pro-social 
skills, and resilience. Direct and/or gene x environment interactions were 
identified in over half of the studies. ASD and conduct disorder (including 
callous unemotional traits) were the diagnoses that were most studied and for 
which there was the strongest evidence of direct links with OXTR polymorphisms. 
In most studies identifying gene x environment interactions, the candidate OXTR 
polymorphism was rs53576. Results suggest that OXTR polymorphisms are associated 
with social, emotional or behavioural functioning in children and adolescents. 
The mixed findings do, however, highlight the need for further research.

Copyright Â© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104573
PMID: 35149102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]