1. Dis Markers. 2022 Feb 3;2022:1407183. doi: 10.1155/2022/1407183. eCollection 
2022.

Apolipoprotein E ε4 Polymorphism as a Risk Factor for Ischemic Stroke: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Qiao SY(1), Shang K(1), Chu YH(1), Yu HH(1), Chen X(1), Qin C(1), Pan DJ(1), 
Tian DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

INTRODUCTION: Rising studies indicate that the apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is 
related to the susceptibility of ischemic stroke (IS). However, certain 
consensus is limited by the lack of a large sample size of researches. This 
meta-analysis was performed to explore the potential association between the 
APOE gene and IS.
METHODS: To identify relevant case control studies in English publications by 
October 2020, we searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and the Cochrane 
Library. Pooled odds ratios (ORs) with fixed- or random-effect models and 
corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated to analyze 
potential associations.
RESULTS: A total of 55 researches from 32 countries containing 12207 IS cases 
and 27742 controls were included. The association between APOE gene ε4 mutation 
and IS was confirmed (ε4 vs. ε3 allele: pooled OR = 1.374, 95% CI, 1.214-1.556; 
ε2/ε4 vs. ε3/ε3: pooled OR = 1.233, 95% CI, 1.056-1.440; ε3/ε4 vs. ε3/ε3: pooled 
OR = 1.340, 95% CI, 1.165-1.542; ε4/ε4 vs. ε3/ε3: pooled OR = 1.833, 95% CI, 
1.542-2.179; and APOE ε4 carriers vs. non-ε4 carriers: pooled OR = 1.377; 95% 
CI, 1.203-1.576). Interestingly, APOE ε4 mutation showed a dose-response 
correlation with IS risk (ε4/ε4 vs. ε2/ε4: pooled OR = 1.625; 95% CI, 
1.281-2.060; ε4/ε4 vs. ε3/ε4: pooled OR = 1.301; 95% CI, 1.077-1.571). Similar 
conclusions were drawn in the small artery disease (SAD) subtype, but not in 
large artery atherosclerosis (LAA) or in cardioaortic embolism (CE), by subgroup 
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations reveal that specific APOE ε4 mutation was 
significantly associated with the risk of IS in a dose-dependent manner, while 
APOE ε4 mutation was related to SAD subtype onset without a cumulative effect.

Copyright © 2022 Su-Ya Qiao et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/1407183
PMCID: PMC8831053
PMID: 35154509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.