1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Feb 1;12:789564. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.789564. eCollection 2021.

Insight Into Pituitary lncRNA and mRNA at Two Estrous Stages in Small Tail Han 
Sheep With Different FecB Genotypes.

Chen S(1), Guo X(1)(2), He X(1), Di R(1), Zhang X(2), Zhang J(2), Wang X(1), Chu 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry 
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy 
of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Tianjin Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Tianjin, China.

The pituitary is a remarkably dynamic organ with roles in hormone (FSH and LH) 
synthesis and secretion. In animals with the FecB (fecundity Booroola) mutation, 
the pituitary experiences hormone fluctuations during the follicular-luteal 
transition, which is implicated in the expression and regulation of many genes 
and regulators. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are a novel type of regulatory 
factors for the reproductive process. Nevertheless, the expression patterns of 
lncRNAs and their roles in FecB-mediated follicular development and ovulation 
remain obscure. Thus, we profiled the pituitary transcriptome during the 
follicular (F, 45 h after evacuation vaginal sponges) and luteal (L, 216 h after 
evacuation vaginal sponges) phases in FecB-mutant homozygous (BB) and wild-type 
(WW) Small Tail Han sheep. We identified 78 differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs) and 41 differentially expressed lncRNAs (DELs) between BB_F and BB_L, 32 
DEGs and 26 DELs between BB_F and WW_F, 16 DEGs and 29 DELs between BB_L and 
WW_L, and 50 DEGs and 18 DELs between WW_F and WW_L. The results of real-time 
quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) correlated well with the transcriptome data. In both 
the follicular and luteal phases, DEGs (GRID2, glutamate ionotropic receptor 
delta type subunit 2; ST14, ST14 transmembrane serine protease matriptase) were 
enriched in hormone synthesis, secretion, and action. MSTRG.47470 and 
MSTRG.101530 were the trans-regulated elements of ID1 (inhibitor of DNA binding 
3, HLH protein) and the DEG ID3 (inhibitor of DNA binding 3, HLH protein), and 
EEF2 (eukaryotic translation elongation factor 2), respectively; these factors 
might be involved in melatonin and peptide hormone secretion. In the 
FecB-mediated follicular phase, MSTRG.125392 targeted seizure-related 6 homolog 
like (SEZ6L), and MSTRG.125394 and MSTRG.83276 targeted the DEG KCNQ3 (potassium 
voltage-gated channel subfamily Q member 3) in cis, while MSTRG.55861 targeted 
FKBP4 (FKBP prolyl isomerase 4) in trans. In the FecB-mediated luteal phase, 
LOC105613905, MSTRG.81536, and MSTRG.150434 modulated TGFB1, SMAD3, OXT, 
respectively, in trans. We postulated that the FecB mutation in pituitary tissue 
elevated the expression of certain genes associated with pituitary development 
and hormone secretion. Furthermore, this study provides new insights into how 
the pituitary regulates follicular development and ovulation, illustrated by the 
effect of the FecB mutation.

Copyright Â© 2022 Chen, Guo, He, Di, Zhang, Zhang, Wang and Chu.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.789564
PMCID: PMC8844552
PMID: 35178025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.