1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2022 May;41(5):713-721. doi: 
10.1007/s10096-022-04423-6. Epub 2022 Feb 21.

Risk factors for antibiotic resistance and mortality in patients with 
bloodstream infection of Escherichia coli.

Zhao S(1), Wu Y(2), Dai Z(1), Chen Y(1), Zhou X(3), Zhao J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Lanxi Branch (Lanxi People's 
Hospital), Lanxi, 321100, China.
(2)Emergency Department, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Lanxi Branch (Lanxi People's Hospital), Lanxi, 321100, 
China.
(3)Bacterium Room, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School 
of Medicine, Lanxi Branch (Lanxi People's Hospital), Lanxi, 321100, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Zhejiang Medical & 
Health Group Hangzhou Hospital, 1 Banshan Road, Hangzhou, 310022, China. 
zhaojun_hangzhou@sina.com.

This study aimed to investigate the risk factors for bloodstream infection (BSI) 
caused by extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Escherichia coli (E. 
coli) and related mortality. The clinical data of 388 patients with E. coli BSI 
were analyzed. Blood cultures were performed and the antimicrobial 
susceptibility profiles of the resulting isolates were determined. Four 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (rs231775, rs12343816, rs16944, and rs2233406) 
were genotyped using real-time PCR. ESBL were detected by disk diffusion 
confirmatory testing. Univariate and multivariate regression analyses were 
applied to identify the risk factors for ESBL-producing isolates and the 
BSI-induced mortality. The prevalence of ESBL-producing E. coli in BSI patients 
was 40.98%. E. coli isolates were commonly susceptible to carbapenem and 
β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations. The major ESBL genes were CTX-M-14, 
CTX-M-55, CTX-M-15, and CTX-M-27. The proportion of CTX-M-15 was significantly 
higher in patients over 70 years and those receiving stomach tube 
catheterization. Nosocomial infection, biliary tract infection, stomach tube 
catheterization, and previous cephalosporin administration were independent risk 
factors for ESBL-producing isolates. ESBL positivity, nosocomial infection, and 
cancer were independent risk factors of mortality. Two genetic polymorphisms 
associated with inflammation activation, rs231775 A allele and rs2233406 T 
allele, significantly increased the mortality risk of E. coli BSI with a risk 
ratio (95% CI) of 1.93 (1.05-3.55) and 4.38 (2.07-9.29), respectively. For 
patients with nosocomial infection, biliary tract infection, and cancer, the 
monitor of BSI and antibiotic susceptibility should be enhanced. The invasive 
procedures should be minimized. rs231775 and rs2233406 are promising prognostic 
markers for E. coli BSI patients.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-022-04423-6
PMID: 35190911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]