1. Biomedicines. 2022 Jan 26;10(2):276. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10020276.

Genetic Complementation of ATP Synthase Deficiency Due to Dysfunction of TMEM70 
Assembly Factor in Rat.

Marković A(1)(2), Tauchmannová K(1), Šimáková M(1), Mlejnek P(1), Kaplanová 
V(1), Pecina P(1), Pecinová A(1), Papoušek F(1), Liška F(1)(3), Šilhavý J(1), 
Mikešová J(1), Neckář J(1), Houštěk J(1), Pravenec M(1)(3), Mráček T(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Vídeňská 1083, 142 20 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, Charles University, 128 00 Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University and General University Hospital, 128 00 Prague, Czech Republic.

Mutations of the TMEM70 gene disrupt the biogenesis of the ATP synthase and 
represent the most frequent cause of autosomal recessive 
encephalo-cardio-myopathy with neonatal onset. Patient tissues show isolated 
defects in the ATP synthase, leading to the impaired mitochondrial synthesis of 
ATP and insufficient energy provision. In the current study, we tested the 
efficiency of gene complementation by using a transgenic rescue approach in 
spontaneously hypertensive rats with the targeted Tmem70 gene (SHR-Tmem70ko/ko), 
which leads to embryonic lethality. We generated SHR-Tmem70ko/ko knockout rats 
expressing the Tmem70 wild-type transgene (SHR-Tmem70ko/ko,tg/tg) under the 
control of the EF-1α universal promoter. Transgenic rescue resulted in viable 
animals that showed the variable expression of the Tmem70 transgene across the 
range of tissues and only minor differences in terms of the growth parameters. 
The TMEM70 protein was restored to 16-49% of the controls in the liver and 
heart, which was sufficient for the full biochemical complementation of ATP 
synthase biogenesis as well as for mitochondrial energetic function in the 
liver. In the heart, we observed partial biochemical complementation, especially 
in SHR-Tmem70ko/ko,tg/0 hemizygotes. As a result, this led to a minor impairment 
in left ventricle function. Overall, the transgenic rescue of Tmem70 in 
SHR-Tmem70ko/ko knockout rats resulted in the efficient complementation of ATP 
synthase deficiency and thus in the successful genetic treatment of an otherwise 
fatal mitochondrial disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10020276
PMCID: PMC8869460
PMID: 35203486

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.