1. Exp Eye Res. 2022 Aug;221:108974. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2022.108974. Epub 2022
Feb  21.

Alzheimer's disease amyloid-β pathology in the lens of the eye.

Moncaster JA(1), Moir RD(2), Burton MA(3), Chadwick O(2), Minaeva O(1), Alvarez 
VE(4), Ericsson M(5), Clark JI(6), McKee AC(4), Tanzi RE(2), Goldstein LE(7).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Aging and Development Laboratory, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, 02118, USA; Boston University Alzheimer's Disease Research 
Center, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 East Concord Street, B-7800 
Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(2)Genetics and Aging Research Unit, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, 02129, USA.
(3)Molecular Aging and Development Laboratory, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(4)Boston University Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Boston University 
School of Medicine, 72 East Concord Street, B-7800 Boston, MA, 02118, USA; Edith 
Nourse Rogers Memorial Veterans' Hospital, Bedford, MA, 01730, USA.
(5)Electron Microscopy Facility, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(6)Departments of Biological Structure and Ophthalmology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA.
(7)Molecular Aging and Development Laboratory, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, 02118, USA; Boston University Alzheimer's Disease Research 
Center, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 East Concord Street, B-7800 
Boston, MA, 02118, USA. Electronic address: lgold@bu.edu.

Neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD) include pathogenic 
accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides and age-dependent formation of amyloid 
plaques in the brain. AD-associated Aβ neuropathology begins decades before 
onset of cognitive symptoms and slowly progresses over the course of the 
disease. We previously reported discovery of Aβ deposition, β-amyloidopathy, and 
co-localizing supranuclear cataracts (SNC) in lenses from people with AD, but 
not other neurodegenerative disorders or normal aging. We confirmed 
AD-associated Aβ molecular pathology in the lens by immunohistopathology, 
amyloid histochemistry, immunoblot analysis, epitope mapping, immunogold 
electron microscopy, quantitative immunoassays, and tryptic digest mass 
spectrometry peptide sequencing. Ultrastructural analysis revealed that 
AD-associated Aβ deposits in AD lenses localize as electron-dense 
microaggregates in the cytoplasm of supranuclear (deep cortex) fiber cells. 
These Aβ microaggregates also contain αB-crystallin and scatter light, thus 
linking Aβ pathology and SNC phenotype expression in the lenses of people with 
AD. Subsequent research identified Aβ lens pathology as the molecular origin of 
the distinctive cataracts associated with Down syndrome (DS, trisomy 21), a 
chromosomal disorder invariantly associated with early-onset Aβ accumulation and 
Aβ amyloidopathy in the brain. Investigation of 1249 participants in the 
Framingham Eye Study found that AD-associated quantitative traits in brain and 
lens are co-heritable. Moreover, AD-associated lens traits preceded MRI brain 
traits and cognitive deficits by a decade or more and predicted future AD. A 
genome-wide association study of bivariate outcomes in the same subjects 
identified a new AD risk factor locus in the CTNND2 gene encoding δ-catenin, a 
protein that modulates Aβ production in brain and lens. Here we report 
identification of AD-related human Aβ (hAβ) lens pathology and age-dependent SNC 
phenotype expression in the Tg2576 transgenic mouse model of AD. Tg2576 mice 
express Swedish mutant human amyloid precursor protein (APP-Swe), accumulate hAβ 
peptides and amyloid pathology in the brain, and exhibit cognitive deficits that 
slowly progress with increasing age. We found that Tg2576 trangenic (Tg+) mice, 
but not non-transgenic (Tg-) control mice, also express human APP, accumulate 
hAβ peptides, and develop hAβ molecular and ultrastructural pathologies in the 
lens. Tg2576 Tg+ mice exhibit age-dependent Aβ supranuclear lens opacification 
that recapitulates lens pathology and SNC phenotype expression in human AD. In 
addition, we detected hAβ in conditioned medium from lens explant cultures 
prepared from Tg+ mice, but not Tg- control mice, a finding consistent with 
constitutive hAβ generation in the lens. In vitro studies showed that hAβ 
promoted mouse lens protein aggregation detected by quasi-elastic light 
scattering (QLS) spectroscopy. These results support mechanistic 
(genotype-phenotype) linkage between Aβ pathology and AD-related phenotypes in 
lens and brain. Collectively, our findings identify Aβ pathology as the shared 
molecular etiology of two age-dependent AD-related cataracts associated with two 
human diseases (AD, DS) and homologous murine cataracts in the Tg2576 transgenic 
mouse model of AD. These results represent the first evidence of AD-related Aβ 
pathology outside the brain and point to lens Aβ as an optically-accessible AD 
biomarker for early detection and longitudinal monitoring of this devastating 
neurodegenerative disease.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2022.108974
PMCID: PMC9873124
PMID: 35202705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]