1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2022 Jun;23(6):407-427. doi:
10.1038/s41580-022-00452-3.  Epub 2022 Feb 28.

Human topoisomerases and their roles in genome stability and organization.

Pommier Y(1), Nussenzweig A(2), Takeda S(3), Austin C(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Developmental Therapeutics Branch, 
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. 
pommier@nih.gov.
(2)Laboratory of Genomic Integrity, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Radiation Genetics, Medical School, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(4)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Human topoisomerases comprise a family of six enzymes: two type IB (TOP1 and 
mitochondrial TOP1 (TOP1MT), two type IIA (TOP2A and TOP2B) and two type IA 
(TOP3A and TOP3B) topoisomerases. In this Review, we discuss their biochemistry 
and their roles in transcription, DNA replication and chromatin remodelling, and 
highlight the recent progress made in understanding TOP3A and TOP3B. Because of 
recent advances in elucidating the high-order organization of the genome through 
chromatin loops and topologically associating domains (TADs), we integrate the 
functions of topoisomerases with genome organization. We also discuss the 
physiological and pathological formation of irreversible topoisomerase cleavage 
complexes (TOPccs) as they generate topoisomerase DNA-protein crosslinks 
(TOP-DPCs) coupled with DNA breaks. We discuss the expanding number of redundant 
pathways that repair TOP-DPCs, and the defects in those pathways, which are 
increasingly recognized as source of genomic damage leading to neurological 
diseases and cancer.

Â© 2022. This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the 
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41580-022-00452-3
PMCID: PMC8883456
PMID: 35228717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.