1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Healthc Eng. 2022 Feb 16;2022:7414165. doi: 10.1155/2022/7414165. eCollection 
2022.

Evaluation of Fundus Blood Flow Perfusion in Patients with Diabetic Retinopathy 
after PPV with Fundus Color Doppler Based on Big Data Mining.

Wang X(1), Li F(2), Zhao W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Lianshui County People's Hospital, Huai'an 
223400, Jiangsu Province, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, The Affiliated Huai'an Hospital of Xuzhou 
Medical University, Huai'an Second People's Hospital, Huai'an 223001, Jiangsu 
Province, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Hongze District People's Hospital, Huai'an 
223100, Jiangsu Province, China.

Retraction in
    J Healthc Eng. 2023 Jul 12;2023:9867807. doi: 10.1155/2023/9867807.

In this paper, we have carefully investigated the clinical phenotype and 
genotype of patients with Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) with diabetes 
mellitus as the main manifestation. Retinal vessel segmentation is an important 
tool for the detection of many eye diseases and plays an important role in the 
automated screening system for retinal diseases. A segmentation algorithm based 
on a multiscale attentional resolution network is proposed to address the 
problem of insufficient segmentation of small vessels and pathological 
missegmentation in existing methods. The network is based on the encoder-decoder 
architecture, and the attention residual block is introduced in the submodule to 
enhance the feature propagation ability and reduce the impact of uneven 
illumination and low contrast on the model. The jump connection is added between 
the encoder and decoder, and the traditional pooling layer is removed to retain 
sufficient vascular detail information. Two multiscale feature fusion methods, 
parallel multibranch structure, and spatial pyramid pooling are used to achieve 
feature extraction under different sensory fields. We collected the clinical 
data, laboratory tests, and imaging examinations of JBS patients, extracted the 
genomic DNA of relevant family members, and validated them by whole-exome 
sequencing and Sanger sequencing. The patient had diabetes mellitus as the main 
manifestation, with widened eye spacing, low flat nasal root, hypoplastic nasal 
wing, and low hairline deformities. Genetic testing confirmed the presence of a 
c.4463 T > C (p.Ile1488Thr) pure missense mutation in the UBR1 gene, which was a 
novel mutation locus, and pathogenicity analysis indicated that the locus was 
pathogenic. This patient carries a new UBR1 gene c.4463 T > C pure mutation, 
which improves the clinical understanding of the clinical phenotypic spectrum of 
JBS and broadens the genetic spectrum of the UBR1 gene. The experimental results 
showed that the method achieved 83.26% and 82.56% F1 values on CHASEDB1 and 
STARE standard sets, respectively, and 83.51% and 81.20% sensitivity, 
respectively, and its performance was better than the current mainstream 
methods.

Copyright © 2022 Xin Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/7414165
PMCID: PMC8865997
PMID: 35222891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.