1. BMC Nephrol. 2022 Mar 4;23(1):87. doi: 10.1186/s12882-022-02710-0.

A case report of mitochondrial myopathy with membranous nephropathy.

Cai M(1), Yu Q(1), Bao J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, No. 100, Haining Road, Shanghai, 200080, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, No. 100, Haining Road, Shanghai, 200080, People's 
Republic of China. bamboobao@163.com.

BACKGROUND: MtDNA 3243 A > G mutation leads to mitochondrial myopathies with 
predominant hyperlactatemia. Given the ubiquitous nature of mitochondria, 
cellular dysfunction can also appear in tissues with high metabolic turnover; 
thus, there can be cardiac, digestive, ophthalmologic, and kidney complications. 
MtDNA 3243 A > G mutation has been shown to be with renal involvement in the 
previous cases of which are FSGS and tubularinterstitial nephritis.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of patient who had the mitochondrial 
myopathy with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 3243 A > G mutation diagnosed membranous 
nephropathy by kidney biopsy, which was never reported before. Our patient was 
found to have chest tightness and shortness of breath with hyperlactatemia and 
was diagnosed mitochondrial myopathy with mtDNA 3243 A > G mutation 11 months 
ago. Acute kidney injury occurred with hyperuricemia (urid acid 1011umol/L) 
which may be associated with mtDNA mutation. Since then, persistent proteinuria 
was also found and the 24-h urine protein quantitative was around 2 g. Kidney 
biopsy was performed and the result was consistent with membranous nephropathy, 
with abnormal mitochondria seen in renal tubules by electron microscopy.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with mitochondrial myopathy could also have renal 
presentation of membranous nephropathy. Patients with mtDNA mutation may have 
various renal manifestations so that more attention should be paid on their 
kidneys.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-022-02710-0
PMCID: PMC8895630
PMID: 35246049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.