1. Transl Neurodegener. 2022 Mar 7;11(1):14. doi: 10.1186/s40035-022-00288-z.

Long-term hyperglycemia aggravates α-synuclein aggregation and dopaminergic 
neuronal loss in a Parkinson's disease mouse model.

Lv YQ(#)(1), Yuan L(#)(1), Sun Y(1), Dou HW(1), Su JH(1), Hou ZP(1), Li 
JY(2)(3), Li W(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Research in Parkinson's Disease and Related Disorders, Health 
Sciences Institute, China Medical University, Shenyang, 110122, China.
(2)Laboratory of Research in Parkinson's Disease and Related Disorders, Health 
Sciences Institute, China Medical University, Shenyang, 110122, China. 
lijiayi@cmu.edu.cn.
(3)Neural Plasticity and Repair Unit, Department of Experimental Medical 
Sciences, Lund University, 221 84, Lund, Sweden. lijiayi@cmu.edu.cn.
(4)Laboratory of Research in Parkinson's Disease and Related Disorders, Health 
Sciences Institute, China Medical University, Shenyang, 110122, China. 
Wli87@cmu.edu.cn.
(5)Neural Plasticity and Repair Unit, Department of Experimental Medical 
Sciences, Lund University, 221 84, Lund, Sweden. Wli87@cmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Growing evidence suggests an association between Parkinson's disease 
(PD) and diabetes mellitus (DM). At the cellular level, long-term elevated 
levels of glucose have been shown to lead to nigrostriatal degeneration in PD 
models. However, the underlying mechanism is still unclear. Previously, we have 
elucidated the potential of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in facilitating PD 
progression, involving aggregation of both alpha-synuclein (α-syn) and islet 
amyloid polypeptide in the pancreatic and brain tissues. However, due to the 
complicated effect of insulin resistance on PD onset, the actual mechanism of 
hyperglycemia-induced dopaminergic degeneration remains unknown.
METHODS: We employed the type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) model induced by 
streptozotocin (STZ) injection in a transgenic mouse line (BAC-α-syn-GFP) 
overexpressing human α-syn, to investigate the direct effect of elevated blood 
glucose on nigrostriatal degeneration.
RESULTS: STZ treatment induced more severe pathological alterations in the 
pancreatic islets and T1DM symptoms in α-syn-overexpressing mice than in 
wild-type mice, at one month and three months after STZ injections. Behavioral 
tests evaluating motor performance confirmed the nigrostriatal degeneration. 
Furthermore, there was a marked decrease in dopaminergic profiles and an 
increase of α-syn accumulation and Serine 129 (S129) phosphorylation in 
STZ-treated α-syn mice compared with the vehicle-treated mice. In addition, more 
severe neuroinflammation was observed in the brains of the STZ-treated α-syn 
mice.
CONCLUSION: Our results solidify the potential link between DM and PD, providing 
insights into how hyperglycemia induces nigrostriatal degeneration and 
contributes to pathogenic mechanisms in PD.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40035-022-00288-z
PMCID: PMC8900445
PMID: 35255986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.