1. Pharm Res. 2022 Dec;39(12):3123-3136. doi: 10.1007/s11095-022-03212-2. Epub
2022  Mar 9.

Towards a better understanding of the role of stabilizers in QESD 
crystallizations.

Hansen J(1), Kleinebudde P(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, Heinrich Heine Universitaet 
Duesseldorf, Universitaetsstrasse 1, 40225, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, Heinrich Heine Universitaet 
Duesseldorf, Universitaetsstrasse 1, 40225, Duesseldorf, Germany. 
kleinebudde@hhu.de.

Quasi-emulsion solvent-diffusion crystallization (QESD) is a type of spherical 
crystallization which can be used as a particle design method to improve the 
flowability and micromeritic properties of drugs or excipients. Spherical 
particles are generated by dispersing a solvent phase in an antisolvent so that 
a transient emulsion is formed. Within the droplets the material can crystallize 
and agglomerate into spherical, hollow particles. Surfactants, such as 
surface-active polymers like hypromellose, are often required to stabilize the 
quasi-emulsion. To gain further understanding for the role of the stabilizer, a 
new screening-method was developed which compared different surface active 
polymers in solution at similar dynamic viscosities rather than at a set 
concentration. The dynamic viscosities of a low-viscosity grade hypromellose 
solution used in the previous publications describing the QESD crystallization 
of metformin hydrochloride by the authors was used as a target value. QESD 
crystallizations of metformin hydrochloride (MF) and celecoxib showed that the 
type of stabilizer and whether it is dissolved in the solvent or antisolvent has 
an effect on the agglomerates. For MF, the type of hypromellose used can have a 
significant influence on the properties of the agglomerates. More polymers could 
be used to stabilize the transient emulsion of celecoxib than previously found 
in literature. Furthermore, QESD crystallizations seem to be more robust when 
the stabilizer is dissolved in the antisolvent, however this can lead to a 
reduced drug load of the agglomerates.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11095-022-03212-2
PMCID: PMC9780136
PMID: 35266086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state no conflict of interest.