1. Nutrients. 2022 Jan 28;14(3):575. doi: 10.3390/nu14030575.

Identification of Inhibitory Activities of Dietary Flavonoids against URAT1, a 
Renal Urate Re-Absorber: In Vitro Screening and Fractional Approach Focused on 
Rooibos Leaves.

Toyoda Y(1), Takada T(1), Saito H(1)(2), Hirata H(2), Ota-Kontani A(2), Tsuchiya 
Y(2), Suzuki H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 Hongo, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(2)Frontier Laboratories for Value Creation, Sapporo Holdings Ltd., 10 Okatome, 
Yaizu, Shizuoka 425-0013, Japan.

Hyperuricemia, a lifestyle-related disease characterized by elevated serum urate 
levels, is the main risk factor for gout; therefore, the serum urate-lowering 
effects of human diets or dietary ingredients have attracted widespread 
interest. As Urate transporter 1 (URAT1) governs most urate reabsorption from 
primary urine into blood, URAT1 inhibition helps decrease serum urate levels by 
increasing the net renal urate excretion. In this study, we used a cell-based 
urate transport assay to investigate the URAT1-inhibitory effects of 162 
extracts of plant materials consumed by humans. Among these, we focused on 
Aspalathus linearis, the source of rooibos tea, to explore its active 
ingredients. Using liquid-liquid extraction with subsequent column 
chromatography, as well as spectrometric analyses for chemical characterization, 
we identified quercetin as a URAT1 inhibitor. We also investigated the 
URAT1-inhibitory activities of 23 dietary ingredients including nine flavanols, 
two flavanonols, two flavones, two isoflavonoids, eight chalcones, and a 
coumarin. Among the tested authentic chemicals, fisetin and quercetin showed the 
strongest and second-strongest URAT1-inhibitory activities, with IC50 values of 
7.5 and 12.6 Î¼M, respectively. Although these effects of phytochemicals should 
be investigated further in human studies, our findings may provide new clues for 
using nutraceuticals to promote health.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14030575
PMCID: PMC8839210
PMID: 35276934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.S. (Hiroki Saito), H.H., A.O.-K. (Ami 
Ota-Kontani), and Y.T. (Youichi Tsuchiya) were the employees of Sapporo Holdings 
Ltd.; Y.T. (Yu Toyoda), T.T., H.S. (Hiroki Saito), H.H., Ami Ota-Kontani, and 
Hiroshi Suzuki have a patent-pending related to the work reported in this 
article. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the 
decision to publish the results.