1. Am Heart J. 2022 Jun;248:84-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2022.02.001. Epub 2022 Mar 
10.

Prognostic value of echocardiography for heart failure and death in adults with 
chronic kidney disease.

Fitzpatrick JK(1), Ambrosy AP(2), Parikh RV(3), Tan TC(3), Bansal N(4), Go 
AS(5); CRIC Study Investigators,.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Kaiser Permanente San Francisco Medical Center, San 
Francisco, CA USA.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Kaiser Permanente San Francisco Medical Center, San 
Francisco, CA USA; Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, 
Oakland, CA USA.
(3)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland, CA USA.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA USA.
(5)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland, CA USA; 
Department of Health Systems Science, Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School 
of Medicine, Pasadena, CA USA; Departments of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and 
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA USA; Department of 
Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA USA.

BACKGROUND: Adults with chronic kidney disease (CKD) are at increased risk of 
heart failure (HF) morbidity and mortality. Despite well-characterized 
abnormalities in cardiac structure in CKD, it remains unclear how to optimally 
leverage echocardiography to risk stratify CKD patients.
METHODS: We evaluated associations between echocardiographic parameters and risk 
of HF hospitalization and death using Cox proportional hazard models and forward 
selection with integrated discrimination improvement (IDI).
RESULTS: The study included 3,505 participants enrolled in the Chronic Renal 
Insufficiency Cohort (CRIC) study. Mean age was 59 ± 11 years, HF prevalence was 
10%, and mean left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (LVEF) was 54 ± 9%. During 
median 11 (interquartile range: 8-12) years of follow-up, event rates per 
100-person years for HF hospitalizations and death, respectively, were 9.4 (95% 
Confidence Interval [CI]: 7.9-11.3) and 8.9 (95% CI: 7.6-10.5) for participants 
with LVEF <40%, 3.5 (95% CI: 3.0-4.2) and 4.6 (95% CI: 4.0-5.2) for patients 
with LVEF 40% to 49%, and 1.9 (95% CI: 1.7-2.1) and 3.1 (95% CI: 2.9-3.3) for 
patients with LVEF >50%. The rate of HF hospitalizations and deaths increased 
with lower eGFR across all LVEF categories. LV mass index, LVEF, and LV geometry 
had the strongest association with outcomes but provided modest incremental 
prognostic value to a baseline clinical model (IDI = 0.14 and ΔAUC = 0.017 for 
HF hospitalization, IDI = 0.12 and ΔAUC = 0.008 for death).
CONCLUSIONS: Baseline echocardiographic parameters are independently associated 
with increased risk of subsequent HF morbidity and mortality but provide only 
marginal incremental prognostic utility beyond clinical characteristics in the 
setting of CKD.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ahj.2022.02.001
PMCID: PMC9064944
PMID: 35278374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures APA is supported by a Mentored 
Patient-Oriented Research Career Development Award (K23HL150159) through the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, has received relevant research 
support through grants to his institution from Amarin Pharma, Inc., Abbott, and 
Novartis, and modest reimbursement for travel from Novartis. ASG has received 
relevant research support through grants to his institution from the National 
Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases; National Heart, Lung and 
Blood Institute; National Institute on Aging; Amarin Pharma, Inc.; Novartis; 
Janssen Research & Development; and CSL Behring. All other authors have no 
relevant conflicts of interest to declare.