1. Blood. 2022 Dec 8;140(23):2429-2442. doi: 10.1182/blood.2021014749.

Exosomes in multiple myeloma: from bench to bedside.

Menu E, Vanderkerken K.

Multiple myeloma (MM) remains an incurable plasma cell malignancy that develops 
in the bone marrow (BM). This BM is partially responsible for protecting the MM 
cells against current standard-of-care therapies and for accommodating 
MM-related symptoms such as bone resorption and immune suppression. Increasing 
evidence has implicated extracellular vesicles (EV), including exosomes in the 
different processes within the BM. Exosomes are <150-nm-sized vesicles secreted 
by different cell types including MM cells. These vesicles contain protein and 
RNA cargo that they deliver to the recipient cell. In this way, they have been 
implicated in MM-related processes including osteolysis, angiogenesis, immune 
suppression, and drug resistance. Targeting exosome secretion could therefore 
potentially block these different processes. In this review, we will summarize 
the current findings of exosome-related processes in the BM and describe not 
only the current treatment strategies to counter them but also how exosomes can 
be harnessed to deliver toxic payloads. Finally, an overview of the different 
clinical studies that investigate EV cargo as potential MM biomarkers in liquid 
biopsies will be discussed.

© 2022 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2021014749
PMCID: PMC10653045
PMID: 35271699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.