1. Nat Med. 2022 Apr;28(4):798-808. doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01718-1. Epub 2022
Mar  14.

Pancreatic islet cryopreservation by vitrification achieves high viability, 
function, recovery and clinical scalability for transplantation.

Zhan L(#)(1), Rao JS(#)(2)(3), Sethia N(4), Slama MQ(5), Han Z(1), Tobolt D(2), 
Etheridge M(1), Peterson QP(5)(6), Dutcher CS(1)(4), Bischof JC(1)(7), Finger 
EB(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
MN, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(3)Schulze Diabetes Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(5)Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN, USA.
(6)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
MN, USA.
(8)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. 
efinger@umn.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Med. 2022 May 13;3(5):279-280. doi: 10.1016/j.medj.2022.04.004.

Pancreatic islet transplantation can cure diabetes but requires accessible, 
high-quality islets in sufficient quantities. Cryopreservation could solve islet 
supply chain challenges by enabling quality-controlled banking and pooling of 
donor islets. Unfortunately, cryopreservation has not succeeded in this 
objective, as it must simultaneously provide high recovery, viability, function 
and scalability. Here, we achieve this goal in mouse, porcine, human and human 
stem cell (SC)-derived beta cell (SC-beta) islets by comprehensive optimization 
of cryoprotectant agent (CPA) composition, CPA loading and unloading conditions 
and methods for vitrification and rewarming (VR). Post-VR islet viability, 
relative to control, was 90.5% for mouse, 92.1% for SC-beta, 87.2% for porcine 
and 87.4% for human islets, and it remained unchanged for at least 9 months of 
cryogenic storage. VR islets had normal macroscopic, microscopic, and 
ultrastructural morphology. Mitochondrial membrane potential and adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) levels were slightly reduced, but all other measures of 
cellular respiration, including oxygen consumption rate (OCR) to produce ATP, 
were unchanged. VR islets had normal glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) 
function in vitro and in vivo. Porcine and SC-beta islets made insulin in 
xenotransplant models, and mouse islets tested in a marginal mass syngeneic 
transplant model cured diabetes in 92% of recipients within 24-48 h after 
transplant. Excellent glycemic control was seen for 150 days. Finally, our 
approach processed 2,500 islets with >95% islets recovery at >89% post-thaw 
viability and can readily be scaled up for higher throughput. These results 
suggest that cryopreservation can now be used to supply needed islets for 
improved transplantation outcomes that cure diabetes.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-022-01718-1
PMCID: PMC9018423
PMID: 35288694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.Z., J.S.R., Z.H., N.S., M.E., C.S.D., J.C.B. 
and E.B.F. have filed a provisional patent application (serial no. 63/270,192) 
relevant to this study.