1. Cell Chem Biol. 2022 Jun 16;29(6):1037-1045.e4. doi: 
10.1016/j.chembiol.2022.02.006. Epub 2022 Mar 15.

Rheb regulates nuclear mTORC1 activity independent of farnesylation.

Zhong Y(1), Zhou X(2), Guan KL(3), Zhang J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA; Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
jzhang32@health.ucsd.edu.

The small GTPase Ras homolog enriched in brain (Rheb) plays a critical role in 
activating the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1), a signaling 
hub that regulates various cellular functions. We recently observed nuclear 
mTORC1 activity, raising an intriguing question as to how Rheb, which is known 
to be farnesylated and localized to intracellular membranes, regulates nuclear 
mTORC1. In this study, we found that active Rheb is present in the nucleus and 
required for nuclear mTORC1 activity. We showed that inhibition of 
farnesyltransferase reduced cytosolic, but not nuclear, mTORC1 activity. 
Furthermore, a farnesylation-deficient Rheb mutant, with preferential nuclear 
localization and specific lysosome tethering, enables nuclear and cytosolic 
mTORC1 activities, respectively. These data suggest that non-farnesylated Rheb 
is capable of interacting with and activating mTORC1, providing mechanistic 
insights into the molecular functioning of Rheb as well as regulation of the 
recently observed, active pool of nuclear mTORC1.

Copyright Â© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2022.02.006
PMCID: PMC9667991
PMID: 35294906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.