1. Mitochondrion. 2022 May;64:59-72. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2022.03.001. Epub 2022
Mar  17.

Human clinical mutations in mitochondrially encoded subunits of Complex I can be 
successfully modeled in E. coli.

Zhang F(1), Dang QL(1), Vik SB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX 
75275-0376, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX 
75275-0376, USA. Electronic address: svik@smu.edu.

Respiratory Complex I is the site of a large fraction of the mutations that 
appear to cause mitochondrial disease. Seven of its subunits are mitochondrially 
encoded, and therefore, such mutants are particularly difficult to construct in 
cell-culture model systems. We have selected 13 human clinical mutations found 
in ND2, ND3, ND4, ND4L, ND5 and ND6 that are generally found at subunit 
interfaces, and not in critical residues. These mutations have been modeled in 
E. coli subunits of Complex I, nuoN, nuoA, nuoM, nuoK, nuoL, and nuoJ, 
respectively. All mutants were expressed from a plasmid encoding the entire nuo 
operon, and membrane vesicles were analyzed for deamino-NADH oxidase activity, 
and proton translocation activity. ND5 mutants were also analyzed using a 
time-delayed expression system, recently described by this lab. Other mutants 
were analyzed for the ability to associate in subcomplexes, after expression of 
subsets of the genes. For most mutants there was a positive correlation between 
those that were previously determined to be pathogenic, or likely to be 
pathogenic, and those that we found with compromised Complex I activity or 
subunit interactions in E. coli. In conclusion, this approach provides another 
way to explore the deleterious effects of human mitochondrial mutations, and it 
can contribute to molecular understanding of such mutations.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mito.2022.03.001
PMCID: PMC9035099
PMID: 35306226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]