1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2022 Apr 29;50(2):773-782. doi: 10.1042/BST20190062.

Stop CRYing! Inhibition of cryptochrome function by small proteins.

Kruusvee V(1)(2), Toft AM(1), Aguida B(3), Ahmad M(3), Wenkel S(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 
Thorvaldsensvej 40, 1871 Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(2)Copenhagen Plant Science Centre, University of Copenhagen, Thorvaldsensvej 
40, 1871 Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(3)Sorbonne Universités -CNRS, UMR8256 - IBPS, Photobiology Research Group, 
Paris, France.
(4)NovoCrops Centre, University of Copenhagen, Thorvaldsensvej 40, 1871 
Frederiksberg C, Denmark.

Plants can detect the presence of light using specialised photoreceptor 
proteins. These photoreceptors measure the intensity of light, but they can also 
respond to different spectra of light and thus 'see' different colours. 
Cryptochromes, which are also present in animals, are flavin-based 
photoreceptors that enable plants to detect blue and ultraviolet-A (UV-A) light. 
In Arabidopsis, there are two cryptochromes, CRYPTOCHROME 1 (CRY1) and 
CRYPTOCHROME 2 (CRY2) with known sensory roles. They function in various 
processes such as blue-light mediated inhibition of hypocotyl elongation, 
photoperiodic promotion of floral initiation, cotyledon expansion, anthocyanin 
production, and magnetoreception, to name a few. In the dark, the cryptochromes 
are in an inactive monomeric state and undergo photochemical and conformational 
change in response to illumination. This results in flavin reduction, 
oligomerisation, and the formation of the 'cryptochrome complexome'. Mechanisms 
of cryptochrome activation and signalling have been extensively studied and 
found to be conserved across phylogenetic lines. In this review, we will 
therefore focus on a far lesser-known mechanism of regulation that is unique to 
plant cryptochromes. This involves inhibition of cryptochrome activity by small 
proteins that prevent its dimerisation in response to light. The resulting 
inhibition of function cause profound alterations in economically important 
traits such as plant growth, flowering, and fruit production. This review will 
describe the known mechanisms of cryptochrome activation and signalling in the 
context of their modulation by these endogenous and artificial small inhibitor 
proteins. Promising new applications for biotechnological and agricultural 
applications will be discussed.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BST20190062
PMCID: PMC9162457
PMID: 35311888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.