1. Biomedicines. 2022 Mar 19;10(3):717. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10030717.

Combined HP (13)C Pyruvate and (13)C-Glucose Fluxomic as a Potential Marker of 
Response to Targeted Therapies in YUMM1.7 Melanoma Xenografts.

Farah C(1), Neveu MA(2), Yelek C(1), Bouzin C(3), Gallez B(1)(4), Baurain JF(5), 
Mignion L(1)(4), Jordan BF(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Magnetic Resonance Research Group, Louvain Drug Research 
Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, UCLouvain, B-1200 Brussels, 
Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Tumor Inflammation and Angiogenesis, Department of Oncology, KU 
Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(3)IREC Imaging Platform, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique, 
Université Catholique de Louvain, UCLouvain, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Nuclear and Electron Spin Technologies (NEST) Platform, Louvain Drug Research 
Institute (LDRI), Université catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain), B-1200 Brussels, 
Belgium.
(5)Molecular Imaging and Radiation Oncology (MIRO) Group, Institute de Recherche 
Expérimentale et Clinique (IREC), B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

A vast majority of BRAF V600E mutated melanoma patients will develop resistance 
to combined BRAF/MEK inhibition after initial clinical response. Resistance to 
targeted therapy is described to be accompanied by specific metabolic changes in 
melanoma. The aim of this work was to evaluate metabolic imaging using 13C-MRS 
(Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy) as a marker of response to BRAF/MEK inhibition 
in a syngeneic melanoma model. Tumor growth was significantly delayed in mice 
bearing YUMM1.7 melanoma xenografts treated with the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib, 
and/or with the MEK inhibitor trametinib, in comparison with the control group. 
13C-MRS was performed in vivo after injection of hyperpolarized (HP) 
13C-pyruvate, at baseline and 24 h after treatment, to evaluate dynamic changes 
in pyruvate-lactate exchange. Furthermore, ex vivo 13C-MRS steady state 
metabolic tracing experiments were performed after U-13C-glucose or 
5-13C-glutamine injection, 24 h after treatment. The HP 13C-lactate-to-pyruvate 
ratio was not modified in response to BRAF/MEK inhibition, whereas the 
production of 13C-lactate from 13C-glucose was significantly reduced 24 h after 
treatment with vemurafenib, trametinib, or with the combined inhibitors. 
Conversely, 13C-glutamine metabolism was not modified in response to BRAF/MEK 
inhibition. In conclusion, we identified 13C-glucose fluxomic as a potential 
marker of response to BRAF/MEK inhibition in YUMM1.7 melanoma xenografts.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10030717
PMCID: PMC8945537
PMID: 35327519

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.