1. Brain Sci. 2022 Feb 24;12(3):308. doi: 10.3390/brainsci12030308.

Caloric Restriction Mimetic 2-Deoxyglucose Reduces Inflammatory Signaling in 
Human Astrocytes: Implications for Therapeutic Strategies Targeting 
Neurodegenerative Diseases.

Vallee KJ(1), Fields JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.

Therapeutic interventions are greatly needed for age-related neurodegenerative 
diseases. Astrocytes regulate many aspects of neuronal function including 
bioenergetics and synaptic transmission. Reactive astrocytes are implicated in 
neurodegenerative diseases due to their pro-inflammatory phenotype close 
association with damaged neurons. Thus, strategies to reduce astrocyte 
reactivity may support brain health. Caloric restriction and a ketogenic diet 
limit energy production via glycolysis and promote oxidative phosphorylation, 
which has gained traction as a strategy to improve brain health. However, it is 
unknown how caloric restriction affects astrocyte reactivity in the context of 
neuroinflammation. We investigated how a caloric restriction mimetic and 
glycolysis inhibitor, 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG), affects interleukin 1β-induced 
inflammatory gene expression in human astrocytes. Human astrocyte cultures were 
exposed to 2-DG or vehicle for 24 h and then to recombinant IL-1β for 6 or 24 h 
to analyze mRNA and protein expression, respectively. Gene expression levels of 
proinflammatory genes (complement component 3, IL-1β, IL6, and TNFα) were 
analyzed by real-time PCR, immunoblot, and immunohistochemistry. As expected, 
IL-1β induced elevated levels of proinflammatory genes. 2-DG reversed this 
effect at the mRNA and protein levels without inducing cytotoxicity. 
Collectively, these data suggest that inhibiting glycolysis in human astrocytes 
reduces IL-1β-induced reactivity. This finding may lead to novel therapeutic 
strategies to limit inflammation and enhance bioenergetics toward the goal of 
preventing and treating neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci12030308
PMCID: PMC8945872
PMID: 35326266

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.