1. Pharmaceutics. 2022 Feb 27;14(3):532. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14030532.

CYP1A2 mRNA Expression Rather than Genetic Variants Indicate Hepatic CYP1A2 
Activity.

Fekete F(1)(2), Mangó K(1), Minus A(1), Tóth K(1), Monostory K(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Enzymology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Magyar Tudósok 
2, H-1117 Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Doctoral School of Biology and Institute of Biology, Eötvös Loránd 
University, Pázmány Péter Sétány 1/A, H-1117 Budapest, Hungary.

CYP1A2, one of the most abundant hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes, is involved in 
metabolism of several drugs and carcinogenic compounds. Data on the significance 
of CYP1A2 genetic polymorphisms in enzyme activity are highly inconsistent; 
therefore, the impact of CYP1A2 genetic variants (−3860G>A, −2467delT, −739T>G, 
−163C>A, 2159G>A) on mRNA expression and phenacetin O-dealkylation selective for 
CYP1A2 was investigated in human liver tissues and in psychiatric patients 
belonging to Caucasian populations. CYP1A2*1F, considered to be associated with 
high CYP1A2 inducibility, is generally identified by the presence of −163C>A 
polymorphism; however, we demonstrated that −163C>A existed in several 
haplotypes (CYP1A2*1F, CYP1A2*1L, CYP1A2*1M, CYP1A2*1V, CYP1A2*1W), and 
consequently, CYP1A2*1F was a much rarer allelic variant (0.4%) than reported in 
Caucasian populations. Of note, −163C>A polymorphism was found to result in an 
increase of neither mRNA nor the activity of CYP1A2. Moreover, hepatic CYP1A2 
activity was associated with hepatic or leukocyte mRNA expression rather than 
genetic polymorphisms of CYP1A2. Consideration of non-genetic phenoconverting 
factors (co-medication with CYP1A2-specific inhibitors/inducers, tobacco smoking 
and non-specific factors, including amoxicillin+clavulanic acid therapy or 
chronic alcohol consumption) did not much improve genotype−phenotype estimation. 
In conclusion, CYP1A2-genotyping is inappropriate for the prediction of CYP1A2 
function; however, CYP1A2 mRNA expression in leukocytes can inform about 
patients’ CYP1A2-metabolizing capacity.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics14030532
PMCID: PMC8954692
PMID: 35335907

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.