1. Aging (Albany NY). 2022 Mar 28;14(6):2880-2901. doi: 10.18632/aging.203981.
Epub  2022 Mar 28.

A systematic pan-cancer study demonstrates the oncogenic function of 
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein C.

Pan C(1)(2), Wu Q(1), Feng N(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), National 
"111" Center for Cellular Regulation and Molecular Pharmaceutics, Hubei Key 
Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Hubei Research Center of Food 
Fermentation Engineering and Technology, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan 
430068, China.
(2)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116027, 
China.

Although complex links between heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein C 
(HNRNPC) and numerous types of cancer have been shown in both cell and animal 
models, a comprehensive pan-cancer investigation on the features and activities 
of HNRNPC is still lacking. Based on the Cancer Genome Atlas and Gene Expression 
Omnibus datasets, we investigated the possible oncogenic effects of HNRNPC in 
thirty-three cancers. HNRNPC expression was detected in the majority of cancers, 
and its expression level was shown to be significantly linked with cancer 
patient prognosis. HNRNPC increased the phosphorylation of S220, which was 
detected in various cancers, including ovarian cancer and colon cancer. HNRNPC 
expression was also shown to be related to cancer-associated cell infiltration, 
most notably in uveal melanoma, testicular germ cell tumors, and thymoma. 
Additionally, the signaling pathway for vascular endothelial growth factors and 
RNA transport were implicated in HNRNPC's functioning processes. In short, 
HNRNPC may further influence cancer progression through gene mutation, protein 
phosphorylation, cancer associated fibroblasts infiltration and related 
molecular pathways. This work was intended to provide a relatively thorough 
knowledge of the oncogenic activities of HNRNPC across a variety of tumor types 
by performing a systematic pan-cancer investigation.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.203981
PMCID: PMC9004556
PMID: 35344508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.