1. Int J Biol Sci. 2022 Feb 28;18(5):2132-2145. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.69325. 
eCollection 2022.

The RNF26/CBX7 axis modulates the TNF pathway to promote cell proliferation and 
regulate sensitivity to TKIs in ccRCC.

Liu W(1)(2)(3), Wang H(1)(2)(3), Jian C(1)(2), Li W(1)(2), Ye K(2), Ren J(1)(2), 
Zhu L(1)(2), Wang Y(1), Jin X(1)(2), Yi L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan, 410011, China.
(2)Uro-Oncology Institute of Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410011, 
China.
(3)Hunan Engineering Research Center of Smart and Precise Medicine, Changsha, 
Hunan, 410011, China.

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) accounts for 85% of all malignant renal 
tumors. Currently, the pathogenesis of ccRCC is not fully understood. Chromobox 
(CBX) family proteins are the major subunits of PcG complexes and are implicated 
in regulating mammalian development. The CBX family consists of eight members, 
namely, CBX1-8. Numerous studies have highlighted that each CBX protein exhibits 
distinct functions and prognostic roles in specific cancer types. In this study, 
in silico analysis indicated that CBX7 was downregulated in ccRCC and correlated 
with favorable prognosis in a ccRCC cohort. Subsequent studies showed that CBX7 
inhibited cancer cell proliferation and invasion. Then, we showed that CBX7 
downregulated ETS1 to inactivate the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling 
pathway, which inhibited tumor proliferation and enhanced the sensitivity of 
ccRCC cells to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Moreover, we found that CBX7 
was a bona fide substrate of RNF26. RNF26 promoted the degradation of CBX7 and 
enhanced ccRCC tumor growth. Therefore, our results revealed a novel RNF26/CBX7 
axis that modulates the TNF signaling pathway in ccRCC.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.69325
PMCID: PMC8935234
PMID: 35342353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.