1. ADMET DMPK. 2019 Apr 5;7(2):140-150. doi: 10.5599/admet.632. eCollection 2019.

Molecular docking studies of salubrinal and its analogs as inhibitors of the 
GADD34:PP1 enzyme.

Zadorozhnii PV(1), Pokotylo IO(1), Kiselev VV(1), Okhtina OV(1), Kharchenko 
AV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organic Substances and Pharmaceutical Preparations, Ukrainian 
State University of Chemical Technology, Gagarin Ave., 8, Dnipro 49005, Ukraine.

The phenomenon of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress as a molecular 
pathophysiological process underlies diseases as cancer, diabetes mellitus, 
myocardial infarction, neurodegenerative disorders, diseases of the urinary 
system, disorders associated with bone integrity, etc. To prevent ER stress, 
salubrinal, which is a phosphatase inhibitor of the eukaryotic translation 
initiation factor - GADD34:PP1, is currently being intensively studied. The aim 
of this work is to search for new analogues of this drug using molecular docking 
methods. Optimization of the geometry of the studied structures and molecular 
docking was carried out using the ArgusLab 4.0.1 software package. The 
three-dimensional crystal structure of the GADD34: PP1 enzyme (PDB ID: 4XPN) was 
loaded in the PDB format from the protein molecule data bank. The model of the 
binding site was created on the basis of the phosphoric acid residue (403 PO4). 
The dimensions of the binding site were set manually and were 40.000 Å along the 
X-axis, 40.000 Å - the Y-axis and 40.000 Å - the Z-axis. The docking was done 
with a flexible ligand, and the semi-empirical AScore function was used for the 
scoring procedure. It was shown that for the salubrinal molecule the most 
favorable was the conformation stabilized by the intramolecular hydrogen bond 
formed between the hydrogen atom of the thiourea fragment and the oxygen atom of 
the amide fragment. According to molecular docking data, six compounds from the 
fifty-four analyzed analogues of salubrinal exceed it in the stability of the 
complex formed with GADD34:PP1. The results of this work can be used to create 
new phosphatase inhibitors of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 
GADD34:PP1.

Copyright © 2019 by the authors.

DOI: 10.5599/admet.632
PMCID: PMC8957232
PMID: 35350543

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interests.