1. Front Neurol. 2022 Mar 15;13:844697. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.844697.
eCollection  2022.

Neuroprotective Mechanisms of Glucagon-Like Peptide-1-Based Therapies in 
Ischemic Stroke: An Update Based on Preclinical Research.

Yang X(1), Qiang Q(1), Li N(1), Feng P(2), Wei W(1), Hölscher C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Huadong Hospital Affiliated to Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, China.
(3)Henan University of Chinese Medicine, Academy of Chinese Medical Science, 
Zhengzhou, China.

The public and social health burdens of ischemic stroke have been increasing 
worldwide. Hyperglycemia leads to a greater risk of stroke. This increased risk 
is commonly seen among patients with diabetes and is in connection with worsened 
clinical conditions and higher mortality in patients with acute ischemic stroke 
(AIS). Therapy for stroke focuses mainly on restoring cerebral blood flow (CBF) 
and ameliorating neurological impairment caused by stroke. Although choices of 
stroke treatment remain limited, much advance have been achieved in assisting 
patients in recovering from ischemic stroke, along with progress of 
recanalization therapy through pharmacological and mechanical thrombolysis. 
However, it is still necessary to develop neuroprotective therapies for AIS to 
protect the brain against injury before and during reperfusion, prolong the time 
window for intervention, and consequently improve neurological prognosis. 
Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) are broadly regarded as 
effective drugs in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Preclinical 
data on GLP-1 and GLP-1 RAs have displayed an impressive neuroprotective 
efficacy in stroke, Parkinson's disease (PD), Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and other neurodegenerative diseases. Based 
on the preclinical studies in the past decade, we review recent progress in the 
biological roles of GLP-1 and GLP-1 RAs in ischemic stroke. Emphasis will be 
placed on their neuroprotective effects in experimental models of cerebral 
ischemia stroke at cellular and molecular levels.

Copyright © 2022 Yang, Qiang, Li, Feng, Wei and Hölscher.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.844697
PMCID: PMC8964641
PMID: 35370875

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.