1. J Integr Plant Biol. 2022 Jun;64(6):1168-1180. doi: 10.1111/jipb.13261. Epub 
2022 May 21.

HEXOKINASE1 forms a nuclear complex with the PRC2 subunits CURLY LEAF and 
SWINGER to regulate glucose signaling.

Liu Y(1), Bai Y(1), Li N(1), Li M(1), Liu W(1), Yun DJ(2), Liu B(1), Xu ZY(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of the Ministry of Education (MOE), 
Northeast Normal University, Changchun, 130024, China.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul, 
132-798, South Korea.

The glucose sensor HEXOKINASE1 (HXK1) integrates myriad external and internal 
signals to regulate gene expression and development in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
However, how HXK1 mediates glucose signaling in the nucleus remains unclear. 
Here, using immunoprecipitation-coupled mass spectrometry, we show that two 
catalytic subunits of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2, SWINGER (SWN) and CURLY 
LEAF (CLF), directly interact with catalytically active HXK1 and its inactive 
forms (HXK1G104D and HXK1S177A ) via their evolutionarily conserved SANT 
domains. HXK1, CLF, and SWN target common glucose-responsive genes to regulate 
glucose signaling, as revealed by RNA sequencing. The glucose-insensitive 
phenotypes of the Arabidopsis swn-1 and clf-50 mutants were similar to that of 
hxk1, and genetic analysis revealed that CLF, SWN, and HXK1 function in the same 
genetic pathway. Intriguingly, HXK1 is required for CLF- and SWN-mediated 
histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) deposition and glucose-mediated gene repression. 
Moreover, CLF and SWN affect the recruitment of HXK1 to its target chromatin. 
These findings support a model in which HXK1 and epigenetic modifiers form a 
nuclear complex to cooperatively mediate glucose signaling, thereby affecting 
the histone modification and expression of glucose-regulated genes in plants.

Â© 2022 Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/jipb.13261
PMID: 35394700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]