1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Mar 24;13:866271. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.866271. 
eCollection 2022.

Genome-Wide Approaches to Unravel the Host Factors Involved in Chikungunya Virus 
Replication.

Tanaka A(1), Suzuki Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Research Animal Laboratory and Translational Medicine, Research 
and Development Center, Osaka Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Takatsuki, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Faculty of Medicine, Osaka 
Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Takatsuki, Japan.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV), the causative agent of Chikungunya fever (CHIKVF) 
that is often characterized by fever, headache, rash, and arthralgia, is 
transmitted to humans by Aedes mosquito bites. Although the mortality rate 
associated with CHIKV infection is not very high, CHIKVF has been confirmed in 
more than 40 countries, not only in tropical but also in temperate areas. 
Therefore, CHIKV is a growing major threat to the public health of the world. 
However, a specific drug is not available for CHIKV infection. As demonstrated 
by many studies, the processes completing the replication of CHIKV are assisted 
by many host factors, whereas it has become clear that the host cell possesses 
some factors limiting the virus replication. This evidence will provide us with 
an important clue for the development of pharmacological treatment against 
CHIKVF. In this review, we briefly summarize cellular molecules participating in 
the CHIKV infection, particularly focusing on introducing recent genome-wide 
screen studies that enabled illuminating the virus-host interactions.

Copyright Â© 2022 Tanaka and Suzuki.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.866271
PMCID: PMC8988064
PMID: 35401487

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.