1. Cells. 2022 Apr 5;11(7):1232. doi: 10.3390/cells11071232.

Identification of Transcription Factors Responsible for a Transforming Growth 
Factor-β-Driven Hypertrophy-like Phenotype in Human Osteoarthritic Chondrocytes.

Thielen NGM(1), Neefjes M(1), Vitters EL(1), van Beuningen HM(1), Blom AB(1), 
Koenders MI(1), van Lent PLEM(1), van de Loo FAJ(1), Blaney Davidson EN(1), van 
Caam APM(1), van der Kraan PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Rheumatology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life 
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

During osteoarthritis (OA), hypertrophy-like chondrocytes contribute to the 
disease process. TGF-β's signaling pathways can contribute to a 
hypertrophy(-like) phenotype in chondrocytes, especially at high doses of TGF-β. 
In this study, we examine which transcription factors (TFs) are activated and 
involved in TGF-β-dependent induction of a hypertrophy-like phenotype in human 
OA chondrocytes. We found that TGF-β, at levels found in synovial fluid in OA 
patients, induces hypertrophic differentiation, as characterized by increased 
expression of RUNX2, COL10A1, COL1A1, VEGFA and IHH. Using luciferase-based TF 
activity assays, we observed that the expression of these hypertrophy genes 
positively correlated to SMAD3:4, STAT3 and AP1 activity. Blocking these TFs 
using specific inhibitors for ALK-5-induced SMAD signaling (5 µM SB-505124), 
JAK-STAT signaling (1 µM Tofacitinib) and JNK signaling (10 µM SP-600125) led to 
the striking observation that only SB-505124 repressed the expression of 
hypertrophy factors in TGF-β-stimulated chondrocytes. Therefore, we conclude 
that ALK5 kinase activity is essential for TGF-β-induced expression of crucial 
hypertrophy factors in chondrocytes.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11071232
PMCID: PMC8998018
PMID: 35406794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.