1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Mar 25;14:825086. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.825086. 
eCollection 2022.

Microglia and Neuroinflammation: Crucial Pathological Mechanisms in Traumatic 
Brain Injury-Induced Neurodegeneration.

Shao F(1), Wang X(2), Wu H(2), Wu Q(2), Zhang J(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Aesthetic Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Brain Research Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, China.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is one of the most common diseases in the central 
nervous system (CNS) with high mortality and morbidity. Patients with TBI 
usually suffer many sequelae in the life time post injury, including 
neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD). However, the pathological mechanisms connecting these two 
processes have not yet been fully elucidated. It is important to further 
investigate the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying TBI and TBI-induced 
neurodegeneration, which will promote the development of precise treatment 
target for these notorious neurodegenerative consequences after TBI. A growing 
body of evidence shows that neuroinflammation is a pivotal pathological process 
underlying chronic neurodegeneration following TBI. Microglia, as the immune 
cells in the CNS, play crucial roles in neuroinflammation and many other CNS 
diseases. Of interest, microglial activation and functional alteration has been 
proposed as key mediators in the evolution of chronic neurodegenerative 
pathology following TBI. Here, we review the updated studies involving 
phenotypical and functional alterations of microglia in neurodegeneration after 
injury, survey key molecules regulating the activities and functional responses 
of microglia in TBI pathology, and explore their potential implications to 
chronic neurodegeneration after injury. The work will give us a comprehensive 
understanding of mechanisms driving TBI-related neurodegeneration and offer 
novel ideas of developing corresponding prevention and treatment strategies for 
this disease.

Copyright Â© 2022 Shao, Wang, Wu, Wu and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.825086
PMCID: PMC8990307
PMID: 35401152

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.