1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2022 Mar 28;16:843069. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2022.843069. 
eCollection 2022.

Neuroinflammation as the Underlying Mechanism of Postoperative Cognitive 
Dysfunction and Therapeutic Strategies.

Li Z(1), Zhu Y(2), Kang Y(1), Qin S(1), Chai J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.

Postoperative cognitive dysfunction (POCD) is a common neurological complication 
following surgery and general anesthesia, especially in elderly patients. Severe 
cases delay patient discharge, affect the patient's quality of life after 
surgery, and are heavy burdens to society. In addition, as the population ages, 
surgery is increasingly used for older patients and those with higher 
prevalences of complications. This trend presents a huge challenge to the 
current healthcare system. Although studies on POCD are ongoing, the underlying 
pathogenesis is still unclear due to conflicting results and lack of evidence. 
According to existing studies, the occurrence and development of POCD are 
related to multiple factors. Among them, the pathogenesis of neuroinflammation 
in POCD has become a focus of research in recent years, and many clinical and 
preclinical studies have confirmed the correlation between neuroinflammation and 
POCD. In this article, we reviewed how central nervous system inflammation 
occurred, and how it could lead to POCD with changes in peripheral circulation 
and the pathological pathways between peripheral circulation and the central 
nervous system (CNS). Furthermore, we proposed some potential therapeutic 
targets, diagnosis and treatment strategies at the cellular and molecular 
levels, and clinical applications. The goal of this article was to provide a 
better perspective for understanding the occurrence of POCD, its development, 
and preventive strategies to help manage these vulnerable geriatric patients.

Copyright Â© 2022 Li, Zhu, Kang, Qin and Chai.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2022.843069
PMCID: PMC8995749
PMID: 35418837

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.