1. Sci Rep. 2022 Apr 13;12(1):6178. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-07154-y.

The upregulation of circFNDC3B aggravates the recurrence after endoscopic 
submucosal dissection (ESD) in early gastric cancer (EGC) patients.

Zhang J(#)(1), Bai J(#)(1), Zhu H(1), Li W(1), An Q(2), Wang D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Chinese PLA NO. 254 Hospital, 
60 Huangwei Rd, Tianjin, 300142, China.
(2)Department of Blood Transfusion, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, 127 Changle West Rd, Xi'anShaanxi Province, 710032, China. 
skki88@163.com.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Chinese PLA NO. 254 Hospital, 
60 Huangwei Rd, Tianjin, 300142, China. lncRNAstudy@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

It has been reported that the expression of CD44 variant 9 could be utilized as 
a predictive marker for the recurrence in early gastric cancer (EGC) after 
endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD). And circFNDC3B was proved to increase 
the migration and invasion of gastric cancer (GC) cells. In this study, we 
recruited 96 EGC patients after ESD treatment and grouped them into High 
circFNDC3B expression group (High expression group) and Low circFNDC3B 
expression group (Low expression group). Accordingly, we found that the 
recurrence-free rate in the High expression group was lower than that in the Low 
expression group. In the High expression group, the relative expression of 
miR-942 and miR-510 was both suppressed while the relative expression of CDH1 
mRNA and CD44 mRNA/protein was increased compared with those in the Low 
expression group. CircFNDC3B was found to target miR-942 and miR-510 and 
suppress their expressions respectively. Moreover, miR-942 was found to target 
CD44 mRNA while miR-510 was found to target CDH1 mRNA. The overexpression of 
circFNDC3B led to the down-regulation of miR-942 and miR-510, which accordingly 
resulted in the up-regulation of CD44 and CDH1 in MKN28 cells. Moreover, we 
found H. pylori infection could promote the expression of circFNDC3B, which also 
resulted in up-regulated CD44 and CDH1 mRNA level in rTip-α cultivated MKN28 
cells. In summary, our study demonstrated that a higher level of circFNDC3B 
could lead to the increased expression of CD44 and CDH1 via modulating the 
signaling pathways of miR-942/CD44 and miR-510/CDH1 in EGC patients. And the 
up-regulation of CD44 and CDH1 would accordingly result in a higher recurrence 
rate of EGC patients treated by ESD.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-07154-y
PMCID: PMC9007947
PMID: 35418175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.