1. J Biol Chem. 2022 May;298(5):101929. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101929. Epub 2022
 Apr 10.

Biochemical purification uncovers mammalian sterile 3 (MST3) as a new protein 
kinase for multifunctional protein kinases AMPK and SIK3.

Liu Y(1), Wang TV(1), Cui Y(1), Gao S(1), Rao Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemical Biology, Department of Chemical Biology, College 
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain 
Research, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, 
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Health Sciences Center, Peking University, 
Beijing, China; Chinese Institute for Brain Research, Beijing, China; School of 
Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China; Changping 
Laboratory, Beijing, China.
(2)Laboratory of Neurochemical Biology, Department of Chemical Biology, College 
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain 
Research, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, 
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Health Sciences Center, Peking University, 
Beijing, China; Chinese Institute for Brain Research, Beijing, China; School of 
Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China; Changping 
Laboratory, Beijing, China. Electronic address: yrao@pku.edu.cn.

The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and AMPK-related kinase salt-inducible 
kinase 3 (SIK3) regulate many important biological processes ranging from 
metabolism to sleep. Liver kinase B1 is known to phosphorylate and activate both 
AMPK and SIK3, but the existence of other upstream kinases was unclear. In this 
study, we detected liver kinase B1-independent AMPK-related kinase 
phosphorylation activities in human embryonic kidney cells as well as in mouse 
brains. Biochemical purification of this phosphorylation activity uncovered 
mammalian sterile 20-like kinase 3 (MST3). We demonstrate that MST3 from human 
embryonic kidney cells could phosphorylate AMPK and SIK3 in vivo. In addition, 
recombinant MST3 expressed in and purified from Escherichia coli could directly 
phosphorylate AMPK and SIK3 in vitro. Moreover, four other members of the MST 
kinase family could also phosphorylate AMPK or SIK3. Our results have revealed 
new kinases able to phosphorylate and activate AMPK and SIK3.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101929
PMCID: PMC9112001
PMID: 35413286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.