1. Clin Pharmacol. 2022 Feb 21;14:19-26. doi: 10.2147/CPAA.S288846. eCollection 
2022.

Exenatide Once Weekly for Management of Type 2 Diabetes: A Review.

Inaishi J(1)(2), Saisho Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Nephrology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Center for Preventive Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Exenatide is one of the exendin-based glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists 
(GLP-1RAs) and is currently available in two formulations, ie, exenatide twice 
daily (BID), a short-acting GLP-1RA, and exenatide once weekly (QW), a 
long-acting GLP-1RA. Clinical efficacy and safety of exenatide 2 mg QW in 
patients with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) has been demonstrated in the DURATION study 
program. Exenatide QW has been shown to achieve greater HbA1c reduction compared 
with exenatide BID, with less injection frequency and greater treatment 
satisfaction. However, exenatide QW failed to show a significant cardiovascular 
risk reduction in a cardiovascular outcome trial (CVOT), the EXSCEL trial, while 
other GLP-1RAs have shown positive CV outcomes. Furthermore, exenatide QW has 
been shown to be inferior to liraglutide and semaglutide with respect to HbA1c 
or body weight reduction in the head-to-head trials. Thus, although the 
long-term efficacy and safety of exenatide QW have been demonstrated, exenatide 
QW might be selected with lower priority within the class of GLP1-RAs for the 
management of T2DM, especially for patients at high CV risk. On the other hand, 
exenatide QW is now expected to be a treatment option for children with T2DM or 
patients with Parkinson's disease. This review provides an overview of the 
current evidence regarding the clinical efficacy and safety of exenatide QW and 
discusses the current perspectives on exenatide QW for treatment of T2DM.

Â© 2022 Inaishi and Saisho.

DOI: 10.2147/CPAA.S288846
PMCID: PMC9004502
PMID: 35422660

Conflict of interest statement: J.I. reports no conflicts of interest in this 
work. Y.S. received honoraria from Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Co.