1. RSC Adv. 2021 Dec 22;12(1):561-577. doi: 10.1039/d1ra08055e. eCollection 2021 
Dec 20.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of new derivatives of thieno-thiazole and 
dihydrothiazolo-thiazole scaffolds integrated with a pyrazoline nucleus as 
anticancer and multi-targeting kinase inhibitors.

Othman IMM(1), Alamshany ZM(2), Tashkandi NY(2), Gad-Elkareem MAM(1), Abd 
El-Karim SS(3), Nossier ES(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar University Assiut 71524 
Egypt.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University P.O. 
Box 42805 Jeddah 21551 Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Therapeutic Chemistry, National Research Centre Dokki Cairo 
12622 Egypt somaia_elkarim@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy 
(Girls), Al-Azhar University Cairo 11754 Egypt dremannossier@azhar.edu.eg.

Deregulation of various protein kinases is considered as one of the important 
factors resulting in cancer development and metastasis, thus multi-targeting the 
kinase family is one of the most important strategies in current cancer therapy. 
This context represents the design and synthesis of two sets of derivatives 
bearing a pyrazoline-3-one ring conjugated either with a thieno[3,2-d]thiazole 
or with a dihydrothiazolo[4,5-d]thiazole scaffold via an NH linker, 3a-d and 
5a-d respectively, using the pyrazolinone-thiazolinone derivative 1 as a key 
precursor. All the newly synthesized compounds were assessed in vitro for their 
anticancer activity against two cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and HepG-2). The safety 
profile of the most active cytotoxic candidates 1 and 3c was further examined 
against the normal cell line WI-38. The compounds 1 and 3c were further 
evaluated as multi-targeting kinase inhibitors against EGFR, VEGFR-2 and 
BRAFV600E, exhibiting promising suppression impact. Additionally, the latter 
compounds were investigated for their impact on cell cycle and apoptosis 
induction potential in the MCF-7 cell line. Moreover, the antimicrobial activity 
of all the new analogues was evaluated against a panel of Gram-positive and 
Gram-negative bacteria, yeast and fungi in comparison to streptomycin and 
amphotericin-B as reference drugs. Interestingly, both 1 and 3c showed the most 
promising microbial inhibitory effect. Molecular docking studies showed 
promising binding patterns of the compounds 1 and 3c with the prospective 
targets, EGFR, VEGFR-2 and BRAFV600E. Finally, additional toxicity studies were 
performed for the new derivatives which showed their good drug-like properties 
and low toxicity risks in humans.

This journal is Â© The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d1ra08055e
PMCID: PMC8694192
PMID: 35424523

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.