1. Front Immunol. 2022 Mar 30;13:843712. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.843712. 
eCollection 2022.

Macrophage Subsets and Death Are Responsible for Atherosclerotic Plaque 
Formation.

Li H(1)(2)(3), Cao Z(1)(2)(3), Wang L(1)(2)(3), Liu C(1)(2)(3), Lin H(1)(2)(3), 
Tang Y(1)(2)(3), Yao P(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Food Nutrition and Safety, School of Public Health, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 
China.
(3)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Environment, School of Public Health, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 
China.

Cardiovascular diseases, the notorious killer, are mainly caused by 
atherosclerosis (AS) characterized by lipids, cholesterol, and iron overload in 
plaques. Macrophages are effector cells and accumulate to the damaged and 
inflamed sites of arteries to internalize native and chemically modified 
lipoproteins to transform them into cholesterol-loaded foam cells. Foam cell 
formation is determined by the capacity of phagocytosis, migration, scavenging, 
and the features of phenotypes. Macrophages are diverse, and the subsets and 
functions are controlled by their surrounding microenvironment. Generally, 
macrophages are divided into classically activated (M1) and alternatively 
activated (M2). Recently, intraplaque macrophage phenotypes are recognized by 
the stimulation of CXCL4 (M4), oxidized phospholipids (Mox), 
hemoglobin/haptoglobin complexes [HA-mac/M(Hb)], and heme (Mhem). The 
pro-atherogenic or anti-atherosclerotic phenotypes of macrophages decide the 
progression of AS. Besides, apoptosis, necrosis, ferroptosis, autophagy and 
pyrotopsis determine plaque formation and cardiovascular vulnerability, which 
may be associated with macrophage polarization phenotypes. In this review, we 
first summarize the three most popular hypotheses for AS and find the common key 
factors for further discussion. Secondly, we discuss the factors affecting 
macrophage polarization and five types of macrophage death in AS progression, 
especially ferroptosis. A comprehensive understanding of the cellular and 
molecular mechanisms of plaque formation is conducive to disentangling the 
candidate targets of macrophage-targeting therapies for clinical intervention at 
various stages of AS.

Copyright Â© 2022 Li, Cao, Wang, Liu, Lin, Tang and Yao.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.843712
PMCID: PMC9007036
PMID: 35432323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.