1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 Mar 30;15:868089. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.868089. 
eCollection 2022.

Insights Into the Role of Heat Shock Protein 27 in the Development of 
Neurodegeneration.

Holguin BA(1), Hildenbrand ZL(1), Bernal RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at El Paso, El 
Paso, TX, United States.

Small heat shock protein 27 is a critically important chaperone, that plays a 
key role in several essential and varied physiological processes. These include 
thermotolerance, apoptosis, cytoskeletal dynamics, cell differentiation, protein 
folding, among others. Despite its relatively small size and intrinsically 
disordered termini, it forms large and polydisperse oligomers that are in 
equilibrium with dimers. This equilibrium is driven by transient interactions 
between the N-terminal region, the α-crystallin domain, and the C-terminal 
region. The continuous redistribution of binding partners results in a 
conformationally dynamic protein that allows it to adapt to different functions 
where substrate capture is required. However, the intrinsic disorder of the 
amino and carboxy terminal regions and subsequent conformational variability has 
made structural investigations challenging. Because heat shock protein 27 is 
critical for so many key cellular functions, it is not surprising that it also 
has been linked to human disease. Charcot-Marie-Tooth and distal hereditary 
motor neuropathy are examples of neurodegenerative disorders that arise from 
single point mutations in heat shock protein 27. The development of possible 
treatments, however, depends on our understanding of its normal function at the 
molecular level so we might be able to understand how mutations manifest as 
disease. This review will summarize recent reports describing investigations 
into the structurally elusive regions of Hsp27. Recent insights begin to provide 
the required context to explain the relationship between a mutation and the 
resulting loss or gain of function that leads to Charcot-Marie Tooth disease and 
distal hereditary motor neuropathy.

Copyright © 2022 Holguin, Hildenbrand and Bernal.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.868089
PMCID: PMC9005852
PMID: 35431800

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.