1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 Mar 31;15:858582. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.858582. 
eCollection 2022.

AUTS2 Syndrome: Molecular Mechanisms and Model Systems.

Biel A(1), Castanza AS(2), Rutherford R(1), Fair SR(1), Chifamba L(1), Wester 
JC(3), Hester ME(1)(3)(4), Hevner RF(2).

Author information:
(1)The Steve and Cindy Rasmussen Institute for Genomic Medicine, Abigail Wexner 
Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, United 
States.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
United States.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, 
Columbus, OH, United States.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, 
Columbus, OH, United States.

AUTS2 syndrome is a genetic disorder that causes intellectual disability, 
microcephaly, and other phenotypes. Syndrome severity is worse when mutations 
involve 3' regions (exons 9-19) of the AUTS2 gene. Human AUTS2 protein has two 
major isoforms, full-length (1259 aa) and C-terminal (711 aa), the latter 
produced from an alternative transcription start site in exon 9. Structurally, 
AUTS2 contains the putative "AUTS2 domain" (∼200 aa) conserved among AUTS2 and 
its ohnologs, fibrosin, and fibrosin-like-1. Also, AUTS2 contains extensive 
low-complexity sequences and intrinsically disordered regions, features typical 
of RNA-binding proteins. During development, AUTS2 is expressed by specific 
progenitor cell and neuron types, including pyramidal neurons and Purkinje 
cells. AUTS2 localizes mainly in cell nuclei, where it regulates transcription 
and RNA metabolism. Some studies have detected AUTS2 in neurites, where it may 
regulate cytoskeletal dynamics. Neurodevelopmental functions of AUTS2 have been 
studied in diverse model systems. In zebrafish, auts2a morphants displayed 
microcephaly. In mice, excision of different Auts2 exons (7, 8, or 15) caused 
distinct phenotypes, variously including neonatal breathing abnormalities, 
cerebellar hypoplasia, dentate gyrus hypoplasia, EEG abnormalities, and 
behavioral changes. In mouse embryonic stem cells, AUTS2 could promote or delay 
neuronal differentiation. Cerebral organoids, derived from an AUTS2 syndrome 
patient containing a pathogenic missense variant in exon 9, exhibited 
neocortical growth defects. Emerging technologies for analysis of human cerebral 
organoids will be increasingly useful for understanding mechanisms underlying 
AUTS2 syndrome. Questions for future research include whether AUTS2 binds RNA 
directly, how AUTS2 regulates neurogenesis, and how AUTS2 modulates neural 
circuit formation.

Copyright © 2022 Biel, Castanza, Rutherford, Fair, Chifamba, Wester, Hester and 
Hevner.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.858582
PMCID: PMC9008325
PMID: 35431798

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.