1. MedComm (2020). 2022 Apr 9;3(2):e130. doi: 10.1002/mco2.130. eCollection 2022 
Jun.

Antigenicity comparison of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron sublineages with other variants 
contained multiple mutations in RBD.

Li Q(1)(2), Zhang M(1), Liang Z(1)(3), Zhang L(1), Wu X(1), Yang C(1), An Y(1), 
Tong J(1), Liu S(1), Li T(1), Cui Q(1), Nie J(1), Wu J(1), Huang W(1), Wang 
Y(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of HIV/AIDS and Sex-Transmitted Virus Vaccines Institute for 
Biological Product Control WHO Collaborating Center for Standardization and 
Evaluation of Biologicals NHC Key Laboratory of Research on Quality and 
Standardization of Biotech Products and NMPA Key Laboratory for Quality Research 
and Evaluation of Biological Products National Institutes for Food and Drug 
Control (NIFDC) Beijing China.
(2)Jiangsu Recbio Technology Co., Ltd. Taizhou China.
(3)Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College Beijing China.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants, 
particularly those with multiple mutations in receptor-binding domain (RBD), 
pose a critical challenge to the efficacy of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
vaccines and therapeutic neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). Omicron 
sublineages BA.1, BA.2, BA.3, as well as the recent emergence of C.1.2, B.1.630, 
B.1.640.1, and B.1.640.2, have multiple mutations in RBD and may lead to severe 
neutralizing antibody evasion. It is urgent to evaluate the antigenic change of 
the above seven variants against mAbs and sera from guinea pigs immunized with 
variants of concern (VOCs) (Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, Omicron) and variants of 
interest (VOIs) (Lambda, Mu) immunogens. Only seven out of the 24 mAbs showed no 
reduction in neutralizing activity against BA.1, BA.2, and BA.3. However, among 
these seven mAbs, the neutralization activity of XGv337 and XGv338 against 
C.1.2, B.1.630, B.1.640.1, and B.1.640.2 were decreased. Therefore, only five 
neutralizing mAbs showed no significant change against these seven variants. 
Using VOCs and VOIs as immunogens, we found that the antigenicity of variants 
could be divided into three clusters, and each cluster showed similar 
antigenicity to different immunogens. Among them, D614G, B.1.640.1, and B.1.630 
formed a cluster, C.1.2 and B.1.640.2 formed a cluster, and BA.1, BA.2, and BA.3 
formed a cluster.

Â© 2022 The Authors. MedComm published by Sichuan International Medical Exchange 
& Promotion Association (SCIMEA) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mco2.130
PMCID: PMC8994617
PMID: 35434713

Conflict of interest statement: Qianqian Li is an employee of Jiangsu Recbio 
Technology Co., Ltd. All other authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.