1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Apr 5;13:869713. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.869713. 
eCollection 2022.

Protein Biofortification in Lentils (Lens culinaris Medik.) Toward Human Health.

Salaria S(1), Boatwright JL(1), Thavarajah P(1), Kumar S(2), Thavarajah D(1).

Author information:
(1)Plant and Environmental Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, United 
States.
(2)Biodiversity and Crop Improvement Program, International Centre for 
Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA), Rabat-Institute, Rabat, 
Morocco.

Lentil (Lens culinaris Medik.) is a nutritionally dense crop with significant 
quantities of protein, low-digestible carbohydrates, minerals, and vitamins. The 
amino acid composition of lentil protein can impact human health by maintaining 
amino acid balance for physiological functions and preventing protein-energy 
malnutrition and non-communicable diseases (NCDs). Thus, enhancing lentil 
protein quality through genetic biofortification, i.e., conventional plant 
breeding and molecular technologies, is vital for the nutritional improvement of 
lentil crops across the globe. This review highlights variation in protein 
concentration and quality across Lens species, genetic mechanisms controlling 
amino acid synthesis in plants, functions of amino acids, and the effect of 
antinutrients on the absorption of amino acids into the human body. Successful 
breeding strategies in lentils and other pulses are reviewed to demonstrate 
robust breeding approaches for protein biofortification. Future lentil breeding 
approaches will include rapid germplasm selection, phenotypic evaluation, 
genome-wide association studies, genetic engineering, and genome editing to 
select sequences that improve protein concentration and quality.

Copyright Â© 2022 Salaria, Boatwright, Thavarajah, Kumar and Thavarajah.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.869713
PMCID: PMC9016278
PMID: 35449893

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.