1. Mol Biol Cell. 2022 Jul 1;33(8):ar67. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E21-11-0553. Epub 2022 
Apr 21.

Long-term mitochondrial stress induces early steps of Tau aggregation by 
increasing reactive oxygen species levels and affecting cellular proteostasis.

Samluk L(1), Ostapczuk P(1), Dziembowska M(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland.

Accumulating evidence indicates that mitochondrial dysfunction is involved in 
the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. Both of these conditions are 
often associated with an increase in protein aggregation. However, still unknown 
are the specific defects of mitochondrial biology that play a critical role in 
the development of Alzheimer's disease, in which Tau protein aggregates are 
observed in the brains of some patients. Here, we report that long-term 
mitochondrial stress triggered Tau dimerization, which is the first step of 
protein aggregation. Mitochondrial dysfunction was induced in HEK293T cells that 
received prolonged treatment with rotenone and in HEK293T cells with the 
knockout of NDUFA11 protein. To monitor changes in Tau protein aggregation, we 
took advantage of the bimolecular fluorescence complementation assay using 
HEK293T cells that were transfected with plasmids that encoded Tau. Inhibition 
of the ISR with ISRIB induced Tau dimerization, whereas ISR activation with 
salubrinal, guanabenz, and sephin1 partially reversed this process. Cells that 
were treated with ROS scavengers, N-acetyl-l-cysteine or MitoQ, significantly 
reduced the amount of ROS and Tau dimerization, indicating the involvement of 
oxidative stress in Tau aggregation. Our results indicate that long-term 
mitochondrial stress may induce early steps of Tau protein aggregation by 
affecting oxidative balance and cellular proteostasis.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E21-11-0553
PMCID: PMC9635289
PMID: 35446108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]