1. Front Synaptic Neurosci. 2022 Apr 4;14:861215. doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2022.861215.
 eCollection 2022.

cAMP-Dependent Synaptic Plasticity at the Hippocampal Mossy Fiber Terminal.

Shahoha M(1)(2), Cohen R(1)(2), Ben-Simon Y(3), Ashery U(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, School of Neurobiology, Biochemistry and 
Biophysics, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Neurophysiology, Vienna Medical University, Vienna, Austria.

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) is a crucial second messenger involved in 
both pre- and postsynaptic plasticity in many neuronal types across species. In 
the hippocampal mossy fiber (MF) synapse, cAMP mediates presynaptic long-term 
potentiation and depression. The main cAMP-dependent signaling pathway linked to 
MF synaptic plasticity acts via the activation of the protein kinase A (PKA) 
molecular cascade. Accordingly, various downstream putative synaptic PKA target 
proteins have been linked to cAMP-dependent MF synaptic plasticity, such as 
synapsin, rabphilin, synaptotagmin-12, RIM1a, tomosyn, and P/Q-type calcium 
channels. Regulating the expression of some of these proteins alters synaptic 
release probability and calcium channel clustering, resulting in short- and 
long-term changes to synaptic efficacy. However, despite decades of research, 
the exact molecular mechanisms by which cAMP and PKA exert their influences in 
MF terminals remain largely unknown. Here, we review current knowledge of 
different cAMP catalysts and potential downstream PKA-dependent molecular 
cascades, in addition to non-canonical cAMP-dependent but PKA-independent 
cascades, which might serve as alternative, compensatory or competing pathways 
to the canonical PKA cascade. Since several other central synapses share a 
similar form of presynaptic plasticity with the MF, a better description of the 
molecular mechanisms governing MF plasticity could be key to understanding the 
relationship between the transcriptional and computational levels across brain 
regions.

Copyright Â© 2022 Shahoha, Cohen, Ben-Simon and Ashery.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsyn.2022.861215
PMCID: PMC9013808
PMID: 35444523

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.