1. BMC Oral Health. 2022 Apr 20;22(1):134. doi: 10.1186/s12903-022-02169-3.

Useful diagnostic histogenetic features of ectopic odontogenic ghost cell 
tumours.

Noda Y(1), Ohe C(2), Ishida M(2), Okano K(2), Sando K(2), Hada N(2), Ebisu Y(2), 
Fujisawa T(3), Yagi M(3), Iwai H(3), Tsuta K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Kansai Medical University 
Hirakata Hospital, 2-3-1 Shin-machi, Hirakata, Osaka, 573-1191, Japan. 
nodayuridesu@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Kansai Medical University 
Hirakata Hospital, 2-3-1 Shin-machi, Hirakata, Osaka, 573-1191, Japan.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Kansai Medical 
University Hirakata Hospital, 2-3-1 Shin-machi, Hirakata, Osaka, 573-1191, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Ectopic odontogenic tumours are rare and difficult to diagnose. 
Consequently, they are occasionally misdiagnosed as other tumours and 
overtreated. Dentinogenic ghost cell tumours (DGCTs) are odontogenic neoplasms 
characterised by a CTNNB1 mutation, ghost cell appearance, and dentinoid-like 
calcification. Herein, we present a case of ectopic DGCT on the floor of a 
patient's mouth, providing reliable clinicopathological and genetic evidence of 
its odontogenicity for the first time.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 72-year-old man presented with painless sublingual 
swelling. Imaging revealed a multi-lobulated, solid-cystic mass on the floor of 
his mouth. Cytological evaluation showed folded epithelial clusters composed of 
basaloid cells, keratinised material, and calcification. Histological analysis 
revealed a multi-cystic, cribriform to solid nest, with an odontogenic satellate 
reticulum-like epithelium, including ghost cells and dentinoid matrix 
deposition. Immunohistochemical analysis found that CK19, CK5/6, bcl-2, and p63 
were diffuse positive, β-catenin was focal positive in the nuclei, and the cells 
in the dentinoid matrix were positive for DMP1. The CTNTTB1 mutation was 
detected, leading to the final diagnosis of ectopic DGCT. There was no 
recurrence during the 6-month follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we have presented a comprehensive clinical overview of 
DGCT and identified its pathological and genetic features. This report will aid 
in the recognition of this rare disease in the future and help to avoid 
misdiagnosis and overtreatment.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-022-02169-3
PMCID: PMC9022270
PMID: 35443664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.