1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2022 Apr 5;11(4):715. doi: 10.3390/antiox11040715.

Water Hardness Can Reduce the Accumulation and Oxidative Stress of Zinc in 
Goldfish, Carassius auratus.

Choi CY(1), Li Z(1), Song JA(2), Park YS(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Marine BioScience, Korea Maritime and Ocean University, Busan 
49112, Korea.
(2)Marine Bio-Resources Research Unit, Korea Institute of Ocean Science and 
Technology, Busan 49111, Korea.
(3)Department of Nursing, Catholic University of Pusan, Busan 46252, Korea.

We investigated the changes in toxicity stress in goldfish, Carassius auratus, 
under exposure to different concentrations of Zn and water hardness for 14 days. 
We analyzed the changes in water hardness and Zn accumulation after exposure. To 
investigate the stress levels, the expression of metallothionein, caspase-3 
activity, NO activity, and total antioxidant capacity were detected. Terminal 
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assays were also 
performed to measure apoptosis in the liver. The results showed that compared to 
the control group, a more significant difference in the accumulation of Zn in 
body stress markers (metallothionein, caspase-3 activity, NO activity, and total 
antioxidant capacity) were observed with increasing Zn concentration and 
exposure time. Notably, at the same Zn concentration and exposure time, lower 
stress levels were discovered in the samples under harder water conditions. 
Finally, the TUNEL assay showed that Zn accumulation caused apoptosis and high 
water hardness could reduce the apoptosis. In conclusion, we found that high 
water hardness can influence the absorption of Zn, and alleviating the hardness 
levels can reduce the toxicity stress caused by Zn.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox11040715
PMCID: PMC9029772
PMID: 35453398

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.