1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Apr 12;13(4):679. doi: 10.3390/genes13040679.

miR-129-5p Participates in Hair Follicle Growth by Targeting HOXC13 in Rabbit.

Yao F(1), Zhao B(1), Hu S(1), Bai S(1), Jin R(1), Zhang C(1), Chen Y(1), Wu 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 
225009, China.

Mammalian hair formation is critically determined by the growth of hair 
follicles (HF). MiRNAs are crucial in the periodic development of hair 
follicles; they maintain epidermal homeostasis by targeting genes and 
influencing the activity of signaling pathways and related regulators. Our study 
discovered miR-129-5p to be overexpressed in the skin of Angora rabbits during 
catagen, and was negatively correlated with HOXC13 expression (Pearson’s R = 
−0.313, p < 0.05). The dual-Luciferase reporter gene detection system and 
Western blotting confirmed that miR-129-5p targeted HOXC13. In addition, 
miR-129-5p overexpression was found to significantly inhibit the expression of 
hair follicle development-related genes (HFDRGs), such as BCL2, WNT2, CCND1, and 
LEF1 (p < 0.01), and promoted the expression of SFRP2, TGF-β1, and FGF2 (p < 
0.01), which was the same as the knockdown of HOXC13. In contrast, the knockout 
of miR-129-5p was the opposite, and it demonstrated similar results to the 
overexpression of HOXC13. CCK8 and flow cytometry demonstrated that miR-129-5p 
mimics significantly promoted the apoptosis of dermal papilla cells (DPCs) and 
inhibited proliferation (p < 0.01), while the inhibitor was found to reduce the 
apoptosis of DPCs and promote proliferation (p < 0.01). These results showed 
that miR-129-5p can participate in the periodic development of HF by targeting 
HOXC13, and it can induce apoptosis and inhibit proliferation of DPCs. These 
results will help to understand the role and mechanism of miR-129-5p in the 
periodic development of HF, and will provide support for subsequent studies, not 
only providing a theoretical basis for genetically improving the quality of hair 
in animals in the future, but also a new theory and method for diagnosing and 
treating hair loss in humans.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13040679
PMCID: PMC9024705
PMID: 35456485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.