1. Front Immunol. 2022 Apr 6;13:845499. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.845499.
eCollection  2022.

Design and Evaluation of TIM-3-CD28 Checkpoint Fusion Proteins to Improve 
Anti-CD19 CAR T-Cell Function.

Blaeschke F(1), Ortner E(1), Stenger D(1)(2), Mahdawi J(1), Apfelbeck A(1), 
Habjan N(1), Weißer T(1), Kaeuferle T(1)(3), Willier S(1), Kobold S(2)(4), 
Feuchtinger T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, 
Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, University Hospital, Ludwig Maximilian 
University of Munich (LMU), Munich, Germany.
(2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Munich, Germany.
(3)National Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Munich, Germany.
(4)Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM) and Division of Clinical 
Pharmacology, Department of Medicine IV, Klinikum der LMU München, Munich, 
Germany.

Therapeutic targeting of inhibitory checkpoint molecules in combination with 
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells is currently investigated in a variety 
of clinical studies for treatment of hematologic and solid malignancies. 
However, the impact of co-inhibitory axes and their therapeutic implication 
remains understudied for the majority of acute leukemias due to their low 
immunogenicity/mutational load. The inhibitory exhaustion molecule TIM-3 is an 
important marker for the interaction of T cells with leukemic cells. Moreover, 
inhibitory signals from malignant cells could be transformed into stimulatory 
signals by synthetic fusion molecules with extracellular inhibitory receptors 
fused to an intracellular stimulatory domain. Here, we designed a variety of 
different TIM-3-CD28 fusion proteins to turn inhibitory signals derived by TIM-3 
engagement into T-cell activation through CD28. In the absence of anti-CD19 CAR, 
two TIM-3-CD28 fusion receptors with large parts of CD28 showed strongest 
responses in terms of cytokine secretion and proliferation upon stimulation with 
anti-CD3 antibodies compared to controls. We then combined these two novel 
TIM-3-CD28 fusion proteins with first- and second-generation anti-CD19 CAR T 
cells and found that the fusion receptor can increase proliferation, activation, 
and cytotoxic capacity of conventional anti-CD19 CAR T cells. These additionally 
armed CAR T cells showed excellent effector function. In terms of safety 
considerations, the fusion receptors showed exclusively increased cytokine 
release, when the CAR target CD19 was present. We conclude that combining 
checkpoint fusion proteins with anti-CD19 CARs has the potential to increase 
T-cell proliferation capacity with the intention to overcome inhibitory signals 
during the response against malignant cells.

Copyright © 2022 Blaeschke, Ortner, Stenger, Mahdawi, Apfelbeck, Habjan, Weißer, 
Kaeuferle, Willier, Kobold and Feuchtinger.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.845499
PMCID: PMC9018974
PMID: 35464394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: FB and SK: Patent applications have been filed 
in the field of immuno-oncology. SK has licensed IP to TCR2 Inc, Boston, USA and 
Carina Biotech, Adelaide, Australia. SK has received research support from TCR2 
Inc, Boston, USA and Arcus Biosciences, San Francisco, USA. SK has received 
honoraria from TCR2 Inc, BMS, and Novartis. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.