1. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2023 Nov 22;15(4):431-437. doi: 
10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2022.2021-12-3. Epub 2022 Apr 25.

A Novel Pathogenic IGSF1 Variant in a Patient with GH and TSH Deficiency 
Diagnosed by High IGF-I Values at Transition to Adult Care.

Kardelen AD(1), Karakılıç Özturan E(1), Poyrazoğlu Ş(1), Baş F(1), Ceylaner 
S(2), Joustra SD(3), Wit JM(3), Darendeliler F(1).

Author information:
(1)İstanbul University, İstanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric 
Endocrinology, İstanbul, Turkey
(2)Intergen Genetic Research Center, Ankara, Turkey
(3)Willem-Alexander Children’s Hospital; Leiden University Medical Center, 
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Leiden, 
Netherlands

IGSF1 deficiency is a rare X-linked condition characterized by central 
hypothyroidism and a wide variety of other clinical features with variable 
prevalence, including a delayed pubertal testosterone rise and growth spurt in 
the context of normal or accelerated testicular growth, and adult macroorchidism 
with relatively low serum testosterone concentrations. Other features include 
increased waist circumference, attention deficit, prolactin deficiency and 
transient partial growth hormone (GH) deficiency in childhood, contrasting with 
an increased GH secretion in adulthood. Patients with this disorder are not 
detected shortly after birth if neonatal screening programs are based on 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) concentrations. A 13.2-year-old male patient 
was referred to pediatric endocrinology for evaluation of short stature. He was 
born large for gestational age into a nonconsanguineous family. During work-up 
for short stature, deficiencies of TSH, prolactin and GH were detected, leading 
to treatment with levothyroxine and GH. At 16.9 years, GH treatment was stopped 
and during transition to adult care, his insulin-like growth factor 1 level was 
above the normal range. This prompted an analysis of IGSF1, in which a novel 
hemizygous variant causing a stop codon at c.3559C>T (p.Q1187*) was found, 
confirming the diagnosis of IGSF1 deficiency syndrome. In this report, we 
describe his clinical and hormonal characteristics at presentation and during 
long-term follow-up.

©Copyright 2023 by Turkish Society for Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes / 
The Journal of Clinical Research in Pediatric Endocrinology published by Galenos 
Publishing House.

DOI: 10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2022.2021-12-3
PMCID: PMC10683549
PMID: 35466665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared