1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Apr 7;10:731831. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.731831. 
eCollection 2022.

Naringin Mediates Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis for Antidepression via 
Activating CREB Signaling.

Gao C(1)(2), Wu M(1), Du Q(1), Deng J(3), Shen J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chinese Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Hong Kong, Hon Kong SAR, China.
(2)The Institute of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University City College, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Efficacy Study on Chinese Materia Medica, Guangxi 
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanning, China.

The brain-derived neurotrophic factor/tropomyosin receptor kinase B/cAMP 
response element-binding protein (BDNF/TrkB/CREB) signaling pathway is a 
critical therapeutic target for inducing adult hippocampal neurogenesis and 
antidepressant therapy. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that naringin, a 
natural medicinal compound, could promote adult hippocampal neurogenesis and 
improve depression-like behaviors via regulating the BDNF/TrkB/CREB signaling 
pathway. We first investigated the effects of naringin on promoting adult 
hippocampal neurogenesis in both normal and chronic corticosterone 
(CORT)-induced depressive mice. Under physiological condition, naringin 
treatment enhanced the proliferation of neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) and 
accelerated neuronal differentiation. In CORT-induced depression mouse model, 
naringin treatment promoted neuronal differentiation and maturation of NSPCs for 
hippocampal neurogenesis. Forced swim test, tail suspension test, and open field 
test confirmed the antidepressant and anxiolytic effects of naringin. 
Co-treatment of temozolomide (TMZ), a neurogenic inhibitor, abolished these 
antidepressant and anxiolytic effects. Meanwhile, naringin treatment increased 
phosphorylation of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) but had no 
effect on the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and 
phosphorylation of TrkB in the hippocampus of CORT-induced depressive mice. 
Co-treatment of CREB inhibitor 666-15, rather than TrkB inhibitor Cyc-B, 
abolished the neurogenesis-promoting and antidepressant effects of naringin. 
Taken together, naringin has antidepressant and anxiolytic effects, and the 
underlying mechanisms could be attributed to enhance hippocampal neurogenesis 
via activating CREB signaling.

Copyright Â© 2022 Gao, Wu, Du, Deng and Shen.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.731831
PMCID: PMC9037031
PMID: 35478969

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.