1. Parasite. 2022;29:22. doi: 10.1051/parasite/2022022. Epub 2022 Apr 27.

Molecular genetic diversity and bioinformatic analysis of Leucocytozoon 
sabrazesi based on the mitochondrial genes cytb, coxI and coxIII and 
co-infection of Plasmodium spp.

Nooroong P(1), Watthanadirek A(1), Minsakorn S(1), Poolsawat N(1), Junsiri W(1), 
Srionrod N(1), Sangchuai S(2), Chawengkirttikul R(3), Anuracpreeda P(1).

Author information:
(1)Parasitology Research Laboratory (PRL), Institute of Molecular Biosciences, 
Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom 73170, Thailand.
(2)Parasitology Research Laboratory (PRL), Institute of Molecular Biosciences, 
Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom 73170, Thailand - Department of Parasitology, 
Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700, 
Thailand.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok 
10400, Thailand.

Leucocytozoon sabrazesi is an intracellular haemoprotozoan parasite responsible 
for leucocytozoonosis, which is transmitted by insect vectors and affects 
chickens in tropical and subtropical areas in many countries. It causes huge 
economic losses due to decreased meat and egg production. In the present study, 
we used nested PCR to determine the genetic diversity of L. sabrazesi based on 
the cytb, coxI, coxIII and concatenated genes in chickens in Thailand. In 
addition, we found co-infections between L. sabrazesi and Plasmodium spp. (P. 
gallinaceum or P. juxtanucleare) in chickens that were not identified by 
microscopic examination of blood smears. The phylogenetic analysis indicated 
that L. sabrazesi cytb and coxIII genes were conserved with similarity ranging 
from 99.9 to 100% and 98 to 100%, respectively whereas the coxI gene was 
diverse, with similarities ranging from 97 to 100%. These findings ascertained 
the nucleotide analysis of the cytb, coxI, coxIII and concatenated sequences in 
which 4, 8, 10 and 9 haplotypes were found, respectively. In addition, it was 
found that the large number of synonymous substitutions and conservative amino 
acid replacements in these mitochondrial genes occurred by non-synonymous 
substitution. The evolutionary analysis of the Ka/Ks ratio supported purifying 
selection and the negative values of both Fu's Fs and Tajima's D indicate 
selective sweep especially for the coxI gene. The entropy and Simplot analysis 
showed that the genetic variation in populations of Plasmodium spp. was higher 
than in Leucocytozoon. Hence, the nucleotide sequences of three mitochondrial 
genes could reflect the evolutionary analysis and geographic distribution of 
this protozoan population that switches hosts during its life cycle.

Publisher: TITLE: Diversité génétique moléculaire et analyse bioinformatique de 
Leucocytozoon sabrazesi basée sur les gènes mitochondriaux cytb, coxI et coxIII 
et la co-infection avec Plasmodium spp.
ABSTRACT: Leucocytozoon sabrazesi est le parasite hémoprotozoaire 
intracellulaire responsable de la leucocytozoonose, qui est transmise par des 
insectes vecteurs et affecte les poulets dans les zones tropicales et 
subtropicales de nombreux pays. Il provoque d’énormes pertes économiques en 
raison de la diminution de la production de viande et d’œufs. Dans la présente 
étude, nous avons utilisé la PCR nichée pour déterminer la diversité génétique 
de L. sabrazesi sur la base des gènes cytb, coxI, coxIII et concaténés chez des 
poulets en Thaïlande. De plus, nous avons trouvé des co-infections entre L. 
sabrazesi et Plasmodium spp. (P. gallinaceum ou P. juxtanucleare) chez des 
poulets, qui n’ont pas été identifiées par l’examen microscopique de frottis 
sanguins. L’analyse phylogénétique a indiqué que les gènes cytb et coxIII de L. 
sabrazesi étaient conservés avec une similarité allant respectivement de 99,9 à 
100 % et de 98 à 100 %, alors que le gène coxI était diversifié, avec des 
similarités allant de 97 à 100 %. Ces découvertes ont confirmé l’analyse des 
nucléotides des séquences cytb, coxI, coxIII et concaténées dans lesquelles 4, 
8, 10 et 9 haplotypes ont été trouvés, respectivement. De plus, il a été 
constaté que le grand nombre de substitutions synonymes et de remplacements 
conservateurs d’acides aminés dans ces gènes mitochondriaux se produisaient par 
substitution non synonyme. L’analyse évolutive du rapport Ka/Ks a soutenu la 
sélection purificatrice et les valeurs négatives des Fs de Fu et D de Tajima 
indiquent un balayage sélectif, en particulier pour le gène coxI. L’entropie et 
l’analyse Simplot ont montré que la variation génétique de la population de 
Plasmodium spp. était plus élevée que pour Leucocytozoon. Par conséquent, les 
séquences nucléotidiques de trois gènes mitochondriaux pourraient refléter 
l’analyse évolutive et la répartition géographique de cette population de 
protozoaires qui changent d’hôte au cours de leur cycle de vie.

© P. Nooroong et al., published by EDP Sciences, 2022.

DOI: 10.1051/parasite/2022022
PMCID: PMC9044968
PMID: 35475784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]