1. Cell Host Microbe. 2022 Jun 8;30(6):848-862.e7. doi:
10.1016/j.chom.2022.03.036.  Epub 2022 Apr 27.

Global, distinctive, and personal changes in molecular and microbial profiles by 
specific fibers in humans.

Lancaster SM(1), Lee-McMullen B(1), Abbott CW(1), Quijada JV(1), Hornburg D(1), 
Park H(1), Perelman D(1), Peterson DJ(1), Tang M(1), Robinson A(1), Ahadi S(1), 
Contrepois K(1), Hung CJ(1), Ashland M(1), McLaughlin T(2), Boonyanit A(1), 
Horning A(1), Sonnenburg JL(3), Snyder MP(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; 
Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, 
USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Chan-Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; 
Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 
Electronic address: mpsnyder@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2022 Jun 8;30(6):762-763. doi: 
10.1016/j.chom.2022.05.007.

Dietary fibers act through the microbiome to improve cardiovascular health and 
prevent metabolic disorders and cancer. To understand the health benefits of 
dietary fiber supplementation, we investigated two popular purified fibers, 
arabinoxylan (AX) and long-chain inulin (LCI), and a mixture of five fibers. We 
present multiomic signatures of metabolomics, lipidomics, proteomics, 
metagenomics, a cytokine panel, and clinical measurements on healthy and 
insulin-resistant participants. Each fiber is associated with fiber-dependent 
biochemical and microbial responses. AX consumption associates with a 
significant reduction in LDL and an increase in bile acids, contributing to its 
observed cholesterol reduction. LCI is associated with an increase in 
Bifidobacterium. However, at the highest LCI dose, there is increased 
inflammation and elevation in the liver enzyme alanine aminotransferase. This 
study yields insights into the effects of fiber supplementation and the 
mechanisms behind fiber-induced cholesterol reduction, and it shows effects of 
individual, purified fibers on the microbiome.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2022.03.036
PMCID: PMC9187607
PMID: 35483363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.