1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Apr 12;13:890052. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.890052. 
eCollection 2022.

Genome-wide Identification and Characterization of the GRAS Transcription 
Factors in Garlic (Allium sativum L.).

Zhang X(1)(2), Yang X(1), He Q(1), Wang Y(1), Liang G(2), Liu T(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bast Fiber Crops, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Changsha, China.
(2)College of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Southwest University, 
Chongqing, China.

GRAS transcription factors play crucial roles in plant growth and development 
and have been widely explored in many plant species. Garlic (Allium sativum L.) 
is an important crop owing to its edible and medicinal properties. However, no 
GRAS transcription factors have been identified in this crop. In this study, 46 
garlic GRAS genes were identified and assigned to 16 subfamilies using the GRAS 
members of Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza sativa, and Amborella trichopoda as 
reference queries. Expression analysis revealed that garlic GRAS genes showed 
distinct differences in various garlic tissues, as well as during different 
growth stages of the bulbs. Five of these 46 genes were identified as DELLA-like 
protein-encoding genes and three of which, Asa2G00237.1/Asa2G00240.1 and 
Asa4G02090.1, responded to exogenous GA3 treatment, and showed a significant 
association between their transcription abundance and bulb traits in 102 garlic 
accessions, thereby indicating their role in regulating the growth of garlic 
bulbs. These results will lay a useful foundation for further investigation of 
the biological functions of GRAS genes and guiding the genetic breeding of 
garlic in the future.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zhang, Yang, He, Wang, Liang and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.890052
PMCID: PMC9039536
PMID: 35498719

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.