1. Front Immunol. 2022 Apr 13;13:857527. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.857527. 
eCollection 2022.

Case Report: A Novel CXCR4 Mutation in a Chinese Child With Kawasaki Disease 
Causing WHIM Syndrome.

Ma X(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Wu P(1)(2), Kang M(1)(2), Hong Y(1)(2), Xue Y(1)(2), 
Chen C(1)(2), Li H(1)(2), Fang Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Hematology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

WHIM syndrome, an extremely rare congenital disease with combined 
immunodeficiency, is mainly caused by heterozygous gain-of-function mutation in 
the CXCR4 gene. There have been no previous case reports of WHIM syndrome with 
Kawasaki disease. We herein report a case of a boy who developed Kawasaki 
disease at the age of 1 year. After treatment, the number of neutrophils in his 
peripheral blood decreased continuously. His medical history revealed that he 
had been suffering from leukopenia, neutropenia and low immunoglobulin since 
birth, and his neutrophils could return to the normal level in the presence of 
infection or inflammation. Clinical targeted gene sequencing of 91 genes 
associated with granulocyte-related disease revealed that the patient had a 
novel heterozygous NM_003467; c.1032_1033delTG;p.(E345Vfs*12) variant in exon 2 
of CXCR4 gene. Family verification analysis by Sanger sequencing showed that his 
father also had heterozygous variation at this site, while other family members 
did not. The computer prediction software indicated that the variation had a 
high pathogenicity. The computational structure analysis of the mutant revealed 
significant structural and functional changes in the CXCR4 protein. It should be 
noted that when unexplained persistent neutropenia with low immunoglobulin 
occurs after birth, especially when there is a family history of neutropenia, 
immunodeficiency should be investigated with genetic testing.

Copyright Â© 2022 Ma, Wang, Wu, Kang, Hong, Xue, Chen, Li and Fang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.857527
PMCID: PMC9043559
PMID: 35493524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.