1. Anat Cell Biol. 2022 Jun 30;55(2):239-246. doi: 10.5115/acb.21.242. Epub 2022 
May 3.

Combination of alpha lipoic acid and metformin supplement improve assisted 
reproductive technologies outcomes in polycystic ovary syndrome patients.

Jannatifar R(1)(2), Piroozmanesh H(1)(2), Sahraei SS(1)(2), Asa E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Academic Center for Education, Culture, 
and Research (ACECR), Qom Branch, Qom, Iran.
(2)Infertility Treatment Center, Academic Center for Education, Culture, and 
Research (ACECR), Qom Branch, Qom, Iran.

We aimed to investigating the effects of metformin (MET) in combination with 
alpha lipoic acid (ALA) on hormonal and biochemical parameters, in polycystic 
ovary syndrome (PCOS) women undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). 
This experimental pilot study with a randomized design was carried out on 40 
PCOS women in two groups: (1) MET group, administered 1,500 mg/day MET, and (2) 
MET (1,500 mg/day)+ALA (1,800 mg/day) group. Drugs were administered from the 
third day of the previous cycle until the day of oocyte aspiration (six weeks of 
treatment in total). MET+ALA significantly increased the number of maturated 
oocytes and the rate of fertilization when compared to the MET group. 
Combination MET+ALA could increase significantly the number of oocytes retrieval 
and the number of good-quality embryos. Also, the malondialdehyde (MDA) level 
decreased significantly in the MET+ALA group and the total antioxidant capacity 
(TAC) level increased significantly in the MET+ALA group compared to the MET 
group. Also, fasting blood sugar (FBS), insulin, luteinizing hormone (LH), and 
LH/follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) levels were significantly lower in the 
MET+ALA group. The pregnancy outcomes showed no significant difference in the 
rates of biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, miscarriage, and live births 
between the control and study groups. The combination of MET+ALA treatment could 
moderate the complications of PCOS and subsequently improve oocyte and embryo 
quality.

DOI: 10.5115/acb.21.242
PMCID: PMC9256491
PMID: 35501295

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.