1. Neuroimage Clin. 2022;34:103025. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2022.103025. Epub 2022
Apr  26.

Increased brain tissue sodium concentration in Friedreich ataxia: A multimodal 
MR imaging study.

Krahe J(1), Dogan I(1), Didszun C(2), Mirzazade S(2), Haeger A(1), Joni Shah 
N(3), Giordano IA(4), Klockgether T(4), Madelin G(5), Schulz JB(1), Romanzetti 
S(1), Reetz K(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074 
Aachen, Germany; JARA-BRAIN Institute Molecular Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 
Research Centre Juelich GmbH and RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074 
Aachen, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074 
Aachen, Germany; JARA-BRAIN Institute Molecular Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 
Research Centre Juelich GmbH and RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany; 
Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine 4 (INM-4), Research Centre Juelich GmbH, 
52428 Juelich, Germany; Monash Institute of Medical Engineering, Department of 
Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, and Monash Biomedical Imaging, 
School of Psychological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Bonn, Venusberg-Campus 1, 
53127 Bonn, Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 
Venusberg-Campus 1, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(5)Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, New York University 
Grossman School of Medicine, New York NY10016, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074 
Aachen, Germany; JARA-BRAIN Institute Molecular Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 
Research Centre Juelich GmbH and RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany. 
Electronic address: kreetz@ukaachen.de.

In patients with Friedreich ataxia, structural MRI is typically used to detect 
abnormalities primarily in the brainstem, cerebellum, and spinal cord. The aim 
of the present study was to additionally investigate possible metabolic changes 
in Friedreich ataxia using in vivo sodium MRI that may precede macroanatomical 
alterations, and to explore potential associations with clinical parameters of 
disease progression. Tissue sodium concentration across the whole brain was 
estimated from sodium MRI maps acquired at 3 T and compared between 24 patients 
with Friedreich ataxia (21-57 years old, 13 females) and 23 controls 
(21-60 years old, 12 females). Tensor-based morphometry was used to assess 
volumetric changes. Total sodium concentrations and volumetric data in brainstem 
and cerebellum were correlated with clinical parameters, such as severity of 
ataxia, activity of daily living and disability stage, age, age at onset, and 
disease duration. Compared to controls, patients showed reduced brain volume in 
the right cerebellar lobules I-V (difference in means: -0.039% of total 
intracranial volume [TICV]; Cohen's d = 0.83), cerebellar white matter (WM) 
(-0.105%TICV; d = 1.16), and brainstem (-0.167%TICV; d = 1.22), including pons 
(-0.102%TICV; d = 1.00), medulla (-0.036%TICV; d = 1.72), and midbrain 
(-0.028%TICV; d = 1.05). Increased sodium concentration was additionally 
detected in the total cerebellum (difference in means: 2.865 mmol; d = 0.68), 
and in several subregions with highest effect sizes in left (5.284 mmol; 
d = 1.01) and right cerebellar lobules I-V (5.456 mmol; d = 1.00), followed by 
increases in the vermis (4.261 mmol; d = 0.72), and in left (2.988 mmol; 
d = 0.67) and right lobules VI-VII (2.816 mmol; d = 0.68). In addition, sodium 
increases were also detected in all brainstem areas (3.807 mmol; d = 0.71 to 
5.42 mmol; d = 1.19). After controlling for age, elevated total sodium 
concentrations in right cerebellar lobules IV were associated with younger age 
at onset (r = -0.43) and accordingly with longer disease duration in patients 
(r = 0.43). Our findings support the potential of in vivo sodium MRI to detect 
metabolic changes of increased total sodium concentration in the cerebellum and 
brainstem, the key regions in Friedreich ataxia. In addition to structural 
changes, sodium changes were present in cerebellar hemispheres and vermis 
without concomitant significant atrophy. Given the association with age at 
disease onset or disease duration, metabolic changes should be further 
investigated longitudinally and in larger cohorts of early disease stages to 
determine the usefulness of sodium MRI as a biomarker for early 
neuropathological changes in Friedreich ataxia and efficacy measure for future 
clinical trials.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2022.103025
PMCID: PMC9065922
PMID: 35500368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.