1. RSC Adv. 2020 Oct 14;10(62):37974-37981. doi: 10.1039/d0ra06863b. eCollection 
2020 Oct 12.

Selective oxidation of alcohols and sulfides via O(2) using a Co(ii) salen 
complex catalyst immobilized on KCC-1: synthesis and kinetic study.

Allahresani A(1), Naghdi E(1), Nasseri MA(1), Hemmat K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Sciences, University of Birjand Birjand 
97175-615 Iran a_allahresani@birjand.ac.ir.

The aim of this study was to immobilize a Co(ii) salen complex on KCC-1 as a 
catalyst that can be recovered (Co(ii) salen complex@KCC-1). Field-emission 
transmission electron microscopy, FT-IR spectroscopy, thermogravimetric 
analysis, elemental analysis, atomic absorption spectroscopy, and XRD were used 
to confirm the structure and chemical nature of Co(ii) salen complex@KCC-1. The 
oxidation efficiency was obtained for an extensive range of sulfides and 
alcohols using this sustainable catalyst, alongside O2 as an oxygen source and 
isobutyraldehyde (IBA) as an oxygen acceptor, with superior selectivity and 
conversion for the relevant oxidation products (sulfoxides and ketones or 
aldehydes) under moderate conditions. The μ-oxo and peroxo groups on the ligands 
of the Co complex appeared to be responsible for the superior activity of the 
catalyst. Essential factors behind the oxidation of alcohol and sulfoxides were 
investigated, including the catalyst, solvent, and temperature. In this paper, 
molecular oxygen (O2) was used as a green oxidant. Furthermore, kinetic studies 
were conducted, revealing a first-order reaction for the oxidation of both 
benzyl alcohol and sulfide. The reaction progressed at mild temperature, and the 
catalyst could be easily recovered and reused for numerous consecutive runs 
under the reaction conditions, without any substantial reduction in the 
functionality of the catalytic system.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/d0ra06863b
PMCID: PMC9057241
PMID: 35515194

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.