1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Apr 18;13:891361. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.891361. 
eCollection 2022.

Integrated Analysis of Coding and Non-coding RNAs Reveals the Molecular 
Mechanism Underlying Salt Stress Response in Medicago truncatula.

An Y(1), Su H(1), Niu Q(1), Yin S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Grassland Science, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, China.

Salt stress is among the most severe abiotic stresses in plants worldwide. 
Medicago truncatula is a model plant for legumes and analysis of its response to 
salt stress is helpful for providing valuable insights into breeding. However, 
few studies have focused on illustrating the whole-transcriptome molecular 
mechanism underlying salt stress response in Medicago truncatula. Herein, we 
sampled the leaves of Medicago truncatula treated with water or NaCl and 
analyzed the characteristics of its coding and non-coding RNAs. We identified a 
total of 4,693 differentially expressed mRNAs (DEmRNAs), 505 DElncRNAs, 21 
DEcircRNAs, and 55 DEmiRNAs. Gene ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes pathway enrichment analyses revealed that their functions were mostly 
associated with metabolic processes. We classified the lncRNAs and circRNAs into 
different types and analyzed their genomic distributions. Furthermore, we 
predicted the interactions between different RNAs based on the competing 
endogenous RNA (ceRNA) theory and identified multiple correlation networks, 
including 27 DEmiRNAs, 43 DEmRNAs, 19 lncRNAs, and 5 DEcircRNAs. In addition, we 
comprehensively analyzed the candidate DEmRNAs and ceRNAs and found that they 
were involved in Ca+ signaling, starch and sucrose biosynthesis, phenylpropanoid 
and lignin metabolism, auxin and jasmonate biosynthesis, and transduction 
pathways. Our integrated analyses in salt stress response in Medicago truncatula 
revealed multiple differentially expressed coding and non-coding RNAs, including 
mRNAs, lncRNAs, circRNAs, and miRNAs, and identified multiple DEmRNA and ceRNA 
interaction pairs that function in many pathways, providing insights into salt 
stress response in leguminous plants.

Copyright Â© 2022 An, Su, Niu and Yin.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.891361
PMCID: PMC9064118
PMID: 35519807

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.