1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Apr 21;13:838397. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.838397. 
eCollection 2022.

Study on the Characteristics of Small-Molecule Kinase Inhibitors-Related 
Drug-Induced Liver Injury.

Dong H(1), You J(2), Zhao Y(3), Zheng D(1), Zhong Y(1)(3), Li G(3), Weng 
Z(1)(3), Luo H(1)(3)(4), Jiang S(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Biological Science and Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 
China.
(2)Department of Hepatology, Hepatology Research Institute, The First Affiliated 
Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(3)College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 
China.
(4)MetaNovas Biotech Inc., Foster City, CA, United States.
(5)Department of Vascular Thyroid Surgery, Affiliated Union Hospital, Fujian 
Medical University, Fuzhou, China.

Background and Aim: More than half of the small-molecule kinase inhibitors (KIs) 
induced liver injury clinically. Meanwhile, studies have shown a close 
relationship between mitochondrial damage and drug-induced liver injury (DILI). 
We aimed to study KIs and the binding between drugs and mitochondrial proteins 
to find factors related to DILI occurrence. Methods: A total of 1,223 oral 
FDA-approved drugs were collected and analyzed, including 44 KIs. Fisher's exact 
test was used to analyze DILI potential and risk of different factors. A total 
of 187 human mitochondrial proteins were further collected, and high-throughput 
molecular docking was performed between human mitochondrial proteins and drugs 
in the data set. The molecular dynamics simulation was used to optimize and 
evaluate the dynamic binding behavior of the selected mitochondrial protein/KI 
complexes. Results: The possibility of KIs to produce DILI is much higher than 
that of other types (OR = 46.89, p = 9.28E-13). A few DILI risk factors were 
identified, including molecular weight (MW) between 400 and 600, the defined 
daily dose (DDD) ≥ 100 mg/day, the octanol-water partition coefficient (LogP) ≥ 
3, and the degree of liver metabolism (LM) more than 50%. Drugs that met this 
combination of rules were found to have a higher DILI risk than controls (OR = 
8.28, p = 4.82E-05) and were more likely to cause severe DILI (OR = 8.26, p = 
5.06E-04). The docking results showed that KIs had a significant higher affinity 
with human mitochondrial proteins (p = 4.19E-11) than other drug types. 
Furthermore, the five proteins with the lowest docking score were selected for 
molecular dynamics simulation, and the smallest fluctuation of the backbone RMSD 
curve was found in the protein 5FS8/KI complexes, which indicated the best 
stability of the protein 5FS8 bound to KIs. Conclusions: KIs were found to have 
the highest odds ratio of causing DILI. MW was significantly related to the 
production of DILI, and the average docking scores of KI drugs were found to be 
significantly different from other classes. Further analysis identified the top 
binding mitochondrial proteins for KIs, and specific binding sites were 
analyzed. The optimization of molecular docking results by molecular dynamics 
simulation may contribute to further studying the mechanism of DILI.

Copyright © 2022 Dong, You, Zhao, Zheng, Zhong, Li, Weng, Luo and Jiang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.838397
PMCID: PMC9068902
PMID: 35529445

Conflict of interest statement: Author HL was employed by MetaNovas Biotech Inc. 
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of 
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.