1. Am J Gastroenterol. 2022 Aug 1;117(8):1296-1304. doi: 
10.14309/ajg.0000000000001805. Epub 2022 May 9.

Cannabidiol for Functional Dyspepsia With Normal Gastric Emptying: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial.

Atieh J(1), Maselli D(1), Breen-Lyles M(1), Torres M(1), Katzka D(1), Ryks M(1), 
Busciglio I(1), Burton D(1), Carlson P(1), Harmsen WS(1)(2), Camilleri M(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Enteric Neuroscience and Translational and Epidemiological Research 
(CENTER), Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(2)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Department of Health 
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Cannabidiol (CBD), a CBR2 agonist with limited psychic effects, 
antagonizes CB1/CB2 receptors. Allelic variation CNR1 (gene for CBR1) rs806378 
and FAAH rs324420 were associated with altered gut motility and sensation. This 
study aimed to compare the pharmacodynamics and clinical effects of a 4-week 
treatment with pharmaceutical-grade CBD vs placebo and assess the interactions 
of FAAH and CNR1 gene variants on the effects of CBD in patients with functional 
dyspepsia (FD).
METHODS: We performed a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled (1:1 
ratio) study of CBD b.i.d. (20 mg/kg/d according to the US Food and Drug 
Administration escalation guidance) in FD patients with nondelayed gastric 
emptying (GE) at baseline. Symptoms were assessed by validated daily symptom 
diary (0-4 scale for upper abdominal pain, nausea, and bloating), weekly 
assessment of adequate relief, Leuven Postprandial Distress Scale (8 symptoms, 
adjectival scores rated 0-4 for severity), and quality of life (Short-Form 
Nepean Dyspepsia Index [average of 10 dimensions each on a 5-point scale]). 
After the 4-week treatment, all patients underwent measurements of GE of solids, 
gastric volumes, and Ensure nutrient satiation test. Statistical analysis 
compared 2 treatments for all endpoints and the effects of CBD in association 
with FAAH rs324420 and CNR1 rs806378.
RESULTS: CBD and placebo effects on physiological functions and patient response 
outcomes were not significantly different. There were borderline CBD 
treatment-by-genotype interactions: rs806378 CNR1 with Leuven Postprandial 
Distress Scale ( P = 0.06) and GE solids ( P = 0.12).
DISCUSSION: Approved doses of CBD used off-label do not relieve FD with normal 
baseline GE of solids or alter gastric motor functions and satiation. CBD 
treatment-by-gene interactions suggest potential benefits for postprandial 
distress with CNR1 rs806378 T allele.

Copyright Â© 2022 by The American College of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.14309/ajg.0000000000001805
PMID: 35537858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]