1. PLoS One. 2022 May 10;17(5):e0266742. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0266742. 
eCollection 2022.

Nucleotide substitutions in the mexR, nalC and nalD regulator genes of the 
MexAB-OprM efflux pump are maintained in Pseudomonas aeruginosa genetic 
lineages.

Aguilar-Rodea P(1)(2)(3), Zúñiga G(4), Cerritos R(5), Rodríguez-Espino BA(6), 
Gomez-Ramirez U(2)(7), Nolasco-Romero CG(2)(7), López-Marceliano B(2), Rodea 
GE(2), Mendoza-Elizalde S(2), Reyes-López A(8), Olivares Clavijo H(9), Vigueras 
Galindo JC(2), Velázquez-Guadarrama N(2), Rosas-Pérez I(3).

Author information:
(1)Posgrado en Ciencias de la Tierra, Centro de Ciencias de la Atmósfera, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, México.
(2)Unidad de Investigación en Enfermedades Infecciosas Área de Genética 
Bacteriana, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, Ciudad de México, 
México.
(3)Laboratorio de Aerobiología, Centro de Ciencias de la Atmósfera, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, México.
(4)Laboratorio de Variación Biológica y Evolución, Departamento de Zoología, 
Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad 
de México, México.
(5)Centro de Investigación en Políticas Población y Salud, Centro de Ciencias de 
la Complejidad, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, 
México.
(6)Laboratorio de Investigación y Diagnóstico en Nefrología y Metabolismo 
Mineral Óseo, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, Ciudad de México, 
México.
(7)Programa de Posgrado en Ciencias Químicobiologicas, Escuela Nacional de 
Ciencias Biológicas. Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ciudad de México, México.
(8)Centro de Estudios Económicos y Sociales en Salud, Dirección de 
Investigación, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, Ciudad de México, 
México.
(9)Hemerobiblioteca, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, Ciudad de 
México, México.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa has different resistant mechanisms including the 
constitutive MexAB-OprM efflux pump. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
the mexR, nalC, and nalD repressors of this efflux pump can contribute to 
antimicrobial resistance; however, it is unknown whether these changes are 
mainly related to genetic lineages or environmental pressure. This study 
identifies SNPs in the mexR, nalC, and nalD genes in clinical and environmental 
isolates of P. aeruginosa (including high-risk clones). Ninety-one P. aeruginosa 
strains were classified according to their resistance to antibiotics, typified 
by multilocus sequencing, and mexR, nalC, and nalD genes sequenced for SNPs 
identification. The mexAB-oprM transcript expression was determined. The 96.7% 
of the strains were classified as multidrug resistant. Eight strains produced 
serine carbapenemases, and 11 strains metallo-β-lactamases. Twenty-three new STs 
and high-risk clones ST111 and ST233 were identified. SNPs in the mexR, nalC, 
and nalD genes revealed 27 different haplotypes (patterns). Sixty-two mutational 
changes were identified, 13 non-synonymous. Haplotype 1 was the most frequent (n 
= 40), and mainly identified in strains ST1725 (33/40), with 57.5% pan drug 
resistant strains, 36.5% extensive drug resistant and two strains exhibiting 
serin-carbapenemases. Haplotype 12 (n = 9) was identified in ST233 and 
phylogenetically related STs, with 100% of the strains exhibiting XDR and 90% 
producing metallo-β-lactamases. Haplotype 5 was highly associated with XDR and 
related to dead when compared to ST1725 and ST233 (RRR 23.34; p = 0.009 and RRR 
32.01; p = 0.025). A significant relationship between the mexR-nalC-nalD 
haplotypes and phylogenetically related STs was observed, suggesting mutational 
changes in these repressors are highly maintained within genetic lineages. In 
addition, phylogenetically related STs showed similar resistant profiles; 
however, the resistance was (likely or partly) attributed to the MexAB-OprM 
efflux pump in 56% of the strains (only 45.05% showed mexA overtranscription), 
in the remaining strains the resistance could be attributed to carbapenemases or 
mechanisms including other pumps, since same SNPs in the repressor genes gave 
rise to different resistance profiles.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0266742
PMCID: PMC9089866
PMID: 35536836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.