1. RSC Adv. 2018 Aug 30;8(53):30589-30599. doi: 10.1039/c8ra04866e. eCollection 
2018 Aug 24.

Eco-friendly synthesis of CuInS(2) and CuInS(2)@ZnS quantum dots and their 
effect on enzyme activity of lysozyme.

Mir IA(1), Das K(1), Akhter T(2), Ranjan R(1), Patel R(3), Bohidar HB(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Physical Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University New Delhi India 
bohi0700@mail.jnu.ac.in.
(2)Department of Botany, University of Delhi New Delhi India.
(3)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences, Jamia Millia Islamia 
New Delhi India.
(4)Special Center for Nanosciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University New Delhi India.

We report on the green and facile aqueous microwave synthesis of glutathione 
(GSH) stabilized luminescent CuInS2 (CIS, size = 2.9 nm) and CuInS2@ZnS 
core-shell (CIS@ZnS, size = 3.5 nm) quantum dots (QDs). The core-shell 
nanostructures exhibited excellent photo- and water/buffer stability, a long 
photoluminescence (PL) lifetime (463 ns) and high PL quantum yield (PLQY = 26%). 
We have evaluated the comparative enzyme kinetics of these hydrophilic QDs by 
interacting them with the model enzyme lysozyme, which was probed by static and 
synchronous fluorescence spectroscopy. The quantification of the QD-lysozyme 
binding isotherm, exchange rate, and critical flocculation concentration was 
carried out. The core-shell QDs exhibited higher binding with lysozyme yielding 
a binding constant of K = 5.04 × 109 L mol-1 compared to the core-only 
structures (K = 6.16 × 107 L mol-1), and the main cause of binding was 
identified as being due to hydrophobic forces. In addition to the enzyme 
activity being dose dependent, it was also found that core-shell structures 
caused an enhancement in activity. Since binary QDs like CdSe also show a change 
in the lysozyme enzyme activity, therefore, a clear differential between binary 
and ternary QDs was required to be established which clearly revealed the 
relevance of surface chemistry on the QD-lysozyme interaction.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1039/c8ra04866e
PMCID: PMC9085571
PMID: 35546847

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interest.