1. Front Pain Res (Lausanne). 2022 Apr 25;3:861598. doi:
10.3389/fpain.2022.861598.  eCollection 2022.

CGRP Administration Into the Cerebellum Evokes Light Aversion, Tactile 
Hypersensitivity, and Nociceptive Squint in Mice.

Wang M(1), Duong TL(2), Rea BJ(2)(3), Waite JS(2), Huebner MW(2), Flinn HC(2), 
Russo AF(2)(3)(4), Sowers LP(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, 
IA, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, United States.
(3)Center for the Prevention and Treatment of Visual Loss, Veterans 
Administration Health Center, Iowa City, IA, United States.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States.

The neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is a major player in 
migraine pathophysiology. Previous preclinical studies demonstrated that 
intracerebroventricular administration of CGRP caused migraine-like behaviors in 
mice, but the sites of action in the brain remain unidentified. The cerebellum 
has the most CGRP binding sites in the central nervous system and is 
increasingly recognized as both a sensory and motor integration center. The 
objective of this study was to test whether the cerebellum, particularly the 
medial cerebellar nuclei (MN), might be a site of CGRP action. In this study, 
CGRP was directly injected into the right MN of C57BL/6J mice via a cannula. A 
battery of tests was done to assess preclinical behaviors that are surrogates of 
migraine-like symptoms. CGRP caused light aversion measured as decreased time in 
the light zone even with dim light. The mice also spent more time resting in the 
dark zone, but not the light, along with decreased rearing and transitions 
between zones. These behaviors were similar for both sexes. Moreover, 
significant responses to CGRP were seen in the open field assay, von Frey test, 
and automated squint assay, indicating anxiety, tactile hypersensitivity, and 
spontaneous pain, respectively. Interestingly, CGRP injection caused significant 
anxiety and spontaneous pain responses only in female mice, and a more robust 
tactile hypersensitivity in female mice. No detectable effect of CGRP on gait 
was observed in either sex. These results suggest that CGRP injection in the MN 
causes light aversion accompanied by increased anxiety, tactile 
hypersensitivity, and spontaneous pain. A caveat is that we cannot exclude 
contributions from other cerebellar regions in addition to the MN due to 
diffusion of the injected peptide. These results reveal the cerebellum as a new 
site of CGRP actions that may contribute to migraine-like hypersensitivity.

Copyright Â© 2022 Wang, Duong, Rea, Waite, Huebner, Flinn, Russo and Sowers.

DOI: 10.3389/fpain.2022.861598
PMCID: PMC9082264
PMID: 35547239

Conflict of interest statement: AR is a consultant for Lundbeck, Amgen, 
Novartis, Eli Lilly, AbbVie, and Schedule 1 Therapeutics. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.