1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Apr 29;9:881547. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.881547. 
eCollection 2022.

HTLV-1 Transmission and HIV Pre-exposure Prophylaxis: A Scoping Review.

Bradshaw D(1)(2), Taylor GP(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Virus Reference Department, UK Health Security Agency, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)National Centre for Human Retrovirology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS 
Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (HIV-PrEP) is effective in reducing the likelihood 
of HIV acquisition in HIV-negative people at high risk of exposure. Guidelines 
recommend testing for sexually transmitted infections (STIs) before starting, 
and periodically on PrEP, including bacterial infections, HIV, hepatitis C 
virus, and, for those who are non-immune, hepatitis B virus. Diagnosed 
infections can be promptly treated to reduce onward transmission. HTLV-1 is not 
mentioned; however, it is predominantly sexually transmitted, causes adult 
T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma (ATL) or myelopathy in 10% of those infected, and is 
associated with an increased risk of death in those without any classically 
HTLV-associated condition. The 2021 WHO Technical Report on HTLV-1 called for 
the strengthening of global public health measures against its spread. In this 
scoping review, we, therefore, (1) discuss the epidemiological context of 
HIV-PrEP and HTLV-1 transmission; (2) present current knowledge of 
antiretrovirals in relation to HTLV-1 transmission prevention, including 
nucleos(t)ide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and integrase strand 
transfer inhibitors (INSTIs); and (3) identify knowledge gaps where data are 
urgently required to inform global public health measures to protect HIV-PrEP 
users from HTLV-1 acquisition. We suggest that systematic seroprevalence studies 
among PrEP-using groups, including men who have sex with men (MSM), people who 
inject drugs (PWIDs), and female sex workers (FSWs), are needed. Further data 
are required to evaluate antiretroviral efficacy in preventing HTLV-1 
transmission from in vitro studies, animal models, and clinical cohorts. PrEP 
delivery programmes should consider prioritizing the long-acting injectable 
INSTI, cabotegravir, in HTLV-1 endemic settings.

Copyright Â© 2022 Bradshaw and Taylor.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.881547
PMCID: PMC9103472
PMID: 35572998

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.