1. Cancer Drug Resist. 2019 Mar 19;2(1):43-52. doi: 10.20517/cdr.2018.22. 
eCollection 2019.

Opportunities and challenges of implementing Pharmacogenomics in cancer drug 
development.

Tarantino P(1)(2), Trapani D(1)(2), Morganti S(1)(2), Ferraro E(1)(2), Viale 
G(1)(2), D'Amico P(1)(2), Duso BA(1)(2), Curigliano G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Early Drug Development for Innovative Therapies, IEO, European 
Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan 20141, Italy.
(2)Department of Oncology and Haematology (DIPO), University of Milan, Milan 
20122, Italy.

Cancer drug development is a time and resources consuming process. Around 90% of 
drugs entering clinical trials fail due to lack of efficacy and/or safety 
issues, more often after conspicuous research and economic efforts. Part of the 
discarded drugs might be beneficial only in a subgroup of the study patients, 
and some adverse events might be prevented by identifying those patients more 
vulnerable to toxicities. The implementation of pharmacogenomic biomarkers 
allows the categorization of patients, to predict efficacy and toxicity and to 
optimize the drug development process. Around seventy FDA approved drugs 
currently present one or more genetic biomarker to keep in consideration, and 
with the progress of Precision Medicine tailoring therapies on individuals' 
genomic landscape promises to become a new standard of cancer care. In the 
current article we review the role of pharmacogenomics in cancer drug 
development, underlying the advantages and challenges of their implementation.

Â© The Author(s) 2019.

DOI: 10.20517/cdr.2018.22
PMCID: PMC9019172
PMID: 35582141

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared that there are no conflicts 
of interest.