1. Comput Biol Med. 2022 Jul;146:105566. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105566. 
Epub 2022 May 17.

In silico exploration of disulfide derivatives of Ferula foetida oleo-gum 
(Covexir®) as promising therapeutics against SARS-CoV-2.

Hashemzadeh H(1), Iranshahy M(2), Iranshahi M(3), Raissi H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology, School of 
Pharmacy, Birjand University of Medical Sciences, Birjand, Iran. Electronic 
address: hashemzade_h@bums.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy, School of Pharmacy, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address: iranshahiml@mums.ac.ir.
(3)Biotechnology Research Center, Pharmaceutical Technology Institute, Mashhad 
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address: 
iranshahim@mums.ac.ir.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Birjand, Birjand, Iran. Electronic 
address: hraeisi@birjand.ac.ir.

Although vaccines have been significantly successful against coronavirus, due to 
the high rate of the Omicron variant spread many researchers are trying to find 
efficient drugs against COVID-19. Herein, we conducted a computational study to 
investigate the binding mechanism of four potential inhibitors (including 
disulfide derivatives isolated from Ferula foetida) to SARS-CoV-2 main protease. 
Our findings revealed that the disulfides mainly interacted with HIS41, MET49, 
CYS145, HIS64, MET165, and GLN189 residues of SARS-CoV-2 main protease. The 
binding free energy decomposition results also showed that the van der Waals 
(vdW) energy plays the main role in the interaction of HIS41, MET49, CYS145, 
HIS64, MET165, and GLN189 residues with the inhibitors. Furthermore, it is found 
that the Z-isomer derivatives have a stronger interaction with SARS-CoV-2, and 
the strongest interaction belongs to the 
(Z)-1-(1-(methylthio)propyl)-2-(prop-1-enyl)disulfane (ΔG = -18.672 kcal/mol). 
The quantum mechanical calculations demonstrated that the second-order 
perturbation stabilization energy and the electron density values for 
MET49-ligand interactions are higher than the other residue-ligand complexes. 
This finding confirms the stronger interaction of this residue with the ligands.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105566
PMCID: PMC9112615
PMID: 35598351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.