1. Materials (Basel). 2022 Apr 28;15(9):3184. doi: 10.3390/ma15093184.

Influence of the Tool Cutting Edge Helix Angle on the Surface Roughness after 
Finish Milling of Magnesium Alloys.

Zagórski I(1), Szczepaniak A(1), Kulisz M(2), Korpysa J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Production Engineering, Mechanical Engineering Faculty, Lublin 
University of Technology, 20-618 Lublin, Poland.
(2)Department of Organisation of Enterprise, Management Faculty, Lublin 
University of Technology, 20-618 Lublin, Poland.

This paper shows the surface quality results after finishing milling of AZ91D 
and AZ31 magnesium alloys. The study was performed for variable technological 
parameters: cutting speed, feed per tooth, axial depth of cut and radial depth 
of cut. The tools used in the study were two carbide cutters with a different 
tool cutting edge helix angle. The measurement of the research results presented 
the surface roughness parameters was made on the lateral faces and the end faces 
of the specimens. Statistical analysis and simulations using artificial neural 
networks were carried out with the Statistica software. The normality of the 
distribution was examined, and the hypotheses of the equality of mean values and 
variance were verified. For the AZ91D magnesium alloy on the lateral and the end 
faces (Ra, Rz parameters), simulations were carried out. Two types of ANN were 
used: MLP (Multi-layered perceptron) and RBF (Radial Basis Function). To 
increase the machining stability and to obtain a high surface finish, the more 
suitable tool for finishing milling is the tool with a helix angle of λs = 20°. 
Artificial neural networks have been shown to be a good tool for predicting 
surface roughness parameters of magnesium alloys after finishing milling.

DOI: 10.3390/ma15093184
PMCID: PMC9100010
PMID: 35591519

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.