1. Curr Microbiol. 2022 May 20;79(7):199. doi: 10.1007/s00284-022-02887-5.

Engineered CRISPR/Cas9 System for Transcriptional Gene Silencing in Arthrobacter 
Species Indicates Bacterioruberin is Indispensable for Growth at Low 
Temperatures.

Flegler A(1), Lipski A(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Nutritional and Food Science, Food Microbiology and Hygiene, 
University of Bonn, Friedrich-Hirzebruch-Allee 7, 53115, Bonn, Germany.
(2)Institute of Nutritional and Food Science, Food Microbiology and Hygiene, 
University of Bonn, Friedrich-Hirzebruch-Allee 7, 53115, Bonn, Germany. 
lipski@uni-bonn.de.

Pink-pigmented Arthrobacter species produce the rare C50 carotenoid 
bacterioruberin, which is suspected to be part of the cold adaptation mechanism. 
In silico analysis of the repertoire of genes encoded by the Arthrobacter agilis 
and Arthrobacter bussei genome revealed the biosynthetic pathway of 
bacterioruberin. Although genetic analysis is an essential tool for studying the 
physiology of Arthrobacter species, genetic manipulation of Arthrobacter is 
always time and labor intensive due to the lack of genetic engineering tools. 
Here we report the construction and application of a CRISPR/deadCas9 system 
(pCasiART) for gene silencing in Arthrobacter species. The engineered system 
pCasiART is suitable for the Golden Gate assembly of spacers, enabling rapid and 
accurate construction of adapted systems. In addition, pCasiART has been 
developed to provide an efficient transcription inhibition system for 
genome-wide gene silencing. The gene silencing of the phytoene synthase (CrtB), 
the first enzyme in bacterioruberin biosynthesis, suppressed bacterioruberin 
biosynthesis in Arthrobacter agilis and Arthrobacter bussei, resulting in a lack 
of pink pigmentation, reduction of biomass production, and growth rates at low 
temperatures.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-022-02887-5
PMCID: PMC9122864
PMID: 35595842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare relevant to this article’s content.