1. Front Oncol. 2022 May 4;12:881015. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.881015. eCollection 
2022.

Identification by Bioinformatics Analysis of Potential Key Genes Related to the 
Progression and Prognosis of Gastric Cancer.

Gao W(1), Yang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang Chinese 
Medical University, Hangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: Despite increasingly sophisticated medical technology, the prognosis 
of patients with advanced gastric cancer is still not objectively certain. 
Therefore, it is urgent to identify new diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. To 
identify potential critical genes related to gastric cancer's staging mechanism 
and to the prognosis of gastric cancer.
METHODS: Dynamic trend analysis was conducted to find genes with similar trends 
in gastric cancer staging in order to explore the differentially expressed genes 
in gastric cancer and identify the intersection of the results of the dynamic 
trend analysis. Functional predictive analysis were performed on the obtained 
genes to observe the expression of prognostic genes in gastric cancer and in 
gastric cancer stages as well as the correlation with tumor immune cell 
infiltration. Gastric cancer samples were collected and sequenced for follow-up 
analysis based on the results of the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database 
analysis.
RESULTS: The expression of genes enriched in module 0 had a similar trend in 
gastric cancer staging. 3213 differential genes were screened. A total of 50 
intersection genes were obtained among genes with similar trends, of which only 
10 genes have prognostic significance in gastric cancer. These 10 genes were 
correlated with macrophage infiltration in varying degrees. In addition, we 
found that AGT was significantly abnormally expressed in the results of sample 
sequencing. AGT was related to the occurrence of gastric cancer and interacted 
with brd9, golph3, nom1, klhl25, and psmd11.
CONCLUSION: AGT has prominent abnormal expression in gastric cancer and may 
promote gastric cancer progression. This study provides a new direction for 
further exploring potential biomarkers and molecular targeted gastric cancer 
therapy.

Copyright Â© 2022 Gao and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.881015
PMCID: PMC9114743
PMID: 35600357

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.