1. Neurobiol Stress. 2022 Apr 22;18:100455. doi: 10.1016/j.ynstr.2022.100455. 
eCollection 2022 May.

Mineralocorticoid receptor and glucocorticoid receptor work alone and together 
in cell-type-specific manner: Implications for resilience prediction and 
targeted therapy.

Daskalakis NP(1), Meijer OC(2), de Kloet ER(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Belmont, 
MA, USA.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.

'You can't roll the clock back and reverse the effects of experiences' Bruce 
McEwen used to say when explaining how allostasis labels the adaptive process. 
Here we will for once roll the clock back to the times that the science of the 
glucocorticoid hormone was honored with a Nobel prize and highlight the 
discovery of their receptors in the hippocampus as inroad to its current status 
as master regulator in control of stress coping and adaptation. Glucocorticoids 
operate in concert with numerous neurotransmitters, neuropeptides, and other 
hormones with the aim to facilitate processing of information in the 
neurocircuitry of stress, from anticipation and perception of a novel experience 
to behavioral adaptation and memory storage. This action, exerted by the 
glucocorticoids, is guided by two complementary receptor systems, 
mineralocorticoid receptors (MR) and glucocorticoid receptors (GR), that need to 
be balanced for a healthy stress response pattern. Here we discuss the cellular, 
neuroendocrine, and behavioral studies underlying the MR:GR balance concept, 
highlight the relevance of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) -axis patterns 
and note the limited understanding yet of sexual dimorphism in glucocorticoid 
actions. We conclude with the prospect that (i) genetically and epigenetically 
regulated receptor variants dictate cell-type-specific transcriptome signatures 
of stress-related neuropsychiatric symptoms and (ii) selective receptor 
modulators are becoming available for more targeted treatment. These two new 
developments may help to 'restart the clock' with the prospect to support 
resilience.

Â© 2022 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ynstr.2022.100455
PMCID: PMC9118500
PMID: 35601687

Conflict of interest statement: In the past 3 years, NP Daskalakis has been a 
consultant for Sunovion Pharmaceuticals and is on the scientific advisory board 
for Sentio Solutions and Circular Genomics for unrelated work. OC Meijer 
collaborates with and receives research funding from Corcept Therapeutics. ER de 
Kloet owns stock of Corcept Therapeutics.