1. Gels. 2022 May 19;8(5):312. doi: 10.3390/gels8050312.

Promotion of Cyst Formation from a Renal Stem Cell Line Using Organ-Specific 
Extracellular Matrix Gel Format Culture System.

Sakai Y(1), Kubo Y(1), Shirakigawa N(1), Kawabe Y(1), Kamihira M(1), Ijima H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Graduate School, 
Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan.

Researchers have long awaited the technology to develop an in vitro kidney 
model. Here, we establish a rapid fabricating technique for kidney-like tissues 
(cysts) using a combination of an organ-derived extracellular matrix (ECM) gel 
format culture system and a renal stem cell line (CHK-Q cells). CHK-Q cells, 
which are spontaneously immortalized from the renal stem cells of the Chinese 
hamster, formed renal cyst-like structures in a type-I collagen gel sandwich 
culture on day 1 of culture. The cysts fused together and expanded while 
maintaining three-dimensional structures. The expression of genes related to 
kidney development and maturation was increased compared with that in a 
traditional monolayer. Under the kidney-derived ECM (K-ECM) gel format culture 
system, cyst formation and maturation were induced rapidly. Gene expressions 
involved in cell polarities, especially for important material transporters 
(typical markers Slc5a1 and Kcnj1), were restored. K-ECM composition was an 
important trigger for CHK-Q cells to promote kidney-like tissue formation and 
maturation. We have established a renal cyst model which rapidly expressed 
mature kidney features via the combination of K-ECM gel format culture system 
and CHK-Q cells.

DOI: 10.3390/gels8050312
PMCID: PMC9140708
PMID: 35621610

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.