1. Front Hum Neurosci. 2022 May 11;16:849297. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.849297. 
eCollection 2022.

Walking and Balance Outcomes Are Improved Following Brief Intensive Locomotor 
Skill Training but Are Not Augmented by Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation 
in Persons With Chronic Spinal Cord Injury.

Evans NH(1)(2), Suri C(1), Field-Fote EC(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Shepherd Center, Crawford Research Institute, Atlanta, GA, United States.
(2)Department of Applied Physiology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, 
GA, United States.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA, United States.

Motor training to improve walking and balance function is a common aspect of 
rehabilitation following motor-incomplete spinal cord injury (MISCI). Evidence 
suggests that moderate- to high-intensity exercise facilitates neuroplastic 
mechanisms that support motor skill acquisition and learning. Furthermore, 
enhancing corticospinal drive via transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) 
may augment the effects of motor training. In this pilot study, we investigated 
whether a brief moderate-intensity locomotor-related motor skill training (MST) 
circuit, with and without tDCS, improved walking and balance outcomes in persons 
with MISCI. In addition, we examined potential differences between within-day 
(online) and between-day (offline) effects of MST. Twenty-six adults with 
chronic MISCI, who had some walking ability, were enrolled in a 5-day 
double-blind, randomized study with a 3-day intervention period. Participants 
were assigned to an intensive locomotor MST circuit and concurrent application 
of either sham tDCS (MST+tDCSsham) or active tDCS (MST+tDCS). The primary 
outcome was overground walking speed measured during the 10-meter walk test. 
Secondary outcomes included spatiotemporal gait characteristics (cadence and 
stride length), peak trailing limb angle (TLA), intralimb coordination (ACC), 
the Berg Balance Scale (BBS), and the Falls Efficacy Scale-International (FES-I) 
questionnaire. Analyses revealed a significant effect of the MST circuit, with 
improvements in walking speed, cadence, bilateral stride length, stronger limb 
TLA, weaker limb ACC, BBS, and FES-I observed in both the MST+tDCSsham and 
MST+tDCS groups. No differences in outcomes were observed between groups. 
Between-day change accounted for a greater percentage of the overall change in 
walking outcomes. In persons with MISCI, brief intensive MST involving a circuit 
of ballistic, cyclic locomotor-related skill activities improved walking 
outcomes, and selected strength and balance outcomes; however, concurrent 
application of tDCS did not further enhance the effects of MST.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: [ClinicalTrials.gov], identifier [NCT03237234].

Copyright Â© 2022 Evans, Suri and Field-Fote.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2022.849297
PMCID: PMC9130633
PMID: 35634208

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.