1. Nat Commun. 2022 May 31;13(1):3013. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30621-z.

Omega-3 fatty acid epoxides produced by PAF-AH2 in mast cells regulate pulmonary 
vascular remodeling.

Moriyama H(1), Endo J(2), Kataoka M(1), Shimanaka Y(3), Kono N(3), Sugiura Y(4), 
Goto S(1), Kitakata H(1), Hiraide T(1), Yoshida N(1), Isobe S(1), Yamamoto T(1), 
Shirakawa K(1), Anzai A(1), Katsumata Y(1), Suematsu M(4), Kosaki K(5), Fukuda 
K(1), Arai H(3), Sano M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. 
jinendo@keio.jp.
(3)Laboratory of Health Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Pulmonary hypertension is a fatal rare disease that causes right heart failure 
by elevated pulmonary arterial resistance. There is an unmet medical need for 
the development of therapeutics focusing on the pulmonary vascular remodeling. 
Bioactive lipids produced by perivascular inflammatory cells might modulate the 
vascular remodeling. Here, we show that ω-3 fatty acid-derived epoxides (ω-3 
epoxides) released from mast cells by PAF-AH2, an oxidized 
phospholipid-selective phospholipase A2, negatively regulate pulmonary 
hypertension. Genetic deletion of Pafah2 in mice accelerate vascular remodeling, 
resulting in exacerbation of hypoxic pulmonary hypertension. Treatment with ω-3 
epoxides suppresses the lung fibroblast activation by inhibiting TGF-β 
signaling. In vivo ω-3 epoxides supplementation attenuates the progression of 
pulmonary hypertension in several animal models. Furthermore, whole-exome 
sequencing for patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension identifies two 
candidate pathogenic variants of Pafah2. Our findings support that the 
PAF-AH2-ω-3 epoxide production axis could be a promising therapeutic target for 
pulmonary hypertension.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-30621-z
PMCID: PMC9156667
PMID: 35641514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.