1. J Adv Res. 2023 Mar;45:15-29. doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2022.05.012. Epub 2022 May
31.

Immunomodulatory properties of mesenchymal stromal/stem cells: The link with 
metabolism.

Li H(1), Dai H(1), Li J(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Stomatology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 401147, 
China; Chongqing Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases and Biomedical Sciences, 
Chongqing 401147, China; Chongqing Municipal Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedical 
Engineering of Higher Education, Chongqing 401147, China.
(2)College of Stomatology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 401147, 
China; Chongqing Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases and Biomedical Sciences, 
Chongqing 401147, China; Chongqing Municipal Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedical 
Engineering of Higher Education, Chongqing 401147, China. Electronic address: 
jieli@hospital.cqmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (MSCs) are the most promising stem 
cells for the treatment of multiple inflammatory and immune diseases due to 
their easy acquisition and potent immuno-regulatory capacities. These immune 
functions mainly depend on the MSC secretion of soluble factors. Recent studies 
have shown that the metabolism of MSCs plays critical roles in immunomodulation, 
which not only provides energy and building blocks for macromolecule synthesis 
but is also involved in the signaling pathway regulation.
AIM OF REVIEW: A thorough understanding of metabolic regulation in MSC 
immunomodulatory properties can provide new sights to the enhancement of 
MSC-based therapy.
KEY SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS OF REVIEW: MSC immune regulation can be affected by 
cellular metabolism (glucose, adenosine triphosphate, lipid and amino acid 
metabolism), which further mediates MSC therapy efficiency in inflammatory and 
immune diseases. The enhancement of glycolysis of MSCs, such as signaling 
molecule activation, inflammatory cytokines priming, or environmental control 
can promote MSC immune functions and therapeutic potential. Besides glucose 
metabolism, inflammatory stimuli also alter the lipid molecular profile of MSCs, 
but the direct link with immunomodulatory properties remains to be further 
explored. Arginine metabolism, glutamine-glutamate metabolism and 
tryptophan-kynurenine via indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) metabolism all 
contribute to the immune regulation of MSCs. In addition to the metabolism 
dictating the MSC immune functions, MSCs also influence the metabolism of immune 
cells and thus determine their behaviors. However, more direct evidence of the 
metabolism in MSC immune abilities as well as the underlying mechanism requires 
to be uncovered.

Copyright Â© 2023. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jare.2022.05.012
PMCID: PMC10006530
PMID: 35659923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.