1. Neurol Sci. 2022 Sep;43(9):5391-5396. doi: 10.1007/s10072-022-06125-5.

OPTN variants in ALS cases: a case report of a novel mutation and literature 
review.

Mou Y(1)(2), Li M(1)(2), Liu M(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Zhu G(1)(2), Zha Y(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Yichang, Three Gorges 
University College of Medicine, Yichang, 443000, China.
(2)Institute of Neural Regeneration and Repair, The First Hospital of Yichang, 
Three Gorges University College of Medicine, Yichang, 443000, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Yichang, Three Gorges 
University College of Medicine, Yichang, 443000, China. yzha7808@ctgu.edu.cn.
(4)Institute of Neural Regeneration and Repair, The First Hospital of Yichang, 
Three Gorges University College of Medicine, Yichang, 443000, China. 
yzha7808@ctgu.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Optineurin (OPTN)-associated mutations have been implicated in the 
development of type 12 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS12). We reported a case 
of ALS with a new OPTN variant (p.D527fs) and reviewed relevant literature to 
better understand the phenotypes and pathophysiological mechanisms of ALS12.
METHODS: We report a case of a 55-year-old female patient with a new 
heterozygous variant of the OPTN gene. A literature search of ALS cases 
associated with the OPTN gene mutations was performed in PubMed with the search 
criteria as [("amyotrophic lateral sclerosis") OR ("motor neuron disease")] AND 
("OPTN").
RESULTS: The case of ALS with a new OPTN variant (p.D527fs) in our report 
manifested with bulbar involvement in onset and a rapidly progressive course. A 
literature review of 37 ALS patients with OPTN mutations included 20 males and 
16 females with another patient whose gender was not described. The mean onset 
age of 37 ALS12 patients was 48 with the youngest 23 and the oldest 83 years 
old. Differences in onset age between male and female patients were not 
significant. Mean time from initiation to death was 61.8 ± 12.0 months. Patients 
present with either limb onset (73.5% cases) or bulbar onset (23.5% cases).
CONCLUSION: Through the literature review, we summarized the clinical 
characteristics of ALS12. The phenotypes of the reported patients elucidate the 
genetic profiles and clinical phenotypes of ALS12. Clinicians should pay close 
attention to the role of receptor-interacting kinase 1 (RIPK1)-dependent 
necroptosis in the pathophysiologic development of ALS12, since necroptosis 
inhibitors are expected as potential therapeutic agents for treating ALS12.

© 2022. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-022-06125-5
PMID: 35661277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]