1. Front Genet. 2022 May 23;13:855052. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.855052.
eCollection  2022.

De Novo Assembly of Plasmodium knowlesi Genomes From Clinical Samples Explains 
the Counterintuitive Intrachromosomal Organization of Variant SICAvar and kir 
Multiple Gene Family Members.

Oresegun DR(1), Thorpe P(1), Benavente ED(2), Campino S(2), Muh F(1), Moon 
RW(2), Clark TG(2)(3), Cox-Singh J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection and Global Health, School of Medicine, University of St 
Andrews, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(2)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Plasmodium knowlesi, a malaria parasite of Old World macaque monkeys, is used 
extensively to model Plasmodium biology. Recently, P. knowlesi was found in the 
human population of Southeast Asia, particularly Malaysia. P. knowlesi causes 
uncomplicated to severe and fatal malaria in the human host with features in 
common with the more prevalent and virulent malaria caused by Plasmodium 
falciparum. As such, P. knowlesi presents a unique opportunity to develop 
experimental translational model systems for malaria pathophysiology informed by 
clinical data from same-species human infections. Experimental lines of P. 
knowlesi represent well-characterized genetically stable parasites, and to 
maximize their utility as a backdrop for understanding malaria pathophysiology, 
genetically diverse contemporary clinical isolates, essentially wild-type, 
require comparable characterization. The Oxford Nanopore PCR-free long-read 
sequencing platform was used to sequence and de novo assemble P. knowlesi 
genomes from frozen clinical samples. The sequencing platform and assembly 
pipelines were designed to facilitate capturing data and describing, for the 
first time, P. knowlesi schizont-infected cell agglutination (SICA) var and 
Knowlesi-Interspersed Repeats (kir) multiple gene families in parasites acquired 
from nature. The SICAvar gene family members code for antigenically variant 
proteins analogous to the virulence-associated P. falciparum erythrocyte 
membrane protein (PfEMP1) multiple var gene family. Evidence presented here 
suggests that the SICAvar family members have arisen through a process of gene 
duplication, selection pressure, and variation. Highly evolving genes including 
PfEMP1family members tend to be restricted to relatively unstable sub-telomeric 
regions that drive change with core genes protected in genetically stable 
intrachromosomal locations. The comparable SICAvar and kir gene family members 
are counter-intuitively located across chromosomes. Here, we demonstrate that, 
in contrast to conserved core genes, SICAvar and kir genes occupy otherwise 
gene-sparse chromosomal locations that accommodate rapid evolution and change. 
The novel methods presented here offer the malaria research community not only 
new tools to generate comprehensive genome sequence data from small clinical 
samples but also new insight into the complexity of clinically important 
real-world parasites.

Copyright Â© 2022 Oresegun, Thorpe, Benavente, Campino, Muh, Moon, Clark and 
Cox-Singh.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.855052
PMCID: PMC9169567
PMID: 35677565

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.