1. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2022 Jun 7;13(1):238. doi: 10.1186/s13287-022-02921-0.

Comprehensive insight into endothelial progenitor cell-derived extracellular 
vesicles as a promising candidate for disease treatment.

Chen K(#)(1), Li Y(#)(1), Xu L(#)(1), Qian Y(1), Liu N(1), Zhou C(1), Liu J(1), 
Zhou L(1), Xu Z(1), Jia R(2), Ge YZ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
No. 68 Changle Road, Nanjing, 210006, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Urology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
No. 68 Changle Road, Nanjing, 210006, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. 
ruipengj@163.com.
(3)Department of Urology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
No. 68 Changle Road, Nanjing, 210006, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. 
geyuzheng@njmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs), which are a type of stem cell, have been 
found to have strong angiogenic and tissue repair capabilities. Extracellular 
vesicles (EVs) contain many effective components, such as cellular proteins, 
microRNAs, messenger RNAs, and long noncoding RNAs, and can be secreted by 
different cell types. The functions of EVs depend mainly on their parent cells. 
Many researchers have conducted functional studies of EPC-derived EVs (EPC-EVs) 
and showed that they exhibit therapeutic effects on many diseases, such as 
cardiovascular disease, acute kidney injury, acute lung injury, and sepsis. In 
this review article, we comprehensively summarized the biogenesis and functions 
of EPCs and EVs and the potent role of EPC-EVs in the treatment of various 
diseases. Furthermore, the current problems and future prospects have been 
discussed, and further studies are needed to compare the therapeutic effects of 
EVs derived from various stem cells, which will contribute to the accelerated 
translation of these applications in a clinical setting.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13287-022-02921-0
PMCID: PMC9172199
PMID: 35672766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interest exists.