1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 May 23;9:906001. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.906001. 
eCollection 2022.

Construction and Analysis of a Joint Diagnosis Model of Random Forest and 
Artificial Neural Network for Obesity.

Yu J(1), Xie X(1), Zhang Y(1), Jiang F(2), Wu C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Neonatology, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.

Obesity is a significant global health concern since it is connected to a higher 
risk of several chronic diseases. As a consequence, obesity may be described as 
a condition that reduces human life expectancy and significantly impacts life 
quality. Because traditional obesity diagnosis procedures have several flaws, it 
is vital to design new diagnostic models to enhance current methods. More 
obesity-related markers have been discovered in recent years as a result of 
improvements and enhancements in gene sequencing technology. Using current gene 
expression profiles from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) collection, we 
identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with obesity and 
found 12 important genes (CRLS1, ANG, ALPK3, ADSSL1, ABCC1, HLF, AZGP1, TSC22D3, 
F2R, FXN, PEMT, and SPTAN1) using a random forest classifier. ALPK3, HLF, FXN, 
and SPTAN1 are the only genes that have never been linked to obesity. We also 
used an artificial neural network to build a novel obesity diagnosis model and 
tested its diagnostic effectiveness using public datasets.

Copyright Â© 2022 Yu, Xie, Zhang, Jiang and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.906001
PMCID: PMC9168076
PMID: 35677823

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.