1. J Nutr Biochem. 2022 Oct;108:109081. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2022.109081. Epub 
2022 Jun 10.

The PNPLA3 variant I148M reveals protective effects toward hepatocellular 
carcinoma in mice via restoration of omega-3 polyunsaturated fats.

Patsenker E(1), Thangapandi VR(2), Knittelfelder O(3), Palladini A(4), Hefti 
M(5), Beil-Wagner J(6), Rogler G(5), Buch T(6), Shevchenko A(3), Hampe J(2), 
Stickel F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: eleonora.patsenker@usz.ch.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Universitätsklinikum Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany; Center for Regenerative Therapies, TU Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany.
(3)Max Plank Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany.
(4)Paul Langerhans Institute Dresden of the Helmholtz Zentrum München at the 
University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany; German Center for Diabetes Research, Neuherberg, Germany.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(6)Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, University of Zurich, Schlieren, 
Switzerland.

Alcohol consumption and high caloric diet are leading causes of progressive 
fatty liver disease. Genetic variant rs738409 in patatin-like phospholipase 
domain-containing protein 3 (PNPLA3 rs738409 C&gt;G) has been repeatedly 
described as one of the major risk loci for alcoholic liver cirrhosis (ALC) and 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in humans, however, the mechanism behind this 
association is incompletely understood. We generated mice carrying the rs738409 
variant (PNPLA3 I148M) in order to detect genotype-phenotype relationships in 
mice upon chow and alcohol-high fat/high sugar diet (EtOH/WD). We could clearly 
demonstrate that the presence of rs738409 per se is sufficient to induce 
spontaneous development of steatosis after 1 year in mice on a chow diet, 
whereas in the setting of unhealthy diet feeding, PNPLA3 I148M did not affect 
hepatic inflammation or fibrosis, but induced a striking lipid remodeling, 
microvesicular steatosis and protected from HCC formation. Using shot gun 
lipidomics, we detected a striking restoration of reduced long 
chain-polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFA)-containing TGs, docosapentaenoic 
acid (C22:5 n3) and omega-3-derived eicosanoids (5-HEPE, 20-HEPE, 19,20-EDP, 
21-HDHA) in PNPLA3 I148M mice upon EtOH/WD. At the molecular level, PNPLA3 I148M 
modulated enzymes for fatty acid and TG transport and metabolism. These findings 
suggest (dietary) lipids as an important and independent driver of hepatic 
tumorigenesis. Genetic variant in PNPLA3 exerted protective effects in mice, 
conflicting with findings in humans. Species-related differences in physiology 
and metabolism should be taken into account when modeling unhealthy human 
lifestyle, as genetic mouse models may not always allow for translation of 
insight gained in humans.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2022.109081
PMID: 35691594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.