1. Bioengineered. 2022 May;13(5):13970-13985. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2022.2084235.

DEAD-box helicase 56 functions as an oncogene promote cell proliferation and 
invasion in gastric cancer via the FOXO1/p21 Cip1/c-Myc signaling pathway.

Wang J(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Wang J(3), Zhang S(1)(2), Yu Z(1)(2), Zheng K(1)(2), 
Fu Z(1)(2), Wang C(1)(2), Huang W(1)(2), Chen J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Gland Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital 
of Guangxi Medical University, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, 
China.
(2)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Enhanced Recovery after Surgery for 
Gastrointestinal Cancer, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, China.

DEAD-box helicase (DDX) family exerts a critical effect on cancer initiation and 
progression through alternative splicing, transcription and ribosome biogenesis. 
Increasing evidence has demonstrated that DEAD-box helicase 56 (DDX56) is 
over-expressed in several cancers, which plays an oncogenic role. Till the 
present, the impact of DDX56 on gastric cancer (GC) remains unclear. We 
conducted high-throughput sequencing (RNA-seq) to demonstrate aberrant DDX56 
levels within 10 GC and matched non-carcinoma tissue samples. DDX56 levels were 
detected through qRT-PCR, western blotting (WB) and immunochemical staining in 
GC patients. We conducted gain- and loss-of-function studies to examine DDX56's 
biological role in GC development. In vitro, we carried out 
5‑Ethynyl‑2‑deoxyuridine (EdU), scratch, Transwell, and flow cytometry (FCM) 
assays for detecting GC cell growth, invasion, migration and apoptosis. 
Additionally, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), WB assay, and Encyclopedia of 
RNA Interactomes (ENCORI) were carried out for analyzing DDX56-regulated 
downstream genes and signaling pathways. In vivo, tumor xenograft experiment was 
performed for investigating how DDX56 affected GC development within BALB/c nude 
mice. Functionally, DDX56 knockdown arrested cell cycle at G1 phase, invasion 
and migration of AGS and MKN28 cells, and enhanced their apoptosis. Ectopic 
DDX56 expression enhanced the cell growth, migration and invasion, and inhibited 
apoptosis. Knockdown of DDX56 suppressed GC growth in the tumor models of BALB/c 
nude mice. Mechanistically, DDX56 post-transcriptionally suppressed FOXO1/p21 
Cip1 protein expression, which could activate its downstream cyclin 
E1/CDK2/c-Myc signaling pathways. This sheds lights on the GC pathogenic 
mechanism and offers a potential anti-cancer therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2022.2084235
PMCID: PMC9275944
PMID: 35723050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).