1. Front Neurol. 2022 Jun 2;13:764917. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.764917.
eCollection  2022.

Clinical Manifestations and Molecular Backgrounds of Parkinson's Disease 
Regarding Genes Identified From Familial and Population Studies.

Nishioka K(1), Imai Y(1)(2), Yoshino H(3), Li Y(1), Funayama M(1)(3), Hattori 
N(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Research for Parkinson's Disease, Juntendo University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Research Institute for Diseases of Old Age, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.

Over the past 20 years, numerous robust analyses have identified over 20 genes 
related to familial Parkinson's disease (PD), thereby uncovering its molecular 
underpinnings and giving rise to more sophisticated approaches to investigate 
its pathogenesis. α-Synuclein is a major component of Lewy bodies (LBs) and 
behaves in a prion-like manner. The discovery of α-Synuclein enables an in-depth 
understanding of the pathology behind the generation of LBs and dopaminergic 
neuronal loss. Understanding the pathophysiological roles of genes identified 
from PD families is uncovering the molecular mechanisms, such as defects in 
dopamine biosynthesis and metabolism, excessive oxidative stress, dysfunction of 
mitochondrial maintenance, and abnormalities in the autophagy-lysosome pathway, 
involved in PD pathogenesis. This review summarizes the current knowledge on 
familial PD genes detected by both single-gene analyses obeying the Mendelian 
inheritance and meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) from 
genome libraries of PD. Studying the functional role of these genes might 
potentially elucidate the pathological mechanisms underlying familial PD and 
sporadic PD and stimulate future investigations to decipher the common pathways 
between the diseases.

Copyright © 2022 Nishioka, Imai, Yoshino, Li, Funayama and Hattori.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.764917
PMCID: PMC9201061
PMID: 35720097

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.