1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2022 Jun 2;10:922949. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.922949.
 eCollection 2022.

A Mutated Nme1Cas9 Is a Functional Alternative RNase to Both LwaCas13a and 
RfxCas13d in the Yeast S. cerevisiae.

Zhang Y(1), Ge H(1), Marchisio MA(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 
China.

CRISPR-Cas systems provide powerful biological tools for genetic manipulation 
and gene expression regulation. Class 2 systems, comprising type II, type V, and 
type VI, have the significant advantage to require a single effector Cas protein 
(Cas9, Cas12, and Cas13 respectively) to cleave nucleic acids upon binding the 
crRNA. Both Cas9 and Cas12 recognize DNA and induce a double-strand break in it. 
In contrast, Cas13 bind and cleave RNA exclusively. However, some Cas9 homologs 
have shown RNase activity as well. Here, we harnessed Nme1Cas9, LwaCas13a, and 
RfxCas13d to carry out gene downregulation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by 
triggering mRNA degradation. To avoid potential DNA damage, we mutated Nme1Cas9 
into d16ANme1Cas9 that lost the nuclease activity of the RuvC domain but 
retained the active HNH domain, able to act on the target DNA strand and, 
therefore, on the corresponding transcript. Our results showed that d16ANme1Cas9 
is a functional RNase in vivo, although with moderate activity since it provoked 
a fluorescence reduction from 21% to 32%. Interestingly, d16ANme1Cas9 works in a 
PAM-independent way nor demands helper PAMmer molecules. LwaCas13a and RfxCas13d 
appeared substantially unfunctional in S. cerevisiae, though they were shown to 
perform well in mammalian cells. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first 
report about the working in vivo of a variant of Nme1Cas9 as an RNase and the 
issues connected with the usage of Cas13 proteins in S. cerevisiae.

Copyright Â© 2022 Zhang, Ge and Marchisio.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.922949
PMCID: PMC9201564
PMID: 35721864

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.