1. Vaccines (Basel). 2022 Jun 13;10(6):938. doi: 10.3390/vaccines10060938.

Sputnik V Effectiveness against Hospitalization with COVID-19 during Omicron 
Dominance.

Shkoda AS(1), Gushchin VA(2)(3), Ogarkova DA(2), Stavitskaya SV(1), Orlova 
OE(1), Kuznetsova NA(2), Keruntu EN(1), Pochtovyi AA(2)(3), Pukhov AV(1), 
Kleymenov DA(2), Krzhanovsky VG(1), Vasina DV(2), Shkuratova NV(1), Shidlovskaya 
EV(2), Gorbunov AL(1), Kustova DD(2)(3), Mazurina EA(1), Kozlova SR(2), Soboleva 
AV(1), Grigoriev IV(2), Pankratyeva LL(1), Odintsova AS(2), Belyaeva ED(2)(3), 
Bessonova AA(2), Vasilchenko LA(2), Lupu IP(2), Adgamov RR(2), Tkachuk AP(2), 
Tokarskaya EA(2), Logunov DY(2), Gintsburg AL(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)City Clinical Hospital No. 67 Named after. L.A. Vorokhobov of the Moscow City 
Department, 123423 Moscow, Russia.
(2)Federal State Budget Institution "National Research Centre for Epidemiology 
and Microbiology Named after Honorary Academician N F Gamaleya" of the Ministry 
of Health of the Russian Federation, 123098 Moscow, Russia.
(3)Department of Virology, Biological Faculty, Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, 119991 Moscow, Russia.
(4)Department of Infectiology and Virology, Federal State Autonomous Educational 
Institution of Higher Education I M Sechenov First Moscow State Medical 
University of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation (Sechenov 
University), 119435 Moscow, Russia.

Mass vaccination campaigns against COVID-19 affected more than 90% of the 
population in most developed countries. The new epidemiologic wave of COVID-19 
has been ongoing since the end of 2021. It is caused by a virus variant 
B.1.1.529, also known as "Omicron" and its descendants. The effectiveness of 
major vaccines against Omicron is not known. The purpose of this study is to 
evaluate the efficacy of the Sputnik V vaccine. The main goal is to assess its 
protection against hospitalization in the period of Omicron dominance. We 
conducted our study based on a large clinical center in Moscow (Russia) where 
1112 patients were included. We used the case-population method to perform the 
calculations. The data we obtained indicate that the Omicron variant causes at 
least 90% of infections in the studied cohort. The effectiveness of protection 
against hospitalization with COVID-19 in our study was 85.9% (95% CI 83.0-88.0%) 
for those who received more than one dose. It was 87.6% (95% CI 85.4-89.5%) and 
97.0% (95% CI 95.9-97.8%) for those who received more than two or three doses. 
The effectiveness in cases of more severe forms was higher than for less severe 
ones. Thus, present study indicates the high protective efficacy of vaccination 
against hospitalization with COVID-19 in case of Omicron lineage.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines10060938
PMCID: PMC9227631
PMID: 35746546

Conflict of interest statement: D.Y.L. and A.L.G. (Alexander L. Gintsburg) 
report patents for a Sputnik V immunobiological expression vector, for a 
pharmaceutical agent, and for its method of use to prevent COVID-19. The funders 
had no role in the design and conduct of the study; in the collection, 
management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; in the preparation, 
review, or approval of the manuscript; or in the decision to submit the 
manuscript for publication. All other authors declare no competing interests.