1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jul 8;50(12):7147-7160. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac535.

Structural and dynamic studies of DNA recognition by NF-κB p50 RHR homodimer 
using methyl NMR spectroscopy.

Singh A(1), Martinez-Yamout MA(1), Wright PE(1), Dyson HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, Scripps 
Research, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla CA 92037, USA.

Protein dynamics involving higher-energy sparsely populated conformational 
substates are frequently critical for protein function. This study describes the 
dynamics of the homodimer (p50)2 of the p50 Rel homology region (RHR) of the 
transcription factor NF-κB, using 13C relaxation dispersion experiments with 
specifically (13C, 1H)-labeled methyl groups of Ile (δ), Leu and Val. Free 
(p50)2 is highly dynamic in solution, showing μs-ms relaxation dispersion 
consistent with exchange between the ground state and higher energy substates. 
These fluctuations propagate from the DNA-binding loops through the core of the 
domain. The motions are damped in the presence of κB DNA, but the NMR spectra of 
the DNA complexes reveal multiple local conformations of the p50 RHR homodimer 
bound to certain κB DNA sequences. Varying the length and sequence of κB DNA 
revealed two factors that promote a single bound conformation for the complex: 
the length of the κB site in the duplex and a symmetrical sequence of guanine 
nucleotides at both ends of the recognition motif. The dynamic nature of the 
DNA-binding loops, together with the multiple bound conformations of p50 RHR 
with certain κB sites, is consistent with variations in the transcriptional 
activity of the p50 homodimer with different κB sequences.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac535
PMCID: PMC9262625
PMID: 35748866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]