1. Viruses. 2022 Jun 11;14(6):1273. doi: 10.3390/v14061273.

Nucleopore Traffic Is Hindered by SARS-CoV-2 ORF6 Protein to Efficiently 
Suppress IFN-β and IL-6 Secretion.

Gori Savellini G(1), Anichini G(1), Gandolfo C(1), Cusi MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, 
Italy.

A weak production of INF-β along with an exacerbated release of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines have been reported during infection by the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus. 
SARS-CoV-2 encodes several proteins that are able to counteract the host immune 
system, which is believed to be one of the most important features contributing 
to the viral pathogenesis and development of a severe clinical outcomes. 
Previous reports demonstrated that the SARS-CoV-2 ORF6 protein strongly 
suppresses INF-β production by hindering the RIG-I, MDA-5, and MAVS signaling 
cascade. In the present study, we better characterized the mechanism by which 
the SARS-CoV-2 ORF6 counteracts IFN-β and interleukin-6 (IL-6), which plays a 
crucial role in the inflammation process associated with the viral infection. In 
the present study, we demonstrated that the SARS-CoV-2 ORF6 protein has evolved 
an alternative mechanism to guarantee host IFN-β and IL-6 suppression, in 
addition to the transcriptional control exerted on the genes. Indeed, a block in 
movement through the nucleopore of newly synthetized messenger RNA encoding the 
immune-modulatory cytokines IFN-β and IL-6 are reported here. The ORF6 accessory 
protein of SARS-CoV-2 displays a multifunctional activity and may represent one 
of the most important virulence factors. Where conventional antagonistic 
strategies of immune evasion-such as the suppression of specific transcription 
factors (e.g., IRF-3, STAT-1/2)-would not be sufficient, the SARS-CoV-2 ORF6 
protein is the trump card for the virus, also blocking the movement of IFN-β and 
IL-6 mRNAs from nucleus to cytoplasm. Conversely, we showed that nuclear 
translocation of the NF-κB transcription factor is not affected by the ORF6 
protein, although inhibition of its cytoplasmic activation occurred. Therefore, 
the ORF6 protein exerts a 360-degree inhibition of the antiviral response by 
blocking as many critical points as possible.

DOI: 10.3390/v14061273
PMCID: PMC9230033
PMID: 35746745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.