1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 Jun 9;15:901953. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.901953. 
eCollection 2022.

Eucommia ulmoides Olive Male Flower Extracts Ameliorate Alzheimer's Disease-Like 
Pathology in Zebrafish via Regulating Autophagy, Acetylcholinesterase, and the 
Dopamine Transporter.

Sun C(1)(2), Zhang S(1)(2), Ba S(1)(2), Dang J(1)(2), Ren Q(1)(2), Zhu Y(1)(2), 
Liu K(1)(2), Jin M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biology Institute, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of 
Sciences), Jinan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory for Drug Screening Technology, Shandong Academy of Sciences, 
Jinan, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent neural disorder. However, the 
therapeutic agents for AD are limited. Eucommia ulmoides Olive (EUO) is widely 
used as a traditional Chinese herb to treat various neurodegenerative disorders. 
Therefore, we investigated whether the extracts of EUO male flower (EUMF) have 
therapeutic effects against AD. We focused on the flavonoids of EUMF and 
identified the composition using a targeted HPLC-MS analysis. As a result, 125 
flavonoids and flavanols, 32 flavanones, 22 isoflavonoids, 11 chalcones and 
dihydrochalcones, and 17 anthocyanins were identified. Then, the anti-AD effects 
of the EUMF were tested by using zebrafish AD model. The behavioral changes were 
detected by automated video-tracking system. Aβ deposition was assayed by 
thioflavin S staining. Ache activity and cell apoptosis in zebrafish were tested 
by, Acetylcholine Assay Kit and TUNEL assay, respectively. The results showed 
that EUMF significantly rescued the dyskinesia of zebrafish and inhibited Aβ 
deposition, Ache activity, and occurrence of cell apoptosis in the head of 
zebrafish induced by AlCl3. We also investigated the mechanism underlying 
anti-AD effects of EUMF by RT-qPCR and found that EUMF ameliorated AD-like 
symptoms possibly through inhibiting excessive autophagy and the abnormal 
expressions of ache and slc6a3 genes. In summary, our findings suggested EUMF 
can be a therapeutic candidate for AD treatment.

Copyright © 2022 Sun, Zhang, Ba, Dang, Ren, Zhu, Liu and Jin.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.901953
PMCID: PMC9222337
PMID: 35754707

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.