1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Jun 16;9:856853. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.856853. 
eCollection 2022.

Novel Epigenetic Clock Biomarkers of Age-Related Macular Degeneration.

Mallik S(1), Grodstein F(2), Bennett DA(2), Vavvas DG(3), Lemos B(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular and Integrative Physiological Sciences, Department of 
Environmental Health, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, 
United States.
(2)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
United States.
(3)Ines and Frederick Yeatts Retina Research Laboratory, Retina Service, 
Department of Ophthalmology, Mass Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, United States.
(4)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States.

Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD) is a bilateral ocular condition resulting 
in irreversible vision impairment caused by the progressive loss of 
photoreceptors in the macula, a region at the center of the retina. The 
progressive loss of photoreceptor is a key feature of dry AMD but not always wet 
AMD, though both forms of AMD can lead to loss of vision. Regression-based 
biological age clocks are one of the most promising biomarkers of aging but have 
not yet been used in AMD. Here we conducted analyses to identify 
regression-based biological age clocks for the retina and explored their use in 
AMD using transcriptomic data consisting of a total of 453 retina samples 
including 105 Minnesota Grading System (MGS) level 1 samples, 175 MGS level 2, 
112 MGS level 3 and 61 MGS level 4 samples, as well as 167 fibroblast samples. 
The clocks yielded good separation among AMD samples with increasing severity 
score viz., MGS1-4, regardless of whether clocks were trained in retina tissue, 
dermal fibroblasts, or in combined datasets. Clock application to cultured 
fibroblasts, embryonic stem cells, and induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs) 
were consistent with age reprograming in iPSCs. Moreover, clock application to 
in vitro neuronal differentiation suggests broader applications. Interesting, 
many of the age clock genes identified include known targets mechanistically 
linked to AMD and aging, such as GDF11, C16ORF72, and FBN2. This study provides 
new observations for retina age clocks and suggests new applications for 
monitoring in vitro neuronal differentiation. These clocks could provide useful 
markers for AMD monitoring and possible intervention, as well as potential 
targets for in vitro screens.

Copyright Â© 2022 Mallik, Grodstein, Bennett, Vavvas and Lemos.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.856853
PMCID: PMC9244395
PMID: 35783640

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.