1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Jun 16;13:922885. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.922885. 
eCollection 2022.

CD73-Adenosine A(1)R Axis Regulates the Activation and Apoptosis of Hepatic 
Stellate Cells Through the PLC-IP(3)-Ca(2+)/DAG-PKC Signaling Pathway.

Liu Z(1)(2), Wu X(1)(2), Wang Q(3), Li Z(1)(2), Liu X(1)(2), Sheng X(1)(2), Zhu 
H(1)(2), Zhang M(1)(2), Xu J(4), Feng X(1)(2), Wu B(1)(2), Lv X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Inflammation and Immune Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui 
Institute of Innovative Drugs, School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, 
Hefei, China.
(2)Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.
(3)Seventh Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen, China.
(4)General Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei, China.

Alcohol-related liver fibrosis (ALF) is a form of alcohol-related liver disease 
(ALD) that generally occurs in response to heavy long-term drinking. 
Ecto-5'-nucleotidase (NT5E), also known as CD73, is a cytomembrane protein 
linked to the cell membrane via a GPI anchor that regulates the conversion of 
extracellular ATP to adenosine. Adenosine and its receptors are important 
regulators of the cellular response. Previous studies showed that CD73 and 
adenosine A1 receptor (A1R) were important in alcohol-related liver disease, 
however the exact mechanism is unclear. The aim of this study was to elucidate 
the role and mechanism of the CD73-A1R axis in both a murine model of alcohol 
and carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) induced ALF and in an in vitro model of fibrosis 
induced by acetaldehyde. The degree of liver injury was determined by measuring 
serum AST and ALT levels, H & E staining, and Masson's trichrome staining. The 
expression levels of fibrosis indicators and PLC-IP3-Ca2+/DAG-PKC signaling 
pathway were detected by quantitative real-time PCR, western blotting, ELISA, 
and calcium assay. Hepatic stellate cell (HSC) apoptosis was detected using the 
Annexin V-FITC/PI cell apoptosis detection kit. Knockdown of CD73 significantly 
attenuated the accumulation of α-SMA and COL1a1 damaged the histological 
architecture of the mouse liver induced by alcohol and CCl4. In vitro, CD73 
inhibition attenuated acetaldehyde-induced fibrosis and downregulated A1R 
expression in HSC-T6 cells. Inhibition of CD73/A1R downregulated the expression 
of the PLC-IP3-Ca2+/DAG-PKC signaling pathway. In addition, silencing of 
CD73/A1R promoted apoptosis in HSC-T6 cells. In conclusion, the CD73-A1R axis 
can regulate the activation and apoptosis of HSCs through the 
PLC-IP3-Ca2+/DAG-PKC signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2022 Liu, Wu, Wang, Li, Liu, Sheng, Zhu, Zhang, Xu, Feng, Wu and Lv.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.922885
PMCID: PMC9245432
PMID: 35784730

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.