1. Immune Netw. 2022 Apr 15;22(3):e28. doi: 10.4110/in.2022.22.e28. eCollection 
2022 Jun.

Evaluation of Immunoproteasome-Specific Proteolytic Activity Using Fluorogenic 
Peptide Substrates.

Kim S(1)(2)(3), Park SH(1)(2)(3), Choi WH(1)(3), Lee MJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University Graduate School, 
Seoul 03080, Korea.
(3)BK21 FOUR Biomedical Science Program, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.

The 26S proteasome irreversibly hydrolyzes polyubiquitylated substrates to 
maintain protein homeostasis; it also regulates immune responses by generating 
antigenic peptides. An alternative form of the 26S proteasome is the 
immunoproteasome, which contains substituted catalytic subunits (β1i/PSMB9, 
β2i/PSMB10, and β5i/PSMB8) instead of constitutively expressed counterparts 
(β1/PSMB6, β2/PSMB7, and β5/PSMB5). The immunoproteasome expands the peptide 
repertoire presented on MHC class I molecules. However, how its activity changes 
in this context is largely elusive, possibly due to the lack of a standardized 
methodology to evaluate its specific activity. Here, we describe an assay 
protocol that measures the immunoproteasome activity of whole-cell lysates using 
commercially available fluorogenic peptide substrates. Our results showed that 
the most accurate assessment of immunoproteasome activity could be achieved by 
combining β5i-targeting substrate Ac-ANW-AMC and immunoproteasome inhibitor 
ONX-0914. This simple and reliable protocol may contribute to future studies of 
immunoproteasomes and their pathophysiological roles during viral infection, 
inflammation, and tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2022. The Korean Association of Immunologists.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2022.22.e28
PMCID: PMC9250865
PMID: 35799704

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no 
potential conflicts of interest.