1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jun 20;13:919792. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.919792. 
eCollection 2022.

Loss of Gut Barrier Integrity In Lupus.

Ma L(1), Morel L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus is a complex autoimmune disease and its etiology 
remains unknown. Increased gut permeability has been reported in lupus patients, 
yet whether it promotes or results from lupus progression is unclear. Recent 
studies indicate that an impaired intestinal barrier allows the translocation of 
bacteria and bacterial components into systemic organs, increasing immune cell 
activation and autoantibody generation. Indeed, induced gut leakage in a mouse 
model of lupus enhanced disease characteristics, including the production of 
anti-dsDNA antibody, serum IL-6 as well as cell apoptosis. Gut microbiota 
dysbiosis has been suggested to be one of the factors that decreases gut barrier 
integrity by outgrowing harmful bacteria and their products, or by perturbation 
of gut immune homeostasis, which in turn affects gut barrier integrity. The 
restoration of microbial balance eliminates gut leakage in mice, further 
confirming the role of microbiota in maintaining gut barrier integrity. In this 
review, we discuss recent advances on the association between microbiota 
dysbiosis and leaky gut, as well as their influences on the progression of 
lupus. The modifications on host microbiota and gut integrity may offer insights 
into the development of new lupus treatment.

Copyright Â© 2022 Ma and Morel.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.919792
PMCID: PMC9250981
PMID: 35795671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.