1. J Family Med Prim Care. 2022 May;11(5):1610-1618. doi: 
10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_1319_21. Epub 2022 May 14.

Comparison of neonatal and maternal outcomes of anti-diabetic drugs in the 
treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus: Findings from Bayesian network 
meta-analysis.

Shah MK(1), Shah MA(1), Shah SD(2), Shah PK(3), Patel K(4), Gupta M(5).

Author information:
(1)Student, Smt. NHL Municipal Medical College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.
(2)Student, A.M.C. Dental College and Hospital, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.
(3)Student, School of Engineering and Applied Science, Ahmedabad University, 
Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.
(4)Student, Government Medical College, Surat, Gujarat, India.
(5)Student, Alchemist Research and Data Analysis, Medical Director and Lead 
Epidemiologist at PGI, Chandigarh, India.

The safety and efficacy of different anti-diabetic drugs are not clear because 
of the lack of sufficiently powered clinical trials. This network meta-analysis 
was conducted to compare the efficacy and safety of three anti-diabetic drugs 
(insulin, glyburide, and metformin), and rank them as per their efficiency to 
control glucose levels, pregnancy, and neonatal outcomes. The study design is a 
systematic review, meta-analysis, and network meta-analysis. After a systematic 
search of existing databases, 34 randomized controlled trials were selected for 
inclusion in the analysis. We did pairwise network meta-analysis to calculate 
standardized mean difference and odds ratio (OR) as the summary measures for 
numerical and dichotomous variables, respectively, by using random-effects 
model. Our key outcomes were incidence of neonatal hypoglycemia, respiratory 
distress syndrome, macrosomia, C-section, admission to neonatal intensive care 
unit (NICU) and mean differences in the birth weight of neonates, gestational 
age at birth, HbA1C levels, fasting blood sugar, large at gestational age, and 
post-prandial glucose. It was found that metformin significantly lowered the 
post-prandial levels of glucose as compared with both glyburide and insulin in 
pairwise analysis (SMD = 14.11 [23-4.8]; SMD = 22.45 [30-14]), respectively. 
There was a significant reduction in birth weights of babies whose mothers were 
administered metformin as compared with either glyburide or insulin. The 
proportion of neonates admission to NICU was significantly lower for metformin 
when compared with insulin [Log OR = 0.334 (0.0184, 0.6814))]. Large at 
gestational age was significantly lower for metformin as compared with both 
glyburide and insulin [log OR = 0.6882 (0.171, 1.329), log OR = 0.393 (0.00179, 
0.8218)], respectively. Oral anti-diabetic drugs especially metformin performed 
better than both glyburide and insulin for all neonatal and maternal outcomes 
except that it significantly lowered the neonatal birth weight.

Copyright: Â© 2022 Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care.

DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_1319_21
PMCID: PMC9254795
PMID: 35800546

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.