1. Front Neurol. 2022 Jun 24;13:890256. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.890256.
eCollection  2022.

Auditory Phenotype and Histopathologic Findings of a Mutant Nlrp3 Expression 
Mouse Model.

Kim Y(1), Lee SY(2), Kim MY(1), Park K(1), Han JH(1), Kim JH(3), Kim BJ(4), Choi 
BY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Seoul National University Bundang 
Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South 
Korea.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Chungnam National 
University, Chungnam National University Sejong Hospital, Sejong, South Korea.

OBJECTIVE: The pathogenesis of hearing loss in autoinflammatory disorders due to 
activation of the inflammasome remains incompletely understood. Previously no 
animals expressing mutant Nlrp3 (NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 
3) survived to an age when hearing evaluation was possible due to embryonic 
lethality. We aimed to establish a novel mouse model that manifests quantifiable 
hearing loss with other syndromic features due to alteration of Nlrp3 and 
investigate the audiologic and histopathologic phenotype in the cochlea to 
clarify how the genetic alterations of NLRP3 could induce autoinflammatory 
hearing loss.
METHODS: To induce inner ear expression of the mutant Nlrp3, Nlrp3 D301NneoR 
mice were bred with Gfi1 Cre knock-in mice for conditional mutant Nlrp3 
activation in the cochlea and hematopoietic cells. Hearing thresholds were 
measured. Hematoxylin-eosin sections of the cochlea, brain, kidney, and liver 
were examined under light microscopy. Immunohistochemical analyses using 
polyclonal anti-NLRP3 antibodies on cochlear whole-mount preparations and frozen 
sections were performed.
RESULTS: We, for the first time in the literature, established a mouse model 
that manifests quantifiable hearing loss due to Nlrp3 alteration. ABR recordings 
of Nlrp3 D301NneoR/+; Gfi1 Cre/+ mice, albeit with limited life expectancy, 
exhibited severe to profound hearing loss at postnatal day 20 (P20). There was 
overall overexpression of mutant Nlrp3, and mutant Nlrp3 expression was noted in 
the spiral prominence, the outer sulcus region (Claudius cells and outer sulcus 
cells), the organ of Corti, the inner sulcus, and the spiral ganglion neurons in 
the cochlea. The hematoxylin-eosin sections of Nlrp3 D301NneoR/+; Gfi1 Cre/+ 
mice cochleae at P12 exhibited a disorganized organ of Corti between the outer 
hair cells/supporting Deiters' cells and basilar membrane compared with the 
normal phenotype mice, leading to a collapsed Nuel's space. This morphologic 
feature gradually returned to normal by P15. Varying degrees of inflammation 
with lymphocytic infiltrations were observed in the brain, kidney, and liver.
CONCLUSION: We report the first mutant Nlrp3 overexpression mouse model (Nlrp3 
D301NneoR/+; Gfi1 Cre/+) that shows obvious overexpression of Nlrp3 in the 
cochlea, a transient developmental lag of the cochlea, and severe to profound 
hearing loss. We expect that this mouse line, which models human 
autoinflammatory hearing loss, could provide a valuable tool to elucidate the 
underlying pathogenic mechanism of inflammasome activation-mediated hearing 
loss.

Copyright Â© 2022 Kim, Lee, Kim, Park, Han, Kim, Kim and Choi.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.890256
PMCID: PMC9263128
PMID: 35812087

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.