1. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2022 Feb 4;67(5):117-122. doi: 
10.14715/cmb/2021.67.5.16.

Small molecule TKI inhibitors affect the development of non-small cell carcinoma 
through HIPPO/YAP/PD-L1.

Lei L(1), Weidong Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tianjin First Central Hospital, Tianjin 
300192, China. Weidongz@foxmail.com.

Non-small cell lung cancer accounts for approximately 80%~85% of lung cancer (1, 
2). With the rapid development of medical technology, targeted therapy is a 
common choice in treatment plans due to its low toxicity and high pertinence 
(3). EGFR can reduce the possibility of autophagy by activating downstream 
factors such as P13K and MAPK (4, 5). TKI inhibitors are targeted therapies for 
EGFR receptors, which bind to receptor target genes to block downstream pathways 
and improve tumor development (6, 7). Low expression of membrane proteins on 
PD-1T cells is an important molecule in regulating the autoimmune system (8, 9). 
Existing literature shows that the expression of PD-L1 is increased in tumor 
patients, and this protein can combine with PD-1, resulting in the occurrence of 
immune escape (10). The activation of YAP can be involved in tumor development. 
Studies have confirmed that the increased expression of YAP in serum and tissues 
of lung cancer patients can promote cell proliferation and metastasis (11, 12), 
so most drugs can inhibit tumor proliferation through HIpo-YAP. At present, 
there are few studies on TKI inhibition and its relationship with HIpo-YAP or 
PD-L1 at home and abroad. Therefore, in order to explore the correlation among 
the three and provide a reference for clinical drug use, this study took 
non-small cell lung cancer A549 cell line as the research object to explore the 
relationship between the influence of small molecule inhibitors on the 
development of non-small cell carcinoma and HIPPO/YAP/PD-L1 signaling pathway, 
so as to provide a basis for tumor targeting and immunotherapy. The results are 
as follows.

DOI: 10.14715/cmb/2021.67.5.16
PMID: 35818263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]