1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab. 2022 Sep;5(5):e00332. doi: 10.1002/edm2.332. Epub 
2022 Jul 12.

MODY probability calculator utility in individuals' selection for genetic 
testing: Its accuracy and performance.

da Silva Santos T(1), Fonseca L(1), Santos Monteiro S(1), Borges Duarte D(1), 
Martins Lopes A(1), Couto de Carvalho A(1), Oliveira MJ(2), Borges T(2), 
Laranjeira F(3), Couce ML(4), Cardoso MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Hospital de Santo António 
- Centro Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Centro 
Materno-Infantil do Norte - Centro Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(3)Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto de Magalhães (CHUPorto), Porto, Portugal.
(4)University Clinical Hospital of Santiago de Compostela, IDIS, CIBERER, 
MetabERN, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: MODY probability calculator (MPC) represents an easy-to-use tool 
developed by Exeter University to help clinicians prioritize which individuals 
should be oriented to genetic testing. We aimed to assess the utility of MPC in 
a Portuguese cohort with early-onset monogenic diabetes.
METHODS: This single-centre retrospective study enrolled 132 participants 
submitted to genetic testing between 2015 and 2020. Automatic sequencing and, in 
case of initial negative results, generation sequencing were performed. MODY 
probability was calculated using the probability calculator available online. 
Positive and negative predictive values (PPV and NPV, respectively), accuracy, 
sensitivity and specificity of the calculator were determined for this cohort.
RESULTS: Seventy-three individuals were included according to inclusion 
criteria: 20 glucokinase (GCK-MODY); 16 hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A 
(HNF1A-MODY); 2 hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A (HNF4A-MODY) and 35 DM individuals 
with no monogenic mutations found. The median probability score of MODY was 
significantly higher in monogenic diabetes-positive subgroup (75.5% vs. 24.2%, 
p < .001). The discriminative accuracy of the calculator, as expressed by area 
under the curve, was 75% (95% CI: 64%-85%). In our cohort, the best cut-off 
value for the MODY calculator was found to be 36%, with a PPV of 74.4%, NPV of 
73.5% and corresponding sensitivity and specificity of 76.2% and 71.4%, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In a highly pre-selected group of probands qualified for genetic 
testing, the Exeter MODY probability calculator provided a useful tool in 
individuals' selection for genetic testing, with good discrimination ability 
under an optimal probability cut-off of 36%. Further geographical and population 
adjustments are warranted for general use.

© 2022 The Authors. Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/edm2.332
PMCID: PMC9471596
PMID: 35822264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.