1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2022 Jul 11;35(9):1206-1210. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2022-0208. Print 2022 Sep 27.

Severe loss of adipose tissue in a Vietnamese lipodystrophy patient caused by 
LMNA p.G465D mutation: a first clinical characterization and two-year follow-up.

Vu NP(1), Tran HT(2), Vu NB(2), Ma TTH(1), Nguyen TD(1)(3), Nong HV(1)(3), 
Nguyen HH(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genome Research, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, 
Hanoi, Vietnam.
(2)Hanoi Medical University Hospital, Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(3)Graduate University of Science and Technology, Vietnam Academy of Science and 
Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam.

OBJECTIVES: Familial partial lipodystrophy type 2 is the most well-known subtype 
of lipodystrophy. We describe for the first time the phenotype of a case with 
lipodystrophy, who carried heterozygous mutation c.G1394A (p.G465D) in the LMNA 
gene.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 17-year-old girl was diagnosed with FPLD2 due to severe 
loss of subcutaneous fat in the extremities, buttocks and metabolic 
complications. However, there was no accumulation of fat over her face and neck, 
which is remarkably different from the FPLD2 clinical phenotypes. Two years of 
surveillance showed the challenge due to unable control of insulin resistance, 
glucose and lipid metabolism. Whole exome sequencing revealed the heterozygous 
mutation c.1394G>A at exon 11 of LMNA gene (p.G465D).
CONCLUSIONS: Our case displayed an atypical phenotype of FPLD2 with metabolic 
anomalies, not cardiovascular diseases. The difficulties of medical management 
in this case pointed out the urgent need for more effective treatment for 
individuals suffering from this rare disease.

Â© 2022 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2022-0208
PMID: 35822709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]