1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2022 Apr 28;20:2134-2142. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2022.04.033. eCollection 2022.

Repurposing of thermally stable nucleic-acid aptamers for targeting tetrodotoxin 
(TTX).

Li Y(1), Song M(1), Gao R(2), Lu F(3), Liu J(1), Huang Q(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, MOE Engineering Research Centre 
of Gene Technology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Engineering of Polymers, Department of 
Macromolecular Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, 
China.
(4)Multiscale Research Institute of Complex Systems, Fudan University, Shanghai 
201203, China.

Tetrodotoxin (TTX) is a lethal neurotoxin produced by the endosymbiotic bacteria 
in the gut of puffer fish. Currently, there is no effective and economical 
method to detect TTX, so it is very interesting to develop low-cost and 
high-sensitivity detection methods by using nucleic-acid aptamers as the 
recognition molecules. However, traditional SELEX screening of aptamers for 
targeting small molecules such as TTX is labor-intensive, and usually the 
success rate is low. Here, we employed a strategy of "repurposing old aptamers 
for new uses" to develop high-affinity aptamers for TTX. To this end, we first 
collected thermally stable DNA aptamers and predicted their affinities for TTX 
by molecular docking; then, we identified high-affinity candidates and verified 
them by microscale thermophoresis (MST) experiments. In this way, two thermally 
stable aptamers (Tv-51 and AI-57) were found to possess nanomolar affinities for 
TTX. Moreover, we performed spontaneous binding simulations to reveal their 
binding mechanisms to TTX and thereby identified the key bases for the binding. 
Guided by these, two variants (Tv-46 and AI-52) with higher affinities and 
specificities were subsequently engineered and confirmed by the MST experiments. 
So, this study not only provides potential recognition molecules for the 
technology developments of TTX detection, but also demonstrates an effective 
repurposing approach to the discovery of high-affinity aptamers for new target 
molecules.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Research Network of 
Computational and Structural Biotechnology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2022.04.033
PMCID: PMC9092388
PMID: 35832627

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.