1. ACS Nano. 2022 Aug 23;16(8):11755-11768. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.2c03776. Epub
2022  Jul 14.

Effects of Scaffold Shape on Bone Regeneration: Tiny Shape Differences Affect 
the Entire System.

Hayashi K(1), Yanagisawa T(1), Kishida R(1), Ishikawa K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomaterials, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 
3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Although studies on scaffolds for tissue generation have mainly focused on the 
chemical composition and pore structure, the effects of scaffold shape have been 
overlooked. Scaffold shape determines the scaffold surface area (SA) at the 
single-scaffold level (i.e., microscopic effects), although it also affects the 
amount of interscaffold space in the tissue defect at the whole-system level 
(i.e., macroscopic effects). To clarify these microscopic and macroscopic 
effects, this study reports the osteogenesis abilities of three types of 
carbonate apatite granular scaffolds with different shapes, namely, irregularly 
shaped dense granules (DGs) and two types of honeycomb granules (HCGs) with 
seven hexagonal channels (∼255 μm in length between opposite sides). The HCGs 
possessed either 12 protuberances (∼75 μm in length) or no protuberances. 
Protuberances increased the SA of each granule by 3.24 mm2 while also widening 
interscaffold spaces and increasing the space percentage in the defect by ∼7.6%. 
Interscaffold spaces were lower in DGs than HCGs. On DGs, new bone formed only 
on the surface, whereas on HCGs, bone simultaneously formed on the surface and 
in intrascaffold channels. Interestingly, HCGs without protuberances formed 
approximately 30% more new bone than those with protuberances. Thus, even tiny 
protuberances on the scaffold surface can affect the percentage of interscaffold 
space, thereby exerting dominant effects on osteogenesis. Our findings 
demonstrate that bone regeneration can be improved by considering macroscopic 
shape effects beyond the microscopic effects of the scaffold.

DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.2c03776
PMCID: PMC9413413
PMID: 35833725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.