1. Cancer Sci. 2022 Oct;113(10):3390-3404. doi: 10.1111/cas.15498. Epub 2022 Aug
1.

N4BP3 promotes angiogenesis in hepatocellular carcinoma by binding with KAT2B.

Han H(1), Zhu W(2), Lin T(3), Liu C(1), Zhai H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Taizhou People's Hospital, Taizhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Xishan People's Hospital of Wuxi City, Wuxi, China.
(3)Department of Basic Medicine, Jiangsu College of Nursing, Huai'an, China.

Although angiogenesis is a critical event in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and 
this process provides the tumor with sufficient oxygen and nutrients, the 
precise molecular mechanism by which it occurs is not fully understood. NEDD4 
binding protein 3 (N4BP3) was identified in this study as a novel pro-angiogenic 
factor in HCC cell lines and tissues. We discovered that N4BP3 was significantly 
expressed in HCC and that its level of expression was positively correlated with 
the density of tumor microvessels in HCC tissues. Cell biology experiments have 
shown that N4BP3 knockdown in HCC cells significantly inhibits the formation of 
complete tubular structures by HUVECs in vitro and HCC angiogenesis in vivo. In 
HCC cells, overexpression of N4BP3 has the opposite effects. Further cell and 
molecular biology experiments have revealed that N4BP3 interacts with KAT2B 
(lysine acetyltransferase 2B), increasing signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3 (STAT3) expression by regulating the distribution of 
acetyl-histone H3 (Lys27) (H3K27ac) in its promoter region. This, in addition, 
regulates the activity of the STAT3 signaling pathway, which promotes the 
proliferation of microvessels in HCC and accelerates the malignant process of 
the tumor. In vivo experiments in nude mice have confirmed our findings, and 
also suggested that N4BP3 could be a potential target for the treatment of HCC 
in combination with sorafenib.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.15498
PMCID: PMC9530875
PMID: 35848906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.