1. PLoS Genet. 2022 Jul 19;18(7):e1010306. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010306. 
eCollection 2022 Jul.

Enrichment of centromeric DNA from human cells.

Gamba R(1), Mazzucco G(2), Wilhelm T(1), Velikovsky L(1), Salinas-Luypaert C(1), 
Chardon F(1), Picotto J(1), Bohec M(3), Baulande S(3), Doksani Y(2), Fachinetti 
D(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Curie, PSL Research University, CNRS, UMR 144, Paris, France.
(2)IFOM, the FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, Milan, Italy.
(3)Institut Curie, Genomics of Excellence (ICGex) Platform, PSL Research 
University, Paris, France.

Centromeres are key elements for chromosome segregation. Canonical centromeres 
are built over long-stretches of tandem repetitive arrays. Despite being quite 
abundant compared to other loci, centromere sequences overall still represent 
only 2 to 5% of the human genome, therefore studying their genetic and 
epigenetic features is a major challenge. Furthermore, sequencing of centromeric 
regions requires high coverage to fully analyze length and sequence variations, 
and this can be extremely costly. To bypass these issues, we have developed a 
technique, named CenRICH, to enrich for centromeric DNA from human cells based 
on selective restriction digestion and size fractionation. Combining restriction 
enzymes cutting at high frequency throughout the genome, except within most 
human centromeres, with size-selection of fragments >20 kb, resulted in over 
25-fold enrichment in centromeric DNA. High-throughput sequencing revealed that 
up to 60% of the DNA in the enriched samples is made of centromeric repeats. We 
show that this method can be used in combination with long-read sequencing to 
investigate the DNA methylation status of certain centromeres and, with a 
specific enzyme combination, also of their surrounding regions (mainly HSATII). 
Finally, we show that CenRICH facilitates single-molecule analysis of 
replicating centromeric fibers by DNA combing. This approach has great potential 
for making sequencing of centromeric DNA more affordable and efficient and for 
single DNA molecule studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010306
PMCID: PMC9295943
PMID: 35853083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.