1. Front Oncol. 2022 Jul 5;12:936145. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.936145. eCollection 
2022.

Growth hormone receptor antagonism downregulates ATP-binding cassette 
transporters contributing to improved drug efficacy against melanoma and 
hepatocarcinoma in vivo.

Basu R(1), Qian Y(1), Mathes S(1), Terry J(1)(2), Arnett N(1)(3), Riddell 
T(1)(2), Stevens A(1)(2), Funk K(1)(2)(4), Bell S(1)(5), Bokal Z(1), Batten 
C(1), Smith C(1), Mendez-Gibson I(1), Duran-Ortiz S(1), Lach G(1)(2), 
Mora-Criollo PA(1), Kulkarni P(1)(2)(4), Davis E(1)(2)(4), Teaford E(1), 
Berryman DE(1)(5), List EO(1), Neggers S(1), Kopchick JJ(1)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Edison Biotechnology Institute, Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University, Athens, OH, United 
States.
(3)Russ College of Engineering, Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States.
(4)Molecular Cellular Biology Program, Ohio University, Athens, OH, United 
States.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, 
Ohio University, Athens, OH, United States.
(6)Translational Biological Sciences Program, Ohio University, Athens, OH, 
United States.

Knockdown of GH receptor (GHR) in melanoma cells in vitro downregulates 
ATP-binding cassette-containing (ABC) transporters and sensitizes them to 
anti-cancer drug treatments. Here we aimed to determine whether a GHR antagonist 
(GHRA) could control cancer growth by sensitizing tumors to therapy through 
downregulation of ABC transporters in vivo. We intradermally inoculated 
Fluc-B16-F10 mouse melanoma cells into GHA mice, transgenic for a GHR antagonist 
(GHRA), and observed a marked reduction in tumor size, mass and tumoral GH 
signaling. Moreover, constitutive GHRA production in the transgenic mice 
significantly improved the response to cisplatin treatment by suppressing 
expression of multiple ABC transporters and sensitizing the tumors to the drug. 
We confirmed that presence of a GHRA and not a mere absence of GH is essential 
for this chemo-sensitizing effect using Fluc-B16-F10 allografts in GH knockout 
(GHKO) mice, where tumor growth was reduced relative to that in GH-sufficient 
controls but did not sensitize the tumor to cisplatin. We extended our 
investigation to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) using human HCC cells in vitro 
and a syngeneic mouse model of HCC with Hepa1-6 allografts in GHA mice. Gene 
expression analyses and drug-efflux assays confirm that blocking GH 
significantly suppresses the levels of ABC transporters and improves the 
efficacy of sorafenib towards almost complete tumor clearance. Human patient 
data for melanoma and HCC show that GHR RNA levels correlate with ABC 
transporter expression. Collectively, our results validate in vivo that 
combination of a GHRA with currently available anti-cancer therapies can be 
effective in attacking cancer drug resistance.

Copyright Â© 2022 Basu, Qian, Mathes, Terry, Arnett, Riddell, Stevens, Funk, 
Bell, Bokal, Batten, Smith, Mendez-Gibson, Duran-Ortiz, Lach, Mora-Criollo, 
Kulkarni, Davis, Teaford, Berryman, List, Neggers and Kopchick.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.936145
PMCID: PMC9296106
PMID: 35865483

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.