1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jul 14;23(14):7777. doi: 10.3390/ijms23147777.

α/β-Hydrolase D16B Truncation Results in Premature Sperm Capacitation in Cattle.

Shan S(1), Xu F(1)(2), Hirschfeld M(1)(3), Herrmann C(4), Schulze M(4), Sharifi 
AR(5), Hoelker M(6), Brenig B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, University of Goettingen, 37077 Goettingen, 
Germany.
(2)Malaria Functional Genomics Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector 
Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)MVZ Brustzentrum Freiburg, 79110 Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Institute for Reproduction of Farm Animals Schoenow, 16321 Bernau, Germany.
(5)Department of Animal Sciences, Devision Animal Breeding and Genetics, 
University of Goettingen, 37017 Goettingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Animal Sciences, Division Biotechnology and Reproduction of 
Farm Animals, University of Goettingen, 37077 Goettingen, Germany.

Recently it was shown that a specific form of male infertility in Holstein 
cattle was caused by a nonsense variant in the α/β-hydrolase domain-containing 
16B (ABHD16B) gene resulting in a protein truncation at amino acid position 218 
(p.218Q*) and loss of function. Lipidomics showed that the absence of ABHD16B 
influenced the content of phosphatidylcholine (PC), ceramide (Cer), 
diacylglycerol (DAG), and sphingomyelin (SM) in variant carrier sperm membranes. 
However, the exact cause of infertility in affected sires has remained unclear 
until now. To elucidate the cause of infertility, we analyzed (i) standard sperm 
parameters (i.e., total sperm number, morphological intact sperm, total sperm 
motility), (ii) in vitro fertilizability and effects on early embryonic 
development, and (iii) sperm survival rates (i.e., capacitation time). The 
affected spermatozoa showed no changes in the usual sperm parameters and were 
also capable of fertilization in vitro. Furthermore, the absence of ABHD16B did 
not affect early embryonic development. Based on these results, it was concluded 
that the affected spermatozoa appeared to be fertilizable per se. Consequently, 
the actual cause of the inability to fertilize could only be due to a time- 
and/or place-dependent process after artificial insemination and before 
fertilization. A process fundamental to the ability to fertilize after 
insemination is capacitation. Capacitation is a biochemical maturation process 
that spermatozoa undergo in the female genital tract and is inevitable for the 
successful fertilization of the oocyte. It is known that the presence and 
concentration of certain sperm membrane lipids are essential for the correct 
course of capacitation. However, precisely these lipids are absent in the 
membrane of spermatozoa affected by the ABHD16B truncation. Since all other 
causes of fertilization inability were excluded in the previous experiments, 
consequently, the only remaining hypothesis was that the loss of function of 
ABHD16B leads to a capacitation disruption. We were able to show that 
heterozygous and homozygous affected spermatozoa exhibit premature capacitation 
and therefore decay before fertilization. This effect of the loss of function of 
ABHD16B has not been described before and our studies now revealed why sires 
harboring the variant in the ABHD16B gene are infertile.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23147777
PMCID: PMC9316559
PMID: 35887122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.