1. Materials (Basel). 2022 Jul 16;15(14):4962. doi: 10.3390/ma15144962.

Application of Genetically Encoded Photoconvertible Protein SAASoti for the 
Study of Enzyme Activity in a Single Live Cell by Fluorescence Correlation 
Microscopy.

Solovyev ID(1), Maloshenok LG(2), Savitsky AP(1).

Author information:
(1)A.N. Bach Institute of Biochemistry, Research Center of Biotechnology of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, 33, bld. 2 Leninsky Ave., 119071 Moscow, Russia.
(2)N.I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Gubkina Str. 3, 119333 Moscow, Russia.

Fluorescent Correlation Spectroscopy (FCS) allows us to determine interactions 
of labeled proteins or changes in the oligomeric state. The FCS method needs a 
low amount of fluorescent dye, near nanomolar concentrations. To control the 
amount of fluorescent dye, we used new photoconvertible FP SAASoti. This work is 
devoted to the proof of principle of using photoconvertible proteins to measure 
caspase enzymatic activity in a single live cell. The advantage of this approach 
is that partial photoconversion of the FP makes FCS measurements possible when 
studying enzymatic reactions. To investigate the process, in vivo we used HeLa 
cell line expressing the engineered FRET sensor, SAASoti-23-KFP. This FRET 
sensor has a cleavable (DEVD) sequence in the linker between two FPs for the 
detection of one of the key enzymes of apoptosis, caspase-3. Caspase-3 activity 
was detected by registering the increase in the fluorescent lifetimes of the 
sensor, whereas the diffusion coefficient of SAASoti decreased. This can be 
explained by an increase in the total cell viscosity during apoptosis. We can 
suppose that in the moment of detectible caspase-3 activity, cell structure 
already has crucial changes in viscosity.

DOI: 10.3390/ma15144962
PMCID: PMC9316514
PMID: 35888428

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.