1. J Cardiol Cases. 2021 Oct 20;25(4):213-217. doi: 10.1016/j.jccase.2021.09.011.
 eCollection 2022 Apr.

A double heterozygous variant in MYH6 and MYH7 associated with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy in a Japanese Family.

Suzuki T(1)(2), Saito K(1)(2), Yoshikawa T(2), Hirono K(3), Hata Y(4), Nishida 
N(4), Yasuda K(1), Nagashima M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Aichi Children's Health and Medical 
Center, Aichi, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Fujita Health University, 
Aichi, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Toyama, 
Toyama, Japan.
(4)Department of Legal Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine University of 
Toyama Hospital, Toyama, Japan.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is genetically heterogeneous. Different 
variants associated with HCM have been identified in several cardiac sarcomeric 
protein genes. We identified the heterozygous missense variant c.2191 C>A p. Pro 
731 Thr in the MYH7 gene and the heterozygous frameshift variant c.1091-1092 
insTGAA p.Lys364fs*in the MYH6 gene in a Japanese family. Family members with 
the double variants demonstrated severe phenotypes, such as sudden 
cardiac-related death and heart failure. These double variants were well 
segregated and might be responsible for the severity of cardiovascular events in 
affected family members. These double variants are potentially associated with 
specific phenotypes in HCM. Further studies are needed to analyze specific gene 
functions. <Learning objective: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is genetically 
heterogeneous and is associated with different variants in sarcomeric protein 
genes. We identified a heterozygous missense variant in the MYH7 gene and a 
heterozygous frameshift variant in the MYH6 gene in a Japanese family. These 
double variants are potentially associated with specific phenotypes in HCM.>.

Â© 2021 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jccase.2021.09.011
PMCID: PMC9326009
PMID: 35911064