1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Sep;298(9):102317. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102317. Epub 2022
 Aug 2.

The Na(+),K(+)-ATPase in complex with beryllium fluoride mimics an ATPase 
phosphorylated state.

Fruergaard MU(1), Dach I(1), Andersen JL(2), Ozol M(1), Shahsavar A(1), 
Quistgaard EM(1), Poulsen H(1), Fedosova NU(3), Nissen P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, DANDRITE - Nordic EMBL 
Partnership for Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, DANDRITE - Nordic EMBL 
Partnership for Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark; 
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark. Electronic 
address: nf@biomed.au.dk.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, DANDRITE - Nordic EMBL 
Partnership for Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark. 
Electronic address: pn@mbg.au.dk.

The Na+,K+-ATPase generates electrochemical gradients of Na+ and K+ across the 
plasma membrane via a functional cycle that includes various phosphoenzyme 
intermediates. However, the structure and function of these intermediates and 
how metal fluorides mimick them require further investigation. Here, we describe 
a 4.0 Å resolution crystal structure and functional properties of the pig kidney 
Na+,K+-ATPase stabilized by the inhibitor beryllium fluoride (denoted E2-BeFx). 
E2-BeFx is expected to mimic properties of the E2P phosphoenzyme, yet with 
unknown characteristics of ion and ligand binding. The structure resembles the 
E2P form obtained by phosphorylation from inorganic phosphate (Pi) and 
stabilized by cardiotonic steroids, including a low-affinity Mg2+ site near ion 
binding site II. Our anomalous Fourier analysis of the crystals soaked in Rb+ (a 
K+ congener) followed by a low-resolution rigid-body refinement (6.9-7.5 Å) 
revealed preocclusion transitions leading to activation of the dephosphorylation 
reaction. We show that the Mg2+ location indicates a site of initial K+ 
recognition and acceptance upon binding to the outward-open E2P state after Na+ 
release. Furthermore, using binding and activity studies, we find that the 
BeFx-inhibited enzyme is also able to bind ADP/ATP and Na+. These results relate 
the E2-BeFx complex to a transient K+- and ADP-sensitive E∗P intermediate of the 
functional cycle of the Na+,K+-ATPase, prior to E2P.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102317
PMCID: PMC9485054
PMID: 35926706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.