1. J Virol. 2022 Aug 24;96(16):e0048022. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00480-22. Epub 2022 Aug
 4.

Structural Study of SARS-CoV-2 Antibodies Identifies a Broad-Spectrum Antibody 
That Neutralizes the Omicron Variant by Disassembling the Spike Trimer.

Zhan W(#)(1)(2)(3), Tian X(#)(2)(4), Zhang X(#)(1)(2)(3), Xing S(#)(1)(2)(3), 
Song W(2)(4), Liu Q(1)(2)(3), Hao A(1)(2)(3), Hu Y(1)(2)(3), Zhang M(1)(2)(3), 
Ying T(2)(4), Chen Z(1)(2)(3), Lan F(1)(2)(3), Sun L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Fifth People's Hospital and Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Institute of Infectious Disease and Biosecurity, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(4)MOE/NHC/CAMS Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Shanghai 
Engineering Research Center for Synthetic Immunology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The continuous emergence of novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants poses new challenges in the fight against the 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. The newly emerging Omicron strain 
caused serious immune escape and raised unprecedented concern all over the 
world. The development of an antibody targeting a conserved and universal 
epitope is urgently needed. A subset of neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) against 
COVID-19 from convalescent patients were isolated in our previous study. In this 
study, we investigated the accommodation of these NAbs to SARS-CoV-2 variants of 
concern (VOCs), revealing that IgG 553-49 neutralizes pseudovirus of the 
SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant. In addition, we determined the cryo-electron 
microscopy (cryo-EM) structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) protein complexed 
with three monoclonal antibodies targeting different epitopes, including 553-49, 
553-15, and 553-60. Notably, 553-49 targets a novel conserved epitope and 
neutralizes the virus by disassembling S trimers. IgG 553-15, an antibody that 
neutralizes all of the VOCs except Omicron, cross-links two S trimers to form a 
trimer dimer, demonstrating that 553-15 neutralizes the virus by steric 
hindrance and virion aggregation. These findings suggest the potential to 
develop 553-49 and other antibodies targeting this highly conserved epitope as 
promising therapeutic reagents for COVID-19. IMPORTANCE The emergence of the 
Omicron strain of SARS-CoV-2 caused higher immune escape, raising unprecedented 
concerns about the effectiveness of antibody therapies and vaccines. In this 
study, we identified a SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody, 553-49, which 
neutralizes all variants by targeting a completely conserved novel epitope. In 
addition, we revealed that IgG 553-15 neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 by cross-linking 
virions and that 553-60 functions by blocking receptor binding. Comparison of 
different receptor binding domain (RBD) epitopes revealed that the 553-49 
epitope is hidden in the S trimer and keeps a high degree of conservation during 
SARS-CoV-2 evolution, making 553-49 a promising therapeutic reagent against the 
emerging Omicron and future variants of SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00480-22
PMCID: PMC9400479
PMID: 35924918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. Fei 
Lan is listed as one of the inventors on two patents (WO2021207962A1 and 
O2021248279A1) about the antibodies used in this study. Other authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.