1. J Extracell Vesicles. 2022 Aug;11(8):e12255. doi: 10.1002/jev2.12255.

Specific anti-glioma targeted-delivery strategy of engineered small 
extracellular vesicles dual-functionalised by Angiopep-2 and TAT peptides.

Zhu Z(1)(2), Zhai Y(1)(2), Hao Y(1)(2)(3), Wang Q(2), Han F(1)(2), Zheng W(4), 
Hong J(1)(2), Cui L(1)(2), Jin W(5), Ma S(4), Yang L(1)(2), Cheng G(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics, University of Science and Technology of 
China, Hefei, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Nano-Bio Interface, Suzhou Institute of Nano-Tech and 
Nano Bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Suzhou, China.
(3)Guangdong Institute of Semiconductor Micro-Nano Manufacturing Technology, 
Guangdong, China.
(4)Suzhou Kowloon Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University Medical School, Suzhou, 
China.
(5)Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

Glioma is one of the primary malignant brain tumours in adults, with a poor 
prognosis. Pharmacological reagents targeting glioma are limited to achieve the 
desired therapeutic effect due to the presence of blood-brain barrier (BBB). 
Effectively crossing the BBB and specifically targeting to the brain tumour are 
the major challenge for the glioma treatments. Here, we demonstrate that the 
well-defined small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) with dual-targeting drug 
delivery and cell-penetrating functions, modified by Angiopep-2 and 
trans-activator of transcription peptides, enable efficient and specific 
chemotherapy for glioma. The high efficiency of engineered sEVs in targeting BBB 
and glioma was assessed in both monolayer culture cells and BBB model in vitro, 
respectively. The observed high targeting efficiency was re-validated in 
subcutaneous tumour and orthotopic glioma mice models. After loading the 
doxorubicin into dual-modified functional sEVs, this specific dual-targeting 
delivery system could cross the BBB, reach the glioma, and penetrate the tumour. 
Such a mode of drug delivery significantly improved more than 2-fold survival 
time of glioma mice with very few side effects. In conclusion, utilization of 
the dual-modified sEVs represents a unique and efficient strategy for drug 
delivery, holding great promise for the treatments of central nervous system 
diseases.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Extracellular Vesicles published by Wiley 
Periodicals, LLC on behalf of the International Society for Extracellular 
Vesicles.

DOI: 10.1002/jev2.12255
PMCID: PMC9451528
PMID: 35932288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.