1. Redox Biol. 2022 Sep;55:102415. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2022.102415. Epub 2022
Jul  30.

Alexander disease GFAP R239C mutant shows increased susceptibility to 
lipoxidation and elicits mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress.

Viedma-Poyatos Á(1), González-Jiménez P(1), Pajares MA(1), Pérez-Sala D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Centro de Investigaciones 
Biológicas Margarita Salas, C.S.I.C., 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Centro de Investigaciones 
Biológicas Margarita Salas, C.S.I.C., 28040, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
dperezsala@cib.csic.es.

Alexander disease is a fatal neurological disorder caused by mutations in the 
intermediate filament protein Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein (GFAP), which is 
key for astrocyte homeostasis. These mutations cause GFAP aggregation, astrocyte 
dysfunction and neurodegeneration. Remarkably, most of the known GFAP mutations 
imply a change by more nucleophilic amino acids, mainly cysteine or histidine, 
which are more susceptible to oxidation and lipoxidation. Therefore, we 
hypothesized that a higher susceptibility of Alexander disease GFAP mutants to 
oxidative or electrophilic damage, which frequently occurs during 
neurodegeneration, could contribute to disease pathogenesis. To address this 
point, we have expressed GFP-GFAP wild type or the harmful Alexander disease 
GFP-GFAP R239C mutant in astrocytic cells. Interestingly, GFAP R239C appears 
more oxidized than the wild type under control conditions, as indicated both by 
its lower cysteine residue accessibility and increased presence of 
disulfide-bonded oligomers. Moreover, GFP-GFAP R239C undergoes lipoxidation to a 
higher extent than GFAP wild type upon treatment with the electrophilic mediator 
15-deoxy-Δ12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2). Importantly, GFAP R239C filament 
organization is altered in untreated cells and is earlier and more severely 
disrupted than GFAP wild type upon exposure to oxidants (diamide, H2O2) or 
electrophiles (4-hydroxynonenal, 15d-PGJ2), which exacerbate GFAP R239C 
aggregation. Furthermore, H2O2 causes reversible alterations in GFAP wild type, 
but irreversible damage in GFAP R239C expressing cells. Finally, we show that 
GFAP R239C expression induces a more oxidized cellular status, with decreased 
free thiol content and increased mitochondrial superoxide generation. In 
addition, mitochondria show decreased mass, increased colocalization with GFAP 
and altered morphology. Notably, a GFP-GFAP R239H mutant recapitulates 
R239C-elicited alterations whereas an R239G mutant induces a milder phenotype. 
Together, our results outline a deleterious cycle involving altered GFAP R239C 
organization, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and further GFAP 
R239C protein damage and network disruption, which could contribute to astrocyte 
derangement in Alexander disease.

Copyright © 2022 Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2022.102415
PMCID: PMC9364016
PMID: 35933901

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.