1. Inorg Chem. 2022 Aug 22;61(33):13149-13164. doi:
10.1021/acs.inorgchem.2c01902.  Epub 2022 Aug 10.

Activation of H-H, HO-H, C(sp(2))-H, C(sp(3))-H, and RO-H Bonds by 
Transition-Metal Frustrated Lewis Pairs Based on M/N (M = Rh, Ir) Couples.

Carmona M(1), Pérez R(1), Ferrer J(1), Rodríguez R(1), Passarelli V(1), Lahoz 
FJ(1), García-Orduña P(1), Carmona D(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Instituto de Síntesis Química y Catálisis 
Homogénea (ISQCH), CSIC - Universidad de Zaragoza, Pedro Cerbuna 12, 50009 
Zaragoza, Spain.

Reaction of the dimers [(Cp*MCl)2(μ-Cl)2] (Cp* = η5-C5Me5) with 
Ph2PCH2CH2NC(NH(p-Tolyl))2 (H2L) in the presence of NaSbF6 affords the chlorido 
complexes [Cp*MCl(κ2N,P-H2L)][SbF6] (M = Rh, 1; Ir, 2). Upon treatment with 
aqueous NaOH, solutions of 1 and 2 yield the corresponding complexes 
[Cp*M(κ3N,N',P-HL)][SbF6] (M = Rh, 3; Ir, 4) in which the ligand HL presents a 
fac κ3N,N',P coordination mode. Treatment of THF solutions of complexes 3 and 4 
with hydrogen gas, at room temperature, results in the formation of the metal 
hydrido-complexes [Cp*MH(κ2N,P-H2L)][SbF6] (M = Rh, 5; Ir, 6) in which the 
N(p-Tolyl) group has been protonated. Complexes 3 and 4 react with deuterated 
water in a reversible fashion resulting in the gradual deuteration of the Cp* 
group. Heating at 383 K THF/H2O solutions of the complexes 3 and 4 affords the 
orthometalated complexes [Cp*M(κ3C,N,P-H2L-H)][SbF6] [M = Rh, 7; Ir, 8, H2L-H = 
Ph2PCH2CH2NC(NH(p-Tolyl))(NH(4-C6H3Me))], respectively. At 333 K, complexes 3 
and 4 react in THF with methanol, primary alcohols, or 2-propanol giving the 
metal-hydrido complexes 5 and 6, respectively. The reaction involves the 
acceptorless dehydrogenation of the alcohols at a relatively low temperature, 
without the assistance of an external base. The new complexes have been 
characterized by the usual analytical and spectroscopic methods including the 
X-ray diffraction determination of the crystal structures of complexes 1-5, 7, 
and 8. Notably, the chlorido complexes 1 and 2 crystallize both as enantiopure 
conglomerates and as racemates. Reaction mechanisms are proposed based on 
stoichiometric reactions, nuclear magnetic resonance studies, and X-ray 
crystallography as well as density functional theory calculations.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.2c01902
PMCID: PMC9406284
PMID: 35948430

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.