1. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2022 Oct;24(10):1370-1380. doi:
10.1111/jch.14552.  Epub 2022 Aug 8.

The genetic architecture of blood pressure variability: A genome-wide 
association study of 9370 participants from UK Biobank.

Jia P(1), Zhan N(1), Bat BKK(1), Feng Q(1)(2), Tsoi KKF(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)JC School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Oxford Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK.
(3)Stanley Ho Big Data Decision Analytics Research Centre, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Long-term blood pressure variability (BPV) is a risk factor for cardiovascular 
diseases, dementia, and stroke. However, its genetic architecture is not fully 
understood. This study aims to explore its genetic factors and provide more 
evidence on the mechanisms and further pathological study of BPV. The 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) is based on the UK Biobank cohort. There 
were four data collection rounds from 2006 to 2020, and 9370 participants with 
more than three blood pressure measurements were included. They had a median age 
of 55 and a male percentage of 50.1%. The phenotypes (BPV) were calculated by 
four methods and the genetic data contains 6 884 260 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) after imputation and quality control. A linear regression 
model was performed with adjustments for sex, age, genotype array, and a 
significant principal component. Subgroup analysis was performed on 
hypertension-free participants. The significant and suggestive significant P 
thresholds were set as 5 × 10-8 and 1 × 10-6 . Six genetic loci (BAD, CCDC88B, 
GPR137, PLCB3, RPS6KA4 for systolic BPV, and WWC2 for diastolic BPV) were 
identified by coding region SNPs at the suggestive significant P threshold (1 × 
10-6 ). Among them, gene CCDC88B and RPS6KA4 reached the significant P threshold 
(5 × 10-8 ), with the strongest signal of SNP rs1229536170 (P = 6.36 × 10-8 , 
β = -.29). The annotation results indicate that genes CCDC88B, GPR137, RPS6KA4, 
and BAD are associated with long-term SBPV. Their functions of inflammation, 
epithelial dysfunction, and apoptosis are related to artery stiffness, which was 
reported as potential mechanisms of BPV.

© 2022 The Authors. The Journal of Clinical Hypertension published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jch.14552
PMCID: PMC9581094
PMID: 35942506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.