1. PLoS Genet. 2022 Aug 11;18(8):e1010169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010169. 
eCollection 2022 Aug.

2-deoxyglucose transiently inhibits yeast AMPK signaling and triggers glucose 
transporter endocytosis, potentiating the drug toxicity.

Laussel C(1), Albanèse V(1), García-Rodríguez FJ(1), Ballin A(1), Defenouillère 
Q(1), Léon S(1).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Cité, CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.

2-deoxyglucose is a glucose analog that impacts many aspects of cellular 
physiology. After its uptake and its phosphorylation into 
2-deoxyglucose-6-phosphate (2DG6P), it interferes with several metabolic 
pathways including glycolysis and protein N-glycosylation. Despite this systemic 
effect, resistance can arise through strategies that are only partially 
understood. In yeast, 2DG resistance is often associated with mutations causing 
increased activity of the yeast 5'-AMP activated protein kinase (AMPK), Snf1. 
Here we focus on the contribution of a Snf1 substrate in 2DG resistance, namely 
the alpha-arrestin Rod1 involved in nutrient transporter endocytosis. We report 
that 2DG triggers the endocytosis of many plasma membrane proteins, mostly in a 
Rod1-dependent manner. Rod1 participates in 2DG-induced endocytosis because 2DG, 
following its phosphorylation by hexokinase Hxk2, triggers changes in Rod1 
post-translational modifications and promotes its function in endocytosis. 
Mechanistically, this is explained by a transient, 2DG-induced inactivation of 
Snf1/AMPK by protein phosphatase 1 (PP1). We show that 2DG-induced endocytosis 
is detrimental to cells, and the lack of Rod1 counteracts this process by 
stabilizing glucose transporters at the plasma membrane. This facilitates 
glucose uptake, which may help override the metabolic blockade caused by 2DG, 
and 2DG export-thus terminating the process of 2DG detoxification. Altogether, 
these results shed a new light on the regulation of AMPK signaling in yeast and 
highlight a remarkable strategy to bypass 2DG toxicity involving glucose 
transporter regulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010169
PMCID: PMC9398028
PMID: 35951639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.