1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jul 26;13:942482. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.942482. 
eCollection 2022.

CipA mediates complement resistance of Acinetobacter baumannii by formation of a 
factor I-dependent quadripartite assemblage.

Ries JI(1), Heß M(1), Nouri N(1), Wichelhaus TA(1), Göttig S(1), Falcone FH(2), 
Kraiczy P(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, University Hospital 
of Frankfurt, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Institute for Parasitology, Biomedical Research Center Seltersberg, Justus 
Liebig University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.

Multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii is known to be one of the leading 
pathogens that cause severe nosocomial infections. To overcome eradication by 
the innate immune system during infection, A. baumannii developed a number of 
immune evasion strategies. Previously, we identified CipA as a 
plasminogen-binding and complement-inhibitory protein. Here we show that CipA 
inhibits all three complement activation pathways and interacts with key 
complement components C3, C3b, C4b, C5, Factor B, Factor D, and in particular 
Factor I. CipA also targets function of the C5 convertase as cleavage of C5 was 
impaired. Systematic screening of CipA variants identified two separate binding 
sites for C3b and a Factor I-interacting domain located at the C-terminus. 
Structure predictions using AlphaFold2 and binding analyses employing CipA 
variants lacking Factor I-binding capability confirmed that the orientation of 
the C-terminal domain is essential for the interaction with Factor I. Hence, our 
analyses point to a novel Factor I-dependent mechanisms of complement 
inactivation mediated by CipA of A. baumannii. Recruitment of Factor I by CipA 
initiates the assembly of a quadripartite complex following binding of either 
Factor H or C4b-binding protein to degrade C3b and C4b, respectively. Loss of 
Factor I binding in a CipA-deficient strain, or a strain producing a CipA 
variant lacking Factor I-binding capability, correlated with a higher 
susceptibility to human serum, indicating that recruitment of Factor I enables 
A. baumannii to resist complement-mediated killing.

Copyright © 2022 Ries, Heß, Nouri, Wichelhaus, Göttig, Falcone and Kraiczy.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.942482
PMCID: PMC9361855
PMID: 35958553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.