1. Elife. 2022 Aug 15;11:e80010. doi: 10.7554/eLife.80010.

Feedback between a retinoid-related nuclear receptor and the let-7 microRNAs 
controls the pace and number of molting cycles in C. elegans.

Patel R(#)(1), Galagali H(#)(2), Kim JK(2), Frand AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Animal development requires coordination among cyclic processes, sequential cell 
fate specifications, and once-a-lifetime morphogenic events, but the underlying 
timing mechanisms are not well understood. Caenorhabditis elegans undergoes four 
molts at regular 8 to 10 hour intervals. The pace of the cycle is governed by 
PERIOD/lin-42 and other as-yet unknown factors. Cessation of the cycle in young 
adults is controlled by the let-7 family of microRNAs and downstream 
transcription factors in the heterochronic pathway. Here, we characterize a 
negative feedback loop between NHR-23, the worm homolog of mammalian 
retinoid-related orphan receptors (RORs), and the let-7 family of microRNAs that 
regulates both the frequency and finite number of molts. The molting cycle is 
decelerated in nhr-23 knockdowns and accelerated in let-7(-) mutants, but timed 
similarly in let-7(-) nhr-23(-) double mutants and wild-type animals. NHR-23 
binds response elements (ROREs) in the let-7 promoter and activates 
transcription. In turn, let-7 dampens nhr-23 expression across development via a 
complementary let-7-binding site (LCS) in the nhr-23 3' UTR. The molecular 
interactions between NHR-23 and let-7 hold true for other let-7 family 
microRNAs. Either derepression of nhr-23 transcripts by LCS deletion or high 
gene dosage of nhr-23 leads to protracted behavioral quiescence and extra molts 
in adults. NHR-23 and let-7 also coregulate scores of genes required for 
execution of the molts, including lin-42. In addition, ROREs and LCSs isolated 
from mammalian ROR and let-7 genes function in C. elegans, suggesting 
conservation of this feedback mechanism. We propose that this feedback loop 
unites the molting timer and the heterochronic gene regulatory network, possibly 
by functioning as a cycle counter.

Â© 2022, Patel, Galagali et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.80010
PMCID: PMC9377799
PMID: 35968765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RP, HG, JK, AF No competing interests declared