1. Struct Chem. 2023;34(3):791-823. doi: 10.1007/s11224-022-02029-4. Epub 2022
Aug  11.

Investigation of [(3)H]diazepam derivatives as allosteric modulators of GABAA 
receptor α(1)β(2)γ(2) subtypes: combination of molecular docking/dynamic 
simulations, pharmacokinetics/drug-likeness prediction, and QSAR analysis.

Djebaili R(1), Kenouche S(2), Daoud I(3)(4), Melkemi N(1), Belkadi A(1), Mesli 
F(3).

Author information:
(1)07000 Biskra, Algeria Group of Computational and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, 
LMCE Laboratory, University of Mohamed Khider.
(2)07000 Biskra, Algeria Group of Modeling of Chemical Systems Using Quantum 
Calculations, Applied Chemistry Laboratory (LCA), University of Mohamed Khider.
(3)Laboratory of Natural and Bioactive Substances, LASNABIO, University of 
Abou-BakrBelkaid, Tlemcen, Algeria.
(4)BP 145 RP, 07000 Biskra, Algeria Present address: Department of Matter 
Sciences, University of Mohamed Khider Biskra.

In this paper, a data set of [3H] diazepam derivatives was analyzed using 
various computational methods: molecular docking/dynamic simulations, and QSAR 
analysis. The main aims of these studies are to understand the binding 
mechanisms by which benzodiazepines allosterically modulate GABAA receptor 
α1β2γ2 subtypes, from inducing neuronal inhibition at lower doses to the 
anesthetic effect at higher doses, and also, to define the structural 
requirements that contribute to improving the response of GABAA/α1β2γ2 receptor 
to benzodiazepine drugs. The results of the molecular docking study allowed 
selecting Ro12-6377 and proflazepam as the best modulators for the four binding 
sites simultaneously. Subsequently, the stability of the selected complexes was 
investigated by performing molecular dynamics simulation. The latter confirmed 
the features of both modulators to exert direct effects on the chloride-channel 
lining residues. Pharmacokinetics and drug-likeness profile were assessed 
through in silico tool. Furthermore, a QSAR analysis was conducted using an 
improved vemolecular dynamics simulations proposed byrsion of PLS regression. 
The goodness of fit and the predictive power of the resulting PLS model were 
estimated according to internal and external validation parameters: R2 = 0.632, 
R2adj = 0.584, F = 12.806; p-value = 6.2050e - 07, Q2loo = 0.639, and 
Q2F3 = 0.813. Clearly, the obtained results ensure the predictive ability of the 
developed QSAR model for the design of new high-potency benzodiazepine drugs.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material 
available at 10.1007/s11224-022-02029-4.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, 
LLC, part of Springer Nature 2022, Springer Nature or its licensor holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) 
or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript 
version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing 
agreement and applicable law.

DOI: 10.1007/s11224-022-02029-4
PMCID: PMC9365687
PMID: 35971551

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare no 
competing interests.