1. World J Clin Cases. 2022 Jul 6;10(19):6728-6735. doi: 
10.12998/wjcc.v10.i19.6728.

Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitor non responses in an 
adult with a history of coronary revascularization: A case report.

Yang L(1), Xiao YY(2), Shao L(1), Ouyang CS(1), Hu Y(1), Li B(1), Lei LF(3), 
Wang H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang Medical College, Nanchang 330006, Jiangxi 
Province, China.
(2)Postgraduate School of Jiangxi University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Jiangxi University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanchang 330008, Jiangxi 
Province, China.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Tonggu People's Hospital, Yichun 336299, 
Jiangxi Province, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang Medical College, Nanchang 330006, Jiangxi 
Province, China. hongwangjx@21cn.com.

BACKGROUND: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
that is characterized by severely increased low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
cholesterol levels. At the same time, elevated LDL levels accelerated the 
development of coronary heart disease. Several classes of drugs are currently in 
use to treat FH. Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitor 
(PCSK9i) is novel one of these.
CASE SUMMARY: This manuscript reports a case of FH that responded modestly after 
treatment with PCSK9i and statin drugs. Of even more concern is that the patient 
frequently admitted to the hospital during a 12-year follow-up period. 
Subsequently, we identified a heterozygous mutation, 1448G>A (W483X) of the LDL 
receptor (LDLR) in this patient. The serum levels of PCSK9 (proprotein 
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9) in the patient was 71.30 ± 26.66 ng/mL, 
which is close the average level reported in the literature. This LDLR mutation 
affects LDLR metabolism or structure, which may make it unsuitable for use of 
PCSK9i.
CONCLUSION: Our outcome demonstrates that LDLR-W483X represents a partial 
loss-of-function LDLR and may contribute to PCSK9i ineffective. In the 
meanwhile, additional measures are therefore required (particularly with gene 
sequencing or change the treatment plan) must be initiated as early as possible. 
Genetic testing for clinically challenging cases who do not respond to PCSK9i 
therapy is very helpful.

©The Author(s) 2022. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i19.6728
PMCID: PMC9294880
PMID: 35979295

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.