1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Aug 4;13:947331. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.947331. 
eCollection 2022.

Whole-transcriptome analysis of differentially expressed genes between ray and 
disc florets and identification of flowering regulatory genes in Chrysanthemum 
morifolium.

Liu H(1), Jia Y(2), Chai Y(1)(3), Wang S(1), Chen H(1), Zhou X(3), Huang C(1), 
Guo S(4), Chen D(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Grassland, Flowers and Ecology, Beijing Academy of Agriculture 
and Forestry Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Landscape Architecture, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, 
China.
(3)School of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Henan Institute of Science 
and Technology, Xinxiang, China.
(4)Chengdu Park City Construction Development Research Institute, Chengdu, 
China.

Chrysanthemum morifolium has ornamental and economic values. However, there has 
been minimal research on the morphology of the chrysanthemum florets and related 
genes. In this study, we used the leaves as a control to screen for 
differentially expressed genes between ray and disc florets in chrysanthemum 
flowers. A total of 8,359 genes were differentially expressed between the ray 
and disc florets, of which 3,005 were upregulated and 5,354 were downregulated 
in the disc florets. Important regulatory genes that control flower development 
and flowering determination were identified. Among them, we identified a TM6 
gene (CmTM6-mu) that belongs to the Class B floral homeotic MADS-box 
transcription factor family, which was specifically expressed in disc florets. 
We isolated this gene and found it was highly similar to other typical TM6 
lineage genes, but a single-base deletion at the 3' end of the open reading 
frame caused a frame shift that generated a protein in which the TM6-specific 
paleoAP3 motif was missing at the C terminus. The CmTM6-mu gene was ectopically 
expressed in Arabidopsis thaliana. Petal and stamen developmental processes were 
unaffected in transgenic A. thaliana lines; however, the flowering time was 
earlier than in the wild-type control. Thus, the C-terminal of paleoAP3 appears 
to be necessary for the functional performance in regulating the development of 
petals or stamens and CmTM6-mu may be involved in the regulation of flowering 
time in chrysanthemum. The results of this study will be useful for future 
research on flowering molecular mechanisms and for the breeding of novel flower 
types.

Copyright Â© 2022 Liu, Jia, Chai, Wang, Chen, Zhou, Huang, Guo and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.947331
PMCID: PMC9388166
PMID: 35991433

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.