1. PLoS One. 2022 Aug 25;17(8):e0273279. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0273279. 
eCollection 2022.

Evidence for a functional role of Start, a long noncoding RNA, in mouse 
spermatocytes.

Otsuka K(1)(2), Yang H(1), Matsubara S(3), Shiraishi A(3), Kurihara M(4), Satake 
H(3), Kimura AP(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Life Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, 
Davis, California United States of America.
(3)Bioorganic Research Institute, Suntory Foundation for Life Sciences, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(4)RNA Biology Laboratory, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, Japan.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University, 
Sapporo, Japan.

A mouse testis-specific long noncoding RNA (lncRNA), Start, is localized in the 
cytosol of Leydig cells and in the nucleus of pachytene spermatocytes. We 
previously showed that Start regulates steroidogenesis through controlling the 
expression of Star and Hsd3b1 genes in Leydig cells, but its function in germ 
cells was not known. Here we verified that a spermatocyte-specific protease 
gene, Prss43/Tessp-3, was downregulated in Start-knockout testes. To investigate 
the transcriptional regulatory activity of Start in spermatocytes, we first 
performed a series of reporter gene assays using a thymidine kinase promoter in 
spermatocyte-derived GC-2spd(ts) cells. A 5.4-kb genome sequence encompassing 
Start exhibited enhancer activity for this promoter, and the activity was 
decreased by knockdown of Start. Deletion of the Start promoter and replacement 
of the Start sequence abolished the enhancer activity and, consistently, the 
activity was detected in further experiments only when Start was actively 
transcribed. We then examined whether the Prss43/Tessp-3 gene could be a target 
of Start. A reporter gene assay demonstrated that the 5.4-kb sequence exhibited 
enhancer activity for a Prss43/Tessp-3 promoter in GC-2spd(ts) cells and that 
the activity was significantly decreased by knockdown of Start. These results 
suggest that Start functions in transcriptional activation of the Prss43/Tessp-3 
gene in spermatocytes. Given that Start is presumed to regulate steroidogenic 
genes at the posttranscriptional level in Leydig cells, the function in 
spermatocytes is a novel role of Start. These findings provide an insight into 
multifunctionality of lncRNAs in the testis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0273279
PMCID: PMC9409574
PMID: 36006924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.