1. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2023 Mar;70(3):768-779. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2022.3201709.
 Epub 2023 Feb 17.

Mechanical High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound (Histotripsy) in Dogs With 
Spontaneously Occurring Soft Tissue Sarcomas.

Ruger L, Yang E, Gannon J, Sheppard H, Coutermarsh-Ott S, Ziemlewicz TJ, 
Dervisis N, Allen IC, Daniel GB, Tuohy J, Vlaisavljevich E, Klahn S.

INTRODUCTION: Histotripsy is a non-invasive focused ultrasound therapy that uses 
controlled acoustic cavitation to mechanically disintegrate tissue. To date, 
there are no reports investigating histotripsy for the treatment of soft tissue 
sarcoma (STS).
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the in vivo feasibility of ablating 
STS with histotripsy and to characterize the impact of partial histotripsy 
ablation on the acute immunologic response in canine patients with spontaneous 
STS.
METHODS: A custom 500 kHz histotripsy system was used to treat ten dogs with 
naturally occurring STS. Four to six days after histotripsy, tumors were 
surgically resected. Safety was determined by monitoring vital signs during 
treatment and post-treatment physical examinations, routine lab work, and 
owners' reports. Ablation was characterized using radiologic and histopathologic 
analyses. Systemic immunological impact was evaluated by measuring changes in 
cytokine concentrations, and tumor microenvironment changes were evaluated by 
characterizing changes in infiltration with tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) 
and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) using multiplex immunohistochemistry 
and differential gene expression.
RESULTS: Results showed histotripsy ablation was achievable and well-tolerated 
in all ten dogs. Immunological results showed histotripsy induced 
pro-inflammatory changes in the tumor microenvironment. Conclusion & 
Significance: Overall, this study demonstrates histotripsy's potential as a 
precise, non-invasive treatment for STS.

DOI: 10.1109/TBME.2022.3201709
PMCID: PMC9969335
PMID: 36006886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]