1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Aug 11;14(16):3891. doi: 10.3390/cancers14163891.

Novel Necroptosis-Related Gene Signature for Predicting Early Diagnosis and 
Prognosis and Immunotherapy of Gastric Cancer.

Zhou X(1), Zhang B(1), Zheng G(2), Zhang Z(1), Wu J(1), Du K(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, China Medical University, 
Shenyang 110042, China.
(2)Department of Gastric Surgery, Cancer Hospital of China Medical University 
(Liaoning Cancer Hospital and Institute), Shenyang 110042, China.

Necroptosis is a kind of programmed necrosis, which is different from apoptosis 
and pyroptosis. Its molecular mechanism has been described in inflammatory 
diseases. Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide 
with the third highest mortality. However, the role of necroptosis in the 
occurrence and progression of GC remains largely unexplored. Therefore, we 
investigated necroptosis-related genes (NRGs) by analyzing public transcriptomic 
data from GC samples. Our results indicate that 83 of 740 NRGs are dysregulated 
in GC tissues. Next, we identified necroptosis-associated early diagnosis and 
prognostic gene signatures for GC using machine learning. 2-NRGs (CCT6A and FAP) 
and 4-NRGs (ZFP36, TP53I3, FAP, and CCT6A), respectively, can effectively assess 
the risk of early GC (AUC = 0.943) and the prognosis of GC patients (AUC = 
0.866). Through in-depth analysis, we were pleasantly surprised to find that 
there was a significant correlation between the 4-NRGs and GC immunotherapy 
effect and immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), which could be used for the 
evaluation of immunosuppressants. Finally, we identified the core gene FAP, and 
established the relationship between FAP and ICIs in GC. These findings could 
provide a new target for immunotherapy for GC and a more effective treatment 
scheme for GC patients.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14163891
PMCID: PMC9405737
PMID: 36010886

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.