1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Aug 17;23(16):9251. doi: 10.3390/ijms23169251.

Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing of Congenital Hypothyroidism-Causative Genes 
Reveals Unexpected Thyroglobulin Gene Variants in Patients with Iodide Transport 
Defect.

Bernal Barquero CE(1)(2), Geysels RC(1)(2), Jacques V(3)(4), Carro GH(1)(2), 
Martín M(1)(2), Peyret V(1)(2), Abregú MC(1)(2), Papendieck P(5)(6), 
Masini-Repiso AM(1)(2), Savagner F(3)(4), Chiesa AE(5)(6), Citterio CE(7)(8), 
Nicola JP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, 
Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Cordoba 5000, Argentina.
(2)Centro de Investigaciones en Bioquímica Clínica e Inmunología, Consejo 
Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CIBICI-CONICET), Cordoba 
5000, Argentina.
(3)Laboratoire de Biochimie, Institut Fédératif de Biologie, Le Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire de Toulouse, 31300 Toulouse, France.
(4)Institut des Maladies Métaboliques et Cardiovasculaires (I2MC), Institut 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) UMR 1297, 31432 
Toulouse, France.
(5)División de Endocrinología, Hospital de Niños Dr. Ricardo Gutiérrez, Buenos 
Aires 1006, Argentina.
(6)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas Dr. César Bergadá, Consejo 
Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CEDIE-CONICET), Buenos Aires 
1120, Argentina.
(7)Instituto de Inmunología, Genética y Metabolismo, Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (INIGEM-CONIET), Buenos Aires 1120, 
Argentina.
(8)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Congenital iodide transport defect is an uncommon autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by loss-of-function variants in the sodium iodide symporter (NIS)-coding 
SLC5A5 gene and leading to dyshormonogenic congenital hypothyroidism. Here, we 
conducted a targeted next-generation sequencing assessment of congenital 
hypothyroidism-causative genes in a cohort of nine unrelated pediatric patients 
suspected of having a congenital iodide transport defect based on the absence of 
99mTc-pertechnetate accumulation in a eutopic thyroid gland. Although, 
unexpectedly, we could not detect pathogenic SLC5A5 gene variants, we identified 
two novel compound heterozygous TG gene variants (p.Q29* and c.177-2A>C), three 
novel heterozygous TG gene variants (p.F1542Vfs*20, p.Y2563C, and p.S523P), and 
a novel heterozygous DUOX2 gene variant (p.E1496Dfs*51). Splicing minigene 
reporter-based in vitro assays revealed that the variant c.177-2A>C affected 
normal TG pre-mRNA splicing, leading to the frameshift variant p.T59Sfs*17. The 
frameshift TG variants p.T59Sfs*17 and p.F1542Vfs*20, but not the DUOX2 variant 
p.E1496Dfs*51, were predicted to undergo nonsense-mediated decay. Moreover, 
functional in vitro expression assays revealed that the variant p.Y2563C reduced 
the secretion of the TG protein. Our investigation revealed unexpected findings 
regarding the genetics of congenital iodide transport defects, supporting the 
existence of yet to be discovered mechanisms involved in thyroid hormonogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23169251
PMCID: PMC9409291
PMID: 36012511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.