1. Neural Regen Res. 2023 Mar;18(3):618-625. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.350207.

Neuroprotective effects of neural stem cells pretreated with neuregulin1β on 
PC12 cells exposed to oxygen-glucose deprivation/reoxygenation.

Zhai QY(1), Ye YH(2), Ren YQ(1), Song ZH(1), Ge KL(1), Cheng BH(3), Guo YL(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cerebrovascular Diseases, Medical Research Center, The 
Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Taishan Scholars Construction Project 
Excellent Innovative Team of Shandong Province, Qingdao, Shandong Province, 
China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, Shandong Province, China.
(3)Research Center of Stem Cells, Shandong Haoyun International Hospital of Stem 
Cells, Jinan, Shandong Province, China.

Studies on ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury suggest that exogenous neural stem 
cells (NSCs) are ideal candidates for stem cell therapy reperfusion injury. 
However, NSCs are difficult to obtain owing to ethical limitations. In addition, 
the survival, differentiation, and proliferation rates of transplanted exogenous 
NSCs are low, which limit their clinical application. Our previous study showed 
that neuregulin1β (NRG1β) alleviated cerebral I/R injury in rats. In this study, 
we aimed to induce human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells into NSCs and 
investigate the improvement effect and mechanism of NSCs pretreated with 10 nM 
NRG1β on PC12 cells injured by oxygen-glucose deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/R). 
Our results found that 5 and 10 nM NRG1β promoted the generation and 
proliferation of NSCs. Co-culture of NSCs and PC12 cells under condition of 
OGD/R showed that pretreatment of NSCs with NRG1β improved the level of reactive 
oxygen species, malondialdehyde, glutathione, superoxide dismutase, nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide phosphate, and nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 
(Nrf2) and mitochondrial damage in injured PC12 cells; these indexes are related 
to ferroptosis. Research has reported that p53 and solute carrier family 7 
member 11 (SLC7A11) play vital roles in ferroptosis caused by cerebral I/R 
injury. Our data show that the expression of p53 was increased and the level of 
glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) was decreased after RNA interference-mediated 
knockdown of SLC7A11 in PC12 cells, but this change was alleviated after 
co-culturing NSCs with damaged PC12 cells. These findings suggest that NSCs 
pretreated with NRG1β exhibited neuroprotective effects on PC12 cells subjected 
to OGD/R through influencing the level of ferroptosis regulated by 
p53/SLC7A11/GPX4 pathway.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.350207
PMCID: PMC9727437
PMID: 36018186

Conflict of interest statement: None