1. Elife. 2022 Aug 30;11:e79387. doi: 10.7554/eLife.79387.

Dynamic molecular evolution of a supergene with suppressed recombination in 
white-throated sparrows.

Jeong H(#)(1), Baran NM(#)(1)(2)(3), Sun D(1)(4), Chatterjee P(1), Layman TS(1), 
Balakrishnan CN(5), Maney DL(2), Yi SV(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, 
United States.
(2)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, United States.
(3)Department of Ecology, Evolution, Marine Biology, University of California, 
Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, United States.
(4)Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Biology, East Carolina University, Greenville, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

In white-throated sparrows, two alternative morphs differing in plumage and 
behavior segregate with a large chromosomal rearrangement. As with sex 
chromosomes such as the mammalian Y, the rearranged version of chromosome two 
(ZAL2m) is in a near-constant state of heterozygosity, offering opportunities to 
investigate both degenerative and selective processes during the early 
evolutionary stages of 'supergenes.' Here, we generated, synthesized, and 
analyzed extensive genome-scale data to better understand the forces shaping the 
evolution of the ZAL2 and ZAL2m chromosomes in this species. We found that 
features of ZAL2m are consistent with substantially reduced recombination and 
low levels of degeneration. We also found evidence that selective sweeps took 
place both on ZAL2m and its standard counterpart, ZAL2, after the rearrangement 
event. Signatures of positive selection were associated with allelic bias in 
gene expression, suggesting that antagonistic selection has operated on gene 
regulation. Finally, we discovered a region exhibiting long-range haplotypes 
inside the rearrangement on ZAL2m. These haplotypes appear to have been 
maintained by balancing selection, retaining genetic diversity within the 
supergene. Together, our analyses illuminate mechanisms contributing to the 
evolution of a young chromosomal polymorphism, revealing complex selective 
processes acting concurrently with genetic degeneration to drive the evolution 
of supergenes.

Â© 2022, Jeong, Baran et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.79387
PMCID: PMC9427109
PMID: 36040313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HJ, NB, DS, PC, TL, CB, DM, SY No competing 
interests declared