1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2022 Nov;9(31):e2203917. doi: 10.1002/advs.202203917. Epub
2022  Sep 4.

Tuning Fe Spin Moment in Fe-N-C Catalysts to Climb the Activity Volcano via a 
Local Geometric Distortion Strategy.

Wang R(1), Zhang L(2), Shan J(3), Yang Y(1), Lee JF(4), Chen TY(5), Mao J(1), 
Zhao Y(1), Yang L(1), Hu Z(2), Ling T(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Advanced Ceramics and Machining Technology of Ministry of 
Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Composite and Functional Materials, School 
of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, 
China.
(2)School of Physics, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, China.
(3)School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 
5005, Australia.
(4)National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Hsinchu, 30076, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Engineering and System Science, National Tsing Hua University, 
Hsinchu, Taiwan.

As the most promising alternative to platinum-based catalysts for cathodic 
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in proton exchange membrane fuel cells, further 
performance enhancement of Fe-N-C catalysts is highly expected to promote their 
wide application. In Fe-N-C catalysts, the single Fe atom forms a square-planar 
configuration with four adjacent N atoms (D4h symmetry). Breaking the D4h 
symmetry of the FeN4 active center provides a new route to boost the activity of 
Fe-N-C catalysts. Herein, for the first time, the deformation of the 
square-planar coordination of FeN4 moiety achieved by introducing chalcogen 
oxygen groups (XO2 , X = S, Se, Te) as polar functional groups in the Fe-N-C 
catalyst is reported. The theoretical and experimental results demonstrate that 
breaking the D4h symmetry of FeN4 results in the rearrangement of Fe 3d 
electrons and increases spin moment of Fe centers. The efficient spin state 
manipulation optimizes the adsorption energetics of ORR intermediates, thereby 
significantly promoting the intrinsic ORR activity of Fe-N-C catalysts, among 
which the SeO2 modified catalyst lies around the peak of the ORR volcano plot. 
This work provides a new strategy to tune the local coordination and thus the 
electronic structure of single-atom catalysts.

© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202203917
PMCID: PMC9631079
PMID: 36057997

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.