1. Eur J Med Chem. 2022 Dec 5;243:114711. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2022.114711. Epub
 2022 Aug 28.

The current strategies of optimization of oseltamivir against mutant 
neuraminidases of influenza A：A review.

Wang K(1), Zhang H(2), Tian Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design and Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, School of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Shenyang Pharmaceutical 
University, 103 Wenhua Road, Shenhe District, Shenyang, 110016, PR China. 
Electronic address: wangkuangl@163.com.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, 103 Wenhua Road, 
Shenhe District, Shenyang, 110016, PR China. Electronic address: 
huicongzhangvip@163.com.
(3)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design and Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, School of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Shenyang Pharmaceutical 
University, 103 Wenhua Road, Shenhe District, Shenyang, 110016, PR China.

Influenza with a tendency to cause pandemic and epidemic is an infectious 
disease with a high of morbidity and mortality. Neuraminidase (NA) inhibitors 
are proved to prevent and treat influenza. Among the four Neuraminidase 
inhibitors (NAIs) licensed, oseltamivir is most commonly used. With the 
extensive usage, several variants containing mutant NAs especially H274Y point 
mutation exhibit reduced susceptibility. In this review, we covered the current 
drugs available for influenza, the analysis of active site of NA, the mutant 
types of NAs and the molecular mechanism of drug resistance brought by H274Y 
mutant NAs. For recovering the susceptibility to oseltamivir, many series of 
oseltamivir analogues were designed. We present the details of the strategies of 
strengthening the interactions with S2 via introducing strong basic fragment, 
targeting additional subpockets and making full use of Zone X by modifying 
3-pentyl of OC. PROTAC targeting NA and combination therapies are also 
introduced. Further, the advantages and disadvantages of these methods are also 
discussed.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2022.114711
PMID: 36055001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.