1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Aug 26;23(17):9703. doi: 10.3390/ijms23179703.

Targeted Mitochondrial Epigenetics: A New Direction in Alzheimer's Disease 
Treatment.

Song Y(1), Zhu XY(1), Zhang XM(1), Xiong H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 
310014, China.

Mitochondrial epigenetic alterations are closely related to Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), which is described in this review. Reports of the alteration of 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) methylation in AD demonstrate that the disruption of 
the dynamic balance of mtDNA methylation and demethylation leads to damage to 
the mitochondrial electron transport chain and the obstruction of mitochondrial 
biogenesis, which is the most studied mitochondrial epigenetic change. 
Mitochondrial noncoding RNA modifications and the post-translational 
modification of mitochondrial nucleoproteins have been observed in 
neurodegenerative diseases and related diseases that increase the risk of AD. 
Although there are still relatively few mitochondrial noncoding RNA 
modifications and mitochondrial nuclear protein post-translational modifications 
reported in AD, we have reason to believe that these mitochondrial epigenetic 
modifications also play an important role in the AD process. This review 
provides a new research direction for the AD mechanism, starting from 
mitochondrial epigenetics. Further, this review summarizes therapeutic 
approaches to targeted mitochondrial epigenetics, which is the first systematic 
summary of therapeutic approaches in the field, including folic acid 
supplementation, mitochondrial-targeting antioxidants, and targeted 
ubiquitin-specific proteases, providing a reference for therapeutic targets for 
AD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23179703
PMCID: PMC9456144
PMID: 36077101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.