1. J Lipid Res. 2022 Oct;63(10):100276. doi: 10.1016/j.jlr.2022.100276. Epub 2022
 Sep 9.

RGMa promotes dedifferentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells into a 
macrophage-like phenotype in vivo and in vitro.

Yuan X(1), Xiao H(2), Hu Q(2), Shen G(2), Qin X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China. Electronic address: 592604389@qq.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.

Erratum in
    J Lipid Res. 2023 Feb;64(2):100331. doi: 10.1016/j.jlr.2023.100331.

Repulsive guidance molecule a (RGMa) is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored 
glycoprotein that has been demonstrated to influence inflammatory-related 
diseases in addition to regulating neuronal differentiation and survival during 
brain development. However, any function or mechanism of RGMa in 
dedifferentiation of contractile vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) during 
inflammatory-related atherosclerosis is poorly understood. In the current study, 
we found that RGMa is expressed in VSMCs-derived macrophage-like cells from the 
fibrous cap of type V atherosclerotic plaques and the neointima of ligated 
carotid artery in ApoE-/- mice. We determined levels of RGMa mRNA and protein 
increased in oxidized LDL (ox-LDL)-induced VSMCs. Knockdown of RGMa, both 
in vivo and in vitro, inhibited the dedifferentiation of ox-LDL-induced VSMCs 
and their ability to proliferate and migrate, reduced the thickness of the 
neointima after ligation of the left common carotid artery in ApoE-/- mice. 
Additionally, we show RGMa promoted the dedifferentiation of VSMCs via 
enhancement of the role of transcription factor Slug. Slug knockdown reversed 
the dedifferentiation of ox-LDL-induced VSMCs promoted by RGMa overexpression. 
Thus, inhibition of RGMa may constitute a therapeutic strategy for 
atherosclerotic plaques prone to rupture and restenosis following mechanical 
injury.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jlr.2022.100276
PMCID: PMC9587411
PMID: 36089003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.