1. PLoS One. 2022 Sep 12;17(9):e0268984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0268984. 
eCollection 2022.

Polymorphisms of adiponectin gene and gene-lipid interaction with hypertension 
risk in Chinese coal miners: A matched case-control study.

Hu X(1), Xi Y(2), Bai W(2), Zhang Z(2), Qi J(3), Dong L(3), Liang H(3), Sun 
Z(3), Lei L(3), Fan G(3), Sun C(4), Huo C(4), Huang J(4), Wang T(3).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Shanxi Medical University/Shanxi Hospital 
Affiliated to Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences/Shanxi 
Province Cancer Hospital, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, China.
(2)Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Shanxi Medical University/Shanxi Hospital 
Affiliated to Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences/Shanxi 
Province Cancer Hospital, Taiyuan, China.
(3)School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, China.
(4)Sinopharm Tongmei General Hospital, Datong, China.

OBJECTIVE: Low serum adiponectin level can predict hypertension development, and 
adiponectin gene (ADIPOQ) polymorphisms have been reported to be linked with 
hypertension risk. Whereas, the interaction between ADIPOQ polymorphisms and 
environmental factors on the susceptibility of hypertension remained unclear. 
The purpose of this study was to explore the relationship of ADIPOQ 
polymorphisms with hypertension risk and their interaction with lipid levels in 
coal miners.
METHODS: A matched case-control study with 296 case-control pairs was performed 
in a large coal mining group located in North China. The participants were 
questioned by trained interviewers, and their ADIPOQ genotype and lipid levels 
were determined. Logistic regression, stratified analysis, and crossover 
analysis were applied to evaluate the effects of rs2241766, rs1501299, and 
rs266729 genotypes and gene-lipid interaction on hypertension risk.
RESULTS: In this matched case-control study, the genotypes of rs2241766 TG+GG, 
rs1501299 GT+TT, and rs266729 CG+GG were marginally related to hypertension 
risk. Individuals with high total cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (LDL-C), and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) level were 
susceptible to hypertension (TC: odds ratio [OR] = 1.807, 95% confidence 
intervals [95%CI] = 1.266-2.581; LDL-C: OR = 1.981, 95%CI = 1.400-2.803; HDL-C: 
OR = 1.559, 95%CI = 1.093-2.223). Antagonistic interactions were detected 
between rs2241766 and TC, rs1501299 and TC, rs2241766 and LDL-C, and rs1501299 
and HDL-C (rs2241766 and TC: OR = 0.393, 95%CI = 0.191-0.806; rs1501299 and TC: 
OR = 0.445, 95%CI = 0.216-0.918; rs2241766 and LDL-C: OR = 0.440, 95%CI = 
0.221-0.877; rs1501299 and HDL-C: OR = 0.479, 95%CI = 0.237-0.967). Stratified 
analysis showed that hypertension risk was high for the subjects with rs2241766 
TG+GG or rs1501299 GG under the low lipid level but low for those under the high 
lipid level. In the case group, the TC and LDL-C levels for rs2241766 TG+GG were 
lower than those for rs2241766 GG, and the TC and HDL-C levels for rs1501299 
GT+TT were higher than those for rs1501299 GG.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the effects of ADIPOQ polymorphisms alone were not 
remarkable, an antagonistic interaction was observed between ADIPOQ 
polymorphisms and lipid levels.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0268984
PMCID: PMC9467355
PMID: 36094942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.