1. Front Immunol. 2022 Aug 29;13:976289. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.976289. 
eCollection 2022.

Advances in the study of HLA class Ib in maternal-fetal immune tolerance.

Yang Y(1), Wang W(1), Weng J(2), Li H(3), Ma Y(4), Liu L(1), Ma W(2).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Area Major Laboratory of Peptide and Small Molecular Drugs, 
Engineering Research Center of Endogenous Prophylactic of Ministry of Education 
of China, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China.
(4)Beijing Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.

The HLA class Ib molecule is an alloantigen that causes transplant rejection on 
behalf of individual human and plays an important role in maternal-fetal immune 
tolerance. Early studies on HLA class Ib focused on the mechanism of 
HLA-G-induced immune escape, but in recent years, studies on the mechanism of 
HLA-G have deepened and gradually explored the mechanism of HLA-E and HLA-F, 
which are also HLA class Ib molecules. In the maternal-fetal interface, 
trophoblast cells express HLA class Ib molecules to protect the fetus from 
maternal immune cells by binding to inhibitory receptors of decidual immune 
cells (DICs) and shifting Th1/Th2 balance toward Th2 bias. Further studies on 
the molecular mechanism of HLA class Ib molecules provide a reference for its 
application in the field of clinical assisted reproduction.

Copyright Â© 2022 Yang, Wang, Weng, Li, Ma, Liu and Ma.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.976289
PMCID: PMC9465335
PMID: 36105800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.