1. Nature. 2022 Sep;609(7929):1012-1020. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05208-9. Epub
2022  Sep 21.

Unified rhombic lip origins of group 3 and group 4 medulloblastoma.

Smith KS(#)(1), Bihannic L(#)(1), Gudenas BL(#)(1), Haldipur P(2), Tao R(1), Gao 
Q(1)(3), Li Y(1), Aldinger KA(2), Iskusnykh IY(4), Chizhikov VV(4), Scoggins 
M(5), Zhang S(5), Edwards A(5), Deng M(6), Glass IA(6), Overman LM(7), Millman 
J(2), Sjoboen AH(2), Hadley J(1), Golser J(2), Mankad K(8), Sheppard H(3), 
Onar-Thomas A(9), Gajjar A(10), Robinson GW(10), Hovestadt V(11), Orr BA(3), 
Patay Z(5), Millen KJ(2), Northcott PA(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(2)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Tennessee, Memphis, TN, 
USA.
(5)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(8)Department of Radiology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, 
UK.
(9)Department of Biostatistics, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
TN, USA.
(10)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.
(11)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(12)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. paul.northcott@stjude.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nature. 2022 Sep;609(7929):901-903. doi: 10.1038/d41586-022-02951-x.

Medulloblastoma, a malignant childhood cerebellar tumour, segregates molecularly 
into biologically distinct subgroups, suggesting that a personalized approach to 
therapy would be beneficial1. Mouse modelling and cross-species genomics have 
provided increasing evidence of discrete, subgroup-specific developmental 
origins2. However, the anatomical and cellular complexity of developing human 
tissues3-particularly within the rhombic lip germinal zone, which produces all 
glutamatergic neuronal lineages before internalization into the cerebellar 
nodulus-makes it difficult to validate previous inferences that were derived 
from studies in mice. Here we use multi-omics to resolve the origins of 
medulloblastoma subgroups in the developing human cerebellum. Molecular 
signatures encoded within a human rhombic-lip-derived lineage trajectory aligned 
with photoreceptor and unipolar brush cell expression profiles that 
are maintained in group 3 and group 4 medulloblastoma, suggesting a convergent 
basis. A systematic diagnostic-imaging review of a prospective institutional 
cohort localized the putative anatomical origins of group 3 and group 4 tumours 
to the nodulus. Our results connect the molecular and phenotypic features of 
clinically challenging medulloblastoma subgroups to their unified beginnings in 
the rhombic lip in the early stages of human development.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-05208-9
PMCID: PMC9748853
PMID: 36131015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests None.