1. Biology (Basel). 2022 Sep 12;11(9):1344. doi: 10.3390/biology11091344.

Identification of Putative Neuropeptides That Alter the Behaviour of Schistosoma 
mansoni Cercariae.

Fogarty CE(1)(2), Suwansa-Ard S(1)(2), Phan P(1)(2), McManus DP(3), Duke MG(3), 
Wyeth RC(4), Cummins SF(1)(2), Wang T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Bioinnovation, University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore, QLD 
4556, Australia.
(2)School of Science, Technology and Engineering, University of the Sunshine 
Coast, Maroochydore, QLD 4556, Australia.
(3)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4006, Australia.
(4)Department of Biology, St. Francis Xavier University, Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5, 
Canada.

Elucidating the infectivity of Schistosoma mansoni, one of the main etiological 
agents of human schistosomiasis, requires an improved understanding of the 
behavioural mechanisms of cercariae, the non-feeding mammalian infective stage. 
This study investigated the presence and effect of cercariae-derived putative 
neuropeptides on cercarial behaviour when applied externally. Cercariae were 
peptidomically analysed and 11 neuropeptide precursor proteins, all of which 
were specific to the Schistosoma genus and most of which highly expressed in the 
cercarial stage, were identified in cercariae for the first time. 
Protein-protein interaction analysis predicted the interaction of various 
neuropeptide precursors (e.g., Sm-npp-30, Sm-npp-33, Sm-npp-35) with cercarial 
structural proteins (e.g., myosin heavy chain and titin). In total, nine 
putative neuropeptides, selected based on their high hydrophobicity and small 
size (~1 kilodalton), were tested on cercariae (3 mg/mL) in acute exposure (1 
min) and prolonged exposure (360 min) behavioural bioassays. The peptides 
AAYMDLPW-NH2, NRKIDQSFYSYY-NH2, FLLALPSP-OH, and NYLWDTRL-NH2 stimulated acute 
increases in cercarial spinning, stopping, and directional change during active 
states. However, only NRKIDQSFYSYY-NH2 caused the same behavioural changes at a 
lower concentration (0.1 mg/mL). After prolonged exposure, AAYMDLPW-NH2 and 
NYLWDTRL-NH2 caused increasing passive behaviour and NRKIDQSFYSYY-NH2 caused 
increasing body-first and head-pulling movements. These findings characterise 
behaviour-altering novel putative neuropeptides, which may inform future 
biocontrol innovations to prevent human schistosomiasis.

DOI: 10.3390/biology11091344
PMCID: PMC9495596
PMID: 36138823

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.