1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Sep 8;13(9):1606. doi: 10.3390/genes13091606.

Whole-Genome Profile of Greek Patients with Teratozοοspermia: Identification of 
Candidate Variants and Genes.

Kyrgiafini MA(1), Giannoulis T(2), Chatziparasidou A(3), Christoforidis N(3), 
Mamuris Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Comparative and Evolutionary Biology, Department of 
Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Thessaly, Viopolis, Mezourlo, 
41500 Larissa, Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Biology, Genetics and Bioinformatics, Department of Animal 
Sciences, University of Thessaly, Gaiopolis, 41336 Larissa, Greece.
(3)Embryolab IVF Unit, St. 173-175 Ethnikis Antistaseos, Kalamaria, 55134 
Thessaloniki, Greece.

Male infertility is a global health problem that affects a large number of 
couples worldwide. It can be categorized into specific subtypes, including 
teratozoospermia. The present study aimed to identify new variants associated 
with teratozoospermia in the Greek population and to explore the role of genes 
on which these were identified. For this reason, whole-genome sequencing (WGS) 
was performed on normozoospermic and teratozoospermic individuals, and after 
selecting only variants found in teratozoospermic men, these were further 
prioritized using a wide range of tools, functional and predictive algorithms, 
etc. An average of 600,000 variants were identified, and of them, 61 were 
characterized as high impact and 153 as moderate impact. Many of these are 
mapped in genes previously associated with male infertility, yet others are 
related for the first time to teratozoospermia. Furthermore, pathway enrichment 
analysis and Gene ontology (GO) analyses revealed the important role of the 
extracellular matrix in teratozoospermia. Therefore, the present study confirms 
the contribution of genes studied in the past to male infertility and sheds 
light on new molecular mechanisms by providing a list of variants and candidate 
genes associated with teratozoospermia in the Greek population.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13091606
PMCID: PMC9498395
PMID: 36140773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.