1. Molecules. 2022 Sep 8;27(18):5834. doi: 10.3390/molecules27185834.

Targeted Bottom-Up Mass Spectrometry Approach for the Relative Quantification of 
Post-Translational Modification of Bovine κ-Casein during Milk Fermentation.

Sagu ST(1)(2), Rawel HM(1), Rohn S(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Nutritional Science, University of Potsdam, 
Arthur-Scheunert-Allee 114-116, Nuthetal, 14558 Potsdam, Germany.
(2)Institute of Food Technology and Food Chemistry, Technische Universität 
Berlin, Gustav-Meyer-Allee 25, 13355 Berlin, Germany.

κ-casein (κ-CN) is one of the key components in bovine milk, playing a unique 
role in the structuration of casein micelles. It contains in its chemical 
structure up to sixteen amino acid residues (mainly serine and threonine) 
susceptible to modifications, including glycosylation and phosphorylation, which 
may further be formed during milk processing. In this study, changes in 
post-translational modification (PTM) of κ-CN during bovine milk fermentation 
were investigated. One-to-five-day fermented milk samples were produced. A 
traditional bottom−up proteomics approach was used to establish a 
multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) method for relative quantification of κ-CN 
PTM. Endoproteinase Glu-C was found to efficiently digest the κ-CN molecule. The 
developed LC-MS method was validated by performing assessments of linearity, 
precision, repeatability, reproducibility, limit of detection (LOD), and limit 
of quantification (LOQ). Among the yielded peptides, four of them containing 
serine and threonine residues were identified and the unmodified as well as the 
modified variants of each of them were relatively quantified. These peptides 
were (1) IPTINTIASGEPTSTTE [140, 158], (2) STVATLE [162, 168], (3) DSPE [169, 
172], and (4) INTVQVTSTAV [180, 190]. Distribution analysis between unmodified 
and modified peptides revealed that over 50% of κ-CN was found in one of its 
modified forms in milk. The fermentation process further significantly altered 
the composition between unmodified/modified κ-CN, with glycoslaytion being 
predominant compared to phosphorylation (p < 0.01). Further method development 
towards α and β-CN fractions and their PTM behavior would be an asset to better 
understand the changes undergone by milk proteins and the micellar structure 
during fermentation.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27185834
PMCID: PMC9506521
PMID: 36144569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.