1. Front Immunol. 2022 Sep 8;13:975017. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.975017.
eCollection  2022.

Case Report: Association between cyclic neutropenia and SRP54 deficiency.

Erdős M(1)(2), Boyarchuk O(3), Maródi L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Primary Immunodeficiency Clinical Unit and Laboratory, Department of 
Dermatology, Venereology and Dermatooncology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(2)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
University, New York, NY, United States.
(3)Department of Children's Diseases and Pediatric Surgery, I. Horbachevsky 
Ternopil National Medical University, Ternopil, Ukraine.

Autosomal dominant mutations in the signal recognition particle (SRP) 54 gene 
were recently described in patients with severe congenital neutropenia 
(SCN). SRP54 deficiency cause a chronic and profound neutropenia with maturation 
arrest at the promyelocyte stage, occurring in the first months of life. Nearly 
all reported patients with SRP54 mutations had neutropenia without a cyclic 
pattern and showed a poor or no response to granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor (G-CSF) therapy. We report here an 11-year-old female patient with cyclic 
neutropenia and recurrent heterozygous p.T117del (c.349_351del) in-frame 
deletion mutation in SRP54, who showed remarkable therapeutic response to G-CSF 
treatment. The diagnosis of cyclic pattern of neutropenia was established by 
acceptable standards. ELANE gene mutation was excluded by using various genetic 
approaches. The patient described here also had dolichocolon which has not been 
described before in association with SCN.

Copyright © 2022 Erdős, Boyarchuk and Maródi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.975017
PMCID: PMC9493107
PMID: 36159802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.