1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Oct 14;50(18):10544-10561. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac798.

Phosphorylation of the auxin signaling transcriptional repressor IAA15 by MPKs 
is required for the suppression of root development under drought stress in 
Arabidopsis.

Kim SH(1), Bahk S(1), Nguyen NT(1), Pham MLA(1), Kadam US(1), Hong JC(1), Chung 
WS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 Four Program), Plant Molecular Biology 
and Biotechnology Research Center, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 52828, 
Republic of Korea.

Since plants are sessile organisms, developmental plasticity in response to 
environmental stresses is essential for their survival. Upon exposure to 
drought, lateral root development is suppressed to induce drought tolerance. 
However, the molecular mechanism by which the development of lateral roots is 
inhibited by drought is largely unknown. In this study, the auxin signaling 
repressor IAA15 was identified as a novel substrate of mitogen-activated protein 
kinases (MPKs) and was shown to suppress lateral root development in response to 
drought through stabilization by phosphorylation. Both MPK3 and MPK6 directly 
phosphorylated IAA15 at the Ser-2 and Thr-28 residues. Transgenic plants 
overexpressing a phospho-mimicking mutant of IAA15 (IAA15DD OX) showed reduced 
lateral root development due to a higher accumulation of IAA15. In addition, 
MPK-mediated phosphorylation strongly increased the stability of IAA15 through 
the inhibition of polyubiquitination. Furthermore, IAA15DD OX plants showed the 
transcriptional downregulation of two key transcription factors LBD16 and LBD29, 
responsible for lateral root development. Overall, this study provides the 
molecular mechanism that explains the significance of the MPK-Aux/IAA module in 
suppressing lateral root development in response to drought.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac798
PMCID: PMC9561270
PMID: 36161329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]