1. Nat Commun. 2022 Sep 27;13(1):5682. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-33420-8.

Structural basis for the activity regulation of a potassium channel AKT1 from 
Arabidopsis.

Lu Y(#)(1), Yu M(#)(2), Jia Y(#)(1), Yang F(1), Zhang Y(1), Xu X(1), Li X(3), 
Yang F(3), Lei J(3), Wang Y(4), Yang G(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, Frontiers Science Center for 
Molecular Design Breeding, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of 
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(3)Technology Center for Protein Sciences, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory 
of Protein Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of 
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China. 
yiwang@cau.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, Frontiers Science Center for 
Molecular Design Breeding, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing, China. guanghuiyang@cau.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The voltage-gated potassium channel AKT1 is responsible for primary K+ uptake in 
Arabidopsis roots. AKT1 is functionally activated through phosphorylation and 
negatively regulated by a potassium channel α-subunit AtKC1. However, the 
molecular basis for the modulation mechanism remains unclear. Here we report the 
structures of AKT1, phosphorylated-AKT1, a constitutively-active variant, and 
AKT1-AtKC1 complex. AKT1 is assembled in 2-fold symmetry at the cytoplasmic 
domain. Such organization appears to sterically hinder the reorientation of 
C-linkers during ion permeation. Phosphorylated-AKT1 adopts an alternate 4-fold 
symmetric conformation at cytoplasmic domain, which indicates conformational 
changes associated with symmetry switch during channel activation. To 
corroborate this finding, we perform structure-guided mutagenesis to disrupt the 
dimeric interface and identify a constitutively-active variant Asp379Ala 
mediates K+ permeation independently of phosphorylation. This variant 
predominantly adopts a 4-fold symmetric conformation. Furthermore, the 
AKT1-AtKC1 complex assembles in 2-fold symmetry. Together, our work reveals 
structural insight into the regulatory mechanism for AKT1.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-33420-8
PMCID: PMC9515098
PMID: 36167696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.