1. ACS Chem Biol. 2022 Oct 21;17(10):2890-2898. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.2c00523. 
Epub 2022 Sep 29.

Essential Role of Loop Dynamics in Type II NRPS Biomolecular Recognition.

Corpuz JC(1), Patel A(1), Davis TD(1), Podust LM(2), McCammon JA(1)(3), Burkart 
MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San 
Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0358, United States.
(2)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0657, 
United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0365, United States.

Non-ribosomal peptides play a critical role in the clinic as therapeutic agents. 
To access more chemically diverse therapeutics, non-ribosomal peptide 
synthetases (NRPSs) have been targeted for engineering through combinatorial 
biosynthesis; however, this has been met with limited success in part due to the 
lack of proper protein-protein interactions between non-cognate proteins. 
Herein, we report our use of chemical biology to enable X-ray crystallography, 
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and biochemical studies to elucidate 
binding specificities between peptidyl carrier proteins (PCPs) and adenylation 
(A) domains. Specifically, we determined X-ray crystal structures of a type II 
PCP crosslinked to its cognate A domain, PigG and PigI, and of PigG crosslinked 
to a non-cognate PigI homologue, PltF. The crosslinked PCP-A domain structures 
possess large protein-protein interfaces that predominantly feature hydrophobic 
interactions, with specific electrostatic interactions that orient the substrate 
for active site delivery. MD simulations of the PCP-A domain complexes and 
unbound PCP structures provide a dynamical evaluation of the transient 
interactions formed at PCP-A domain interfaces, which confirm the previously 
hypothesized role of a PCP loop as a crucial recognition element. Finally, we 
demonstrate that the interfacial interactions at the PCP loop 1 region can be 
modified to control PCP binding specificity through gain-of-function mutations. 
This work suggests that loop conformational preferences and dynamism account for 
improved shape complementary in the PCP-A domain interactions. Ultimately, these 
studies show how crystallographic, biochemical, and computational methods can be 
used to rationally re-engineer NRPSs for non-cognate interactions.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.2c00523
PMCID: PMC9808923
PMID: 36173802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors have declared no 
conflicts of interest.