1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 Sep 16;15:1005112. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.1005112. 
eCollection 2022.

Breakdown of the central synapses in C9orf72-linked ALS/FTD.

Ghaffari LT(1), Trotti D(1), Haeusler AR(1), Jensen BK(1).

Author information:
(1)Jefferson Weinberg ALS Center, Department of Neuroscience, Vickie and Jack 
Farber Institute for Neuroscience, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
PA, United States.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, fatal neurodegenerative 
disease that leads to the death of motor and cortical neurons. The clinical 
manifestations of ALS are heterogenous, and efficacious treatments to 
significantly slow the progression of the disease are lacking. Cortical 
hyper-excitability is observed pre-symptomatically across disease-causative 
genetic variants, as well as in the early stages of sporadic ALS, and typically 
precedes motor neuron involvement and overt neurodegeneration. The causes of 
cortical hyper-excitability are not yet fully understood but is mainly agreed to 
be an early event. The identification of the nucleotide repeat expansion 
(GGGGCC)n in the C9ORF72 gene has provided evidence that ALS and another 
neurodegenerative disease, frontotemporal dementia (FTD), are part of a disease 
spectrum with common genetic origins. ALS and FTD are diseases in which synaptic 
dysfunction is reported throughout disease onset and stages of progression. It 
has become apparent that ALS/FTD-causative genes, such as C9ORF72, may have 
roles in maintaining the normal physiology of the synapse, as mutations in these 
genes often manifest in synaptic dysfunction. Here we review the dysfunctions of 
the central nervous system synapses associated with the nucleotide repeat 
expansion in C9ORF72 observed in patients, organismal, and cellular models of 
ALS and FTD.

Copyright Â© 2022 Ghaffari, Trotti, Haeusler and Jensen.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.1005112
PMCID: PMC9523884
PMID: 36187344

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.