1. Curr Biol. 2022 Nov 7;32(21):4752-4761.e10. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2022.09.026.
Epub  2022 Oct 5.

Condensation of the fusion focus by the intrinsically disordered region of the 
formin Fus1 is essential for cell-cell fusion.

Billault-Chaumartin I(1), Muriel O(1), Michon L(1), Martin SG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Fundamental Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, 
University of Lausanne, Biophore Building, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Fundamental Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, 
University of Lausanne, Biophore Building, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: sophie.martin@unil.ch.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2022 Nov 7;32(21):R1228-R1231. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2022.10.001.

Secretory vesicle clusters transported on actin filaments by myosin V motors for 
local secretion underlie various cellular processes, such as neurotransmitter 
release at neuronal synapses,1 hyphal steering in filamentous fungi,2,3 and 
local cell wall digestion preceding the fusion of yeast gametes.4 During fission 
yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe gamete fusion, the actin fusion focus assembled 
by the formin Fus1 concentrates secretory vesicles carrying cell wall digestive 
enzymes.5,6,7 The position and coalescence of the vesicle focus are controlled 
by local signaling and actin-binding proteins to prevent inappropriate cell wall 
digestion that would cause lysis,6,8,9,10 but the mechanisms of focusing have 
been elusive. Here, we show that the regulatory N terminus of Fus1 contains an 
intrinsically disordered region (IDR) that mediates Fus1 condensation in vivo 
and forms dense assemblies that exclude ribosomes. Fus1 lacking its IDR fails to 
concentrate in a tight focus and causes cell lysis during attempted cell fusion. 
Remarkably, the replacement of Fus1 IDR with a heterologous low-complexity 
region that forms molecular condensates fully restores Fus1 focusing and 
function. By contrast, the replacement of Fus1 IDR with a domain that forms more 
stable oligomers restores focusing but poorly supports cell fusion, suggesting 
that condensation is tuned to yield a selectively permeable structure. We 
propose that condensation of actin structures by an IDR may be a general 
mechanism for actin network organization and the selective local concentration 
of secretory vesicles.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2022.09.026
PMCID: PMC9671092
PMID: 36202103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.