1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Sep 30;23(19):11549. doi: 10.3390/ijms231911549.

A Previously Unrecognized Molecular Landscape of Lynch Syndrome in the Mexican 
Population.

Padua-Bracho A(1)(2), Velázquez-Aragón JA(3), Fragoso-Ontiveros V(1), 
Nuñez-Martínez PM(1), Mejía Aguayo ML(1), Sánchez-Contreras Y(1), Ramirez-Otero 
MA(1), De la Fuente-Hernández MA(1), Vidal-Millán S(1), Wegman-Ostrosky T(4), 
Pedroza-Torres A(1), Arriaga-Canon C(4), Herrera-Montalvo LA(5), Alvarez-Gómez 
RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Hereditary Cancer Clinic, National Cancer Institute, Mexico City 14080, 
Mexico.
(2)Postgraduate Program Doctorate in Biomedicine and Molecular Biotechnology, 
National Polytechnic Institute, Mexico City 11340, Mexico.
(3)Experimental Oncology Laboratory, National Pediatric Institute, Mexico City 
04530, Mexico.
(4)Basic Research Sub Direction, National Cancer Institute, Mexico City 14080, 
Mexico.
(5)General Management, National Institute of Genomic Medicine, Mexico City 
14610, Mexico.

Lynch syndrome (LS) is the main hereditary colorectal cancer syndrome. There 
have been few reports regarding the clinical and molecular characteristics of LS 
patients in Latin America; this is particularly true in the Mexican population, 
where no information is available. The present study aims to describe the 
clinical and molecular spectrum of variants in a cohort of patients diagnosed 
with LS in Mexico. We present a retrospective analysis of 412 patients with 
suspected LS, whose main site of cancer diagnosis was the colon (58.25%), 
followed by the endometrium (18.93%). Next-generation sequencing analysis, with 
an extensive multigene panel, showed that 27.1% (112/414) had a variant in one 
of the genes of the mismatch repair pathway (MMR); 30.4% (126/414) had a variant 
in non-MMR genes such as CHEK2, APC, MUTYH, BRCA1, and BRCA2; and 42.5% 
(176/414) had no genetic variants. Most of the variants were found in MLH1. 
Pathogenic variants (PVs) in MMR genes were identified in 65.7% (96/146) of the 
total PVs, and 34.24% (45/146) were in non-MMR genes. Molecular and clinical 
characterization of patients with LS in specific populations allowed 
personalized follow-up, with the option for targeted treatment with immune 
checkpoint inhibitors and the development of public health policies. Moreover, 
such characterization allows for family cascade testing and consequent 
prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms231911549
PMCID: PMC9569652
PMID: 36232851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.