1. J Oncol. 2022 Sep 19;2022:3426407. doi: 10.1155/2022/3426407. eCollection
2022.

Managing Cancer Drug Resistance from the Perspective of Inflammation.

Lu S(1)(2), Li Y(3), Zhu C(4), Wang W(1), Zhou Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315020, 
China.
(2)Institute of Digestive Disease of Ningbo University, Ningbo 315020, China.
(3)West China School of Basic Medical Sciences and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu 610064, China.
(4)Ningbo First Hospital, Ningbo 315010, China.

The development of multidrug resistance in cancer chemotherapy is a major 
obstacle to the effective treatment of human malignant tumors. Several 
epidemiological studies have demonstrated that inflammation is closely related 
to cancer and plays a key role in the development of both solid and liquid 
tumors. Therefore, targeting inflammation and the molecules involved in the 
inflammatory process may be a good strategy for treating drug-resistant tumors. 
In this review, we discuss the molecular mechanisms underlying inflammation in 
regulating anticancer drug resistance by modulating drug action and 
drug-mediated cell death pathways. Inflammation alters the effectiveness of 
drugs through modulation of the expression of multidrug efflux transporters 
(e.g., ABCG2, ABCB1, and ABCC1) and drug-metabolizing enzymes (e.g., CYP1A2 and 
CYP3A4). In addition, inflammation can protect cancer cells from drug-mediated 
cell death by regulating DNA damage repair, downstream adaptive response (e.g., 
apoptosis, autophagy, and oncogenic bypass signaling), and tumor 
microenvironment. Intriguingly, manipulating inflammation may affect drug 
resistance through various molecular mechanisms validated by in vitro/in vivo 
models. In this review, we aim to summarize the underlying molecular mechanisms 
that inflammation participates in cancer drug resistance and discuss the 
potential clinical strategies targeting inflammation to overcome drug 
resistance.

Copyright Â© 2022 Shuaijun Lu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/3426407
PMCID: PMC9553519
PMID: 36245983

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as potential conflicts of interest.